Chapter I. A Few Pages From Clide De Winton’s Note‐Book.


It was not the reception I ought to have had; but that was my own fault.
The old house was not in the habit of giving such a cold welcome to the
eldest son who brought home his young bride. On the contrary, fireworks
and bonfires, and bells ringing, and flags flying, and universal rejoicing
both inside and outside the house, had been the traditionary mode of
proceeding, on such occasions, since the Conquest, when it first owned a
master of the name of De Winton. My earliest recollections of a distinct
kind are of my father bringing home my step‐mother to the old place, and
of my peeping out from my nursery‐window, and vaguely connecting the
strange lady, who came in the midst of us heralded by such noise and
splendor, with the story of the Queen of Sheba that my nurse read to me
very often on Sundays out of a pictured story‐book. This infantine
delusion had long vanished before I quite lost the sense of childish
bewilderment that accompanied the occasion. I was an odd child, I suppose;
old‐fashioned, but not at all precocious; and the dreamy impressions of
childhood held their grasp on me longer than usual, probably from my
having no children to play with and keep me from dwelling so long and so
exclusively on the fancies of my own hazy little mind. I can recall
vividly even now how I hated all the noise and fuss that followed the
wedding; how I shrank from being dressed in my scarlet cashmere frock, and
being sent for to the drawing‐room, and introduced to strangers, by my
stiff, stately step‐mother, as “my son, Master Clide de Winton.” There
seemed no end to the strangers that came trooping in to shake hands with
my father and to be introduced to his wife. And then the dinners that were
given, and the noise of music afterwards, that used to wake me up in the
nursery, and make me dream such noisy, confused dreams when I fell asleep
again! How I detested it all! And when I expressed something of this to my
nurse, and wondered why the house, that used to be so quiet when we had it
to ourselves, had become so full of noise and strange people from the
moment my new mamma came home, she found no better comfort than to tell me
that that was always the way after a wedding, and that when I was grown up
and married myself I should make just as much fuss, and a great deal more,
because I should be younger, and my wife too. It may sound absurd, like so
many other reminiscences of childhood that were once bitterly real to all
of us; but this horoscopic view of life poisoned many an hour of those
nursery‐days to me. The fact that the dreaded ordeal was yet distant gave
me no consolation. I leaped over the gulf that separated six years old
from five‐and‐twenty, and saw myself miserable in the midst of a
pandemonium of noise, and strange people, and dinners, and pianoforte‐
playing. I was no doubt a morbid little boy, and no doubt my nurse
discovered this, and with the unconscious cruelty of her race took
pleasure in playing upon my idle terrors. I know she used to terrify me by
graphic descriptions of the wedding ceremonial from first to last; and the
more I showed that I was terrified, the more eloquent and inventive—as I
afterwards discovered—she grew. She had been three times through the
performance herself, and thus was peculiarly qualified to speak of it. I
remember once when she told me I would have to stand up before all the
company at a long table and make a speech. I could bear it no longer, and
I began to cry. This did not soften her; she only laughed at me for a
silly little goose, and assured me that, when the time came, I would enjoy
it all as much as I now enjoyed flying my kite and other juvenile
amusements. I ran out of the nursery and away up to a garret where I
sometimes hid myself when I expected to be sent for to the drawing‐room.
and flung myself on the floor, and literally bellowed with misery. I
suppose I cried myself to sleep, for when 1 awoke I was still in the same
place, tired and cold. I considered quietly what I might possibly do to
avert the catastrophe that so appalled me in the distance. I could think
only of one thing: that was to run away before the wedding‐day arrived. I
had heard stories about boys running away from school when they were very
naughty or very unhappy; why should they not run away from home, if driven
to extremities? This resolution soothed me. I crept down from my solitude
a happier child than I had entered it.

If this account of myself sounds unnatural, I can only answer that it is
true. If my step‐mother had been a loving, motherly woman, she would
probably have found out something of these sufferings, and have sought to
modify them by moulding my character; but she was not a woman to win a
child’s confidence, even if she had tried; and she did not try to win
mine. She found me shy, reserved, ungracious, and she left me so. She did
her duty by me as far as she knew how. I was conveyed every day regularly
from the nursery to the dining‐room after dinner. I grew resigned to the
daily punishment after a time, and in reply to the usual questions, “Had I
been a good boy?” and “Would I like an apple?” I learned to answer boldly
that I had and that I would, and to stand straight on both legs and
without wriggling. My step‐mother patted me on the cheek, and observed to
my father that I was improving in my manners. She seldom went further than
this in motherly caresses for the first two years after her marriage. Then
my father died, and I can remember that she kissed me often, and was
altogether more gentle in her manner towards me, and that I felt it, and
liked the change, though I could in no way account for it. I was still
miserably shy, and I retained the same intense dread of notoriety and fuss
of every description. Perhaps it was this that partly decided her on
sending me to Eton when I was barely old enough to be in the school‐room.
Other motives may have added weight to this one, but I shall say nothing
of that now. If her object was to cure me of the painful timidity which
still beset me, it was perhaps a justification for sending the fatherless
and motherless boy away from the solitude and isolation of a gloomy home
into the stir and life of a public school, where shyness, like so many
other foolish weaknesses, is quickly rubbed off by contact with those
intolerant pedagogues—companions of one’s own age and rank. I was happy
enough at Eton, in spite of the dreaded future that still loomed in the
distance. I had forgotten the spectre of a possible wedding‐breakfast and
its accompanying horrors. I knew now that it was in my own hands to suffer
or to avoid them. Meantime, my natural timidity still asserted itself in a
way that was much deplored by my step‐mother. I was an intelligent boy,
and might have distinguished myself over my fellows, had I chosen; but the
same morbid folly that had embittered my childhood now paralyzed my
ambition, and prevented me trying for prizes in any department of study.
Public speaking comes into play very much with candidates for honors at
school, and the finest gold medal that was ever awarded for a Greek and
Latin essay would not have tempted me, if I foresaw the necessity of
reading the essay aloud before that redoubtable array of critics, my
assembled masters and companions. I passed for an oddity, and so I was. My
step‐mother sighed over it in her calm, correct way; regretted I had not
the honorable ambition to make a name for myself and conquer a position
amongst my fellow‐men, and so on. To this I modestly replied that I was
satisfied with the name my fathers had transmitted to me, and which I
hoped to carry honorably at least through life, if not proudly. Pride of
birth was one of the earliest lessons she had endeavored to instil into my
mind, and in this respect I did not prove as stubborn as in others. I
remember saying, in reply to some remarks of hers as to the advisability
of my distinguishing myself in some public career, “When a man has the
good luck to be born a De Winton he is distinguished enough”; and I
remember the smile of approval that accompanied her demure shake of the
head.

I left Eton in course of time, and went to the university. The change from
the now familiar world of school was accomplished with immense reluctance,
and perhaps would never have been accomplished at all without the combined
influence of my step‐mother, my uncle, Admiral de Winton, and Sir Simon
Harness, who was one of my guardians and my father’s oldest friend. I soon
grew to like my new life, and to make friends with a few of my new
companions. I was still too shy to form friendships easily, or to be what
is called popular. Everything however, went smoothly with me till I was a
little over twenty, and then a circumstance occurred which woke up the old
terrors, and showed too plainly that much of the puerile folly of
childhood clung to me still. I am almost ashamed to write it at this lapse
of time; but I shall have more grievous follies to confess by‐and‐by, so
there is no use passing over this one. It arose out of a proposal to give
a farewell dinner to a fellow who was one of our set and extremely
popular. I chimed in heartily with the scheme the moment it was broached,
but when one of my chums, out of pure mischief as I afterwards found out,
suggested that we should one of us make a farewell speech, expressing the
regret and so forth of the rest, and that I should be the speaker, I got
savage, and was for not appearing at all at the dinner, unless they gave
me a solemn promise that I should not be asked to open my lips, even to
propose a toast. We were near quarrelling over it; the others were so
amused at my anger and fright that they kept up the joke, and bullied me
until I was in a downright passion. When it was over, and I had joined in
the laugh against myself, my tormentor said, quite hap‐hazard, and not
with the least idea of rousing me again:

“I say, old boy, how will it be when you come of age? You’ll be giving a
grand blow‐out at the Moat, of course, and we’ll all drink to your health
with three times three; but you will have to return thanks, you know, and
address the tenantry, and that sort of thing. It will be awful fun to see
you stammering and haw‐hawing, and assuring us that the affecting occasion
is really—aw—too much for you—aw—and so forth. When is it to be? About
this time twelve‐month, eh?”

I don’t know what I said to him. I think I felt he was too great a brute
to be spoken to, except in a language which it would not do for a De
Winton to use. But could this be true? Was I making a fool’s paradise to
myself, while every day hurried me on to this dismal catastrophe?

I feigned a sudden call home on family business that required my presence,
and started by the six A.M. train next morning for the Moat.

My step‐mother was surprised to meet me on coming down to
breakfast—surprised, not startled. She was not a woman to be startled.

“Madam,” I said, after greeting her ceremoniously, according to my step‐
filial habit, “have you any plan in view respecting the event of my
majority?”

“You speak in enigmas, my dear Clide. Pray explain yourself,” replied Mrs.
de Winton; and went on washing her hands in that deliberate way of hers
that always exasperated me. Perhaps it was this trick of perpetually
washing her hands that made me think her so uncommonly like the picture of
Lady Macbeth hanging over the library mantel‐piece.

“To be explicit, then,” I replied, “do you intend making a Coming of Age
of it? Do you purpose setting the tenantry into fits making a fuss over
me? In a word do you purpose calling up the seven devils commonly catted
rejoicings and loyal demonstrations? Do you mean to do these things,
madam?”

Whether she thought I had gone suddenly mad, or that, notwithstanding the
early hour, I had been indulging too freely in convivial libations, I
could not tell; but she decidedly thought I was laboring under some sort
of cerebral inflammation. Suspending abruptly the ablutionary movement,
she joined her hands coldly, and looking at me with a severe countenance,
not devoid altogether of pity, “Clide, you surprise me,” she said. “I
hoped that you had sufficient respect for yourself and for your ancestors
to understand....”

“Madam,” I broke in, trembling with excitement, “I respect you and I
respect my ancestors; but as to making a fool of myself for the
gratification of their ante‐diluvian crotchets, I won’t do it. No; if
every De Winton from the Flood down were to stalk out of his coffin and
bully me, I won’t.”

“Won’t what?” demanded my step‐mother, looking now rather alarmed.

“I won’t have those seven devils let loose over the place,” I said
defiantly; “and unless you pledge me your word of honor that there will
not be anything of the sort, as sure as I’m a living De Winton I’ll bolt
from the country, and never set foot in it again!”

“You misapprehend our relative positions altogether, Clide,” resumed Mrs.
de Winton. “When the time of your majority has arrived, you will, by the
very fact of its advent, be master to deal with it as you choose, quite
independent of my wishes. I should hope, however, that by that time you
will have conceived a better notion of your duty to society in your own
person, and to the traditions of the illustrious race from whom it is your
privilege to descend, than you seem to possess at present. It has been
from time immemorial the custom in the family to celebrate with pomp and
festive gatherings the majority of the heir. I am at a loss to understand
why this venerable custom should inspire you with such irrational fury;
why you should anticipate the welcome that awaits every De Winton on his
coming of age otherwise than with a sense of grateful and honorable
pride.”

I had calmed down when I discovered that I was my own master in the
matter. Otherwise I should not have listened so patiently to the end of
her tirade. When it was over, I began to feel rather ashamed of myself. I
had been making a storm in a butter‐boat.

“If I have forgotten in the least degree the deference I owe you, madam,”
I observed, twisting my wide‐awake to give myself what the French call a
countenance, “I apologize for it.”

“I trust you will learn to control yourself, in future, for your own
sake,” observed Mrs. de Winton, washing her hands again. “Be assured of
one thing: I shall take no steps towards the celebration of the event,
which is looked forward to by the tenantry with very different feelings
from yours, without having your consent. I would not expose them or you to
such an exhibition as that I have just witnessed. But you have twelve
months to wait, and to improve, I hope, before your coming of age makes it
necessary to remind you what that circumstance involves.”

“If it involves a fuss, madam,” I said emphatically, and waxing wroth
again, “once more, I won’t have it. I’d rather never come of age!” And
having delivered myself of this decided opinion, I wished her good‐
morning.

I came of age in due time, and fearing that, in spite of my commands to
the contrary, the tenantry might get up some insane rejoicings and
caterwaulings, I feigned illness and waited in London till the anniversary
was a week old.

That Rubicon was no sooner safely passed than the other, the fearful one
that had been the nightmare of my childhood, threatened to overtake me. I
had so constantly announced at school my determination never to marry that
my views on that subject were known to all who knew me, and the reputation
of a woman‐hater preceded me amongst my own people. Still, the Moat being
a fine old place, with a clear rent‐roll of fifteen thousand pounds a
year, and I being an only son and in all other respects what dowagers call
an “eligible young man,” the female mind of ——shire resented such a
resolve on my part as premature and absurd, and set to work diligently to
bring me to a better way of thinking. I pass over the history of that
merciless campaign of match‐making mothers and enterprising daughters. The
very thought of it now is painful to me. Enough that I came out of it
unscathed. After two years of comparative quiet—for I persistently refused
to be lured to the sirens’ caves in the neighborhood, and forced them to
beard the lion in his den, which gave me no inconsiderable vantage‐ground
over the enemy—the fire slackened, and I was left in peace.

My step‐mother did not attempt to coerce me; on the contrary, she
commiserated my position, and more than once expressed her disapproval of
the way in which, as she said, I was hunted down by all the marriageable
womanhood of the county. She insisted on giving one ball when I came home,
to introduce me to her own and my father’s friends and such members of the
family as I only knew by name or very slightly; but after that she
subsided, and my life was as free from fuss as any life in this fussy
world could be.

“Clide,” observed Mrs. de Winton one morning, as we sipped our tea over
the breakfast‐table, “do you think it quite impossible you should ever
marry?”

“Well,” I said reflectively, “as far as a man can answer for himself, I
should say quite impossible.”

“But how far is that?” observed my step‐mother with a sceptical smile.
“You have not yet been put to the test. You have not yet come across the
woman who could persuade you that marriage is the Elysium of man here
below. Supposing—I merely put it in the light of a remote supposition—that
you should come across her some day...?”

“I should probably accept my fate as many a wiser man has done before me,
and capitulate on reasonable terms—namely, that we should be executed at
six o’clock in the morning, no wedding‐dress, no bridemaids, no
speechifying—no fuss, in fact, and nobody present but a beggar‐woman and a
policeman. Then, when we come home, no entertaining, giving and taking
dinners, and that sort of fuss that comes like the farce after the
tragedy. If I ever meet with a pretty girl willing to take me and the Moat
on these conditions, then I will not answer for the consequences.”

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

One year after this conversation with my step‐mother I met that pretty
girl; the result was what I tacitly foretold it would be. I married her.
It happened in this way: I was seized with a desire to travel, and,
instead of beginning with the stereotyped grand tour, I determined to go
first to America. I had a hunger for grand, wild scenery. The vast
primeval forests of the far West, the awful grandeur of Niagara, drew me
powerfully; so off I set, accompanied by a confidential servant named
Stanton. Shyness went for something in the choice. I felt attracted
towards the new young continent as by a sense of homelikeness and kindred.
I was not disappointed. Everything I saw there was at once novel and
familiar. I could converse with the people in my own language, and was
thus spared the mortification of stuttering out my inquiries in dubious
French or German, or trumpeting them through an interpreter, as must have
been the case on the grand tour.

Niagara appalled and fascinated me. Day after day I stood contemplating
the torrents of foam that surged up to meet the great sheet of water that
flung itself in a majestic arch of hard green crystal down into the
boiling, creamy gulf. I gazed and gazed till sight was dim and sense was
lost in a torpor of exquisite delight—neither trance nor vision, but a
state that hovered between both. The thunder of the rushing waters, the
sparkling of the prism that danced and flashed and faded with the changing
lights, reflecting every tint in the sunset, until the cataract blazed
before my dazzled eyes like a thousand rainbows melted into one, then
fainted and died, leaving a uniform sheen of emerald in its place—all this
was like some magnificent apotheosis that kept me spell‐bound, fascinated,
entranced. I had come intending to remain three days; but a week slipped
away and found me still at Niagara. At last I determined to break the
spell. I must tear myself from the spectacle before it overmastered my
reason; for there were moments when, after standing for hours looking down
into the seething abyss of foam, I felt as if an invisible chord were
drawing me on and on, nearer and nearer, luring me in a dreamy way towards
the water. Then I would rouse myself and rush away; but it would not do to
go on playing with a danger that was sweet and potent as a magician’s
spell. I came out one morning to take my last look. It was just after
sunrise. The falls had never looked so beautiful, the booming of the water
had never sounded so solemn, the light had never evolved such a fairy
tracery of jewelled glory on the silvery vapor and the green crystal. The
effect was overpowering. For one moment it seemed to me that I heard the
voice of Jehovah speaking in the roar of many waters; that I stood within
the sanctuary, separated by an impenetrable and mysterious wall of thunder
from the outer, visible world. A spontaneous and almost unconscious
impulse made me uncover myself and stand bareheaded, as in the presence of
the Unseen and Omnipresent. How long I stood thus I cannot say; I know
that I was roused from my revery by a sound that struck in upon my dreamy
deafness with strange and thrilling effect. It was the singing of a human
voice; the words were inarticulate, but I knew the music well. It was a
wild, weird Highland melody; the rhythm was barely distinguishable, as the
notes rose and fell through the roar and boom of the waterfall, sounding
nevertheless preternaturally clear and sweet, like the wail of a spirit or
some sweet sea‐bird’s cry. What was it? Some Undine risen from the spray,
and pouring out her lament to the wave? I dared not look round, so fearful
was I to banish the songster. When the voice ceased, I turned my head and
looked. Was I dreaming, or was it indeed a spirit that I beheld? I doubted
at first. But as I kept my eyes steadily fixed on the figure, it moved
towards me, and I knew that it was neither sprite nor shadow, but a woman,
a young girl rather—for she seemed barely emerged from childhood to
maidenhood—more beautiful than any picture I had ever seen or that my
imagination had ever painted. She was small, below the middle height. Her
hair fell in profuse ringlets or coils—it seemed an accidental
arrangement—down her back; it was black and glossy as jet. Her eyes were
lustrous and dark as a gazelle’s; her complexion almost colorless. She was
dressed in dark green, a loose, unconventional sort of garment that draped
her something after the fashion of a Roman stola; her straw hat had either
fallen off or she had taken it off, and held it dangling from her arm; her
hands were clasped, and her eyes fixed on the fall, as it plunged from the
rocky ledge down, down into the eternity of waters.

She had come within a few yards of me before she seemed conscious of my
presence—of anything but the majestic spectacle that was riveting her
whole soul through her eyes. She walked on like a somnambulist. A sudden
dread seized me. Was she asleep, or was she experiencing in its uttermost
degree the terrible attraction that I had felt more than once, and walking
on unconsciously to death? I advanced a few steps, so as to stand in her
path as she drew near. The effect was instantaneous. She started as if
some one had struck her. I thought she would have fallen, and rushed to
prevent it by stretching out my arm. The movement apparently recalled her
to the sense of where she was. With a slight acknowledgment of my
courtesy, she turned quickly away, and hurried on out of sight. I followed
her, and it was with an unreasonable thrill of delight that I saw her
enter the hotel where I was staying. Who was this siren, or how did one so
young and so beautiful come to be alone in this lonely place? Before the
day was over I met her again. Chance brought us together once more in the
same spot. This time she was not alone. An elderly man, whom she addressed
as uncle, accompanied her. He was not prepossessing in his appearance, and
I doubt whether I should have overcome my natural shyness so far as to
address him, if he had not himself broken the ice by asking me if I had
ventured to walk under the fall, and whether the experience was worth the
risk. I assured him that it amply compensated for any imaginary danger
that might exist, and volunteered to accompany him if he decided on trying
it. This brought us into communication, if not into sympathy. I did not
like him, consequently he did not like me. We both felt this
instinctively, no doubt; there was an opposing element of some sort
between us that made friendship impossible, though it did not prevent that
kind of superficial intimacy which is almost inevitable amongst people of
the same country who find themselves thrown close together under the same
roof in a foreign land. He was Scotch, as I knew at once by his name,
Prendergast, and by his accent. He was a thin, medium‐sized man, and could
not have been more than forty, though his silver hair gave him a
prematurely old look, which was perhaps increased by a settled expression
of ill‐temper about the mouth, arising, so his niece affectionately
alleged, from chronic tooth‐ache. He seemed indeed a martyr to that trying
complaint, and wore his head tied up in a woollen comforter, which must
have been miserably uncomfortable; for the days were hot and the nights as
balmy as June. I fancied that his beautiful niece disliked him, or at
least feared him considerably more than she loved him. I noticed how the
merry, bright little creature started at the sound of his voice when he
called to her sharply, and how she quailed when his cold, hard eye lighted
on her in the midst of one of her childish peals of laughter, checking it
as by a cold bath. It struck me even more than once that she cast a glance
towards me, as if claiming my protection—against whom or what I could not
imagine; but I was resolved to ascertain, and, if my assistance or
sympathy could avail her, to let her have them at any cost. We happened to
be alone on the third day after our first meeting. Isabel—so I heard Mr.
Prendergast call her—was apparently as pleased at the opportunity as I
was. She talked to me with the frank, artless _abandon_ of a child; and,
without in the least intending it, she told me enough of her antecedents
and position to satisfy me that I was right in supposing her not very
happy with her uncle. She told me he was her guardian, and had brought her
up since she was quite a child, her parents having died when she was five
years old. Her mother was his sister; her father’s name was Cameron. He
held a large tract of land in Canada, and had a great deal of money—“heaps
of money,” was her childish estimate of it—in banks and things in England;
and she, being the only child, was heiress to all this wealth. Mr.
Prendergast had had the management of it up to the present, and continued
to treat her as an infant, though she was now of age, she said. He had by
nature a tyrannical temper, and it was increased and rendered irritable
and fierce by years of tooth‐ache. He had been away in hot climates to
seek relief for his exasperated nerves, and it was only on her account
that he had returned to England of late. He had come out to America to
look after her property, and also for the benefit of her health, which had
required change and a long sea‐voyage. I felt grateful to him for this at
least, as the sacrifice had evidently been crowned with success. Miss
Cameron looked the very picture of health, and she said the voyage had
made her stronger than she had ever been in her life. It had, however,
proved very disastrous to Mr. Prendergast, whose teeth had not given him a
day’s rest since they left England; “and of course this makes him very
cross,” his niece observed deprecatingly, with a little sigh.

After this conversation we became perfectly at ease with each other, and
tacitly watched for opportunities of renewing it. I need not say that I
relinquished my plan of leaving the falls, which day after day grew more
beautiful, more irresistibly attractive, to me. A week passed in a dreamy
state of blissfulness, and then a crisis came. Mr. Prendergast, who had
been howling all night in the room next to me with the tooth‐ache, set off
after breakfast, in spite of his swelled face, with a party that were
being taken to walk under the arch of the fall. He wound a quarter of a
mile of Shetland shawls round his head, and, thus fortified, donned the
leathern costume of the occasion, and down he went. Everything went well
enough until he was emerging from the tremendous roar that had covered him
in like a curtain, and was setting his foot on dry land above, when he was
seized with a rush of blood to the head, and fell insensible to the
ground. He was carried to his room, and lay there dangerously ill for
several days. Isabel was not allowed to see him. The doctor enjoined
absolute quiet as of the first necessity; no one entered the sick‐room but
the medical man and a nurse whom he sent for to the nearest town. This
catastrophe naturally threw Miss Cameron and me a good deal together. We
wandered out to admire the falls by sunrise; we were to be seen there
again at sunset, when the clouds rolled in golden cascades over the
western sky, and made a spectacle of rival glory above and beyond the
everlasting glory of Niagara. What could come of all this but what came of
it? We loved each other, and we confessed it. It was a wild act on my
part. I knew nothing of Isabel’s family and antecedents but what she had
accidentally told me; but to a man in love, first love, what more was
wanted? She bore a name that was ancient as my own. As to her fortune, I
cared nothing for that. She told me it was already legally in her own
power; that she was twenty‐one. I believed this, since she said it, but it
required a strong effort of faith to credit that beaming young face with
more than seventeen years in this cold world. Those were blissful days
while we walked arm‐in‐arm through the yellowing forest, and alongside the
river beyond the falls, cooing our young loves to one another, as foolish
and as tender as any two Babes in the Wood. But Mr. Prendergast was
getting well now, and called Isabel constantly to his side, and sternly
catechised her as to what she did when she left him. He was to be down‐
stairs to‐morrow, and they were to leave Niagara in a few days, and sail
for England by the next boat that left Quebec. She whispered this to me
with white lips one morning, and then rushed up‐stairs to answer the call
of the dragon, who was shouting to her from his open window. I waited till
she came down again, and then drew her out into a favorite spot of ours at
a little distance from the house.

“Isabel,” I said, “does your uncle know that we love each other?”

“Oh! no, no; he would kill me if he knew it,” she replied, speaking in a
whisper, and looking up at me with an expression of terror and trust that
nerved me to anything.

“What, then, are we to do? Shall I speak to him at once?” I asked.

“There is no use speaking to him; he will never let me marry you, Clide.
Forgive me for making you unhappy,” she said, clasping her hands on my
arm, while the big tears ran down her face. “I never ought to have let you
care for me. I never ought to have let myself love you, but I could not
help it; I could not help it.”

Her head fell on my shoulder, and the sobs shook the frail little figure
that leaned against me with the artless confidence of a child.

“You _shall_ marry me, darling,” I cried; “no uncle that ever lived shall
separate us. I swear it! We shall be married before we leave this. Trust
to me to do everything; we will arrange it all before that old Turk knows
or suspects anything. Promise only to trust to me entirely and to do as I
ask you. Promise me, Isabel.”

She promised, placing her hand confidingly in mine.

Next morning, soon after sunrise, while Mr. Prendergast was still asleep,
we two stole out to the little church where a few stray worshippers sang
their hymns to the music of the waterfall, and were married by the old
clergyman of the place. My man, Stanton, and the sexton were the only
witnesses. It was indeed a wedding after my own heart, all done as quietly
as if marrying a wife were as much an every‐day accident in life as taking
a walk before breakfast. Isabel was, if possible, more delighted with the
mode of proceeding than I was. I forget how she came to make the avowal,
but I know it was quite spontaneous, that she hated the fuss and
paraphernalia of a wedding in England as she hated a thunder‐storm; and
that if she had been given her choice, she would infinitely have preferred
this quiet little marriage of ours to the most magnificent display that
could have been got up for her in Scotland. We were as happy as two
children as we walked home together. But then came the business of telling
Mr. Prendergast. Isabel declared she would rather die than enter his
presence now alone; he would read her rebellious act on her face, and he
would kill her. He was capable of anything when he was roused. I was not
going to risk my treasure within his reach. I sat down and wrote a
respectful letter, informing him that I had become the husband of his
niece, and requesting his forgiveness for what might seem a violation of
good faith, but which his own conscience would, I felt sure, find an
excuse for in my behalf. I stated my fortune and position more accurately
than I had been able to do to Isabel, who put her hand to my mouth when I
attempted to speak of settlements and so forth, saying she wanted to hear
nothing about my money. I now begged of Mr. Prendergast to let me know
what his wishes were concerning his niece’s fortune, and pledged myself
beforehand to conform to them, and prove by my conduct in this respect
that money was the last consideration that had actuated me in marrying an
heiress. In answer to this I received a curt line informing me that I had
behaved like a scoundrel, and that, as a gentleman, Mr. Prendergast
declined to meet me, and that I had better take myself off with my wife
before chance threw me in his way again. Isabel was overjoyed at this
unexpected issue. I was stung by the man’s insolence and his unjust
accusations, but, on the whole, it was the easiest way of getting rid of
him and securing myself and Isabel from his brutal temper and ungovernable
violence.

We left Niagara that day. I wrote to my step‐mother, acquainting her that
I was a married man, and announcing the day she might expect to see us at
the Moat. I wrote for places in the next steamer, and we were fortunate
enough to find two vacant ones at nearly the last moment in a splendid
vessel that sailed from New York. It had occurred to me that before
leaving America it would have been prudent and rational to make some
inquiries concerning the landed property which my wife held in Canada; but
as she did not propose this, I feared it might strike her unfavorably if I
did, and suggest that her uncle’s insulting insinuations were not as
unfounded as I wished her to believe. I therefore abandoned the idea, and
we left the United States without my asking a single question on the
subject.

The voyage homeward was delightful. Isabel formed plans for the future
that sounded like songs from Arcadia, and drew a picture of our life at
the Moat that looked like a vision of the Elysian fields. We stopped a
week in London to extemporize a trousseau and purchase some trinkets, and
then I took my wife to her Welsh home. My step‐mother gave her a gracious,
if not a hearty, welcome. It was a very quiet home‐coming; nothing,
indeed, could have been tamer. There were no tenantry to meet us, no
rejoicings either in the village or at the house. I thought this strange,
though it was strictly in accordance with the desires I had always
expressed on the subject to my step‐mother. Isabel, however, was entirely
satisfied, and confessed to me that she had been in a nervous flutter all
the way home, fearing to find some horror in the shape of a deputation
from the tenants or something awaiting us at our journey’s end.

A few days after our arrival, when I came down to breakfast alone, my
step‐mother said to me, “Clide, it is time that you thought a little of
business now. I think you told me that your wife’s fortune is in her own
right; this is very desirable to begin with, but of course it cannot
remain so. Your rights as a husband must be properly protected.”

“My wife’s affection and my confidence in her are the only security I
require on that, madam,” I replied stiffly.

“The sentiment does honor to you both,” observed Mrs. de Winton, with an
undertone of sarcasm that did not escape me; “but you do not expect
Admiral de Winton or Sir Simon Harness to be satisfied with such a
sentimental guarantee.”

“I understand you, and I respect your motives,” was my cold rejoinder;
“but as I am not responsible to any one but myself for the good or bad
management of myself and my property, I do not recognize any one’s right,
trustee or relation, to interfere with me, and still less to interfere
with my wife.”

“Who talks of interfering with your wife? You tell me she is an heiress
with forty thousand pounds in the Funds and an estate in Canada. Your
father’s widow and your late guardian and trustee have certainly a right
to ask the whereabouts of the money and the land. Admitting that your wife
be as devoted and as disinterested as you believe, is she entirely her own
mistress? This tyrannical old uncle who has kept her in such bondage—how
far did he or does he hold control over her fortune? For her sake as much
as for your own you should put yourself in possession of these facts.”

This view of the case had not occurred to me. I saw the justice of it, and
frankly said so.

“Isabel will put no obstacle in the way of a just and prudent arrangement;
I am quite sure of that,” I said emphatically. “My only fear is that she
should see in this horrid investigation a desire on my part to count my
prize, and perhaps suspect me of having had a base, ulterior motive in
marrying her; and rather than wrong myself or wound her by such a
suspicion, I would sooner never see a penny of her money or an acre of her
land.”

“And does your wife share these sentiments? Is she quite as indifferent
about the matter as you are?” inquired my step‐mother.

“Every bit!” I answered vehemently.

“Did she tell you so?”

“Do you suppose I would ask her?”

“Ridiculous boy!” sneered my step‐mother. “But taking for granted that
just at present she does share your juvenile folly and poetical want of
common sense, how long will it last, do you think? A bride in her
honeymoon is a very different being from a wife of a few years’ standing.
She knows nothing of the value of money now; but when she finds herself
the mother of a family, with daughters growing up to be married and
portioned, she will awake to the value of it in a way that will astonish
you. And when a few years hence she asks you for an account of her own
splendid fortune, what answer will you make to her? You were too delicate
to hurt her feelings by any inquiries about so insignificant a matter, so
you left it to her uncle to see to it!”

“I said I was prepared to do what was necessary to protect her interests,”
I replied. “I will speak to her on the subject this afternoon. What am I
to do next?”

“Write to Sir Simon Harness, and beg him to fix a day to come down here;
and when he has done so, you will write to the family lawyer, and request
him to be here to meet him. Of course you will write to Admiral de Winton,
as your father’s executor and your nearest relative now.”

“What a confounded fuss it will be!” I exclaimed impatiently, and, kicking
over a footstool, I started up and began to walk up and down the room. “I
wish I had married a milkmaid!”

“Don’t talk like a fool, Clide!” said my step‐mother. “I do believe your
pretended delicacy and fear of hurting Isabel’s feelings are nothing but a
cloak to cover your dread of a fuss!”

I was going to protest, but the door opened, and Isabel walked in.

She looked so beautiful in her pink cashmere drapery, breaking into the
brown old wainscoted room like a sunbeam, that even my step‐mother was
surprised into an involuntary tribute of admiration; and when my wife,
coming up to her in that pretty, kitten‐like way that was so bewitching,
stooped down to be kissed, my step‐mother responded quite warmly, and
actually put up her hand to caress the sunny face after she had kissed it.

I felt so proud of my lovely Isabel, and so grateful to my step‐mother for
this unfeigned recognition of her loveliness, that I was seized with a
strong impulse to embrace them both on the spot. I restrained it, however,
and we sat down to breakfast; my wife, as mistress of the house, presiding
over the cups and saucers.

“Clide,” began my step‐mother (she prefaced every remark by my Christian
name), as soon as Isabel had provided us respectively with tea and coffee,
“what are we going to do to make Mrs. de Winton welcome amongst us? Now,
don’t answer me with your usual lazy outcry about fuss. My dear,” she
said, turning to Isabel, “you will have a great deal to do in the way of
reforming him; and if you succeed, it will be little short of a miracle.”

“Isabel will find out my vices soon enough, without your enlightening her
beforehand,” I protested. “It’s not fair to take away a man’s character
without giving him a chance of redeeming it.”

“Then begin and redeem it in time,” said my step‐mother. “Here is a good
opportunity. Have some people down from London to put the house in order,
and then give a series of proper entertainments to introduce your wife to
her new family and friends.”

“Oh! please ...” cried Isabel, pursing up her rosebud of a mouth, and
joining her hands with a delicious little pantomime of fright.

“What! are you as silly as himself? Or has he spoilt you already?”

“I was ready spoilt for him, dear Mrs. de Winton. I hate being introduced;
and as to refurnishing anything, I wouldn’t have it for the world. I adore
old furniture!” declared Isabel.

“Old furniture is one thing, and shabby furniture is another,” observed my
step‐mother, resuming the chronic rigidity of manner which Isabel’s beauty
and sweetness had thawed for a moment. “If Clide had done me the honor of
confiding his intentions to me in time, I certainly would have taken upon
myself to make the house decently clean to receive you. I had for some
time past urged on him the necessity of getting new carpets and curtains;
it was not surprising he shrank from the annoyance of a few days’
hammering merely to make it habitable for _me_, but I fancied for his wife
he might have undergone as much.”

“I shall be delighted to hear the hammers going for a month, if Isabel
likes it,” I replied evasively.

“But I don’t like it; I hate it, Clide!” exclaimed my wife passionately.

“Well, then, you sha’n’t have it, my darling,” I said. My step‐mother sat
back in her chair and washed her hands. She said nothing, but this was
sufficiently suggestive.

“Have you announced your marriage to Sir Simon Harness?” she resumed after
a pause.

“Not yet. I mean to write to him to‐day.”

“Who is Sir Simon Harness?” inquired Isabel.

“He was my father’s particular friend and the trustee during my minority,”
I explained.

“You had better ask him to come down here for a few days to make your
wife’s acquaintance,” suggested Mrs. de Winton.

“No, he sha’n’t!” broke in the angel in pink. “I don’t want to make his
acquaintance. He’s a mean, disagreeable old man. Trustees always are. I
hate them!”

I thought this charmingly innocent and childlike, though, it must be
confessed, she put more vehemence into her manner than the case warranted;
but remembering the type of trustee on which she had built her opinion of
the class, I could not resent her prejudice against my old friends. My
step‐mother took a less indulgent view of the _sortie_. Seeing me cast a
smile of tender indulgence on the culprit, she looked at me very sternly.

“Do you mean to requite years of faithful kindness and interest in your
concerns by such a gross breach of respect and common courtesy as not to
invite Sir Simon Harness to your house on such an occasion as this?” she
demanded.

“Isabel is mistress of her own house. I cannot insist upon her receiving
any one against her will,” I replied; “but when I have explained to her
what kind of man Sir Simon is, I think she will consent to make his
acquaintance.”

Isabel peeped at me from behind the urn, and made a face indicative of
anything but consent.

Luckily, my step‐mother did not see the little by‐play, and, taking her
silence for acquiescence, she said, addressing me:

“And Admiral de Winton—of course you mean to ask him down?”

“Is that another trustee?” asked Isabel.

“Not exactly, though he often acted with Sir Simon in my affairs, being
next of kin,” I said. “He was my father’s executor.”

“Executor! Why, that’s worse than a trustee! I won’t have him come here,
Clide! You’re going to fill the house with horrid old men who will worry
me to death. I know they will. But I won’t submit to it!”

She pushed away her cup with a sudden gesture that made the china rattle,
and, flushing up scarlet, walked away from the table, and flung herself
into a chair near the fire. If she had flung the tea‐pot at my head, I
could not have been more taken aback. It was impossible to deny that the
burst of temper was very becoming to her complexion, but ... I was
conscious of a very distinct sense of disappointment. Yes, disappointment;
there was no other word for it. As to my step‐mother, she looked from me
to my wife, and from my wife to me. Isabel, meantime, sat trembling and
excited, her eyes sparkling, her face glowing like an angry rose.

“Dearest....” I began, “really....”

“Oh! don’t,” she shrieked, and burst into a torrent of tears.

Mrs. de Winton, prompted either by delicacy or by disgust, got up and left
the room, leaving me to conjure as best I could the storm that had
suddenly broken out in my conjugal paradise. I was utterly at a loss to
understand Isabel. She said she was inconsolable at having vexed me, but
to all my entreaties and arguments would answer nothing except that she
was frightened at strangers, and above all at horrid old men; and that if
I loved her, I was not to introduce her to anybody, but to let us live all
our lives alone in the dear old Moat. She wanted no society but mine, and
surely, if I loved her, I ought not to want any but hers! This was
irresistible logic to my heart; but my reason, being less infatuated,
perversely refused to abide by it. There was no use at this crisis in
broaching prudential arrangements as an excuse for inviting down my two
friends. Such an insinuation would only have added fuel to the fire. Yet
the new aspect in which my heiress‐wife was revealing herself made it
clear that some such measures as my step‐mother had suggested were
absolutely necessary to protect Isabel against her own folly and
deplorable ignorance of life.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

The storm of sobs and tears subsided by degrees. Isabel declared she was
ready to make any sacrifice of her own feelings to mine; that if I liked
to invite all the trustees in Lincoln’s Inn and Chancery Lane down to the
Moat, she would do her best to receive them properly, so that I should not
be ashamed of my wife; but of course there was an end to her happiness.
Arcadia was gone. All her dreams of romantic bliss had vanished into thin
air. She was after all to be nothing more than a humdrum wife with a house
to look after and guests to entertain.

“O Clide, Clide! is this what you promised me?” she cried, her voice still
broken with sobs. “Is this my dream? or was it only a dream, nothing but
the baseless fabric of a vision?”

She clasped her hands, and, throwing back her head, fixed her eyes on the
ceiling, as if the vision were disappearing in that direction, and she
were straining for a last glimpse of it.

I was so spell‐bound by the extraordinary beauty that borrowed a new charm
from her emotions and from the despairing tenderness of her voice and
manner that I entirely lost sight of every other point in the picture. In
fact, I lost my head. I was after all no more than a man, and the wisest
of us is but a fool in the hands of a woman. What could I do but what I
did do? Fall upon my knees and swear that she should have Arcadia back
again, adjure her to build up a new vision, and, if she loved me, never to
talk about baseless fabrics and such like again; and as to her sinking
down into a humdrum wife, it was preposterous nonsense. She could never be
anything but an archangel to me, and that.... But why do I bear witness in
this wanton way to my own folly? We made up our quarrel, as all such
quarrels are intended to be made up. Isabel went to her room, and I went
round to the stables. I had no fancy for meeting my step‐mother just now,
and I had a vague sense of something having gone wrong with me which a
gallop over the downs would set right.

It was a cold February morning—bitterly cold, but bright and bracing, just
the sort of day to enjoy a ride across country; so as soon as I was out of
the park I set spurs to my horse and galloped away, taking flying leaps
over everything, hurdle, and ditch, and brook, as if the hounds were
ahead, and my life staked on being in at the death. After five miles of
this going‐in‐for‐the‐Derby pace I drew rein at the foot of a hill, and
walked my horse to the top. The hard riding had made him so hot that his
flanks smoked like a steam‐engine, and sent up clouds of vapor that
enveloped me in a tepid bath; but I did not feel that the violent exercise
had produced any effect on myself. I was not clear as to the nature of the
effect I had expected, and still less could I analyze the cause that
demanded it. Something was wrong somewhere. I looked about me vacantly,
persistently, as men do when they feel they ought to look within
themselves for the object of their search, and dare not.

I cast my eyes to the sky. It was as blue as liquid sapphire, and as
cloudless. But it said nothing to me. The river winding round the foot of
the wooded hill was ice‐bound and silent as death. The trees stood up
naked and grim against the blue, like skeleton giants, and whispered
nothing. There was no rustle of leafy tongues. They were dead and gone
down into the dumb sod. There was no ripple of tiny cascades; no buzzing
of insects holding council in the grass that grew high and free on the
hill‐side; no song amongst the birds. Nothing spoke to me. Everything was
dumb. Everything was cold. Everything was a disappointment. I began to
whistle. The sound of my own voice echoed merrily through the wood, but it
woke no responsive note from linnet or blackbird or robin. Silence
everywhere.

“What can it mean?” I said aloud, the apostrophe not being addressed to
the birds that could sing, and would not sing, but to my own perplexity
concerning the scene at the breakfast‐table. There was something out of
all reason in the passionate energy Isabel had displayed. Excuse it as my
heart and my vanity would on the ground of a jealous love that shrank from
any intrusion on our solitude capable of distracting my thoughts from her,
which she chiefly urged as her motive of dislike to my two friends’ visit,
I could not see it in a satisfactory light. Again, it was simply
preposterous that a girl of one‐and‐twenty, who had seen even as little of
the world as Isabel had, could be so morbidly shy as to cry herself into
hysterics at the mere idea of being introduced to two old gentlemen in her
own house. There was some motive in the background which it behooved me
for my own peace of mind to discover.

Removed from the magnetic influence of her beauty, and her distress, and
her pretty, endearing ways, I was able to look back dispassionately at the
morning’s entertainment; and the more I looked at it, the less I liked it.
The undisciplined outburst of temper which revealed to me the painful fact
that Socrates was henceforth to be my model, and patience under an
inevitable evil the sustained effort of my life, was in itself no small
matter for regret. But this, though the most tangible of my cares, was not
the one that chiefly possessed me. No; I could have signed away every
penny of my wife’s fortune on the spot to feel sure that it had been a
genuine outbreak of mere temper; but it was borne in on me, not by
circumstantial, but by strong internal evidence that she was actuated by
_fear_. Fear of whom? Of what? What could her young life have done, or
suffered, or known, that she should be afraid? Her uncle had been very
tyrannical, and was now very much incensed with her on account of her
marriage. But she had nothing to fear from him now. He might storm and
fume, but she was out of his reach; he could not hurt her. Besides, she
had not hinted at any fear of malice or vengeance on his part as a reason
for shunning the society or acquaintance of other men. Who or what was she
afraid of? “She hated fuss, and I promised her this and that and the
other.”

Nonsense! Two old friends of my father’s sleeping a night or two in the
house did not constitute a fuss. “She hated trustees; they were
always....” Stop! No; I’m a fool and a brute to wrong the child by such a
thought. Besides, I never hinted, even indirectly, at anything like
inquiries and settlements. I avoided the subject scrupulously. No; there
could be nothing in that.

The fact is, the dear child is in love with me, and wants to play at Romeo
and Juliet for the rest of her life; and here am I, like a born idiot,
making a mountain out of a mole‐hill, instead of blessing my stars for my
luck. This, by a natural train of thought, led me to picture her standing
on the balcony by moonlight, and myself in the garden below looking up and
worshipping.

“What a distracting Juliet she would have made!” I exclaimed aloud,
carried away by my imagination. Then—I can’t for the life of me tell
why—but I remembered how she had looked a while ago with her hands clasped
and her head thrown back, and how she had suddenly checked her passionate
complaint to assume the rapt attitude, the _pose_ of picturesque despair,
and how very melodramatic the effect had been. If it had not been the
purest nature, it would have been the most finished piece of acting that
ever drew down the house to a Siddons or a Kemble. But it _was_ pure
nature. Then why do I start, and why does my heart begin to thump against
my coat in this inexplicable way? Pshaw! Because I am a fool. I set spurs
to my horse, and galloped home, whistling defiantly all the way.

My wife was watching for me, Juliet fashion, from the window of her turret
chamber, and, as soon as she caught sight of my horse entering the park,
flew down to meet me in the hall.

“Why did you stay away so long, Clide? Mrs. de Winton ‘sent me her
compliments to know if I wouldn’t like to go and see the dairy’; but I
didn’t like. I was afraid it was just an excuse to get me all to herself
and scold me. I knew I was naughty this morning, and you may scold me as
much as you like; but I won’t be scolded by anybody else.” And nestling up
to me in her childlike way, Isabel laid her cheek on my shoulder, and
looked up at me with two eyes that would have melted a judge and won from
any twelve men in England an unhesitating verdict of—innocent as a babe
unborn. Linking her arm in mine, and whispering all the way as if we were
a pair of lovers stealing a clandestine interview, she carried me off to
her boudoir. Then, when we were safe in the room, she turned the key in
the door, and began to skip and dance about like an emancipated kitten,
giving me chase round the room, clapping hands and laughing and singing in
frantic merriment. We kept up this impromptu game of puss‐in‐the‐corner
till she was fairly tired out and allowed herself to be taken prisoner and
held in durance vile on my knee, while she panted for breath, and shook
back her hair, that had slipped from its imprisoning pins, and fell in
long, black ripples down her shoulders. Thinking the moment opportune,
“Now, my darling,” I said, “let us have a quiet little talk together. How
are we to make it straight with the dowager? It won’t do to have her
suspect my dear little dove of not being as good and as sweet‐tempered as
I know her to be, and I’m afraid that silly pout at breakfast has put you
in a false light with her.”

Isabel said nothing for a moment, but went on shaking her curls.

“Do you wish me to go and beg her pardon?” she said at last. “I will, if
you like, Clide.”

“My angel! no. I doubt the wisdom of that,” I replied, laughing at the
_naïveté_ of the proposal. “It would be better if we took some more
practical means of pacifying her. Suppose we give in about asking down
these two old friends of mine?”

“Very well. I will do anything you like, Clide,” she answered
indifferently, rolling a curl on her two fingers, and not looking up at
me.

“The admiral is the jolliest old tar in the world,” I continued, “and will
never talk a word of politics or business, or anything you don’t care
about; and as to Sir Simon, my only fear is that you will fall in love
with him, and some fine morning elope after him, or with him if he stays
long enough. He’s the most unmerciful lady‐killer in the three kingdoms.”

“Is he?”

This was said in a sort of absent way, as if she had been only listening
with one ear to what I was saying; all her thoughts were intent on the
curling operation, that was again recommenced and completed for the tenth
time.

“Then shall I tell Mrs. de Winton that we will ask them both for
Wednesday—till Saturday, say? If you like them, it s very easy to renew
the invitation.”

“Of course,” assented Isabel, and began a fresh curl.

“How proud I shall be introducing my wife!” I said, pushing back the heavy
veil of hair that partly hid her face from me.

She shook it down again, not roughly, but there was a touch of impatience
in the movement that surprised me. I thought it best, however, not to seem
to notice it. Suddenly she started from my knee, flew to the piano—I had
ordered a Cottage Pleyel for her private use—and broke out into a gush of
song that made the air literally thrill with melody. Passionate, tender,
angry, and entreating by turns, her voice poured out the florid Italian
music with the full‐throated carol of a thrush. Singing was as natural to
her as speaking. In fact, she appeared to find it an easier medium of
emotion, whether of pain or pleasure, than speech; and when she was
excited, her first impulse was to break out in thrills and cadences just
as a bird might do. Once started, she could go on for ever. I sat a full
hour this morning listening to her running through a _repertoire_ of
varied power and beauty. Schubert, Rossini, Beethoven, Verdi—she was at
home in every school, and her rich soprano voice adapted itself to each as
if that one had been her sole and special study. But while I sat there
drinking in the intense delight, my mind divided between it and the beauty
of her face, some sudden expression of the latter every now and then
startled me. The wonderful mobility of her features reflected every
changing emotion of the music with a responsive fidelity which it is
impossible to describe. I suppose it was the absence of the artistic
instinct in me, combined with a total ignorance of the emotional law of
music, that made this appear to me unnatural, and filled me with a sudden
and painful misgiving as to the genuine truthfulness of Isabel’s nature.
Was it possible to feign so perfectly, and to be at the same time
thoroughly truthful?

But I was cut short in my perplexing reflections by the luncheon‐bell,
that sounded a vigorous carillon at the foot of the stairs leading up to
my wife’s boudoir. She shut the piano quickly, and, passing her arm
through mine, marshalled me down to the dining‐room, humming the “Valse de
Venzano” all the way.

I observed casually during lunch that we had fixed on Wednesday to have
Sir Simon and the admiral down to the Moat. Mrs. de Winton slowly elevated
her eyebrows, but gave no articulate indication of surprise.

I did not look at Isabel while I made this announcement, but when, a
moment after, I stole a glance at her, she was as pale as the table‐cloth.
Instantaneously I grew a shade paler. I felt I did. My heart stood still.
What in the name of wonder was behind this dislike of hers to see these
two men? There was a mystery somewhere. She was afraid of somebody or
something. At any and every cost I must find it out.

To Be Continued.




Religion And State In Our Republic.


The great questions which concern the relation of the state to the church
have already been partially treated of in this magazine. The vast
importance of the subject, however, demands that we should return to it
once more, and will serve as a sufficient excuse if we even repeat many
things which have already been said in previous articles. The relation
which the state ought to have to the church according to sound principles
of philosophy, the relation which it is intended to have according to the
principles of the Constitution of this republic, the relation which it
ought to have according to the principles of the canon law and theology of
the Catholic Church, and the bearing of these various questions severally
toward each other, both in their theoretical and practical import, make up
together a complex topic which is under a perpetual and ardent discussion,
and which is felt by all parties to involve momentous issues. We have no
unwillingness to express fully and unreservedly all our convictions and
opinions upon any of the several parts of this question. It is undoubtedly
much desired by many who are hostile to the Catholic religion or
suspicious of it, on account of its bearing upon the science of politics,
that competent persons should make such full explanations of the real and
genuine principles by which all sound and thoroughly‐instructed Catholics
of the present time in our own country, as well as elsewhere, are and will
be guided. We see no reason why their desire should not be gratified, but,
on the contrary, every motive and reason worthy of having any weight with
a sincere and courageous advocate of the Catholic cause, why the
discussion should be brought as speedily and directly as possible upon the
merits of the case fully exposed.

The leaders of the Catholic body, and, in due measure, the great body
itself, are credited by many persons with certain views and intentions
concerning the institutions, laws, and political destinies of this
republic which necessarily cause them to regard the increase of our
numbers and the extension of our influence in the nation with alarm. Such
persons would like to know what we would really undertake to do with this
republic, if we had the power to do what we pleased. We are willing to let
them know precisely what our opinion about the matter is, and to use our
best endeavors to explain what those principles of the Catholic Church are
which must form the conviction of every one of her devoted and instructed
members upon the right and just method of applying the divine law to the
various conditions in which a state may exist; from that in which the
church is at her lowest point of depression, to that in which she is at
the summit of her influence. In our own case, as citizens of the United
States, the manner in which Catholic principles require us to act, as
voters, judges, legislators, with that degree of influence we now have,
and in which the same principles would require us to act if we were equal
or superior in number and influence to non‐Catholics, if we were in the
majority, or if we were practically the whole people, is a topic upon
which we think it desirable that all should be enlightened, as well those
who are members of the church as those who are aliens from her fold.
Stated in an abstract form, the question is, What is the ideal Christian
state when actualized in its perfection, and what is the difference
between that state and the one which is the best practically in our real
circumstances?

In discussing this theme we must beg the indulgence of our readers if we
begin at a considerable apparent distance from the practical point we
intend to come at eventually. We have to lay down some general principles
about government, and to make some explanations about the American
Constitution, before we can grapple with the main difficulty. In our
opinion, many maxims usually taken for granted by speakers, writers, and
by their blind followers, in treating of political constitutions, and
specially of our own, are sheer assumptions which will not bear
examination. Such are, that in general, the spiritual and temporal orders
are in their nature and ought to be kept separate from each other, and are
really separated in our own political constitution. Those sophistical
maxims have been combated by Dr. Brownson so frequently and victoriously
that we can scarcely hope to produce any new arguments or more lucid
expositions to convince those whom he has not been able to satisfy.
Sometimes, however, a sound from an unexpected quarter startles the
attention which has remained sluggishly insensible to a louder and more
continuous booming to which it has been accustomed for a long time. We
trust, therefore, that the authority of a great foreign writer, who is a
Protestant withal, and one of the most celebrated historians of the age,
will claim some little deference from those who may refuse it to any one
of ourselves. And we accordingly resort to Prof. Leo, of Halle, rather
than to any Catholic author, for an exposition of the general relation of
the state to the church, and of the particular form of that relationship
in the United States.

In the introduction to his great work, _Lehrbuch der Universalgeschichte_,
Leo develops with masterly force of reasoning the fundamental principle
upon which his entire work is constructed, and which is, in truth, the
architectonic law of the history of the human race. The history of mankind
is the evolution in successive and progressive stages of the grand plan of
God to conduct the human race to its prefixed supernatural end of
beatitude in God through the incarnation of the Word. The organization of
the various portions of the human race in distinct nations, with their
laws, political institutions, and governments, is subordinated to this
end, and therefore subordinated to that higher and more universal
organization in which all are included, and which dominates over all—the
church. The nations which have been broken off from the church which God
established from the foundation of the world for all mankind, have been
broken off through sin, revolt against God, defection from the movement of
the human race on the line marked out by the Creator towards its end and
destiny. Yet, even in this defection, they derive all their constitutive
and organic principles and forces from their previous union with the
divine society or church, and are formed by religious ideas which are
merely perverted, corrupted, travestied imitations of the revealed dogmas
which their forefathers had received. All true reform, restoration,
renovation, and improvement must be effected by a return to unity, a
reincorporation into the church, and a reflux of organic life from the
centre into the chilled and deadened members.


    “No religion can unfold itself among men, extend itself, or
    maintain its existence, without social relations existing between
    men themselves. Every religion presupposes a state originating
    together with itself or already previously formed; but it is
    equally true that no state is conceivable without a religion, for
    every state includes a system of moral conceptions, and is itself
    a system and manifestation of moral conceptions; and a system of
    moral conceptions without a religious force underlying it is
    something unthinkable.”


Here we have the statement of the universal principle that the religious
and political orders, the spiritual and the temporal, or, otherwise,
church and state, are, like soul and body, though distinct, inseparable in
living, organized humanity. The author then goes on to prove the truth of
his assertion by the example of our own republic, apparently the most
notable exception to his rule, and an instance sufficient to disprove to
most men of modern habits of thought the universality of the rule as an
organic principle of society.


    “In appearance, some particular religion may leave the state free
    to shift for itself or make itself free from it, and some
    particular state act in the same way toward religion; but this is
    only in appearance, for when, for example, the North American
    state proclaims that the religious confession is a matter of
    indifference in respect to its existence, it proceeds on the
    assumption that there could not be any religious confession,
    except such an one as should _include in itself that which
    constitutes its own proper religious force_. Just suppose that a
    religion like that of the Assassins or Robber sects of the East
    should make its appearance in North America, and you would
    speedily see how the entire body politic would be violently
    agitated by efforts to cast out this foreign religious force, and
    to annihilate it within its own precinct. You would see then at
    once that the North American state, in spite of all its contrary
    assurances, has its own religion, and a state religion at that, as
    the collision of some of the North American states with the
    Mormons has already amply proved. This North American religion of
    state only avoids assuming the name and aspect of a religion or an
    ecclesiastical organization, and manifests itself rather
    altogether in the ethical institutions of the state as they are
    for the time being, and consequently permits a most extraordinary
    variety of religious doctrines and churches to exist alongside of
    the state, yet only under the tacit condition that they all
    acknowledge that which is the religious force of the state as
    their own. If, therefore, the North American state proclaims that
    religion is an indifferent matter, it proceeds from an absurd
    imagination that there cannot be any religion which does not
    include in itself that particular religious force which its own
    moral subsistence has need of. In point of fact, religion and the
    state form _one_ ethical whole, precisely as in individual men the
    soul remains an inseparable whole, although we separately consider
    particular faces of its exterior surface as special
    faculties—understanding, will, etc. Religion and state are one
    single ethical whole, which, although divided into distinct
    members, and apparently separated in these, must always be united
    in one germinating point and a common vital root.”(151)


A singular corroboration of the doctrine of Leo in its application to the
United States is furnished by the following extract from the _New York
Herald_. If it seem to any one singular that we cite the _Herald_ on such
a question, it will cease to appear so when we explain our reason for
doing it. This well‐known paper is remarkable for a certain tact and
sagacity in divining and expressing the instinctive dictates of American
common‐sense upon questions which concern practical, temporal interests.
We cite it, therefore, in this instance, as a proof of the fact that the
public sensibility is stirred by any practical collision of a foreign and
hostile religious force with the latent religious force underlying our own
legislation, just as Leo says it must be. Theories and phrases are
disregarded; and the mouth‐piece of popular opinion strikes at once,
promptly and surely, upon the very head of the nail, and drives it home.
It is very singular to see, in the extract we are about to cite, how the
instinct of self‐interest and self‐preservation evolves by a short process
the same conclusion which the philosopher establishes as the result of
long study and thought. Here is the extract in full, with some passages
marked in italics by our own hand, to which we wish to call special
attention, as containing the nucleus of the whole matter, and agreeing
almost verbally with the language we have quoted from Dr. Leo:


    “Brigham Young And Polygamy—Will The Prophet Take Sensible Advice?

    “Judge Trumbull, United States senator from Illinois, has just had
    a conversation with Brigham Young in Salt Lake City, which, as
    reported, is of more than ordinary significance and importance. It
    seems that as the judge was taking leave of Young, the latter
    remarked that on returning to Congress he (the judge) might hear
    of some persons—obnoxious federal officials—being put out of the
    Territory, and, if done, he might be sure it would be for just and
    good reasons. Judge Trumbull replied by requesting Young, before
    he took any step of that kind, to make known his grievances to
    President Grant, remarking that the President was a just man,
    intending to do justice to all, but that he would not permit a
    violation of law to go unpunished, and adding that it would ‘not
    be safe to molest public officers in the discharge of their
    duties.’ The judge then asked Young if he promised obedience to
    the Constitution and the laws of the Union. The latter replied
    that he would adhere to the Union, but that there was ‘one
    enactment of Congress which the Mormons would not obey,’ namely,
    the one forbidding polygamy.

    “Here, then, is the whole Mormon question in a nutshell—the
    positive declaration on the part of the Mormon leader that federal
    officers, sent to Utah, unless acceptable to himself, should be
    banished the Territory, and that there was at least one law of
    Congress he positively refuses to acknowledge or obey. Now, what
    is the plain duty of the national government in the face of these
    revolutionary averments? It is to see that the enactments of
    Congress are enforced _without respect to persons or religions_,
    and that the representatives of the federal government legally
    appointed for that purpose shall be upheld and protected, if it be
    necessary to employ the whole power of the nation. This Mormon
    matter demands decisive action on the part of the administration.
    President Grant has already declared his purpose of enforcing the
    laws impartially, even the most obnoxious, and there is no good
    reason why the Mormons should be exempted from the operations of
    this policy. The fact is, Brigham Young and his satellites have
    been treated with too much leniency and good‐nature by the United
    States government ever since they settled upon the national
    domain, and whatever they have done for the improvement of the
    wilderness in which they settled they have done for their own
    benefit, and have reaped the rewards of their industry and
    frugality. Among the many other settlements that have sprung up in
    the great West and grown into populous cities and States since the
    Mormon hegira from Nauvoo, where can one be shown to have defied
    the United States government, and to have treated its laws and its
    public officials with the contempt and insolence the Mormons have?
    On the contrary, among the most loyal States in the Union, and
    among those which sent into the field the greatest armies during
    the struggle for our national existence, are States in which the
    earlier pioneers had to undergo as many perils, hardships, and
    privations in organizing their communities, in subduing the
    forests and the savage, and in implanting the seeds of civil and
    religious liberty and constitutional law, as ever the Mormons did
    in erecting their Salt Lake empire, and in establishing in the
    heart of the nation’s public domain _a religious organization the
    corner‐stone of which is a dogma abhorrent to modern civilisation
    and in violation of all the received rules of decent social and
    domestic life and society_. Therefore the claims of these
    impertinent and rebellious Mormon squatters for immunity from the
    operations of the general laws of the country, on account of the
    service they have rendered in improving a barren waste, but more
    properly in making fortunes for themselves out of the Gentiles and
    the government, are idle and ridiculous. Greater hardships and
    more personal sacrifices, we repeat, have been undergone by
    settlers in other tracts of territory, now become great and
    prosperous States, respecting the laws and fighting for the
    national flag, than ever these Mormon adventurers encountered from
    the time when old Joe Smith went into the tablet business, after
    the manner of Moses, and founded the Mormon sect, up to the moment
    of the conversation Brigham Young held with Senator Trumbull, as
    related above. They have no claims for political sympathy, for
    immunity from legal responsibilities, nor for hardly the
    consideration paid to other religious communities; for the odor of
    their sanctity is foul, and _their moral practices are unlike
    those of all modern Christians_. We say, therefore, to Brigham
    Young and his deluded followers, that they had better accept the
    sensible advice of Judge Trumbull, consult with President Grant
    before they proceed to extremities, _accept the laws of Congress
    in regard to polygamy, as well as in regard to everything else
    they are required to, and either haul in their rebellious horns or
    prepare to pack up their baggage for a tramp to some distant
    country outside the boundaries of the United States_. _You must
    obey the law, Prophet Brigham, or you must march. Uncle Sam has
    stood your nonsense long enough. He will tolerate it no longer._”


What is it which is thus asserted by a paper always considered as
advocating the most extreme modern notions respecting religious liberty?
It is that there is something in our civilization, our received rules of
morality, our lawful principles and acts of administration, intolerant of
certain religious dogmas and tending to exclude them. This latent
something is what Leo calls our state religion, the religious basis of our
institutions and laws, of our whole political and social fabric.

The first point we wish to come at, in our evolution of the whole question
under discussion, is, what is this religious basis or fundamental
religious law, essentially and precisely? According to Leo and excellent
authors of our own, it is the moral law, so far as that law governs
political and social relations. Whatever is _contra bonos mores_ is
prohibited and excluded by it, and nothing more. But this is too general.
We are obliged to ask what moral law, what standard or criterion of good
or bad morals, is tacitly understood? To this we reply that, in our
opinion, it is the Christian law, as embodied in the common and statute
laws under which we have been living since the origin of our nation. If we
ask, further, what fixes and determines this Christian law—that is, what
criterion determines that which is really prescribed or forbidden by this
law—we can assign nothing more definite and precise than the common and
general conscience of the sovereign people, as this exercises its
controlling power through legislative and judicial enactments and
decisions. It is therefore not an unchangeable quantity, but variable and
varying in the different laws of the distinct States, and in the different
laws of separate epochs which are the result of the change for better or
worse which takes place in the moral sense of the community. We cannot
enumerate a definite number of moral canons forming our state religion in
every part of the country during every period of its history. But we can,
at any one time, designate a certain number of things required, permitted,
or forbidden by our state code of morals, without respect to the doctrines
of any particular religious body. Whatever religious doctrine professed by
any set of men contradicts any part of this code, although it may be
maintained and advocated theoretically with impunity so long as this can
be allowed without immediate danger of inciting to an open violation of
the laws, cannot be reduced to practice without bringing the offending
parties within the coercive jurisdiction of the courts of justice. A
Mahometan or a Mormon will be allowed to advocate in speech or writing the
claims of Mahomet or Joe Smith as the great prophet of God, and to defend
polygamy as a divine institution; but if he attempts to keep a harem, the
law will condemn the act, and will punish it, at least to a certain
extent, by inflicting legal disabilities on every one of his wives and
children who is not regarded as legitimate by the statutes of the State
where he lives. Any enthusiast may give himself out as an inspired
prophet; but if he is directed by his fancied revelations to kill some
one, to set up a kingdom for himself, or to undertake anything else
against the laws, the laws will avenge themselves without regard to his
liberty of conscience or his interior conviction that he is executing the
commands of God. A very piquant and characteristic expression of this
principle was once given by General Jackson. After the capture of the
Indian chief Black Hawk and his adviser, the Prophet, an interview took
place between the warlike president and these dusky potentates of the
forest. The president demanded of the chief an account of the reasons and
motives which had led him to make war on the United States. The
crestfallen warrior laid all the blame on the Prophet, who was in turn
subjected to the stern glance and imperious demand of the formidable old
general. Quailing and abject beneath the superior moral force of the great
white chief, the trembling Prophet excused himself by saying that he had
been deceived by what he thought was the voice of the Great Spirit, but
which was only the whispering of his own mind. Upon this the old general,
gathering up all the dignity and force of his character into his brow and
attitude, and raising his voice to a tone of thunder, turned upon the poor
Prophet, and anathematized him with this terrible dogmatic decree: “If you
ever again mistake the hallucinations of your disordered imagination for
the inspirations of the Divine Spirit, by the Eternal! I will send you
where it will be for ever impossible for you to repeat the mistake!” Our
chief magistrate spoke according to the written and unwritten law of our
constitutions and our traditions. There is a certain point beyond which
the practical carrying out of opinions or beliefs, whatever claim they may
make to be derived from a superhuman source, will be resisted by the
entire coercive and penal force of the law. There are and must be certain
inherent principles in our laws, whether these are vague or definite,
variable or fixed, which determine this point of physical resistance to
liberty of conscience or liberty of religion. These constitute our state
religion, which claims for itself a legal infallibility, as exacting and
unyielding as that of the Holy See, so far as outward submission and
obedience are concerned.

We come now at our immediate question, namely, the attitude of the
Catholic religion towards this state religion; and if we are able to
designate and define this accurately, we are able by logical consequence
to conclude precisely what degree of agreement or opposition is contained
in the essence of Catholic and of American principles respectively to each
other. We intend to meet this question fairly and squarely, without trying
to twist either the one or the other set of principles, or to invent a
medium of compromise between them. We take the Catholic principles as they
are authoritatively promulgated by the supreme authority in the church,
the Roman Pontiff, particularly as contained in the encyclical _Quanta
Cura_, with its appended Syllabus, and as they are taught and explained by
the most approved authors in canon law. These definitions and expositions
alone have authority in the church, and these alone have any weight or
significance in the minds of thinking men who are not members of the
church, but are more or less positively hostile to her extension in our
country. Private versions or modifications of Catholicity count for
nothing, for they are merely the theories of individuals, and will have no
influence over the real development of the church, in so far as they
disagree by excess or defect with her authoritative teaching. For
ourselves, we are purely and simply Catholic, and profess an unreserved
allegiance to the church which takes precedence of, and gives the rule to,
our allegiance to the state. If allegiance to the church demanded of us
opposition to political principles adopted by our civil government, or
disobedience to any laws which were impious and immoral, we should not
hesitate to obey the church and God. We should either keep silence and
avoid all discussion of the subject, or else speak out frankly in
condemnation of our laws and institutions, if we believed them to be anti‐
Christian or, which is the same thing, anti‐Catholic in their principles.

We do not try and judge Catholic principles and laws by the criterion of
the American idea, as it is called, nor do we justify and vindicate these
principles on the ground that they are in harmony with, or reconcilable
to, the maxims and ideas upon which our political fabric is based. We aim
at making an exposition of the case as it really is; and if we take a view
of it favorable to our American political order, it is for the sake of
justifying that order, and proving both to our own adherents and to our
opponents that our duty to God does not require us to make war on it, so
that all the arguments and motives for creating a conflict on the
political arena may fall to the ground, and the battle‐field be restricted
to the fair, open ground of theological polemics.

What is it, then, which furnishes to a certain set of violent enemies of
the Catholic Church in this country a pretext for making the issue between
Catholic and Protestant principles a political one, and inclines a great
number of the mass of the people to believe or suspect that this pretext
is valid? The newspapers, publications, and speeches which have been
giving utterance to the sentiments of those who dread and oppose the
spread of our religion, ever since it began to show signs of vitality and
growth in this country, furnish the answer. The pretext is that all
Catholics who thoroughly understand and are loyal to the principles of
their religion wish to change or overthrow the republic, and substitute
for it a political order fundamentally different; and that, if they ever
become strong enough, they will do what they can to carry out their
design. Is there any truth in this pretext? We will express our own
convictions on the matter as fully and clearly as possible, and leave them
to exert what influence they may upon those really sincere and intelligent
persons who may honor us with their attention.

In the first place, as to the republican form and constitution of our
government. There is no doubt a difference of opinion among our clergy and
intelligent laymen in regard to the abstract question what form of
government is the most excellent and perfect. In regard to this subject,
it is a part of our American liberty that we should be free to form and
express our own opinions, and there is undoubtedly a diversity of opinions
regarding it among non‐Catholics, as well as among ourselves. It is
certain that many of our bishops, clergy, and educated laymen have a very
decided preference for the republican form of government, where it can be
established under conditions favorable to order, stability, and success.
And as to the mass of our people, they have suffered so much from tyranny
and oppression that they are inclined to go to the extreme left rather
than the extreme right in all questions of political authority and
liberty. If we look at the question closely, we shall see that the
difference of opinion which may exist in regard to the form of government
among those who hold to the divine institution of the state, and the
divine sanction to political authority and law, is really not concerning
essentials. S. Thomas teaches that the best form of government is one
which combines the monarchical, aristocratic, and democratic elements in
just proportions. Bellarmine maintains that absolute monarchy is ideally
the most perfect form of government, but that, considering the actual
state of men, the mixed form is the best in practice. It is our opinion
that very few men among the leading classes in the Catholic Church could
be found, either in this country or in Europe, who would not agree with
the second member of Cardinal Bellarmine’s proposition. This is quite
enough for the justification of the governmental order established by our
constitutions and laws in our United States. We have the monarchical
principle in our president, and governors, and the mayors of cities. We
have the aristocratic in the legislators, judges, and magistrates. The
existence of the democratic element need not be proved. The difference
between our monarchy and aristocracy and those which are hereditary is
only that ours is elective, and the difference between them and certain
others which are elective is that our election is only for a certain term
and by a popular vote. The Pope is an elective monarch. The governing
aristocracy of Belgium is elective. The essential principle of the mixed
government is simply a stable and legitimate order, under which the
monarchy, aristocracy and democracy are created and sustained in the
regular exercise of certain functions of government. Catholics are
therefore bound by their own principles to recognize the political order
in the country as lawful, and to give it their allegiance. Moreover,
without any question, apart from singular and individual opinions which
Catholics as well as Protestants may entertain, the Catholics of this
country are agreed in the conviction that the republican institutions of
the United States are the best and the only possible ones for our own
country. They have no desire to subvert them, and there has never been any
conspiracy against them, except in the malicious or deluded brains of
fanatical anti‐Catholic writers and speakers and of the crowd which they
have duped. Genuine Catholics will never conspire against our government
and laws, but will always be true and loyal American citizens. If the
majority of the people or the whole people were to become Catholics, they
would not use their power to subvert our American institutions, or
substitute for them those of any European nation. On the contrary, nothing
could happen which would secure the perpetuity of the republic and promote
its political prosperity and glory with anything like the influence which
the Catholic religion would exercise in producing such desirable results.
The dangers we have to apprehend come from the sectarian divisions which
waste and neutralize the religious sentiment and force of the country,
from infidelity and radicalism, from vice and immorality, from secret
societies, from public and private corruption and profligacy, from
swindling and maladministration in high quarters, from principles akin to
those of the conspirators of Europe, from detestable books like _Lothair_,
atheistical magazines and unprincipled newspapers—evils for which the
Catholic Church alone can furnish a remedy.

Another part of the subject is worthy of much more serious consideration,
and requires far more elucidation in order to be presented in its true
light. This relates, not to the outward form of the government, but to its
inward spirit; to the scope and quality of the legislation, and not to the
manner of designating the legislators or judges. All forms of government
are lawful before the church, whether absolute monarchies or republics. It
is evident that a republic may be governed in perfect accordance with
Catholic principles, and that an empire may be governed in complete
discordance with the same. A sensible man would not, therefore, be likely
to consider the form of our government as the object which demands his
particular solicitude in view of the progress of the Catholic religion. He
would consider, rather, that the gist of the matter lay in the relation of
Catholic principles to that which we have called, after Leo, the state
religion. If we are correct in our preliminary statements, the Catholic
religion always tends to infuse itself into the state in which it exists,
and succeeds as soon as it has become the governing moral force which
constitutes the soul of the body politic. Now, what is the relation of the
Catholic religion to the actual state religion in our country, and, when
they come strongly in contact, what degree of struggle will ensue between
them, and what amount of change would be produced by the predominance of
the Catholic force?

In the first place, let us consider the case in reference to those things
which the Catholic conscience positively enjoins or positively prohibits.
In every case of this kind a Catholic must obey his conscience; and if he
is subject to a civil law which requires him to violate it, he must die
rather than submit. Formerly we have had to make this passive resistance
to laws existing in the American colonies; and in some cases—as, for
instance, in regard to certain oppressive laws passed in the State of
Missouri, it has been necessary to resist some state laws. On the whole,
however, we may say that our laws do not put the Catholic citizen into the
alternative of incurring a penalty from either the human or the divine
law. This part of the case can be therefore dismissed as not practical.

In the second place, we have to consider those things which are the rights
and privileges of the Catholic conscience, but which do not concern its
indispensable obligations. In regard to these things, a Catholic must obey
the law, and he must refrain from all violent and seditious conduct. He
must submit to the abridgment of his rights and liberties so long as he
cannot obtain their free possession and use by lawful means. But, under
our free institutions, it is the right of the Catholic citizen, by
argument, influence, and voting, to secure as much as possible of his just
religious liberty without prejudice to the natural or civil rights of
others. Therefore, as a matter of course, whenever Catholics obtain
sufficient power to command a majority of votes, they will, if they act on
Catholic principles, demand and obtain all their rights and full equality
before the law with other citizens. For instance, in regard to schools,
prisons, hospitals, ships of war, fortresses, etc., they will secure the
complete right of Catholics in these places to practise their religion and
to be free from the interference of non‐Catholic religious teachers
appointed by the state.

But what would be the action of Catholics, if they should ever become the
majority, in regard to requiring or prohibiting by law those things in
which the Catholic conscience differs from the Protestant and non‐Catholic
standard of right and wrong? It is always necessary in such a case for all
parties to exercise the greatest forbearance, moderation, and fairness
toward one another, in order that these questions should have a peaceable
solution. Therefore those violent and fanatical or selfish demagogues,
both clerical and lay, who seek to exasperate the non‐Catholic citizens of
this country against their Catholic fellow‐citizens, are the most
dangerous enemies of the public peace. We appeal to all candid, impartial,
intelligent American citizens to say who are they who seek to fan the
embers of strife into a flame; are they Catholic leaders, or are they the
chiefs and orators of a violent, sectarian, anti‐Catholic party? Our
Catholic citizens, if fairly treated, will always respect the rights of
their fellow‐citizens. They will never take part in despoiling churches,
societies, colleges, or other institutions of their property or chartered
privileges, as radicals and infidels most assuredly will, so far as they
have any power. Catholics will not do anything of this sort, even in case
they should in certain States become an overwhelming majority. They will
never seek to tyrannize over their fellow‐citizens, to establish their
religion by force, or to compel any one to do those things which are
required only by the Catholic conscience. The difficulty lies chiefly in
respect to those laws which forbid certain things as contrary to the
divine law. The civil code consists chiefly of laws prohibiting crimes
against the moral law, and annexing penalties to the commission of them.
The law must therefore have some ethical standard of right and wrong, and
must be based on some interpretation of the divine law, or, in a Christian
state, of the Christian law. Now, if the interpretation of the Christian
law of morals held by one large portion of the community differs from that
of another large portion, what is to be done? This is the precise question
which we are seeking to answer in reference to the Catholic and non‐
Catholic portions of the community in any State where the former should be
in the preponderance. The case of divorce and marriage is one precisely in
point, and the most important and practical of all others which could be
mentioned. Let us suppose, then, that the reformation of the marriage code
were to come up before a legislature in which the majority were Catholics,
under the leadership of sound jurists who were also strictly conscientious
in fulfilling their duty of obedience to the church. Would they make the
canon law also civil law _in globo_, without regard to the opinions or
wishes of the minority? We think not. In our view of the case, the right
and the wise thing to do would be to bring the law back to the condition
in which it was during the earlier and better period of our existence as a
people, in so far as the assent of the whole people could be secured with
a moral unanimity. As for the rest, it would be altogether in accordance
with Catholic precedents and Catholic principles not to legislate at all,
but to leave the church and the other religious bodies to exert their
moral influence over their own members.(152)

If we suppose the entire people of the United States to become a Catholic
people, we must suppose, as a matter of course, that the entire law of the
Catholic Church, in so far as it is an ethical code, becomes _per se_ the
sovereign law of the collective people. This follows by a rigorous
deduction from the principles we have laid down respecting the religion of
the state. The religion of the state, as we have seen, is its body of
ethical principles. This body of principles came by tradition from the
Christian teaching which created European civilization. It is, in a vague
and general sense, the Christian law. It is good so far as it goes, and in
harmony with Catholic principles. But it is imperfect and liable to
change, for the want of a competent tribunal to pronounce upon its true,
genuine sense in disputed cases. This is seen in the instance of marriage,
there being in courts and legislatures no right or power to decide from
the New Testament or any other source what the divine or Christian law
really prescribes. Let the collective conscience of the country become
Catholic, and it at once, without changing the fundamental principle of
our organic law, obtains an infallible and supreme interpretation of that
law which raises it to the standard of ideal perfection. It becomes a
perfect Christian republic, passing under the control of a higher law in
all that is comprised within the sphere of ethical obligation, but
retaining political, civil, and individual liberty in all other respects,
guarded by more powerful sanctions than it ever before possessed.

Do our fellow‐citizens who are not Catholics think it possible that this
will ever take place? We suppose not. Nor have Catholics any certain
grounds for expecting it, whatever they may hope from the power and grace
of Almighty God. There is no reason, therefore, for making a controversy
about what the Catholic Church would do in the United States if the whole
people were her docile children. The question of real importance relates
to the action which Catholics ought to take, and probably will take, as
one factor of greater or less power in the political community. Our aim in
discussing topics of this kind is, first, to animate Catholics to a manly
and honorable determination to secure their own equal rights, and to obey
strictly their conscience in all their political and civil relations. It
is, in the next place, to persuade our fellow‐citizens that conscience and
obedience to the teaching of the Catholic Church do not require or permit
Catholics to make an aggressive party, to disturb the peace of the
commonwealth, to subvert our laws or liberties, or to invade the rights of
our fellow‐citizens, and seek the opportunity of establishing the
supremacy of the Catholic religion by violent and forcible means. We have
no expectation of convincing, conciliating, or silencing the greater
portion of our active opponents. We have not the slightest hope of seeing
them desist from their utterly unfair and fallacious method of conducting
the controversy between us. Their only chance of success lies in
sophistry, artifice, appeals to prejudice, ignorance, and passion, and the
evasion of all serious argument. We have, however, great hopes of gaining
more and more the hearing, the attention, and the confidence of that vast
body of thinking and reading Americans who, if not convinced of the divine
origin of the Catholic religion, are certainly devoid of all respect for
every form of fanatical sectarianism. They know well that these violent
parties, however loud in the assertion of liberal sentiments, are
invariably tyrannical when they have power; and we hope to convince them
that the Catholic Church, while condemning a false liberalism, is ever the
guardian angel of true right and liberty.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

All the foregoing portion of this article was written four years ago, and
has been waiting until the present moment for a suitable occasion of
publication. The controversy aroused by Mr. Gladstone’s pamphlet in
November of the last year has furnished a better occasion than we could
have hoped for, and we have therefore offered this contribution to the
discussion now going on. The statements we have made in regard to the
essential relation between religion and the state with reference to our
own republic are equally applicable to the European nations. They cover
the whole ground of allegiance due from Catholics to an infallible
authority, in respect to the domain of political ethics. This infallible
authority is the proximate rule of faith in regard to what must be done or
omitted in order to obey the law of God. It is the higher law, the
objective rule, directing the subjective conscience, or practical judgment
respecting right or wrong, in the individual. It is of course, supreme;
for it is an unerring promulgation of the divine law. The definition of
the infallibility of the Pope has not made the slightest practical change
in respect to his authority of defining and proclaiming this infallible
Catholic rule of conscience. All Catholics, bishops included, even when
assembled in general council, were always required to assent to and obey
his judgments in matters of faith and morals, as final and without right
of appeal. The assent of the church could never be wanting, since it was
obligatory on every bishop, priest, and layman to give it at once, under
pain of excommunication. If some were illogical enough to maintain that
the infallibility of his judgments depended on this assent, the erroneous
opinion which they held did not subject them to excommunication as formal
heretics before the solemn definition of the Vatican Council had condemned
and anathematized their error as a heresy. Yet the Roman Pontiff always
exercised his infallible prerogative without hesitation, and was always
obeyed, except by heretics and rebels. In respect to the promulgation of
the divine law to the consciences of all men, the Pope has always been, by
divine right, just what he now is—the supreme teacher and judge of the
whole earth, as the Vicar of Christ. His power is spiritual, and its
executive is the conscience of each individual. Infallibility is obeyed
only by interior assent, which is a free act of volition not subject to
any coercive force. It is utterly silly, therefore, to say that this
submission is a surrender of freedom, or that obedience to a rule of
conscience subsisting in an infallible tribunal interferes with allegiance
to civil authority one whit more than obedience to any kind of rule
whatever. In fact, what Prince Bismarck denounces and wishes to crush is
the resistance of _subjective_ conscience to the absolute mandates of the
state, for which we have his own plain and express words. His doctrine is
the very quintessence of the basest and most degrading slavishness—the
slavishness of intelligence and conscience crouching abjectly before pure
physical force—_la force prime le droit_.

Legislative and governing authority in the church is something quite
distinct from infallibility. It proceeds from the power delegated by Jesus
Christ to his Vicar to exercise spiritual jurisdiction over all bishops
and all the members of their flocks, and in general over all the faithful.
No direct temporal jurisdiction is joined with it by divine right. The
direct temporal jurisdiction of the Pope in his kingdom is from human
right, and his ancient jurisdiction as suzerain over sovereign princes was
also a mere human right. The indirect jurisdiction which springs from the
divine right is only an application of spiritual jurisdiction, varying in
its exercise as the civil laws are more or less conformed to the divine
law, and depending on the concurrence of the civil power. Suppose, for
instance, that a bishop revolts against the Holy See. The Pope judges and
deposes him. This act deprives him of spiritual rights and privileges. If
he is to be violently expelled from his cathedral, his palace, and the
possession of his revenues, the civil magistrate must do this in virtue of
a civil law. If he were one of the prince‐bishops of a former age, and
were deprived of his principality, the civil law would deprive him. If he
married, and incurred temporal penalties thereby, it would be through the
civil law. The judgment which pronounces him guilty, deposed,
excommunicated, invalidly married, and therefore liable to all the
temporal penalties incurred under the civil code, is an act of spiritual
jurisdiction. The temporal effect of this judgment is indirect, varies
with the variation in civil jurisprudence, and depends on an executive
clothed with a direct temporal and civil authority.

Nothing is more certain than that the church has always recognized the
immediate derivation of the civil power in the state from God, its
distinction from the spiritual power, and its sovereign independence in
its own sphere of any direct temporal jurisdiction of the Pope. The
statements made above show how the immutable rights of the Pope as
Christ’s Vicar in respect to indirect jurisdiction in temporal matters
have a variable application in practice, according to the variation of
times, laws, and circumstances. It is futile, therefore, to attribute to
the Holy See or to Catholics in general, on account of the doctrine of
Papal infallibility and supremacy, the intention of striving after a
restoration of all that actual exercise of ecclesiastical power in
political affairs which was formerly wielded by popes and bishops. Much
more futile is it to suppose that a claim to revive ancient political
rights derived purely from human laws and voluntary concessions is always
kept in abeyance, and to be ever dreaded and guarded against by states.

Catholics ought to beware, nevertheless, of regarding the ancient
constitution of Western Christendom under the headship of the Pope as
something needing an apology, or as a state less perfect than the one
which has supplanted it. We do not share in or sympathize with this view
or with the political doctrines of those who hold it, however estimable
they may be, in the slightest degree. Although convinced that the mediæval
system has passed away for ever, and that the present and coming age needs
a régime suited to its real condition, and not to one which is ideal only,
we glory in the past which partly realized that Christian ideal.

France was _par excellence_ the Christian nation, as even Duruy, advocate
though he be of the principles of ’89, proclaims with a Frenchman’s just
pride in the _Gesta Dei per Francos_. Her golden age was the period
between Louis le Gros and Philippe le Bel. Her decadence and disasters
began with the contest of the latter sovereign and the infamous Nogaret,
precursor of the Cavours and Bismarcks, against Boniface VIII. Crecy,
Poitiers, and Agincourt, the dismemberment of France, the conquests of
Edward III. and Henry V., the apparition of Etienne Marcel, the father of
Parisian revolutionists and communists, were in logical sequence from
Philippe’s rebellion, and the logical antecedents of the modern French
Revolution and the disasters of 1870. In that olden time France was
rescued only by the miraculous mission of Joan of Arc, a kind of living
personification of the Catholic Church, in her three characters as virgin,
warrior, and victim. So, at a later period, S. Pius V., that pontiff whom
Lord Acton has so vilely calumniated, saved Europe from the Turkish
invasion to which the recreant sovereigns had exposed it by basely
abandoning the Crusades to despoil each other. It needs but small
knowledge of history to see through the sophisms of second‐class writers
like Buckle and Draper, who seek to despoil the Catholic Church of her
glory as the sole author and preserver of civilization in Western
Christendom. The history of Europe from the fall of the Roman Empire to
this moment is only the record of an effort of the popes to lead the
nations in the path of true glory and happiness, and of the ever‐recurring
struggle of the civil power, of sophists, and of revolutionists to drag
them aside into the path of degradation and misery, for their own base and
selfish purposes. Faithless priests, unworthy heirs of noble names, men
who have perverted the highest gifts of nature and grace, have, during
this long, eventful course of time, been mixed up with the arrogant
tyrants, cunning politicians, bold blasphemers, shameless sensualists, and
their common herd of followers, in the war against the vicegerent of God
and the spouse of Christ. What is now, has been in the time past, and will
be until the curtain drops after the finished drama. There are similar
actors on both sides now, and a similar struggle, to those recorded in the
history of the past. We may expect a similar result. La Pucelle was
falsely accused, unjustly condemned, suffered death by fire, and
triumphed. The Catholic religion is La Pucelle. Abandoned, falsely
accused, doomed to the flames, by an ungrateful world, recreant or
cowardly adherents, and open enemies, it will be hailed in the age to come
by all mankind as the saviour of the world.




Release.


I sometimes wish that hour were come
  When, lying patient on my bed,
My soul should view her future home
  With eager, trembling wings outspread
And earnest faith; that age and pain
  Should pass at death’s divine behest,
As the freed captive leaves his chain
  When he has ceased to be the guest
Of prisons—on the dungeon floor
A burden dropped for evermore.

Eternal joy, eternal youth,
  Await beyond that portal gray—
Which all must pass that hope for truth—
  The lonely spirit freed from clay;
But suffering only bids us yearn
  For that mysterious, strange release
Which through the grave, the funeral urn,
  Brings such infinitude of peace.
Oh! in that dread, ecstatic hour
Uphold me, Saviour, with thy power.




The Veil Withdrawn.


Translated, By Permission, From The French Of Mme. Craven, Author Of “A
Sister’s Story,” “Fleurange,” Etc.



XXXIV.


I pretended to be very much surprised the next morning when Lando informed
me Gilbert was obliged to take his departure the following day in order to
join an English friend of his who was to accompany him to Egypt and had
sent a despatch he should be at Malta by the end of the week.

I recollect nothing more concerning that morning except my depression,
which only increased as the day advanced. Towards night this sadness
assumed a new character, and became still deeper in consequence of a
letter from Lorenzo, announcing his return the following day.

He had left Milan, and was now at Bologna. He was really there this time,
and not pretending to be, as when he went to Sorrento to see Donna
Faustina! Oh! what bitter thoughts, what feelings of indignation, were
awakened by the perusal of this letter, at once devoid of affection and
sincerity! He doubtless supposed a scandal published in so many
newspapers, though only the initials of the persons concerned were given,
had come to my knowledge, but he was in that sort of humor in which the
wrongs one has to endure produce an irritation against those who have the
most to suffer in consequence. It was evident he felt some regret for the
past, but there was not a symptom of repentance; and though he did not say
so directly, his letter seemed intended to warn me, as he had once done,
with regard to questions, advice, and promises, that he was not disposed
to endure the slightest reproach. Not a word that appealed to my
generosity, not one that could touch my heart! I could see nothing to
cheer and console me in that direction. All was dark and cold. Such was my
conviction on reading this letter. But I did not appear the less cheerful
when evening came to remind me that my interior struggle would be over in
a few hours, and the next day I should feel at liberty to yield without
restraint to thoughts I should no longer be afraid to betray.

The large drawing‐room on the ground floor which opened into the small
garden after the fashion of Pompeii, with its pillared portico, had been
arranged for the occasion by Lando, who had constructed a platform,
ornamented with lights and flowers, where the concert he had improvised
was to take place, varied by speeches.

Gilbert was to explain its object at the commencement, and at the end,
Angiolina, for whom Lando had begged this exceptionally long evening, was
to go around with a basket to collect the money intended for the poor
people whose lives had been saved by her mother.

Lando excelled in such arrangements, and, to tell the truth, he had left
nothing here to be desired. I must also add that all of our little
coterie, except Gilbert, Stella, and myself, eagerly participated in the
work.

My aunt, in particular, looked with a favorable eye on this mixture of
charity and amusement, which at once satisfied her kind heart and
gratified her dominant passion. It seemed to her a more delightful
invention had never been brought from beyond the Alps. Besides, she had
that very day made a discovery which put an end to her maternal indecision
with regard to her daughter’s fate. This indecision, in consequence of
Lando’s intentions, which became more and more evident, was caused neither
by the frivolity for which he might have been reproached, nor by the
extravagance with which he had squandered his modest patrimony, nor by any
other motive dictated by prudence, but solely by a difficulty which
vanished in the twinkling of an eye as soon as my aunt discovered a fact
she was before ignorant of, to wit, that Lando Landini, like a great many
younger sons of good family in Italy, had a right to assume, on marrying,
a title he had not heretofore borne. Oh! from that instant nothing more
was wanting. She had always found Don Landolfo nearly faultless, but now
he could offer her daughter the charming title of the Countess _del
Fiore_, he was perfection itself. After such a revelation, her consent was
not deferred for an instant. Lando, in the midst of the preparations he
was making, had taken time to come in haste to communicate the news. This
explained the air of triumph, as well as joy, with which my aunt made her
appearance in the evening, and the unusual brilliancy of Teresina’s black
eyes, greatly set off by the white dress and coral ornaments she wore. Her
sister had also something in her manner that evening that differed a
little from the unmeaning placidity which usually characterized her. She
was not as pretty as Teresina, but she had a more agreeable expression,
and a better right to the epithet of _simpatica_ which was sometimes given
her. Their faces were both flushed with the excitement produced in advance
by the pleasure of singing in company when it could be done without fear
and without any doubt of success. And my cousins had voices of superior
quality, such as are often met with in Italy, and harmonized wonderfully
together. They were, moreover, very good musicians, and though their style
was not perfect, every one listened to them with pleasure, more especially
the young amateur of music who had been appointed to accompany them that
evening. For some time, the Baron von Brunnenberg had regarded Mariuccia
in a most sentimental manner; but hitherto the handsome young Englishman,
Harry Leslie, seemed to please her more than the baron, and consequently
she had always treated the latter with more or less coldness. It was
evident, however, that Leslie, since the evening on Mt. Vesuvius, had not
a thought or look, or scarcely a word, for any body but Stella. I often
wondered if this had any effect on her, as I observed her occasionally
pensive air so unlike her usual self. However the case might be, Mariuccia
had drawn therefrom a practical conclusion for her own personal benefit:
Leslie did not care for her; she must therefore resign herself and turn to
some one else. This resignation led her to favor the baron with such
smiles as he had never obtained before, so that he also was radiant, and
the group around the piano presented an appearance of the utmost
satisfaction. I felt a sensation of surprise as I looked at their smiling
faces and heard their merry voices. I seemed to be separated from them by
an impassable grate that permitted me to see and hear them, but absolutely
prevented me from approaching to participate in their liveliness and joy.
“Happiness ... gaiety ... hope ... all these are at an end for me!” said I
to myself. Nevertheless, I fulfilled all it was incumbent on me to do, and
succeeded in appearing nearly the same as usual.

At length, all the company arrived, and when they had taken their places
and every eye was turned towards the platform, I took Angiolina, and,
going to the embrasure of a window, I sat down where I was half concealed,
and took the child on my knee. The company of this angelic little creature
was not only always delightful and soothing, but she had a singularly
precocious instinct of the beautiful which excited my wonder and made me
keep my eyes on her while she was listening to music, and even to poetry
whose rhythm delighted her ear even when the words were beyond her
comprehension, especially when it was her mother who was repeating it. At
such times nothing was more touching than to behold the animated
expression of her sparkling blue eyes and the tremulous movement of her
childish mouth!... I now clasped her in my arms, and it seemed as if the
agitation of my heart subsided as I embraced her!

The baron first played, by way of overture, a piece of Mendelssohn’s which
disposed the audience to be attentive: then, after a moment’s silence,
Gilbert made his appearance. He was extremely pale, and seemed to be
making a great effort to rise above some great moral or physical
suffering. This was so evident that he might have claimed the indulgence
of the audience and excused himself on the plea of a real or pretended
indisposition. But presently his voice grew stronger, the orator was
roused, and his manner, usually so unpretending, became what it always was
when he spoke in public—imposing, brilliant, and impressive. What he said
at first I cannot tell. Too many recollections crowded on my mind at once
as he made his appearance, reminding me of the day when I first heard him
at the Hôtel de Kergy. I remembered what I was then, what my feelings,
what my hopes were. I thought of all the changes that had since taken
place, and what a singular coincidence it was that he should appear before
me on the day of our separation in the same way as when we met for the
first time! My attention was soon drawn to the words of the speaker by the
murmur of approbation, that soon increased to enthusiastic applause, with
which they were received. To speak of Vesuvius at Naples, and to
Neapolitans, in a way to excite their interest, requires a _tour de
force_, and this feat he was able to accomplish. With the ready
appreciation of ability which characterized his audience, the difficulty
he had to surmount was felt, and lively spontaneous applause interrupted
him at every instant, as he mingled poetry, art, and history with an
originality and grace that did not permit the least appearance of pedantry
to diminish the charm of his profound, unstudied erudition. But when he
finally came to the account he was appointed to give of our recent
excursion, and began by describing the spot where we had witnessed the
eruption together, I could not repress a thrill of emotion. I fancied, his
eyes had detected me in the corner where I was concealed, and when he
added _that he felt in the presence of that spectacle a profound emotion
the remembrance of which could never be effaced, however long the duration
of his life_! I leaned my forehead against Angiolina’s fair head as if
everybody could understand the double meaning of his words, and for some
minutes I heard nothing but the rapid beating of my heart....

All at once the child looked eagerly up, and touching my cheek with her
little hand to attract my attention, she said in a joyful tone:

“Listen, listen to what he is saying about mamma!”

Then everything else was forgotten for an instant but the pleasure of
hearing Stella’s courageous deed related in the noble, incomparable
language peculiar to Gilbert. There was a burst of applause on all sides,
and I was about to add mine when my attention was suddenly attracted and
concentrated in an unexpected direction, as if dazzled by one of those
repeated flashes of lightning that set the heavens aflame, and which is
distinguished from the others by a more terrible brilliancy.

It had occurred to Lando to ornament the platform with shrubs and flowers,
in order to conceal from the spectators those who were to take part in the
performance till it was their turn to appear. Stella was in this way
concealed from everybody but me. From the place to which I had betaken
myself I could see her distinctly, and follow every movement she made,
without her being aware of it. I was soon surprised and struck with the
effect of the address she was listening to. It was not merely attention;
it was not interest; it was a breathless emotion which contracted her
features, and to such a degree that I thought she was going to faint. I
had already risen to go to her assistance, when I was struck with a sudden
idea which nailed me to the spot—an idea that no sooner crossed my mind
than it became a certainty, and caused me such terrible anguish that I was
frightened. I looked at her steadily, trying to imagine and read her
thoughts, and while penetrating to the depths of her heart, I felt mine
sink within me. Alas! Why should the discovery I thought I had made thus
cause me to tremble and shudder? Why did it seem as if I had been struck
by an arrow that pierced me to the heart?

I endeavored to overcome the repugnance I was so weak as to feel in my
soul. Yes, I tried to regard Stella in the new light that had just dawned
on me, and to consider him in this same light—him!... I tried to say to
myself without shrinking that before me was the very one of whom I had
spoken the evening before; who was at once beautiful, good, noble‐hearted,
and worthy of him—and one whom he could love without fear, without
scruple, without remorse. I tried to do all this, and like every effort to
rise above self, this did me good, perhaps, and rendered me stronger; but
I did not gain the victory.

As soon as Gilbert finished speaking, I watched him, in spite of myself,
while Stella’s name was mingled with his in the enthusiastic acclamations
of the audience, and—shall I avow it?—I noticed with pleasure that he left
the platform without the least thought of approaching her. He slipped away
as quickly as he could through a little door that opened on the portico,
and from the shadowy recess where I was sitting, I could see him in the
moonlight leaning against a pillar in the attitude of one who is reposing
after some great effort or long constraint.

I was for some time incapable of giving the least attention to what was
going on around me. I vaguely listened to _A te sacrai Regina_, to which
Mariuccia’s fine contralto voice gave wonderful expression; and after this
duet from _Semiramis_, various other pieces were played by the baron. One
of these gave me a thrill, and brought me back to a sense not only of the
present but of the past. It was the air of Chopin’s which Diana de Kergy
played at Paris on that other farewell occasion! Everything to‐night
seemed combined to overwhelm me with recollections and emotion! I could
hardly bear to listen to this music, it so overpowered me with its
heartrending, passionate character. My eyes, in spite of my efforts, were
already filled with tears when the young amateur abruptly stopped and
struck up a waltz from Strauss, with so much spirit and _brio_ that
Angiolina jumped down, as if drawn by some irresistible impulse, and began
to whirl around, holding her little dress up with both hands. All those in
the assembly who were still in their teens seemed strongly tempted to
follow her example; but the waltz soon ended, silence was restored, and
Angiolina returned to my side as Stella, in her turn, made her appearance.

The object of the _soirée_ sufficiently accounted for the acclamations
with which she was received—a marked homage to the noble deed that had
just been eulogized in such eloquent terms. When these subsided, the
silence became profound.

Stella remained motionless while all these demonstrations were going on
around her in her honor, and did not seem to be aware of them. I can see
her still in her white dress, the flowing sleeves of which displayed her
hands and arms. Her only ornament was a circlet of gold, which confined
the waving masses of her thick, brown hair. She did not look paler than
usual, for her complexion, of dazzling whiteness, rarely had any color;
her eyelashes and eyebrows were as dark as her hair, and her eyes, when
nothing animated her, were of a rather dull gray; but at the least emotion
the pupils seemed to dilate, and deepen in hue, and then nothing could
surpass their brilliancy! This change was especially remarkable when she
exercised the natural talent for declamation which she possessed without
having ever cultivated it. Her sense of the poetic was profound and
accurate, and her voice, full and sonorous, was precisely adapted to
express what she felt at the moment in her heart. To this were added
simple, natural gestures, which the mere movement of her beautiful hands
and arms always rendered noble and graceful. There was no affectation
about her, and yet her face, usually animated by extreme gaiety, possessed
a strange tragical power. Such was Stella’s talent—a sufficiently faithful
reflection of the character of her soul.

During the noisy manifestations that greeted her appearance, she was
apparently very calm, as I have just described her; but her hands were
clasped nervously together, and an almost imperceptible movement of her
lips indicated more agitation than she manifested outwardly. But this
repressed emotion added to the very charm of her voice when she began with
incomparable grace a sonnet from Zappi; and when, striking another chord,
she repeated a scene from one of Manzoni’s finest tragedies, there was a
genuine thrill of admiration in the audience. I noticed poor Harry Leslie,
in particular, who was touched, excited, amazed. I looked around for
Gilbert—and (pardon me, O my God!—forgive me, Stella!) I was glad to see
he was not present. The very power which each of them possessed in a
different way of moving an audience seemed to establish a relationship
between them, the bare thought of which made me suffer, and this suffering
was as harrowing as remorse!

Finally, Stella began the canto at the end of the _Divina Commedia_, which
commences with this prayer—certainly the most beautiful ever inspired by
genius and piety: “_O Vergin Madre! figlia del tuo Figlio!_”(153) At that
moment Gilbert reappeared. He did not enter the room, but remained leaning
against the door. Nevertheless, I saw a slight flush pass over Stella’s
brow; I heard her voice tremble; and I knew she was aware of his presence
and had lost some of her self‐control. As for him, I saw he was surprised
and astonished. He added his applause to that of the whole assembly. But
when they all rose at the end to crowd around Stella, his eyes turned in a
different direction, and it was evident he thought of her no longer.

At that instant, little Angiolina, who was leaning against my shoulder,
mutely contemplating her mother, and only saying from time to time in a
low voice, “How beautiful! Isn’t it beautiful?” as if she were listening
to some musical strain, was borne away by Harry Leslie, who, as was
appropriate, had been appointed to accompany the little _quêteuse_. There
was now a bustle and general confusion, as is often the case after
prolonged silence and attention, and everybody seemed wild with gaiety. To
this merriment was added the noise of a deafening march which the baron
played, as he said, by way of accompaniment to the triumphant progress of
the child borne around the room on Leslie’s shoulder to receive the
contributions that were to end the _soirée_.

The contrast between the state of my mind and all this tumult, animation,
and gaiety, only served to heighten the agitation of my soul to the
utmost. All the doors and windows of the room were open, and I
mechanically went out and leaned for a moment against the same pillar
where I had seen Gilbert only a short time before. While standing there, I
suddenly heard his voice beside me:

“Adieu! madame,” said he in a low, trembling tone.

“Adieu, Gilbert! May heaven protect you!” I replied, extending my hand. He
took it, pressed it to his lips, gave it a slight pressure, and that was
all.... He was gone! I followed him with my eyes, by the bright moonlight,
till he disappeared under the trees of the avenue.

I remained motionless in the place where I was, looking alternately at the
garden around me bathed in the light of the moon, and at the brilliantly
illuminated _salon_ within. And while my eyes wandered from one to the
other, it seemed as if everything before me disappeared never to return,
that these bright lights were about to be extinguished never to be
relighted again, this numerous assembly dispersed never to be reunited,
and it was the last time I was to mingle in the gay world surrounded by
all the display that wealth could afford. The impression was singular; but
what is certain, I felt at that very moment all my happiness was over,
that which was dangerous as well as that which was legitimate, pleasure as
well as repose, joy as well as peace, memory as well as hope! It was a
moment of agony, but the sufferings of such agony, however terrible they
may be, are they not, like a mother’s throes, the signs and prelude of
life?



XXXV.


When I returned to the drawing‐room, I found scarcely any one left. Leslie
came to tell me Stella had gone away without bidding me good night,
because she was in a hurry to take Angiolina home as soon as the
collection was ended. Presently nobody remained. Silence once more
reigned, and I found myself alone, face to face with myself!

But I by no means experienced the happiness that so often results from the
accomplishment of a duty, or the consummation of a sacrifice. On the
contrary, I felt a desolation which was the prelude of a state of mind
which was to render the following days gloomy beyond any I ever spent in
my life—gloomy! yes, as the profound darkness of night just before the
dawn!

While Gilbert remained, I did not allow myself to analyze my feelings for
fear of shaking my resolution. I was able to maintain it to the end; but
as soon as he was gone, I gave free course to every thought that could
aggravate my sufferings. I now experienced that isolation which, from
childhood, I had dreaded more than death! Lorenzo no longer cared for me,
I should never behold Gilbert again, and the friendship of Stella, the
only one who comprehended and pitied me, I was not sure of preserving!

I now began to recall, and study, so to speak, all that had taken place
during the evening just at an end, but this only seemed to increase the
conviction that had taken such strong possession of my mind. I felt
determined, however, to ascertain the truth. I would satisfy my mind. I
would question her till she told me exactly all that was passing in her
heart.

But Stella, with all her gaiety, was not a person who could readily be
induced to make a confidential disclosure of her most secret thoughts.
Without the least dissimulation, she was impenetrable. She knew how to
enter fully into the feelings of others—their joys and, above all, their
sufferings. But if, on the other hand, any one sought to participate in
hers, a smile, the opening of her large eyes, or a slight movement of her
lips and shoulders, seemed to forbid looking beneath the serene expression
of her smiling face. The truth was, she thought very little about herself.
There was no duplicity in the habit she had acquired of never lifting the
veil that concealed the inner workings of her heart, for she did not try
to raise it herself, and was by no means curious to fathom all that was
passing there.

When I saw her again, I found her, therefore, nearly the same as usual—a
little graver, perhaps, and somewhat more quiet, but that was all. As to
questioning her, I did not dare to, and the query soon rose in my mind:
Have I read her heart aright? And to this immediately succeeded another:
Has she read mine? I dwelt on these questions a long time without being
able to answer them to my satisfaction.

What inclined me to decide in the affirmative was the care we both took to
avoid mentioning Gilbert’s name, the tacit agreement we made not to
prolong our interview, and the facility with which, under some trifling
pretext, she excused herself from driving out with me, though she
consented to let me take her little Angiolina.

I set off, therefore, with the child, and drove beyond Posilippo where the
road descends to the water’s edge. There I left the carriage, and taking
the child, I went down to the shore and seated myself so near the sea that
the waves died softly away at my feet. I had a particular fancy for this
spot. Seated there in full view of Nisita, with Ischia, Procida, Capo
Miseno, and Baja in the distance, Pozzuoli at the right, and the heights
of Posilippo and Camaldoli at the left and behind, I seemed to be a
thousand leagues from the inhabited world, in a spot where it was easier
than anywhere else to forget all the rest of the universe.

While I sat there silently gazing around me, Angiolina was running about
gathering sea‐shells to fill the little basket she had brought for the
purpose. Occasionally she stopped and clapped her hands with delight as
she looked around. More than ever did I at that moment envy Stella the
happiness that prevented her from feeling the isolation and intolerable
void in which I was plunged! I envied her, and forgot to pity her! I
forgot, moreover, to tremble for her! One would have thought the saying:
“_Aux légers plaisirs les souffrances légères; aux grands bonheurs les
maux inouis_,” or, at least, the evident truth they contain, had never
struck my mind!

At that time I only dreamed of human happiness under every conceivable
form—a happiness that seemed to be accorded and permitted to others, but
of which I was for ever deprived. And while Angiolina continued to ramble
about, not far off, I ceased admiring the spectacle before me, and
suddenly burying my face in my hands, I burst into tears. At the same
instant I felt Angiolina’s little arms around my neck.

“Zia Gina!” she exclaimed (she had heard her mother call me Gina, as well
as sister, and composed therefrom the name she always gave me). “Zia Gina,
what makes you cry?”

“I am sad, Lina,” said I, my tears falling on her beautiful fair curls.

“Why?”

“I cannot tell you.”

“Can you tell the good God?”

What a singular question!... She made me blush, and, after a moment’s
reflection, I replied somewhat evasively:

“One can tell him everything, Lina, for he is our Father.”

“Yes, I know he is our Father; I call him so every day.”

Her attention was diverted an instant by a butterfly she saw floating by.
She watched it till it flew away, and then resumed:

“Then, my dear Zia Gina, you must pray God to console you.”

“Pray for me, _carina_.”

After some reflection, she said: “I only know two prayers—the Our Father
and Ave Maria: which shall I say for you?”

“Say both of them.”

“Yes, certainly: Our Father first; I like it so much.”

And there on the shore she folded her hands, raised her eyes, as blue as
the heavens to which she raised them, and with her clear, silvery voice
softly repeated the divine words. If ever there were lips on earth worthy
of being the echo of that voice which once uttered this prayer that we
might learn it, they were certainly the innocent lips now repeating it
beside me! I too clasped my hands and joined in her prayer.

When it was ended, she stopped a moment with a thoughtful air, and then
repeated: “Deliver us from all evil.”

“But, as I am praying for you, ought not I to say to Our Father: Deliver
Zia Gina from all evil?”

“Yes, my darling,” exclaimed I, embracing her: “yes, pray always in this
way for me, and may God hear and bless you!”

Her angelic face, her piety and innocence, completely diverted my mind
from my sorrows. I only felt an infinite joy at not having rendered myself
unworthy to hear the words she had just uttered. I had suffered; I still
suffered, of course; but I had prayed, and still prayed, to be delivered
from temptation and sin, and it seemed to me a ray from heaven had fallen
on me in answer to this angel’s prayer!

But this impression, though lively and consoling, was only momentary, I
had to return to the reality of life, and this reality was painful. It
became much more so the following day when Lorenzo at last returned.

He did not, of course, appear like a man who returns to the fireside he
loves and respects. Nor could he be expected to present himself in the
attitude of a penitent. I was far from being prepared, however, for the
stand he took and the complete change I found in him, but Lorenzo had been
endowed by Divine Providence with such rare gifts that, in giving himself
up to evil instead of good impulses, he had to suffer from the law which
condemns those to stray further away and fall lower who would perhaps have
become guides to others had they not erred from the right way. The serious
errors into which he had fallen, less excusable than they would have been
at any other epoch of his life, were this time accompanied by a
shamelessness and indifference to scandal that at once wounded and
disgusted me. The consciousness of faults he would not acknowledge caused
him insupportable uneasiness, and this produced a complete change in the
expression of his face, his language, and even in his manners, formerly so
dignified and courteous, but now haughty and not unfrequently rude. But
what was specially evident was, the fatal fascination he did not cease to
feel. The fact was, he had not been driven from her by disgust: repentance
and duty had not led him to return to me. She who had forsaken him still
reigned in his heart, and the influence I had over him so short a time
before, was now utterly destroyed!

All this was clearly perceptible from the first day of his return. I saw
he was even rather irritated than pleased at having no reproach to make
me. In fact, he did not propose peace, but imposed it, on the condition of
absolute silence on my part. The slightest reproach from me, I felt, would
have been the cause of a violent scene and perhaps of open rupture!

Such was the aspect my life assumed at Lorenzo’s return. Will any one be
astonished at the revolt I felt in my heart in spite of my apparent
submission, which was only a mixture of pride and disdain? Will any one
wonder at the harrowing regrets, dangerous recollections, and profound
discouragement which threw me into the deepest melancholy, and sometimes
into utter despair? I began my life over again in imagination with
Gilbert, and dwelt on what it might have been, that I might suffer the
more for what it was!

This remembrance seemed to be my only resource: these vain desires and
regrets my only solace. I gave myself up to them with my whole heart, and
thus, while I considered myself irreproachable, I was as much separated
from Lorenzo as he was from me, and I allowed myself to live interiorly in
a world over which I had no scruple in allowing another to reign almost
absolutely!

The following Saturday I was at the grate of the convent parlor a long
time before my usual hour. The anguish of my soul was at its height, and
for the first time, without regard to the place where I was, and perhaps I
ought to say, to her who listened to me, I made known all my troubles to
Livia, not only Lorenzo’s new offences, but also my other trials, my
inclinations, my regrets, and what at the same time I called my
“courageous sacrifice.”

She turned pale as she listened to me, and an expression of grief, such as
I had never seen her wear, came over her face, which remained anxious,
even when I told her that she unawares had given me the strength to
accomplish it.

“So much the better,” said she; adding, with a grave smile, “If that is
the case, I certainly did not this time play the part of a
_jettatrice_!... But, Ginevra, you escaped a less fearful peril the day I
saw you borne by that furious horse towards the abyss. You were saved when
I saw you again, whereas to‐day....”

“To‐day?... Are you not satisfied? Have I not obeyed what I felt were your
wishes?”

“Yes, my poor Gina, you have made an effort, a courageous effort; and yet
you deceive yourself like a child. Lorenzo certainly ought to conduct
himself very differently; but even if he did, you would still be deprived
of the happiness you dream of. As to that other mirage,” continued she
with a shudder. “O merciful heavens! do you not see whence comes the light
that has caused it? Ginevra, I can only say one thing to you—what I have
said before: pray!”

“I pray every day.”

“With fervor?”

“Yes, Livia, with all my heart, I assure you, I pray as well as I know
how. I tell you the truth.”

As I uttered these words, a celestial smile came over her face for the
first time since the beginning of our conversation, and she exclaimed:

“O dearest sister!”...and then stopped.

Rather vexed than consoled by the manner in which she received my
communications, I remained with my forehead leaning against the _grille_,
feeling for the first time how truly it separated us, that my sister felt
no pity for me, did not render me justice as she ought, and that she knew
neither the world, nor its difficulties, nor its temptations, nor its
pains. My tears fell like rain as I made these reflections, but it seemed
as if Livia, usually so compassionate, beheld me weep with indifference.

All at once she asked:

“Ginevra, is it long since you went to confession?”

I abruptly, raised my head, my tears ceased to flow, and I wiped my eyes
with a gesture of impatience. It was certain Livia could find nothing to
say that did me any good. I made no reply.

“You will not tell me. Why not, _carina_?”

Was I really out of humor with her—with Livia? And on the point of showing
it? . . . Oh! no; I at once felt it was impossible. Besides, the touch of
severity that chilled me had disappeared. She now spoke in a tone I never
had refused to listen to. I therefore replied without any further
entreaty:

“Yes, Livia, longer than usual.”

No sooner had I uttered these words, than a lively color suffused my whole
face. It at once occurred to me that the time corresponded exactly with
the length of Gilbert’s visit at Naples. Livia did not observe my
confusion, and calmly resumed:

“Listen, Gina. You believe, as well as I, that the Sacrament of Penance is
a remedy, do you not? It has been called, I think, ‘the divine
prescription for the maladies of the soul,’ and you are conscious, I
trust, that your soul is really ill.”

“Oh! yes, my soul, my heart, my mind, my body, my whole being! O Livia! I
suffer every way!”

“Well, if you were physically ill, you would certainly consult the best
physician in the city, and, who knows? if there were a better one still at
the other end of Europe, you would perhaps, like many others, undertake a
long journey to consult him as to the remedy.”

“Perhaps so! What then?”

“Listen, dear Gina. I have just thought of a piece of advice to give you,
and as it has occurred to me in a moment of pity for you, when my whole
heart is filled with affection and sympathy, perhaps it is a good
inspiration you would do well to follow.”

“O Livia!” I exclaimed, greatly affected, for I recognized the accent of
affection I had been so doubtful about—an affection more than human,
because it was an emanation of divine charity: “Yes, tell me, dear sister,
what it is. Say anything you please. Command me, and I will obey you.”

She proceeded to inform me that a saintly monk had recently arrived at
Naples who was universally known and respected on account of his extensive
knowledge, and was remarkable for the unpretending simplicity of his
manners. His words went to the heart, led sinners to return to God, and
made those who were pious better than they were before.

“Go to him humbly, I beseech you, and open your heart to him before
God—your whole heart. I feel a conviction he will be able to give you the
remedy you need, and if you have the courage to apply this remedy,
whatever it be, I feel the assurance, Ginevra, you will be healed.”



XXXVI.


Let those who do not wish to enter the region into which I am about to
lead my readers, now lay aside this book. I assure them, however, there is
nothing in the previous portion of this narrative more strictly true than
what I am going to relate. I affirm, moreover, that it refers to a point
that interests every Christian soul; I might say, every human soul, but I
know beforehand that they alone will comprehend me who have faith in these
words: “I believe in God the Father Almighty,” that is to say, they who
with the Catholic Church firmly believe His Omnipotence is present, living
and acting in our midst, and there is not a single instant in which the
material and spiritual world, the world of nature and the inner world of
the human soul, cannot feel its supernatural and _miraculous_ effects. At
the mere sight of this word, I suppose every sceptical, incredulous, or
scornful reader has taken the alarm and made his escape, and I shall
henceforth address only those who speak, or at least comprehend, the
language I am about to employ.

I left the convent without deciding on the hour for following Livia’s
advice, and was already on my way home when I took the sudden resolution
to proceed without any delay to the church she had indicated. This church
was one of the finest in Naples, the only one, perhaps, in which the eye
is not offended by any of the incongruities so often found in Italy
between the beautiful proportions, the marbles, the frescos that adorn the
walls, and certain objects of devotion whose choice or execution indicates
more piety than taste. Here everything harmonized, and this harmony was
favorable to devotion. I took a chair and knelt against it on the marble
pavement; then, according to the Neapolitan custom at confession, I took
off my hat and threw over my head a scarf of black lace I wore over my
silk dress, and patiently waited for others to enter the deserted church.
It was nearly three o’clock.

I did not have to wait long. As soon as the clock struck, I saw quite a
number of men and women of every rank and age, as well as young ladies and
even children, come in and gather around the confessional, near which by
chance I had stationed myself. I turned towards a lady who knelt beside
me, and asked the name of the confessor she was awaiting. She looked up
with an air of surprise.

“Father Egidio di San Mauro, of course,” said she. “Do you not know his
confessional?”

Father Egidio was the name of the priest to whom my sister had directed
me. Chance had led me to the spot I wished to find. I was obliged to wait
a long time; but this delay, and the profound silence around, aided me in
concentrating my mind on the act I was going to perform, and enabled me, I
think, to make a good preparation. Besides, I had already gained a victory
over myself by the very act of coming here, for I had been obliged to
surmount a mixture of timidity and embarrassment one always feels about
going to a strange confessor.

At length the priest we were waiting for made his appearance. He came
slowly out of the sacristy and proceeded directly to the high altar, where
he knelt for some time in prayer. He then rose, and, crossing the church,
passed before me on his way to the confessional. He was of lofty stature,
but bowed down by years and still more by that sanctity which does not
spare the body. His white hair and bald forehead gave his mild, delicate
features a grave, imposing aspect, which at once inspired respect, though
it was impossible to feel any fear.

I ought to have been the first to approach, as I arrived before the
others; but as soon as Father Egidio seated himself in the confessional,
which, according to the Italian style, was only closed by a low door, he
perceived the children awaiting him, and, leaving the door open, he made
them a sign to approach. One by one they presented themselves before him.
He bent down his head as he addressed them, and the innocent faces raised
towards him were marked by a pious attention that was touching. He smiled
occasionally as he listened to them, and the hand they kissed when they
were done, he afterwards placed on their heads in benediction.

When the children had finished I was obliged to wait still longer, for a
young man brushed hastily by me and fell on his knees in the place they
left vacant, and this time the confession was long. Father Egidio, resting
both hands on the shoulders of his new penitent, bent his head to listen
without interrupting him, and when the young man ceased speaking, the
advice he gave in return must have touched his penitent’s heart, for, as
he listened, he bent his head lower and lower towards the old priest’s
knees, and when he rose his eyes were inundated with tears.

At last my turn came, and I knelt in the place usually taken at
confession. My voice trembled as I began, but grew stronger by degrees,
and I continued with clearness and the wish to be sincere. My troubles,
alas! were closely connected with my faults, and I not only opened my
heart and soul, but laid before him my entire life, feeling, as I did so,
the relief there is in the avowal of one’s weaknesses in confession that
can be compared to no human confidence, however great the wisdom or
sympathy that wins it. He murmured two or three times as he listened,
“Poor child!” but did not otherwise interrupt me till I had finished.

The words he addressed me then were the mildest and yet most powerful that
ever roused the human heart to a sense of duty. But when he finally told
me that though I had banished him whose presence was so dangerous to my
soul, I must likewise banish his memory with equal resolution; that the
recollections in which I still indulged without scruple ought to be
resisted, overcome, rooted out, and rejected, I felt an insurmountable
repugnance, and replied:

“No, father, I cannot do it.”

He again repeated, “Poor child!” and then said in a tone of mingled
compassion and kindness:

“You are not willing, then, to give God the place he has a right to in
your heart?”

I did not understand his meaning, and replied:

“Father, I cannot help what I think and feel, or what I suffer.”

Without losing anything of his mildness, but with an authority that
subdued my rebellious spirit, he said:

“I know, my child, what is in your power, and what does not depend on your
will; but in the name of Him who now speaks to you through me, I ask you
to repeat with a sincere heart these words, which comprise all I have just
said:

“O my God! root out of my heart everything that separates it from Thee.”

These words, the accent with which they were uttered, and the prayer that
I have no doubt rose from the depths of the holy soul from which they
sprang, inspired me with the wish and strength to obey.

O my God! enable me now to make others understand what then took place in
my soul.

I leaned my head against my clasped hands, and after a moment’s silence,
during which I summoned all the strength of my will, I slowly repeated
with the utmost sincerity the words he dictated:

“O my God! root out of my heart everything that separates it from
Thee.”...

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

O merciful, divine Goodness! how shall I speak of Thee? how tell of thy
marvellous grace and love? While uttering these words, before they were
even ended, I felt touched by some strange, mysterious, supernatural
influence. My heart and soul seemed filled with light. My whole being was
transformed. I was inundated with a joy that could not be expressed in
human language, and the source of this joy, the sensible cause, which I
still feel, and shall never cease to feel, was the conviction made audible
in some miraculous manner that _God loves me_!

God loves me. Yes, I heard these words. I comprehended their entire
signification. _The Veil was forever withdrawn._ The mysterious enigma of
my heart was solved as clearly and obviously as my eyes beheld the light
of day.

I loved, not as we try, but in vain, to love our fellow‐creatures; I loved
with _all_ the strength of my heart! and with so much strength that I
could not have loved more without dying!...

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

All human language is inadequate, I know, to speak of supernatural grace.
I can only stammer as I attempt it, and will no longer dwell on the
ineffable moment which wrought an entire transformation in my life. I no
longer recollect what words I then uttered, or what was said to me: I only
remember the holy absolution I received with bowed head, and these words,
afterwards uttered in a tone of emotion: “Be calm, my child, and go in
peace.”

I had knelt down overwhelmed with sadness. I rose up so happy that I
suffered from the great intensity of a joy my heart was too weak to
endure!



XXXVII.


Long years have passed by since that day, and perhaps long years still
await me; but whatever be the duration of my life nothing will ever efface
the remembrance—not of the moment I have just described, for that moment
is always present, it can never become a memory of the past—but of the
effect which the sight of the earth, the sky, and the sea had on me when I
issued from the church where I had received so great a blessing.
Everything seemed to have assumed a new aspect, a new meaning, a more
glorious signification; for the torrent of happiness in my soul seemed
diffused over all nature! I no longer wished for anything. I had found
all. I was freed from all anxiety. Hope had become certitude—a certitude
more complete than can be derived from the surest of earthly things; for
great indeed is the certitude of that assurance which _nothing_ can
deprive us of, except _through our own will_!...

_Nothing_ could quench the source from which sprang my joy, or deprive me
of its benefits: _nothing_, for my will was henceforth absorbed, and, so
to speak, _lost_ in the most ardent love!

To love with strength, disinterestedness, and passion the worthiest object
on earth, and learn all at once we could not be deprived of it without the
consent of our own heart, would not this induce us to utter the word
_never_ with an absolute meaning that the things of this world do not
admit of? It was thus God gave me the grace to love, to feel sure of
loving always, sure of the impossibility of ever being deprived of the
object of my love!

The beauty of the natural world around me now seemed a mere ray of this
joy. Never had I found it so lovely. And yet (those whom I _alone_ address
now will understand this, however contradictory it may appear) I felt an
almost equal disgust for all created things, an ardent desire to renounce
everything, a profound contempt for all that had hitherto seemed worthy of
so much esteem. Wealth, honor, dress, display, luxury, even the beauty, so
uncertain, which I prized so much—they all lost their importance and
became worthless in my eyes, not through satiety, or a feeling of
melancholy, but through the disgust one naturally feels for the mediocre
after seeing the beautiful, and for the beautiful after seeing the
perfect!

On the other hand, in spite of this fountain of inexhaustible joy, I by no
means imagined I was released from suffering; and what was also strange,
perhaps, I did not desire to be. I already felt there was a lively,
poignant, and sometimes terrible suffering inherent in the divine love I
had just begun to experience. He who has described this love better than
any other human being, doubtless because he felt it in a greater degree;
he who more than six centuries ago wrote the following words: “Nothing is
stronger than love, nothing more generous, nothing more pleasant, nothing
fuller or better in heaven or earth.... When weary it is not tired, when
straitened is not constrained, when frightened is not disturbed, but like
a lively flame and a torch all on fire, it mounts upward and securely
passes through all opposition;”(154) he who uttered these and so many
other burning words, likewise said these: “There is no living in love
without some pain or sorrow.” I knew it, and my heart was as ready to
embrace the one as the other. As to the ordinary trials of life, it seemed
to me I had sufficient courage to encounter them all, and that henceforth
I should have nothing in the world to fear, nothing to complain of....

To the reader who comprehends me, and knows all this is perfectly true, I
need not say that the state I have just described, though a blessed and
rare one, has in all ages, as well as ours, been one to which a great
number of souls have arrived by slow but natural progression. When,
therefore, I speak of this as _miraculous_ and supernatural, I merely
apply the word to the sudden wonderful grace which shortened the way for
me, making me pass in an instant from a totally different frame of mind to
a plenitude of faith and happiness!

And now ... how did they who were much more closely interwoven with my
life than the natural world around me, appear in this new light? How did I
now regard them in my heart?—Lorenzo! Livia! Stella! Gilbert! What were
the feelings of my heart and soul towards them now that I was so suddenly
brought to see and feel what was clear and right?...

In order to express my sentiments with regard to them, I will employ an
illustration that may seem obscure, and yet I know no better way of making
myself understood. It seemed to me that all the pure, tender, legitimate,
and noble feelings of my heart found in this luminous flame a new and
powerful aliment, while all others were consumed by this flame as quickly
as pernicious weeds cast into a fiery furnace!

Nothing, therefore, was changed in my feelings towards Livia and Stella,
unless I loved them more tenderly than before, one seeming more than ever
an angel, and the other the dearest of friends!

As to Lorenzo, the change was great, sudden, and profound!... My affection
for him, which he had mortally wounded and extinguished, was now rekindled
at the divine source of all true love, and became equal to that I had felt
at the time of my brightest hopes. The wish I once so ardently felt seemed
now to be the only one worthy of occupying my mind. What did a little more
or less of human love matter to me now? As Livia had predicted, my heart
was satiated; I was rich, even if I did not possess the affection of a
single heart on earth. It was, therefore, no longer through a selfish
thirst for happiness I now wished to set his soul at liberty, but from a
desire a thousand times more ardent—so ardent that it seemed to become my
only passion!

And now, Gilbert! ... how shall I speak of him? How, in the light of this
divine flame, did the dangerous attachment, the enervating, subtle
affection that had so absorbed my mind, appear to me now? And those vague,
false hopes—those impossible dreams—those harrowing regrets? And my
foolish and culpable longing for his return?

All this was consumed like the pernicious weeds I have just spoken of, and
I distinctly saw the abyss on the edge of which I had been walking. I
turned away from the danger I had escaped with terror. I felt with
profound gratitude that I was saved! ... and like one who has escaped from
the perils of the sea, I looked back with horror on the waves that had so
recently threatened to engulf me.

This impression was so strong that it began to render the memory odious
that I so recently thought the only joy of my life—the joy I could not
make up my mind to deny myself. The miraculous effect of the divine mercy
had been in answer to the very essence of my prayer; the obstacle that
separated me from God had been completely rooted out of my heart. In this
respect, more than any other, I felt changed and transformed. But this
powerful impression was modified by degrees, and I was soon able to see
Gilbert in so clear and true a light as to think of him henceforth without
the least disturbance of mind. I now thought of his danger, and the
thought filled me with regret. I perceived my secret participation, the
primary, and often the only, cause of others’ faults, from which it is so
rare to be wholly exempt in such cases, and I prayed God to pardon me and
heal the wounds of his soul as perfectly as he had healed mine!

Perhaps I have dwelt too long on this event—the greatest, the only great
event of my life—and the effect it had on me in so many ways. But it was
necessary to describe the transfigured state of my soul in order to
explain what I still have to relate—this day having, thank heaven! set its
ineffaceable seal on every succeeding day of my life.



XXXVIII.


For several days I had some difficulty in concealing the irrepressible joy
I betrayed in my face in spite of my efforts, and which there was
apparently nothing to justify.

Lorenzo’s attitude, in fact, remained the same. He continued, as he had
done since his return, to appear only at the hour of his repasts. A part
of the morning he remained shut up in his studio, which he now rarely
allowed me to enter, and he spent all his evenings abroad. Mario had
returned to Sicily; Stella had not yet wholly resumed her usual ease with
me, and Lando, absorbed in his own affairs, was less interested than usual
in mine.

Our customary reunions continued, however, and the same visitors assembled
every evening, as before. I frequently heard my aunt loudly lament the
departure of _quel Francese simpatico_, and declare how much il Kergy was
missed by everybody. In fact, Gilbert’s name was continually repeated, and
I sometimes thought Stella was astonished at my calmness, which was
incomprehensible to her, whereas, on the contrary, I was not in the least
surprised at her silence, which I understood perfectly. But we continued
our tacit agreement never to speak of him to each other. Several days
passed in this way, during which Livia was the only person from whom I
concealed nothing. How great her joy was when, on seeing me again, she
read with a single look the recovered peace of my soul, it is useless to
say here. From that time we seemed to be united by a stronger tie than
that of blood, and to have become more than sisters. But when, in the
transport of my new joy, I declared that the luxuries of my beautiful home
now seemed a burden and a fetter, and that I preferred the austere
simplicity which surrounded her, she at once checked me.

“Our tastes should correspond with our vocation, Gina. Yours is not to
leave the world, or even to lay aside its superfluities. Endeavor to
please Lorenzo, to win him back. That is your mission, which is as high as
any other; and when you feel your former affection for him revive in your
heart, believe me, _carina_, it will meet with no opposition from the love
God has revealed to your soul! You have dreamed of great things for
Lorenzo. Come, Gina, courage! now is the time to realize them!”

It was thus she led me back to a great but evident truth. I comprehended
it in spite of the different feelings I had experienced, and trusted time
would give me an opportunity of winning back my husband’s heart, which was
even sorer than mine had ever been. My eyes were often filled with tears,
in spite of myself, as I saw the alteration in his face, his anxious look,
his brow furrowed before the time, and all the sad indications by which a
soul that is tarnished betrays the reaction which has such an injurious
effect on physical beauty itself. But the time was gone by when it seemed
possible to form some project, and achieve it in a day. I had learned the
value of the words _patience_ and _silence_.

I rose now every morning as soon as it was light, and went with Ottavia to
the church of a neighboring convent to seek strength for the day and, so
to speak, draw fresh joy from the inexhaustible fountain. I afterwards
carried myself the alms which, in my pride and indolence, I had hitherto
been contented to distribute by her hands. This was the only outward
change in my way of life, and it was one that nobody perceived. But it was
not quite the same with the change that had unconsciously taken place in
my language, manners, and even in the expression of my face, and though
Lorenzo seldom had an opportunity of noticing me, I soon fancied he had
recovered a certain ease of manner towards me. Until now, he had been, not
only wounded in his pride and passion, but especially humiliated in my
presence; and it must be acknowledged that the coldness and disdain that
constituted the mute form of my reproach were not calculated to conciliate
him. The freezing haughtiness of his air in return, which seemed to add
outrage to perjury, increased my exasperation to the utmost, and irritated
me more than his actual offences did at the time I gave myself up with
desperation to the thought of Gilbert, as a kind of intoxication which
made me at once forget my grief and my anger. Now I no longer sought to
escape from the one, and the other was wholly extinguished. This new state
of my soul produced an outward calmness and serenity I had never possessed
before.

Lorenzo’s quick, penetrating eye soon detected the change without being
able to imagine the cause. One day, after looking attentively at me for a
moment, a sad, thoughtful expression came over his face, and I thought
there was something like affection and respect in his look.

This did not prevent him, however, from spending the evening away from
home, and I anxiously followed him in spirit as usual, not daring to utter
a word to detain him, and still less venture to question him. A whole week
passed in this way, in the vague hope of finding some means of influencing
him, but nothing of the kind happened. All at once, one morning, by some
extraordinary accident we happened to be alone a moment together, and
after causing me some anxiety by the gloomy expression on his face, he
gave me a great but pleasant surprise by saying:

“What would you say, Ginevra, if I proposed your taking a journey to
Sicily with me?”

I uttered an exclamation of joy.

“What a question, Lorenzo! You know well nothing could give me more
pleasure than to see my father again, and Messina, the dear old palace,
and....”

Here I stopped, too much affected to continue, and fearing to awaken
remembrances that might seem like a reproach. He perceived it and was
grateful.

“Well, my lawsuit is about to be tried. Don Fabrizio desires my presence,
and I would not for anything in the world renounce the pleasure of hearing
him plead. We will start next week, then, if you are willing.”

This proposition caused me the liveliest and most unexpected pleasure. To
leave Naples! To go with him! and to a place where, more easily than
anywhere else, it seemed to me I could overcome the fatal remembrance in
his heart I had to struggle against! And from there—who could tell?—induce
him perhaps to go to some distant land; persuade him to let me follow him,
go with him to the ends of the earth, if necessary, in search of the pure
air he needed to restore him to health! All this crossed my mind in the
twinkling of an eye, and for the first time for a long while I saw a ray
of hope before me.

When I announced the projected journey to Stella with a satisfaction I
made no attempt to conceal, she looked at me with an air of surprise.

“You have entirely forgiven Lorenzo, then?” said she.

“Yes.”

“Then I conclude he has at last acknowledged his offences and begged your
pardon.”

“No.”

“No?... In that case, Ginevra, you have greatly changed.”

“Yes, a blessed change has come over me.”

“I have noticed it for some days, and if I ask what has produced it, will
you answer me sincerely?”

“Yes, without hesitation. I will tell you the plain truth.”

And without turning my eyes away from hers, which were fastened
attentively on me, I calmly continued:

“Between my violent indignation against Lorenzo, and my strong fancy for
Gilbert, I went very far astray from God, Stella. A single instant of
extraordinary grace enabled me to see this. Everything is clear to me now.
I no longer seek happiness: I possess it.”

The moment Stella heard me pronounce Gilbert’s name, which we had
invariably avoided of late, the pupils of her eyes dilated, and, as I went
on, took that intensity of color and expression which all emotion imparted
to them. But she merely replied:

“I do not wholly understand you, Ginevra, I confess, but I see you are
happy and courageous: that is sufficient.”

After a moment’s silence, I resumed:

“And will you allow me to ask you a question in my turn, Stella?”

She blushed without making any reply. I hastened to say that my question
only concerned Harry Leslie. At his name, she resumed her usual
expression, and a double smile beamed from her eyes and lips.

“Certainly, ask anything you please.”

“Well, he came yesterday with a gloomy air to announce his departure. Am I
wrong in thinking you have something to do with it?”

“No,” replied she, smiling, “not if it is true he cannot remain in Naples
without marrying me, for I have not otherwise ordered him to go away.”

Desirous of drawing her out on this point, I continued:

“But, after all, Mr. Leslie is kind, handsome, excellent, very wealthy
they say, and of a good family. You are very difficult, Stella.”

“Yes, perhaps so,” replied she with agitation and a kind of impatience.
Then she continued in a melancholy tone of anguish:

“Ginevra, never speak to me again, I beg, either of happiness or the
future. I do not know as I shall ever be any happier than I am now, but I
know I can be less so.... Oh! may what I now possess never be taken away
from me. I ask nothing more.”

She shuddered and stopped speaking, as if she could not give utterance to
her fears. It was not the first time I had seen her seized with a kind of
terror when the words future and happiness were mentioned before her. One
would have said she thought there was no happiness in reserve for her,
unless at the price of that she already possessed, and this thought came
over her like a vision of terror.

Poor Stella! Alas! how insecure the joys of earth! To be deprived of them,
or tremble lest we may be—that is to say, to possess these joys with a
poignant fear that empoisons every instant of their duration, and
increases more and more in proportion to their prolongation!...

Is it, then, really necessary for a supernatural light to open our eyes to
force us to acknowledge that this world is only a place of promise, of
which the realization is in another?

To Be Continued.




The Brooklet.


From The German Of Goethe.

O brooklet silver bright and gay!
For ever rushing on thy way,
I, lingering, ever ask thee whence
Thou comest here, where goest thou hence?

“From the dark rock’s deep breast I come,
O’er flow’rs and moss I toss and roam;
While on my bosom smiles and lies
The hovering vision of the skies.

“Ask not of me, a laughing child,
Whither or whence my foot steps wild;
Him do I trust to guide me on
Who called me from the senseless stone.”




The Colonization Of New South Wales By Great Britain.(155)


Some few years ago it became known that the government of Great Britain
were thinking of renewing the experiment of transporting convicts to
Australia with the object of affording them a chance of reformation. This
time, however, it was its western shore which was to be tried, and that,
too, on a scale not inferior in magnitude to that on which the attempt had
been so unsuccessfully made in New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land. The
bare suggestion of such a proposal sufficed to kindle a flame of
indignation throughout the whole Australian continent—for such must an
island be called which is as large as Europe. To judge from a letter which
we shall have occasion to quote further on, the system as pursued in
Eastern Australia, although upon so insignificant a scale, is fraught with
evils similar to those which so signally characterized its more important
precursor in the west. Yet were the eastern colonists, or an influential
and active portion of them, ready to risk the reproduction of the baneful
curse which for nearly half a century blighted the prosperity and checked
the growth of their western rivals, and from the consequences of which the
latter are suffering to this day. So bitter, however, was the remembrance
of this system amongst the western colonists, so keen their sense of the
dire mischiefs still resulting from its action, that they went the length
of avowing their fixed determination to separate from the mother‐country,
if the experiment were attempted, although some thousands of miles
intervened between them and the spot where the experiment was proposed to
be renewed.

What were the causes of a failure so disastrous? The objects proposed in
the original undertaking were of the noblest. To colonize a newly‐
discovered country of great extent and promise, to develop its resources,
and to bring it under the sway of a benign and noble civilization, was a
worthy object of ambition. To unite with this a scheme for the reformation
of criminals, in a land where they would be entirely removed from old
associations, where they might enter upon a new career without being ever
dogged by the spectre of the past, was a great and beneficent design. How
was it that the proposed reformatory became a horrible curse alike to the
convicts and the colony, and that no prospect of progress in any form
could be reasonably entertained until the original scheme was utterly
swept away, and the local administration taken altogether out of the hands
of the home government, and placed upon its present independent footing?

The question of the reformation of criminals is not only of pressing
importance, but one that appeals to our higher feelings; and it has of
late become a subject of special investigation to the somewhat interested
philanthropy and eminently shallow psychology of the day. It is impossible
to say that any solution of the question was seriously attempted in the
original transportation project to Botany Bay. It was the one object,
nevertheless, which assumed a prominent place in the experiment; and to
the history of its failure we propose to devote our chief attention. The
colonization of the country was distinctly announced as forming part of
the scheme; nor, indeed, is it easy to see how it could very well have
been dissociated from it. On this subject, therefore, we will offer a few
remarks by way of introduction.

The recolonization of Southern Europe by the Northern tribes in the Vth
and VIth centuries of the present era offers a striking contrast to the
colonization of Australia by a nation calling itself Christian. Anything
but prepossessing is the description given us by the historians of those
Northern invaders, whose deeds but too faithfully bear out the
description. Over depopulated provinces, cities in ashes, and the ruins of
the noblest monuments of religion and art, they swarmed into their new
settlements. Vandals, Franks, Goths, and Huns, all alike were
distinguished for an unpitying cruelty, although the Huns surpassed the
rest in licentious profligacy and crime. Yet amidst the ruin they had
made, and the prodigious havoc with which they had desolated the fairest
countries of Europe, the winning accents of Christian civilization stole
into their ears and subdued their untutored souls. In one respect they had
the advantage of the first English settlers in Australia. They had not
been flung out of their own country like garbage. They came under no ban
of law. They bore not with them the consciences of convicted criminals.
They marched to the spoil under the (to them) legitimate banners of
ambition, or to satisfy their greed of gain. The untutored instincts of
humanity, grand even in their lawlessness and ferocity, urged them on.
Deformed, as might have been expected, with many of the gross vices of the
savage, they were not wanting in some of the more attractive features of
the nobility of nature. Their ears had never listened to the loving voice
of the Virgin Daughter of Sion. Their hearts had never been disciplined
nor their minds formed by the revelation from heaven committed to her
keeping. Theirs was not the guilt, as it has been of some of the nations
of this XIXth century, to have _apostatized_ to the barbarous maxim that
“might makes right.” They knew no better. No sooner, however, did the
majestic vision of the Spouse of Christ—the Catholic Church—meet their
gaze, than, far from treating her with insult and outrage, they threw
themselves with loving veneration at her feet, bowed their necks with the
truthful docility of children to her discipline, and arose to prove
themselves her most faithful defenders.

But whilst the men‐eating aborigines of Australia had no civilization to
communicate, the first invaders of its shores from Great Britain were,
some of them, of the worst class of barbarians—the barbarians of
civilization. They were of those whose untamable souls law, civilization,
and religion had failed to subdue. They were the offscouring of the
criminal class of the three kingdoms. The society they had outraged had
cast them out from itself upon the coasts of Australia. They stepped on
shore convicted as felons. They had forfeited the citizenship of their own
country; and, although still undergoing their respective sentences, it was
understood that they were to have the opportunity of making a fresh start
in their new country, should their conduct correspond with the clemency of
the executive. On a career that, more than any other, requires a spirit of
enterprise, light‐heartedness, and courage, they had set out under the ban
of expatriation, the burden of shame, and all the depressing influences of
detected guilt. Of such were the first settlers of Australia.

On the evening of the 26th of January, 1788, the English dominion over
what has been called the fifth division of the globe was inaugurated by
the solemnity of pledging the king’s health round a flag‐pole. His
majesty’s subjects in New Holland, at the period of this imposing
function, numbered one thousand and thirty souls. Of these seven hundred
and seventy‐eight were convicts. The remaining two hundred and fifty
consisted of the soldiers who formed the garrison of the new settlement,
and their officers, together with a few civil functionaries. In this rude
germ of future commonwealths the elements neither of agriculture nor of
commerce as yet existed. An encampment of huts was its first abiding‐
place. For food it depended on the stores brought with it from the mother‐
country; amongst which was neither seed nor other provision for future
crops. At the moment at which we write, after a lapse of eighty‐six years,
the flocks and herds of a wealthy agricultural population range over an
area as large as that of Europe; five splendid provinces, each with its
own court and parliament, can boast of cities equal in size to many
European capitals, and constituting commercial marts second to none on the
face of the globe.

Of the prodigious strides they have made in material prosperity, Mr.
Therry, in his interesting _Reminiscences_, gives the following striking
illustration:


    “It has been ascertained that our South Pacific colonies take from
    us in imports for every man, woman, and child of their respective
    populations, on the average, from £8 to £10 per head per annum,
    while the United States were only customers to us in 1859 (before
    the war began), at the rate of 17s. per head. The amount of
    imports received by Canada, which comes nearest to Australia, is
    £5 per head; that of New South Wales alone is £21 3s. 4d. per
    head; of Victoria, £25” (p. 9).


The commerce of these colonies with all parts of the world is nearly three
times larger in money value than was the whole export commerce of England
less than a century ago; and they receive from the United Kingdom upwards
of twenty times the value of exports which the North American colonies
were receiving at the time of their separation from the mother‐country. To
crown the social edifice, a contented people live and prosper under the
shadow of the freest institutions, in many respects surpassing, in this
particular, the much‐vaunted model on which they have been framed.

It is certain that the prevailing motive of the English government in
despatching a penal colony to Botany Bay was to supply the place of her
lost American colonies. No doubt the idea of colonizing the country was
present to their minds. But it never went beyond words. Not a single
provision was made for colonial development. On the contrary, the whole
constitution of the exiled community was fatal to such an object. For
nearly half a century the inherent vices of the system struggled against
and forcibly restrained any efforts to profit by the advantages of a
country of such wonderful promise; nor was it before the original
government scheme had been quite abandoned that the colony rose from its
inaction, like an unfettered giant, and, as it were, almost at a stride,
arrived at a pitch of prosperity unexampled, in so short a period of time,
in the annals of the world, with the single exception of the American
colonies after they had disembarrassed themselves of the yoke of the
mother country.

The defection of those colonies had stopped an important outlet for the
criminal population of the three kingdoms. We are told by Bancroft, in his
_History of the United States_, that


    “The prisoners condemned [in England] to transportation were a
    salable commodity. Such was the demand for labor in America that
    convicts and laborers were regularly purchased and shipped to the
    colonies, where they were sold as indented servants.”


The Irish malcontents, moreover—of whom, owing to the long misgovernment
of the kingdom, Ireland was full, and whose disaffection had been
stimulated by the revolt of the North American colonies—threatened to
increase the convict population by a large and particularly unmanageable
element. It was only a year or two before that a country happened to be
explored and taken possession of in the name of England so happily fitted
for colonization, and of which such admirable use has since been made. The
discovery was the result of sheer accident, so far as the British
government was concerned. The expedition to which it owes it was sent out
by the Royal Society for scientific purposes; the object being to make
accurate observations of the transit of Venus from the island of Otaheite.
The islands of New Zealand and the east coast of New Holland were explored
on the way home. The astronomical expedition returned to England in the
midsummer of 1771.

In 1786, the government decided on establishing permanent settlements on
the coast lately explored by Captain Cook, accompanied by Messrs. Green
and Banks and Dr. Solander. The colony consisted exclusively of the
convicts and the military in charge; of prisoners and their jailers. Any
class out of which a free civil community might be formed could only arise
out of chance settlers, or of those among the convicts whose position was
the result rather of untoward circumstances than of any irreclaimable
criminality of disposition, and who were prepared to re‐commence in those
distant lands a career from which their misfortune or their fault had shut
them out at home.

The constitution of the expedition was as follows: A governor, lieutenant‐
governor, judge‐advocate, commissary, and chaplain; a surgeon and two
assistant surgeons; an agent for the transports; two hundred and twelve
soldiers and mariners, including officers; their wives, numbering forty,
and their children; five hundred and forty‐eight male convicts, and two
hundred and thirty female.

The neighborhood of Botany Bay having been judged unsuitable for the new
settlement, the expedition landed at a spot situated at the head of one of
the coves of Port Jackson Harbor, which had been judiciously selected by
the governor as the site of the future capital. The 26th of January, 1788,
was the day of disembarkation, and it was on the evening of that day that
the inaugural rite, to which we have before alluded, was solemnized. After
a lapse of eleven days, consumed in putting up the public and private
structures needful for the new colony, the ceremony of inauguration was
supplemented by one of a yet more imposing character. On the seventh of
February was held a formal assembly of all the members of the new
commonwealth. An occasion of greater interest could not be imagined. Upon
no band of colonists was ever lavished a greater wealth of hope and
fortune. No guilt of diplomatic fraud or commercial overreaching marred
their title to the new territory. Through no bloodshed, no violence, but
quite unopposed, they had entered on its peaceable possession. No foreign
power, to whom the new state might be calculated to give umbrage,
threatened its future welfare. A magnificent harbor sheltered its ships
and transports; and it was only one of many such with which a coast of
vast extent was indented. A whole continent of virgin soil stretched out
before them, which, under the influence of the finest climate under
heaven, waited only the bidding of man to quicken within itself an
exhaustless luxuriance of vegetable life. A mighty Empire of the South
offered itself to any hands that were willing and able to grasp it. It was
only reasonable to expect that England, having just lost her supremacy in
the New World, would have devoted her utmost resources of civilization and
statesmanship to laying deep and wide the foundations of her new dominion.
If none of the members of an aristocracy enjoying more advantages and more
power than were ever possessed by the most privileged class of any the
most privileged nation, were willing to leave the home of their ancestral
traditions, the softness of hereditary ease, and an absolute independence
of fortune’s caprice, in order to join in the struggling life of a young
community, we should at least have expected that the mother‐country would
despatch a contribution from each of the other classes of her citizens to
assist in the formation of the new settlement. Her system of
jurisprudence, admirable in spite of the inextricable jumble of statutes
and precedents amidst which it has been reared, would be represented, one
would have thought, by a sufficient number of lawyers of character; her
merchant princes would be encouraged to carry their spirit of enterprise
to so rich and promising a field; still more, that which forms the only
true and solid basis of material prosperity—agriculture—would be
abundantly cared for in the shape of a due supply of competent masters and
sturdy laborers; last, though not least, some provision would be made, not
only for the moral and religious training of the people, but for such
mental cultivation as was compatible with the condition of an infant
community. What no one in his senses could have anticipated was that the
government of a great and ancient nation should have sent out as the
founders of a new colonial empire a contingent of malefactors, guarded by
a few marines. Upon the occasion of the formal inauguration ceremony the
whole colony were assembled around the governor. Nearest to himself were
the lieutenant‐governor, the judge‐advocate, provost‐marshal, commissary,
adjutant, doctor, and chaplain. The two hundred and twelve marines,
including no less than fifteen commissioned officers, were drawn up in
battle array. Apart from the rest, as under the ban of crime, stood the
bulk of the community—namely, the convicts. To this assemblage the judge‐
advocate read the royal commission and the act of Parliament which
constituted the court of judicature. After the reading of which documents
the one hundred and ninety‐seven marines shouldered old “Brown Bess,” made
ready, presented, and fired three times.

The ceremony was not imposing, but it was on a par with the rest of the
proceedings. The governor, Capt. Phillip, wound it up with a speech in
which, in spite of grammatical errors which may be pardoned in a sailor,
he displayed considerable ability and eloquence, but a marvellous absence
of common sense. In the course of a somewhat inflated panegyric on England
and her fortunes, his excellency went on to portray his native country as
the peculiar favorite of heaven, and to ascribe her successful
colonization of New Holland—a matter considered by anticipation as already
accomplished, and that, too, in the teeth of the recent defection of her
most splendid colonies on the plea of tyrannical misgovernment—to a
prolonged special intervention of Divine Providence.


    “Nor did our good genius desert us,” continued the governor, “when
    we reached our destination. On the contrary, it was then that
    her(?) crowning favor was bestowed. Witness the magnificent harbor
    which before us extends its hundred beautiful bays. Witness the
    beautiful landscape, the islands, capes, and headlands, covered
    with waving foliage, rich and varied beyond compare. Witness every
    surrounding object which, as regards a situation for our future
    homes, our necessities could demand or our tastes desire. Happy
    the nation whose enterprises are thus favored by the elements and
    by fortune! Happy the men engaged in an enterprise so favored!
    Happy the state to whose founding such propitious omens are
    granted!”


It is clear from the following passage, incredible as it may appear, that
the government of the day did really contemplate founding a new state
beyond the seas out of the criminal population, the moral refuse of
society. Gov. Phillip even challenges for the scheme the praise of
magnanimity.

“The American colonies,” he said in his inaugural address, “smarting under
what they considered a sense of injustice, had recourse to the sword, and
the ancient state and the young dependency met in deadly conflict. The
victory belonged to the American people, and Britain, resigning the North
America continent (?) to the dominion of her full‐grown offspring,
magnanimously seeks in other parts of the earth a region where she may lay
the foundations of another colonial empire, which one day will rival in
strength, but we hope not in disobedience, that which she has so recently
lost” (_Flanagan_, vol. i. p. 30).

It is, however, remarkable that Mr. Flanagan grounds his own attribution
of magnanimity on the absence of those very features of the new territory
on whose conspicuous presence the governor, standing on the spot,
congratulates his fellow‐colonists, as one of the signs of a special
interposition of Providence in their favor.


    “To incur vast expense,” writes the author of the _History of New
    South Wales_, “encounter great dangers, and overcome great
    difficulties, in order to possess and colonize a country more
    remote than any hitherto brought under subjection by Europeans—a
    country presenting _no pre‐eminent attractions in soil, destitute,
    so far as was then known, of the precious metals_, and inhabited
    by a people in the greatest degree barbarous and devoid of all
    riches—while countries possessing all those attractions which New
    Holland wanted were within her reach, is the best evidence which
    can possibly be afforded of national magnanimity” (_Flanagan_,
    vol. i. p. 2).

    “How grand is the prospect which lies before the youthful nation!”
    exclaimed the enthusiastic governor to the new colony in his
    inaugurative speech. “Enough of honor for any state would it be to
    occupy the first position, both in regard to time and influence,
    in a country so vast, so beautiful, _so fertile_, so blessed in
    climate, so rich in all those bounties which nature can confer;
    ... _its fertile plains tempting only the slightest labor of the
    husbandman to produce in abundance the fairest and the richest
    fruits_; its interminable pastures, the future home of flocks and
    herds innumerable; _its mineral wealth, already known to be so
    great as to promise that it may yet rival those treasures which
    fiction loves to describe_—enough for any nation, I say, would it
    be to enjoy those honors and those advantages; but others not less
    advantageous, but perhaps more honorable, await the people of the
    state of which we are the founders.”


“To these,” continued the governor, addressing that engaging instalment of
British civilization which the imperial government had sent forth from the
shores of their country to take possession, in its name, of this new land,
and develop its abundant resources, “will belong the surpassing honor of
having introduced permanently the Christian religion and European
civilization into the southern hemisphere. At no distant date it will be
theirs to plant the standard of the cross and the ensign of their country
in the centre of numerous populous nations to whom both these have
hitherto been but little known. Such are the objects which will arouse the
enterprise and stimulate the energies of the people of this young
country—enterprise and energy, directed not toward conquest or rapine,
chiefly because Australia, rich beyond measure in her own possessions,
cannot desire those of others, but towards the extension of commerce, the
spread of the English language, the promotion of the arts and sciences,
and the extension of the true faith. Such are the circumstances and
conditions which lead to the conviction that this state, of which to‐day
we lay the foundation, will, ere many generations have passed away, become
the centre of the southern hemisphere—the brightest gem of the Southern
Ocean” (_Flanagan_, vol. i. pp. 32, 33).

Were these, then, whom Capt. Phillip addressed the men to introduce the
Christian religion and European civilization in a newly‐discovered
continent? Were a detachment of jail‐birds and their keepers to “develop
commerce, spread the English language, promote the arts and sciences, and
extend the true faith?” Were such as these the missionaries to plant the
standard of the cross, or even that of their own country, amidst
populations alien to both alike? Did the English government seriously
propose to make a missionary college out of a reformatory, if such it
could be called? Were the Barabbases of England to be the pioneers of
civilization, the Artful Dodgers of the metropolis the heralds of the
Christian faith?

The truth is that the only object directly provided for by the government
to which England was indebted for this “magnanimous” deed of colonization
was the establishment of a secure and distant depot for the worst
criminals of the country.

The noble object to which the exhaustless resources of the continent they
had just taken possession of were to be devoted was left to the chapter of
accidents. A picture of the future greatness of the equivocal colony was,
it is true, dashed off, in glowing colors, by Commodore Phillip, but no
provision of any kind was made for its realization.

There was nothing whatever to hinder the attainment of both these objects,
or at least an attempt to attain them. On the contrary, never was a fairer
opportunity for an experiment of the kind offered to a people. Before them
lay the wide, almost limitless landscape in all its exuberant beauty and
unexhausted fertility. There it lay, as a kind of treasure‐trove, at their
feet, with no one to dispute its possession. Their first object ought
assuredly to have been to bring a large portion of the soil under
cultivation; agriculture being that on which more than on anything else
the prosperity of a country, and especially of a young country, depends.
Not one shilling did these original and eccentric colonists invest in the
soil of that vast island continent, every acre of which was theirs, with
all its latent wealth, whether that wealth consisted in its as yet untried
productive powers, or in the hoard of precious metals which might be
locked up in its secret depths.

The home government thus had it in their power to offer to a superior
class of yeomen inducements of the most persuasive kind to try their
fortunes in the new colony. Sufficient area being left for the development
of a splendid capital, they should have been planted in middling‐sized
farms as closely around the reserved area as seemed desirable, and
stretching out into the continent in gradually‐encroaching circles. A
small contingent of married men, of good reputation amongst their
neighbors, and of superior capacity and attainments, should have been
encouraged to throw their fortunes into the colony. To these a greater
extent of land should have been granted. These settlers would have formed
the nucleus of a class from which could have been selected men fitted for
holding the most responsible positions. The young colony could very well
dispense with hereditary titles of honor. But it could not so well
dispense with a class such as we refer to, if it was to become a country
to which men of character and position would not hesitate to resort. A
class was wanted other than the emancipists—the very worst that could have
been chosen—to supply persons of standing, acquirements, and, above all,
of reputable experience for the magistracy, and for other national, so to
speak, as well as local, offices of trust and administration. Such a class
of yeomen having been thus provided, the staff of government officials,
the military and naval forces, and the continually increasing influx of
convict laborers, added to the population of those classes themselves,
would have supplied a considerable population, ready to hand, of customers
and consumers. The mercantile and professional classes would soon have
sent their contributions from the overstocked mother‐country, not in
arrear, at all events, of the ordinary course of supply and demand. A
manufacturing class would have developed of itself quite as soon as the
interests of the colony required it. And, lastly and most imperatively of
all, had the mother‐country been Catholic, the interests of religion would
have been the very first consideration. Priests and a nucleus of one or
more religious orders would have been despatched with the expedition.
Churches would have been the first structures raised. Land would have been
set apart for their support, and for the appropriate splendor of Christian
worship. And hospitals, attended by religious of both sexes, would have
been erected, and endowed with sufficient land for their perpetual
support.

Nothing of the sort was so much as attempted. Thirty years after the
memorable inauguration day, a period of time embracing nearly one‐half of
the entire age of the colony, the then governor, Macquarie, we are told by
Mr. Therry, “_considered the colony was selected as a depot for convicts;
that the land properly belonged to them, as they emerged from their
condition of servitude; and that emigrants were intruders on the soil._”
Ten years afterwards, little more than seventy years ago, the state of
“the brightest gem of the Southern Ocean,” in spite of the encouragement
given to emigration by Macquarie’s successor, Sir Thomas Brisbane, during
the three years of his administration, is thus described by the very
competent authority just quoted: “_The majority of the community he_ (Sir
Thomas Brisbane) _ruled over were of the convict class, who were not
respectable nor right‐minded. It consisted of very inflammable materials,
composing two‐thirds of the whole community, which it required the
exercise of a stern authority to repress._”

Natural advantages have triumphed over the obstacles offered by human
folly. The present condition of the Australian colonies more than realizes
the glowing expectations of the head‐jailer of the first convict gang that
landed on their shores. Indeed, if those utterances of Commander Phillip
were to be judged by the results, we might be tempted to ascribe them to
the inspiration of even prophetical sagacity. One merit, at all events,
may be accorded to the enthusiastic sailor. He did not overestimate the
boundless resources and advantageous position of the noble country of
which he and his prisoners were assuming the proprietorship “on behalf of
the British people,” utterly incapable as they were of taking advantage of
them.

To Be Concluded Next Month.




A Summer In Rome.


By The Author Of “The House Of Yorke.”

Of course all our friends exclaimed, when we intimated the possibility of
our remaining in Rome for the summer:

We would suffocate with heat.

We would be poisoned with malaria.

We would have chills, and consequently fevers.

The fruit would make us sick, the wine would turn sour while we were
pouring it out, and we would be kept awake all night by people in the
street.

We would have no one to speak to, for everybody would be gone out of town.

Besides, and above all, it was not the proper thing to do.

I do not believe that either of us was serious in first making the
proposal, unless Bianca cherished such a wish under her pensive silence;
but so much opposition led us to look at the project, and we did not find
it so bad as might have been expected. Besides, no one with a particle of
spirit likes to be scouted and talked down; and all of us had spirit
enough to feel a little vexed at the storm of opposition we had brought
about our ears—all except Mr. Varney. He was too indolent to resent
anything.

“I do not believe that there is the least necessity for having a fever in
Rome,” said Isabel. (It was nearly always Isabel who spoke.) “One has but
to select a cool apartment and use a little prudence. If we were to do as
I have seen people do here—go from the oven to the refrigerator—we should
know what to expect. To walk in a sunny street till you are in a
perspiration, then sit on a shady stone to cool off, is not only inviting
a fever, but sending a _gendarme_ to fetch it. As for heat, New York is
ten times hotter; and I once passed a whole summer in New York, and was
quite comfortable; wasn’t I, papa? Then, how any one can say that we shall
have no one to speak to I cannot imagine. Here are four of us; and I take
perfect delight in talking to myself. The most interesting conversations I
ever had in my life were with Miss Isabel Varney.”

“Besides,” said a clear voice from the window, “what we came to Rome to
see doesn’t go away in the summer.”

We all looked at Bianca, who had turned her head toward us to speak, and
was gazing out the window again, the lace curtain wrapped about her like a
bridal veil, and the _persienne_ half closed to shield her from the many
eyes in the piazza.

“May I ask what you came to see?” inquired a visitor, who always tried to
make this silent one talk.

She only half turned to answer.

“The Holy Father; the shrines and homes of the saints; all the holy, and
all the beautiful, and all the famous places here; and the skies that are
above them. And, again, the Holy Father. He is the Christian Prometheus,
bound to the Vatican as to a rock, and we are a little chorus of American
Oceanides who are come to bewail him, and who have no mind to go away for
pleasure.”

“Brava!” said papa.

“And as for the ‘proper thing,’ ” said another member of the family, “we
have bored ourselves to death all winter trying to do that.”

“Besides,” struck in Isabel, with a bright thought, “we want to learn the
language; and that we never could do going about from place to place. Here
we can sit down quietly, and study the four or five hundred irregular
verbs at our leisure, and settle the genders of things, and learn to
pronounce properly all their undulating and circuitous strings of vowels
and the little curly tails to their ridiculous words.”

“Don’t include me in your class, if you please,” Mr. Varney said. “I would
as soon shave off my hair and wear a wig as drop my own language and speak
another. I shall speak English when I say anything; and if people do not
understand me, it will not be my fault. We can always find interpreters;
and I do not approve of—of—er—of deserting your own tongue for another,”
he concluded rather weakly, not having measured his strength before
commencing this speech.

The truth was that he never did approve of anything which cost him the
least effort; but we listened as gravely as if we believed him to be
actuated by the most heroic patriotism.

“You are quite right, papa,” Isabel said emphatically. “Still, since
interpreters may not always be honest, you know, it is better that some of
us should understand and be able to protect the family.”

“You will not find the verbs so difficult as you may imagine,” remarked an
Italian. “The irregularities are chiefly in the preterite. Preterites are
always ragged. They are never a part of the original language, I think,
but were interpolated when it was discovered that a nicer expression of
thought was needed; and then the grammarians had to accommodate themselves
to circumstances, and use what was left. You will take pleasure in
learning so musical a language, Miss Isabel.”

“Oh! I think English quite as musical as Italian,” replied the young woman
with composure.

“When you speak it, _signorina_,” said the Italian, after a momentary
pause of astonishment.

“I find the phrases and words I learned in music very useful,” she
continued. “The other day I said ‘_allegro, ma non troppo_,’ to the
coachman, and he drove perfectly. That is on millions of pieces of music,
you know, papa. It quite pleased me to talk to a coachman as if he were a
fugue. And when I said ‘_andante_,’ he actually put down the brake.”

“But you know we were going down‐hill then, Bella,” remarked her sister.

“I can make the servants understand perfectly well,” continued Isabel.
“But in churches and galleries, and catacombs, and such places, the people
are very stupid.”

This is the way in which Miss Isabel Varney made the servants understand
perfectly:

“Angelina,” she would say to the _donna_, in English, “I want you to black
my thick walking‐boots. The dust has made them look dingy. But first bring
me another pitcher of water. It is strange that in a city that would be a
lake if all its aqueducts were to burst at once one cannot get more than a
quart of water at a time. Make haste, now, for I wish to go out
immediately.”

Angelina stood immovable, a picture of distressful doubt. The time had
gone past when she would have ventured to remind her mistress that English
had not been included in her education.

“Oh! to be sure,” says Isabel. “What a bother it is when one is in a
hurry! What is the Italian for water, Bianca? _Acqua?_ Well, Angelina,
bring me some _acqua_.”

The _donna_ began to lift her apron toward her eyes.

“_Apportez moi_ some _acqua!_” said her mistress distinctly and
authoritatively.

The _donna_ shrank back. “Signorina mia,” she began pitifully.

“Don’t talk!” cried the young lady. “What is the use of your talking to me
when I cannot understand a word you say? It is too absurd. Besides, it is
the servant’s place to obey without speaking. Bianca, do look in the
dictionary for the Italian for wish or will, the strongest word you can
get; then in the grammar for the first person, singular, indicative of
it—or, no, the imperative. And be quick, or I never shall get out.
_Voglio?_ Angelina, I _voglio_ a pitcher of _acqua_—what is the word for
quickly? _Vitement?_ No. That isn’t Italian. It must be _vita_. That is an
Italian word, I know, and it sounds as if it meant quickly. Angelina, I
_voglio acqua vita_.”

“_Si, si, signorina!_” exclaimed the poor little _donna_, and ran off,
glad to get out of the room.

“And, after all, she hasn’t taken the pitcher,” said Isabel. “But may be
she will bring a pailful. She knew quite well that I was finding fault
because we have so little. They understand what we say, I’m sure they do.
Their ignorance is all a pretence.”

Five minutes passed, and ten minutes; and when the young lady had
exhausted herself in impatient exclamations, Angelina entered the chamber,
all out of breath, but smiling in confident triumph, and placed in her
hand a bottle on which was an apothecary’s label with _acquavite_ neatly
inscribed on it.

There was a _bersagliere_ passing the house at that moment; and I have
always thought I would like to know if he ever suspected that the hand of
a _papalina_ flung that bottle which alighted safely on the great tuft of
flying feathers in his hat. I am sure that if the bottle had contained
anything but _acquavite_, the military would have been called out.

This feat accomplished, Miss Isabel seized the empty water‐pitcher, and
thrust it into the hands of the frightened girl with one word, “_Acqua!_”
uttered in a tone which proved her to have tragical abilities.

Angelina returned in a trice with the water, and found her mistress
standing in the middle of the room, with a stern countenance, and a
dictionary in her hand.

“Now, _nero_ my _guadagno_.”

The girl lifted her eyes to the ceiling.

“_Profitto_, I mean,” was the hasty correction.

Tears rolled down Angelina’s cheeks.

“It couldn’t be that boot is _stivale!_” said the young woman in a low
tone to a third person in the room. “That sounds as if it meant something
three‐cornered.”

“You might try,” was the suggestion.

“_Stivale?_” demanded the young woman of the _donna_.

“_Si, signorina_,” said the girl eagerly, glancing at the articles in
question.

“Well, _nero_ my _stivale_,” ordered the mistress haughtily.

“_O Dio mio!_” sobbed Angelina.

Isabel lost all patience and dignity. She flew at the boots and caught
them in one hand, flew at the toilet‐table and snatched her tooth‐brush in
the other, then, rushing at the terrified _donna_, performed before her
face a furious pantomime of polishing her boots with the tooth‐brush.

“_Capisco!_” cried Angelina joyfully.

“It is worse than Robinson Crusoe with his man Friday,” sighed Isabel,
sinking, exhausted, into a chair. “These scenes are positively ruining my
disposition. You know, Bianca, I used to have a very good temper, and the
servants at home were always fond of me. But here I am becoming a scold
and a fury. We must get settled in another apartment, and have a teacher
right away.”

A cool summer apartment was found near the Esquiline, a teacher engaged,
and our parting friends went their several ways, taking doleful leave of
us.

And here it may not be amiss to make the reader better acquainted with the
family who desire the pleasure of his acquaintance and company for a time.

Mr. Varney, the son of a Boston merchant, had, when he was young and
venturesome, made a voyage to Spain in one of his father’s ships. The ship
came back without him; but, after six months’ absence, he returned,
bringing with him a young Spanish wife, whom he had wooed and won during
that brief visit. She lived only ten years, pining ever for the sunny land
of her birth, and dropped away finally before they had begun to fear that
she was dying, leaving two daughters, Bianca and Isabel.

Her death quite uprooted her husband from his accustomed life, and gave
him a shock from which he never recovered. He had always promised, and had
meant, to take her back to Spain; but, between the calls of business and a
habit of procrastination, had put off the visit from year to year till it
was too late. Then the New England which had killed her became distasteful
to him, and, after lingering a few years to settle up his business, he
went abroad for an indefinite time, taking his daughters with him. He
seemed to fancy that by this tardy journey he was proving to his wife his
regret and the sincerity of his promises.

They avoided Spain, however, unwilling to hasten at once to that land
which she had longed in vain to see. There was even an idea of self‐exile
and punishment in going so near without touching its beautiful shores.
They visited England and France, then came directly to Rome.

“I do not believe that we shall ever go away from Italy for any length of
time,” Bianca said. “It is the true land of the lotos, and we have eaten
of the charmed plant.”

“Would you like to live here always?” her father asked, looking earnestly
at her.

There was a certain pensive melancholy in her face and attitude which
constantly drew his anxious regards.

“Yes!” she answered slowly.

“I think Bianca is changed from what she used to be,” he said afterward to
one of the family. “It seems to me that I remember her gay and bright,
like Isabel; but she has grown quiet and gentle, little by little, and so
gradually that I do not know when the change began.”

The person whom he addressed tried to give him the comfort and reassurance
which his anxiety evidently pleaded for. She pointed out that one had but
to look at the two girls to see at once the difference in their
temperaments; that Isabel’s shorter and more compact form proved a
stronger and more aggressive vitality than her sister’s willowy
slenderness was capable of; that the very shape of their faces—a delicate
oval in the one and a full oval in the other—was another proof of
difference; and that, moreover, Bianca, being the elder, had been of an
age to be impressed by her mother’s death, while Isabel was still too
young.

“And I find yet another reason,” the comforter continued, turning mentor.
“Your frequently‐expressed regret for your wife, and the habit you have of
referring to her love for Spain and her home‐sickness, cannot fail to
sadden so sensitive a heart as Bianca’s, while Isabel thinks that it is
merely a ‘way you have got into,’ as she would express it.”

It was, perhaps, rather a severe speech; but when a person contracts a
habit of making a mournful luxury of his troubles, and of perpetually
setting up his mourning standard beside the red, white, and blue of those
who at least try to be cheerful, it does no harm to let him know that the
effect is not enlivening.

Well, we were settled in our summer quarters, and had just finished our
first dinner there, when the historian of the party made a prudent
suggestion.

“Since we are beginning a new life with new people, I think that we should
have a clear understanding about everything, so as to save trouble at the
end,” she said.

Her ears were still ringing with the din of battle which had accompanied
their exit from their former home—the loud voice of the _padrona_
demanding payment for broken chairs and tables that had dropped in pieces
the first time they were touched; the vociferous porter, who insisted on
having money because he had snatched Isabel’s reticule from her hand, in
spite of her, and carried it a dozen steps; the small but very shrill boy,
whom they had no recollection of ever having seen before, and who wanted
to be paid for they knew not what; the hysterical _donna_, who expected
that her heart, lacerated because her services had not been re‐engaged,
would be soothed by the gift of a few extra _lire_; and a half‐dozen
beggars crying for “_qualche cosa_.”

And so “it might be as well to have everything arranged at the beginning,”
remarked this prudent person.

“I settled about the furniture before you came in to dinner,” Isabel said.
“I had the whole family up, and before their eyes, with papa as witness, I
shook and leaned on every table and cabinet, and sat down in every chair
as hard as I could. Two chairs dropped, and are taken out for repair,
which will cost us nothing. And I have ordered out all the paper bouquets
with tall glass cases over them, and all the ornamental cups and saucers.
But I think we may as well tell them that if they send begging people up
to us, we will deduct what we give from the rent. Papa says he has made a
careful reckoning, and finds that if we give a _soldo_ to each ragged
beggar in the street, and half a _lira_ to each well‐dressed beggar who
comes up, we shall be ourselves reduced to beggary in six months.”

Bianca turned round on the piano‐stool, her face full of expostulation.
“Oh! but those dear Capuchins!” she exclaimed.

“It isn’t likely that I meant to refuse a Capuchin,” answered Isabel
indignantly. “They are an exception; and so are all religious. No one can
say that religion costs them much in Italy. I am ashamed to give so little
and receive so much.”

“Having an understanding at the beginning will make no sort of difference
at the end,” Mr. Varney said. “Every stranger here expects to have a fight
with the family he is leaving. It is a part of the play which cannot be
left out by particular request, like the Prince of Denmark out of
_Hamlet_. Let us put off explanations till they are forced on us. I would
like, though, to say a word or two to Giuseppe about the table.”

Giuseppe was a new servant, whom we considered ourselves very fortunate in
engaging, as he not only spoke English, but had lived in England several
months, and might therefore be supposed to know something of Anglo‐Saxon
ways. He came in immediately.

“There are two or three directions which I wish to give once for all,
Giuseppe,” Mr. Varney said in his slow, languid way. “I hope you will
remember them, for I do not like to repeat orders.”

“Yes, sir!” said Giuseppe, with a stiffness of bow and attitude oddly in
contrast with his sparkling Italian face.

“In the first place,” resumed his master, “when I say that I want
breakfast, or dinner, or the carriage at a certain hour, I mean that time
precisely, and not an hour or a half‐hour later, nor even five minutes
later.”

A second bow and “Yes, sir!” worthy of May Fair.

Mr. Varney went on argumentatively, bringing his fingers into play:
“Secondly, I want my wine brought in with the seals unbroken. If I find a
single bottle of the wine I have put up opened, I will”—he paused for a
suitable threat.

“Break the bottle over your head,” struck in Isabel. “Remember, papa, all
the watered wine we have paid for, and don’t be too mild. Remember the
horrible stuff for which we paid three times the market price all last
winter. Don’t be too mild. You may depend upon it, Giuseppe, we shall not
permit of any tampering with wine, or fruit, or candles, or anything. We
have had too much of that.”

“Yes, miss!” says Giuseppe.

“I hate to be called ‘miss,’ ” remarked the young lady. “Call me
_signorina_. Of all titles I think miss the most disagreeable. And Mrs.
and Mr. are not much better. The Italian language has that one advantage,
I will own.”

“Be careful about the fruit you give us,” Mr. Varney went on. “We want
ripe fruit. The figs to‐day were not quite perfect. Figs,” said Mr. Varney
with solemn deliberation—“figs should be just right, or they are good for
nothing. When they are just right, there is nothing better, and you can
give them to us three times a day. They must be ripe, but not too ripe;
fine‐grained, but not salvy; cool, crisp, intensely sweet, and on the
point of bursting open, but not quite broken.”

Giuseppe forgot his English training long enough to inquire, “Hadn’t you
better speak to the trees about it, sir?”

“That will do,” Mr. Varney concluded with dignity. “I have no more to say
now. You can go.”

The setting sun, shining on the new walls opposite, was reflected into our
drawing‐room, lighting it beautifully, touching Mr. Varney’s gray hair and
pleasant face, as he sat in a huge, yellow arm‐chair by the window and
diving into Isabel’s bright eyes, as she leaned on his shoulder, and
looked over with him the _Diario Romano_, trying to make out the holy‐
days.

“Here is the anniversary of the coronation of Pius IX.,” she said. “I
wonder if we shall be arrested if we wear yellow roses in our hats,
Bianca?”

Mr. Varney pored awhile over the book in his hand, and presently asked,
with a general inquiring glance about the room, “Does anybody know what
time of day or night twenty‐three o’clock is? Here is a function announced
to begin at twenty‐three o’clock. Do people go to church at that hour? I
should think it would be very late at night.”

“It might be some time the next day,” suggested a member of the family.

The gentleman arranged his glasses, and looked puzzled. “Then, when a
function is announced for twenty‐three o’clock on Wednesday, it takes
place at some hour on Thursday,” he said.

No one ventured either to acquiesce or to dissent, and it was concluded to
put this difficulty on the list of questions we were making out for our
Italian teacher to answer the next morning.

“He will be such a convenience to us!” Isabel said. “People assure me that
he knows everything, and is never at loss for an answer.”

Mr. Varney took a pinch of snuff. He had always shown an inclination
toward that indulgence, but had not dared to yield to it in America. Now,
however, with such eminent examples constantly before his eyes, he could
carry his snuff‐box, not only with impunity, but with a kind of pride.

“Have you reflected, my daughter,” he asked, “that your Italian teacher
knows not a word of English, and that, since you cannot very well fly at
him, as you could at Angelina, and extract his meaning at the sword’s
point, his explanations, however excellent they may be, are not likely to
profit you much for some time to come?”

“Oh! we will make out some way,” she replied carelessly. “One can always
understand a clever person. Besides, if worse comes to worse, I don’t know
why I shouldn’t fly at him, if necessary. He will be paid for his time;
and one can always scold a person whom one pays.”

The last sun‐ray faded away, and the golden globe of the new moon shone
out over Santa Maria Maggiore, shining so low and full in the transparent
sky that one almost feared it might strike the tower or domes of that
dearest of churches in passing, and break itself like a bubble.

We were silent a little while, then Mr. Varney said, “Sing us that song
you are humming, my darling.”

When he said “my darling,” he always meant Bianca.

She made a motion to put away the music‐sheet before her, and take
another, but replaced it; and presently we heard her low voice, which half
sang, half spoke, the words:


    “Friend, the way is steep and lonely,
      Thickly grows the rue;
    All around are shadows only:
      May I walk with you?

    “Not too near; for, oh! your going
      Is upon the heights,
    Where the airs of heaven are blowing
      Through the morning lights.

    “Dare I brush the dews that glisten
      All about your feet?
    Can I listen where you listen?
      Meet the sights you meet?

    “Not too far—I faint at missing
      You from out my way.
    Vain is then the glory kissing
      All the peaks of day;

    “Vain are all the laughing showers
      Leading in the spring;
    All the summer green and flowers,
      All the birds that sing.

    “At your side my way is clearest:
      Tell me I may stay!
    Not too near—and yet, my dearest,
      Not too far away!”


“What does it mean?” asked Mr. Varney. “It seems to me very obscure.”

“Oh! a song isn’t expected to mean anything but melody,” somebody answered
rather hastily. “All that is required of the lines is that they should be
of the proper length. Sing the other, Bianca—the one I looked over to‐
day.”

The speaker knew that nothing suited Mr. Varney so well as a genuine love‐
song.

Bianca sang


    “O roses dewy, roses red and sweet!
      Tinting with your hues the summer air,
    Give my cheeks your blushes, give my mouth your breathing,
    Add such rounded beauty as is meet,
    Wrap me in the graces all your tendrils wreathing;
      For he loves me, and I would be fair.

    “O sunshine, playing with the swinging vine,
      Sift your gold through all my dusky hair,
    Gild each braid and ringlet with a softened glimmer,
      Hint the crown his love has rendered mine.
    Than the brightest eyes, oh! let not mine be dimmer;
      For he loves me, and I would be fair.

    “O lilies! in a drift of scented snow,
      Willing all your sweetness to immure
    In a leafy cloister, waves alone caressing,
      Give my soul your whiteness ere ye go,
    That its stainless beauty be to him a blessing;
      For he loves me, and I would be pure.

    “O faithful stars! I pray ye, touch me so
      With the virtue given unto you
    That I fail him never, living, nor yet dying,
      Howsoe’er the days may come and go,
    With a steadfast tenderness his life supplying;
      For he loves me, and I would be true.”


The first stroke of the _Ave Maria_ broke off the last chord of the song,
and there was silence in the room till the bells had sung their evening
chorus.




Matter. VI.


_Constitution of bodies._—We have hitherto explained and vindicated those
facts and principles which experience and reason point out to us as the
true foundations of a sound philosophical theory of matter. We are now
prepared to examine the much‐vexed question of the constitution of bodies;
nor are we deterred from our undertaking by the very common belief that
the essence of matter is, and will ever be, an impenetrable mystery; for
although the different schools of philosophy have long disputed about the
subject without being able to agree in their conclusions, we are confident
that these very conclusions, every one of which contains a portion of
truth, will afford us the means of reaching the true and complete solution
of the question.

The opinions at present entertained by philosophers about the constitution
of matter may be reduced to the three following:

Some affirm that the first constituents of natural bodies are the _first
matter_ and the _substantial form_, as explained by Aristotle and by his
followers. This view, which reigned supreme for centuries, we shall call
the _scholastic_ solution of the question.

Others affirm, on the contrary, that the first constituents of bodies are
_simple elements_, or points of matter, acting on each other from a
certain distance, and thus forming dynamical systems of different natures
according to their number, powers, and geometrical arrangement. This
second view, which, after Boscovich, found a great number of advocates, we
shall call the _dynamic_ solution of the question.

Finally, others affirm that the first constituents of bodies are
_molecules_, or _chemical atoms_. This view, based entirely on chemical
considerations, originated with Dalton, of Manchester, early in the
present century, and it was very favorably received by all men of science
as the true interpretation of chemical facts. This third view we shall
call the _atomic_ solution of the question.

The investigation of the grounds on which these three solutions are
supported will soon convince us that none of them can be entirely
rejected, as each of them has some foundation in truth. To begin with the
scholastic solution, all true philosophers know that God alone is a _pure
act_; whence it follows that all creatures essentially consist of _act_
and _potency_. This act and this potency, when there is question of
material things, are called _the substantial form_ and _the matter_. It is
therefore an evident truth that material substance is essentially
constituted of matter and substantial form. Against this doctrine nothing
can be objected by the advocates of the dynamic or of the atomic solution.

On the other hand, the doctrine which teaches that bodies are made up of
chemical atoms, or molecules, which have a definite nature and combine in
definite numbers, is very satisfactorily established by experimental
science; and nothing can be objected against it by speculative
philosophers. But, to prevent misconceptions, we must observe that this
theory does not consider the chemical atoms as absolutely indivisible, or
as absolutely primitive, or as so many pieces of continuous matter. The
word “atom” in chemistry signifies the least possible quantity of any
natural substance known to us. Atoms are chemical equivalents. Their
chemical indivisibility, on account of which they are called “atoms,” is a
fact of experience; but they are absolutely divisible, owing to their
physical composition; for we know by the balance that atoms of different
substances contain different quantities of matter; and their vibrations,
change of size, and variations of chemical activity with the variation of
circumstances, unmistakably show that their mass is a sum of units
substantially independent of one another, though naturally connected
together by mutual actions in one dynamical system. Their matter is
therefore discrete, not continuous.

As to the doctrine of simple and unextended elements, we have no need of
saying anything in particular in this place, as such a doctrine is a
simple corollary of the thesis concerning the impossibility of continuous
matter, which we have fully developed in our last article.

From these remarks it will be seen that to the question, _What are the
primitive constituents of bodies?_ three answers may be given, and each of
them true, if properly interpreted, as we shall presently explain. Thus it
is true, in a strictly metaphysical sense, that the primitive constituents
of bodies are the matter and the substantial form; it is true again, in a
certain other sense, that the primitive constituents of bodies are
chemical atoms; and it is true also, in a still different sense, that the
primitive constituents of bodies are simple and unextended elements. Hence
the scholastic solution does not necessarily clash with the atomic, nor
does this latter exclude the dynamic, but all three may stand together in
perfect harmony, or rather they are required by the very nature of the
question, in the same manner as three solutions are required by the nature
of a problem whose conditions give rise to an equation of the third
degree. The duty, therefore, of a philosopher, when he has to handle this
subject, is not to resort to one of the three solutions in order to attack
the others, as it is the fashion to do, but to investigate how the three
can be reconciled, and how truth in its fulness can be attained to by
their conjunction.

This may appear difficult to those whose philosophical bias in favor of a
long‐cherished opinion prevents them from looking at things in more than
one manner; but those whose mind is free from prejudice and exclusiveness
will readily acknowledge that whilst the atomists determine the
constituents of bodies by _chemical_ analysis, the dynamists, on the
contrary, determine those constituents by _mechanical_ analysis, and the
scholastics by _metaphysical_ analysis. Now, these analyses do not exclude
one another; they rather prepare the way to one another. Hence their
results cannot exclude one another, but rather lead to one another, and
give by their union a fuller expression of truth.

If we ask of an atomist, “What are the primitive constituents of a mass of
gold?” he will answer that they are _the atoms_, or the molecules, _of
gold_, as chemistry teaches him. This answer is very good, as it points
out the first _specific_ principles of the compound body; for we cannot go
further and resolve the molecule without destroying the specific nature of
gold. For this reason the atomist, when he has reached the atoms of gold,
stops there, and declares that the _analysis cannot go further_. He
evidently refers to the _chemical_ analysis.

If now we ask a dynamist, “What are the primitive constituents of a mass
of gold?” he will answer that they are _the simple elements_ of which the
molecules of gold are made up. This answer, too, is very good, as it
points out the first _physical_ principles of the compound body; for we
cannot go further and resolve the simple element without destroying the
physical being. For this reason the dynamist, when he has reached the
simple elements, stops there, and declares that _the analysis can go no
further_. Of course he means the _physical_ analysis.

Let us now ask of a schoolman, “What are the primitive constituents of a
mass of gold.” He will answer that they are the _substantial form_ and
_the matter_, as the last terms obtained by the metaphysical analysis of
substance. This last answer also is very good, as it points out the first
_metaphysical_ principles of substance. It should, however, be borne in
mind that this answer does not apply to the mass of the body as such, nor
to its molecules, but only to each primitive element contained in the mass
and in the molecules of the body, as we shall fully explain in another
place. When he has reached the substantial form and the matter, the
schoolman stops there, and declares that _the analysis can go no further_.
He means the _metaphysical_ analysis, which resolves the physical being
into metaphysical realities incapable of further resolution.

It is manifest that these three answers, however different, do not clash
with one another. Accordingly, the atomist, the dynamist, and the
schoolman may all agree in teaching truth, while they give different
answers. The fact is, they do not look at the question from the same point
of view, and, rigorously speaking, they solve different questions.

The first answers the question, What are the first _specific_ principles
of gold or the first golden particles; and he affirms that they are the
_molecules_ or _atoms_ of gold.

The second answers the question, What are the first _physical_ principles
of such golden particles? and he affirms that they are _unextended
elements_ or _primitive substances_.

The third answers the question, What are the first _metaphysical_
principles of those primitive substances? and he affirms that they are
_the matter_ and _the substantial form_.

This being the case, it may be asked how it came to pass that the atomic,
the dynamic, and the scholastic solutions have hitherto been considered as
irreconcilable. We reply that the three solutions would never have been
held irreconcilable, if their advocates had kept within reasonable limits
in the expression of their views. But as philosophers, like other people,
are often exclusive, narrow‐minded, and ready to oppose whatever comes
from a school which is not their own, it frequently happens that they are
too easily satisfied with a partial possession of truth, and disdain the
views of others who regard truth under a different aspect. By such a
course, instead of promoting, they hinder, the advance of philosophical
knowledge; and while fighting under the banner of a special school, which
they mistake for the banner of truth, they allow themselves to be carried
away by a spirit of contention, the unyielding character of which is the
greatest impediment in the way of philosophical progress. The constitution
of bodies is one of the subjects which, unfortunately, have been and are
still handled by different schools with remarkable unfairness to one
another. The atomist fights against the dynamist, and both despise the
follower of the schoolman; whilst the schoolman from the stronghold of his
metaphysical castle looks superciliously on both, confident that he will
eventually drive them out of the field of philosophy. This attitude of one
school towards another is not worthy of men who profess to love truth. If
the atomistic philosopher cannot go beyond the chemical analysis, we will
allow him to stop there, on condition, however, that he shall not claim a
right to prevent others, who may know better, from proceeding to further
investigations beyond the boundaries of chemistry. In like manner, if the
dynamist cannot rise to the consideration of the metaphysical principles
of substance, let him be satisfied with the consideration of the primitive
elements of matter, and dispense with further inquiries; but let him not
interfere with the work of the metaphysician, whose method and principles
he does not understand. As to the metaphysician himself, we would warn him
that, however deeply conversant he may be with the _general truths_
concerning the essential constituents of things, he is nevertheless in
danger of erring in their application to particular cases, unless he tests
his conclusions by the principles of chemical, mechanical, and physical
science; for it is from these sciences that we learn the true nature of
the facts and laws of the material world; and all metaphysical
investigation about the constitution of bodies must prove a failure, if it
lacks the foundation of real facts and their correct interpretation.

It is obvious, after all, that truth cannot fight against truth; and since
we have shown that each of the three solutions above given contains a
portion of truth, we cannot reject any of them absolutely, but we must
discard that only which troubles their harmony, and retain that through
which they complete and confirm one another.

We therefore admit the substantial points of the three systems on the
constitution of bodies, and recognize the general principles on which they
are established. The analysis of bodies carried on through all its degrees
leads to the following results:

First, by analyzing _the body_ chemically, we find the _atoms_, or
molecules, endowed with a determinate mass and with specific powers,
corresponding to the specific nature of the body. Such atoms are not
absolutely indivisible, though chemistry, as yet, cannot decompose them:
hence atoms are further analyzable.

Secondly, by analyzing _the atom_, or the molecule, we discover its
components, or primitive parts, called _primitive elements_, and primitive
substances, which are physically simple and unextended, and concur in
definite numbers to the constitution of definite molecular masses.

Finally, by analyzing _the simple element_ or the primitive substance,
which can no longer be resolved into physical parts, we find that such an
element consists of _act_ and _potency_, or, as we more frequently express
ourselves, of _form_ and _matter_, neither of which can exist separately,
as the first physical being which exists in nature is the substance
arising from their conspiration. Accordingly the form and the matter of
which the simple element consists are not physical, but only metaphysical,
principles, and they constitute a metaphysical, not a physical, compound.

These three conclusions are scientifically and philosophically certain;
and while they afford a sound basis to our reasonings on material objects,
they reconcile modern physics with the principles of old metaphysics. We
say _with the principles_, not _with the conclusions_; for we must own
that the old metaphysicians, owing to their insufficient knowledge of the
laws of nature, not unfrequently failed in the application of their
principles to the interpretation of natural facts. Thus the chemical, the
dynamical, and the scholastic views of the constitution of bodies cease to
be antagonistic, and each of the three schools is awarded all it can claim
consistently with the rights of truth.

As we intend to speak hereafter more in detail of the constitution of
bodies, we shall content ourselves at present with these general remarks
on the subject. It is manifest from what precedes that bodies and
molecules arise from simple elements, and are substances, not on account
of their bodily or molecular composition, but merely because their
primitive physical components, the elements, are substances. Hence the
question concerning the constitution of material substance, as such, does
not necessarily require any further research after the constitution of
bodies, but may be directly settled by the consideration of the elements
themselves.

We have already seen that the primitive elements of matter are rigorously
unextended; that each of them is endowed with _activity_, _passivity_, and
_inertia_, and is thus fitted to produce, receive, and conserve local
movement; and that the elementary activity, whether attractive or
repulsive, is exercised in a sphere according to a permanent law. And
since the essential constitution of things must be gathered from their
essential properties, it is of the utmost importance for us to ascertain
whether the principles of the material element may be fully determined by
its known properties, or whether the element may possess occult properties
which, if known, would modify our notion of its principles; for it is only
after an adequate knowledge of its principle of activity, of its principle
of passivity, and of the relation of the one to the other, that we can
safely pronounce a judgment about the essence of a primitive being.

We may ask, therefore, in the first place: _Does a simple element possess
any occult power besides its known power of attracting or repelling?_

This question must be answered in the negative. Occult powers and occult
qualities have been admitted by the ancient philosophers, and are admitted
even now, in _compound_ substances, not because any unknown power resides
in the first elements of which they are made up, but because the manner of
their composition, and consequently the manner of determining the
resultant of their elementary actions, transcends our conception and
baffles our calculations. Thus the phenomena of chemical affinity,
cohesion, capillarity, electricity, and magnetism depend on actions which
science cannot trace to their _primitive_ causes—viz., to the simple
elements—but only to their proximate causes, which are complex, and, as
such, follow different laws of causation corresponding to the different
modes of their constitution. Before we are able to trace such phenomena to
their simple and primitive causes, it would be necessary to find out the
intrinsic constitution of every molecule; the number, quality, and
arrangement of its constituent elements; the arrangement and distance of
the molecules in the body; and the mathematical formulas by which every
movement of each particle could be determined for every instant of time.
As this has not been done, and will never be done, the determination of
the causality of molecular phenomena remains, and will ever remain, an
insoluble problem, and the complex power from which any such phenomenon
proceeds remains, and will ever remain, unknown so far as it is the result
of an unknown composition, though we know, at least in general, the nature
of the primitive powers from which it results. In other terms, there are
no occult powers in matter, but only unknown resultants of known primitive
powers.

To prove this, we observe that an occult power is to be admitted, then,
only when a phenomenon occurs which cannot proceed from powers already
known. This is evident; for, when phenomena can be accounted for by known
powers, there is no ground for any inquiry about occult causes. In other
words, to look for occult causes without data or indications on which to
ground the induction, is to propose to one’s self a problem without
conditions; which no man in his senses would do. Now, no phenomenon has
been observed anywhere in material things which cannot proceed from the
known powers of attraction and repulsion; nay, it is positively certain
that all phenomena proceed from the same powers. For each material point,
when acted on, receives a determination to local movement, and nothing
else; and therefore the effect of the action of matter upon matter is
nothing but local movement, one element approaching to or retiring from
the other. Now, this is precisely what attractive and repulsive powers are
competent to do. Hence it is that in all the works of science and natural
philosophy the causality of phenomena of every kind is uniformly traced to
mere attractions and repulsions.

Again, if any occult power, besides that of attracting or repelling, be
assumed to reside in a primitive element of matter, such a power will
remain idle for ever, inasmuch as it will never be applicable to the
production of natural phenomena. On the other hand, it is obvious that a
power destined to remain idle for ever is an absurdity. It is therefore
absurd to assume that there is in the elements of matter any occult power
besides that of attracting or repelling. In this argument the minor
proposition is evident, because all active power is naturally destined to
act; whilst the major proposition is evidently inferred from the fact that
matter has no passivity, except with regard to local motion, as is
acknowledged by all philosophers, and as we shall presently show from
intrinsic reasons. Whence it follows that, if there were in matter any
hidden power not destined, as the attractive and the repulsive are, to
produce local movement, such a power would be absolutely useless, as
absolutely inapplicable to any other matter, and would remain in this
absurd condition for ever. We need not, therefore, trouble ourselves with
the absurd hypothesis of occult powers; and we conclude, accordingly, that
the principle of activity of a primitive element is merely attractive or
repulsive, as explained in one of our past articles.

It may be asked, in the second place: _Is the centre of a simple element
to be identified with the principle of passivity of the element?_

This question must be answered in the affirmative. For the principle of
passivity is that to which the action is terminated; but the action of any
one element of matter is terminated to the centre of any other element;
therefore the centre of any element is its principle of passivity. The
minor proposition of this syllogism might be proved by metaphysical
considerations(156); but we may prove it more clearly in the following
manner: Locomotive action implies direction, and no direction can be
really taken in space except from a real point to another real point. Now,
that by which any two elements, _A_ and _B_, mark out two distinct points
in space, is the centre of their sphere of action. The direction of the
action is therefore from the centre of _A_ to the centre of _B_, and _vice
versa_—that is, the action of the one is terminated to the centre of the
other. And thus it is evident that each single element receives the action
of every other element in its central point, which is, accordingly, the
passive principle of the element. This conclusion may be expressed in this
other manner: In a material element the matter (passive principle) is a
point from which the action of the element is directed towards other
points in space, and to which the actions of other material points in
space are directed.

We may remark, also, that material elements, whilst they are always ready
to receive movement from extrinsic agents, cannot apply their own power to
themselves, because they are inert. This being the case, it obviously
follows that the action of an extrinsic agent on an element is terminated
there where the action of the element itself cannot be terminated. Now, a
little reflection will show that the centre of the element is just the
point where the action of the element itself cannot be terminated. For as
locomotive action implies direction, and as no direction can be had from
the centre of activity to itself, but only from a point to a distinct
point, the action of the element upon its own centre is a metaphysical
impossibility. Whence we conclude that the principle of passivity, or that
in which the primitive element is liable to receive a determination to
local movement, is nothing else than the intrinsic term of its essence,
the centre from which it directs its action in a sphere, or, in other
terms, the matter itself as contradistinguished from the substantial form.

In the third place, it may be asked: _Can it be proved that a material
element is susceptible of nothing but local movement?_

We answer: Yes. For we have shown that the passivity of the material
element resides in a mere mathematical point, which, having no bulk,
cannot be liable to _intrinsic_ changes, and therefore is susceptible of
such determinations only as will bring about a change of _extrinsic_
relations. It is hardly necessary to explain that such a change of
extrinsic relations is always brought about by local movement; for such
relations either are distances or depend on distances; and distances
cannot be modified except by local movement. It is thus manifest that
material elements are susceptible of nothing but local movement. Hence the
passivity of matter is confined to the reception of local movement alone.

From this well‐known truth we may again confirm our preceding solution of
the question concerning occult powers. For the activity and the passivity
of a simple element essentially respond to one another in the same manner
and with as strict a necessity as _giving_ and _receiving_, and since they
spring from the principles of one and the same primitive essence, they
must belong to one and the same kind. If, then, there were in the material
elements any occult power besides that which produces local movement,
there would be also a correspondent passivity not destined to receive
local movement; for without this new passivity the occult power could not
be exercised. And since the passivity of matter is limited to the sole
reception of local movement, none but locomotive power can be admitted to
reside in matter.

_Essence of material substance._—We are now ready to answer with all
desirable precision and clearness the question, “What is the essence of
material substance?”—a question not at all formidable, when the active and
the passive principle of matter have been properly defined and elucidated.
Our answer is as follows:

The essence, or quiddity, of a thing is really nothing else than its
nature; hence if we know the principles which constitute the nature of the
material element, we know in fact the essence of material substance. Now,
the principles which constitute any given created nature are _an act of a
certain kind_—that is, a certain principle of activity; and _a
corresponding potency_—that is, a corresponding principle of passivity.
Whence we conclude that the principles of a material nature are _the act
by which such a nature is determined to act in a sphere and to cause local
movement_, and _the potency on account of which the same nature is liable
to receive local movement_. And since the said act is called “the
substantial form,” and the said potency “the matter,” we conclude that the
essence of material substance _consists of matter and substantial form_.

This conclusion is by no means new; it expresses, on the contrary, the
universal doctrine of the ancient philosophers on the essence of material
substance. But it must be observed that we limit this doctrine to the
essence of primitive elements, which alone can be rigorously styled “first
substances,” whilst the ancients, owing to their imperfect notions of
natural things, applied the same doctrine to compound substances, which
they believed to arise by substantial generation instead of material
composition. Thus our conclusion is more guarded and less comprehensive
than that of the old metaphysicians. Moreover, the ancient philosophers,
who did not know the primitive elements, but assumed the continuity of
matter, could not picture to themselves the intellectual notions of matter
and substantial form in a sensible manner, and certainly were unable to
find any _true_ sensible image of them; and for this reason their
speculations about the essence of material substance remained imperfect
and their explanations obscure and unsatisfactory. We, on the contrary,
thanks to the investigations and discoveries made in the last centuries,
have the advantage of knowing that all matter is subject to gravitation,
and acts in a sphere according to a constant and very simple law, which
presides over the molecular and chemical no less than the astronomical
phenomena; and we are thus enabled to form a true and genuine conception
of the matter and form of the primitive element, founded on ascertained
facts, and free from false or incongruous imaginations. Hence the words
“matter” and “form,” as employed by us, have such a clear and precise
sense that no room is left for their misinterpretation.

We therefore know, and _clearly_ too, the essence of primitive material
substance, whatever may be said to the contrary by some admirers of the
old philosophy, who spurn the discoveries of modern physics, or by some
modern thinkers, who revile all metaphysical analysis as mere rubbish.

The essential definition of material substance, as such, is therefore the
following: _Material substance is a being fit to cause and receive merely
local motion._ This definition is fuller than the one adopted by the
ancients, who defined matter to be “a movable being”—_Ens mobile._ Of
course, when they spoke of a “movable” being, the ancients referred to
“local” movement; but, as there are movements of some other kinds, none of
which can be produced or received by matter, we prefer to keep the epithet
“local” as prominent as possible in our definition, and we add the adverb
“merely” as a further limitation required by the nature of the subject.
The old definition mentions nothing but the mobility of matter. This is
owing to the fact that the ancients had no notion of universal attraction,
and considered the activity of material substance as dependent on
movement, according to their axiom: _Nihil movet nisi motum._ But as we
know, on the one hand, that the specific differences of things must be
derived from their formal rather than from their material constitution,
and, on the other, as the constituent form of the material element is an
efficient principle of local motion, we include in the definition of
matter its aptitude both to produce and to receive local motion “as the
_complete_ specific difference” which distinguishes material substance
from any other being whatever.

It seems to us that our definition of matter wants neither clearness nor
precision. Indeed, we would be unable to make it clearer or more accurate;
and as for its soundness, let our readers, who have hitherto followed our
reasonings, judge for themselves.

In the opinion of most modern philosophers, the essence of matter consists
of _extension_ and _resistance_. From what has preceded it is evident that
this opinion is utterly false. Extension is not a property of matter as
such, but only of physical compounds containing a multitude of distinct
material points; and, even in this case, it is not the matter, but the
volume, or the place circumscribed by the extreme terms of the body, that
can be styled “extended,” as we have shown in our last article. As to
resistance, it suffices to remark that no accidental act belongs to the
essence of substance; hence resistance, which is an accidental act, cannot
enter into the definition of matter. Some will say that, if not
resistance, at least _the power of resisting_, belongs to the essence of
matter. But not even this is true. The material element has the power of
attracting or of repelling; but such a power cannot be considered as
formally _resisting_. Resistance is a particular case of repulsion, when
the agent by its repulsive exertion gradually lessens and exhausts the
velocity of an approaching mass of matter; but resistance may also be a
particular case of attraction, inasmuch as the agent by its attractive
exertion gradually lessens and exhausts the velocity of a mass of matter
receding from it. Hence all material substance has a motive power, either
attractive or repulsive; but neither of them can be described as a
resisting power; for attractivity does not resist the movement of an
approaching body, nor does repulsivity resist the movement of a receding
body. It is scarcely necessary to add that the notion of a resisting power
essential to matter is a remnant of the old prejudice consisting in the
belief that, when two bodies come in contact, the matter of the one
precludes, by its materiality, bulk, and inertia, the further advance of
the other. Nothing is more common, with the followers of the ancient
theories, than the assumption that the matter of bodies _by its quantity
and by its occupation of space_ resists the passage of any other matter.
We have shown elsewhere that resistance is action, and therefore is not
owing to the inert matter standing in the way of the approaching body, but
to the active power of which the inert matter is the centre.

To complete our elucidation of the essential definition of matter,
something remains to be said about the inertia of material substance. We
shall see that inertia is not a constituent, but only a result of the
constitution, of matter; whence it follows that no mention of inertia is
needed in the essential definition of material substance. In fact, the
notion of this substance includes nothing but the essential act and the
essential term, that is, the principle of activity and the principle of
passivity, both concerned with local motion only. To have a principle of
activity and a principle of passivity is in the nature of all created
substances, and constitutes their _generic_ entity; hence the mention of
these two principles in our definition serves to point out the _genus_ of
material substance; whilst the intrinsic ordination of the same principles
to _local_ motion serves to point out the essential _difference_ which
separates matter from any other substance.

_Inertia._—Many confound the inertia of matter with its passivity, and
consider inertia as one of the essential constituents of matter. It is not
difficult, however, to show that inertia and passivity are two distinct
properties. Those who reduce the principles of real being to an _act_ and
a _term_, without taking notice of its essential _complement_,(157) reduce
in fact the intrinsic properties of real being to activity and passivity,
the one proceeding from the act, and the other from the potential term;
and thus the inertia of matter, for which they cannot account by any
distinct principle, is considered by them as an attribute of matter
identical with, or at least involved in, its real passivity. The truth is
that, as the act and the potency, which constitute the essence of a
material being, are the formal source of its actuality, so also the
activity connatural to that act, and the passivity connatural to that
potency, are the formal source of the inertia by which the same being is
characterized. This will be easily understood by a glance at the nature of
inertia.

That inertia is not passivity is clear enough; for passivity is the
potentiality of receiving an impression from without, whereas inertia is
the incapability of receiving an impression from within; passivity is that
on account of which matter receives the determination to move, whereas
inertia is that on account of which matter cannot change that
determination, but is obliged to obey it, by moving with the received
velocity in the given direction. The determination to move is received
only while the agent acts, that is, as long as the passivity is being
actuated, and no longer; whereas the movement itself, which follows such a
determination, continues, owing to inertia, without need of continuing the
action, so that, if all further action were to cease, the moving matter,
owing to its inertia, would persevere in its movement for ever.

Moreover, whence does the passivity and whence does the inertia of matter
proceed? Matter is passive, because its substantial term, whose reality
entirely depends on actuation, is still actuable or potential with regard
to accidental acts. Passivity is therefore nothing but the further
actuability of the substantial term; whilst, on the contrary, matter is
inert, because its substantial act and its substantial term are so related
to one another that the motive power possessed by the former can never
terminate its action to the latter; for this is the only reason why a
material element cannot modify the determinations which it receives from
without. Hence inertia is nothing but the result of the special relation
intervening between the principle of activity and the principle of
passivity in the constitution of material substance; or, in other terms,
inertia is a corollary of the essential correlation of form and matter,
and, therefore, is to be traced, not, as passivity, to the essential term
of the substance, but to its essential complement. This shows that, in the
phrase _matter is inert_, the word “matter” stands for the material
substance itself, and not for _the_ matter, or potential term, which is
under the substantial form, and whose character is passivity.

The question we have here discussed may seem of very little importance;
yet we had to give its solution, not only because the confusion of
distinct notions is a source of difficulties and sophisms, but also
because the given solution confirms the necessity of admitting the
essential complement as the third principle of real being, and because in
spiritual substances there is passivity, though not inertia; which shows
how indispensable is our duty of distinguishing between the two.

From the preceding remarks we infer also that inertia belongs to the
essence of material substance, not, however, as a constituent principle,
but only as something implied in the nature of its constituent principles.
As it is impossible to alter the nature of such principles without
destroying the essence of matter, so also it is impossible for matter to
cease to be inert so long as its essence remains unchanged. In a word,
_non‐inert matter_ is a metaphysical impossibility.

Lastly, we may add that inertia does not admit of degrees; and therefore
all material elements are equally inert. In fact, when we say that matter
is inert, we mean, as has been explained, that material substance is
entirely and absolutely incapable of imparting motion to itself. Now,
absolute incapacity is perfect incapacity, and does not admit of degrees.
Hence we may find in different bodies more or less of inert matter, but
not more or less of inertia. This is true also of the passivity of matter;
that is, we may find in different bodies more or less of passive matter,
but not more or less of passivity; for passivity, as consisting in an
absolute liability to accidental actuation, cannot admit of degrees.

_A few conclusions._—It may be useful, and may prove satisfactory to our
readers, to cast a glance over the ground we have trodden and the results
so far reached. The sum and substance of the doctrine which we have
endeavored to establish is contained in the following propositions:

I. Matter is not continuous, nor divisible _in infinitum_, nor has it any
intrinsic quantity connected in any manner with its essential
constitution.

II. All bodies are ultimately made up of primitive elements, physically
simple and unextended, which being reached, the physical division of
bodies cannot go further.

III. The primordial molecules, or so‐called “atoms,” of all substances are
so many systems of simple elements dynamically bound with one another by
mutual action.

IV. The continuous extension, or geometric quantity, usually predicated of
bodies, is the extension of the place comprised within the extreme limits
of each body. It is, in other terms, the extension of the volume, not of
the matter. Nevertheless, such an extension may be called “material,” not
only because the terms of its dimensions are material, but also because in
most bodies the elements and the molecules are so close that their action
on our senses produces the appearance of material continuity.

V. The extension of bodies is real, though their material continuity is
merely apparent; hence only the volumes of bodies, and not their masses,
can be properly styled _extended_.

VI. The true _absolute_ mass of a body is the number of primitive elements
it contains.

VII. The primitive elements are of two kinds, some of them always and
everywhere attractive, others always and everywhere repulsive. The matter,
however, is the same in both kinds, and bears the same relation to its
form, whether this be of an attractive or of a repulsive nature.

VIII. There are no other powers in the primitive elements than that of
attracting and that of repelling.

IX. All primitive elements have a sphere of activity, throughout which
they constantly act according to the Newtonian law—that is, in the inverse
ratio of the squared distances, even when the distance is molecular; and
no distance, however great, can be designated where the action of an
element will not have a finite intensity.

X. The active power of primitive elements cannot be exerted in the
immediate contact of matter with matter, distance being an essential
condition of all locomotive actions.

XI. The elementary power acts immediately on all distant matter throughout
its sphere, independently of any material medium of transmission or
communication. Movement, however, cannot be propagated without a material
medium.

XII. The term _from which_ the action of any given element is directed,
and the term _in which_ the same element receives the motion caused by
other elements, is one and the same, viz., the real centre of its sphere
of activity; and it is called _the matter_. The act from which such a
centre receives its first existence is called _the substantial form_; and
it has a spherical character, inasmuch as it constitutes a virtual
indefinite sphere.

XIII. The essence of a primitive element of matter is by no means a
mystery. The essential definition of such an element is “a substance fit
to cause and to receive mere local motion.”

XIV. Inertia is an essential property of material substance, no less than
activity and passivity. Inertia admits of no degrees.

XV. The so‐called “force of inertia” is neither the inertia itself nor any
special motive power; but it merely expresses a certain exercise of the
elementary powers dependent on the inertia of the matter acted on; for
bodies, on account of their inertia, cannot leave their place before they
have received in all their parts a suitable velocity. Hence while such a
velocity is being communicated to a body, the body which is acted on
cannot yield its place to the impinging body; and consequently, during the
struggle of two bodies, the one which impinges loses a quantity of
movement equal to that which it imparts to the mass impinged upon. The
loss of movement in the impinging body is therefore caused, not by the
inertia of the body impinged upon, but by its elementary powers as
exercised by it during the reception of the momentum.

The foregoing conclusions, as every attentive reader must have noticed,
have been drawn from nothing but known facts and received principles; we
may therefore consider them as fully established. The more so as we have
taken care to examine both sides of each question, and have given not only
such direct proofs of each conclusion as would suffice to convince all
unprejudiced minds, but also every objection that we have been able to
find against our own views, and have thus found the opportunity of
confirming, by our answers to the same, the truth of the doctrine
propounded. There may be other objections which did not occur to our mind;
yet it is likely that their solution will need no new considerations
besides those already developed in the preceding pages. Should any other
difficulty occur to the reader which cannot be answered by those
considerations, we would earnestly entreat him to propound it to us, that
we may try its strength. We are always glad to hear a new objection
against what we hold to be true. For objections either can or cannot be
solved. If they can, their solution will throw a new light on the doctrine
we defend; and if they cannot, their insolubility will show us some weak
point, or at least some impropriety of our language, and will thus cause
us to correct our expressions or modify our opinions. Whatever helps us to
regard things under some new point of view is calculated to enlarge our
conceptions, to make our language clearer and more precise, and to
strengthen our philosophical convictions. Those alone need to be afraid of
objections who draw their conclusions from arbitrary hypotheses, instead
of established truths.

We conclude the present article with a short answer to a question, which
has often been raised by timorous people, concerning what may be styled
the cardinal point of our doctrine on matter‐viz., the _simplicity_ of
material elements. The question is the following: If we admit that the
elements of matter are physically simple, is there not a serious danger of
setting at naught the essential difference between the spiritual and the
material substance, and are we not drifting thus into materialism?

We reply that no such danger needs to be apprehended. For it is not true
that physical simplicity constitutes the essential difference between
spirit and matter. Every primitive being is physically simple; and yet it
does not follow that all primitive beings belong to the same species. On
the other hand, spirit and matter, notwithstanding their physical
simplicity, evidently belong to different species. The element of matter
is inert—that is, though acting all around itself, it cannot exercise its
activity within itself; whereas the spiritual substance exercises its
activity within as well as without itself, and continually modifies its
own interior state by its vital operations. Again, the element of matter
is ubicated in space, and marks a local point, from which it directs its
action in a sphere; whereas the spiritual substance neither marks a local
point in space nor acts in a sphere, but determines both the direction and
the intensity of its action as it pleases. Moreover, the element of matter
has nothing but locomotive power; whereas the spiritual substance
possesses not only the locomotive, but also, and principally, the thinking
and the willing powers, by which it vastly transcends all material being.
This suffices to show that spirit and matter, though physically simple,
have an entirely different metaphysical constitution—that is, a different
substantial act, a different substantial term, and a different substantial
complement. Hence the simplicity of the material element does not set at
naught the essential difference between matter and spirit.

Those whose metaphysical notions about material substance still hang upon
the physics of the ancients will be loath to admit that our unextended
element can be physically simple; for they have been taught to believe
that wherever there is matter and form, there is _physical_ composition.
But such a notion is evidently wrong; for where in the element are the
_physical_ components, without which physical composition is impossible?
Can we say that the matter and the substantial form are _physical_
components? Certainly not; for the form without the matter cannot exist,
nor can the matter exist without the form. Both are absolutely required
for the constitution of the _primitive_ physical being. How, then, can
they be conceived as physical beings, if no physical being can be
conceived before their meeting in one essence and in a common existence? A
physical compound is a compound whose components have a distinct and
independent existence in nature; for physical beings alone can be physical
components, and nothing which has not a distinct and independent existence
in nature can be called a physical being, except by an abuse of terms. The
physical being is a complete being—that is, an act materially completed by
its intrinsic term, and formally completed by its individual actuality.
All beings that are incomplete, and whose existence depends on other
cognate beings, are no more than _metaphysical_ realities. Hence the
substantial form of the element, which has no separate existence, is not a
physical, but only a metaphysical, being; and in the same manner, the
matter to which that form gives the first existence is not a physical, but
only a metaphysical, reality. Whence it follows that the composition of
matter and substantial form is not a physical, but only a metaphysical,
composition; and, further, that the primitive element is indeed a
metaphysical, but not a physical, compound.

On this subject we shall have more to say when explaining the peripatetic
theory of substantial generations, which assumes that the substantial form
can be changed without changing the matter. It is on this assumption that
the physical distinction between matter and form has been maintained. We
shall prove in the most irrefragable manner that the assumption is based
on an equivocation about the meaning of the epithet “substantial” as
applied to natural forms, and that no form which is truly and strictly
substantial—that is, which gives the first being to its matter—can leave
its matter and be subrogated by another substantial form.

To Be Continued.




Robespierre. Concluded.


We know how the son of S. Louis passed his last hours on earth; let us see
how the men who sentenced him—against their consciences—prepared for that
solemn passage. One, named Valazé, on hearing the sentence, stabbed
himself, and fell dead in the court; he was dragged back with the others
to prison. The remaining twenty‐one passed their death‐vigil in riotous
singing and drinking and making merry; in improvising a comedy where
Robespierre and the devil conversed in hell; the dead Valazé meanwhile
lying in his blood in the same room. Vergniaud, who so hesitated to vote
“death” for the king, is now bent on escaping the block by poisoning
himself; but he has only poison enough for one, so he throws away the
dose, too generous to desert his companions in their last journey. They
will all go together; so, after a night of bacchanalian shouting and
carousing, they all set forth in the fatal tumbrel; even dead Valazé is
flung in to have his head cut off, that the guillotine may not be done out
of its prey. They jolt on, singing the _Marseillaise_ and crying Vive la
République. One by one the heads fall, the chorus grows weaker, and at
last ceases to be heard. The Girondists are gone. Robespierre is King of
the Revolution now, and reigns supreme over its destinies. Now let him
prove what truth there is in the plea put forth by his apologists that he
was only cruel from necessity, from the pressure put upon him by his
fellow‐demagogues. His accession to undivided responsibility was, on the
contrary, the signal for greater slaughter, and we see the number of
victims swelling in proportion to the growth of his individual power. Look
at the lists of the _Moniteur_. In July, 1793, there were thirteen persons
condemned by the revolutionary tribunal of Paris, and in July of the
following year the number sent by it to the guillotine was eight hundred
and thirty‐five!

But this system of legal assassination was beginning to recoil on the head
of its inventor. The murder of the Girondists was an impolitic act that
Robespierre soon repented of. He had made a precedent in attacking the
representatives of the nation, hitherto inviolate; and now that the
longing for vengeance was satisfied, he was clear‐sighted enough to
perceive what the cost was likely to be. He had sacrificed his rivals, but
he had imperilled his own head. From this day forward he seemed haunted by
the shadow of coming retribution. He had poured out the blood of those who
stood beside him, and now he was slipping in it; his footing was no longer
secure; the words “assassination,” “victim of the poignard of revenge,”
etc., etc., were continually on his lips, and there is evidence that his
life was poisoned by the constant dread of being murdered by some of the
friends of his victims. Those who had hitherto aided and abetted his
atrocities now began to look with suspicion and terror on him; even Danton
tried to back out of the partnership, and to talk of “the joys of private
life” in a way that suggested he had had enough of the glories of public
life. He had just married a young and beautiful woman, whose influence was
said to have already exercised a humanizing effect on his ferocious
nature. She had brought him independence, too, so there was every
inducement to him to quit the shambles, and leave Robespierre there alone
in his glory. He withdrew from the Public Safety Committee, and ceased
almost altogether to attend the meetings of the Convention. Robespierre
understood this significant change. He saw his accomplices were deserting
him, and he trembled. The Revolution, Saturn‐like, was devouring her own
children; why should not the hunters be devoured by their own dogs? Every
one was falling away from the tyrant. Camille Desmoulins and Hébert,
lately his devoted friends, were gathering up a rival faction dubbed
Ultra‐Revolutionists, and, aided by Hébert’s abominable newspaper, _Père
Duchêsne_, they and their followers set to work to hunt down the popular
idol. Robespierre was known to harbor a sneaking prejudice in favor of
some sort of religion, and once even openly declared his opinion that some
such institution was necessary for governing with effect. The Ultras used
this admission as a means of insulting him, and at the same time weakening
his prestige. They got hold of an unfortunate, half‐witted man named
Gobel, an apostate priest, dressed him up as an archbishop, and,
surrounded by a crowd of mock priests and prelates, they led him, riding
on an ass, to the Convention; here he made a burlesque and blasphemous
abjuration of his former state and belief, and solemnly pronounced the
_Credo_ of atheism, and the worship of the goddess Reason. The law‐givers,
thereupon, amidst the frantic enthusiasm of the crowd, decreed that “God
and all superstition were abolished,” and the worship of Reason
substituted in their place. A monstrous ceremony was at once organized to
celebrate the new religion: an actress was carried to the cathedral of
Notre Dame, dressed—or undressed—as the goddess of this adoption,
enthroned on the consecrated altar of the living God, while the populace
passed before her in adoration. The walls of the sacred temple re‐echoed
to the hymn of liberty, the _Marseillaise_, and were profaned with horrors
that no Christian pen may retrace. Similar scenes were enacted in the
other churches. Venerable old S. Eustache was turned into a fair; tables
were spread with sausages, pork‐puddings, herrings, and bottles; children
were forced to sing songs and give toasts, and to drink to the half‐naked
goddess; and when the little ones—the precious little ones of Jesus—got
drunk, there was huge merriment amongst the spectators.

The shrine of S. Geneviève was torn down and desecrated. The tombs of the
kings of France at S. Denis were broken open, and the ashes scattered
abroad with every species of insult. The _Moniteur_ thus describes the
spectacle the streets of Paris presented during the Festival of Reason:
“Most of the people were drunk with the brandy they had swallowed out of
Chalices—eating mackerel on the Patens!... They stopped at the doors of
dramshops, held out Ciboriums, and the landlord, stoop in hand, had to
fill them thrice.” Other things are recorded of this demoniacal saturnalia
which had best be left unsaid—if happily they be yet unknown to Catholic
hearts.

The provinces followed suit. Lyons sacked her churches, and drove a mitred
ass through her streets, trailing the sacred volumes at his tail. The
Loire was polluted with drowned bodies of priests. At Nantes ninety
priests are embarked at dead of night under hatches; in the middle of the
stream the boat is scuttled, and goes down with her human cargo. These are
the _noyades_. Then follow others of more than a hundred at a time. Oh!
these priests, these men of the Gospel of Christ, at any cost they must be
got rid of! The guillotine is too slow; let us have fire and water to the
rescue! So there are the fusillades; men, women, priests, and nuns fall
under the showers of grapeshot as fast as they can be gathered and ranged
in line—mothers with infants at their breasts, children clinging to one
another—five hundred at a batch they go. The mother Revolution herself is
turning sick of it. Robespierre alone shows no signs of squeamishness;
but, whether from sagacity or some latent moral—perhaps even
religious—instinct, he repudiated the sacrilegious excesses which
inaugurated and followed the installation of the new goddess. He saw, too,
that it was an arrow pointed at himself. He denounced Hébert at the
Jacobin Club, ridiculed his new‐fangled divinity, and declared that if
“God did not exist, a wise law‐giver would have invented him.” Hébert
winced; Camille Desmoulins started the _Vieux Cordelier_, and began to
broach the doctrine of clemency and the savage stupidity of useless blood‐
shedding. Never since the Revolution began had such theories been hinted
at. The country was growing nauseated with wholesale butcheries; the
daring words of the _Vieux Cordelier_ were heard with wonder and welcomed
with deep though silent applause. Robespierre might have tolerated the
humane doctrines of the newspaper, if it had abstained from personal
aggression; but Desmoulins used his weapon of sarcasm unsparingly against
the tyrant, on one occasion twitting him, half facetiously, with his
aristocratic origin, as proved by the discarded _de_ formerly prefixed to
his name. Robespierre grew pale—paler than his usual sea‐green hue—on
reading this, and Desmoulins’ doom was sealed. Hébert went first; he, with
nineteen of the faction, perished in one hour on the scaffold, in March,
1794. Ten days later Camille and Danton fell. It is yet a mystery why
Danton was thus quickly sacrificed; he was apparently on good terms with
Robespierre, and had pointed no witticisms at him like the editor of the
_Vieux Cordelier_. The tyrant himself gives no explanation in his long‐
winded speeches on the hard necessity which compelled him “to sacrifice
private friendship to the good of the country,” and so on. But whatever
the motive may have been, the act drew upon its perpetrator the aversion
and contempt of those who till then had been his staunchest followers and
supporters. Every one was terrified for his own head. Danton’s fall seemed
to bring the axe to every man’s door. Robespierre was now alone, more
terribly alone than the lost traveller in the desert. His fellows shunned
him, or shuddered when he passed. He lived in perpetual fear of being
assassinated, though it is doubtful whether any attempt was ever made on
his life. Several were trumped up with a view to uplifting his tottering
popularity; but though the accused persons were guillotined with great
pomp and _éclat_, the proofs of their intended crime were extremely
doubtful. A last expedient yet remained.

Robespierre would re‐establish the existence of God, and thus be a prophet
as well as a king. He decreed, accordingly, a great meeting which should
atone for Hébert’s Feast of Reason and annihilate its brief triumph. It
was to take place in the Tuileries gardens. Robespierre, while working the
axe so assiduously, never bespattered himself with the blood of his
instrument. In a time when _sans‐culottism_ made dirt and Bohemian gear
the fashion, he remained a dandy, powdered and frizzled in the midst of
legislators who prided themselves on dirty hands and begrimed linen. For
this gala‐day of his new religion he ordered a fine sky‐blue silk coat,
white‐silk waistcoat embroidered with silver, white stockings, and gold
shoe‐buckles. Thus equipped, the Prophet of the Mountain sallied forth to
patronize the Omnipotent and decree the existence of a Supreme Being. He
ascended the rostrum with a bouquet of flowers in his hand, made a fulsome
discourse in a vein of sentimental deism, and then proceeded to unveil the
effigy of atheism, a hideous caricature, made of paste‐board, besmeared
with turpentine and other inflammable stuffs, to which he applied a
lighted torch. The flame leaped up, and Atheism, amidst shouts and
cracklings, burned itself to dust; then from the ashes rose up another
effigy, the statue of Wisdom, supposed to symbolize the new religion, but
sorrily smutted and begrimed by the subsiding smoke of Atheism. No wonder
Billaud should exclaim, “Get thee gone! Thou art a bore, thyself and thy
_Etre Suprême_.”

O merciful God! may heaven and earth praise thee, and all the creatures
therein, for thou art verily a God of love, long suffering and patient!

And now that Robespierre has duly installed his _Etre Suprême_, and
decreed, moreover, “that consoling principle, the immortality of the
soul,” and obliterated from the graves of murdered citizens the hitherto
obligatory inscription, “Death is an eternal sleep,” what is there left
for him to do? Nothing, apparently, but to go on killing. The
revolutionary tribunal must be made to work with greater speed, and so it
is split into four fractions, each with its president, and empowered to
try and condemn as fast as it can. Even the Mountain quaked when this
proposition was uttered at its base; but the law was carried, and
henceforth the guillotine quadruples its business. Fouquier‐Tinville sets
up one of “improved velocity,” and boasts of being able to make room for a
batch of one hundred and fifty at one time. He wants to establish one in
the Tuileries itself, but Collot protests that this would “demoralize the
instrument.” It did not matter, apparently, how much the instrument
demoralized the people. These sit at their windows watching for the
tumbrels to pass, criticising the occupants, joking and enjoying
themselves. Women fight for seats near the scaffold, where day after day
they sit knitting, counting off the heads, as they fall, by the prick of a
pin in a bit of card‐board. These are the “furies of the guillotine.”

But to make the new law, called _22me Prairial_, more fully available, it
was necessary to provide extra work for the executioners. Fouquier‐
Tinville was equal to the occasion. He got up an accusation against the
occupants of the prisons for “conspiring against the Convention.” Let us
cast a glance into these prisons, where, at this crisis, twelve thousand
human beings lie literally _rotting_ to death. The memoirs of the time
agree in describing the twelve houses of arrest (the original prisons had
long since been increased to that number) as dens of noisome horror never
equalled in any other clime or period. Noble dames, maidens of tender
years, were huddled pell‐mell with the worst and most wretched of their
sex; nobles and shoe‐blacks, priests and ruffians, nuns and actresses,
crowded by day and night into the condemned cells, where every night the
turnkey came and read his list for the morrow’s “batch.” Then followed
scenes such as no pen or painter’s brush could adequately describe. “Men
rush towards the grate; listen if their name be in it; ... one deep‐drawn
breath when it is not. We live still one day! And yet some score or scores
of names were in. Quick these; they clasp their loved ones to their heart
one last time. With brief adieu, wet‐eyed or dry‐eyed, they mount and are
away. This night to the _Conciergerie_; through the palace, misnamed of
Justice, to the guillotine to‐morrow.” These were the persons whom
Tinville’s ready wit accused of getting up a plot to overthrow the
Convention! But what did it signify whether the story was an impossibility
as well as a lie? The four tribunals must have work, the guillotine must
have food. In three days—the 7th, 9th, and 10th of July—one hundred and
seventy‐one prisoners were executed on the charge of conspiring from the
depth of their squalid dungeons to overturn the state. So much did the
newly‐discovered _Etre Suprême_ do towards softening the rule of
Robespierre.

But, oh! are we not sick of the ghastly tale? It is now hurrying to a
close.

Barère, one of the fiercest of the revolutionary gang who had so far
escaped the guillotine, gave a bachelor’s dinner at a suburban villa on a
warm day in July, Robespierre being among the guests. The weather was
intensely hot, and the company, unshackled by stiff conventionalities,
threw off their coats, and sauntered out to sip their coffee under the
trees in easy _déshabillé_. Carnot wanted his pocket‐handkerchief, and
went indoors to fetch it. While looking for his own coat he espied
Robespierre’s fantastic sky‐blue garment, and, prompted by a sudden
thought, put his hand into the pockets, wondering if any secret might be
lurking there. What were his feelings on discovering a list of forty names
told off for the guillotine, his own amongst the number! He carried off
the paper, showed it discreetly to his friends, and they agreed that
Robespierre must be made away with. Two days later he appears at the
Convention, and is met by dark faces that scowl when he ascends the
tribune, and show no docile acquiescence when he speaks. Terror for their
own lives has at last stirred these dull, brutalized accomplices to raise
their voice and protest against the tyrant. He is impeached by common
acclamation. He defends himself in a passionate harangue, accusing Mr.
Pitt and King George of having bribed the Convention to arrest him, after
sowing calumnies against him in the minds of the people. The charges
against him were numerous and heavy; he answered them all with vehemence
and a certain wild, disjointed eloquence, and wound up by the following
denunciation: “No, _death is not an eternal sleep_! The nation will not
submit to a desperate and desolating doctrine that covers nature itself
with a funereal shroud; that deprives virtue of hope, and misfortune of
consolation, and insults even death itself. No; we will efface from our
tombs your sacrilegious epitaph, and replace it with the consoling truth,
‘Death is the beginning of immortality!’ ” The speech produced an effect
on the Assembly, but it did not secure a real success. The next day Saint‐
Just mounted the tribune to defend Robespierre; but he had hardly begun
his discourse when cries of “Down with the tyrant!” forced him to give it
up. Robespierre stood at his place, utterly abandoned by the members of
the Assembly, where twenty‐four hours ago he ruled with despotic and
unrivalled sway. Not a voice was raised in his behalf. He strove to obtain
a hearing, but his words were drowned in shouts of “Away with him! down
with him!” He stood dumb and petrified at the sound of those words, bowed
his head, and slowly descended the steps of the tribune; suddenly he
looked up and cried, “Let me die, then, at once!” The younger Robespierre
advances and takes his brother’s arm, asking to share the same fate with
him. This generous movement excites the Convention to still greater rage;
it yells and bellows, gesticulating like so many madmen. The president
puts on his hat, and calls for order; a temporary lull ensues. Robespierre
again tries to make himself heard, but his voice is again drowned in
shouts and hisses; he rushes up and down the steps and about the hall,
clenching his fist and breathing menaces that now fall powerless and are
met with taunts of triumphant hate. At last, over‐mastered by his own
emotions, he drops into a chair. The arrest of the two brothers is voted
unanimously. The elder one endeavors to resist, but is seized and carried
forcibly down to the bar. In the midst of this stormy ebullition, one of
the deputies, seeing Robespierre unable to speak from the violence of his
rage and terror, cried out: “It is Danton’s blood that is choking him!”
Stung by the taunt, Robespierre found breath and courage to retort,
“Danton! Is it Danton that you regret? Cowards! why did you not defend
him!” These spirited words were the last he ever uttered in public. He and
his brother were now removed in custody to a hall close by the Convention,
and with them Saint‐Just, Couthon, and Lebas. It had been an arduous day’s
work for the Convention, and it is not surprising that the deputies
“clamored for an adjournment, that they might repose themselves and dine”;
for whether men live or die, legislators must dine. They were thoughtful
enough to remember that the five in custody would also like to dine, even
for the last time; so the guilty deputies had a good dinner provided for
them, and immediately after were transferred to separate prisons:
Robespierre to the Luxembourg, his brother to St. Lazare, Couthon to Port
Royal (dubbed Port _Libre_ since it had been turned into a prison!), Lebas
to Le Force, and Saint‐Just _aux Ecossais_. Henriot, who commanded the
troops devoted to Robespierre, was seized in the act of attempting an
attack on the Convention, bound, and locked up in one of the courts. Two
bold friends of his rallied the soldiers, stormed the Convention, released
him, and placed him again at the head of his men. Meantime, the jailer of
the Luxembourg had refused to admit Robespierre, and the bailiffs had to
take him to the _Mairie_, where he was received with acclamations of
respect as the “father of the people.” Henriot and his band by midnight
had set him and the other four deputies free, and they were installed at
the Hôtel de Ville, with a large body of soldiers drawn round the edifice
to protect them. But the Convention, on its side, had not been idle.
Barras was placed in command of all the troops that could be mustered, and
in company with twelve energetic leaders, at the head of the _gendarmerie_
and the artillery, marched on the Hôtel de Ville, dispersed Henriot’s
troops, and penetrated into the building, where they found the five
deputies and captured them. The younger Robespierre flung himself out of a
window in a frantic effort to escape the more tragic death that was now a
certainty; he was picked up horribly mutilated, but with life enough yet
to realize the horrors of his position. Lebas, on hearing the _gendarmes_
battering on the door of the room, blew his brains out with a pistol.
Saint‐Just was seized with a knife in his hand, which he was going to
plunge into his heart; he gave it up without a word, and allowed himself
to be bound. Couthon, who was nearly blind and half‐paralyzed, being
powerless to offer the slightest resistance, was flung into a wheelbarrow
that chanced to be in the court‐yard. Robespierre himself, the centre of
this group of suicides and murderers, attempted to cheat the guillotine as
Lebas had done; but either his cowardly hand trembled and betrayed his
will or was seized as he pulled the trigger, for the bullet went through
the cheek instead of through the forehead. The jaw was frightfully
fractured, and hung loose from the face, held on only by the flesh. Some
spectator had the humanity to help the unfortunate man to tie it up with a
handkerchief, and in this miserable plight he and his companions were
conveyed at about two o’clock in the morning to the Committee of Public
Safety. The official report of the day gives the following graphic
description of what then occurred: “Robespierre was brought in on a plank
... by several artillery‐men and armed citizens. He was placed on the
table of the ante‐chamber which adjoins that where the Committee holds its
sittings. A deal box, which contained some samples of the ammunition‐bread
sent to the army _du Nord_, was put under his head by way of pillow. He
was for nearly an hour in a state of insensibility which made us think
that he was no more; but after an hour he opened his eyes. Blood was
running in abundance from the wound he had in the left lower jaw; the jaw
was broken, and a ball had gone through the cheek. His shirt was bloody.
He was without hat or neckcloth. He had on a sky‐blue coat,(158) nankeen
breeches, white stockings hanging down at his heels.... At six in the
morning a surgeon who happened to be in the court‐yard of the Tuileries
was called in to dress the wound. By way of precaution he first put a key
in Robespierre’s mouth. He found the left jaw broken. He pulled out two or
three teeth, bandaged up the wound, and got a basin of water, which he
placed at his side.” All this time no word was spoken by the wounded man;
not even a sigh escaped him when the teeth were being extracted, yet the
agony he endured must have been terrific. There he lay, a spectacle to
gods and men, in his sky‐blue coat, a tiger caught in his own lair, barked
at and cursed and triumphed over by a band of wolves. Who could pity
him—he who had never known pity for man or woman? For more than twenty
hours he lay there in this mental and bodily torture. Once he made a sign
which was understood to express thirst. The burning fever of his wound had
parched him till he gasped for breath: but no one was so merciful as to
get him a glass of water. Vinegar and gall they gave him in abundance.
Many cursed him as the murderer of their kith and kin, and bade him drink
his own blood, if he was thirsty.

All this while the tocsin is ringing out the glad news to Paris. Crowds
rush out on the house‐tops, and wave signals to the prisoners in the
_Conciergerie_ that the hour of deliverance is at hand. The prisoners
cannot understand; they think the tocsin is the signal for a new September
massacre. The word flies from cell to cell, and all fall on their knees
and prepare for instant death.

Others, too, are making ready for death, but not thus. The tumbrels jolt
up to the Convention, and collect for the last time their “batch”; this
time there are but twenty‐three victims. Amongst them, by an exquisite
touch of retributive justice, is Simon the Cordwainer, going to die with
Robespierre! And now they are ready, and the tumbrels move on. The corpse
of Lebas is flung in with Robespierre, as that of Valazé was with Brissot;
the other three were so disfigured with blood and the traces of the death‐
scuffle in the town‐hall that they are hardly to be recognized. The entire
city is out, shouting itself hoarse with joy. The roofs of the houses are
alive with human eyes, all watching for the figure of Robespierre. When it
appears, the soldiers point to it with their swords—show the tyrant, bound
and gagged, to the people. The sight causes a frantic thrill of exultation
that finds utterance in a yell of something too unholy for joy, too fierce
for laughter. A woman breaks through the crowd, dashes aside the bayonets
of the escort, and leaps to the side of the tumbrel. “Ah! thou demon,” she
cries, waving her hand above her head, “the death of thee is better than
wine to my heart Wretch, get thee down to hell with the curses of all
wives and mothers!”

Surely this is hell already begun. The wretched man opens his eyes, glued
together with blood; a shade of deadlier hue passes over his livid, sea‐
green face; he shudders, but utters no sound. The tumbrel reaches the
Place de la Revolution. The furies of the guillotine rush round it, and
execute a dance of fiendish joy, the crowd making room for them and
applauding. Now the cart stops, and the condemned alight. In the first are
the two Robespierres, Couthon, Henriot, and Lebas. Maximilien Robespierre
is the only one who has strength left in him to ascend the scaffold
without help. He stood on the fatal step whither a few days ago his nod
sufficed to send the noblest heads in France; within a few yards of the
spot where only six weeks ago he had decreed the existence of the
Omnipotent, at whose judgment‐bar he was now going to appear. Seldom
indeed does that silent, inscrutable Judge allow us to behold the
judgments of his justice accomplished here below, and amidst circumstances
so palpably impressive, and to our human eyes so fearfully appropriate, as
was this death‐scene of Robespierre’s. He showed no sign of terror or
remorse, but, dumb and self‐contained to the last, yielded himself to
Samson’s hands. Only when the bandage was wrenched brutally from the
broken jaw, letting it drop from the face, he uttered a piercing cry that
rang above the yells of the multitude. It was the last sound his voice
emitted in this world. Samson did his work, and Robespierre was no more.

One long, loud shout of gladness went up to heaven, and carried the
tidings to the ends of France on wings quicker than words. It penetrated
the iron doors of the prisons, like the sweet beams of the golden dawn,
and bade men hope and rejoice, for the Reign of Terror was at an end and
the gates of their dungeons unlocked.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

The guillotine has been so prominent a figure in the foregoing sketch, as
indeed throughout the whole span of the Reign of Terror, that a word on
its origin may not be uninteresting. It is popularly supposed to have been
invented by Dr. Guillotin, but this is a mistake. The first idea of it
emanated from him, and he had the unenviable glory of giving it his name;
but these are his only claims to its invention. The guillotine would seem
to be almost a creature born spontaneously of the Revolution, a cruel
offspring of the self‐devouring monster. It is strange that, until the
“_Sainte Guillotine_” was enthroned as the agent of that murder‐mad reign,
no mention is ever made in the reports of the time of the exact kind of
machine used in capital punishment. We read of persons being “condemned”
and “executed,” but there is no more definite account of the manner of
execution. The _lanterne_ was the mode of capital punishment up to the
Reign of Terror, and the mob could always do summary justice on its
victims by making a gallows of the nearest lamp‐post; but when speed
became the primary object, this was found too tedious, besides being
troublesome. Towards the close of the year 1789 Dr. Guillotin was elected
to the States‐General. He was such a mediocre, insignificant person in
every way that his appearance in the Assembly caused general surprise and
laughter. In the _Portraits of Celebrated Persons_, a contemporaneous
work, we find him thus treated: “By what accident has a man without either
ability or reputation obtained for himself a frightful immortality? He
_fathered_ a work written by a lawyer—Hardouin—who had too much character
to produce it in his own name; and his work having been censured by the
parliament, Guillotin, who assumed the responsibility of it, became the
man of the day, and owed to it that gleam of reputation which ensured his
election to the States‐General. He was, in truth, a _nobody_ who made
himself a _busy‐body_, and by meddling with everything was at once
mischievous and ridiculous.” This meddling personage made himself
extremely ridiculous on the one occasion to which may be traced his ill‐
starred celebrity. He proposed in the Assembly that some machine, more
humane and expeditious than the process of hanging, should be invented for
capital punishment, and, after describing the idea that was in his mind,
he proceeded to illustrate it by a pantomime with his fingers,
straightening out the left index, and bringing down that of the right hand
over the thumb with a snap. “There, now, I put your head here; this falls,
and it is cut off; you feel nothing; it is the affair of a moment!” Roars
of laughter followed this lucid and cheerful explanation, and the next day
the ballad‐mongers diverted Paris with a song, the burden of which was “a
machine that will kill us right off, and be christened _la guillotine_!”
The doctor said no more about his idea, but, jocosely presented as it was,
it nevertheless made an impression on the Assembly, who adopted it three
years later. Meantime, they were beset by complaints from the _Tiers
Etat_, who could not reconcile it to their dignity that the _bourgeoisie_
should be hanged while the _noblesse_ were beheaded. Let it be hanging all
round, they said, and they would be satisfied; but why should nobles have
their head cut off, while plebeians “swung at the lantern?” The grievance
met with cold sympathy, however, until the times were ripe for reform, and
it became urgent to find some more expeditious means of despatching both
nobles and plebeians into the other world. Dr. Guillotin’s proposal was
reconsidered; an officer of the Criminal Court, named Laquiante, designed
an instrument, which was approved of by the authorities and confided for
execution to a piano‐maker—a native of Strasbourg, we believe—named
Schmidt. There was a good deal of haggling over the cost. Schmidt, in the
first instance, wanted nine hundred and sixty francs, which was found
exorbitant and refused. In consideration, however, of his having suggested
some improvements in the original design, they consented to let him take
out a patent, and to give him an order for eighty‐three machines, one for
every department in France, at five hundred francs each, and to be made as
quickly as possible. They were three months quarrelling over the bargain,
and all this time an unfortunate criminal, of the name of Pelletier, was
lying in prison, waiting to be executed; when at last the price was
settled and the first machine ready, he had the miserable distinction of
inaugurating it on the 25th of April, 1792. The prejudice had been very
strong against the new mode of decapitation, the clergy especially arguing
that “the sight of blood would prove highly demoralizing to the people.”
Samson, the executioner, was one of the staunchest opposers of the
innovation on the same grounds, and also because of the shock the
spectacle would give to many spectators. His letter to the Assembly
embodying his opinions and experience on the subject is a curious bit of
literature, highly creditable to the hangman, as indeed all that has come
down to us concerning him seems to be. The humane desire to abridge the
sufferings of the criminal overcame, however, every objection, and hanging
was formally abolished and replaced by decapitation. The new
instrument—most unjustly, as we see—was called the guillotine, in spite of
a semi‐official mention of it as _Louison_, and some efforts to make that
name adhere. The worthy doctor was doomed to notoriety on account of his
having first mooted the affair and made Paris laugh over it. Nothing
secures immortality with the Parisians like a joke.

Apropos of the guillotine, we may mention that the Samsons were a
respectable family of Abbeville, and held the office of “Executioner of
the High Acts of Justice,” by descent, from the year 1722. Charles Henri
Samson, who beheaded Louis XVI., came into office in 1778, and retired on
a pension in 1795. He was succeeded by his son in his formidable
functions, the latter having resigned the grade of captain in the
artillery to undertake them.




Robert Cavelier De La Salle.


The pious hymns of the good and noble Marquette and his companions had not
ceased to reverberate over the waters of the Great River, awakening the
echoes of its banks and overhanging forests, when a bold and devoted
spirit, fired by the fame of previous explorations, was meditating on the
shores of Lake Ontario the prosecution of the grand work begun by the
illustrious missionary. The world was startled with the news that the
waters over whose bosom the missionaries and traders of Canada drove their
canoes at the north, after meandering through the vast plains and forests
of the continent, poured themselves into the Gulf of Mexico. This great
physical problem was settled by Father Marquette and the Sieur Joliet,
who, after having explored the course of the Mississippi for eleven
hundred miles, returned to electrify the world by the reports of their
brilliant success. But as yet comparatively little was known of this
gigantic stream. The imagination of the most sanguine and the hearts of
the boldest were appalled at the task; but it was a destined step in the
onward march of religion and civilization. A Catholic missionary had
gloriously led the way; a Catholic nobleman no less gloriously advanced to
complete the work. This was Robert Cavelier de La Salle.

He was born at Rouen, in Normandy, of a good family, but the date of his
birth has not been transmitted to us. He spent ten or twelve years of his
early life in one of the Jesuit seminaries of France, where he received a
good education, and he was well acquainted with mathematics and the
natural sciences. His renunciation of his patrimony and his long sojourn
among the Fathers of the Society of Jesus justify the belief that he was
intended for the priesthood. Providence, however, destined him for a
somewhat different sphere of labor and usefulness, but one in close co‐
operation with the great work of the church among mankind. He carried with
him from the seminary of the Jesuits the highest testimonials of his
superiors for purity of character, unblemished life, and exhaustless
energy. By his own high qualities and noble achievements he has won a
diploma for himself, inscribed on the brightest pages of our history, and
more honorable than man can confer.

Emerging from the seminary full of youth, intelligence, and daring spirit,
he joined one of the numerous bands of emigrants from France who came to
seek adventures and fortunes in the New World. He came to Canada about the
year 1667, and embarked with great energy in the fur trade, then the
prevailing means of obtaining an exchange of European wealth and
merchandise. His enterprising spirit soon carried him to the frontiers,
and in his frail canoe he traversed the vast rivers and broad lakes of the
continent, mingling with the aborigines, and acquiring information and
experience of their modes of life, character, and languages. He explored
Lake Ontario, and ascended Lake Erie. The activity of his mind and the
restlessness of his genius could not be satisfied even with the vast and
adventurous field of trade presented to him; for he shared largely in the
prevailing ambition of discovering a northwest passage across the
continent to China and Japan, an evidence of which he left behind him in
the name of Lachine, which he bestowed upon one of his trading posts on
the island of Montreal. He saw in that extended chain of lakes the link
that united America with Asia, and indulged in the fond and proud dream
that, as the discoverer of the long‐sought passage, his name would be
inscribed beside that of Columbus on the scroll of immortality.

Seeing the advantages of the position selected by the Comte de Frontenac,
the Governor of Canada, in fortifying the outlet of Lake Ontario, La Salle
erected one of his trading posts under the protection of Fort Fontenac. He
acquired the favor and friendship of the governor, and soon rejoiced in
the esteem and confidence of the public. Up to this time his efforts were
apparently chiefly expended in bold and energetic efforts to build up his
fortunes. But his resources were inferior to the grand enterprises which
he contemplated. He accordingly repaired to France in 1675, where, aided
by the influence of Frontenac and the recommendations of the minister
Colbert, he obtained from his sovereign, Louis XIV., letters‐patent,
granting him Fort Frontenac and the seigniory of a large tract of land
about the same, upon condition that he would rebuild the fort of stone,
garrison it at his own expense, and clear up certain lands. This grant
secured to him a large domain and the exclusive traffic with the Five
Nations. The king also raised him and his family to the rank of nobility
as a reward for his services and noble actions. His patent of nobility
bears date the 13th of May, 1675.

Returning to America, the Cavalier de La Salle took possession of his
seigniory, and soon proved how well he merited the confidence and favors
he enjoyed. He fulfilled all his stipulations with the king. In two years
Fort Frontenac reared its massive walls and bastions of stone which cast
their shadows on the waters of Ontario. A number of French families
clustered around the fort; the Recollect missionaries induced their Indian
neophytes and catechumens to pitch their tents and offer up their newly‐
learned devotions under its shadow; the rugged wilds were supplanted by
cultivated fields, gardens, and pastures, and the new lord of Cataraqui
was at once the pioneer of civilization and the friend of religion. Such
was the origin of the present city of Kingston.

At the same time La Salle prosecuted his commercial enterprises with
renewed vigor, and these, in return, seemed at first to promise to repay
his perseverance and energy. Now for the first time the rapids of the St.
Lawrence were stemmed, and the waters of Ontario ploughed by the keels of
three small barks with decks erected on them. Had all depended on energy
and zeal, success and prosperity would have followed, and the young
nobleman would have achieved a fortune, fame, and power that would not
have been long in winning for him a position among the proudest and most
powerful nobility of France. But his fame was destined rather to be
associated with the foundation of a great republic than with the more
limited work of founding a noble family, to whom to transmit a princely
fortune, and with building up the power of a brilliant despotism. His
enterprises failed, wealth eluded his grasp, and he found himself
oppressed with vast debts, incurred in the great undertakings in which he
had embarked. Turning from this field of disaster, his vigorous mind again
became filled with visions of the northwest passage and with his darling
projects of discovery. He studied the accounts of the Spanish and other
adventurers and discoverers on the continent. Joliet, in 1674, passing
down from the upper lakes, had visited Fort Frontenac, of which La Salle
was then commander under Gov. Frontenac, and thus La Salle was one of the
first to learn of the brilliant achievements and discoveries of the
illustrious Marquette and Joliet, and was probably one of the first to see
the maps and journal which the latter lost between the fort and the next
French post. These did not seem, at the time, to have deeply impressed the
mind of La Salle, who was then engaged in other plans; for it was after
this that he embarked in the project of founding the seigniory of
Cataraqui on the shores of Ontario, and in the vast trading operations
above referred to. On the failure of these he began to plan new adventures
and discoveries. His study of the reports of Spanish and French explorers
led him before all others to identify the great river of Marquette and
Joliet with that of De Soto. Blending the taste for commerce with the
thirst for fame, he saw in the vast herds of bison, described as roaming
over the prairies that extended from the banks of the Missouri and
Illinois rivers, the means of shipping cargoes of buffalo‐skins and wool
to France from the banks of those rivers _via_ the Mississippi and the
Gulf of Mexico. Nor did he yet relinquish his trading projects at the
north; for these he expected to connect with his contemplated trading
posts on the Mississippi, Fort Frontenac still remaining his principal
post. Nor did he yet abandon the hope of discovering from the head‐waters
of the Mississippi a passage to the China Sea.

Filled with these grand and noble views, he returned to France in 1677,
and still enjoying the recommendation of Frontenac and the favor of the
great Colbert and of his son and successor in the ministry, the Marquis de
Seignelay, he succeeded in obtaining from the king, on the 12th of May,
1678, new letters‐patent, confirming his rights to the fort and the
seigniory of Cataraqui, and authorizing him to advance as far westward as
he desired, to build forts wherever he might choose, and prosecute his
commercial enterprises as before, with the single exception that he should
not trade with the Hurons and other Indians who brought their furs to
Montreal, in order that there might be no interference with other traders.
At the recommendation of his friend, the Prince de Conti, La Salle took
into his service as his lieutenant the veteran Chevalier de Tonty, an
Italian by birth, who proved a great acquisition to the work, and was the
ever‐faithful friend and companion of the great captain.

In two months La Salle completed his work in France, and in the autumn of
1678, sailed from Rochelle, accompanied by Tonty, the Sieur de la Motte, a
pilot, mariners, ship‐carpenters, and other workmen. He was well provided
with anchors, sails, cordage, and everything necessary for rigging
vessels, with stores of merchandise for trading with the Indians, and
whatever might be useful for his projected expedition. Arriving at Quebec
in September, he immediately pushed forward to Fort Frontenac—but not
without having to surmount great difficulties and labors in getting his
heavy canoes and freight over the perilous rapids of the St.
Lawrence—where he arrived exhausted and emaciated by his fatigues, but
full of courage and hope.

As the winter approached La Salle pressed forward the preparations for his
grand enterprise, which he resolved to enter upon in the spring. On the
18th of November, 1678, he despatched the hardy and faithful Tonty,
accompanied by Father Louis Hennepin, to the Niagara River in one of his
brigantines of ten tons, with workmen, provisions, implements, and
materials, to undertake the construction and equipment of a vessel to bear
his party over the upper lakes—a work which was to be accomplished with a
handful of men, in the midst of winter, at a distance of hundreds of miles
from any civilized settlement, and surrounded by savage tribes, whose
enmity had been enkindled by the malice of La Salle’s enemies, who,
actuated by the rivalry of trade, had induced the Indians to believe that
he intended to monopolize their trade upon terms dictated by himself at
the cannon’s mouth. Tonty set to work with a cheerful heart. He
encountered perils and hardships, which overcame the endurance of La
Motte, who abandoned the enterprise, and retired to Quebec to seek ease
and rest from such labors. Tonty persevered until the 20th of January,
when La Salle by his presence inspired him and his companions with new
ardor and courage. About this time the brigantine was cast away on the
southern shore of Lake Ontario, in consequence of dissensions among the
pilots; and several bark canoes, with their valuable freight of goods and
provisions, were wrecked and lost. His difficulties with the Senecas also
compelled La Salle to relinquish the fort which he had begun to build at
the falls of Niagara as a protection to his ship‐builders, and to content
himself with a mere shed or store‐house. A spirit less brave and firm than
La Salle’s would have quailed under the misfortunes which, through the
inclemency of the season and the malice of men, surrounded his steps. But
these only nerved him to greater exertion. In six days after his arrival
the keel of his vessel was laid, the cavalier driving the first bolt with
his own hand. “When he saw the snow began to melt,” he sent out fifteen
men in advance of his exploring expedition, with instructions to pass over
the lakes to Mackinac, provide provisions for the expedition, and await
the arrival of the main party.

Leaving Tonty now to conduct the building of the vessel, La Salle made a
journey of over three hundred miles of frozen country to Fort Frontenac,
to arrange his financial business before setting out in the spring. His
only food was a bag of corn; his baggage was drawn over the snow and ice
by two men and a dog. At the fort he had to exert all his ability and
energy to counteract the malicious efforts and practices of his enemies
for his ruin. His creditors at Quebec became alarmed by the reports and
calumnies of his foes. His effects at that town were seized and
sacrificed, while the property which he was compelled to leave at Fort
Frontenac was in value double all his debts. But the delay of his
expedition would be to him a greater evil than the loss of property, so
that he could not stop to remedy or resist these proceedings. In the midst
of such harassing cares he bore in mind the necessity of providing for the
religious wants of his companions and of the benighted heathen nations
which he intended to visit. He secured the services of three Recollect
missionaries, Fathers Gabriel de la Ribourde, Louis Hennepin, and Zenobe
Membré. He had already, while commanding at Fort Frontenac, built for
these good missionaries a house and chapel; he now bestowed upon their
order eighteen acres of land near the fort, and one hundred acres of
forest‐land.

Tonty having faithfully completed his task, the ship was launched,
receiving the name of _Griffin_, as a compliment to the Comte de
Frontenac, whose armorial bearings were adorned with two griffins. Tonty
was next sent in search of the fifteen men who had previously set out. The
_Griffin_, with La Salle, the missionaries, and the remainder of the party
on board, sailed on the 7th of August, 1679, on the bosom of Lake Erie.
The artillery saluted the vessel, as she dashed through the waves, and the
missionary and crew chanted a grateful _Te Deum_ in honor of Him who had
speeded their work. The Senecas gazed with wonder at a bark of sixty tons
riding the lake with greater ease and grace than their own canoes.
Reaching in safety the straits connecting Lakes Erie and Huron, he
considered the expediency of planting a colony on the majestic Detroit, as
he glided between its islands; and on the 12th, S. Clare’s Day, as he
traversed its shallow waters, he bestowed upon the little river the name
of that saint. While the ship was passing over Lake Huron, she was
overtaken by a terrible storm, which caused even the bold captain to fear
for the safety of all on board. Uniting with the missionaries in petitions
for the intercession of S. Anthony of Padua, he made a promise to dedicate
the first chapel built in the countries he was going to discover in honor
of that patron saint, in case he should escape. The province from which
the missionaries of the expedition had come was that of S. Anthony of
Padua, in Artois; hence the selection of this saint as their protector on
this occasion, as well as for the reason that he is frequently invoked as
the patron of mariners. The storm abated, and on the 27th of August, the
_Griffin_, aided by friendly winds, entered a safe harbor in the island of
Mackinac.

Here again the “great wooden canoe” was an object of admiration and dread
to the natives, heightened by the roar of the cannon on board. La Salle,
clad in a cloak of scarlet and gold, visited the nearest village, and the
pious priests offered up the Holy Sacrifice for the benefit of those
benighted savages. The opposite bank had been the scene of the missionary
labors of the illustrious Marquette. The captain visited this spot,
endeavoring there and in the neighboring country to propitiate the
friendship of the natives as he advanced. His enemies had here too been at
work, poisoning the minds of the Indians against him far and near, and
tampering with the advanced corps of fifteen men whom he had sent out, and
who, under such influences, became faithless to their leader: some of them
deserted, and others squandered the provisions which he had entrusted to
them. Again setting sail, the _Griffin_ bore them to Green Bay, where La
Salle had the satisfaction of meeting some of his advanced party who had
continued faithful to him and their duty, and who now returned with a
goodly quantity of furs, the result of successful traffic with the
Indians. After two weeks he loaded the _Griffin_ with the rich furs
brought in by his men, and sent her with the pilot and five mariners back
to the Niagara, amidst the murmurs of his men, who dreaded the work of
proceeding in light canoes. It has been remarked(159) that had he adopted
the Ohio as his conduit to the Mississippi, one vessel would have answered
his purpose, and much suffering and delay been saved, for this river had
been known to the missionaries; by his present plan, he had to build two
vessels, one above the falls of Niagara, and one on the Illinois River. He
now set out to descend Lake Michigan in four bark canoes, September the
19th, the party consisting of La Salle, the fathers, and seventeen men;
and they continued their perilous voyage along the west side of the lake.
They were overtaken before nightfall by a violent storm, and for several
days they struggled through wind, rain, sleet, and waves, until they
landed with great danger near the river Milwaukee. Seeing their perilous
situation, La Salle leaped into the water, and with his own hands helped
to drag his canoe ashore. Those in the other boats followed his example,
and soon the landing was effected and the canoes secured.

La Salle was accompanied in his expedition by a faithful Indian, who
proved a useful member of the party; for his unerring gun frequently
relieved the hunger of the travellers with game from the surrounding
forests. They also procured corn from the natives, always paying its full
value; and even when they had to take it from villages temporarily
abandoned, where there was no one to receive payment, its value in goods
was left in its place. At this bleak landing near the Milwaukee the
Indians, moved with sympathy for their exhausted and weather‐beaten
condition, brought deer and corn for their relief, smoked with them the
calumet of friendship, and entertained them with war dances and songs.
Cheered on their way by the kindly offices and generous sympathy of the
natives, in which they felt that


    “Kindness by secret sympathy is tied,
    For noble souls in nature are allied,”


they pushed on with renewed courage to encounter again the perils of the
elements. The voyage from this point to the end of the lake was one
continued series of hardships and dangers. They found it frequently a
relief from the fury of the waves to drag their canoes over the rugged
rocks; and as they pulled them ashore the heaving surf dashed the spray
over their heads. They encountered a wandering party of Outagamies, or Fox
Indians, near a green and refreshing spot, where they stopped to rest and
refresh themselves, and it was only the address, deliberation, and iron
courage of La Salle that prevented a bloody conflict with these
treacherous savages. On the first of November the entire party came safely
into the mouth of the Miami River, now S. Joseph’s, previously appointed
as the rendezvous, at which the several companies were to meet.

Here La Salle was sorely disappointed at not finding the Chevalier Tonty.
Suffering from want of food and the increasing severity of the winter, the
men began to murmur; but La Salle’s bold spirit of command kept them in
subjection, especially when they saw him sharing every hardship,
privation, and danger with them. He kept them busy in building a fort for
their protection from the savages, and in exploring the country and
neighboring rivers. The missionaries caused a bark chapel to be erected,
in which the divine service was attended by both Europeans and Indians.
But La Salle’s apprehensions for the fate of the _Griffin_ began to
increase. At length Tonty arrived, and, while he relieved his captain and
men with provisions and reinforcements, he confirmed their alarm for the
vessel. The _Griffin_ had not reached Mackinac, no tidings could be
obtained from the Indians of her safety or fate, and it became, alas! too
certain that she, the first to ride triumphantly, with her proud sails
spread and her streamers unfurled, across these great lakes, had been the
first to fall a victim, with her hardy crew, to the avenging waves of Lake
Michigan.

The cavalier now prepared to go down the Kankakee River to the Illinois.
The distance to the portage was seventy miles, and much time and labor
were spent in endeavoring to find the proper portage. La Salle started out
himself to explore the country, and to discover, if possible, the eastern
branch of the Illinois. Detained till evening in making the circuit of a
large marsh, his gun, fired as a signal, was not answered, and he resolved
to spend the night alone in that fearful wilderness. He fortunately
descried a fire, and on approaching saw near by a bed of leaves, from
which some nomadic son of the forest, startled at the report of the gun,
had just fled. La Salle scattered leaves and branches around, in order
that he might not be surprised in the night, and then took possession of
the Indian’s rustic bed, in which he slept peacefully till morning. To the
great joy of his friends, he returned in the following afternoon, with two
opossums hanging from his belt. At length the Indian hunter of the
expedition found the portage. Leaving four men in the fort, the expedition
set out on the 3d of December; the canoes and all the baggage were carried
over five or six miles to the head‐waters of the Kankakee, and about the
5th of December the company, consisting of thirty‐three persons, commenced
their passage down the dreary and marshy stream, rendered yet more gloomy
by the rigors of mid‐winter. At length, after enduring hunger and cold,
they came to a more genial and smiling country, and soon their canoes
glided into the river Illinois. On the banks of the river they discovered
and visited the largest of the Illinois villages, composed of four or five
hundred cabins, in each of which resided five or six families, not far
below the present town of Ottawa, in La Salle County, Illinois. But the
place was deserted; the inhabitants had all gone to the hunting‐grounds
for wild cattle and beaver, leaving their corn stored away in their
granaries. Yielding to the necessities of his condition, and trusting to
fortune for an opportunity to make ample compensation, La Salle
appropriated fifty bushels of corn from the immense quantities stored away
in the capacious granaries of the village. Re‐embarking on the 27th of
December, the party proceeded down the current. On the 1st of January,
1680, the feast of the Circumcision of Our Lord was solemnly and
appropriately celebrated, the salutations of the New Year were exchanged,
and we may well imagine with what hearty and earnest good‐wishes those
brave voyagers blessed each other. On the same day, after passing through
Lake Pimiteony, now Lake Peoria, our voyagers came suddenly upon an Indian
encampment on both sides of the river. Having heard that the Illinois were
hostile, La Salle arranged his flotilla for the emergency; the men were
armed, and the canoes were placed in battle array across the entire river,
La Salle and Tonty occupying the two canoes nearest the shore. Observing
that the Indians were somewhat alarmed and disposed to parley, La Salle
boldly landed in the midst of the innumerable bands of dusky warriors,
prepared for either war or peace, and by his skill and invincible courage
soon succeeded in making them his friends. After smoking with them the
calumet of peace, he explained the circumstance of his having taken their
corn, and then paid them liberally for it, to their great satisfaction. He
also told them that he came amongst them in order to give them a knowledge
of the one true God, and to better their condition. An alliance of
friendship was entered into, and all retired apparently to rest.

But during the night emissaries from La Salle’s enemies arrived. A grand
council was held, as that is the favorite time with the Indians for
transacting their most important business. The poison was infused into the
minds of La Salle’s recent allies; and on the following morning his keen
eye soon saw that the intrigues of his enemies had not failed to follow
him to that distant region, and it was only his brave, frank, and
determined bearing that enabled him to surmount the countless obstacles
that were thus thrown in his way. The effect of this intrigue, however,
was not wholly lost on his own men. Six of them deserted him at this
trying juncture. Severe as was this loss, his proud spirit bore up
manfully under it; but the loss of his vessel was a severer trial to him,
but one that failed to dampen the ardor of his enthusiasm or the
determination of his will. He selected a spot for a fort half a league
from the Indian camp and near the present city of Peoria; and while he
bestowed upon his fort the name of Crèvecœur—Broken Heart—under the sad
influence of the loss of the _Griffin_ and the machinations of his
enemies, the vigor with which he raised its walls and arranged its
armament is ample proof that he still possessed a heart full of courage
and hope.

In the middle of January the entire company took up their residence within
the fort. Father Membré remained with the Indians, was adopted into the
family of a noted chief, and devoted himself to the task of winning the
Illinois to the Christian faith. Father de La Ribourde exercised his
ministry at the fort, where he erected a chapel; and Father Hennepin is
said to have “rambled as his fancies moved him.”

La Salle engaged a portion of his men in building a brigantine forty‐two
feet long and twelve feet broad, in which to descend the Mississippi. On
the 29th of February, 1680, he sent an expedition under the direction of
Father Hennepin, accompanied by Picard Du Gay and Michel Ako, to explore
for the first time the Mississippi above the mouth of the Wisconsin, the
point from which Father Marquette’s voyage down the great river commenced.
In six weeks the hull of the brigantine was nearly ready to receive the
masts and rigging, but the necessary materials were wanting to complete
the equipment. An abundance of such materials had been placed on board the
_Griffin_, but these had been buried beneath the waters of the lake with
the ill‐fated vessel. Gloomy indeed was the prospect before our brave
cavalier; but bold resolves are rapidly conceived and speedily executed by
daring spirits. He placed Tonty in command of the fort, and, in order to
procure what was necessary for the new vessel, he determined to return on
foot to Fort Frontenac, distant at least twelve hundred miles. His journey
lay along the southern shores of Lakes Erie and Ontario, through vast
forests; innumerable rivers intervened, which he had to ford or cross on
rafts, and this, too, at a season of the year when the drifting snow and
floating ice threw extraordinary dangers and fatigues in the path of the
traveller. For food he must rely entirely upon the hazards of the chase.
The history of our race contains the record of few such undertakings as
this; yet the spirit of La Salle faltered not. On the 2d of March the bold
cavalier shouldered his musket and knapsack, and, with three Frenchmen and
his Indian hunter, started upon his perilous journey:


                    “My heart is firm;
    There’s naught within the compass of humanity
    But I would dare and do.”


After La Salle’s departure the brave and faithful Tonty began to
experience in turn the frowns of fortune. While superintending the
erection of a new fort at a spot selected by La Salle, Tonty received the
news of an insurrection at Fort Crèvecœur. This, too, was instigated by La
Salle’s enemies. Deserted by more than half his party, Tonty took up his
quarters at the great Indian village, where he was treated with
hospitality. After a residence there of six months a war‐party of Iroquois
and Miamis approached the village, and for a long time Tonty and Father
Membré, at great peril and with much ill treatment at the hands of the
invading savages, endeavored to negotiate a peace. Failing in every
effort, and finding that dangers and perils were gathering thick and fast
around him, Tonty resolved to make his escape with his remaining five
companions, which he succeeded in accomplishing, in an old and leaky
canoe, on the 18th of September. On the following day, about twenty‐five
miles from the village, they drew the canoe to the shore for repairs.
While thus engaged they had the misfortune of losing for ever the great
and good Father Gabriel de La Ribourde, who, with a mind fond of the
beautiful in nature, as well as with a soul that loved all men, had
wandered too far up the banks of the river, drawn on by the picturesque
scenery that lay before him, was met by three young Kickapoo warriors, and
fell a victim to the unsparing tomahawk. After passing, with heavy hearts,
over ice and snow, rambling for some time almost at random in the woods,
and enduring hunger and delays, they fortunately reached a village of the
Potawatamies, where they were received with hospitality. Tonty was
detained at the village by a severe and dangerous illness. Father Membré
advanced to the missionary station at Green Bay; here they all met in the
spring, and then proceeded to Mackinac to await the return of La Salle.

In the meantime La Salle, after stopping twenty‐four hours at the Indian
village which he had previously visited, and finding that the two men whom
he had despatched from the Miami River to Mackinac had obtained no tidings
of the _Griffin_, now abandoned every lingering hope for her safety. He
pressed forward on his great journey, only to hear of new disasters and
losses at Fort Frontenac. The fact that he accomplished such a journey
under such circumstances is sufficient to illustrate the endurance and
unbending resolution of this great explorer. Of this chapter in the
history of La Salle Bancroft thus writes:


    “Yet here the immense power of his will appeared. Dependent on
    himself, fifteen hundred miles from the nearest French settlement,
    impoverished, pursued by enemies at Quebec, and in the wilderness
    surrounded by uncertain nations, he inspired his men with
    resolution to saw trees into plank and prepare a bark; he
    despatched Louis Hennepin to explore the Upper Mississippi; he
    questioned the Illinois and their southern captives on the course
    of the Mississippi; he formed conjectures concerning the Tennessee
    River; and then, as new recruits were needed, and sails and
    cordage for the bark, in the month of March, with a musket and a
    pouch of powder and shot, with a blanket for his protection, and
    skins of which to make moccasins, he, with three companions, set
    off on foot for Fort Frontenac, to trudge through thickets and
    forests, to wade through marshes and melting snows, having for his
    pathway the ridge of highlands which divide the basin of the Ohio
    from that of the lakes—without drink, except water from the
    brooks; without food, except supplies from his gun. Of his
    thoughts on that long journey no record exists.”


He arrived safely at Fort Frontenac, but his affairs had all gone wrong in
his absence. In the destruction of his vessel and cargo he had sustained a
loss of a large portion of his means; besides this, his agents had
plundered him in the fur trade on Lake Ontario; a vessel freighted with
merchandise for him had been lost in the Bay of St. Lawrence; his heavily‐
laden canoes had been dashed to pieces by the rapids above Montreal; some
of his men, corrupted by his enemies, had deserted, carrying his property
among the Dutch in New York, and his creditors, availing themselves of a
report, gotten up by his enemies, that he and his companions had been
lost, had seized on his remaining effects, and sacrificed them in the
market. But one friend remained to him in all Canada—the Comte de
Frontenac. The undaunted La Salle still pushed forward his work; having
arranged his affairs as well as he could, he secured the services of La
Forest as an officer, and engaged more men. On the 23d of July, 1680, he
set out on his return. Detained more than a month on Lake Ontario by head‐
winds, he reached Mackinac in the middle of September, and the Miami
towards the end of November. Proceeding to the spot where he had left
Tonty, he found his forts abandoned, the Illinois village abandoned, and
could hear nothing of the companions whom he had left behind him. He now
heard of the Iroquois war, and spent some time and effort in endeavoring
to effect an alliance of all the neighboring tribes against the Illinois.
Finding it impossible to accomplish his purpose for want of a larger
force, he returned to the Miami River late in May, 1681, and about the
middle of June he had the happiness of saluting Tonty and his companions
in the harbor of Mackinac. The two cavaliers sat down together, and
related to each other their respective misfortunes and hardships. Thus
another year’s delay was occasioned; but in the meantime the trade with
the Indians was prosecuted with vigor. Some idea may be formed of the
material of which these two men were made when it is related that even
now, when all their plans had failed and all seemed lost to them, the
ardor with which they first commenced this wonderful task remained
unbroken and undiminished. In order to renew their preparations for the
exploration of the Mississippi, they all set out in a few days for Fort
Frontenac, from which La Salle had already twice departed with the bold
and lofty purpose of exploring and laying open to the world the interior
geography of the continent. An eyewitness to these interesting conferences
between La Salle and Tonty relates that the former maintained “his
ordinary coolness and self‐possession. Any one but him would have
renounced and abandoned the enterprise; but, far from that, by a firmness
of mind and an almost unequalled constancy, I saw him more resolute than
ever to continue his work and to carry out his discovery.”(160)

As already mentioned, Father Hennepin had been commissioned by the captain
to explore, with his selected companions, the Upper Mississippi, probably
the last aspiration of La Salle after the discovery of the northwest
passage to the China Sea. Proceeding down the Illinois to its mouth,
Father Hennepin directed his canoe up the unexplored stream, and on the
eleventh day he and his companions were near the Wisconsin River. Turning
up this river, they proceeded nineteen days, when the grand cataract burst
for the first time upon the view of Europeans.


    “It hath a thousand tongues of mirth,
      Of grandeur, or delight,
    And every heart is gladder made
      When water greets the sight.”


It was called “The Falls of St. Anthony” in honor of the holy founder of
the order of the Recollects. Falling in with the Sieur Du Luth, the two
parties, nine in number, rambled and messed together till the end of
September, 1680, when they all set out for Canada. Father Hennepin sailed
from Quebec to France, where he published, in 1684, an account of his
travels and discoveries. Thirteen years after this, and ten after the
death of La Salle, he published his _New Discovery of a Vast Country in
America, between New Mexico and the Frozen Ocean_, in which the love of
the marvellous is regarded by historians as having far transcended the
limits of authentic and trustworthy narrative, and as conflicting with the
recognized and just pretensions of La Salle.

Upon his return to Fort Frontenac La Salle lost no time in preparing for
another effort. He arranged his affairs with his creditors, pledged Fort
Frontenac and the adjacent lands and trading privileges for his future
expenses, and enlisted forces for his expedition. On the 28th of August,
1681, the company set out in canoes from the head of the Niagara River,
and on the third of November they had arrived at the Miami. The constant
and ever‐faithful Tonty and the good Father Membré accompanied the
expedition, which consisted of fifty‐four persons, of whom twenty‐three
were Frenchmen, eighteen Abnakis or Loup Indians, ten Indian women whom
the Indians insisted should go along in order to do their cooking, and
three children. Six weeks were consumed at the Miami in making the
necessary arrangements. The Sieur Tonty and Father Membré proceeded with
nearly the entire company along the southern border of Lake Michigan to
the mouth of the Chicago River, dragging their canoes, baggage, and
provisions for about eighty leagues over the frozen waters of the Illinois
on sledges prepared by the indefatigable Tonty. La Salle travelled on foot
from the Miami River, and joined the company on the 4th of January, 1682.
They continued their journey in the same way up the Chicago to Lake
Peoria, where the canoes were carried upon the waters, and on the 6th of
February the great river, then called the “Colbert,” received its
explorers safely upon its waves. They were detained by the floating ice
till about the 19th, when the flotilla commenced its eventful voyage. On
the same day, six leagues lower down, they passed the mouth of the
Missouri, then called the Osage. They stopped at a deserted village of the
Tamaroas Indians, whose people were absent on the chase, and then slowly
passed on for forty leagues till they reached the Ohio, stopping
frequently on the route to replenish their stock of provisions by hunting
and fishing. Leaving the Ohio, they passed through one hundred and twenty
miles of low, marshy river, full of thick foam, rushes, and walnut‐trees,
till, on the 26th of February, they came to Chickasaw Bluffs, where they
rested. Here a fort was built and called Fort Prudhomme, in memory of
Peter Prudhomme, one of their companions, who was lost while hunting in
the woods, supposed to have been killed or carried off by a party of
Indians, whose trail was discovered near by. Afterwards, by the untiring
and determined efforts of La Salle, and after nine days scouring the
country, Prudhomme was found and restored to his companions; but the fort
long retained his name. Proceeding about a hundred miles, they heard the
sound of drums and the echo of war‐cries, and soon they came abreast of
the villages of the Arkansas Indians, whose inhabitants were informed at
one and the same time that the strangers were prepared for war—as was
evidenced by the erection of a redoubt upon the shore; or for peace—as was
manifested by their extending the calumet of peace. They found the Indians
peaceable and friendly, and here our voyagers stopped to rest. Two weeks
were spent amongst these gay, open‐hearted, and gentle natives in smoking
the calumet, partaking of feasts, and obtaining Indian corn, beans, flour,
and various kinds of fruits, for which they repaid their entertainers with
presents which, however trifling, pleased their fancy much. Father Membré
erected a cross, around which the natives assembled; and though he could
not speak their language, he succeeded in acquainting them with the
existence of the true God and some of the mysteries of the true faith. The
Indians seemed to appreciate all he said, for they raised their eyes to
heaven and fell upon their knees in adoration; they rubbed their hands
upon the cross, and then all over their own bodies, as if to communicate
its holiness to themselves; and, on the return voyage, the missionary
found that they had protected the cross by a palisade. La Salle also took
possession of the country with great ceremony in behalf of France, and
erected the arms of the king, at which the Indians expressed great
pleasure.

On the 17th they proceeded on their route, and were received and
entertained most hospitably at another village of the same Akansas nation.
On the 20th they arrived at a small lake formed by the waters of the
Mississippi, on the opposite side of which they found a gentle tribe of
Indians, far more civilized than any they had yet met, whose sovereign
ruled over his people with regal ceremony, whose houses were built with
walls and cane roofs, were adorned with native paintings, and furnished
with wooden beds and other domestic comforts. Their temples were
ornamented, and served as sepulchres for their departed chiefs. La Salle
being too fatigued to visit this interesting people, he sent the Sieur
Tonty and Father Membré on an embassy to the king, to whom they carried
presents, and who received them with great ceremony. The king next
returned the compliment by a visit to the commander, sending his master of
ceremonies and heralds before him, and coming two hours afterwards
himself, preceded by two men carrying fans of white feathers, himself
dressed in a white robe beautifully woven of the bark of trees, with a
canopy over his head, and attended by a royal retinue. The king’s demeanor
during the interview was grave but frank and friendly. Resuming their
route on the 26th of March, thirty or forty miles below this they came
among the Natchez Indians, whose village La Salle, with some of his
companions, visited by invitation, sleeping there that night and receiving
hospitality. A cross was erected here, too, to which were attached the
arms of France, signifying that thereby they took possession of the
country in the name of their sovereign. The Holy Mass was also offered,
and the company received the Blessed Sacrament. They next visited the
village of Koroa, and then, advancing over a hundred miles, on the 2d of
April they came to the country of the Quinipissas, a belligerent tribe,
who answered a proposal to smoke the calumet of peace by a shower of
arrows. But having no object to attain by difficulties with the natives,
La Salle passed on to the village of the Tangiboas, three of whose
deserted cabins he saw full of the bodies of Indians who, fifteen or
sixteen days before, had fallen victims in an engagement in which the
village was sacked and pillaged. Speaking of La Salle while thus
descending the great river, Bancroft writes: “His sagacious eye discerned
the magnificent resources of the country. As he floated down its flood; as
he framed a cabin on the first Chickasaw bluff; as he raised the cross by
the Arkansas; as he planted the arms of France near the Gulf of Mexico, he
anticipated the future affluence of the emigrants, and heard in the
distance the footsteps of the advancing multitude that were coming to take
possession of the valley.”

To Be Concluded Next Month.




Birth‐Days.


“WHO ARE JUST BORN, BEING DEAD.”

Who weeps when love, a cradled babe, is born?
  Rather we bring frankincense, myrrh, and gold,
  While softest welcomes from our lips are rolled
To meet the dawning fragrance of a morn
Of checkered being. Even while the thorn
  Keeps pace with rosy graces that unfold,
  Do we with rapture cry, “Behold, behold,
A heaven‐dropped flower our garden to adorn!”
And yet when from our darling fall the years
  As from the rose the shrivelled petals rain,
  And into newer life the soul again
Springs thornless to the air of purer spheres,
  So blinded are we by our bitter pain
We greet the sweeter birth with selfish tears.




The Future Of The Russian Church.


By The Rev. Cæsarius Tondini, Barnabite.



II.—Continued.


Let it only be borne in mind _what_ are those things which are required of
her members by the faith and discipline of the Orthodox Church, and it
will be granted us, at least face to face with unbelief, that her priests
need something more than the ordinary respectability of a worthy man, an
obedient subject of his sovereign, a good father of a family, faithful to
his wife and devoted to his children.(161)

This _something more_ is possessed by the Catholic Church. The Russian
Church has lost it. Whatever may be thought of the ecclesiastical law on
the celibacy of the priesthood, we think it cannot be denied that a
priest, living as an angel upon earth, exercises an influence which is
always lacking to a married priest. This “magnetism of purity,” as it has
been called, has inspired one of the noblest odes of the great English
poet, Tennyson;(162) and they who in good faith argue against sacerdotal
celibacy do so because, in their opinion, the purity required by the
Catholic Church is a virtue too celestial to be met with here below; thus
reasoning as did that Jew who, after reading a treatise on the Holy
Eucharist by the Abbé Martinet,(163) said to us, “This cannot be true,
because it would be too beautiful!” Those who reason as did this Jew
conclude too easily from difficulty—what virtue is not difficult?—to
impossibility? We do not undertake to convince those who have not faith,
and who refuse to allow the efficacy of supernatural means; for the task
would be a hopeless one. But if they have faith, we will submit to them
the following consideration, which will not be without some weight.

And this is that the Catholic Church earnestly invites all her priests to
celebrate _daily_ the holy Mass, and makes it their strict duty to recite
every day, with attention and piety, the divine Office. In undertaking the
defence of the Russian clergy M. Schédo‐Ferroti says: “Hypocrisy is a vice
unknown among them, their piety being of a genuine stamp, and only giving
outward expression to the sentiment which is really felt—namely, a belief
in the sanctifying virtues of the ceremonies which they are called to
perform.”(164) Let it, then, be permitted to us also to express here our
firm belief in the sanctifying virtue of the Mass and the divine Office.
The Holy Eucharist is called in Scripture _frumentum electorum et vinum __
germinans virgins_—“the wheat of the elect and the wine which makes
virgins spring forth” (Zach. ix. 17). With regard to the divine Office, it
is the prayer _par excellence_ of the church. As the Lord’s Prayer, taught
and recommended by Jesus Christ himself, has a power which is special to
it, and a particular efficacy, so also is a sanctifying virtue attached to
a prayer chosen and placed daily on our lips by the church. The Mass and
the divine Office, in a manner, force the priest to have always about him
some thoughts of heaven. If vanity or worldly seductions acquire over him
a momentary ascendency, the Mass and the divine Office recall him to those
salutary truths which never change.

We will not dwell longer on this point; the reader will be well able to
make its practical application. We will only now add that, if to have been
capable of an act of great generosity is a title to indulgence for many
defects; if the remembrance of an heroic action in favor of one’s country
or of humanity surrounds with an aureola of glory the whole existence of
him who has performed it; and if, in short, people hesitate to pronounce
sentence against him, even when he has deserved blame, let it also be
remembered that every Catholic priest, whoever he may be, has
accomplished, at least once in his life, an act of the greatest
generosity. He has sworn, on being admitted into Holy Orders, to renounce
every affection which, by dividing his heart, could hinder him from
devoting himself solely and without reserve for the good of souls; and
solely with that intent has he voluntarily chosen the path of self‐denial
and of conflicts which are the consequences of his generosity. This being
considered, there is nothing surprising in the fact that a certain
influence is invariably exercised by the Catholic priest who is faithful
to his duties, even if his learning and education be defective.

Now, this influence, doubly necessary in Russia, on account of the social
inferiority of the orthodox clergy, is entirely wanting to all that
portion of the clergy which is in contact with the people;(165) and the
fatal consequences of this want will make themselves especially felt in
that day when nothing shall be unimportant that can help to keep alive
faith in the Russian people.

And this is not all. In the poem alluded to above Tennyson puts these
words into the mouth of his hero, the virgin‐knight:


    “My good blade carves the casques of men,
      My tough lance thrusteth sure,
    My strength is as the strength of ten,
      Because my heart is pure.”(166)


He who thus reveals to us the intimate relation existing between purity
and strength is not a Catholic. If we had expressed the same thought as
originating from ourselves, we might have been charged with mysticism;
this is why we have quoted the great poet. He would not fear being called
upon to justify his thought; let him therefore be the one attacked.

But whatever may be the weight which experience gives to this thought of
Tennyson’s, there is no need to wait for the time when the Russian clergy
shall be waging war against unbelief, to judge of the strength they are
likely to have for the combat. In a chapter devoted to revelations of the
state of the “orthodox” clergy, M. Schédo‐Ferroti takes praiseworthy pains
to exhibit their good qualities. “I have found,” he writes, “with some
regrettable exceptions, that the Russian priest possessed two valuable and
truly Christian qualities, the frequency of which constitutes in some sort
a characteristic feature of the class. The Russian priest is pious without
any ostentation, and he is gifted with a wonderful faculty for supporting
misfortune, under whatever form it may overtake him.”(167) We have already
made some observations on the first of these two qualities, and will now
do the same for the second.

To be endowed with a marvellous power of supporting misfortune—what better
preparation, apparently, could there be for supporting the struggle of the
future? It is to patience that our Lord Jesus Christ promises the
possession of our souls for a happy eternity when he says: _In patientia
vestra possidebitis animas vestras_—“In your patience you shall possess
your souls” (S. Luke xxi. 19). These divine words, alas! cannot in any way
find their application in the patience of the Russian clergy. The patience
whereof our Lord speaks is that which fills and sustains the soul, and
which places in our mouths words whose wisdom puts our adversaries to
silence.

This explanation is not our own; it is that of Jesus Christ himself. “They
will lay their hands on you, and persecute you, delivering you up to the
synagogues and into prisons, dragging you before kings and governors, for
my name’s sake: and it shall happen to you for a testimony. Lay it up,
therefore, in your hearts, not to meditate before, how you shall answer.
For I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall
not be able to resist and gainsay. And you shall be betrayed by your
parents and brethren, and kinsmen and friends: and some of you they will
put to death. And you shall be hated of all men for my name’s sake: but a
hair of your head shall not perish. In your patience you shall possess
your souls” (S. Luke xxi. 12‐19). The patience here described corresponds
exactly with the patience of which the Catholic bishops and priests of
Switzerland, Germany, and elsewhere are offering us at this very time so
edifying and admirable an example.

The patience taught by our Lord, then, is not wanting to the Catholic
clergy; can we hope to find it in the Russian clergy in the day when
orthodoxy shall be threatened? Let us well consider the words of our Lord
which we have just quoted, bearing in mind the energetic spirit which they
suppose, and let us then compare them with the following words of the most
devoted advocate of the orthodox clergy in Russia: “This readiness to
bear, without murmuring, the sudden reverses of fortune,” says Schédo‐
Ferroti, “this spontaneous submission to the decrees of Providence, is too
Christian a virtue to allow us to refuse it the admiration which it
deserves; but it seems to us that the combination of circumstances which
has contributed to develop in the Russian clergy this _mute resignation_
has also exercised a depressing influence upon their moral strength, in
paralyzing the powers of their will by rendering its free exercise utterly
and invariably impossible. It is the natural consequence of excessive
suffering, whether physical or moral, to end in the enervation of the
patient, by depriving him of the faculty of action, by destroying all his
energy, and leaving him destitute even of any belief in his own strength;
allowing him to remain in possession of but one single conviction, that of
his powerlessness to struggle against fate—a conviction that finds its
expression in this mute and absolute resignation which we find in the
lower Russian clergy.”(168)

Poor Russian clergy! They are all that they can be expected to be,
considering what the czars have made them. The sufferings of the Russian
priest are not forgotten by God, neither does he forget his resignation.
Far from desiring to cast a stone at him, we gladly point out all that we
can find in his favor. Reduced to such a degree of indigence that he is
compelled to maintain himself by laboriously toiling in the fields, the
pressing needs of life bow down not only his brow, but his soul also,
towards the earth. What right have we to expect that he can devote to the
interests of souls the time and thought imperiously demanded by the daily
necessities of his own existence? And even could he forget himself, and in
self‐devotion taste the sublime joy of sacrifice, he is not alone; and
will his wife and children also become so many victims of his zeal for
souls?

This feebleness, this helplessness, these bonds—these are the very things
which many would desire to see also in the militant ranks of the Catholic
Church. “But wherefore, then, is it,” asks the church, in pointing out the
armies of this world, “that the secular governments will that the soldiers
called to defend their country should be alone and free?”(169)

But if to be single and free is an element of strength lacking to the
Russian priest, already by long habituation to suffering and slavery
reduced to the state of which so striking a picture is drawn by Schédo‐
Ferroti, another support is also wanting to him, the power of which is
evident in the Catholic clergy. In our day, and under our very eyes, every
circumstance concurs to encourage apostasy among the latter. Priests who
fail in their duty gain the favor of governments, a considerable portion
of the press, the secure perspective of honors and offices; they are
proclaimed the only honest, the only true ministers of Jesus Christ, who
alone comprehend his interests or succeed in causing him to be loved by
souls. In all this there is something seductive, not only for the
ambitious and such as would free themselves from the severe discipline of
the church, but for those also who, in presence of the ravages which
unbelief is making, persuade themselves—not with much humility—that if the
church would act according to their ideas, the interests of God would be
better secured. In spite of all these things, the number of apostates is a
mere nothing when we take into consideration the number of Catholic
priests. Did those who have undertaken to make war against Catholicity
expect this check?—which, we remark in passing, witnesses plainly against
the alleged prevalence of abuses. Have they well calculated the forces of
the enemy which they flattered themselves they were about to annihilate?
Unless we are mistaken, they think that its strength is the same in the
present day as it was in the time of Luther, and that, if whole nations
were then withdrawn from the church, there is no reason why they should
not be so now. But the Protestantism of those days allowed a true faith in
God, in Providence, in Jesus Christ, and retained a baptism in every
respect valid. It is allowable to believe that if God has permitted that
whole nations should be snatched from the _immediate_ care of the church,
his providence will keep them from ever falling back into the state in
which they were before the redemption; though this is the logical result
of modern Protestantism. Besides, the social and political situation of
Europe, the habits of the various nations, and especially the difficulty
of communication, then permitted sovereigns to raise, as it were, so many
walls of China round the confines of their states. They could at that time
isolate their subjects, and only allow them just so much
intercommunication with the rest of the world as _they_ might choose to
consider suitable to the interests of the state. If thought itself could
not be chained, its manifestations at least could be circumscribed or
stifled. This is no longer possible in the present day; a pamphlet, a
journal, a speech in parliament, even to a simple word of a bishop, can
now, from the other end of the world, trouble the repose and disturb the
plans of a powerful conqueror. For thought there are no longer any
barriers possible, nor yet police; and thought makes revolutions.

Now, amongst the thoughts which escape the vigilance of all police, and
which pass through every barrier, there is also that of the constancy
which, in no matter what period of the existence of the Catholic Church,
is shown by men living under different climates, ruled by various
institutions, but _brothers in the faith_. If to bear the same name, to be
born on the same soil, and to speak the same tongue, creates bonds so
powerful and so devoted a defence of common interests, fraternity in the
Catholic faith yields the palm in nothing to any other fraternity
whatsoever for the powerfulness of its effects. The humble _curé_ of a
poor parish hidden among the gorges of the mountains learns that a priest
in a distant land has been imprisoned for refusing to betray his
conscience. He is moved by the tidings, and takes a lively interest in the
fate of the priest, following anxiously in his journal the narrative of
the struggles of this confessor of the faith. During this time, without
his being aware of it, a salutary work has been going on in his mind. Soon
afterwards he finds himself in the same case—namely, of being called upon
to suffer for the performance of those duties which his quality of priest
imposes upon him. His adversaries, judging him by the gentleness of his
language and his life, expect to intimidate him by a word; but, to their
amazement, they find in him the firmness of an apostle. From whence did he
gain this courage? They know not, neither does he; that which impressed
his soul and prepared it for the conflict was nothing else than the story
of the sufferings of his brother in the faith and in the priesthood, in a
distant and foreign land.

Well, then, this sustaining thought which supports the Catholic priest by
making him feel himself a member of that family which is as vast as the
world and a brother in the faith with martyrs—this support will be wanting
to the Russian clergy when upon it alone will depend the fate of
orthodoxy. The Russian priest, who, not being alone, will have need of a
courage so much the greater as there are beings dear to him whose
existence is bound up with his own, will seek examples to encourage him;
but will he find them? The same causes which have produced the _mute
resignation_ spoken of by Schédo‐Ferroti authorize us to think that the
Russian clergy will not have its martyrs, or, if there should be some,
that their number will be too small to counterbalance the example of the
general feebleness. And yet here again we will undertake the defence of
the Russian clergy; for who, in fact, could require an act of heroism of a
man “enervated by excess of moral and physical sufferings, deprived of the
faculty of action, and not only possessing no longer any energy, but
having also lost all belief in his own powers”? Now, this is, word for
word, the condition of the Russian priest, as depicted by his most zealous
defender.

“But,” it may be said, “the Orthodox Church is not confined to Russia; the
orthodox priest will find brethren in Austria, in Roumania, in Turkey, and
in Greece.” This is true; but it is not enough to find brothers only. The
Russian priest will need brother‐martyrs; and where will he find them?

Besides, strange to say, the various branches of the Orthodox Church live
almost strangers to each other, unless some political interest awaken the
sentiment of fraternity in their common faith. Without entering into
details on this point, we will only make one remark. It is easy to find
several histories of the different branches, taken separately; but is it
so easy to find an universal history of the Orthodox Church?(170) In
Catholic countries the reverse of this is always the case; it is,
comparatively, difficult to meet with particular histories of the Catholic
Church in France, in Italy, in Germany, etc.; but everywhere is found and
taught the universal history of the Catholic Church—a history in which
that of a nation, however great or powerful, figures, if not as an
episode, certainly as but a simple portion, a contingent part, of a
necessary whole.

We one day read in an English journal that has a wide circulation the
following remark: “A church which counts among its members men like
Archbishop Manning and Dr. Newman is a church which is not to be
despised.” English common sense thus did justice to the “coal‐heavers’
faith,” as people are pleased to call the adhesion of Catholics to the
doctrines proposed to them by their church. In fact—to speak only of the
last named of these two personages—the author of the _Grammar of Assent_
does not yield in intellectual power to any of his Anglican adversaries;
from whence we may infer, by a series of logical deductions, that neither
does he yield in this to any of the adversaries of the Catholic Church. To
speak plainly, we have never perceived that these adversaries have shown
any alarming degree of intelligence, at least with regard to the
application of the rules of logic. In any case, as, since Porphyry and
Celsus, men have never been wanting who have represented the faith
propounded by the Catholic Church as an abdication of reason, so also,
since Justin and the first Christian philosophers, the church has never
lacked doctors who, in defending her, have at the same time been the
defenders of reason. The apostolate of learning is not less fruitful,
perhaps, than that of virtue and of martyrdom. Without pronouncing upon
the relative necessity and advantages of these three apostolates, nor
examining whether it is possible to exercise a _true_ apostolate by
learning unaided by self‐denial and virtue, nor even doing more than call
to mind how God in the Old Law, and the church in the New, have always
made learning a part of the duty of a priest, we will confine ourselves to
remarking that many souls are led to embrace the faith, and others,
tempted to doubt, are quieted and confirmed, by a simple reflection
analogous to that of the English journal just quoted. “A faith,” they say,
“professed by minds so much above the ordinary class as such and such a
writer ought not to be lightly rejected.” It is a preliminary argument of
which the effects are salutary, and grace does the rest.

If we now take into account all that eighteen centuries and innumerable
writers of all lands have accumulated in the way of proofs and testimonies
in favor of the Catholic faith; and if we at the same time consider the
immense variety and the infinitely‐multiplied forms of error, each in its
turn combated by the church, we shall comprehend that it is scarcely
possible to imagine any error of which the refutation has not already
somewhere appeared. In the same way the struggle still goes on in all
parts of the globe, and among peoples who have advanced, some more, some
less, in learning and civilization; in all parts of the globe the defence
also continues, and by men brought up among the same surroundings as their
adversaries. In short, Catholic productions are not the exclusive appanage
of any single diocese, any single country, any single nation; they are the
family treasures, belonging to the whole Catholic Church. Facility of
communication brings us, together with their names, the works of those who
are waging war against various errors in various lands. To take time, to
enquire, to make some researches—this is the worst that could happen to a
Catholic priest who might find himself, for the moment, unable to solve an
objection. But the objection is already solved, even if it be drawn from
some scientific discovery of yesterday, if indeed (as it often happens) it
cannot be solved at once by the simple use of common sense, and especially
of logic, the most necessary of sciences, and the least studied of all.

Thus we see what happens in the Catholic Church, and we see, therefore,
why it is that in those countries where formerly the clergy may have been
at times taken by surprise, and not well prepared to meet a sudden
adversary, they now struggle bravely; and also we see why earnest
Catholics have been able without difficulty to distinguish between true
and false progress, and between true science and false.

Will it be the same in Russia?

We do not wish to exaggerate anything, and will even admit that the
complaints which are so general of the ignorance of the Russian clergy may
be much overstated. Nevertheless, in looking through the bibliography of
that country, we find ourselves forced to acknowledge that whenever the
day shall arrive for unbelief to have free course there, decorated with
the seductive appellations of science, of progress, of the emancipation of
reason, etc., the Russian clergy will either find themselves without arms
wherewith to defend orthodoxy, or with such only as shall prove
insufficient.

In fact, the reader is perhaps not aware that, from the year 1701, Peter
the Great had been _obliged_ (according to Voltaire) to forbid the use of
pen and ink to monks. “It required,” says the apostle of science, “an
express permission from the archimandrite, who was responsible for those
to whom he granted it. Peter willed that this ordinance should
continue.”(171) The successors of Peter likewise willed the same, although
we do not venture to affirm that the ordinance is still observed. Let us,
then, be just, and refrain from blaming the Russian monks. If, since the
time of Peter the Great, they have not extraordinarily enriched the
literature of their country, the fault is none of theirs.

Neither have we any right to blame the secular Russian clergy if few
writers have appeared among them, nor yet any one of those whose name
alone exercises an apostolate. All the Russians who have written on the
ecclesiastical schools of their country are unwearied in their complaints
against the badness of the method and the insufficiency of instruction
which the young Russian levite takes with him on leaving the
seminary.(172) We do not in any way accuse the commissions charged with
the inspection and reformation of the ecclesiastical schools. We are
convinced that these commissions have done their best; if the evil still
continues as before, it is because they have not the power to touch its
root. Besides, how can it be expected that a priest, poor, burdened with a
family, and in very many cases necessitated to maintain himself and his
family by the work of his hands, can either have the necessary freedom of
mind or sufficient leisure to devote himself to study?

It remains for us to consider the bishops. These are taken from the
monastic orders, and if, since Peter I., all of them have not been
archimandrites, yet to all has, at any rate, been granted by the
archimandrite, of their convent, at his own risk and peril, the use of pen
and ink. Of the two hundred and eighty ecclesiastical writers who have
appeared and died in Russia from the conversion of that country to
Christianity down to the year 1827, and whose biographies may be found in
the _Dictionary_ of Mgr. Eugenius, Metropolitan of Kief,(173) one hundred
and ten belonged to the episcopate; and ever since 1827 that episcopate
has continued to reckon among its members men remarkable for their
learning. Everything, however, is relative. These bishops have shone in
Russia; and there has been a desire to make them shine as far as France by
translating into French the _Orthodox Theology_ of Mgr. Macarius, Bishop
of Vinnitsa; a collection of _Sermons_, by the late Mgr. Philarete,
Metropolitan of Moscow; and perhaps some other works. It is also to be
supposed that some care must have been shown in selecting from amongst the
productions of ecclesiastical literature in Russia, the best there were to
be found of what she possessed. Without criticising, we think there is
reason for saying that hitherto the Russian episcopate has not by its
writings furnished orthodoxy with a support proportioned to the dangers
with which it is threatened, and we doubt very much whether it will be
equal to furnishing her with it very quickly. The Russian prelates
renowned for their learning are but few in number; besides, so long as the
faith and the church are protected by the Penal Code, and judicial
prosecution would be the consequence of any attack, neither priests nor
bishops have much chance of finding themselves face to face with any
adversaries of importance. The latter, in fact, would be exceedingly
careful to avoid the men who could denounce them; and the result of this
is that, for want of exercise, neither the bishops nor priests can state
what is either their strength or their weakness. To this we must add the
thousand hindrances placed by Russian censorship to the manifestation of
religious thought. There is nothing, even to the sermon preached by the
pope in his parish, which must not be submitted to censure.(174) As for
pastoral letters of bishops, we should be very glad if any could be quoted
to us. The formalities and delays which accompany the revision and
approbation of every work destined to appear in print are of a nature to
discourage the most intrepid. The examination of _all_ the ecclesiastical
productions destined to appear in the immense empire of the czars is
confided to the committees of the _four_ ecclesiastical academies of Kief,
Kasan, Moscow, and St. Petersburg. If no exceptions were allowed, at any
rate in favor of periodical works, the complaint of Jeremias might be
truly applied to Russia: _Parvuli petierunt panem, et non erat, qui
frangeret eis_—“The little ones asked for bread, and there was none to
break it for them” (Lament. Jer. iv. 4). Finally, we will not stop to
consider the manner in which ecclesiastical censorship is exercised in
Russia, nor yet its tendencies nor its object; but we say, to single out
one point only, that it is impossible to find in all Russia a single work
that is able to throw any light upon the reciprocal relations of the
church and state. More than one reader will join us in acknowledging that
in Russia a true, apologetic literature has yet to be created.

To complete the picture of that which will inevitably take place in Russia
on the day when the Orthodox Church shall there lose the support of the
Penal Code, and will have to struggle alone, and abandoned to her own
strength against heresy and unbelief, we ought to observe that, since the
general confiscation of the goods of the clergy which was effected under
Catherine II. (1762), the Russian Church has no longer anything to supply
its needs but that which is allowed it by the state. It is the state which
provides for the keeping up of churches and monasteries; the state which
furnishes the expenses of the orthodox worship, and which assigns to the
ministers of that worship the piece of land from which they must find a
maintenance for themselves and their families, or else which supplies them
with a salary proportioned to the functions they are to exercise. It is
not, after all, impossible that, in the day of which we speak, the state,
while continuing to retain a budget for the orthodox worship, may
nevertheless extraordinarily reduce it; and also it is not impossible that
conditions which cannot be conscientiously accepted will be attached to
the payment of the salary, already so moderate, of the ministers of this
church. In either case, more even than to combat heresy and unbelief, it
will be necessary for the Russian Church to consider how her priests and
their families are to find bread and shelter. Now, the only classes which
can then effectively help them—are they not the same which at this day
show so great a contempt for their popes?

And this is not yet all. In the day of which we speak who will secure to
the bishops the obedience of the secular clergy? This clergy trembles now
before them, because it sees them armed by the law with a despotic
power;(175) but no one can foresee what will happen in the day when popes
and bishops shall be equal before the law. The bishops being all drawn
from the monastic state, the result has been that hitherto the secular
clergy have lived in subjection to the regular; and this fact, united to
other causes, has created a powerful antagonism between these two orders
of the clergy, which not unfrequently betrays itself by venomous writings.
One portion of the press makes common cause with the secular clergy; and,
if we may judge by certain tendencies, the admission of the secular clergy
to the episcopate will probably be one of the consequences of the changes
that will take place in the relations between the church and state. But it
is not possible that this change can be peaceably effected; the disorders
which, at times, arise in the application of the principle of universal
suffrage, show, in some degree, how, in this case, various elections of
bishops would be brought about. And then, in the confusion and wild
disorder of conflict, where would be found the authority which could have
power to settle these differences and claim for itself adhesion and
respect? The bishops, moreover, who or a century and a half have all been
equal before the czar, and only distinguished by the titles and
decorations granted or refused according to the good pleasure of the
monarch—will these submit themselves to an archbishop, to a metropolitan,
to a patriarch—in a word, to one from amongst themselves? Will they, for
the love of concord, invest him with a superior authority, and obey him?
And were they to reach this point, would not St. Petersburg contest the
primacy with Moscow? And would Kief forget her canonical jurisdiction of
former times?

Yet more, would not Constantinople vindicate any right over Russia? And
the other Oriental patriarchs—would they forget that their concurrence was
formerly sought for the erection of the patriarchate of Moscow, and their
approbation to sanction the establishment of the Synod?

We may thus, in its principal features, behold the state to which the
czars have reduced the faith and the church of which they entitle
themselves the guardians. The picture is a gloomy one; nevertheless, we do
not believe that we have exaggerated anything. Before proceeding further
we would even say a word of excuse for the czars.

If the Catholic Church were not built upon a rock, proof against all
tempests, many a Catholic sovereign designated by appellations indicative
of the highest degree of attachment to the church would long ago have
reduced her to the same condition as the church of the czars.

To Be Continued.




The Bells Of Prayer.


    During the prevalence of the great plague at Milan, “at the break
    of day, at noon, and at night a bell of the cathedral gave the
    signal for reciting certain prayers which had been ordered by the
    archbishop, and this was followed by the bells of the other
    churches. Then persons were seen at the windows, and a confused
    blending of voices and groans was heard which inspired sorrow,
    not, however, unmixed with consolation.”


Stern Death, the tyrant, had swept along
With trailing robes through the dusty mart.
And laid his hand, that is white and chill,
        On the city’s heart.

The Lombard City of olden ways
Over its sorrow and wild despair
A cry sent up to the unseen Throne
        In an earnest prayer.

A lord that is dead as a peasant is,
And a peasant dead is as a lord;
The angel stood at the city’s gate
        With his lifted sword!

The tongues of bells in the steeple‐tops
Sent on the breath of the baleful air
A call for the people far and near
        To evening prayer.

At the sound of bells the weeping ceased,
The heart of the thousand stilled its moan,
The name of God was uttered aloud
        With the bells’ sad tone.

And the gleaming crosses pointing up,
Like the gold of crowns that princes wear,
Seemed in the gray of the changeless sky
        As signs of prayer.

And the women’s eyes were wet with tears,
Their desolate souls were wrung with pain,
For the dead asleep in their silent graves
        Through the sun and rain.

In the dawn and noon and dusk it rose,
Threading its way up the narrow stair—
The Catholic cry—when the bells were rung
        For the people’s prayer.




New Publications.


    THE PRISONERS OF THE TEMPLE; OR DISCROWNED AND CROWNED. by M. C.
    O’Connor Morris. (Eleventh volume of Father Coleridge’s _Quarterly
    Series_.) London: Burns & Oates. 1874. (New York: Sold by The
    Catholic Publication Society.)


This is a republication with additions of papers from that excellent
magazine, _The Month_, which is especially valuable for its historical
articles. It gives an account of the imprisonment of Louis XVI. and his
family in the old tower of the Templars, together with sketches of other
parts of the history of that noble and unfortunate group of victims to
atheistic and revolutionary fury. The chief interest centres in the
history of Louis XVII., commonly called the Dauphin. The tragic tale of
his horrible sufferings and death is minutely told. At the end of the
volume we have a report of the judgment in the famous case of the
Naundorffs, who pretended to be the heirs of the Dauphin. This is one of
the many tales of an escape of the Dauphin from the Temple and the
substitution of another child in his place. The utter falsity of all these
stories is amply proved, pretenders and prophets to the contrary
notwithstanding. Whoever looks to the branch of the Capets for the
deliverance of France must find him in the Count de Chambord. We cannot
too warmly recommend this charming and pathetic narrative to all our
readers.


    MEDITATIONS ON THE LIFE AND DOCTRINE OF JESUS CHRIST. By Nicholas
    Avancinus, S.J. Translated from the German Edition of the Rev. J.
    E. Zollner, by F. E. Bazalgette. With a Preface on Meditation, by
    George Potter, S.J. 2 vols. London: Burns & Oates. 1874. (New
    York: Sold by The Catholic Publication Society.)


The _Meditations_ of Avancinus were specially adapted to the use of
religious. The German editor modified them for the use of all persons
indiscriminately. They are prepared for every day in the year, are short,
simple, and well fitted for use, both in community and in private.


    THE NOBLEMAN OF ’89. By M. A. Quinton. Translated by Prof. Ernest
    Lagarde, of Mt. St. Mary’s College. Baltimore: Kelly & Piet. 1874.


Some of our readers have doubtless read the _Quatre‐Vingt‐Treize_ of that
great magician of language and fiery genius of revolution, Victor Hugo. It
is an apology for the French Revolution; yet, to any person whose mind and
heart are not already corrupted by bad principles and passions, it must
seem like an apology which makes the crime worse and less excusable. The
romances of Erckmann‐Chatrian are more subtle and plausible. One or two of
them are, if taken singly, quite inoffensive, and a translation of them
was some time ago given in our own pages on account of their vivid
illustration of most interesting historical epochs. A contributor, quite
unsuspectingly, even proposed to translate them all, and the necessity of
reading the whole set before accepting the proposition, first opened our
eyes to the scope and object which their authors have always had in view,
and which is exposed in some very plainly; as, for instance, in
_Waterloo_, the sequel to _The Conscript_. The end of these writers is to
extend and popularize hatred of the church, the clergy, and the classes
enjoying wealth or power in the state; to foster the spirit of liberalism
either in its extreme or moderate form, and thus to help on the
revolution. The influence of such books teaches us a valuable lesson
concerning the polemic strategy to be employed on the opposite side.
Historical romances have an extraordinary charm for a multitude of
readers, and they can be made the vehicle of conveying historical
knowledge together with the valuable lessons which history teaches. In
order that they may perfectly fulfil their highest purpose, they should
present true, authentic history, using fiction merely as an accessory. M.
Quinton has done this, and has given a correct and vivid historical sketch
of one period in the French Revolution, which is included in the plot of a
novel of genuine dramatic power and descriptive ability. Its size is very
considerable, making a volume of eight hundred pages, closely printed in
quite small type. Fearful as the scenes are through which we are hurried
in following the adventures of the persons figuring in the story, we are
not left without some compensation and alleviation in the episodes of
quiet life which relieve its tragic gloom. Some charming characters are
portrayed, the best of which are three individuals of low station but high
heroism—Louisette, Drake, and Cameo.

The characters of Marat, Danton, Robespierre, Philippe Egalité, and other
leaders of the Revolution, are well portrayed. The author’s special
success, however, is in describing the low ruffians who led the mob in the
work of assassination. Maillefer, Lepitre, Boulloche, and Ratfoot are like
Dante’s demons. We have never read anything more infernally horrible than
the description of Aunt Magloire and the band of women who were trained to
yell at the royal family. We recommend the perusal of this description
most especially to the strong‐minded young ladies who are inclined to
dabble in infidelity. In Mme. Roland they may see themselves as they are
now; in Aunt Magloire and her frenzied band they may see where womanhood
is brought by the abandonment of faith, when the lowest stage of
degradation is reached.

The translator has done a great service to the public by putting this
admirable historical novel into English. We take the liberty of
recommending to him another one—M. Barthelemy’s _Pierre le Peillarot_. The
multiplication of such books will go far to counteract the evil influence
of those which falsify history and instil bad principles. We have vainly
endeavored to persuade some of our publishers to undertake the translation
of Conrad von Bolanden’s historical novels, which are far superior to the
heavy productions of Mühlbach. If these latter, in spite of their dulness,
obtained so extensive a circulation, why not the admirable works of
Bolanden which depict the thrilling scenes of the Thirty Years’ War? A
series of small, popular histories of certain important epochs is also
very much wanted.


    PURGATORY SURVEYED, ETC. Edited by W. H. Anderdon, S.J. Reprinted
    from the edition of 1663. London: Burns & Oates. 1874. (New York:
    Sold by The Catholic Publication Society.)


The original of this treatise was written in French by Father Binet, S.J.
As it now stands it is the work of Father Thimelby, S.J., who used the
work of Father Binet as a basis for his own. It is quaint, rich, and in
one respect more directly practical as a spiritual book than some other
excellent treatises on the same subject, inasmuch as it shows the pious
reader how to avoid purgatory.


    LESSONS IN BIBLE HISTORY FOR CATHOLIC SCHOOLS. By a Teacher. New
    York: P. O’Shea. 1875.


Experienced teachers usually prepare the best school‐books. The compiler
of these Bible lessons is a lady of remarkable talent, who has spent many
years of most successful labor as a teacher in an academy for young ladies
which deservedly enjoys the highest reputation. Her book is one which has
been prepared during this long course of teaching, and thus practically
tested, as well as continually improved. It is now published with the
direct sanction of his Grace the Archbishop of New York, after a careful
revision made under his authority. The author has not attempted to go into
questions of difficult critical erudition in respect to chronology and
similar matters, but has simply followed the commonly‐received
interpretation of the text of Scripture history, where there is one,
avoiding the difficulties and doubtful topics which beset the study of all
ancient history, sacred as well as profane. In this respect she has shown
uncommon tact and judgment, and has always kept in view her true object,
which is to prepare a text‐book suitable for young pupils of from ten to
fifteen years old. The style and method are admirable for brevity,
clearness, and a graphic, picturesque grouping of events and characters.
The delicacy with which every narrative, where immoral and criminal acts
are involved, shuns the danger of shocking the innocent mind of children
by contact with evil of which it is ignorant, is exquisite. The questions
about morals which necessarily suggest themselves to the quick,
inquisitive minds of children, and which the author has often had to
answer in class, are solved prudently and correctly. The interval between
the sacred history of the Old Testament and that of the New has been
filled up from profane authors, particularly Josephus, which is a great
addition to the value of the book, and throws light on the narrative of
the Gospels that makes it much more intelligible. In the history of the
life of Christ the words of the evangelists are for the most part
employed, without other changes or additions than such as are necessary to
make the narrative continuous. The parables are arranged by themselves in
a series. A summary of the Acts of the Apostles concludes the work, which
is of very moderate size and copiously illustrated by woodcuts. As a
school‐book this is the best of its kind, in our opinion, and we expect to
see it generally adopted in Catholic schools. We cannot too cordially
recommend it to teachers and parents for their young pupils and for family
reading. Many adults, also, will find it the best and most suitable
compendium of Bible history for their own reading; and even if they are in
the habit of reading the sacred books themselves in their complete text,
this manual will aid them to gain a better understanding of their
historical parts than they can otherwise obtain. We trust the good example
set by the pious and accomplished author will be followed by many of her
associates in the holy work of religious education, to the great advantage
of both teachers and pupils. Thousands of lovely children whom she will
never see this side of heaven will bless the hand that has prepared for
them so much delightful instruction, even if their curiosity is never
gratified by knowing her name.


    EXCERPTA EX RITUALI ROMANO. NOVA ET AUCTIOR EDITIO. Baltimore:
    Kelly, Piet, et Soc. 1874.


This is a lovely little ritual, a very pretty present for any one to make
to a priest, especially to one just sent out from the seminary to a poor
and arduous country mission.


    LETTERS OF MR. GLADSTONE AND OTHERS. New York: _Tribune_ Office.
    1874.


The London _Tablet_ epigrammatically remarks that Mr. Gladstone kindled a
fire on a Saturday which was put out on the following Monday. Mgr. Capel
has very satisfactorily answered him. Every person not an ignoramus in
theology and jurisprudence, knows that the Catholic Church teaches the
derivation of the state from a divine institution _immediately_, and _not_
mediately through the church; moreover, that she teaches what follows by
logical sequence, the duty of allegiance to the state. No Christian, no
moral philosopher, and no person holding the principles on which the
American fabric of law is based, can hold that this allegiance is
unlimited.

The New York _Herald_, remarkable both for extraordinary blunders and for
extraordinarily just and sensible statements, has well said that there is
a “higher law” recognized by every one who believes in the supremacy of
conscience and duty to God. It is a very base and inconsistent thing for
an American to profess a doctrine of blind, slavish obedience to civil
magistrates and laws, however wicked these may be. The Catholic Church has
always claimed to be the infallible judge in morals as well as in faith.
The Pope has always exercised the supreme power of pronouncing the
infallible judgments of the church, and the Vatican decrees have added
nothing to that power. They have embodied the perpetual doctrine of the
church in a solemn judgment with annexed penalties, as an article of
Catholic faith; and, in consequence, whoever refuses obedience and assent
to that judgment is _ipso facto_ a heretic and excommunicated. It is
therefore idle for Lord Acton and Lord Camoys, who have stained their
nobility and their Catholic lineage by an act of treason and apostasy, to
pretend to be Catholics. They are no more Catholics than is Mr. Gladstone,
and the English Catholics have repudiated them and their doctrine with
indignation. It is futile to pretend that the Pope claims any _jure
divino_ temporal power directly over states or citizens in their political
capacity, or pretends to retain any _jure humano_ sovereignty beyond his
own kingdom. The reader will find the general subject of this notice
discussed at greater length elsewhere in this number.


    OUTLINES OF ASTRONOMY. By Arthur Searle, A.M., Assistant at
    Harvard College Observatory. 16mo, 415 pp. Boston: Ginn Brothers.
    1874.


A new interest has within the past few years been given to the science of
astronomy by the recent discoveries which have been made in it,
principally by the use of the spectroscope and by the new field which has
been opened and which is still opening before astronomers, of physical
research into the construction of the celestial bodies. A short time ago
the science seemed nearly as complete as it was ever likely to become;
now, while retaining its old ground intact, it is rapidly developing new
resources, and, besides being itself perfected, it is contributing no
small share to the solution of the great problem of the day in purely
physical science—the constitution of matter.

Many new and excellent works have, accordingly, as might be expected,
lately appeared on the subject, called forth by the reawakened interest in
it, both in the world at large and among scientific men. The book forming
the subject of this notice is certainly one of the best of these.

It is not a mere condensed summary of what is known and has been
discovered. Such summaries, of course, are of great utility, both for
reference and as text‐books, and serve excellently in the latter way, if
the object of the learner be to memorize for a time a large number of
facts, or, in other words, to cram for an examination. They may serve, for
students of good memories, even a permanent purpose; but they require
close application, and labor under the difficulty—too often a fatal one—of
not being interesting, unless helped out by startling representations of
nebulæ, comets, clusters of stars, and other beautiful objects at which
many people seem to suppose astronomers to spend their lives in idly
gazing.

Fine writing, on the other hand, about the grandeur and magnificence of
the celestial orbs, etc., is indeed often interesting; but, though
edifying and useful in its way, it fails to instruct. One really knows
little more after it than before.

This book has to a great extent, and perhaps as far as possible, avoided
both of these difficulties, which usually stand in the way of people who
wish to know something of astronomy, but not to become practical
astronomers. It is more on the plan of Herschel’s treatise than of any
other which we remember, but is, though this is saying a good deal,
superior to it in two respects. One is, as is obvious, that it is brought
up to the present state of the science; and the other, that in the first
part the geometrical diagrams usually considered necessary are dispensed
with, and supplied by ingenious popular illustrations borrowed from facts
of daily life, and familiar to all, which attract, instead of terrifying,
the reader. It is true that the fear which most people have of mathematics
is to a great extent unreasonable; but allowance must be made, even for
ill founded prejudices. Illustrations and explanations of this kind, for
which the author has a remarkable talent, are a feature of the book
throughout.

The last half of it is intended for those who have a real desire to
understand the work which astronomers do, and how they have done it; the
nature of the problems which they have to solve, and the means employed.
It does not presuppose any really mathematical education; what geometry is
needed is explained as it is required, and with a great deal of
originality, as we may observe by the way. But to this branch of the
subject there is no admission, except by Newton’s key of “patient
thought.” Those who do not care to use it must dispense with the knowledge
to which it opens the door. The chapter on the “History of Astronomy” is,
however, easy reading, and much the best short sketch of the progress of
the science of which we are aware.

The illustrations are excellent, not being copies on a traditional type,
but taken from photographs or careful original drawings. A copious index,
appended to the book, facilitates reference.

The work is mainly intended for the general reader; but there is no reason
why it should not be a text‐book, especially for academies and colleges,
as Sir John Herschel’s, already alluded to, has proved to be. We have no
hesitation in recommending it for this purpose, and as being worthy to
take the place of any now in use.

We regret that the words on page 384, expressing a mere hope in the
existence, or at any rate in the providence, of God as the author of
nature, should have been inserted. We have not noticed anything else in
the book to which Catholics can object, unless it be the use of the word
infinity in the sense common to Protestant authors, which is, in fact, the
one ordinarily given to it by mathematicians.


    THE TESTIMONY OF THE EVANGELISTS EXAMINED BY THE RULES OF EVIDENCE
    ADMINISTERED IN COURTS OF JUSTICE. By Simon Greenleaf, LL.D., late
    Dane Professor of Law in Harvard University, author of “Treatise
    on the Law of Evidence,” etc. New York: James Cockcroft & Co.
    1874.


Prof. Greenleaf’s reputation as a writer on jurisprudence is too well
known to need any comment from us. In bringing his judicial calmness and
legal acumen to bear on the Christian evidences, he has conferred an
obligation which all Christians must acknowledge. He writes as a Christian
scholar should write, with learned gravity, yet with reverent simplicity;
and as he believes the divinity of Our Lord, and raises no disputed point
of doctrine, his work may be accepted as orthodox. It is in reading the
productions of such minds as his that the really ephemeral character of
works like Renan’s _Life of Jesus_ is best appreciated. Renan holds a
brief, and his arguments in support of it are only flowery and superficial
rhetoric. Renan’s _scenes_ are very dramatic—the apparition of our Lord to
Magdalen, for instance, is worked up with great elaborateness of effect;
but when he comes to face solid evidence, he fails most deplorably. Thus,
in treating of Our Lord’s appearance to the apostles after his
resurrection, and the conviction of the doubting Thomas, he merely says
that at the first interview S. Thomas was not present, adding in a
careless way: “It is said (_on dit_) that eight days afterward he was
satisfied.” A cavalier way this of disposing of a most circumstantial
piece of history!

This ample and elegant volume is a new edition of a work published, we
believe, some thirty years ago, and now out of print. One of the best
parts of the book is the Appendix, containing, among other things, M.
Dupin’s “Refutation of Salvador’s Chapter on the Trial of Jesus.”


    SINS OF THE TONGUE; OR, JEALOUSY IN WOMAN’S LIFE; followed by
    discourses on rash judgments, patience, and grace. Boston: Patrick
    Donahoe. 1874.

    THE VALIANT WOMAN: A series of discourses intended for the use of
    women living in the world. Boston: Patrick Donahoe. 1874.


Two very practical books written by Mgr. Landriot, late Archbishop of
Rheims, and translated from the French by Helena Lyons. After having
passed through four editions in England, Mr. Donahoe presents them to us
in an American dress for circulation and perusal in this country. The
print is clear, the translation good, and the binding in keeping.

Both of these books will be found very useful to clergymen who have the
spiritual direction of women living in the world, and will assist them in
preparing sermons to decry those most mischievous of sins: envy, jealousy,
rash judgments, and sloth.

Although these books were written for females, yet they will be very
beneficial to many of the opposite sex, who are not unfrequently in great
need of cultivating reserve and charity. The first one, particularly, may
be read with advantage by some writers for the press, who seem to forget
that calumny, detraction, and vituperation are mortal sins, which are even
more aggravated when published to the world than when only privately
indulged in, and that, moreover, they exact reparation.


    ORDO DIVINI OFFICII RECITANDI MISSÆQUE CELEBRANDÆ, JUXTA RUBRICAS
    BREVIARII AC MISSALIS ROMANI, ANNO 1875. Baltimore: apud Fratres
    Lucas, Bibliopolas, via vulgo dicta Market, No. 170.


We beg pardon for having misquoted the title of this work. The title‐page
contains the word “Rectandi,” which we have supposed to stand for
“Recitandi,” and “Celebrande,” for which we have substituted “Celebrandæ.”

It would be well if the mistakes in this important publication were all on
the title‐page, and if they were all merely misprints. We will, however,
begin with these. The proofs do not seem to have been read at all.

The following, then, are some of the misprints. Feb. 4, “S. Andræ
Corsini.” Feb. 10, “_Dom. Possion_.” Mar. 10, “_A cunctus_.” Mar. 20,
“_fucit heri_” and “_præsente Candav_.” Mar. 28, “DOM. RESURECT.” This
last is, if we remember rightly, an old acquaintance. Apr. 13, “S.
Hemenegildi.” May 2, “S. Anthanasii.” May 5, “_præsente caduv_.” May 19,
“S. Prudentianæ.” May 23, “Festum SS. Trinitatatis.” The superfluous “at”
here has perhaps come out of “_Matut._,” on June 8, which reads “_Mut._”
June 13, “Vesp.”

These will suffice as specimens of mere typographical errors. The
following cannot be considered as such:

On January 16 we find the feast of S. Marcellinus. The Breviary has
Marcellus. Similarly, on July 13, we have S. Anicetus for S. Anacletus.

The feast of S. John Nepomucen has disappeared altogether. Unless it has
been suppressed, it should have the day to which that of S. Francis
Caracciolo has been transferred. This requires the following changes:

June 15. For S. Francis Caracciolo read S. John Nepomucen.

June 17. For S. Ubaldus read S. Francis Caracciolo.

June 18. For S. Bernardine read S. Ubaldus.

June 22. For S. M. M. of Pazzi read S. Bernardine.

June 23. For the Vigil of S. John read S. M. M. of Pazzi.

The assigned feast of S. Leo comes, it would seem, this year, on July 3.
Until now it has been on July 7. Moreover, we do not find it in the
Breviary on the 27th of June, as stated this year, but rather on the 28th,
as previously.

We must do the _Ordo_ the justice to say that it has itself corrected one
of its mistakes. It put in the feast of S. Justin on the 14th of April,
and has inserted a slip saying that this is only for the Roman clergy.

Cannot we have a better _Ordo_ next year? It has been getting worse and
worse for some time. And if we have a change for the better, would it not
be a good idea at the same time to separate the part peculiar to the
Diocese of Baltimore entirely from the rest, for the convenience of the
clergy? Since writing the above, our attention has been called to the
omission of the anniversaries of consecration of some of our bishops.

There may be some other errors; it is not probable that we have noticed
all.


    REGLEMENT ECCLESIASTIQUE DE PIERRE LE GRAND. Par le R. P. C.
    Tondini, Barnabite. Paris: Libr. de la Soc. Bibliogr., 75 Rue du
    Bac. 1874.


F. Tondini has sent us two copies of this curious and valuable document,
for which he will please accept our thanks. It contains the text of the
_Regulation_ in Russian, Latin, and French, with other pieces and notes,
and is prefaced by an introduction. There is a great deal of political
talent and skill exhibited in this code of the Russian Peter, which is the
foundation upon which the modern schismatical Church of Russia is founded.
There are also many things in it most whimsical and amusing. The Emperor
Paul wanted to celebrate a Pontifical Mass in vestments of sky‐blue
velvet. Peter did not care about performing any such childish escapade as
this, but he was resolved to exercise the governing power of a supreme
pontiff, and he carried his resolve into execution. The one salient
feature of his regulation is the systematic effort to degrade the
hierarchy and clergy of the Russian Church, to make them impotent and
contemptible. The able despot, aided by his unscrupulous instruments,
succeeded but too well. The ultimate result has been that Russia is worm‐
eaten and undermined by infidelity and its necessary concomitant, the
revolutionary principle. There is no salvation for it, even politically,
except in a return to obedience to the See of Peter, the Prince of the
Apostles. Our Episcopalian admirers of the Russian Church will find some
wholesome reading in this interesting and learned work of F. Tondini.


    SADLIERS’ CATHOLIC DIRECTORY, ALMANAC, AND ORDO FOR THE YEAR OF
    OUR LORD 1875. New York: D. & J. Sadlier & Co. 1875.


In the cursory glance we have been able to give this publication, we are
glad to notice an evident effort to improve on the issues of previous
years. We do not look for perfection in such difficult compilations, and
anything approaching it is to be commended.


    IERNE OF ARMORICA. By J. C. Bateman. New York: D. & J. Sadlier &
    Co. 1874.


This work, reprinted from Father Coleridge’s admirable _Quarterly Series_,
was noticed, at the time of its original publication, in THE CATHOLIC
WORLD for June, 1873. We have also received from the same house: Moore’s
_Irish Melodies_, with memoir and notes by John Savage; Carleton’s
_Redmond Count O’Hanlon_, _The Evil Eye_, and _The Black Baronet_; the
latter reprints, we believe, of works heretofore published by Mr. Donahoe
of Boston.


    THE MILWAUKEE CATHOLIC MAGAZINE, January, 1875.


We welcome to our table this new contemporary, an octavo monthly of
thirty‐two pages, just come to hand. The editor having beautified the
churches and dwellings of his locality with the productions of his pencil
and crayon, now takes up the pen professional; though he has heretofore
made occasional contributions to the press, which have recently been put
into book‐form. He brings to his task a refined, poetic taste, a genuine
appreciation of the beautiful in art and nature, and a sturdy good sense,
which will doubtless serve him well in his new relations. We wish him all
success.

ANNOUNCEMENT.—The Catholic Publication Society has in press, and will soon
publish from advance sheets, two very important works in answer to Mr.
Gladstone’s late pamphlet; one by the Very Rev. John Henry Newman, D.D.,
and the other by His Grace Archbishop Manning. The former is entitled _A
Letter to the Duke of Norfolk, on the occasion of Mr. Gladstone’s recent
Expostulation_, and the latter, _The Vatican Decrees and their Bearings on
Civil Allegiance_.





THE CATHOLIC WORLD. VOL. XX., NO. 120.—MARCH, 1875.




Italian Documents Of Freemasonry.


When Elias Ashmole and his literary friends amused their learned leisure
at Brazenose in the construction of abstruse symbols and mystic jargon,
that passed through their cavalier associates to the first Masonic lodges,
they could never have foreseen the result of their invention. In less than
two centuries the association that sprang from the union of a few Royalist
officers in England, and accompanied the exile of King James’ followers to
France, has spread itself over the two hemispheres, a mystery where it is
not a terror. Its history has been written by many pens and in many
colors. Some have ascribed to it an origin lost in fabulous antiquity, or
traced its genealogy back a thousand years before the Christian era. To
some it is an absurd system of innocent mystification, without any
capacity for the good it promises, and powerless for the evil with which
its intentions are credited. But others discern under its mantle of
hypocrisy nothing less than a subtle organization for the destruction of
all established order, and a diabolical conspiracy for the overthrow of
religion. Between the two descriptions our choice is easily made. The
voice of the Roman pontiffs, our guardians and our teachers, has been
neither slow nor uncertain. Clement XII. and Benedict XIV., Pius VII. and
Leo XII., Gregory XVI. and Pius IX., have unequivocally condemned Masonic
societies as hot‐beds of impiety and sedition. This judgment was not
lightly pronounced. It proceeded from an examination of the manuals,
statutes, and catechisms of the order, from undoubted evidence of its
practical action as well as its speculative principles. Since the close of
the last century many writers, both Catholic and Protestant, have
contributed by their researches to justify the sentence of the popes, and
nothing has more powerfully aided these efforts than the publication from
time to time of the authentic documents of this secret society.

A signal service has just been rendered to the same cause by the
publication in Rome of the General Statutes of Freemasonry, and of two
rituals for initiation into the first and thirtieth grades of the
craft.(176) It would be a mistake to suppose that the organization of
Freemasonry is everywhere identical, or that it has been always
harmoniously developed to the same extent in the different countries where
it has taken root. It has been torn by schisms from the beginning,
although its divisions, which concerned rather matters of form and detail
than general principles, have never prevented its combining for common
purposes of destruction. The two great factions which divide the brethren
take their name from the _rite_ which they profess. The orthodox Masons,
who are the great majority, give their allegiance to the Scottish rite,
which at one time, they say, had its principal seat in Edinburgh. Now, as
Domenico Angherà, Grand‐Master of the Neapolitan Orient, tells us in a
reserved circular of the 22d of May last, which has found its way to the
public papers, the acknowledged centre is established in Maryland under
the specious designation of Mother‐Council of the World. In the Scottish
rite the grades are thirty‐three: eighteen symbolic, twelve philosophic,
and three administrative. The Reform of Orléans, which distinguishes the
followers of the French rite, abolishes all the philosophic and higher
grades, and reduces the symbolic to seven. The reformers are reproached
with clipping the wings of the eagle of liberty, forbidding the
introduction of political and religious questions into the lodges, and
cancelling at a stroke two‐thirds of the Masonic programme, Equality and
Liberty, making Fraternity sole motto of the order.

The documents published are those of the orthodox Masons of the Scottish
rite, which is almost exclusively followed in Italy. Of their authenticity
there is no doubt. The statutes are printed from the latest edition,
clandestinely prepared for Masonic use at Naples (Tipografia dell’
Industria, 1874). They are distributed into five hundred and eighty
articles, and in the Roman reprint are followed by thirty‐seven
supplementary statutes for Italy agreed to in the Masonic convention held
at Rome in May. The rituals, equally authentic, are also copied from the
most recent editions. Without the rituals, the statutes cannot be
understood. The latter are put into the hands of all Freemasons, and the
language, when not positively misleading, is studiously ambiguous, only to
be explained as the initiated proceeds in his graduation. It is necessary
to give their substance at greater length than the platitudes and general
professions of philanthropy they contain would warrant, in order that the
commentary afforded by the other manuals may bring the hypocrisy and
imposture of the system into full relief. As far as possible these
documents shall be allowed to speak for themselves. They are their own
indictment.

The General Constitutions of the Society of Freemasons of the Ancient and
Accepted Scottish Rite in their first paragraph declare that the scope of
the order is the perfection of mankind. Embracing in its scheme the whole
human race, the grand aim of the institution requires its members to
devote all their material means and mental faculties to its furtherance.
The brethren, whatever be their nationality, to whatever rite of Masonry
they owe allegiance, are members of a great family, one as is the species
to which they belong, as the globe they inhabit, as nature which they
contemplate. For this reason Freemasons of every country are to take among
themselves the designation of brothers, and both in and out of their
lodges show, in their deportment to each other, true fraternal affection.
The _venerable_ president of the lodge is required to see observed that
strict equality which ought to exist among brothers. He is never to forget
that the simple quality of man in the eyes of a Freemason commands the
highest respect, and is to show deference only to such as deserve it by
their virtue and superior Masonic acquirements. He must never permit a
brother to assume any superiority over another on account of rank or
distinctions he may enjoy in the profane world. He himself, on his
admission to office, is reminded that he is but _primus inter pares_, that
his authority lasts only for a time. He must never make his superiority be
felt by the others. He ought to reflect that he is chosen to lead because
he is considered possessed of the necessary prudence, and that only gentle
and kind demeanor can secure the harmony that should reign among
Freemasons.

Every member at his initiation, besides his entry‐money paid to the
treasurer, must deposit a sum for the benevolent fund. At every meeting of
the lodge a collection is made for the poor. This is so essential that any
meeting where this duty has been omitted is declared not Masonic,
irregular and null. All fines imposed on delinquents or absentees go to
the same fund. The grand almoner is charged with the distribution of the
offerings among the more indigent of the fraternity, and even the profane
are sometimes admitted to share in the Masonic alms. Every application for
assistance must be made through a member, and is discussed in the lodge.
Preference is to be given to those cases where distress has not been
produced by idleness or vice. Certain circumstances justify the president
in authorizing an alms without consulting the lodge, but an explanation is
to be given at the first meeting. He has also power to exempt the poorer
brethren from the payment of the regular subscription, but this he is
enjoined to do with such precautions as may conceal the exemption from the
other members of the lodge. Were he to manifest the favor, he would be
expelled the order.

In every lodge there is an official styled hospitaller, whose duty it is
to visit the brethren in sickness daily, and supply them with medicines
and whatever else they may happen to need. All the members of the lodge
are obliged to visit the sick brother, one each day by turns, and also
during his convalescence. A remarkable provision is added, obliging the
sick Mason to receive the visits of his brethren. If the illness is
dangerous, the sick man must hand over all his Masonic papers to those who
are deputed to take charge of them. The funeral expenses of a deceased
member are defrayed by the lodge, when circumstances require it, and he is
accompanied to the grave by all his brethren of the same or lower grade in
Freemasonry. The lodge orator, where practicable, pronounces a discourse
over the tomb, enumerating the virtues and praises of the deceased; within
the lodge the oration must never be omitted.

In keeping with the professedly humanitarian scope of the order are those
articles of the statutes which regulate the admission of new members: “If
the end of the institution is the perfection of mankind, it is
indispensable that the Freemason should practise true morality, which
supposes the knowledge and practice of the duties and rights of man. He
ought, accordingly, to be upright, humane, sincere, beneficent to every
sort of persons, and, above all, a good father, a good son, a good
brother, a good husband, and a good citizen. A Freemason must be a citizen
in full enjoyment of his civil rights, of acknowledged probity, and of at
least ordinary intelligence. No one is admitted who has not the age
required by the statutes. No one may be admitted or may remain in the
order who has once been employed or engages in servile, mean, and
dishonorable trades or professions, or who has been condemned to suffer
punishment for crime. The expiation of any such sentence gives no claim
for readmittance.”

The retiring warden, handing over the keys of the Masonic temple to the
warden‐elect, admonishes the latter to exclude from its precincts all who
have not laid aside every profane distinction, and who do not seek to
enter solely by the path of virtue. Every precaution is taken to prevent
the admission of unworthy subjects. The age for reception is fixed at
twenty‐one, but the son of a Freemason may be initiated at eighteen, or
even at fifteen if his father is of the upper grades of the order. The
candidate must be proposed in the lodge by a member. Three commissioners
are secretly appointed to separately inquire into the antecedents of the
postulant, each inquisitor concealing his mandate from his fellow‐
commissioners.

“The investigation,” it is prescribed, “should chiefly turn on the
constant integrity of the _profane_ in his habitual conduct, on the exact
discharge of the duties of his position, on the rectitude and safeness of
his principles, on the firmness of his character, on his activity and
ability to penetrate, develop, and fully understand the profound sciences
which the mystic Masonic institute offers to the consideration of its
followers.”

The three reports of the inquisitors must agree in recommending the
candidate; otherwise the subject drops. But even when the commissioners
unanimously approve of the proposal, the question is put to the secret
votes of the lodge in three several meetings. Two negative votes in the
first ballot are sufficient to delay the next trial for three months,
while after three negatives it is put off for nine; and if at the end of
that time three black balls are again found in the urn, the candidate is
definitively rejected, and communication is made of the result to the
Grand Orient, which informs all the dependent lodges of the exclusion, to
prevent the admission of the rejected candidate among the brethren of its
jurisdiction.

Having secured by these stringent regulations the purity of selection, and
put the mystic temple beyond the risk of contamination by unworthy
neophytes, it is not surprising that the statutes should tell us
(paragraph 444) “that the character of Freemason does not admit the
supposition that he can commit a fault.” Nevertheless, considering the
weakness of human nature and the force of old habits imperfectly subdued,
certain violations of decorum are contemplated in the statutes which
constitute Masonic faults, and are enumerated with the penalties attached
to each. Among these peccadilloes are mentioned perjury and treason
against the order, the revelation of its mysteries, embezzlement of its
funds, insubordination and rebellion against its authority, duelling
_among brethren_, and breaches of hospitality.

Out of the lodges the conduct of the brethren is to be closely watched. It
is the duty of the president to admonish any one whose conduct is
reprehensible. This he must do in secret, and with due fraternal
tenderness endeavor to bring back the wanderer to the path of virtue.
Every corporation has to see that its individual members do nothing to
forfeit the good opinion and confidence of the world at large. When,
therefore, a brother is subjected to a criminal prosecution and proved
guilty, the lodge is to take immediate steps for his expulsion.

Promotion from the lower to the higher grades of Masonry is regulated on
the same principles of meritorious selection that govern the first
admission of members. Irreprehensible conduct, both in his civil and
Masonic capacity, are requisite in the aspirant; and he must have acquired
a thorough knowledge of the grade which he possesses before he can be
advanced to _greater light_. Certain intervals must pass between each
successive step, that the spirit and devotedness of the brother may be
fully ascertained and his promotion justified.

Minute rules are laid down in the statutes to regulate the proceedings in
lodge. The arrangement of the seats, the order of business, the method of
discussion, all is provided for in a way to promote harmony and social
feeling. Unbecoming behavior and offensive language are severely punished.
“Among Freemasons everything must breathe wisdom, kindness, and joy.” Any
brother may signify his dissent from a proposal while it is under
discussion; but when it has received the approbation of the majority, he
must applaud the decision with the rest, “and not be so foolishly vain as
to think his own opinion better than that of the greater number.” When the
ritual practices have been observed, and necessary business despatched,
the presiding dignitary may invite the brethren to suspend their labors
and engage without formality in conversation or amusement. After this
relaxation the ceremonial is resumed for the remainder of the meeting, and
the lodge is closed in the usual manner.

Prominent among the observances instituted for the cultivation of Masonic
feeling are the _Agapæ_ of Masonic banquets. Some are _de rigeur_, as
those on the Feasts of S. John the Baptist and S. John the Evangelist, and
on the anniversary of the foundation of the various lodges. Others may be
given according to circumstances. In the regulation banquets the lodge
orator makes an appropriate address. Toasts and songs enliven the
entertainment, and dancing is not prohibited. Between the toasts a poet,
if there be one, may offer some of his productions. “Mirth, harmony, and
sobriety are the characteristics of a Masonic feast.” Officials are
charged to maintain order and decorum in these reunions. They are
instructed to observe a “moderate, fraternal austerity” in their
superintendence. Venial slips may be corrected on the spot, and a trifling
penance imposed, which must be accepted with the best grace. A brother who
more gravely offends against any of the social decencies is to be
rigorously chastised at the first subsequent meeting.

After the claim of Freemasonry to represent a universal brotherhood, and
its professed purpose to effect a general diffusion of its principles and
influence, we are not surprised to find the statutes enjoin the most
absolute respect for all political opinions and all religious beliefs. The
325th article says: “It is never permitted to discuss matters of religion
or affairs of state in the lodges.”(177) We are not, however, to interpret
toleration into a denial of the foundation of religious truth, or into a
wicked connivance at subversive agencies in the body politic. Every
Masonic temple is consecrated to the “Great Architect of the Universe.” In
the name of him, “the purest fountain of all perfection,” the election of
the office‐bearers is proclaimed on S. John’s day. By him they swear when,
with their hands on S. John’s Gospel, they promise fidelity to the order.
All their solemn deeds are inscribed “to the glory of the Great Architect
of the Universe” in the name of S. John of Scotland (S. John the Baptist),
or of S. John of Jerusalem (S. John the Evangelist), according to the
rite. The Bible is always reverently placed on the warden’s table when the
lodges meet, and the proceedings are always opened with an invocation of
the Deity. If the craft admits among its adepts men of all persuasions, it
professes to do so because it does not search consciences. Its toleration,
it declares, does not proceed from atheism, but from enlightened
liberality. Nor has the state anything to apprehend from the brethren, if
we believe the admonition addressed to a novice at his initiation. “Masons
are forbidden to mix themselves up in conspiracies.” The first toast in
all Masonic banquets is to the head of the nation. It would be strange
indeed if, notwithstanding the enlightened scope of the institution and
the jealous care with which it professes to exclude all those who are
troublesome to society or have given cause of complaint in their civil
conduct, any government should find that the Masonic body was not one of
the firmest stays of order. Virtue, philanthropy, benevolence,
brotherhood—these are the watchwords of Masonry, and its statutes
appropriately terminate in the following paragraph:


    “The Freemason is the faithful friend of his country and of all
    men. He must not forget that by the oath he took at his initiation
    he stripped himself of every profane decoration and of all that is
    vulgar in man, to assume no other distinction but the sweet name
    of brother. Let his conduct correspond to the title, and the scope
    of Masonry is attained.”


We have hitherto drawn on the General Constitutions, which are binding on
“all Masonic lodges, and on all Freemasons, of whatever grade, throughout
the two hemispheres.” As these statutes, though carefully guarded from the
eyes of the profane, are put into the hands of the apprentices or youngest
adepts, whose prudence and capacity for _greater light_ have still to be
tested, it would be dangerous to make in them more open professions of
faith than are covered by elastic and general expressions; yet there is
sufficient internal evidence in them to show that the maxims they contain
are mere exoteric doctrine compared to the deeper revelation of the inner
sanctuary, where only the tried craftsman may dare to penetrate.
“Secrecy,” say the Constitutions, “is the first characteristic of the
order.”

And this secrecy is to be observed not merely towards the uninitiated, but
is equally enforced between the different grades of the brotherhood. The
presence of a member of a lower grade regulates the quality of the
business to be transacted in the lodge, even if all the others are master‐
masons. And not only the business but the very ceremonial must be
accommodated to the imperfection of those present. Each of the thirty‐
three grades has its own ritual, the publication of which is high treason
to the order, and which cannot be read without profanation by a member of
inferior degree. The books in the lodge library are by no means
promiscuous reading, but are permitted according to gradation. Hence the
multiplicity of officials with fantastic names who watch over the privacy
of the proceedings, verify the certificates of strangers, look out for
spies or illegitimate intruders; hence the precautions taken with their
documents, and the intricate system of checks and counterchecks on the
very office‐bearers through whose hands the correspondence and written
documents of an intimate nature have to pass. Why all this secrecy, and
why those terrible oaths, which we have still to see, if the end of
Masonry is faithfully exhibited in these Constitutions? As they stand,
they might almost suit a pious confraternity. Doubtless there are
suspicious articles. Their exclusiveness is not a Christian trait.


    “Odi profanum vulgus et arceo”


is not the spirit of religion. The visits to the sick, and the obligation
not to decline them, receive a dubious commentary in the death‐bed scenes
now so distressingly frequent in Italy: when the minister of religion is
driven away by the visitors even when sent for by the dying man or his
relatives. The solemn decree, “The hand of a Mason shall not be raised
against a brother,” throws light on the inexplicable verdicts of juries,
judicial sentences, and remarkable escapes of condemned prisoners with
which the newspapers have made us familiar. But from the statutes we can
learn no more. We cannot discover whether the anti‐Christian and anti‐
social maxims which are unquestionably ascribed to Masonry are the real
outcome of its teaching, or an element quite extraneous to its genuine
principles. This is to be gathered from other sources, and, fortunately,
these are at hand in equally authentic documents, the rituals of the
several degrees, and many of the secret instructions that from time to
time are issued by the directing lodges. An examination of these leaves no
room to doubt the genuine scope of the association. The process may be
tedious, but it is conclusive. It brings out the hideous impiety of the
sect and its satanic hypocrisy.

Let us follow, Ritual in hand, a neophyte in his first initiation to the
grade of apprentice.

A lodge is properly composed of four chambers—a vestibule, the Chamber of
Reflection, the middle chamber, and the lodge proper, or temple. In the
last the ordinary assemblies of the Masons are held, but for the
initiation of a member all the apartments are put in requisition. The
candidate is conducted, if possible, in a carriage, blindfolded, to the
place of meeting; at all events, he must be blindfolded before entering
the Masonic precincts. He is led first into the vestibule, where he is
handed over to the Expert. This functionary, who is clothed in a long,
black robe, with a hood concealing his features, takes the candidate by
the hand, then bids him put his confidence in God, and, after making him
take several turns in the outer chamber, introduces him to the Chamber of
Reflection. This is described in the Ritual as


    “A dark place impenetrable to the rays of the sun, lit by a single
    sepulchral lamp. The walls are painted black with death’s heads
    and similar funereal emblems to assist the recipient in his
    meditations. He has to pass through the four elements of the
    ancients, and here he is supposed to find himself in the bowels of
    the earth, reminded of his last abode and of the vanity of earthly
    things by the spectacle of a skeleton stretched on a bier. In the
    absence of a skeleton a skull must be placed on a small table in
    the centre of the room. On the table are pen, ink, and paper, a
    dish of water, and a piece of bread. A chair completes the
    furniture.”


Inscriptions are distributed over the walls; as, “If curiosity has brought
you here, depart,” “If you are capable of dissimulation, tremble,” and
others, as the lodge may think proper. The Ritual adds: “If it can be
conveniently arranged, appropriate voices may be made to proceed from the
ceiling.” The candidate is made to sit with his back to the door, and the
bandage is taken from his eyes. The Expert addresses him: “I leave you to
your reflections. You will not be alone. God sees every one.” Then he
quits him abruptly, and, closing the door, locks it behind him.

The length of time to be employed in self‐examination is not prescribed in
the Ritual, but is left to the caprice of the Masons, who are now engaged
in the temple. When the brethren are bent on a joke at the expense of the
recipient, it has been known to extend over four hours. The state of the
patient during this time may be imagined. He came with his head full of
mysterious fancies about Masonry, and the first surroundings are
calculated to crowd perplexing thoughts on an already agitated mind. Some
never get past this first essay. They have had enough of the mystic rite
at the threshold, and are accompanied to the door with the gibes and
laughter of the brotherhood, who then close the evening over a repast
prepared at the expense of the candidate with his forfeited entrance
money.

In most cases, however, the time for reflection is just so much as is
necessary to allow the completion of the opening ceremonies in the temple
preparatory to the reception of the neophyte. When these are finished, the
president sends the Expert to require of the candidate written replies to
three questions: “What does man owe to God? What does he owe to himself?
What to his fellow‐men?” The candidate is also to be told that as the
trials through which he has to pass are full of danger, it behooves him to
make his will. When the Expert returns, the will is laid by to be returned
to the candidate at the end of the function; but the answers to the three
questions are discussed in public, and the disquisitions in theology,
philosophy, and ethics may be fancied. If among the auditors there are
junior Masons whose ears are not yet accustomed to unequivocal negations
of God and the human soul, the president strives to moderate the language
of the disputants, and always sums up with a vague and general declaration
of respect for all opinions, and of Masonic toleration.

The recipient is now prepared for further tests. The preparation consists
first in having his eyes once more bandaged in the Chamber of Reflection,
then in being stripped of his clothes, “left only in his shirt and
drawers, with his left breast and arm and his right leg bare, his feet in
slippers, and a cord twined three times round his neck.” He is led by this
cord to the door of the lodge. Here he is to be subjected to a lengthy
interrogatory as to his name, birthplace, age, profession, and other
qualifications. “As Masonry receives into its bosom members of all
opinions and all religions, the president must not propose political or
religious questions to offend the sentiments or belief of the recipient or
of the auditory.”

In due time the neophyte may learn that the creed of Masons is to have
none, and that its politics are the subversion of all authority; but
prejudices must be respected at the outset, and the apprentices are not to
be shocked unprepared. When the examination is over, the farce begins. The
doors of the lodge are thrown open with a great noise, and as soon as the
candidate has been led into the room, the Tiler holding the point of a
sword against his naked breast, they are violently shut. “What do you
perceive?” the president asks. “I see nothing,” the recipient must answer;
“but I feel the point of a sword on my breast.” “That point,” says the
president, “is symbolic of the remorse that would gnaw your heart, should
you ever betray the society you seek to enter. Think what you are about to
do. Awful tests await you. _Terrible_ brother, take this profane one out
of the lodge, and lead him through those places which all must pass over
who would know our secrets.” The candidate is then led out and made to
take so many turns that he completely loses every idea of where he is; and
when he has quite lost his bearings, he is again in the lodge, although he
does not know it; and the brethren, in breathless silence, await the
progress of the comedy.

A large, wooden frame, filled in with paper, has been prepared in his
absence, and set up in the lodge before the entrance. “What is to be done
to this profane one?” asks Brother Terrible. “Throw him into the cavern,”
replies the president. Two Masons then seize the candidate and cast him
against the frame. The paper, of course, breaks, and the candidate is
caught in the arms of some of the brethren who are in waiting. The doors
of the lodge are then closed with noise, an iron ring, passing over a
dentate bar of iron, is made to imitate the bolting of the door, and the
candidate, blindfolded, out of breath, stunned, and frightened, really may
fancy himself at the bottom of a cavern.

The candidate is now seated on a stool, with a jagged bottom and unequal
legs which never find a plane, that with its constant and uneven motion
keeps the occupant in perpetual terror of falling. From this uneasy seat
he must answer all the fanciful questions that the whim of the president
or his own condition suggests. Metaphysics, astronomy, natural sciences,
may all enter into the examination; and as the questions are asked without
previous notice, the replies are not always satisfactory. Although the
Ritual prescribes the greatest decorum and gravity to be observed during
the ceremony, that the neophyte may be properly impressed, and prohibits
all rough usage and buffoonery, this is to be understood by the gloss of
another Ritual, which says that “this test of the stool of reflection is
instituted for the purpose of discovering how far the physical torture
which the candidate is made to suffer in his uneasy seat influences the
clearness of his ideas.”

If after this examination the patient still perseveres in his resolution
to enter the Masonic fraternity, he is admonished to prepare for other
trials. First, he must swear to keep absolute silence on all Masonic
secrets. This oath is to be taken over a cup of water. “If your intention
is pure, you may drink with safety. If in your heart you are a traitor,
tremble at the instant and terrible effects of the potion.” The fatal cup
is then presented to him. This is a chalice‐shaped vessel, having the cup
movable on a pivot in the base, and separated vertically into two
divisions. In one there is fresh water, and this side is presented to the
candidate. In the other there is a bitter mixture. When the candidate,
still blindfolded, has taken hold of the cup, the president invites him to
drink, and at the same time to swear after himself in the following terms:
“I promise the faithful observance of all Masonic obligations, and if I
prove false to my oath”—here he is made to taste the fresh water, and then
the cup is turned so that the next draught must be taken from the side
containing the bitter mixture, and the president continues with the
remainder of the oath to be repeated by the recipient—“I consent to have
the sweetness of this water turned into gall, and its salutary effect
changed to poison.” Here the countenance of the candidate undergoes the
expected change, and at the sight of the fatal grimace the president,
striking a terrible blow on the table with his mallet, cries out, “Ha!
what do I see? What means that distortion of your face? Away with the
profane!” The poor candidate is removed back some paces, and then the
president addresses him: “If your purpose is to deceive us, retire at
once. Soon it will be too late. We would know your perfidy, and then it
were better for you never to have seen the light of day. Think well on it.
Brother Terrible, seat him on the stool of reflection. Let him there
consider what he must do.” When the candidate has been on his uneasy seat
for some time, the president asks him if he means to persevere. If he
persists, the Terrible brother is told to accompany him on his _first
journey_ and protect him in its dangers. The Ritual proceeds:


    “The Expert shall conduct the candidate through this first
    journey, making it as difficult as possible, with thrusts,
    ascents, descents, wind, thunder; in such a way that he can have
    no idea of the ground he goes over, and all in a manner calculated
    to leave a deep impression on the aspirant.”


We really cannot go on without apologizing to the reader for detaining him
over this contemptible mummery. It is humiliating to human nature that men
who make the loftiest professions of respect for its dignity should debase
themselves to such a depth of absurdity. And this, too, when they
matriculate in their school of perfection. Out of a mad‐house and a
Masonic lodge folly like this is inconceivable.

To return to our journey. It is a farce to an onlooker, but it is a
serious matter to the patient. He still supposes himself in the cavern,
and is forced to make several rounds of the lodge, passing over boards
that move under him on wheels, to boards adjusted to take a see‐saw
motion, and from these to others that suddenly yield under his weight in
trap‐door fashion. He is perpetually getting directions to stoop, to raise
his right foot, to raise his left, to leap; and corresponding obstructions
are put in his way at every movement. He is made to mount an interminable
ladder, like a squirrel in a cage, and, when he must think himself as high
as a church‐steeple, is told to fling himself down, and falls a couple of
feet. Perspiring and out of breath, confused, terrified, and fatigued, his
ears are filled with the most horrible noises. Shrieks and cries of pain,
wailing of children, roaring of wild beasts, are heard on every side. All
the theatrical appliances to produce thunder, rain, hail, wind, and
tempest are employed in well‐appointed lodges; and in the others the
ingenuity of the merry brethren supplies the want of machinery. The first
journey is finished when the brethren are tired of the amusement, and then
the candidate makes a second journey without the obstacles, and during
this he only hears the clashing of swords. A third journey is made in
peace, and at last the candidate passes thrice over an ignited preparation
of sulphur, and his purification by earth, water, air, and fire is
complete.

Now comes a Masonic instruction which we shall quote from the Ritual:


    “ ‘Do you believe,’ asks the Venerable, ‘in a Supreme Being?’ The
    answer of the candidate is usually in the affirmative. And then
    the president may reply: ‘This answer does you honor. If we admit
    persons of all persuasions, it is because we do not pry into the
    conscience. We believe that the incense of virtue is acceptable to
    the Deity, in whatever form it is offered. Our toleration proceeds
    not from atheism, but from liberality and philosophy.’ ”


But mark what follows:


    “If the candidate in his reply says he does not believe in God,
    the president is to say: ‘Atheism is incomprehensible. The only
    division possible among candid men is on the question whether the
    First Cause is spirit or matter. But a materialist is no
    atheist.’ ”


This is a specimen of Masonic theology, expressed in guarded terms, to
respect the weaker susceptibilities of an assembly of _apprentices_; for
we must remember that we are assisting at an initiation to the first
grade, which is conducted in presence of the youngest Masons. Still, no
veil can conceal the boldness of the declaration, and the apology of
materialism will surely not protect the dullest adept who remembers the
first lessons of his catechism from taking scandal at its effrontery. But
if he is to graduate in the higher honors, he must sooner or later get an
inkling of what is in reserve, and it is as well that from the very first
grade he should be able without much help to proceed to the development of
the Masonic idea of God—nature and that universe of which he himself is a
part—to pantheism pure and simple. Indeed, the _Rivista della Massoneria_
of the 1st of August, 1874, ventures a little further: “All are aware that
this formula (Great Architect of the Universe) by common consent has no
exclusive meaning, much less a religious one. It is a formula that adapts
itself to every taste, even an atheist’s.”(178)

After this it is scarcely necessary to read on in the Ritual:


    “ ‘What is deism?’ asks the president. Having heard the answer, he
    is to subjoin: ‘Deism is belief in God without revelation or
    worship. It is the religion of the future, destined to supersede
    all other systems in the world.’ ”


The catechising proceeds in a similar strain through a multiplicity of
questions, which are all treated with a studied ambiguity of language,
affirming and denying, saying and unsaying in a breath, leaving nothing
unimplied, to satisfy advanced impiety, and softening down the bolder
expressions that would grate on the ears of a novice.

When the examination is over, the marking of the new brother is to be
proceeded with. He is told to prepare to receive the impression of a hot
iron on his person, and is requested to mention on what part he would
prefer to be branded. The Masons then go through the preparations of
lighting a fire, blowing with a bellows, turning the iron with tongs,
discussing the redness of the heated instrument, all in the hearing of the
patient, who, still blind‐folded, stands pale and trembling, in spite of
his resolution to go through the operation. The diversion this torture
affords the lodge may well be imagined. Of course there is no branding,
but the rituals suggest different methods of producing the sensation. One
recommends violent friction of the part indicated for branding, and then
the sudden application of a piece of ice. Another directs the hot wick of
a candle just blown out to be pressed against the skin. Sometimes the
president declares himself satisfied with the resignation of the neophyte,
and dispenses with the operation. Generally the ceremonies of the Ritual
are considerably curtailed in practice; not even Masons can endure their
tedious trifling.

After this the oath is to be administered. The candidate is warned of the
sacred, inviolable, perpetual nature of the obligation he is about to
assume; and when he has signified his willingness to be bound by it, he is
told that as the time is approaching when he will be admitted to the
secrets of the order, the order requires of him a guarantee—to consist in
the manifestation of some secret confided to him, that he is not at
liberty to reveal. If the candidate agrees, he is to be sharply
reprimanded; if he does not consent, the president praises his discretion.
The latter then proceeds to inform the candidate that the oath he is about
to take requires him to give all his blood for the society. When the
candidate assents, his word is at once put to the test, and he is asked if
he is really to allow a vein to be immediately opened. This proposal
usually draws out a remonstrance, and the victim’s ordinary objection is
the weakness of his health, or the probable derangement of his digestion
by such an operation following so soon after dinner. In the lodge,
however, this is provided for. The surgeon gravely advances, feels the
patient’s pulse, and infallibly declares that he lies, that the blood‐
letting can do him no harm, and positively assures him he will be the
better for it. The bleeding is performed in this manner: The surgeon binds
the arm, and pricks the vein with a tooth‐pick or such like. An assistant
drops on it a small stream of tepid water, which trickles over the arm of
the patient into a vessel held below. The counterfeit is perfect. The arm
is bandaged, arranged in a sling, and the poor man, blindfolded, half‐
naked, terrified, wearied, branded, and bled, is at length conducted to
the _altar_, or table of the presiding master, to seal his initiation with
the final oath. There, on his knees, holding in his left hand the points
of an open compass against his breast, with his right on the sword of the
president (or, according to another ritual, on a Bible, a compass, and a
square), he takes the oath, which we give in its naked impiety, as found
in the Ritual secretly printed at Naples in 1869:


    “I, N. N., do swear and promise of my own free‐will, before the
    Great Architect of the Universe, and on my honor, to keep
    inviolable silence on all the secrets of Freemasonry that may be
    communicated to me, as also on whatever I may see done or hear
    said in it, under pain of having my throat cut, my tongue torn
    out, my body cut into pieces, burned, and its ashes scattered to
    the wind, that my name may go down in execrated memory and eternal
    infamy. I promise and swear to give help and assistance to all
    brother Masons, and swear never to belong to any society, under
    whatever name, form, or title, opposed to Masonry; subjecting
    myself, if I break my word, to all the penalties established for
    perjury. Finally, I swear obedience and submission to the general
    statutes of the order, to the particular regulations of this
    lodge, and to the Supreme Grand Orient of Italy.”


When the profane has finished the oath, the president asks, “What do you
seek?” and the other is to answer, “I seek light.” The most merciless
trick of all follows. The bandage is quickly removed from his eyes.
Unaccustomed for hours to the faintest light, they are suddenly exposed to
the dazzling glare of a great artificial flame started before his face. He
is blinded once more by the change, and closes his eyes against the pain
caused by the brilliancy; and when at last he opens them to look about
him, it is to see the fierce attitudes of the Masons, each pointing his
sword at his face. Few pass this ordeal without exhibiting signs of
terror; some attempt to escape, some beg their lives, and some protest
they have done with Freemasonry. But no one who has reached this point is
permitted to depart without being received, and the novice is comforted
with the assurance that all is over. The president, addressing the new
apprentice, says:


    “Fear not those swords that surround you: they threaten only the
    perjurer. If you are faithful to Masonry, they will protect you.
    If you betray it, no corner of the earth will protect you against
    these avenging blades. Masonry requires in every Mason belief in a
    Supreme Being, and allows him out of the lodge to worship as he
    pleases, provided he leaves the same liberty to others. Masons are
    bound to assist each other by every means when occasion offers.
    Freemasons are forbidden to mix themselves up in conspiracies. But
    were you to hear of a Mason who had engaged in any such
    enterprise, and fallen a victim to his imprudence, you should have
    compassion on his misfortune, and the Masonic bond would make it
    your duty to use all your influence and the influence of your
    friends to have the rigor of punishment lessened on his behalf.”


Our candidate by this lime has somewhat recovered from his confusion. He
is now led up to the president, who, striking him thrice on the head with
his mallet, then with the compass, and lastly with the sword, declares him
Apprentice Mason and active member of the lodge. He is invested with the
insignia, and put in possession of the Masonic signs and passwords. The
description of these would be tedious, and we shall only notice the
_guttural sign_. This is made by bringing to the throat the right hand,
with thumb extended and the other fingers closed together to represent a
square; the whole intended to recall the imprecation in the oath. To this
allusion is made in one of the drinking songs of the Masons, translated
from the French for the brethren in Italy, although the verse has been
left out in the Italian edition:


    Dedans la barque
      Du Nautonnier Charon
    Si je m’embarque
      Je lui dirai: Patron
    A cette marque
      Reconnais un Maçon.


Of the sacred word _Jachin_ there will be occasion to speak again.

When the function is over, the lodge is cleared, tables are spread, and
the brethren sit down to a refreshment which one, at least, has fairly
earned.

Admission to the first three grades of Masonry is easily obtained. Among
the Apprentices, Fellowcraft, and Master‐Masons the official language
always speaks of charity, toleration, and philanthropy. We have seen
sufficient reason to question the sincerity of these expressions in the
mouths of the Masons, and the explanations we have heard from themselves
are far from reassuring. As the society contemplates the gradual formation
of the requisite character in its members, and as most of these at their
first entry have not altogether lost every natural sense of duty, as
understood by the profane, their advance to _perfection_ is generally
slow, and the great bulk never get beyond the symbolic grades. If they are
promoted, it is _pro forma_ in the succeeding grades termed _capitular_,
which are the perfection of symbolism, and are completed in the
Rosicrucian Knight at the eighteenth grade. From this point promotion is
difficult. The degrees that follow up to the thirtieth are called
_philosophic_, and in them the adept is taught plainly, without symbol or
artifice, the practice of true Masonic virtue. Vengeance and death are the
passwords, the poniard the symbol of action. After this the other degrees
are purely administrative, and the Mason of the thirty‐first, thirty‐
second, or thirty‐third grade learns nothing that was not revealed when he
was admitted Knight Kadosh in the thirtieth.

In the nineteenth, or first of the philosophic grades, the Ritual says:


    “It is not difficult to comprehend that the society of Freemasons,
    speaking plainly, is just a permanent conspiracy against political
    despotism and religious fanaticism. The princes who unfortunately
    were admitted into Masonry, were not slow in reducing it to a
    society of beneficence and charity, and maintained that religion
    and politics were foreign to its purpose. They even succeeded in
    having inserted among the statutes that no discussion was to be
    tolerated in the lodges on these subjects.”


In the Ritual of the twenty‐ninth degree:


    “How would not the Masonic mysteries have degenerated, if,
    according to the programme of the common herd of Masons, the adept
    was never to occupy himself with politics or religion!”


And the actual Grand‐Master of the Neapolitan Masons, Domenico Angherà, in
a secret history of the society in that Orient, clandestinely printed in
1864, relates with satisfaction that the work of the Carbonari and Buoni
Cugini in 1820‐21 was conceived and directed by the Masonic lodges, and
carried out by their own adepts under the other designations, and
triumphantly boasts that in those days “the mallets of the Masons beat
harmonious time to the axes of the Carbonari.” In 1869 the Grand‐Master
Frapolli, Deputy in the Chambers, in the opening discourse at the Masonic
gathering held that year in Genoa, acknowledged that “during the previous
fifty years of tyranny Freemasonry in Italy was replaced by the
Carbonari.” He said that on the first reconstruction of the order at
Turin, in 1861, the motto was adopted of “A personal God and a
constitutional monarchy,” but that this was found to be a stifling
limitation, by which the Italian lodges would not submit to be fettered;
and in 1864 a new Grand Orient was established which better corresponded
to the scope. Up to the occupation of Rome in 1870 the aim of the
brotherhood was to “elevate the conscience.” Now they may safely advance a
step. Mauro Macchi, another Deputy, and member of the Supreme Council of
Freemasons, in the _Masonic Review_ of the 16th of February, 1874, thus
expresses his idea of the present practical scope of the society:


    “The keystone of the whole system opposed to Masonry was and is
    that ascetic and transcendental sentiment which carries men beyond
    the present life, and makes them look on themselves as mere
    travellers on earth, leading them to sacrifice everything for a
    happiness to begin in the cemetery. As long as this system is not
    destroyed by the mallet of Masonry, we shall have society composed
    of poor, deluded creatures who will sacrifice all to attain
    felicity in a future existence.”


A Catholic, he says, who mortifies his passions, is consistent and
logical, for to him life is a pilgrimage and an exile, and his career is
but a preparation for a future state; but this the grand‐master refuses to
accept as the type of human perfection.

Let us pass to an inspection of the Ritual of the thirtieth grade of the
Scottish Rite, called Chevalier Kadosh, or Knight of the White and Black
Eagle, printed at Naples, without indication of printer’s name, in 1869.
Here the real ends of Masonry, and the horrible means it directs to their
attainment, are exposed without veil or mystery. As Angherà in his preface
says:


    “Here the great drama of Masonry reaches its _dénoûement_. Only
    Masons of strong capacity and devoted attachment penetrate thus
    far. The other grades are but a sanctuary of approach; this, the
    thirtieth, is the inmost sanctuary, for which the rest is only a
    preparation.”


The infamous nature of the conspiracy which it discloses would justify our
treating it at greater length, if the limits of an article did not oblige
us to hasten to a close. We cannot afford to wade through the tiresome
series of mystifying ceremonies without which nothing Masonic can be
legally performed. Mithric rites, the Temple of Memphis, Zoroaster,
Pythagoras, Numa, the Templars, Manicheans, Rabbinic phrases, and lore
from the Talmud, Arabic, and Hebrew, are jumbled together to give an air
of antiquity to this most modern of widespread impostures. Our business is
to cull out of the mass of profanities a few samples of the perfection
required of the “holy,” “consecrated,” “purified” knight; for such is the
force of the Hebrew Kadosh. Angherà has not proceeded far, when in a note
he takes care to inform us that the two sacred passwords, Jachin and Booz,
which Masons of the first two grades are taught to repeat and understand
as _stability_ and _force_, and whose initial letters, J and B, are
inscribed on the Masonic _columns_, read as they ought to be, backwards,
are two obscene words in the corrupt language of the Maltese Arabs.

The initiation, whenever it is symbolic, recalls the execution of James de
Molai, Grand‐Master of the Templars, and holds up to execration Clement V.
and Philip the Fair, with Noffodei, the false brother. To emancipate
society from the double despotism of priest and king is the duty of the
aspirant. The passwords for him are now _Nekam_, vengeance, _Makah_,
death, and the answer _Bealim_, to traitors. He is told that his duty is
to mark all the murders of friends of liberty, political and religious,
committed by the satellites of despotism, and to avenge the victims of
tyranny; to bind himself, in common action with the other knights, to
annihilate, once for all, the despots of the human race—in a word to
establish political and religious liberty where it does not exist, and
defend it where it is established, with arms if need be. When the theory
of these doctrines has been sufficiently impressed upon him, he is
conducted by the grand‐master before a skull crowned with laurel, and
repeats as he is told: “Honor and glory to persecuted innocence; honor and
glory to virtue sacrificed to vice and ambition.” Next he is shown a skull
crowned with a tiara, a dagger is placed in his hand, and he is made to
exclaim, “Hatred and death to religious despotism!” In the same way,
before a skull on which is placed a kingly diadem, he pronounces “Hatred
and death to political despotism!” Twice must the aspirant repeat this
ceremony, and on the last occasion casts crown and tiara on the
ground.(179) Four times he binds himself by oath to combat political and
religious oppression, to put down religious fanaticism, to overturn
political tyranny, to propagate the principles of Masonry, to disseminate
liberal ideas, to maintain the rights of man and the sovereignty of the
people. Each time the holy name of God is called to witness, but we know
now the value of the invocation—the universe is the Mason’s God.


    “ ‘Do you believe in another world?’ asks the grand‐master, who
    himself resumes, ‘There are not two worlds. We are a compound of
    matter and spirit. These two substances return to their origin:
    this transformation does not remove them out of the universal
    world, of which we form part. What is the future life? The future
    life is the life of our descendants, who are to profit by our
    discoveries.’ ”


Such, then, is the “religion of the future,” by which it is the appointed
task of Masonry to supersede Christianity; such the “progress,”
“civilization,” “perfectibility,” which humanity is to achieve under
Masonic guidance. We have not painted the association in colors of our
own; we have merely produced its official documents, and in the hated
light they leave their own photograph. When society falls under the
influence of such an organization, its demoralization is rapid and
complete. Its circulars regulate the popular elections and control the
votes of parliaments. “Public opinion” is at its beck, the press is its
active instrument. We could quote its instructions to the Italian Deputies
on the Roman question, and a communication of the Grand‐Master of Italy,
sent to all the foreign Grand Lodges, advising a united attack, through
the public mind, on the Carlist movement in Spain. Its theories of
assassination and open rebellion are seldom carried out on its own direct
responsibility. Out of the Masonic lodges arise a multitude of minor
sects, ostensibly independent, but really directed by the brethren. To
these the practical work is committed. As Carbonari, Socialists,
Communists, Internationalists, Mazzinians, they execute orders received
from their common centre. If successful, the result is claimed for the
parent association; if unfortunate, they are disavowed. It is usual to say
that Freemasonry in firmly‐established constitutional states is
comparatively harmless. We are not prepared to affirm that in countries
like the United States or Great Britain the wicked principles of
Continental European Masonry are developed to the same extent
indiscriminately in all the lodges. Where the initiation is supposed never
to advance beyond the three symbolic degrees, the anti‐Catholic principle
of religious indifference is perhaps its most dangerous characteristic.
But this alone is sufficiently repulsive; and the fraternization which
binds together every branch of the association can excuse no individual
member from moral complicity in its worst deeds, wherever perpetrated.

With that keen forecast of danger to the Christian family which has ever
been the characteristic attribute of the Holy See, the popes, from the
first origin of Masonry, saw through its flimsy disguise of benevolent
professions, and over and over again, and chiefly on the eve of those
terrible anti‐social outbursts that have so frequently convulsed Europe
since the formation of the society, raised their prophetic voices,
foretelling the impending storm, denouncing its source, and condemning in
the strongest terms and under the severest penalties all connection with
these secret associations. Princes and peoples disregarded the warning,
and both have suffered for their neglect. Would that at least they had
profited by the lesson! But these eternal enemies of order, emboldened by
their success, are only preparing for a new strife. The state is already
almost everywhere at their control; the church of God everywhere resists.
Against her they now concentrate their warfare. False professions serve no
purpose with the civil government in their own hands, and they have
learned that their hypocrisy does not avail with the church. They drop the
mask. No longer careful to conceal their aim, they make it a public boast.
“Protestantism,” writes B. Konrad from Germany in the _Bauhütte_, a
Masonic paper, “without discipline, faith, or spiritual or moral life,
broken up into hundreds of sects, offers only the spectacle of a corpse in
dissolution. It is not an enemy to oppose us. Our adversary is the Roman‐
Catholic‐Papal‐Infallible Church, with its compact and universal
organization. This is our hereditary, implacable foe. If we are to be true
and honest Freemasons, and wish to promote our society, we must absolutely
cry out with Strauss: We are no longer Christians; we are Freemasons and
nothing else. Amateur Freemasons are no advantage to humanity, and no
credit to our society. Christians or Freemasons, make your choice.”

The church of God fears them not. Her pastors may mourn over the
corruption of morals, the perversion of youth, the irreparable loss of
many souls; but amid the dissolution and universal ruin which infidelity
and revolution are preparing for society, she will stand erect, unshaken,
not shorn of her strength; and when the inevitable revulsion brings
repentant nations to her feet, she will be ready as ever to pour the balm
of religious consolation on their wounds, to bind up their shattered
members, to set humanity once more on the path of true perfectibility, not
to be attained through the impious philosophy of midnight conventicles,
but in the light of the Sun of Justice, preached on the housetops, to the
formation of true Christian brotherhood.




Crown Jewels.


Let’s crown our King with what will show
  His royal power and treasure—
Sharp thorns! ’Tis done! His blood doth flow,
  Of both the might and measure.




Are You My Wife? Chapter II.


By The Author Of “A Salon In Paris Before The War,” “Number Thirteen,”
“Pius VI.,” Etc.



