Chapter II. I Introduce My Wife—She Disappears!


“A nice young gentleman you are, Master Clide, to play off such a trick as
this on your family!” said Admiral de Winton, shaking my hand so
vigorously that I feared he was bent in his indignation on shaking it off.
“Come, sir, what excuse have you to offer for yourself?”

“My dear uncle, I sha’n’t attempt any excuse, for the best reason in the
world, that I have not a decent one. But here is my wife,” I said,
catching sight of her coming up the terrace; “let her plead for me. I
leave my case in her hands.”

Isabel stepped in through the open window, and, going straight up to the
old gentleman, held out her hands, blushing and smiling with the prettiest
little pretence of being ashamed of herself and dreadfully frightened.

“No excuse!” growled the admiral, hollowing out his hands to hold the
soft, pink cheeks, then saluting them with a kiss that resounded through
the room like the double report of a pistol‐shot. “No excuse indeed! You
barefaced hypocrite! How dare you tell me such a crammer? You unmitigated
young rascal, what do you mean by it?”

This series of polite inquiries my uncle fired off, holding Isabel all the
time at arm’s length, with a hand on each shoulder, and looking straight
into her face. She was not the least disconcerted by this singular mode of
apostrophe.

“Don’t scold him! Don’t be angry with him! Please don’t! It was all my
fault,” she said, and looked up at him as if she particularly wanted to
kiss him.

“I’ll horsewhip him! I’ll tie him to the mainmast and flog him!” roared my
uncle.

And then came a second volley of pistol‐shots.

“No, you sha’n’t! If you do, I’ll horsewhip you!” declared Isabel, twining
her arms round the old sailor’s neck, and stamping her tiny foot at him.

My step‐mother made her appearance at this crisis with Sir Simon Harness.
She had driven to meet our guests, but, instead of driving back with them,
she and Sir Simon walked up together from the station, and sent on the
admiral alone in the carriage.

After bidding him a cordial welcome, I presented Isabel to Sir Simon. She
held out her hand. He raised it to his lips, bending his venerable white
head before my young wife with that courtly grace that gave a touch of
old‐fashioned stiffness to his manner towards women, but which was in
reality the genuine expression of chivalrous respect.

Isabel, not apparently satisfied with the stately homage, drew nearer,
and, putting up her face, “May I, Clide?” she said.

Sir Simon naturally did not “pause for a reply,” but taking the blushing
face in his hands, he imprinted a fatherly kiss on her forehead. To say
that I was proud of my wife and delighted with the way she had behaved
towards my two friends would be to convey a very inadequate idea of the
state of my feelings. I was simply inebriated. It is hardly a figure of
speech to say that I did not know whether I was on my head or my heels. I
had looked forward to this meeting with an apprehension which, from being
undefined, was none the less painful, and the relief I experienced at the
successful issue was in proportion great. My step‐mother was evidently
quite as surprised, if in a less degree gratified than myself. The
afternoon passed delightfully, chatting and walking about the park; my two
old friends usurping Isabel completely, making love to her under my eyes
in the most unscrupulous manner, quarrelling as to who should have her arm
when out walking, and sit next to her when they came in. Isabel flirted
with both, utterly regardless of my feelings, and even hinted to me at
lunch that my prophecy with regard to Sir Simon ran a fair chance of
coming true. She came down to dinner arrayed like a fairy, in a dress that
seemed to have been made out of a sunset and trimmed with a rainbow. She
had put on all her jewels—those I had chosen for her, and the diamonds
that came to me from my mother. She wore pearls round her neck, and a row
of diamond stars in her hair; while her arms almost disappeared under the
variety of bracelets of every form and date with which she had loaded
them. It may have been in questionable taste and not very sensible, but
there was an innocent womanly vanity in thus seizing the first available
opportunity of showing herself in her finery that I thought perfectly
delightful. I could see, too, that the admiral and Sir Simon were pleased
at the infantine coquetry, and not a little flattered by it. My step‐
mother alone looked coldly on the proceeding; and while Isabel, sitting
between the two old gentlemen, pointed out for their special admiration
“this bracelet, with the diamond true‐lover’s knot, that Clide gave me the
day after we were engaged, and this blue enamel with the Greek word in
pearls that he bought me the day before we came home,” Mrs. de Winton
dissected her walnuts, and, setting her face like a flint, kept outside
the conversation till the subject changed.

When we assembled in the drawing‐room, Isabel opened a new battery of
fascination that was perhaps the most formidable of all. She began to
sing. The excitement of the jewels, and the sympathetic audience, and the
conscious triumph of the hour, all added, no doubt, to the power and
brilliancy of her voice, which sounded richer, fuller, more entrancing
than I had ever heard it before. She sang all sorts of songs. The admiral
asked for a sea‐song. Isabel knew plenty, comic and dramatic, from “Rule
Britannia” down to “A Life on the Ocean Wave,” which she rang out with a
rollicking zest and spirit that fairly intoxicated the old sailor.

Sir Simon enjoyed an English ballad and an Irish melody. The siren gave
him every one he asked for, old and new. In fact, she surpassed herself in
witchery and skill, and one was at a loss which to admire most, the
artless grace of the woman or the gifts and accomplishments of the artist.
The evening passed rapidly away, and it was past midnight before any one
thought of stirring.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

“Clide,” said my step‐mother next morning, as she was leaving the
breakfast‐room where Isabel and her guests were loitering over their tea‐
cups, while I read the _Times_ in the window, “I wish to speak to you.
Come to me in the library.”

And without waiting for an answer, she walked out. There was no reason why
this commonplace invitation should have brought a sensation of cold down
my back, and of my heart dropping down into my boots; but unaccountably
this double phenomenon was effected in my person. I made a pretence of
going through the leaders before I rose, and then, yawning to give myself
an air of perfect satiety and _ennui_, I sauntered out of the breakfast‐
room, and bent my steps towards the audience‐chamber.

“Clide,” began Mrs. de Winton, when I had closed the door and established
myself on the hearth‐rug, with my back to the fire, “where did your wife
learn singing?”

“Why, in London, I suppose. Where else should she learn it?”

“Did you ask her?” inquired my inquisitor.

“It never occurred to me. Why should it?”

Mrs. de Winton looked at me curiously—not scornfully, as she was
accustomed to do when I committed myself to any ultra‐foolish remark.
Indeed, I thought her face wore an expression gentler and kinder than I
remembered to have seen there since when a child I had seen her look at my
father. She said nothing for a minute. Then fixing her eyes on me with a
glance that sent my heart right out through my heels:

“I have telegraphed to Simpson to come down by the early train to‐day,”
she said.

“The deuce you have!” I exclaimed, and, starting from my impassive
attitude, I dropped my coat‐tails, and stepped off the rug as if it had
suddenly turned into a hot plate.

“Yes,” continued Mrs. de Winton, quite unmoved by my complimentary
ejaculation, “it is my duty, since you are too indifferent to your own
interest to take the....”

“Clide, Clide! Where are you?” cried a sweet voice from the terrace, and,
running up the slopes, Isabel flattened her nose against the window,
peering into the room in search of me. I was so placed that she could not
see me, but she saw my step‐mother. Glad to escape from what threatened to
be a stormy interview, I flew to the window, opened it, and rejoined my
wife.

“Was she scolding you?” asked Isabel, casting a puzzled glance towards the
room where I had so unceremoniously “planted” my step‐mother.

“No, darling,” I answered, laughing.

“What was she saying?” inquired Isabel.

“What an inquisitive little puss it is!” I said, partly amused and partly
at a nonplus for a satisfactory answer.

“Tell me. I’ll go, if you don’t!” And she prepared to carry out the threat
by unlocking her hands and letting go my arm.

But I seized the refractory hands, and held them tight.

“Go!” I said, laughing at her in a most tantalizing way, while she
struggled in vain to set herself free.

“Tell me what you were talking about. I insist on knowing, Clide!”
repeated Isabel, stamping her foot like a naughty child.

I began to dread a repetition of the other morning. Such an exhibition
within hearing of my uncle and Sir Simon would have been so mortifying to
my pride that I was ready to sign away my lawful authority for the rest of
my married life rather than undergo it; so pretending not to notice the
gathering thunder‐clouds:

“My lovely tyrant!” I said, caressing her with the sweetest of smiles, as
we walked past the drawing‐room window, “you don’t suspect me of having a
secret my wife should not share? I was only chaffing you just now for fun,
you looked so mystified. But the fact is, I was put out by the old lady’s
telling me she expected Simpson down here to‐day.”

“And who is Simpson?” inquired Isabel.

“The family lawyer.”

“Ah! Did you tell her to send for him?”

“I tell her! Why, child, if I had, I shouldn’t have been put out to hear
he was coming.”

The question was unpleasantly suggestive. It implied a suspicion in her
mind, which something in my tone resented, probably, for she added
quickly:

“Oh! of course not. I didn’t mean that.”

Then we went on a few steps without speaking.

“Simpson’s a capital fellow,” I resumed, breaking the pause that was
rather awkward. “I’m very fond of him, and shouldn’t the least object to
his coming down here at any other time; only just now it’s a bore. We
wanted to have my uncle and Sir Simon all to ourselves. However, I dare
say you’ll like Simpson too when you see him, though he is of the race of
Philistines. If he’s a shrewd lawyer, he’s a trusty friend and as honest
as the sun. No fear of my ‘doing’ my heiress wife in the settlements,” I
continued laughingly, “or cheating her out of any of her lawful rights,
while old Dominie Simpson has the whip‐hand over me!”

“He’s to be here to‐day, you said?” she remarked interrogatively, as we
entered the house.

“Yes. If he comes by the early train, he may be in time for dinner,” I
replied.

Mr. Simpson did come by the early train, and he was in time for dinner. He
was even an hour and a half beforehand with it, and spent most of the
intervening time closeted with my step‐mother in her private apartment.

My wife appeared in a second edition of sunset and rainbow, and flashed
and sparkled with jewels as on the previous evening.

She received our old friend very graciously, drawing just the right line
of demarcation between her friendly graciousness to him and the daughter‐
like familiarity of her manner towards Sir Simon and her uncle. Dinner
passed off very merrily; but when we rejoined the ladies in the drawing‐
room, I was surprised to find Isabel fast asleep in the depths of a
monumental arm‐chair. She jumped up at the sound of my voice, and, rubbing
her eyes, said she was ashamed to be caught napping, but she was so tired!

“Hollo, Simpson, this is a sorry lookout for you!” exclaimed the admiral.
“We’ve been telling him to get ready his legal soul to be charmed and
devoured by the siren.”

“Oh! I am so sorry,” said Isabel, looking at the old lawyer as if nothing
in this world could give her half so much pleasure as to charm away his
soul on the spot; “but these naughty gentlemen kept me up so late last
night, and made me sing so much, that I have not a note in my voice to‐
night, and I’m just dead with sleep.”

Simpson looked wofully disappointed.

“My pretty pet,” said the admiral, drawing her to him and stroking her
head as if she had been a kitten, “then you sha’n’t sing!”

“If you should lie down for half an hour, dearest,” I said, “do you think
that would rest you, and you might be able to give us just one song?”

I was anxious that Simpson should hear her. He sang a very good song
himself, and his heart seemed set on it.

“Perhaps,” she said, brightening up. “I’ll try, at any rate.”

I gave her my arm, and we went up‐stairs together to her room.

“Don’t come in, or else we’ll begin to talk, and that will wake me up,”
she said, seeing me about to enter; “and I’m so dead with sleep I’m sure I
shall be off in five minutes, if you leave me.”

I did as she wished, and returned to the drawing‐room, where I found my
step‐mother in conclave with the three men on more practical matters than
songs and sirens.

Simpson had been summoned for the sole purpose of discussing and settling
what ought in the proper course of things to have been discussed and
settled before my marriage, and Sir Simon Harness was just as anxious as
Mrs. de Winton that everything should be made straight and clear with
regard to Isabel’s fortune and my due control over it. The admiral alone
was indifferent about it, and exhibited a sailor‐like contempt for the
whole affair—in fact, intimated that it was out of all sense and reason
and morality that I should have got a penny of fortune with such a wife.

“I call it immoral, sir,” he declared, scowling at me from under his bushy
eyebrows; “you ought to be ashamed of yourself.”

“And so I am, my dear uncle,” I replied hastily. “And that’s just why I
hate having the subject attacked in this precipitate way, as if I wanted
to grab up her money the moment I could lay my hands upon it.”

“Then you can lay your hands upon it?” observed Simpson quietly.

“If I choose,” I said; “my wife is of age, and....”

“Of age!” echoed the admiral, throwing up his hands in amaze. “Why, I
should have given the child fifteen at most!”

“She looks young,” I remarked coolly, while interiorly I was bursting with
conceit; “but she is of age, so there is no reason in the world why I
should bother myself or her about this confounded fortune; besides, I
don’t care a rap if I never see a penny of it!”

“Bravo, Clide! That’s right, my boy!” cried my uncle, clapping me soundly
on the back. “You’re a chip of the old block, and it does my heart good to
hear you. Why, when I was a youngster, ...”

“De Winton,” interrupted Sir Simon, “don’t you think you had better retire
to the piano? Simpson has not come down all the way from London to be
entertained with the follies of your youth. It’s most important that we
should have his opinion about these matters; and if you can’t hold your
tongue or talk sense, you had better make yourself scarce.”

“Talk on,” said the admiral; “I won’t hinder you.” And so they did. I sat
there, feeling as if I were on my trial for some sort of misdemeanor, the
nature of which was unknown to me, but the consequences of which would be
probably appalling if the misdemeanor could be brought home to me. Sir
Simon and my step‐mother were judge and jury, Simpson was counsel for some
mythical antagonist, and the admiral stood by in the capacity of a neutral
but benevolent spectator. Both counsel and judge had been made acquainted
by Mrs. de Winton with all she had to tell. How much or how little that
might be, in Mrs. de Winton’s opinion, I could not say. But clearly on
some shallow inductive evidence she had made out a case vaguely
unfavorable for my wife. No one accused her of anything. Not a word was
said that my irritable pride could take hold of and resent. They spoke of
her as a child whose innocence and ignorance made it doubly incumbent on
them to legislate for and protect, since I was unfit for the duty, while
my morbid delicacy they ignored as beneath contempt.

“We must keep him out of it altogether, I see,” observed Sir Simon when
the conversation had lasted about half an hour. “Leave me to deal with the
child. She won’t suspect me of having married her for her money.”

There was no gainsaying this. Still, I was entering a protest against the
way in which my wishes were being set at naught, when tea was brought in
and cut me short.

“Go and see if Isabel be awake, Clide,” said my uncle, glad to put an end
to the subject; “but don’t disturb her if she’s asleep. She’s not to be
worried for old fogies like us, mind.”

I ran up the stairs lightly, and opened the door as stealthily as a thief.
The light was out. “Isabel!” I said in a low voice. No answer.

I closed the door as noiselessly as I had opened it, and returned to the
drawing‐room.

“She’s as fast asleep as a baby, uncle,” I said. “So I followed your
advice, and left her to sleep it out.”

“Poor little pet! We kept her at it too long last night. You must not do
this sort of thing again, Clide,” observed Sir Simon. “It’s a delicate
flower that you’ve got there, and you must take care of it.”

I expressed my hearty concurrence in this opinion and advice.

Isabel’s absence made a great blank in the evening; but as my three
friends had not met for a considerable time, and I had not seen them for
more than a year, we had a great deal to say to each other, and there was
no lack of conversation. Mrs. de Winton remained with us till eleven, when
she withdrew, leaving us to discuss punch and politics by ourselves. It
was past midnight when we separated. I went into my dressing‐room. The
candles were lighted, but, contrary to his custom, Stanton, my man, was
not there. I rang the bell; but while my hand was still on the rope, the
sound of his voice reached me through the door—not the outer door, but the
door leading into my wife’s room. He was speaking in a loud, argumentative
tone, and was stuttering violently, which he always did when excited. I
flung open the door, and beheld him standing in the middle of the room
with Susette, my wife’s maid, and Mrs. de Winton, who was wrapped in a
dressing‐gown and her feet bare, as if she had been called suddenly out of
bed, and had rushed in in terrified haste.

“Clide!”

“Monsieur!”

“Sir ...” exclaimed the three in one voice when they saw me.

“Good God! what is the matter? Isabel!”

I flew to the bed and drew back the curtains.

The bed was empty.

_My wife was gone!_

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

Here Clide’s journal breaks off. A long gap ensues, and we must fill it up
from the recollections of others. The scene that followed the discovery of
his young wife’s flight was not to be described. First, it was incredulity
that filled the old Moat. “Gone! Fled! Nonsense!” protested Admiral de
Winton, walking up and down the corridor, where he had rushed out in semi‐
nocturnal attire when Stanton had burst into his room with the dreadful
intelligence. The old sailor was scarcely to be recognized in the
_déshabillé_ of his coatless and wigless person, as he blustered loudly,
his hands in his pockets, zigzagging to and fro as if he were pacing the
quarter‐deck and expostulating angrily with a surly crew.

Sir Simon Harness was calmer. He did not contradict his friend’s vehement
assertion that it was all a trick of Isabel’s to terrify us; he even made
a show of pooh‐poohing the notion of a flight as absurd, ridiculous, not
to be entertained for a moment. But there was not that heartiness in his
voice or manner that carries conviction to others. Mrs. de Winton also
made a semblance of chiming in with the admiral’s view, but it was a
palpable failure. Mr. Simpson was the only one who did not try to act his
part in the kindly comedy. He was fully convinced that it was no comedy,
but a most miserable drama that was beginning for the son of his old
friend and client. He had mistrusted Isabel from the first moment he fixed
his keen, legal vision on her. Mrs. de Winton had, it is true, inoculated
him beforehand with a good share of her own mistrust, and he came to the
scrutiny with a jaundiced eye; prejudiced, and predetermined not to be
fascinated or beguiled out of his severest judgment. He regarded hers as a
case of which he was to take a strictly legal view, and which was to be
investigated, sifted, and proved before he would endorse it. It was a very
odd case on the face of it; but Benjamin Simpson had had many odd cases to
deal with in the course of his experience, and he flattered himself he was
not to be baffled by a child scarcely out of her teens. She might be very
clever, and succeed in hoodwinking a rich young gentleman into marrying
her, on the strength of a fictitious story of misery and a still more
fictitious one of heiresship; but she was not likely to stand Simpson’s
cross‐examination long without breaking down. Such ungallant reflections
as these had been passing through the lawyer’s brain while he sipped his
claret and watched the fair face that sat opposite to him at the dinner‐
table, glancing at him with eyes that flashed more brightly than her
jewels. He had made up his mind, as he looked at her, that she was a
delusion; she would disappear sooner or later. The news of her flight was
therefore only a surprise by its suddenness. Clide was rushing all over
the basement story, calling out Isabel’s name into every room, while Mrs.
de Winton and her own and Isabel’s maid were pursuing a similar search in
the upper part of the house. The rambling old mansion was echoing from end
to end with opening and shutting of doors and cries of the fugitive’s
name; but no answer was heard except the echoes of the voices and the
doors.

“My dear boy,” said the admiral, pausing on his imaginary quarterdeck, as
Clide came up the stairs, “I’ll stake my head on it, the sly little puss
is playing a game of hide‐and‐seek with us, and laughing fit to kill
herself in some cupboard or other, while we are kicking up this row; take
my word for it, the best thing we can do is to go quietly to our own beds,
and before long she’ll come out of her hiding‐place.”

Clide muttered an impatient “stuff and nonsense!” Was she likely to perish
herself such a night as this playing hide‐and‐seek for their amusement—she
that could not bear a breath of cold? Even crossing through a fireless
room she would shiver like an aspen. The admiral grunted something about
“deserving to be whipped,” and turned to his zigzag promenade again.

Stanton and some of the other men‐servants had gone out to scour the park
and the gardens; they had been absent now long enough to have discovered
something, if there was anything to discover, but the stars made no answer
to their calling. “Madame! Mistress!” they shouted, till at last they gave
it up, and retraced their steps to the house. Clide had been going to the
window in a restless way, looking out into the night, and listening as if
he expected to hear the silence send him back some sign. It was impossible
to say whether he believed the least bit in the hide‐and‐seek theory,
whether he had a lingering hope of hearing Isabel call out to him or
appear from some corner, or whether he was just in that condition of mind
that precludes alike sitting still or doing something. He might be excited
by hope, or he might be stupefied by despair. He was as white as ashes,
and came and went with the quick, unsteady gait of a man who has lost his
self‐command, and is swayed only by the force of some terrible emotion.
Clide’s face was a fine, manly one; it would have been noble but for the
weakness of the chin and a certain tremulous movement of the lower
lip—perhaps of both; for the upper one was shaded by a light‐brown
moustache that prevented you seeing whether it had the firmness that would
have redeemed the lower one. The eyes were expressive, rather sleepy when
the face was in repose; but they woke up with flashes of lightning when he
was excited, and transfigured the whole countenance into one of energy and
power. There was no need to be a physiognomist to judge of the character
of such a face. The most unskilled observer could read it like a book.
There were all the elements of a stormy life there—passive strength, and
passions that needed only a spark to kindle them into a flame; a man who,
as he was taken, would be as easily led as a lamb or as intractable as a
young hyena. He had started in life with the fixed purpose of steering
clear of storms, of saving himself trouble and avoiding fuss. Poor Clide!
Life, he fancied, had a lake of oil at the entrance of the wide sea where
storms blew and waves roared angrily, and he had made up his mind to
anchor in the lake, and never venture beyond its peaceful margin.

The servants had come back—those that had been scouring the park—and the
others, who had been slamming doors all through the house, were
congregating in twos and threes upon the stairs leading to the broad
landing off which their young mistress’ room stood, its door wide open,
with a dismal, vacant air about it already.

“I see her! There she is!” exclaimed Clide. He had been staring for some
minutes out of the window, and suddenly bounded down the great oak stairs,
and out in the path, making for a clump of laurel‐trees far down near the
water. The admiral, Sir Simon, Simpson, and Mrs. de Winton pressed into
the embrasure of the window, the servants peeping over their heads to
catch a sight of the figure he was pursuing; but they saw nothing except
the winter trees, that stood like silver against the sky, while their
straggling shadows lay black upon the lawn. Still Clide bounded on,
calling out Isabel! Isabel! as he ran, and still no sound answered him;
the thud of his footfall on the frosty grass came sharply distinct in the
silence.

“The boy is dazed!” muttered his uncle; “it was a shadow he saw. But, no!
By Jove, there she is!” Clide was now close upon the laurels, that looked
like a black mound in the moonlight. The group in the window saw a white,
crouching figure rise slowly at his approach; he stopped, uttered a cry of
disappointment, and turned drearily back towards the house.

“What is it? Who is it?” shouted several voices; but before Clide answered
a moonbeam lighted up the figure of a deer, as it glided lightly over the
sward, and disappeared into the distant copse.

Instead of entering the house at once, Clide wandered round towards the
stables. It occurred to him that something in that region might suggest a
clew to the mode of his wife’s escape. He was quickly undeceived. Every
door was locked. There was no sign of any horse having disturbed the
slumbers of its companions.

“There is no use in your passing the night out of doors,” said Sir Simon,
who came to see where Clide had gone. “Come in, and let us put our heads
together to see what is to be done. I’m inclined to believe with De Winton
that it is a trick, and that the foolish child is amusing herself at
seeing us all out of doors searching for her.”

Whether this was honest or not, Clide felt it was meant in kindness. He
let his old friend draw his arm within his and lead him back into the
house. It was lighted up as for an impromptu illumination; every servant,
male and female, was afoot, and they had busied themselves in and out of
all the up‐stair rooms that for years had been untenanted; and as it was
necessary to do something, they lighted candles.

“Suppose it is not a trick!” said Clide, looking into Sir Simon’s face
with a terrible question in his eyes.

“That’s what we have got to find out,” replied the baronet evasively.
“Meantime, come up and let us hear what the others have to say.”

They had nothing to say. Presently Mrs. de Winton remarked:

“I wonder what dress she had on? If she kept on her jewels, and that light
gauze one, with the low body and short sleeves, she wore at dinner, she
can’t have gone far.”

They, went into the empty room to investigate. The jewels were gone, every
one she had worn; there were the empty cases. But the light gauze dress
was there hanging in the wardrobe, as if her maid had carefully put it
away. What she had put on to replace it was the next point which Mr.
Simpson insisted on clearing up. All the elegant dresses of the young
bride’s trousseau were tossed out of drawers and wardrobes by
Susette—Susette had been engaged for her by Clide himself after their
marriage—and counted over, till one was found missing in the roll: the
claret‐colored silk in which she had travelled down from London, and had
never worn since. It was the most appropriate dress of all she had for a
midnight flight, and, being dark, would escape observation. Mr. Simpson
seized immediately on this, “making a point” of it in his legal way, that
so exasperated Clide he could have flown at the lawyer’s throat and
strangled him on the spot. He resisted the impulse, and turned away,
inviting Mrs. de Winton by a sign to go with him. He walked into his own
dressing‐room, and, when his step‐mother had followed him, he closed the
door, and took a turn in the room with a quick, passionate step.

“What in the name of heaven can it be?” he said, stopping abruptly and
coming close up to her, as she stood by the mantel‐piece.

“She is gone,” answered his step‐mother. “I hardly doubted it for an
instant. I have been expecting some such catastrophe for several days
past. If you ask me why, I cannot tell you. I somehow never trusted.... My
dear Clide,” she continued in an earnest tone of kindness, quite unlike
her usual cold manner to him, “I wish with all my heart I could do
something or say something to comfort you or help you. Can you throw no
light at all on it from your own knowledge of things? Is there nothing in
what you know, or in what you do not know, about her antecedents and
connections to help you to form some guess? Where can she have gone to,
and who has she gone with?”

Clide clenched his hand, and moved away with an expression of anguish that
was dreadful.

“Gone to!” he repeated suddenly. “Why, what fools we are not to have seen
to that at once! But it’s not too late....” He pulled out his watch....
“It’s just three‐quarters of an hour since we missed her. Sir Simon and I
will saddle a couple of horses and ride both ways, for Glanivold and
Lanfarl. If she is making for either, we may overtake her.”

He was going to the door, but Mrs. de Winton laid her hand on his arm.
“Not three‐quarters of an hour since we missed her, but she may be gone
more than three hours. It was scarcely eight o’clock when she came up‐
stairs to lie down, and now it’s ten minutes past twelve. Supposing she’s
gone to the station....”

“Nonsense!” broke in Clide; “the station is three hours’ walk from this.
She could no more do it than an infant.”

“I’m only _supposing_; one must suppose something,” replied his step‐
mother patiently. “The train leaves at a quarter to twelve; so if that
were her object, it is too late to stop her.”

“There’s something too absurd in the idea! It’s simply impossible!”
declared Clide with a vehemence that carried no sense of conviction with
it—rather the contrary. “It’s absurd to contemplate it,” he repeated; “but
if you would sleep easier for having the thing certified, I’ll jump into
the saddle, and ride to the station and inquire.”

“Inquire what? Consider what you are going to do, Clide,” said Mrs. de
Winton, holding him back firmly—“raise a hue and cry after your wife as if
she were a runaway thief! Suppose it turns out after all to be a trick,
and that we see her emerge out of some closet or corner before you come
back; how will you look after sending it over the country that your wife
disappeared one night? Do you imagine the world will believe the story of
the game of hide‐and‐seek?”

Before he could reply Sir Simon and the admiral burst into the room.

“We found this on her dressing‐table,” said the admiral, handing his
nephew a note. Clide took it. A cold chill ran through his blood. He tore
open the letter. It ran thus:

“Clide, I am going to leave you. I don’t ask you to forgive me. You can
never do that. But God help me! I shall suffer for having so wickedly
deceived you. I should not have been worthy of you, even if I had been as
true as I have been false. But I loved you, and I shall never love anybody
else. Don’t try to find me. You will never find me. Good‐by, Clide. Forget
me and be happy.

“Your wicked but remorseful and loving

Isabel.”

The letter dropped from the young man’s hand, and he fell to the ground
with a cry.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

We return to Clide’s journal:

The sun was shining over the sea—the strong‐waved sea that washes the
northern coast of France, the country of legends and cider, and gray ruins
and chivalry, and all that survives in the France of to‐day of the France
of long ago, the “plaisant pays de France” that poets sang to Marie Stuart
in her happy days of young queenhood. There to the right, as the steamer
paddled towards the port, stood the cliff where William of Normandy
harangued his Norsemen before they embarked with him to snatch from Harold
by force the crown he had not been able by fraud to prevent his assuming.
Dieppe lay twinkling in the sunlight below, a town of gossip and carved
ivory and many odors. As we entered the harbor, a strain of wild,
plaintive music came floating towards us from the shore. It was the hymn
of the fishermen’s wives, pulling the fishing smacks along the pier.
Children were toddling by the side of the mothers, and clutching by the
rope with their small fingers, while their shrill trebles piped in chorus
with the elders. A pretty picture, if I had been in a mood to admire it.
But the gloom within quenched all the brightness without.

The boat was steered alongside the quay, where half the town, it seemed to
me, had assembled to jeer at our pea‐green faces, as we emerged from our
separate purgatories and staggered up the gangway. I never feel so
thorough a misanthrope as when I see my fellow‐creatures enjoying the
humiliation of my steamboat misery, and hear them chuckling over me as I
pass along the plank that leads from deck to dry land. On this particular
occasion I remember with what a vehemence of hatred I resented their
inhumanity, and I assumed as defiant an air as was compatible with my
abject bodily and mental condition, as I marched on with my fellow‐
victims, and passed between two hedges of eager, staring eyes. My uncle
was with me. But he was not abject. He was far removed from such a
wretched infirmity as sea‐sickness, and nothing but his kindheartedness
prevented him from joining with the chucklers who were making merry at our
expense. It was almost an aggravation of my own suffering to see the
intensity of his sympathy, the way in which he was perpetually mounting
guard beside me to ward off any random shaft that the chance remarks of
others every now and then aimed at me.

I had now spent six weary months prosecuting my search, the most
extraordinary and unfortunate that ever man was engaged in, and up to the
day I started for Dieppe I had failed to obtain the smallest clew. I had
left nothing untried. I had stimulated the activity of Scotland Yard by
reckless liberality; I had set the whole detective force in motion, but to
no purpose.

I had had recourse to the mysterious column in the _Times_ for months
together; but the agony of feeling that my appeals to Isabel to “come back
to her husband, or communicate with him by letter,” was making all the
breakfast‐tables in the kingdom laugh, brought no response from the
fugitive herself. All this time my uncle seconded me by his exertions and
supported me by his kindness. I think I should have gone mad, if it had
not been for him. He never tired of my lamentations, my long, sullen fits
of gloom, the wearisome refrain of my self‐reproach, my endless wondering
at the behavior of Isabel, and my cursing and swearing at the stupidity of
the Scotland Yard people. He bore with me as patiently as a mother with a
sick child. My step‐mother had talked him into her belief that Isabel had
been on the stage, and that the most likely place to hear of her would be
amongst managers and play‐actors. There was something utterly revolting to
me in this notion, and I burst out into such uncontrollable anger one day
when my uncle was arguing in favor of it with a degree of sense that was
quite unanswerable, that he determined never to broach the supposition
again to me. This did not prevent him from following up the idea by
employing agents in every direction to hunt the theatres both of London
and the provincial towns. Meanwhile, I was secretly doing the same. I
could not look the thing bravely in the face, even with him; but I had in
my innermost heart a dread, amounting at times to certainty, that he was
right, and that if ever I found my wife it would be in the green‐room or
on the stage. I discovered afterwards that my dear old uncle knew
perfectly well the game I was playing, but he left me under the delusion
that he believed in my disbelief, and so spared me the shame I morbidly
shrank from. More than once a false alarm led me to fancy that these were
realized, and that she was in the hands of a manager, and then my
sensation was one of poignant misery, almost of despair. While I knew
nothing I might yet hope. My feelings resembled that of the French miser
who, while looking for the will that if found would rob him of a legacy,
confessed naively: “Je cherche en priant Dieu de ne pas trouver.”

I was sitting at breakfast in my lodgings in Piccadilly one morning when
my uncle came suddenly in, and said abruptly:

“You told me once that the sign by which the police could positively
identify her was a silver tooth?”

“Yes,” I replied, and my heart thumped against my ribs; “a silver tooth in
the left jaw, rather far back.”

“Did it never occur to you to make inquiries amongst the dentists?”

“No, that never occurred to me! But now that you mention it, it seems very
strange that it should not. I quite remember her speaking to me of a
clever one who had put in the silver tooth for her; how he had at first
been obstinate and annoyed about it, and then when it was done how pleased
he was with it. How stupid of me not to have thought of it before!” I
cried in vexation; “but to‐morrow I will begin and set inquiries on foot
in this direction.”

“You needn’t trouble about it,” said my uncle; “I’ve found the man who did
it.”

“You have!” I cried. “And he has seen her! He has told you something! For
heaven’s sake, uncle, speak at once. What does the man know?”

“No great things,” answered my uncle, stepping from the hearth‐rug, where
he had been standing with his back to the clock, and flinging himself into
an arm‐chair. “It seems that your step‐mother’s fancy was the right one
after all; the child _was_ brought up for public singing, and she was here
ten days ago. For aught this dentist can tell, she may be here still; but
I think not. She came to him to have something done to this identical
silver tooth. It was hurting her, and she was in a great state about it,
because she had just got an engagement to sing at a provincial theatre
this season; she didn’t say where, but the last time he saw her—she went
to him for several days running—she was fidgetting about the weather—you
remember we had some stiffish gales last week—and wondering what sort of
passage the people would have who were crossing the Channel with the wind
so high. He could give me no idea what port she had in her mind, or in
fact anything but just what I tell you. Well, I thought it was as well to
make inquiries before I set you on the go again, so I telegraphed to the
police at all the French ports, and just a minute ago I got this from
Dieppe.”

He handed the telegram to me: “Beautiful young woman, answers to
description. Landed on Saturday; sings to‐night. Hôtel Royal. Elderly man
with her.” There was not a doubt in my mind but that this was Isabel. The
elderly man must be the villain who passed himself off as her uncle. I
said so; my uncle agreed with me.

“The dentist fellow described him just as you do,” he continued—“a gruff
old man, with a brown coat and broad‐brimmed hat, and a disagreeable
snuffle when he talked. He used to go with her a year ago, when she got
the silver tooth made, and he was with her the other day. And now, my boy,
when are we to start for Dieppe? Let’s look at the time‐table.”

We started by the tidal train, and reached Dieppe about five P.M. that
evening. It was the season, and every hotel was brimful of English and
French fashion, come to bathe itself in the briny wave of that strong salt
sea. We went straight to the Hôtel Royal, but the landlord had not even a
garret where he could put up a bed for us. The lodging‐houses in the whole
length of the Rue Aguado were overflowing, and we were finally driven to
explore the Faubourg de la Barre, where we were thankful to be taken in by
a garrulous old landlady, who showed us two small rooms on the first
floor. I was not in a frame of mind to quarrel with the accommodation, but
I heard the admiral relieving himself in strong vernacular on the
corkscrew staircase.

We deposited our light _impedimenta_ in these lodgings, and then went out
to see what information was to be gathered concerning the object of our
journey. The first thing we beheld on entering the Grande Rue was a
placard announcing “La Sonnambula” for that evening; the _prima donna_ was
to be a “gifted young soprano _débutante_, Signorina Graziella.” We went
to the box‐office; every place was taken, and we had only a prospect of
standing‐room in the space between the first tier and the balcony. The
_prima donna_ had been heralded by such a flourish of trumpets that the
whole population was eager to hear her—so the box‐keeper informed us.

By this time it was six o’clock; but I was fed by something stronger than
meat, and it never occurred to me that since my breakfast, which had been
suspended before I was half through it, I had tasted no food. My uncle’s
sympathy, however, being of the healthiest kind, was not proof against the
demands of nature, and he suggested that it was time to think of dinner. I
was ashamed of having so entirely forgotten his comfort in my own
absorbing preoccupation, and proposed that we should go to the _table‐
d’hôte_ of the Hôtel Royal, which was served at six. I would have eaten
merely to keep him company; but the first spoonful of soup seemed to choke
me. The brave old sailor was near losing temper with me at last, and vowed
that he would wash his hands of me if I didn’t eat my dinner. He had
roughed it on many a heavy sea, and in nine cases out of ten it was his
hearty appetite that kept him afloat and pulled him through. In any case,
he would not admit fasting to be an element in sentiment with rational
human beings. He called for a bottle of Château Lafitte, and insisted on
my helping him to empty it. I did my best, and the result was that before
dinner was over the generous wine repaid me for the effort, and enabled me
to take, if not a more hopeful, at any rate a less utterly disconsolate,
view of life, and of the particular chapter of it I was now passing
through. It had a still kinder effect on my uncle; his heart soon warmed
by the juice of the red grape to such an extent that he talked of my
miserable position cheerfully, as if it had been the most ordinary
occurrence, and as if there was no reason why I should despond about it at
all. He persisted in treating Isabel as a naughty child who had never been
taught submission to the rules of life, and broke through them the moment
she found they trammelled her. It was no unprecedented event for an
excitable young thing to go mad about the stage; there were, on the
contrary, plenty of instances of it. He could count them on his
fingers—young ladies who had gone quite mad about it, and who had calmed
down, when the freak was over, into excellent wives and mothers. Why
should not this silly little puss do the same? I did not dare remind him
of those terrible words, written in her own hand: “If I were as true as I
have been false.”

It was a solace to hear him rambling on in his good‐natured, foolish talk.
Only when he repeated with stout emphasis for the tenth time that she was
herself the victim and dupe of the designing old scoundrel who called her
his niece, I ventured to remark: “But Simpson says....” “Simpson is an
ass!” snarled my uncle, and I at once assented, and declared my belief
that Simpson was an ass.

The moment we had finished our Château Lafitte we rose and left the
crowded room, where new‐comers were still pouring in to seize upon every
seat as it was vacated. I had been casting uneasy glances towards the
door, after first quickly scanning the three hundred heads that were
bobbing up and down over as many soup‐plates when we entered; but my fears
were vain. Isabel was not likely to run such a risk, if she wished—as
evidently she did wish—to remain undiscovered. I overheard some persons
near us discussing the appearance of the _prima donna_, who, they
observed, never showed herself off the stage. Many curious idlers had
wasted hours lolling about the hotel door, in hopes of seeing her come out
to walk or bathe; but since she had been in Dieppe—four days now—no one
had caught a glimpse of her. They little dreamed, as they bandied this
gossip with one another, that they were stabbing a heart with every word.
The persistent avoidance of notice was but too significant to me of the
_prima donna’s_ identity. It wanted yet half an hour of the time for the
theatre, and my uncle said we might as well spend it inhaling the fresh
breeze that was blowing from the north, borne in by the advancing tide. He
linked his arm in mine, and we sauntered down to the beach. The waves were
breaking in low thunder‐sobs upon the shingles, and all the town that was
not dining was out of doors watching them. The Etablissement was crowded,
and the music of the band that was playing there came floating towards us
with every roll of the waves; but the hum of the chattering crowd rose
distinctly above the sobbing of the sea and the murmur of the more distant
orchestra. I was too excited, too absorbed in my own thoughts, to realize
distinctly anything around me, but I quite well remember how I was
impressed in a vague yet vivid way by the contrast between the sad,
majestic tide heaving and surging on one side, and the human stream
rippling to and fro on the other, dressed out in such tawdry gear, and
simpering and chattering and subsiding like the frothy foam on the
billows. I can remember, too, how I turned, irritated and sick, from the
sight of it to the prettier, purer one of children playing on the sward
beside the beach. The peals of their innocent laughter did not jar upon
me; there was no discord between it and the dirge‐like sound of the water
washing the shore. All this passed and repassed before me like something
in a dream.

But the time was hurrying on, and now I was impatient to see my doom with
my own eyes, or to know that the reprieve was prolonged, and that I might
yet cling to a plank of hope.

“I think it’s time we were going,” I remarked, pulling out my watch; “the
crowd is thinning, and I suppose it is bound in the same direction.” We
were late, as I expected; every spot was filled in the little theatre when
we arrived, and the performance had begun. As the box‐keeper opened the
door to admit us to our standing‐post on the first tier, we were almost
thrown back by the roar of applause that burst upon our ears; it rose and
fell like a mighty gust of wind, and seemed literally to make the ground
shake under our feet and the walls tremble round us. For a moment I was
stunned. There was a lull, and then we went in. The singer had left the
stage, but the air was still vibrating with the melody of her voice and of
the rapturous echoes it had awakened. A fine barytone was confiding his
despair and his hopes to the audience, but it fell idly on their ears
after what had gone before. The _Sonnambula_ appeared again; the first
notes were greeted by another salvo of bravos, louder, more impassioned
and prolonged, than the first; again and again the plaudits rose,
handkerchiefs fluttered, and hands clapped—the house was electrified. She
could bear it no longer; overcome by emotion, she held out her arms to the
spectators in an entreating gesture that seemed to say: “Enough! Spare me;
I can bear no more!” It was either an impulse of childlike nature or the
most finished piece of art ever seen on the stage. Whatever it was, the
effect was tremendous. I suppose it could not really have been so, but I
would have sworn that the house rocked. It was a sustained roll of human
thunder from the pit to the gallery, and from the gallery to the pit.
Isabel—for it was she—made another passionate response with the same
childlike, bewitching grace, and rushed off the scene. I was rooted to the
spot, not daring to look at my uncle; not thinking of him, of anything. I
was like a man in a nightmare, held fast in the grasp of a spectre,
longing to call for help, but powerless to utter a sound.

The manager came forward and addressed a few words of expostulation to the
audience; implored them to control their ecstasies a little for the sake
of the sensitive and gifted being who had called them forth. He was
nervous and at the same time triumphant. He was answered by a loud buzz of
assent. The _Sonnambula_ once more came forth, and this time a deep,
suppressed murmur was the only interruption. The dress, the glare, the
gaslight, the strange way the lustrous coils of her black hair were
arranged—tumbled in a sort of studied tangle all over the forehead—while a
veil, half on, half off, concealed part of the face, the entire
transformation of the _mise‐en‐scène_, in fact, might easily have
disguised her identity from eyes less preternaturally keen than mine; but
my glance had scarcely fallen on the frail, shrouded figure, as it glided
in from the background, than I knew that I beheld my wife; beheld her
clasped—gracious heavens! yes, I saw it, and stood there motionless and
dumb—clasped by the man who was howling out some idiotic lamentations. She
stepped forward, and began to sing. Her head was first slightly bowed over
her breast, and her hands clasped and hanging. The first bars were warbled
out in a kind of bird‐like whisper, as if she were in a dream; but little
by little they grew higher, more sonorous, until, carried away by the
power of the music and her own magnificent interpretation of it, she flung
back her head, and let the gossamer cloud fall from it, revealing the
unshrouded contour of the face, upturned, inspired, all alight with the
triumph of the hour, while the bell‐like notes rang out with a breadth and
pathos that melted and stirred every heart in that vast crowd like touches
of fire. It was a vision of beauty that defies all words. I neither spoke
nor moved while the song lasted; but when the last chord died out, and the
pent‐up hearts of the listeners broke forth in new peals that seemed to
sweep over the songstress in a flood of joy and triumph, I awoke and came
to my senses.

“Come away!” I gasped, and turned to move out. But the words stuck in my
throat. My uncle had caught the delirium, and was cheering and bravoing
like a maniac. “Glorious! Grand, by Jove! Encore! Splendid!” He was
shouting like a madman, whirling his hat and stamping. His brown face was
young again. I never beheld such a transformation in any human
countenance.

“Are you mad, sir?” I shrieked into his ear, while I clutched his arm.

I suppose he was mad; I know he kept on the same frantic shouts and
clappings for several minutes, not paying any more heed to me than to the
floor he was so vigorously stamping. I was frightened at last. I thought
anguish and shame for me had driven him out of his mind; so, taking him
gently by the arm, I said I wanted to speak to him. He let me push him on
before me, and we got out. He was still much excited, and neither of us
spoke till we were in the open air.

“My dear boy,” he said suddenly, with a shamefaced look, “I couldn’t help
it for the life of me! By Jove, but it was the grandest thing I ever heard
in my life. The house reeled round you. I would stake my head there wasn’t
a sane man in it but yourself!”

I laughed bitterly. The irony of the words was dreadful. “Sane?” I cried.
“You think I was sane? I thank heaven I behaved like a sane man; but if I
had been within reach of that ruffian’s throat, I’d have dashed his brains
out as ruthlessly as any escaped maniac from Bedlam. I would do it now, if
I had him!”

My uncle stopped and looked at me. He was thoroughly sobered, and I could
see that he was terrified. He told me long afterwards that he never could
have believed passion could transfigure a face as it did mine; he said I
had _murder_ written in my eyes as plainly as ever it was written on a
printed page. And I believe him. I felt I could have committed murder at
that moment. I would have killed that man, if I had held him, if the
gallows had been there to hang me the next hour. I have never felt the
same towards murderers since that moment. It was an awful revelation to me
of the hidden springs of crime that may lie deep down in a man’s heart,
and never be suspected even by himself, until the touch that can wake them
into deadly life has come. I can never think of that evening without an
humbling sense of my own innate wickedness, of the benign mercy that
overruled that frightful impulse. Given the immediate opportunity and the
absence of the supreme, supervening goodness that stood between me and
myself, and I should have been a murderer. The gulf that separates each
one of us from crime is narrower than we imagine. The discovery of this
truth is humbling, but perhaps none the less salutary for that.

“Come along, Clide; come along with me,” my uncle said in the soothing
tone one uses to a fractious child. “It’s all my fault. I ought to have
known better than to let you go there at all; I ought to have gone by
myself. I’m no better than a blubbering old idiot to you, my boy.”

I went with him passively; we walked to our lodgings without speaking. I
shall never forget the kindness of my uncle all through that night. He was
as patient and as gentle with me as a woman, bearing with me as tenderly
as a mother could have done. I could not rest, and I would not let him
rest. I called for _café noir_, and I kept drinking cup after cup of it
until, added to the stronger stimulant that was setting my blood on fire,
I almost worked myself into a brain fever, bursting out into paroxysms of
childish rebellion, and then lapsing into fits of dumb despair. I had
first insisted on rushing off to the hotel and lying in wait for Isabel,
and compelling her there and then either to return to me or to part from
me for ever; but my uncle was inexorable in opposing this, and I knew by
his tone that he was not to be trifled with. There was a something about
him in certain moods that made resistance to his will as impossible as
wrestling with an elephant. I gave in, and allowed him to give his reasons
for preventing my taking a step which, result how it might, was sure to be
a most humiliating one for me; not only or chiefly as a husband, but as a
De Winton. My uncle’s anxiety lest the old name should suffer by the event
threw his sympathy for my individual sorrow comparatively into the shade.
While my wife’s flight was known only to my immediate household, my step‐
mother—whose pride and touchiness about the honor of a De Winton was
almost as morbid as his own—and the three tried friends of my dear
father’s youth, it was just possible that it might remain a secret beyond
that small circle, and he clung to this hope as tenaciously as I did to
the hope of recovering my wife. The De Wintons were a proud race, and
justly so. We had nobler things to be proud of than the primary one of
ancient, and I may venture to say illustrious, lineage: we could boast
with truth that there was no bar sinister on the old escutcheon; our men
had never known cowardice, nor our women shame; no maiden of our house had
dishonored a father’s white hairs, or wife brought a blot upon her
husband’s name. I was the last of our line so far, and the thought that it
should die out under a cloud of shame with me was bitter with the
bitterness of death to the admiral; for he was at heart as proud as a
Plantagenet, with all his free and easy talk, and his jovial, jolly‐tar
manner to everybody, especially to his inferiors. _Noblesse oblige_ was
engraven on the inmost core of his honest heart; and he could not conceive
a De Winton feeling less acutely on the point than he did himself. He had
never been married; this partially accounted, perhaps, for his inability
to merge the De Winton in the husband. It is possible that, if I had never
been married, I should have comprehended his stern abstract view of the
case, and have felt with him that the husband’s misery was as nothing
compared to the blow dealt at the pride of a De Winton. As it was, I could
not feel this. I could have seen the whole clan of the De Wintons and
their escutcheon in the bottom of the Red Sea, if I could have rescued
myself from the anguish of renouncing for ever the young wife who had so
cruelly charmed and blighted my life. I was driven to make this unworthy
avowal on my uncle’s suggesting that, assuming it were still possible for
me to forgive her, she might lay it down as a condition of our reunion
that she was to pursue her career on the stage. He merely threw out the
idea as a wild notion that crossed his thoughts for a moment; but when I
hinted at the possibility of yielding to this painful and humiliating
condition rather than renounce Isabel for ever, he flew into such a frenzy
of indignation that to calm him I believe I was cowardly enough to swallow
my words, and declare that they had not been spoken in earnest. It was
some time, however, before he subsided from the agitation they caused him.
The idea of alluding, even in jest, to the possibility of a play‐actress
flaunting our name upon the boards of the theatre was too dreadful to be
contemplated without unmitigated horror. If I let her go her mad career
alone, the chances were that this disgrace would be spared us. Isabel had
proved clearly enough so far that she desired secrecy to the full as much
as we did; but if she continued on the stage as my wife, secrecy became
impossible. She might play under the assumed name she now bore, but the
true one would soon be blazoned abroad, do what we all might to conceal
it. The managers who speculated on her voice would be quick to discover
it, and make capital out of it. The admiral was so strong in his
denunciation of the madness of the whole thing that he convinced me he was
right. This little incident left him more than ever determined to keep me
as much as possible in the background, and I so far acknowledged the
wisdom of his views as to consent to let him go by himself to try and see
Isabel in the morning.

It proved a fruitless mission. The _concierge_ said that the _signorina_
had not left her room yet; but the servant, in answer to my uncle’s ring
at her door, informed him that she had gone out for an early drive—it was
not eight o’clock—and that she would not be in until dinner‐hour. Would
monsieur take the trouble to call later? Monsieur said he would, and he
did; but he was then informed that the _signorina_ had taken a chill in
her drive, and had gone to bed. My uncle came home in great wrath; he
believed no more in the chill than he had believed in the drive, and he
was for writing there and then to Isabel, telling her so, and demanding an
interview without more ado, using firm language and hinting at sterner
measures if she refused. I entreated him not to do this. I don’t know
whether in the bottom of my heart I believed the servant’s story, but I
persuaded myself and then him that I did; that it was only natural that a
tender, delicate‐fibred creature like her should have been done up after
the excitement of last evening; and that we had better leave her in peace
for a day. He pooh‐poohed this contemptuously: the excitement was just
what she liked in the business; it was what play‐actors, men and women,
all alike lived on. He humored me, however, and consented to put off the
letter till the next day. Meantime, something might turn up. I might meet
her uncle myself, and button‐hole the scoundrel on the spot. He must walk
out some time or other, and I was determined to be on the watch. I paced
up and down before the hotel for three weary hours, glancing up
continually at the windows. I knew from my uncle what floor Isabel
occupied. Once I fancied I caught sight of the fellow’s face looking out
for a moment, and then hurriedly withdrawn. Was it only fancy, or had he
really seen me, and drawn back to escape my seeing him? I lounged into the
coffee‐room, and adroitly elicited from one of the waiters that the
_signorina_ was keeping very quiet, so as to avoid any disappointment for
the forthcoming representation; she was to sing again in two nights, and
no one was to be admitted to see her in the interval. Orders to this
effect had been given to the _concierge_, who was to deny all visitors on
the plea of the _signorina’s_ state of nervous debility, which made the
slightest excitement off the stage fatal to her. When I repeated this to
the admiral, he set his brown face in a scowl, and we very nearly
quarrelled outright before he again yielded to my resistance, and agreed
to wait two days more, and see whether she kept her engagement for the
next performance. On the morning of the second day we both went out
together to the baths. As we were passing through the Etablissement
gardens, a young man came up to a group of people walking ahead of us, and
gave some news that provoked sudden surprise, apparently of no pleasant
nature; for we heard the words, “Abominable sell!” “What an extraordinary
affair!” repeated with angry emphasis. We had not heard a word of what the
young man had said, but the broken comments that reached us seemed, as if
by some magnetic influence, to inform us of their meaning. The admiral, in
his off‐hand, sailor way, walked up to the party, and asked if any
accident had happened on the coast. “Oh! no; no accident,” the bearer of
the news said, “but a most disagreeable thing for everybody. Graziella has
bolted, no one knows when or how; her rooms were found vacant an hour ago,
and there was not a trace of her or the fellow who was with her. The Hôtel
Royal was in a tremendous commotion about it; the landlord had been down
to the station and to the quay, but there was no trace of them at either
place. The landlord believed they had eloped during the night, by some
highway or by‐way, so as to avoid detection; but why or wherefore was the
mystery. They had paid their bill. It was a horrible sell, for the little
creature was the trump‐card of the season—a second Malibran.”

I knew as well as if I had followed my uncle, and heard the intelligence
with my own ears, what he had to tell me when he turned back, and came up
to me, intending to break it gently. It seemed utterly useless after this
to go to the hotel with the hope of gaining further particulars, but I
urged at the same time that it was possible the landlord himself might be
a party to the affair, and that, if he had been bought over to hold his
tongue, he might be bought to loosen it. I could not count on the
necessary command over myself to speak or to listen to others speaking of
the event at this stage, so I yielded to my uncle’s wish, and went home;
he accompanied me to the door, for he judged by my looks that I was not
fit to be left to go back alone. He then started off to the Rue Aguado. He
found the place in an uproar about the flight, but no one could throw a
particle of light on the time, the manner, or the motive of it. The
_concierge_ remembered seeing a lady, small and slight, and with a very
elastic step, walk rapidly out of the house late on the previous evening,
dressed in the deepest mourning, with a widow’s crape veil, and holding
her handkerchief to her eyes, as if crying bitterly; he had remarked her
at the time, and thought she had been visiting some one in the hotel, and
that she was in fresh mourning for her husband, poor thing! Everybody
agreed that this must have been La Graziella in disguise. But beyond this
not the smallest clew was found that could direct the pursuit of the
fugitives. Their luggage had been carried off as mysteriously as
themselves; no one had seen it removed. This induced the suspicion that
they must have had an accomplice on the premises. The landlord, however,
had a precedent to fall back on—a swindler who had lived at his expense
for three weeks, and then decamped one fine morning, bag and baggage,
having carried them all off himself, disguised as a porter, while several
travellers were under way in the courtyard with their separate lots of
luggage, and porters were hurrying in and out with them.

For two days after this event, which checkmated every movement on our
part, we did nothing but wander about Dieppe, watching helplessly for some
information that could have directed us what to do. My uncle was
constantly down on the quay and at the railway station, questioning the
sailors and the officials, and always coming back just as void of
information as he went. He was more irascible than ever now about the
honor of the De Wintons, and would not allow me to interfere directly or
indirectly. I resented this tyranny; but the fact of my interference
having already proved so disastrous gave him the whip‐hand over me, and I
felt it was wiser in my own interest to subside and let him act. He was
actively seconded in his endeavors to track the fugitives by the manager
of the theatre, who was resolved—so we heard on all sides—to spare neither
trouble nor expense in recapturing his prize. The collapse of such a
_prima donna_ was a serious loss to him; he had gone to considerable
expense in preparing for her _début_, and it had been so brilliant as to
ensure the promise of an overflowing house to the end of the season. On
one side my uncle was gratified at the intelligence and energy displayed
by the manager; but on the other hand it put him in a ferment of terror.
What if, in his search after Graziella, he should discover who she was and
what name she bore! The bare thought of this almost drove him frantic. The
manager’s opinion, it would seem, was that she had escaped in a fishing‐
smack. This was the most likely mode of flight for any one, indeed, to
adopt from a seaport town like Dieppe; no preliminaries were required in
the way of tickets or passports, and the fugitives might steer themselves
to any coast they pleased, and land unobserved where it suited them. It
was useless, however, for us to leave Dieppe until we heard something.
While the manager was vigorously prosecuting the search on his side, my
uncle was busy on ours. He suggested that it would be well to make an
exploring expedition amongst the hamlets on the cliffs‐groups of huts
scattered at short intervals over the long range of the _falaises_
overhanging the sea, and inhabited by a scanty and miserable population.

We had felt it necessary to take a few safe agents of the police into our
confidence; and before setting to work among the _gens de falaise_, as
they are called by the dwellers on the plain, we consulted them as to the
best mode of proceeding, and asked some information as to the sort of
people we had to deal with. The police advised us to leave the attempt
alone. They said the “folk of the cliffs” were so simple that their name
was a by‐word for stupidity down below. It required little short of a
surgical operation to convey a new idea of the simplest kind into their
brain. There was a story current in the town of how, not so very long ago,
a gang of robbers prowled about the neighborhood, and made it expedient
for the mayor to issue a proclamation, wherein it was notified that nobody
would be allowed to enter the gates after night‐fall without a lantern.
The notice was placarded all over the walls, and this is how it worked
with the _gens de falaise_: Ding‐dong came a ring at the gate one evening,
and the sentry called out: “Qui vive?”

“Gens de falaise!” (Pronounced fa_w_laise.)

“Have you a lantern?”

“Eh, oui!”

“Is there a candle in it?”

“Eh, non! We were not told to!”

“Well, now you’re told to; be off and get one!”

Next evening ding‐dong come the travellers again. “Qui vive?”

“Gens de falaise!”

“Have you a lantern?”

“Eh, oui!”

“And a candle in it?”

“Eh, oui?”

“Is it lighted?”

“Eh, non! We were not told to.”

“Well, now you’re told to; go back and light it.”

Away went the _gens de falaise_ again, and finally returned a third time
to the charge with a lantern and a candle in it, and lighted.

This was not very encouraging to persons who wanted to question
intelligent observers. We tried it, however, but soon found that rumor had
not maligned the simple dwellers on the cliffs, and that nothing was to be
gleaned from their dull, unobservant eyes.

Four days passed, and still we were in the same dense darkness. The
suspense and inaction became unendurable to me.

“Uncle,” I said, “I can stand this no longer. I will run up to Paris, and
set the lynx‐eyes of the police there on the lookout for us. Perhaps it
will be of no use; but anything is better than waiting here doing
nothing.”

My uncle fell in with the idea at once. I set off to Paris, and left him
at Dieppe, where, in truth, it seemed more likely that information of some
sort must transpire sooner or later.

To Be Continued.




The Colonization Of New South Wales By Great Britain. Concluded.


It is obvious, then, that, if the remarkable prosperity which has befallen
the English Colonies in Australia is to be ascribed, in any degree, to the
sagacity of the government that sent out the first expedition, or of those
who then and subsequently presided over it, we must look for it in the
perfection of the reformatory system, with a view to which the original
constitution of the colony was exclusively framed. The idea of making the
colonization of a newly discovered territory of prodigious resources
subservient to the reformation of as many as possible of the criminals of
an over‐populated country is a conception of the noblest philanthropy; as
the attempt to use a new and promising colony for the mere purpose of
getting rid anyhow of the dangerous classes would be an act of guilty
folly, the result of an indolent and heartless selfishness, such as even
the most heartless and the most selfish of oligarchies should blush to
have perpetrated. For the prosecution of the former object more care and
pains should have been expended than under ordinary circumstances in
sending out to the new settlement a colony fully equipped with all that
the mother‐country had to give it. The reformed, as they stepped forth
from their cells and shackles, once more masters of their own actions,
free agents, reinvested with reason’s noblest prerogative—the liberty of
choosing good and rejecting evil—should have found a sound and healthy
society with which to mingle. They should have found themselves at once
amidst a society based on those principles of religion, law, and justice
which characterize even the feeblest form of Christian civilization. Such
a society they should have found immediately outside their prison‐walls,
into which they might glide, as it were, unperceived, and from which they
should gradually and insensibly take their tone. What man in his sober
senses could have anticipated any thorough and permanent reformation of
criminals in a society consisting exclusively, after making exception of
the officials and the military guard, of the very criminals themselves? In
reading the inaugural address of the first governor, we naturally conclude
that the government which organized the expedition was deeply impressed
with the necessity of an opposite course. But the illusion is soon
dispelled. We discover to our astonishment that the infant colony took out
with it no one condition of a civilized society. Of law there was simply
none. Even the formalities of martial law, when, soon after the settlement
of the penal colony, it was thought expedient to have recourse to them,
were found to be impracticable, because of some technical difficulty which
there had not been the sagacity to foresee and provide against. Whatever
there was of justice was wholly dependent on the caprice and dispositions
of individuals. Incredible as it may appear, it is nevertheless the fact
that, after the retirement of the first governor, the administration of
the colony was entrusted for three years to the hands of the officers of
the 102d Regiment. Unfit for such a responsibility as were the sea‐
captains from amongst whom the first four governors were selected,
officers of the army were yet more so. The previous habits and training of
English regimental officers are such as to disqualify them, generally
speaking, for judicial functions. But the unfitness of military men in
England for this office was much greater at that period than at the
present day, as they were more illiterate. The government of a colony
transferred to a regimental mess‐room forms indeed a humiliating contrast
to the glowing periods of Commander Phillip. Mr. Therry tells us (p. 69):


    “The first four governors of New South Wales, Phillip, Hunter,
    King, and Bligh, exercised a rule (and this includes the mess‐room
    interregnum) which partook much of the character of the government
    of a large jail or penitentiary.”


Two years and a half after the disembarkation of the first batch of
convicts fresh instructions arrived from the home government respecting
the allotment of land. By these instructions, the advantages already
enjoyed by the emancipists were extended to the privates and non‐
commissioned officers of the military guard on the spot, but no provision
whatsoever was made for free emigrants from the mother‐country. So that,
when the sixth governor, Macquarie, “considered that the colony was
selected as a depot for convicts; that the land properly belonged to them,
as they emerged from their condition of servitude, and that emigrants were
intruders on the soil,” we can only conclude that he interpreted the
policy of the government at home more correctly than the more enthusiastic
sailor who first presided over it. In spite of the singular incapacity
displayed in the first organization of the settlement at Sydney, the
following illustration of the state of law and society therein twenty
years after its establishment, would be incredible if we had it on less
trustworthy authority than that of Mr. Therry. He tells us (p. 74) that,
during the rule of one Capt. Bligh, 1806‐8, “the judge‐advocate, Atkins,
was a person of no professional mark, and was, besides, of a very
disreputable character.” The governor reported of him to the Secretary of
State that “he had been known to pronounce sentence of death when
intoxicated”! With Atkins was associated a convict named Crossley, who had
been transported for forging a will, and for perjury, and who had been
convicted of swindling in the colony.

The result of such a state of things was as unavoidable as it was fatal.
If the reformatory system in the penal colony had been as wise and
efficacious as it was lamentably, nay, wickedly, the reverse, such of the
convicts as yielded to the nobler motives of civil life and the claims of
conscience should have been able to mix unnoticed with the sounder part of
the community. Bygones should have been really bygones. The past should
have been simply ignored. No allusion to it should have been tolerated.
The expiated crime should have been buried out of sight and recollection,
so long as there was no relapse. There should have been no such class as
an emancipist class. The reformatory institution should have remained as a
thing apart, sending from time to time its contingent of convalescents to
be incorporated with the healthy body politic.

Instead of this, as the colony increased, the moneyed and influential
class, the leading class, in a colony intended to reproduce the glories of
England in the fifth great division of the world, consisted of emancipated
convicts. No pains taken to perpetuate the memory of these people’s
disgrace could have attained so undesirable an object more effectually.
They stood out a distinctly marked order in the state. They became landed
proprietors, magistrates, high government officials, even legal
functionaries. Instead of a decent veil of oblivion being thrown over
their antecedents, they were, as in a Methodist experience, even
ostentatiously displayed. It almost constituted a boast, and was worn as
though it were a decoration of honor. When, subsequently, through the
encouragement of one or two of the governors and other causes, the tide of
emigration set in from the mother‐country another moneyed and influential
class arose of untainted reputation. A bitter rivalry between the two was
the immediate consequence. The emancipists excited no sympathy or
compassion for the lingering memory of a misfortune which their subsequent
lives might be supposed to have retrieved, but which, instead of an
obliterated brand, was ostentatiously retained as the badge of a powerful
class, which became thus an object of contempt to the more respectable
new‐comers. The crimes for which they had been punished, and of which they
should, therefore, no longer have borne the burden, reappeared as their
accusers in the intercourse of social life. Society snatched up the sword
which the law had in mercy laid aside; a remitted punishment was exacted
in another form; and the benevolent aim of rescuing the worst class of
criminals from irremediable ruin by a reformatory process, if it were ever
seriously entertained, was wholly frustrated. For scarcely had the infant
settlement, through the gradual influx of immigrants, begun to assume the
appearance of a colony, when the original sin of its constitution appeared
in the form of an evil, fatal not only to the well‐being, but even to the
very existence of a free community. Instead of any effort being made to
heal or, at least, to alleviate this evil by some consistent line of
policy, it was aggravated by the capricious preference of one or other of
the rival classes by successive governors, according to their several
idiosyncrasies. An evil of this nature could end only with the extinction
of one or other of the antagonistic classes, or the dissolution of the
colony; unless indeed the whole reformatory system were remodelled on an
entirely different plan. The problem was solved by the adoption of the
former alternative. The natural advantages of the country and the
commercial energy of the Anglo‐Saxon race proved, at last, too strong for
a reformatory system which was not only crude and faulty to the utmost
degree, but was literally destructive of its own end and object. After a
long struggle against obstacles greater than ever before hindered the
development of vast natural resources, the colony prevailed over the
prison, and the entail of emancipation was finally cut off by the
abolition of transportation in the year 1840.

Turn we now to the penal portion of this quite unique organization for the
reformation of criminals. Here, it may be, we shall be able to trace some
indications, at least, of that humane sympathy, that sorrow for a fellow‐
creature’s fall and anxiety for his restoration, which appeals to whatever
of good may be lingering in the heart of the criminal, not to mention the
higher and more tender charities which religion inspires. No gentler
instrument of cure would appear to have suggested itself to the minds of
the members of the English government of 1788 than the lash!—the lash in
the hands of sots and ruffians!


    “I was once present in the police office in Sydney when a convict
    was sentenced to fifty lashes for not taking off his hat to a
    magistrate as he met him on the road.”


Of Capt. P. C. King, who administered the government from 1800 to 1806,
Mr. Therry writes:


    “He was a man of rough manners, and prone to indulge in offensive
    expressions borrowed from the language then in vogue in the
    navy.... His temper was irascible and wayward. At one time he
    assumed a tone of arrogant and unyielding dictation; at another,
    he indulged in jokes unsuited to the dignity of his position.”


Of Capt. Bligh, who succeeded King, Judge Therry tells us that his


    “despotic conduct as commander of the _Bounty_ had driven the crew
    to mutiny. Yet he who had proved his incapacity for ruling a small
    ship’s company was made absolute ruler of a colony so critically
    circumstanced as that of New South Wales.... He was the same rude,
    despotic man, whether treading the quarter‐deck of the _Bounty_ or
    pacing his reception‐room in Government House at Sydney.”
    “Throughout the colony,” continues the judge, “the uncontrolled
    use of the lash was resorted to, as an incessant and almost sole
    instrument of punishment, and too often those who inflicted this
    degrading punishment regarded themselves as irresponsible agents,
    and kept no record of their darkest deeds.”


But when the backs and the consciences of the unhappy victims of an
English reformatory process had become alike hardened to this demoralizing
torture, a perverse ingenuity had devised in Norfolk Island a place of
penal torment calculated to destroy in its victims the last vestiges of
humanity. To human beings thus circumstanced the scaffold became rather an
object of desire than of dread. And we learn from Mr. Therry that during
the years 1826, 1827, and 1830 no less than one hundred and fifty‐three
persons were hung out of a population of fifty thousand.

But we have not yet fathomed the lowest depth of imbecility and of guilty
indifference to the commonest dictates of prudence and humanity exhibited
in this nefarious scheme for the reformation, forsooth, of criminals.

Incredible as it may appear, it is nevertheless true, that by the authors
of the scheme, although their lips were full of the professions we have
quoted, the influence of religion as an agent of reformation was simply
ignored. It had not been their original intention to send out any minister
at all of their religion with the expedition they had planned. It was
owing to the remonstrance of a dignitary of the Established sect that one
was, at the last moment, appointed. This appointment, however, does not
appear to have been made with any view of bringing the influence of
religion to bear on the unfortunate criminals. To them the rudest objects
of self‐interest appear to have been the only motives of reformation held
out. Dr. Porteous—such was his name—would have displayed more than the
ordinary apathy of his class as to any objects of a merely spiritual
interest, and a less than ordinary keenness of perception as to its
material interests, if he had allowed a large colonial expedition to leave
the shores of the mother‐country without any provision whatsoever being
made for the celebration of the worship of the Established religion in the
distant land to which it was bound. We are told by Mr. Flanagan that a
priest of some Spanish ships, which visited the colony in 1793, “observing
that a church had not yet been built, lifted up his eyes with
astonishment, and declared that, had the place been settled by his nation,
a house would have been erected for God before any house had been built
for men” (_Hist. of N. S. W._, vol. 1. p. 95). In 1791 a fresh batch of
convicts, two thousand and fifty in number, arrived at Sydney, making the
sum total of that portion of the population two thousand eight hundred and
twenty‐eight. Yet, for these, for the large staff of officials, the
military guard, and the few free settlers, the only minister of religion
for six years after the foundation of the colony was this churchless
chaplain, and the only religious influences accessible to that multitude
of unfortunates was the form of Sabbatical prayer adopted by his sect. The
one master cause of the inhumanity of the whole scheme was the complete
and profound disregard of religious influences engendered in the minds of
its authors by that embodiment of religious indifference and lifeless
formalism, the established sect in England.

In few, if in any, exiled convicts have the finer sensibilities of our
common nature been utterly extinguished. In nearly all, charred and
unsightly as may their whole natures have become, diligent and patient
labor will come at last to some unquenched fragment of the precious jewel;
remote and all but lost, but waiting only for one smallest crevice to be
opened through the superincumbent mass of gloom and despair, to spring in
light, like a resurrection, to the surface, and fling its delivered lustre
to the sun. In nearly all, he who should tenderly but perseveringly dig
through the filth and refuse which a highly artificial and evilly
constituted state of society has heaped upon its outcasts, would assuredly
come at last to some faint trickle of the living fountain, which death
only wholly dries up, ready to find its level, and even longing to be
released. How many of those sad ship‐loads, when the shores of their
native country for ever faded from their view, succumbed to the anguish of
some, were it only one, rudely riven tie, and, in the nearest feeling to
despair possible out of the place of reprobation, thrilled with a heart’s
agony of which the severest bodily pain is but a feeble symbol! Cruel to
inhumanity would be the jailer who should refuse to a prisoner in his
dungeon the consolation of one ray of the light of day. But who, with the
hearts of men, could have forbidden to those most miserable of their
fellow‐creatures an entrance to the angels of religion? Who would not have
used every effort to secure their ministrations? The Catholic Church, and
she alone, could have brought the light of hope within those darkened
souls. She alone could have taken from despair that painful past and that
ghastly present, have awakened within those hardened consciences the
echoes of a nobler being, have folded around the poor outcasts her
infinite charities, and enwreathed them in their embrace. She alone could
have recalled them through the tears of compunction to the consciousness
that they were still men, and might yet be saints; and, like the memory of
childhood gliding round the frightful abyss that separated them from
innocence, have beckoned, and encouraged, and helped them up the toilsome
steep of penance, to the place where conquerors, who have narrowly escaped
with their lives, receive their kingdoms and their crowns.

Yet was this mere tribute to the humanity of those forlorn ones wholly
withheld from them. The rigors of penal discipline, increasing in severity
with the progressive depravity of their unhappy victims, reduced them at
length to a condition by comparison of which the lot of the sorriest brute
that was ever becudgelled by a ruffian owner was enviable. What a depth of
misery, and, worse still, what a bitter consciousness of it, is revealed
in the keen reproach of one of them: “When I came here, I had the heart of
a man in me, but you have plucked it out, and planted the heart of a brute
in its stead!” To talk to such men of reformation could only have been a
ghastly jest. Not so much as even a moral motive appears to have been
suggested to them. Nothing but the unlovely object of worldly self‐
advantage.

Of such a system there could be but one result. No longer do we experience
any surprise at finding that the aborigines, who were to have been
civilized, and who, at first, evinced the most friendly disposition
towards the new settlers, were shot down and even poisoned by the
squatters, soldiers, emigrant adventurers, and emancipists, the standard
of whose morality appears to have been about equally high; that men in the
highest judicial stations were notoriously immoral; that amongst the most
prosperous and respectable of Sydney tradesmen were receivers of stolen
goods; that in the time of one governor,


    “the marriage ceremony fell into neglect, and dissolute habits
    soon prevailed; rum became the regular and principal article of
    traffic, and was universally drunk to excess”;


and that, when he left the colony in 1800, “_it was then in a state of
deep demoralization_” (_Therry_, p. 71); that, under the rule of his
successor, to quote Mr. Therry’s own description:


    “The licentiousness that had prevailed in the time of Hunter was
    carried to the highest pitch. Not only was undisguised concubinage
    thought no shame, but the sale of wives was not an unfrequent
    practice. A present owner of broad acres and large herds in New
    South Wales is the offspring of a union strangely brought about by
    the purchase of a wife from her husband for four gallons of rum”
    (p. 72).


Lamentable as must have been the condition of a reformatory colony wherein
the religious sentiment and all concern for a future life were entirely
disregarded, its effects were more terrible to the Catholic portion of the
convicts than to their Protestant fellow‐criminals. The latter, born
blind, were not sensible of the blessing of which they were deprived. To
them religion was a matter of the merest unconcern. The parson was one of
the gentlefolk, nothing more. He made no claim of spiritual power. It was
not likely that they should invest him with it. They felt no need of him
in death, any more than they had throughout their lives. Indeed, they had
all along been taught that it was the special birthright of an Englishman
to die as independently as he had lived. It must be owned, therefore,
that, as far as they were concerned, no privation was experienced nor any
practical loss occasioned by the circumstance that only one Protestant
minister was appointed in the colony during six years, and for another six
years only two.

How different the case of the Catholic portion of the convicts! For them
to be deprived of priestly ministration was a loss all but irreparable.
The clear and rigid dogmatism of the church places the three future states
of existence before her children with a positiveness and reality which the
mysterious power of evil may enable them to brave, but never to ignore.
The intermediate state of temporal punishment forbids the most loaded with
crimes to abandon hope, even at the moment of dissolution. But for this
salvation the sacraments are ordinarily essential, of which the priests,
and only the priests, are the dispensers. To deprive, thus, of priestly
ministrations those poor creatures who stood most in need of them, to drag
them to despair and final impenitence—the only sin from whose guilt the
sacraments are powerless to rescue the sinner—was a cruelty which would
have been diabolical if it had been intentional.

About ten years after the settlement of the colony, the number of Catholic
convicts was greatly increased by large deportations from Ireland after
the unsuccessful insurrection of 1798. But they were a very different
class of men from ordinary convicts. They were superior to the ordinary
political derelicts. If the most brutal and insulting tyranny that ever
goaded a people to rebellion can justify an insurrection against
established authorities, that justification they had to the full. Those
Irish exiles of ’98 were no more criminal than the ministry that arraigned
them or the judges who pronounced their doom. The finer sensibilities of
these men had not been blunted nor their domestic affection stifled by low
associations and long habits of crime. They were, for the most part, men
of blameless manners, and of a people remarkable for virtue. To such men
the rude snapping asunder of the fondest heart‐ties, the being dragged
away for ever from the old spot of home, endeared by all blissful and
innocent memories, from the familiar scenes, the beloved faces, the
cherished friends, the heart‐owned relatives, young and aged, from the
graves of their ancestors, and the country of their birth, to be shipped
off as criminals to the uttermost parts of the earth, with their country’s
deadly enemies for their jailers, must have been a fate from which death
would have been hailed as a deliverer. To deprive those unfortunate
patriots of the consolations and benedictions of their religion was indeed
to make them empty the cup of sorrow to its bitterest dregs. In the year
1829, about forty years after the commencement of transportation from
Ireland, they numbered nearly ten thousand souls. Yet, we are informed by
Mr. Therry,


    “up to that time they were dependent solely on such ministrations
    as could be rendered by a single priest, and for a considerable
    portion of that period there was no priest in the colony.”


How different would have been the organization of the expedition, how far
different its results, if the church had still owned England’s heart, and
her statesmen had been Catholics! The most worldly and ill‐living of such
would not have dreamed of equipping a colony without making full provision
for the celebration of Christian worship and the ministrations of the
church. It would have been their first care. Had they designed to make the
colony subservient to the noble object of reforming those unfortunates
whom society had cast out of its pale, nothing would have been advertently
left undone to bring all the salutary influences of religion to bear upon
them, and to place at their service every one of its supernatural aids.
What is the church, in her actual working in the affairs of men, but a
divinely organized reformatory system? Now a fundamental principle of that
system is that forgiven crime is buried out of sight and out of mind. When
the minister of the divine pardon has opened the doors of the eternal
prison, and has stricken off the deadly fetters from the self‐condemning
penitent, he who was just now kneeling at his side in bonds and death,
together with all the crimes he has committed, are alike forgotten by him.
He is to him quite a new and other man. And with the Christian benediction
he sends him forth reinvested with the royalty of his birth and his
consanguinity to God, to mingle, mayhap, if he correspond to the grace
given, with the most virtuous on the earth, as though he had never broken
its peace or given scandal to his brethren. Men are what their religion
makes them. And no Catholic statesman would have sent out a convict colony
to a distant shore without providing for such as would be reformed a
destination where the past might be at once forgotten and repaired. The
angels of the Gospel, inflamed with the noblest charity that ever dawned
over the everlasting hills on an ice‐bound world, would have been scarcely
ever absent from the prison cells, never weary of importuning their
inmates to save themselves, and to reclaim their place amongst their
fellows by a reformation which would at the same time restore them to
their hopes as immortal men. Far from permitting to them every license of
lust, and the indulgence of every criminal passion which did not interfere
with jail discipline; by their moral reformation, and by it alone, would
they have attempted their reformation as citizens. They would have been
ever at hand to aid them with priestly counsels and the supernatural grace
of the sacraments in those frequent falls and relapses of which nearly
every history of reformation consists. And those who were sufficiently
reformed to be able to conform thenceforth to the easy standard of public
virtue would have found, in the new career to which they were committed,
precisely the same divine system, with its supernatural aids and
exhaustless charities ready to carry on in their behalf the work of
restoration, through the love of man, to the reward of God.

Even in the case of those pitiable beings, in whose crime‐clogged souls
the loving accents of religion appeared to awake no echoes, never would
the indiscriminating and wholesale torture of the lash have been summoned
to its unholy and brutalizing work to deepen still more their moral
degradation and place their reformation for ever out of hope. Restrained
as they were from doing further mischief to society, the church, whose
heart, as of a human mother, yearns with most fondness towards the most
vicious of her children, would never have abandoned, still less have ill‐
treated, the poor outcasts. She would have hoped against hope. Nor would
she for one moment have ceased her importunities, her ministrations, and
her prayers, until final impenitence had taken away the unhappy beings for
ever from the counsels of mercy, or human obduracy had capitulated, at the
hour of death, to the exhaustless love of God.




The Veil Withdrawn.


Translated, By Permission, From The French Of Mme. Craven, Author Of “A
Sister’s Story,” “Fleurange,” Etc.



XXXIX.


The following day Lando, at an unusually early hour, entered the little
sitting‐room next my chamber where I commonly remained in the morning. He
looked so much graver than usual that I thought he had come to tell me
there was some obstacle in the way of his matrimonial prospects. But it
was once more of my affairs, and not of his, he wished to speak.

“Dear cousin,” said he without any preamble, “I come at this unusual hour
because I wish to see you alone. I have something important to tell you.”

“Something that concerns you, Lando?”

“No, it concerns you and Lorenzo.”

My heart gave a leap. What was he about to tell me? What new hope was to
be dashed to the ground?

“Great goodness!” said I, giving immediate utterance to the only object of
my mortal terror, “have you come to tell me Donna Faustina is at Naples,
and Lorenzo has left me again?”

“Donna Faustina? Oh! no. Would to heaven it were merely a question of her,
and that you had nothing more serious to apprehend on Lorenzo’s part than
another foolish journey, were she to lead him beyond the Black Sea! No, it
is not a question of your husband’s heart, which preoccupies you more than
he deserves, but of his property and yours.”

I breathed once more as I heard these words, and my relief was so visible
that Lando was out of patience.

“How singular and unpractical women are!” exclaimed he. “Here you are
apparently grown calm because I have reassured you on a point less
important in reality than the affair in question.”

“I ought to be the judge of that, ought I not, Lando?” said I gravely.

“Of course. I will not discuss their merits with you. But remember, my
dear cousin, if I am correctly informed, it is a question of losing all
you possess! Lorenzo has been playing to a frightful degree! He made such
good resolutions before me, as he was leaving Paris, that he does me the
honor of concealing himself as much from me as from you. He had gone quite
far enough before he went to Milan; but, since his return—influenced, I
suppose, by a mad wish of diverting his mind from other things, and
perhaps of repairing the breaches that had begun to alarm even him—he has
added stock‐gambling to the rest. Some one heard him say the other day
that he expected to triple his fortune, or lose all he possessed. One of
the two was indeed to happen. My dear cousin!... he has not tripled it,
and the other alternative is seriously to be feared.”

I listened with attention, but likewise with a calmness that was not
merely exterior.

“You do not seem to understand,” said he with more impatience than before,
“that you are in danger of losing everything you have? Yes,
_everything_!... What would you say, for example,” continued he, looking
around, “if you were to see all the magnificence that now surrounds you,
and to which you are accustomed, disappear; if this house and all the
precious objects it contains were to vanish for ever from your sight?”

“I should say.... But it is of little consequence what I should say or
think in such a case. For the moment nothing is lost, and, when our
lawsuit in Sicily is once gained, all fear of ruin will be chimerical.
Allow me, therefore, to decline meanwhile participating in your fears.”

“Yes, I know you are certain of gaining your cause, as it is in your
father’s hands. But if some radical change does not take place in
Lorenzo’s habits, the immense fortune that awaits him will share the fate
of that he has just squandered.”

“Therefore, Lando, as soon as the lawsuit is decided, I have formed the
plan of inducing him to undertake one of those long journeys to some
distant land, such as he has made so many of, and to take me with him. We
shall soon come to a region where cards are unknown, and where he will
never hear of dice, roulette, or of stocks.”

“Nor of Donna Faustina, either, eh, cousin?” said he, laughing. “But you
are not in earnest about banishing yourself in this way for an indefinite
period, leaving the civilized world, and sharing the life he leads in
these interminable journeys?”

“I shall not hesitate a single instant, I assure you,” replied I warmly.
“I shall esteem myself the happiest woman in the world if I can induce him
to accede to my wish.”

“Then,” replied he with emotion, “you can really save him; for he now
needs a powerful distraction, a complete and radical change, that will
really give a new turn to his whole life. Nothing less than this can save
him. But you are admirable, Cousin Ginevra, it must be confessed.”

“Wherein, Lando, I beg? In the course of a year you will consider my
conduct very natural, and I hope Teresina will be of the same opinion.”

“Perhaps so. But I assure you I intend to take a very different course
from Lorenzo. I have done many foolish things, heaven knows; but there is
a limit to everything, and I hope never to follow his example.”

“Enough, Lando; you hurt my feelings and distress me.”

He stopped, and soon after went away, leaving me preoccupied with what he
had told me, though I was not troubled. Oh! what life, what repose, I
found in the secret love that had been made manifest to me! The excitement
of my first moment of transport had died away, but I had not become
indifferent. I clearly saw the gathering clouds. I felt I was surrounded
by dangers of all kinds; but I had nothing of the vague fear often
produced by anxiety with respect to the future. What could happen to me?
What tempests, what dangers, had I to fear with the clear, unmistakable
assurance of an unfailing support, constant assistance, and a love ever
faithful and vigilant, and more tender than any human affection—a love
that _is infinite_, which no earthly love can be? We sleep in peace on the
stormiest sea when we are sure of the hand that guides us. How much more
when we know that hand controls the waves themselves, and can still them
at its will!

This conversation with Lando only served to increase my desire to leave
Naples, and it was with real joy I saw the day of our departure arrive at
last. I was joyfully making my preparations at an early hour in my room,
which Lorenzo very seldom entered now, when he suddenly made his
appearance. Of course I was doubly moved. But as soon as I glanced at his
pale, agitated face, I knew he had come to impart some terrible news. But
I only thought of what Lando had communicated, and exclaimed:

“Speak without any fear, Lorenzo. I have courage enough to hear it all.”

But when he replied, it was my turn to grow pale; I uttered a cry of
anguish, and fell at his feet, overcome with horror and grief.

My father was no more! At the very hour when he was arranging the final
documents for his cause, on the very spot where he so long kept me at his
side, he had fallen dead. No one was with him. At the sound of his fall
the old servant, who always remained in the next room, hurried to his
assistance, but in vain. Nothing could recall him to life!

This blow was terrible—terrible in itself and in its effect on my hopes.
In the first place, it put an immediate stop to all my new plans. Lorenzo
felt it more necessary than ever to go to Sicily, but now absolutely
refused to take me with him. He did not seem to understand how I could
desire to go. In his eyes, the sole motive for such a journey no longer
existed. I should now only expose myself to the most harrowing grief,
which it was his duty to spare me. I did not dare insist on going, for
fear of irritating him at a moment when the very pity I inspired might
increase the dawn of returning affection I thought I discovered. Besides,
I had but little time for reflection. Only a few hours intervened between
the arrival of this fatal news and Lorenzo’s departure, which left me
alone, abandoned to my grief and the bitterness of a disappointment I had
not anticipated in the least, mingled with the remembrance of Lorenzo’s
inexplicable farewell!

It was evident he attributed my tears solely to filial emotion. I had seen
him go away so many times without shedding any, that he had no reason to
suppose his departure this time caused them to flow almost as much as the
calamity that had befallen me. He even seemed surprised that I should
insist on accompanying him to the boat and remaining with him till the
last minute.

He had no idea how I longed to be permitted to forgive him on my knees;
how I wished to implore permission to aid him in breaking the fearful
bonds that fettered his noble faculties; to tear off, so to speak, the
mask that seemed to change the very expression of his face! Oh! how I
longed to save him. How I longed to bring this soul, so closely linked
with mine, to itself! The strong desire I once felt, that had been
extinguished by jealousy, frivolity, and temptation, now sprang up again
with a new force that was never to be destroyed. I was ready for any
sacrifice in order to have it realized—yes, even for that of knowing my
sacrifice for ever ignored! Not that I did not aspire to win his heart
once more! It belonged to me by the same divine right that had given mine
to him. I wished to claim it, and I felt that this desire, however ardent
it might be, by no means diminished the divine flame within that now
kindled all my desires—those of earth as well as those of heaven!

He did not, alas! have any suspicion of all this. And yet, when I raised
my eyes in bidding him farewell, he perhaps saw the look of affection and
sorrowful regret I was unable to repress; for he looked at me an instant
with an expression which made me suddenly thrill with hope! One would have
almost said an electric spark enabled our souls to comprehend each other
without the aid of words. But this moment was as fleeting as that
spark—more transitory than the quickest flash that leaves the night as
dark as before!

His face became graver than ever; his brow more gloomy and anxious, as if
some terrible thought had been awakened. He continued to gaze at me, as he
put up the little straw hat I wore, and, pushing back my hair with the
caressing air of protection once so familiar, he kissed my forehead and
cheek, and, pressing me a moment against his heart, he uttered these
strange words: “Whatever happens, I wish you to be happy, Ginevra. Promise
me you will!...”

I had been at home a long time, and seen the last trace of smoke from the
steamboat disappear between Capri and the coast beyond Sorrento, without
having resolution enough to leave that side of the terrace which commanded
the most distant view of the sea. I remained with my eyes fastened on the
horizon, looking at the waves, agitated by the mournful sirocco, whose
dull, sad moans afar off add so much to the gloom felt at Naples when the
bright sun and blue sky are obscured. Elsewhere bad weather is nothing
surprising, but at Naples it always astonishes and creates anxiety, as if
it were abnormal, as the sudden gravity of a smiling face affects and
alarms us more than that of one naturally austere.

I remained, therefore, in my seat, dwelling on my recent hopes, my sudden
disappointment and its distressing cause, on Lorenzo’s departure without
me, his look, his mysterious words, and his affectionate manner as he bade
me farewell.

Oh! why, at whatever cost, had I not gone with him? And then I followed
him in thought to the dear place I was never to behold again—to the old
palace at Messina where I had passed my childhood, happy and idolized,
under the eye of her who always seemed to me like some heavenly vision.
Beside her I saw my father—“my beloved father.” I uttered these last words
aloud, looking, with eyes full of tears, towards the wild gloomy sea that
separated me from him in death as it had in life.

At that instant I heard Lando’s voice beside me. He had approached without
my hearing him. He had a kind heart that redeemed many of his faults, and
had come to pity and console me in his way.

“My poor cousin! I am over‐whelmed.... What a frightful, irreparable
misfortune! I feel as if it concerned me almost as much as you.”

After a moment’s pause he continued:

“And what is to be done now? In three days that great trial is to take
place and your cause is to be decided! What advocate, good heavens! can be
found that can, I will not say equal, but replace, the able and
illustrious Fabrizio dei Monti?”



XL.


The first days of mourning, anxiety, and expectation were spent almost
entirely alone. I only left the house to go to the convent, and saw no one
at home but Stella and my aunt, who, though she resembled her brother but
little, loved him tenderly, and was inconsolable at his loss.

A week passed by, and I began to be surprised at not having received any
news from Lorenzo. The lawsuit must be over. It was time for him to
return, or, at least, for me to receive a letter from him. But none had
come, and I remained in this state of suspense a length of time that was
inexplicable. At last I received two lines written in haste, not from him,
but from my brother:

“I shall arrive the day after this note, and will then tell you
everything. Do not lose courage.

“MARIO.”

Lando was present when this note arrived, and I read it aloud.

“O heavens!” he exclaimed, “you have lost your cause! That is evident. He
tells you so plainly enough!... And I cannot see what he can have worse to
tell you.”

He kept on talking for some time, but I did not listen to him. I read the
note over and over again. Why had not Lorenzo written? Why was Mario
coming, and why did he not say Lorenzo was to accompany him? Why did he
not even mention his name?... I did not dare acknowledge to myself the
terrible fear that passed through my mind; but I recalled his mysterious
words, his look, his voice, and his whole manner when he bade me farewell,
and everything assumed an ominous look. A possibility flashed across my
mind which I did not dare dwell on for fear of losing my reason, and, with
it, the blessed remembrance that was the only support of my life! I
suffered that night as I had not suffered since the hours of grief and
remorse that followed the death of my mother!

The next day, at a late hour, I at last perceived the boat from Sicily
slowly coming up the bay, struggling against a violent out‐wind; for,
after a long continuation of fine weather, now came a succession of
dismal, stormy days, such as often cast a gloom over the end of spring at
Naples. My first impulse was to go to meet Mario at the landing; but I
changed my mind, and concluded to remain at home, that I might be alone
when I should receive the news he was bringing me.

I found it difficult, however, to control my impatience, for I had to wait
nearly an hour longer. But at last I heard his step on the stairs; then my
door opened, and he made his appearance. What I experienced when I saw he
was really alone showed to what an extent I had flattered myself Lorenzo
would return with him. I gazed at him without stirring from my seat,
without the strength to ask a single question. He came to me, took me in
his arms with more tenderness than he had ever shown in his life, and when
he kissed me I saw his eyes were filled with tears.

“Lorenzo! Where is Lorenzo?” I exclaimed as soon as I could speak.

“Be calm, sister,” said he—“be calm, I beg of you.... I will tell you the
whole truth without the slightest evasion.”

“But before anything else, tell me where Lorenzo is, and why he did not
come with you.”

“Ginevra, I cannot tell you, for I do not know yet. I am quite as ignorant
as you what has become of him.”

At this reply the beating of my heart became so violent that I thought I
should faint away; but I struggled to overcome the anguish that seized me,
and said in a hoarse voice:

“At least, tell me all you know, Mario, without delay or reticence.”

Mario drew from his pocket a letter carefully sealed, but still seemed to
hesitate about giving it to me. But I recognized the writing, and cut
short all explanation by snatching it from his hands, and ran to a seat in
the most retired corner of the room, where I could read it at my ease, and
my brother could not guess its contents by my face till it should suit me
to communicate them.

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

“Ginevra, you will doubtless have learned, before opening this letter,
that I have lost my cause—in other words, that I am ruined, irrevocably
ruined. I had a presentiment of this when the only one who could bring it
to a favorable issue was taken away by death at the critical moment; and
when I embraced you at my departure, I felt convinced I was bidding you
adieu for ever.... Whatever I may be, this word will no doubt startle you.
Though the loss of a very bad husband is by no means irreparable, you will
shudder, I am sure, at the thought of all so desperate a state of affairs
may render me capable of, and the most fearful of extremities has already
crossed your mind, I have no doubt. Well, you are not wrong. I confess it
was my intention, and you may be glad to know it was _you_ who caused me
to change it. Yes, Ginevra, the thought of you occurred to my mind, and I
was unwilling to add another horrible remembrance to those I had already
left you, and render a catastrophe, already sufficiently terrible, still
more tragical. It would, however, have restored you to liberty, and
permitted your young life to resume its course and find a happiness I can
no longer promise you. This thought furnished an additional reason to all
those suggested by despair; but the sweet, suppliant look you gave me, the
inexplicable, celestial expression you wore when we separated, arrested
me. The remembrance of that look still haunts me. What did you wish to say
to me, Ginevra? What had you to ask me? What could be the prayer that
seemed to hover on your lips! I can repair nothing now. The past is no
longer in my power, and the future is blighted. The captivating charm of
your beauty has not been powerful enough to enable me to overcome myself.
It is now too late, as you see yourself. All is over. My faults have led
to the most fatal consequences. I have only to endure them, whatever they
may be. I resign myself to the struggle, then. The very word stimulates
me, for to struggle is to labor, and work I love to excess! Why did I not
give my whole soul up to it instead of other things! Ah! if the past could
only be restored!... But let us return to the present. I will work, then;
yes, work, Ginevra, _to gain my livelihood_. However great a sybarite I
have appeared, and am, I am equal to it. I can and will labor, but far
from you—separated from you. Thanks to your brother’s generosity and the
means still at my disposal, which will be communicated to you, this great
reverse will entail no privation on you. This is my only hope, my only
comfort; for, after having clouded the fairest portion of your life, to
invite you to participate in the bitterness of my misfortunes would make
me despise myself and fill me with despair. Be happy, therefore, if you do
not wish me to put an end to my life. And now _adieu_. This word is used
for a brief absence, for the separation of a day. What will be the length
of ours?... A lifelong one, apparently.... May my life be short, that I
may not long deprive you of your freedom!

“Ginevra, you are young, you are beautiful. You are calculated to love and
please, and, however unfaithful and inconstant I have been, I am jealous!
But I leave you without fear, under the protection of that something
mysterious and incomprehensible within you that is a safeguard to your
youth and beauty! I have forfeited the right to love and protect you, but
I know and venerate you as a holy, angelic being. Ginevra, I ought to say,
I wish I could say, forgive me; but that word is vain when it is a
question of the irreparable. I shall do better, then, to say—forget me!

LORENZO.”

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

While I was reading this letter with eager interest, Mario remained in the
place where I left him, his face buried in his hands, absorbed in sad
reflections. I approached him. He instantly looked up.

“Well, sister,” said he anxiously, “have you any idea from this letter
where Lorenzo has gone?”

“No.”

“No?... And yet you look calm and relieved. What other good news could
there be in the letter?”

What good news!... I was really embarrassed to know what reply to make to
his question. I was relieved, to be sure. My heart beat with a certain
joy, but it would not do to say so; nor could I have made Mario comprehend
the reason, for nothing, in fact, could be more serious than my position.

“No good news,” I replied. “His letter contains nothing cheering,
assuredly, for it announces the loss of his lawsuit, which your note had
prepared me for. And Lorenzo seems to bid me an eternal fare‐well, as if
he imagined I should allow him to separate my life entirely from his! That
remains to be decided. But in order to know what I ought to do, you must
tell me everything that has happened, Mario, without any restriction.”

Mario had hoped to be able to avoid telling me the whole truth, but at
this appeal made no further attempt at concealment, and was grateful to me
for the courage which lightened so painful a duty.

Lorenzo arrived at Messina, persuaded in advance that my father’s death
was the signal of his ruin. But when the cause was decided against him, he
remained apparently very calm. During the evening he had a long
conversation with Mario, in which he occupied himself in making
arrangements that would secure my comfort, placing at my disposal all he
had left, and accepting the generous offer of my brother, who now refused
to profit by the renunciation of my right to a portion of my father’s
property which I had made at the time of my marriage. Lorenzo, during this
conversation, repeatedly expressed the desire this storm might pass over
my head without affecting me.

The following morning Mario received a package containing the substance of
this conversation, regularly signed and sealed, and a sealed letter
addressed to me, without any other explanation. My brother waited till the
hour appointed by Lorenzo the night before for a meeting, but he did not
make his appearance; and when Mario went in search of him, he learned he
had taken his departure in the night without leaving any trace of the
direction he had taken. Two boats had left Messina during the night, one
for the Levant, and the other for America. But, notwithstanding all the
precautions taken by Lorenzo to prevent any one from knowing which way he
had gone, Mario thought he had embarked on the latter of these two boats.

Lorenzo had ordered the steward that had always been in his employ to aid
my brother in the execution of his wishes and whatever was to be done in
consequence, either in Sicily or Naples. But he had not revealed to him,
any more than to me or my brother, his personal affairs, or the place to
which he was going.

After listening to this account with the utmost attention, I requested
Mario to leave me alone a few hours, that I might reflect on all I had
heard, and consider at my leisure what course I ought to pursue. I felt
indeed the need of collecting my thoughts in solitude and silence; but
above all ... oh! above all! I longed to be alone, that I might fall on my
knees and bless God!

Yes, bless him with transport! The fear, the horrible, intolerable fear,
that had taken hold of my mind, was for ever removed by the contents of
Lorenzo’s letter. Regret, if not repentance, for his faults was betrayed
in every line he wrote. The manly energy of his character, too, was
manifest throughout. As to what related to me, I felt touched, and more
proud of the tender, confiding, respectful interest he expressed, than of
all the passionate fervor of his former language. And I blessed heaven for
not being unworthy of it. Finally, finally, the words, “I will work to
gain my livelihood,” made my heart leap with joy; for I saw it put an end
to the dangerous, indolent, pernicious life of the past, and held out a
hope of regeneration and salvation—a salvation physical, moral, present,
future, eternal! It really seemed impossible to feel such a hope could be
paid for too dearly!

I remembered, however, that I should have to discuss my affairs with
Mario, and perhaps with Lando also, whose heart was extremely moved by
this catastrophe; and I endeavored, before meeting them again, to moderate
a joy that would have appeared inexplicable, and, at the very time when I
was more reasonable than I had ever been in my life, would have rendered
me in their estimation extravagant in my notions, and without any
practical sense as to the things of the world.



XLI.


When I saw Mario again, therefore, I thanked him affectionately for his
generosity, but declared I would not accept the restoration of the
inheritance I had renounced at the time of my marriage with the Duca di
Valenzano. Livia had done the same on entering the convent. Mario was, and
should remain, my father’s only heir. I was determined not to allow any
change in this arrangement. I had great difficulty in overcoming his
resistance; and when I could not help remarking that the sacrifices which
awaited me would cost me but little, he stopped me by saying I had not yet
made the trial, and insisted I should take no immediate resolution with
regard to the matter.

“Very well,” said I, “if it is your wish, we will discuss the point at a
later day. Let us confine our attention for the moment to what is of much
more importance. You know very well we cannot long remain ignorant where
Lorenzo is, and as soon as we know I shall go to him.”

“Go to him?”

“Do you doubt it?”

Mario looked at me with surprise, and was silent for an instant. Then he
said:

“Sister, Lorenzo’s conduct has been so notorious that, notwithstanding the
solicitude I acknowledge he manifested for you at our last interview, no
one would be astonished at your remaining among your friends and availing
yourself of the means he has used to deliver you from the consequences of
his folly.”

“Accept this beautiful villa, which he wishes to except from the sale of
his property?... Surround myself with the comforts you have together
provided me with, and leave him—him!—alone, poor, struggling against the
difficulties of beginning a new life?... Really, Mario, if you believe I
would consent to this, it is a proof that, though you are less severe than
you once were to your poor little sister, you are not altogether just to
her.”

Mario took my hand, and kissed it with emotion.

“Pardon me, Ginevra; I confess I did not think you were so generous or so
courageous!”

Courageous!... I was not so much so as he thought. A hope had risen in my
heart which would have rendered poverty itself easy to endure, and even in
such a case I should not have been an object of pity. But here there was
no question of poverty. My sight was clearer than that of Mario or Lando,
and I was, in fact, more sensible than either of my two advisers. It was
only a question, at most, of a temporary embarrassment. Lorenzo’s land,
the valuable objects accumulated in his different houses, and the sale of
all my diamonds, would suffice, and more than suffice, to fill the pit dug
by his extravagance, however deep it might be. Besides, his talents alone,
as soon as he chose to turn them to account, excluded all fear of actual
poverty. The mere name of _Lorenzo_ with which he signed all his
productions had long been familiar to the art‐world, and consequently he
would not be obliged to strive for a position.

It was merely a question, therefore, of the relinquishment of all this
display, this magnificence, this overwhelming profusion of superfluities,
and all the luxuries of life that now surrounded me. Ah! I did not dare
tell them what I thought of such _sacrifices_! I did not dare speak of my
indifference, which greatly facilitated their task, however, and still
less did I dare reveal the cause, for fear of being accused of madness,
and that at a time when they should have considered it a proof of the
beneficial effects of supernatural influences on ordinary life. I
contented myself, therefore, with merely explaining the reason why my
situation seemed to me by no means desperate. They were relieved to see me
take things in such a way, and from that moment the necessary changes, so
painful, in their estimation, were undertaken without any delay, though
without haste, without fear, without concealment, and all the so‐called
great sacrifices began to be accomplished.

It would be difficult to render an account of all I experienced during the
following days and weeks. All I can say is that I felt as if my shackles
and barriers one by one were removed, and at every step I breathed a purer
air!... Does this mean I had become a saint, aspiring to heroic sacrifices
and utter renunciation? Assuredly not. I repeat it, I could have no
illusion of this kind. I clearly comprehended that this catastrophe, which
seemed so terrible to others, which Lorenzo considered beyond my strength
to bear, and would have thrown him into an excess of despair, only tore
off the brilliant exterior of my life. But I had often experienced a
confused, persistent desire at various times and places to be freed from
this outer husk, and I now began to understand a thousand things that
heretofore had been inexplicable in the bottom of my soul.

The magnificence that surrounded me belonged, however, to my station, and
all this display was not without reason or excuse; but I felt it impeded
my course, and, as a pious, profound soul(180) has said of happiness
itself, in striving to attain the true end, it only served to _lengthen
the way_!

There was, then, neither courage nor resignation in this case. I was
reasonable and satisfied, as every human being is who in an exchange feels
he has gained a thousand times more than he has lost! The only anxiety I
now felt was to discover the place to which Lorenzo had betaken himself. I
did not in the least believe he had gone either to the Levant or America,
but every means seemed to have been used by him to defeat our efforts to
discover him. One of the two boats that left Messina the night of his
departure was to touch at Marseilles on the way. Reflection and instinct
both assured me he had proceeded no further, but from that place had gone
where he could most easily resume his labors and begin his new life. In
this respect Rome or Paris would have equally suited him, but it seemed
improbable he had returned to Italy. It was therefore to Paris I directed
my search, and I wrote Mme. de Kergy to aid me in finding him.

Perhaps I should have hesitated had Gilbert been at home; but he was
absent, absent for a year, and before his return I should have time to
reflect on the course I ought to pursue, perhaps ask the advice of his
mother herself, to whom, meanwhile, I made known my present situation, my
wishes, my projects, and the extreme anxiety to which I hoped with her
assistance to put an end.

It was not long before I received a reply, and it was much more favorable
than I had ventured to hope. Her large, affectionate heart seemed not only
to comprehend fully what I had merely given her an outline of, but to have
penetrated to the bottom of mine, and divined even what I had not
attempted to say. I felt I had in her a powerful support. Her inquiries
were promptly and successfully made, and the result was what I had
foreseen. Lorenzo was really in Paris, in an obscure corner of the
Faubourg Saint‐Germain. He had narrow quarters adjoining a large studio,
where he had already begun to work. “His celebrity is too great for him to
remain long concealed,” wrote Mme. de Kergy; “besides, the very thing he
is aiming at would prevent all possibility of his remaining long
incognito. Several of his friends have already found him out and called to
see him, but he has only consented to receive one of them, whose counsels
and assistance are indispensable. This gentleman is also a friend of ours.
I have learned through him that as soon as your husband gets under way in
his work, he intends to enter into communication with those he has left,
and probably with you, my dear Ginevra; but he persists in his intention
of remaining by himself, and not allowing you to share his lot. He thinks
he has arranged everything so you can continue to live very nearly the
same as before, with the exception of his presence, which, he says, he has
done nothing to make you desire. You will have some difficulty in
overcoming his obstinacy in this respect; you will find it hard to induce
one who is so sensible of his wrongs towards you to accept the heavy
burden of gratitude. All the sacrifices he imposes on himself will cost
him far less than to consent to those you are so ready to make for him.
Men are all so. Be patient, therefore; be prudent, and have sufficient
thoughtfulness and feeling to manifest your generosity in such a way that
he will perceive it as little as possible....”

It was the easier to follow Mme. de Kergy’s advice that the course she
wished me to pursue would be strictly sincere. I wrote him, therefore,
without affectation or restraint, what my heart dictated, but I wrote in
vain; my first and second letters remained unanswered. The third drew
forth a reply, but it contained a refusal of my wishes which betrayed all
the motives indicated by my aged friend. Alas! to make others accept
forgiveness is often a thousand times more difficult than to obtain it
ourselves!

I was not discouraged, however. I made preparations for my departure, as
if he had sent for me, and I awaited impatiently the time, without the
least doubt as to its arrival, determined to find some means of hastening
it, should the delay be too much prolonged.



XLII.


While so much apparent, as well as real, gloom was gathering around my
path, there was no diminution in the interior brightness of my soul; which
was only manifested, however, by an activity, and at the same time
tranquillity, that greatly surprised my brother and all my friends,
especially my aunt, whose agitation was extreme.

I will not say that Donna Clelia felt in the least that pleasure at the
misfortunes of others attributed by a great satirist to all mankind, but
the change in our respective situations which now afforded her an
opportunity of pitying and protecting instead of envying me, was by no
means displeasing to her pride or kindness of heart.

She offered me the most unlimited hospitality. She wished to establish me
in her _palazzo_ on the Toledo, and give up the largest of her spacious
drawing‐rooms to my sole use. She did not comprehend how I could remain in
my house when it was being stripped of all the magnificence that had
placed me, in her eyes, on the very pinnacle of happiness. But I refused
to the last to leave my chamber and the terrace, with its incomparable
view, the privation of which I should have felt more than anything else. I
remained, therefore, in the corner (a very spacious one, however) of my
beautiful home I had reserved for myself, encouraged by Stella, who,
without surprise or wonder, comprehended my motives, and assisted me in
making preparations for my departure. She always brought Angiolina with
her, which added to our enjoyment; for she continually hovered around,
enlivening us with her prattle. So, in spite of the sadness of my
position, I was able, without much effort, to rise above my dejection and
gloom.

Weeks passed away, however, and, though I had not renounced the hope of
overcoming Lorenzo’s obstinacy, I began to grow impatient, and was
thinking of starting without his consent; for it seemed to me, when once
near him, he could not refuse to see me. This uncertainty was the most
painful feature of my present situation, and the rainy season, meanwhile,
added its depressing influence to all the rest. But to disturb my peace of
mind and diminish my courage would have required a trial more severe and
painful than that.

The sky once more became clear, and we were at length able to return to
the terrace, from which we had so long been banished by the rain. The
clumps of verdure in the garden, the perfume of the flowers, the blueness
of the mountains, sea, and sky—in short, all nature seemed to atone by her
unusual brilliancy for having been so long forced to veil her beautiful
face. But Stella, instead of being charmed and transported, as usual, with
the prospect, looked gravely and silently around for some time, then, with
a sudden explosion of grief, threw herself on my neck.

“Ginevra, what will become of Angiolina and me when you are gone?... Ah! I
ought to love nobody in the world but her!”

She sat down on one of the benches on the terrace, and took up the child,
who had not left us an instant during the day, to play, as she usually
did. And when Angiolina, with her eyes full of tears, begged her to
prevent her dear Zia Gina from going away, all Stella’s firmness gave way
for an instant, and she burst into tears.

Oh! how strongly I then felt, in my turn, the difference there is between
the sacrifice of exterior objects and the interior sacrifices that rend
the soul! The infinite love that tempers all the sufferings of this world
exempts no one from these trials. I might even say it increases them, for
it enlarges the capacity of our affection and pity: it makes us fully
realize what suffering is, and gives it its true meaning.

I could not, therefore, look at Stella in her present mood without being
overcome by a sadness I had never felt before at the thought of our
separation. Her tears, which she was generally so well able to suppress,
continued to flow, as she rocked her child in silence. She remained thus
without uttering a word, even in reply to my questions, until little
Angiolina, after quietly weeping a long time, fell into a heavy, profound
sleep in her mother’s arms.

It was the first time I had ever known Stella to lose courage. Mine failed
me at the sight, and this hour—the last we were to pass together on the
terrace so full of pleasant associations, and so often trod by Angiolina’s
little feet—this hour was sad beyond all expression, and in appearance
beyond all reason. The serenity of the soul, like the sky of Italy, is
thus obscured at times by clouds that trouble and afflict the more because
the light they veil is habitually so bright and serene! Neither Stella nor
I, however, were disposed to believe in presentiments. Besides, our
sadness was too well founded to be surprising. Nevertheless, something
darker hovered over us than we foresaw at the moment: the morrow already
threw its gloom over this last evening!

The sun was going down. Stella suddenly started from her reverie and awoke
Angiolina. It was time to take her home. But the child’s eyes, generally
so bright, were now heavy. She hardly opened them when I approached to
embrace her. Her little mouth made a slight movement to return my kiss,
and she fell asleep again immediately. Her mother, surprised, and somewhat
alarmed at her unwonted languor, hastily wrapped a shawl around her to
protect her as much as possible from the evening air, and carried her
away.

The following day, of sorrowful memory, rose bright and radiant for me;
for when I awoke, I found a letter from Lorenzo awaiting me—a letter which
put an end to all my perplexities, and justified, beyond all my hopes, the
confidence with which I had expected it.

“Ginevra, you have prevailed. I venture at last to beg your forgiveness,
for your letters have inspired the hope of some day meriting it. I no
longer fear, therefore, to meet you again. Come! It is my wish. I am
waiting for you.

“LORENZO.”

These last lines contained the surest promise of happiness I had ever
received in my life, and I kissed them with tears. I longed to start that
very hour, and it will not seem surprising now that I looked around the
sumptuous dwelling I was about to leave for ever without regret, and even
at the enchanting prospect my eyes were never weary of gazing at! It was
by no means these exterior objects that inspired the deep, unalterable joy
of my soul. I did not owe to them the vision of happiness I thought I now
caught the first ray of. My only regret, therefore, was that I could not
start as soon as I wished. All my preparations were made, and I longed to
take my departure at once. But I had to wait three days before the first
boat on which I could embark would leave for Marseilles—a delay that
seemed so long! Alas! I was far from foreseeing how painful and short I
should find them!

Stella had passed every day with me for the last few weeks, and I now
awaited her arrival to communicate my joy. But the usual hour for her to
come had gone by. She did not appear. I was surprised at this delay, and,
instead of waiting any longer, I proceeded on foot to her house, which was
only at a short distance from mine. The previous evening had left me no
anxiety, and its sadness had been dispersed with the joy of the morning.

When I arrived, I found the door open. No servant was there to announce
me. I went through the gallery, a large drawing‐room, and a cabinet,
without meeting a person. At length I came to Stella’s chamber, where
Angiolina also slept in a little bed beside her mother’s. I entered....
Oh! how shall I describe the sight that met my eyes! How express all my
feelings of amazement, pity, affection, and grief!

My dear, unhappy Stella was seated in the middle of the room with her
child extended on her knees, pale, motionless, and apparently without
life!

She did not shed a tear; she did not utter a word. She raised an instant
her large eyes, which were unusually dilated, and looked at me. What a
look! O God! it expressed the grief that mothers alone can feel, and which
no other on earth can surpass!... I fell on my knees beside her. Angiolina
still breathed, but she was dying. She opened her beautiful eyes a
moment.... A look of recognition crossed them.... They turned from her
mother to me, and from me to her mother, and then grew dim. A convulsive
shudder ran over her, and it was all over. The angel was in heaven. The
mother was bereft, for this life, of her only child!...

                  ‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐‐

The longest years cannot efface the memory of such an hour, and time,
which at last subdues all grief, never gave me the courage to dwell on
this. Mothers who have been pierced by such a sword cannot speak of it;
others dare not. The woman who has no child, in the presence of one who
has just lost hers, can only bend in silence and respect before the
sovereign majesty of grief!

I will merely state, with respect to what preceded, that the drowsiness of
the child the night before was a symptom of the violent malady which
suddenly attacked her in the middle of the night. After abating towards
day, it came on again an hour later, and kept increasing without any
relaxation to the end.

As for me, who had given Angiolina the place that had remained vacant in
my heart, the excess of my grief enabled me to form an estimate of hers
whose heart was filled with far greater anguish at being so suddenly
robbed of her all by death. I shuddered at the thought of a sorrow greater
than mine, and did not dare dwell on my own troubles in the presence of a
grief that cast into the shade all the sufferings I had ever witnessed
before. What a remedy for the imaginary or exaggerated woes of life it is
to suddenly be brought to witness the reality of the most terrible of
misfortunes!

What a price was I now to pay for the journey I had so long looked forward
to—the reunion I had longed for with so many prayers and obtained by so
many efforts!

To leave Stella in her affliction was a trial I had not anticipated, and
one which the most imperious duty alone could have induced me to consent
to. I had to do it, however, but not till I had succeeded in gratifying
the only remaining wish of her broken heart—“to leave the world for a few
months, that she might be alone, free to abandon herself entirely to the
dear, angelic memory of her lost joy....”

Stella uttered no complaint. Her grief was mute. But she had expressed
this desire, and it was granted. Livia obtained a place of retreat for her
in a part of her convent that was not cloistered. It was there I left her,
in the shadow of that sweet sanctuary, near the tenderest, strongest heart
she could have to lean on, in presence of the magnificent prospect before
her, and beneath the brilliant canopy of that glorious sky, beyond which
she could follow in spirit the treasure she had been deprived of, but
which she felt sure of some day finding again!



XLIII.


I was filled with solemn emotion when, having taken leave of my brother
and all the friends who had accompanied me on board, I at length found
myself alone with Ottavia on the deck of the boat, gazing at the receding
mountains, hills, villas, and the smiling, flowery shores of the Bay of
Naples as they vanished away. Two years had scarcely flown since the day
when this prospect met my eyes for the first time. But during this short
period so many different feelings had agitated my heart, and so many
events had crossed my path, that the time seemed as long as a whole life.

Joys and sorrows, ardent hopes and bitter deceptions, severe trials,
dangerous temptations, a deadly struggle, grace—to crown all! grace
luminous and wonderful—had all succeeded each other in my soul. And to all
these remembrances was now added the new sorrow which set on these last
days a mournful, heartrending seal! The death of a child, it is true,
would seem to the indifferent to seriously wound no heart but its
mother’s. Mine, however, bled profusely, and the sudden death of the
angelic little creature I had so much loved, as well as the separation
that so soon took place, cast an inexpressible gloom over the hour of
departure I had so eagerly longed for, and which I had obtained at the
price of sacrifices which till now had not seemed worthy of being counted.
Truly, the words already quoted do not apply less to earthly affections
than to the divine love that overrules them and includes them all: “There
is no living in love without some pain or sorrow.” This is indubitable.
The more tender the affection, the more exquisite the suffering it
entails. But by way of recompense, in proportion as these cruel wounds are
multiplied, the never‐failing supreme love affords a remedy by revealing
itself more and more fully, and thereby supplying the place of all these
vanished joys. This love alone assures the promise, the pledge, of their
restoration and immortal duration!

Therefore, whatever the sadness of this hour; whatever the desolation of
heart with which I gazed at the convent on yonder height where I had just
parted from Stella and my sister with so many tears—in short, whatever the
emotions of all kinds that seemed combined to overwhelm me, I felt, in
spite of them, I lived a truer, freer life than when for the first time,
surrounded with illusions and deceitful hopes, I crossed this bay in all
the intoxication of radiant happiness!

These thoughts, and many others of a similar nature, passed through my
mind while the boat was rapidly cleaving the waves, and little by little
the last outline of the coast of Italy faded away and finally disappeared
from my eyes for ever.

Night came on, the stars appeared, but I remained in the place where I
was, without being able to make up my mind to leave it.

This solitude of the sea—more profound than any other—speaks to the soul a
language peculiar to itself. I listened to it with undivided attention,
blessing God for having inclined me to hear his voice, to give heed to no
other during the period of inaction and repose which separated the portion
of my life just closed from that which was about to commence under new and
unknown circumstances.

I did not stop at Marseilles, for I was impatient to arrive at my
journey’s end. And yet, in spite of the summons I was now obeying, I was
not without anxiety as to the reception I should meet with. I knew the
mobility of Lorenzo’s feelings, and that the letter I had so recently
received from him was not a sure guarantee of the disposition in which I
should find him. In fact, when I met him on my arrival at the station, I
did not at first know what to think. He was pale, agitated, and gloomy,
and could scarcely hide the suffering his face expressed much more clearly
than joy at seeing me again. I felt the arm tremble on which I was
leaning, and I remained silent, confounded, and anxious. He hurried me
through the crowd, placed me in a carriage, made Ottavia take a seat
beside me, then closed the door with an air of constraint, saying he
wished to arrive before me.

At first I was astonished at finding myself so suddenly separated from
him, after barely seeing him for a moment. But I saw, by the embarrassment
and painful agitation he manifested, what was passing in his mind, and was
extremely affected. Poor Lorenzo! it was not in this way he had once led
his young bride beneath his roof. This was not the future he then took
pleasure in depicting, or what he had promised. The immense change of
fortune he had undergone was now for the first time to be realized by the
wife he had outraged, and from whom he did not dare expect an affection
which would overlook all and render every sacrifice light. I felt he
regretted now that he had consented to my coming.

After a long drive we at last came to the end of a street at the extremity
of the Faubourg Saint‐Germain, where we entered a small court, and the
carriage stopped before a door of very unpretending appearance.

But the house to which it gave access, covered on the outside with
climbing plants that concealed the reddish tint of the walls, had a
picturesque appearance seldom found in any house in Paris, large or small.
Lorenzo, with his artistic eye, had discovered it, and understood also how
it should be arranged interiorly. Consequently, when he ushered me into a
_salon_ opening into a little parterre filled with flowers, beyond which
rose the trees of an adjacent garden, which made it seem like some rural
solitude; when he took me all over the ground‐floor, where everything was
simple, but nothing vulgar; when on all sides I found evidences both of
his taste and his solicitude for me; above all, when I saw in his cabinet
and studio all the indications that he had resumed his habits of assiduous
labor and serious study, so great a joy filled my heart and beamed from my
eyes that he could no longer feel any doubt, and I saw the cloud that
veiled his brow totally disappear.

“Is it possible?... Is it true?” said he. “You are satisfied, Ginevra? And
I can welcome your presence without remorse?”

I was affected to tears.

“I assure you,” said I, with a sincerity of accent that could not be
mistaken, “this so‐called great catastrophe has only taken away the things
I did not care for: it gives me here all I love, and nearly everything I
desire.”

I looked at him hesitatingly, not yet knowing how far to go. But his look
inspired me with courage, and I continued, with emotion:

“Tell me, in your turn, that you regret nothing, that my presence
suffices, and I pledge you my word, Lorenzo, this hour will be the
happiest of my life.”

Instead of replying directly, he knelt down beside the little divan where
I was sitting, and I saw his eyes beaming with the expression that once
used to flash from them for an instant, not uncertain and transitory as
then, but calm, stable, and profound.

“Ginevra,” said he, “in assuring you to‐day that my reason has been
restored to me, that I have for ever recovered from my detestable
aberration, that I again look upon you as I did when you first effaced
every other image, that I love you as much, yes, a thousand times more
than ever, this is not saying enough, this is not telling you what you
would perhaps listen to far more gladly than all this.”

I opened my eyes and looked steadily towards him. He felt my soul was
trying to read his, and he continued in a low, agitated tone:

“You have made me love in you what is better than yourself. Listen to
me.... Long years of indifference had effaced the memory of divine things
I had been taught in my childhood. Did you think they could ever be
recalled? I had never felt the slightest desire. It is you, Ginevra, who
caused their return. Can you realize it?”

O my God! this hour was too happy for earth! It left me only one wish
more. It realized to the fullest extent all the cherished dreams of the
past, and made me touch at last the summit (alas! always threatening and
uncertain) of earthly happiness! No cloud has ever obscured the bright,
blessed remembrance! No suffering, no trial, has ever checked the effusion
of gratitude I still feel, and which will be eternal!

It will not be difficult to understand that, in this new state of things,
our life speedily and sweetly resumed its course. Strange to say, this
calm, simple life, exempt from splendor, luxury, and worldly _éclat_, was
the precise realization of the secret desire I had always cherished in my
soul, the signification of which had been revealed to me in that great day
of grace which I may call that of my _true birth_!

It would, therefore, have been an absurdity to speak of sacrifice in the
situation in which I now found myself. But Lorenzo did not yet see things
in the same light.

“I acknowledge,” said he one day, after some weeks had passed by—“I
acknowledge we lack nothing essential, that the waifs from our wreck even
afford us a comfortable support, but I wish more than that for you, my
Ginevra. I must work for the means of restoring all my folly has deprived
you of. The public receives my productions with marked favor. They have
all been sold at a fabulous price, except one which I will never part
with. Let me alone, therefore, and I promise you the day shall arrive when
I will place on your brow a diadem even more brilliant than the one you
have lost.”

I made a quick gesture, and was about to express the repugnance such a
prospect inspired. But I stopped. It was better, no matter in what way, he
should be stimulated by some object to be attained by the laborious
efforts to which he devoted all his faculties. I allowed him, therefore,
to dream of the jewels he would adorn me with, and enlarge on his plans
for the future, while I was sitting beside him in his studio, sometimes
reading to him, and sometimes becoming his model again. Whenever he spoke
in this way, I smiled without trying to oppose him.

Mme. de Kergy and Diana hastened to see me the day after my arrival. We
continued to meet almost daily, and I found in their delightful society
the strongest support, the wisest counsels, and an affection which
inspired almost unlimited confidence.

As to Gilbert, he was still absent, and not expected to return till the
autumn of the following year.

When his mother gave me this information, my first feeling was one of
relief. It seemed to me my relations with his family were simplified by
his absence, and I could defer all thought as to what I should do at his
return. But, when I saw my dear, venerable friend secretly wipe away a
tear as she spoke of her son; when she added in a trembling voice that
such a separation at her age was a severe trial which afflicted her more
than any she had ever known; when Diana afterwards came to tell me with a
full heart that Gilbert’s absence was shortening her mother’s days, oh!
then my heart sank with profound sorrow, and I felt an ardent, painful
desire to repair the evil I had caused—an evil which (whatever may be
said) is never altogether involuntary!

Ah! if women would only consider how far their fatal influence sometimes
extends, even those who add hardness of heart to their desire to please
would become indifferent to the wish. They scarcely hesitate sometimes to
sacrifice a man’s career, his abilities, his whole existence. Vanity and
pride take pleasure in ravages of this kind. But if their eyes could
behold the firesides they quench the light of, the maternal hearts they
sadden, the families whose sweet joys they destroy, their trophies would
seem bloody, and they might be brought to comprehend the words of the
Psalmist which I had humbly learned to repeat: _Ab occultis meis munda me,
et ab alienis parce servo tuo._

Lorenzo’s celebrity increased by the productions he now exhibited to the
public. The singularity of our position in returning to Paris, under
circumstances so different from those which surrounded us when we made our
first appearance in the _grand monde_, drew upon us the attention of this
very world which would have enticed us from our retreat. But, thank
Heaven! I did not have to exert my influence over Lorenzo to induce him to
decline it. His pride would have been sufficient, had not his whole time
been absorbed in his labors, and it was even with difficulty he consented
to accompany me one evening to the Hôtel de Kergy.

From that time, however, he willingly repeated his visits, attracted by
Mme. de Kergy’s dignified cordiality and simplicity of manner as well as
by the charm of the intellectual circle of which her _salon_ was the
centre—a charm he would have always appreciated had he not been under the
influence of another attraction. Now there was no counteracting influence,
and he took fresh pleasure every evening in going there to repose after
the fatigue of the day and seek something more beneficial to his mind than
mere recreation.

A person endowed with noble gifts, who returns to the right path after
long going astray, experiences an immense consolation in finding himself
in his true element. It would, therefore, be impossible to tell how great
Lorenzo’s joy now was, or how eloquently he was able to express it. And
nothing could express the feelings with which I listened to him!

The only shadow of my life at this time was my separation from Stella. A
thousand times did I urge her to join me, as she was no longer under any
obligation to remain at Naples. I felt that the only possible solace for
her broken heart would be to leave the place where she had suffered so
much; her courageous soul would find a salutary aliment in the great
charitable movement at Paris, at that time in all the vigor of its first
impulse, given a few years before. I therefore continually urged her to
come, but I begged her in vain. An invincible repugnance to leave the
place of refuge where she had hidden her grief prevented her from yielding
to my wishes.

Thus passed days, weeks, months, yes, even a whole year and more of
happiness. The satisfactory life I had dreamed of was now a reality, and
the world I once fancied I could reveal to Lorenzo unaided he had
discovered himself. It had been revealed to him by trials, humiliation,
and labor. The absolute change in his habits, which Lando had once
indicated as the only remedy, had, as he had foreseen, produced a
beneficial, efficacious, and lasting effect.

But we know one of the anomalies of the human heart is to expect and long
for happiness as its right, and yet to be incapable of possessing it a
single day in its plenitude without trembling, as if conscious it was not
in the nature of things here below for it to endure a long time.

Lorenzo experienced more than most people this melancholy of happiness,
which was often increased by too profound a regret for the errors of his
life. It partook of the vehemence of his character, and it was sometimes
difficult to overcome the sadness awakened by the remembrance of the past.

“Ginevra,” said he one day, “I am far too happy for a man who merits it so
little.”

He said this with a gloomy expression. It was the beginning of spring. The
air was soft, the sky clear, the lilacs of our little garden were in
bloom, and we sat there inhaling the perfume. He repeated:

“Yes, my life is now too happy—too happy, I feel, to be of long duration.”
A remark somewhat trite, which is often thrown like a veil over the too
excessive brightness of earthly happiness! But I could not repress a
shudder as I listened to it. And yet what was there to fear ... to desire
... to refuse ... when I felt the present and the future were in the hands
of Him whom I loved more than anything here below?

To Be Concluded Next Month.




A Bit Of Modern Thought On Matter.


We have now accomplished the first portion of our task, by establishing on
good philosophical and physical grounds the fundamental truths regarding
the essence and the properties of material substance as such. We might,
therefore, take up the second part of our treatise, and begin our
investigation about the nature of the metaphysical constituents of matter
and their necessary relations, in order to ascertain how far the
principles of the scholastic doctrine on matter can nowadays be maintained
consistently with the principles of natural science. But we think it
necessary, before we enter into the study of such a difficult subject, to
caution our readers against some productions of modern thinkers, whose
speculations on the nature of material things confound all philosophy, and
tend by their sophistry to popularize the most pernicious errors. The
number of such productions is daily increasing, owing to the efforts of
powerful societies, and the philosophical imbecility of the scientific
press and of its patrons. The heap of intellectual rubbish thus
accumulated, both in Europe and in America, is quite prodigious; to sweep
it all away would be like purging the Augean stable—a task which some new
Hercules may yet undertake. We shall confine ourselves to a small portion
of that task, by scattering to the winds some plausible quibbles we have
lately met with in an American scientific magazine.

J. B. Stallo is the author of a series of articles published in the
_Popular Science Monthly_ under the title “The Primary Concepts of Modern
Physical Science.” He is a clever writer; but his conclusions, owing to a
lack of sound philosophy, are not always correct. Some of them are
altogether unfounded, others demonstrably false; and many of them, while
attempting to revolutionize science, tend to foster downright scepticism.
We shall single out a few of those propositions which clash with the
common doctrines of modern physics no less than with the common principles
of metaphysics; and we hope to show, by their refutation, the incomparable
superiority of our old over his new philosophy.

_Indestructibility of matter._—“The indestructibility of matter,” says the
writer,(181) “is an unquestionable truth. But in what sense, and upon what
grounds, is this indestructibility predicated of matter? The unanimous
answer of the atomists is: Experience teaches that all the changes to
which matter is subject are but variations of form, and that amid these
variations there is an unvarying constant—the mass or quantity of matter.
The constancy of the mass is attested by the balance, which shows that
neither fusion nor sublimation, neither generation nor corruption, can add
to, or detract from, the weight of a body subjected to experiment. When a
pound of carbon is burned, the balance demonstrates the continuous
existence of this pound in the carbonic acid, which is the product of
combustion, and from which the original weight of carbon may be recovered.
The quantity of matter is measured by its weight, and this weight is
unchangeable.”

So far all is right; but he continues: “Such is the fact familiar to every
one, and its interpretation equally familiar. To test the correctness of
this interpretation we may be permitted slightly to vary the method of
verifying it. Instead of burning the pound of carbon, let us simply carry
it to the summit of a mountain, or remove it to a lower latitude; is its
weight still the same? Relatively it is; it will still balance the
original counterpoise. But the absolute weight is no longer the same....
It is thus evident that the constancy, upon the observation of which the
assertion of the indestructibility of matter is based, is simply the
constancy of a relation, and that the ordinary statement of the fact is
crude and inadequate. Indeed, while it is true that the weight of a body
is a measure of its mass, this is but a single case of the more general
fact that the masses of bodies are inversely as the velocities imparted to
them by the action of the same force, or, more generally still, inversely
as the accelerations produced in them by the same force. In the case of
gravity, the forces of attraction are directly proportional to the masses,
so that the action of the forces (_weight_) is the simplest measure of the
relation between any two masses as such; but in any inquiry relating to
the validity of the atomic theory, it is necessary to bear in mind that
this weight is not the equivalent, or rather the presentation, of an
absolute substantive entity in one of the bodies (the body weighed), but
the mere expression of a relation between two bodies mutually attracting
each other. And it is further necessary to remember that this weight may
be indefinitely reduced, without any diminution in the mass of the body
weighed, by a mere change of its position in reference to the body between
which and the body weighed the relation subsists.”

The aim of the author is, as we shall see, to prove that “there are and
can be no absolute constants of mass”; hence he endeavors at the very
outset to shake our opposite conviction by showing that there is no
absolute measure of masses. Such is the drift of the passage we have
transcribed.

But we beg to remark that absolute quantities may be known to be absolute
independently of any absolute measurement. Three kinds of quantity are
conceivable: intensive quantity, which is measured by _degrees_; dimensive
quantity, which is measured by _distances_; and numerical quantity, which
is measured by discrete _units_. Of course dimensive quantity is
altogether relative, inasmuch as it entirely consists of relations, and
cannot be measured but by relative and arbitrary measures; but intensive
quantity, though measured by arbitrary degrees, is altogether absolute,
because it consists of a reality whose value is independent of correlative
terms. And in the same manner numerical quantity is altogether absolute,
because it consists of absolute units, by which it can be measured,
absolutely speaking, though we may fail to reach such units, and are then
obliged to measure it by some other standard. Now, the mass, or the
quantity of matter in a body, is a numerical quantity; for it consists of
a number of primitive units, independent of one another for their essence
and for their existence, and therefore absolute in regard to their
substantial being. Consequently, every mass of matter has an absolute
value corresponding to the number of absolute units it contains; and thus
every mass of matter is “an absolute constant of mass.” It is true that we
have no means of ascertaining the absolute number of primitive units
contained in a given mass; hence we are constrained to measure the
quantity of matter by a relative measure—that is, by comparing it with an
equal volume of another substance, whose density and weight we assume as
the measure of other densities and weights. But does our ignorance of the
absolute number of primitive units contained in a given mass interfere
with their real existence? or, can our method of measuring change the
nature of the thing measured?

We are told that “the weight of a body may be indefinitely reduced without
any diminution in the mass of the body weighed.” Would not this show that,
contrary to the author’s opinion, the body weighed possesses “an absolute
constant of mass”? We are told at the same time that “the weight of a body
is a measure of its mass.” This cannot be true, unless, while the mass
remains unchanged, the weight also remains unchanged. Hence the author’s
idea of carrying the pound of carbon to the summit of a mountain in order
to diminish its weight, is inconsistent with the law of measurement, which
forbids the employment of two weights and measures for measuring one and
the same quantity.

The atomists measure the quantity of matter by its weight, because they
know that every particle of matter is subject to gravitation, and
therefore that the weights, all other things being equal, are
proportionate to the number of primitive particles contained in the
bodies. Thus, if a body contains a number, _m_, of primitive particles,
and each of these particles is subject to the gravitation, _g_, while
another body contains a number, _m´_, of primitive particles subject to
the same gravitation, the ratio of the weights of the two bodies will be
the same as the ratio of the two masses; for

_mg_ : _m´g_ : : _m_ : _m´_;

and if the two bodies were carried to the summit of a mountain, where the
gravitation is reduced to _g´_, the weights would indeed be changed, but
their ratio would remain unaltered, and we would still have

_mg´_ : _m´g´_ : : _m_ : _m´_.

Hence, whether we weigh two bodies in the valley or at the summit of the
mountain, so long as we keep the same unit of gravitation for both, the
ratio of their masses remains the same. This shows that the quantity of
matter existing in those bodies implies “a constant of mass” _independent_
of the intensity of gravitation, and that the ratio of the two masses is
the ratio of two “absolute” quantities—that is, of two numbers of
primitive material units.

It is not true, therefore, that the weight is not “the presentation of an
absolute substantive entity,” as the author pretends. Weight implies mass
and gravitation, and presents the one as subject to the other. Now, the
mass is an “absolute substantive entity,” as we have shown. Nor is it true
that weight is “the mere expression of a relation between two bodies
mutually attracting each other,” as the author imagines. The pound of
carbon is a pound not because of an attraction exercised by the carbon
upon the earth, but merely because of the attraction exercised by the
earth on the mass of the carbon. Were it otherwise, the mathematical
expression of weight should contain, besides the mass of the body weighed
and the action of gravity upon it, a third quantity representing the
action of the body upon the earth, and the gravitation of the earth
towards the body.

The writer proceeds: “Masses find their true and only measure in the
action of forces, and the quantitative persistence of the effect of this
action is the simple and accurate expression of the fact which is
ordinarily described as the indestructibility of matter. It is obvious
that this persistence is in no sense explained or accounted for by the
atomic theory” (p. 708).

We admit that, owing to our inability to determine the absolute number of
primitive elements in a body, we resort to the persistence of the weight
in order to ascertain the persistence of a certain quantity of matter in
the body. But this does not show that the action of forces is the “only
measure” of masses. A mass is a number of material units; its true measure
is _one of such units_, and it is only in order to determine the relative
number of such units in different bodies that we have recourse to their
weights. It is not the quantity of matter that follows the weight of the
body, but it is the weight of the body that follows the quantity of
matter; and therefore, although we determine the relative quantities of
matter by the relation of their weights, it is not the weight that
measures the quantity of matter, but it is the quantity of matter that
measures the weight. In other terms, the persistence of the mass is merely
_known_ through the persistence of the weight, but the persistence of the
weight is itself _a consequence_ of the persistence of the mass. Hence the
persistence of the mass is perfectly accounted for by the atomic theory,
notwithstanding Mr. Stallo’s contrary assertion.

He says: “The hypothesis of ultimate indestructible atoms is not a
necessary implication of the persistence of weight, and can at best
account for the indestructibility of matter if it can be shown that there
is an absolute limit to the compressibility of matter—in other words, that
there is an absolutely least volume for every determinate mass” (p. 708).
Both parts of this proposition are false. The first is false, because the
weight of a body is the result of the gravitation of all its particles;
and, therefore, it cannot persist without the persistence of the
gravitating particles. The second part also is false, because the
persistence of the weight implies the persistence of the mass
independently of all considerations concerning a limit of compressibility
or an absolute minimum of volume. Hence, whatever the author may say to
the contrary, it is quite certain of scientific certainty that there can
be, and there is, in all bodies, “an absolute constant of mass.”

_Atomic theory._—The writer objects to the atomic theory on the ground
that it does not explain impenetrability, and that it misconceives the
nature of reality. He begins by remarking that “the proposition, according
to which a space occupied by one body cannot be occupied by another,
implies the assumption that space is an absolute, self‐measuring entity,
and the further assumption that there is a least space which a given body
will absolutely fill so as to exclude any other body” (p. 709). We think
that the proposition implies nothing of the kind. The space occupied by
one body cannot _naturally_ be occupied by another, because all bodies are
made up of molecules which at very small distances repel one another with
actions of greater and greater intensities, thus preventing
compenetration, while successfully struggling for the preservation of
their own individuality. This the molecules can do, whether space can be
filled or not, and whether space is a self‐measuring entity or not. Hence
the remark of the author has no foundation.

But he continues: “The atomic theory has become next to valueless as an
explanation of the impenetrability of matter, since it has been pressed
into the service of the undulatory theory of light, heat, etc., and
assumed the form in which it is now held by the majority of physicists.
According to this form of the theory, the atoms are either mere points,
wholly without extension, or their dimensions are infinitely small as
compared with the distances between them, whatever be the state of
aggregation of the substances into which they enter. In this view, the
resistance which a body, _i.e._, a system of atoms, offers to the
intrusion of another body is due not to the rigidity or unchangeability of
volume of the individual atoms, but to the relation between the attractive
and repulsive forces with which they are supposed to be endowed. There are
physicists holding this view, who are of opinion that the atomic
constitution of matter is consistent with its compenetrability—among them
M. Cauchy, who in his _Sept Leçons de physique générale_ (ed. Moigno,
Paris, 1868, p. 38), after defining atoms as material points without
extension, uses this language: ‘Thus, this property of matter, which we
call impenetrability, is explained when we consider the atoms as material
points exerting on each other attractions and repulsions which vary with
the distances that separate them.... From this it follows that, if it
pleased the Author of nature simply to modify the laws according to which
the atoms attract or repel each other, we might instantly see the hardest
bodies penetrate each other, the smallest particles of matter occupy
immense spaces, or the largest masses reduce themselves to the smallest
volumes, the entire universe concentrating itself, as it were, in a single
point’ ” (p. 710).

We think that the author’s notion of the form in which the atomic theory
is now held by physicists is not quite correct. The chemical atoms are now
considered as dynamical systems of material points, so that the atomic
theory is now scarcely distinguishable from the molecular theory. That
such a theory “has become next to valueless as an explanation of the
impenetrability of matter” is not true. Of course two primitive elements
of matter, if attractive, would, according to the theory, as we understand
it, pass through one another; as nothing can oppose their progress except
repulsion, which is not to be thought of in the case of attractive
elements. But the case is different with molecules; for every molecule of
any special substance contains a number of repulsive elements, and
possesses a repulsive envelope(182) which resists most effectually all
attempt at compenetration on the part of other molecules. Hence the
impenetrability of _bodies_ (not of _matter_, as the author says) is a
simple result of the molecular constitution of bodies, as explained in the
atomic theory of the modern chemists.

That the resistance which a body offers to the intrusion of another body
is due “not to the rigidity or unchangeability of volume of individual
atoms, but to the relation between the attractive and repulsive forces
with which they are supposed to be endowed,” is an obvious truth. We do
not see by what kind of reasoning the author can infer from it that “the
atomic theory has become next to valueless as an explanation of
impenetrability.” We rather maintain that the theory is correct, and that
no other theory has yet been found which explains impenetrability without
assuming much that philosophy condemns. As to M. Cauchy’s views, we remark
that, when he defines atoms as “material points without extension,” he
does not speak of the chemical atoms, or equivalents, but of the primitive
elements of which such atoms or equivalents are composed.

The author says: “The assumption of atoms of different specific gravities
proves to be not only futile, but absurd. Its manifest theoretical
ineptitude is found to mask the most fatal inconsistencies. According to
the mechanical conception which underlies the whole atomic hypothesis,
differences of weight are differences of density; and differences of
density are differences of distance between the particles contained in a
given space. Now, in the atom there is no multiplicity of particles and no
void space; hence differences of density or weight are impossible in the
case of atoms” (p. 715).

This conclusion would be quite inevitable, if it were true that the atom
of the chemists contains no multiplicity of particles and no void space;
but the truth is that chemical atoms are nothing but _equivalents_, or
_molecules_—that is, dynamical systems of material points intercepting
void space. Hence the author’s argument has no foundation. The very fact
that men of science unanimously agree in attributing to different atoms a
different weight, should have warned Mr. Stallo that the word “atom” could
not be considered by them as a simple material point.

The author in his second article (November, 1873) argues against the
_actio in distans_. We have given his words in one of our own articles,
where we undertook to show that _actio in distans_ cannot be impugned with
any good argument.(183) The author, however, we are glad to see, honestly
acknowledges that “the transfer of motion from one body to another by
impact is no less incomprehensible than the _actio in distans_” (p. 96);
which shows that, after having rejected the action at a distance, he is at
a loss how to account for any communication or propagation of movement. A
little later he quotes a passage of Faraday, which we have given in
another place, and in which the English professor considers the atoms as
consisting of a mere sphere of power, with a central point having no
dimensions. Then he gives his own view of the subject in the following
words:

“The true root of all these errors is a total misconception of the nature
of reality. All the reality we know is not only spatially finite, but
limited in all its aspects; its whole existence lies in relation and
contrast, as I shall show more at length in the next article. We know
nothing of force, except by its contrast with mass, or (what is the same
thing) inertia; and conversely, as I have already pointed out in my first
article, we know nothing of mass except by its relation to force. Mass,
inertia (or, as it is sometimes, though inaccurately, called, matter _per
se_), is indistinguishable from absolute nothingness; for matter reveals
its presence, or evinces its reality, only by its action, its force, its
tension, or motion. But, on the other hand, mere force is equally nothing;
for, if we reduce the mass upon which a given force, however small, acts,
until it vanishes—or, mathematically expressed, until it becomes
infinitely small—the consequence is that the velocity of the resulting
motion is infinitely great, and that the ‘thing’ (if under these
circumstances a thing can still be spoken of) is at any given moment
neither here nor there, but everywhere—that is, there is no real presence.
It is impossible, therefore, to construct matter by a mere synthesis of
forces.... The true formula of matter is mass × force, or inertia × force”
(p. 103).

The author is greatly mistaken in assuming that those who consider the
atoms (primitive elements) as centres of force totally misconceive the
nature of reality. That Faraday, notwithstanding his saying that “the
substance consists of the powers,” admits with the power the matter also,
is evident from his very mention of the _centre_ of the powers; for such a
centre is nothing else than _the_ matter, as we have proved above. He
says, indeed, that the nucleus of the atom “vanishes”; but by “nucleus” he
means the _bulk_ or the continuous material extension of the atom. This
bulk, says he, must vanish, inasmuch as the centre of the powers must be a
mere unextended point. He therefore denies, not the matter, but only its
intrinsic extension.

Mr. Stallo volunteers to show us “the true root” of all our _errors_.
According to him, we totally misconceive the nature of reality. “All the
reality we know,” he says, “is not only spatially finite, but limited in
all its aspects.” About this we will not quarrel, for we admit that all
created substances are limited; yet we would ask the author whether he
thinks that the range of universal attraction has any known limit in
space; and, if so, we would further ask where it is; for we admit our full
ignorance of its existence. “We know nothing of force,” he continues,
“except by its contrast with mass, or, what is the same thing, inertia.”
Our readers know that mass and inertia are not the same thing; the mass is
a quantity of matter, while inertia is the incapability of self‐motion. A
writer who can confound the two as identical is not competent to correct
our _errors_ and to teach us the nature of reality. As to the contrast of
force with mass, we have no objection; yet, while speaking of the nature
of things, we would prefer to contrast matter with form rather than force
with mass. The term _force_ applies to the production of phenomena, and is
usually confounded with action and with movement, neither of which is a
constituent of substance; whilst the term _mass_ expresses any quantity of
matter from a single element up to a mountain; and thus it does not
exhibit with precision the matter due to the primitive material substance.

“Mass, or matter _per se_, is indistinguishable from absolute
nothingness.” Of course, matter _per se_—that is, without form—cannot
exist. In the same manner “mere force is equally nothing”—that is, the
material form, which is the principle of action, has no separate existence
without its matter. This every one admits, though not on the grounds
suggested by Mr. Stallo. “If we reduce,” says he, “the mass upon which a
given force, however small, acts, until it vanishes—or, mathematically
expressed, until it becomes infinitely small—the consequence is that the
velocity of the resulting motion is infinitely great.” We deny this
consequence, as well as the supposition from which it is inferred. Masses
are numbers of material elements, or units. When such units are reached,
the division is at an end, because those primitive units are without
dimensions. Hence the extreme limit of the reduction of masses is not an
infinitesimal quantity of mass, as the author imagines, but an absolute
finite unit; for this unit, when repeated a finite number of times, gives
us a finite quantity of mass. But, even supposing that the hypothesis of
the author might be entertained (and it must be entertained by all those
who consider matter as materially continuous), his consequence would still
be false. For, let there be a continuous atom having finite dimensions. If
such an atom is acted on, say by gravity, it will acquire a finite
velocity. Now, it is evident that, when the atom has a finite velocity,
every infinitesimal portion of it will have a finite velocity. Therefore
the action which produces a finite velocity in the finite mass of the
atom, produces a finite velocity in the infinitesimal masses of which the
atom is assumed to consist. The error of the author arises from his
confounding quantity of movement with action. A quantity of movement is a
product of a mass into its velocity; and evidently the product cannot
remain constant, unless the velocity increases in the same ratio as the
mass decreases. The action, on the contrary, is _directly_ proportional to
the mass; and therefore, in the author’s hypothesis, the consequence
should have been the very opposite of that which he enounces; that is, the
velocity acquired by an infinitesimal mass would still be finite instead
of infinitely great. But, as we have said, the hypothesis itself is
inadmissible, because only continuous quantity can be reduced to
infinitesimals, whilst masses are not continuous but discrete quantities.

That it is impossible “to construct matter by a mere synthesis of forces”
is undeniable; but there was no need of arguing a point which no one
contests. The author should rather have given us his ground for asserting
that “the true formula of matter is _mass multiplied by force_.” This
assertion can by no means be made good. All physicists know that mass
multiplied by force represents nothing but a quantity of movement; and the
author will not pretend, we presume, that matter is a quantity of
movement. The true formula of matter is its essential definition; and it
is not a mathematical but a metaphysical product, or rather a metaphysical
ratio, as we have shown in another place. Material substance is _matter
actuated by its substantial form_, and nothing else.

The author continues thus: “We now have before us in full view one of the
fundamental fallacies of the atomic theory. This fallacy consists in the
delusion that the conceptual constituents of matter can be grasped as
separate and real entities. The corpuscular atomists take the element of
inertia, and treat it as real by itself: while Boscovich, Faraday, and all
those who define atoms as _centres of force_, seek to realize the
corresponding element, force, as an entity by itself. In both cases
elements of reality are mistaken for kinds of reality” (p. 103).

It is rather singular that a man who is so little at home in questions
about matter should undertake to point out the fallacies and delusions of
the best informed. Is it true that Boscovich, Faraday, and others of the
same school, consider force as an entity by itself? And is it true that
the corpuscular atomists treat the element of inertia as real by itself?
There is much to be said against corpuscular atomists for other reasons,
but they cannot surely be accused of maintaining that the element of
inertia—that is, the mass of the atom—can exist separately without any
inherent power, as they uniformly teach that their atoms are endowed with
resisting powers. The accusation brought against Boscovich, Faraday, and
others, is still more glaringly unjust. They do not seek to realize force
“as an entity by itself”; on the contrary, when they define the atoms as
centres of force, they manifestly teach that both the force and its centre
are indispensable for the constitution of a primitive atom. And, since by
the word _force_ they mean the principle of activity (the form), and in
the centre they recognize the principle of passivity (the matter), we
cannot but conclude that the accusation has no ground, and that the
fallacy and the delusion is on the side of Mr. Stallo himself.

Moreover, is it true that _mass_ and _force_, or, to speak more
accurately, the matter and the form, are nothing more than “the
_conceptual_ constituents” of material substance? This the author assumes
as the base of his argumentation; yet it is plain that, if the
constituents of a thing are only conceptual, the thing they constitute
cannot be anything else than a conceptual being—that is, a being of
reason. We must therefore either deny the reality of matter or concede
that its constituents are more than conceptual. Could not the author
perceive that, if mass is a mere concept, and force another mere concept,
their alliance gives nothing but two concepts, and that the reality of the
external world becomes a dream?

We live in times when men of a certain class presume to discuss
metaphysical subjects without previous study and without a sufficient
acquaintance with the first notions of metaphysics. One of these first
notions is that all real being has real constituents. Such constituents,
when known to us, are the object of our conceptions, and consequently they
may become conceptual; but they do not cease to be real outside of our
mind. Were we to conceive matter as separated from its form, or form as
deprived of its matter, nothing real would correspond to our conception;
for nowhere can real matter be found without a form, or a real form
without its matter. Hence form without matter and matter without form are
at best beings of reason. But when we conceive the matter as it is under
its form, or the form as it is terminated to its matter, we evidently
conceive the real constituents of material substance as they are in
nature—that is, as metaphysical realities contained in the physical being.
Does it follow that “elements of reality,” as the author objects, “are
mistaken for kinds of reality”? By no means. The constituents of physical
reality are themselves metaphysical realities, but they are not exactly
two kinds of reality, because they belong both to the same essence which
cannot be of two kinds. Hence the matter and the substantial form, or, in
general, act and potency, notwithstanding their real metaphysical
opposition and distinction, are one essence, one kind, and one being. But
let us go back to our author.

In his third article (December, 1873) he says: “The ordinary mechanical
explanation of the molecular states of matter, or states of aggregation,
on the basis of the atomic theory, proceeds on the assumption that the
molecular states are produced by the conflict of antagonistic central
forces—molecular attraction and repulsion—the preponderance of the one or
the other of which gives rise to the solid and gaseous forms, while their
balance or equilibrium results in the liquid state. The utter futility of
this explanation is apparent at a glance. Even waiving the considerations
presented by Herbert Spencer (_First Principles_, p. 60 et seq.), that, in
view of the necessary variation of the attractive and repulsive forces in
the inverse ratio of the squares of the distances, the constituent atoms
of a body, if they are _in equilibrio_ at any particular distance, must be
equally _in equilibrio_ at all other distances, and that their density or
state, therefore, must be invariable; and admitting that the increase or
diminution of the repulsive force, _heat_, may render the preponderance of
either force, and thus the change of density or state of aggregation,
possible, what becomes of the liquid state as corresponding to the exact
balance of these two forces in the absence of external coercion? The exact
balance of the two opposing forces is a mere mathematical limit, which
must be passed with the slightest preponderance of either force over the
other. All bodies being subject to continual changes of temperature, the
equilibrium can at best be but momentary; it must of necessity be of the
most labile kind” (p. 223).

This argument against the atomic theory would be very good, if its
premises were not deceptive. Mr. Stallo, unfortunately, relies too much on
the terminology of physical writers, which is not always correct. Thus, it
is not true that the solid form is the result of an actual preponderance
of attraction between the molecules. If attraction prevailed, the
molecules would not remain in their relative position, but would move in
the direction of the attraction. The truth is that molecules, whether in
the solid or in the liquid form, are in equilibrium of position;
accordingly, neither attraction nor repulsion actually prevails between
them.

Their position of equilibrium is determined by their own constitution, and
may change; for the molecules admit of accidental changes in their
constitution. Hence the distance of relative equilibrium is not
necessarily constant, but changes with the change of state of each
molecule. This shows that bodies, whether solid or liquid, can retain
their solid or liquid form while subjected to considerable molecular
changes, and that therefore neither the solid nor the liquid form is
necessarily impaired by “the changes of temperature” or other molecular
movements. The molecules of bodies attract each other when their distance
is great, and repel each other when their distance has become very small;
whence we immediately infer that there is for every kind of molecules a
distance which marks the limit of their mutual attraction and repulsion,
and that at such a distance the molecules must find their position of
equilibrium. A body will be solid when, its molecules being in the
position of relative equilibrium, from a small increase of their distance
an attraction arises, which does not allow of the molecules being easily
separated or arranged in a different order around one another. A body will
be liquid when, its molecules being in the position of relative
equilibrium, from a small increase of their distance a weak attraction
arises, which allows of the molecules being easily separated or easily
arranged, without separation, in a different manner around one another. A
body will be expansive and fluid when its free molecules are at a distance
sensibly less than that of relative equilibrium, and therefore repel each
other, and are in need of exterior pressure to be kept at such a distance.
But we must not forget that the distance of relative equilibrium varies
with the intrinsic dynamical variation of the molecules, and that
therefore “the exact balance of the two opposing forces is _not_ a mere
mathematical limit,” but is comprised between two mathematical limits
determined by the amount of the variations of which each species of
molecules is susceptible before settling into a different form.

Having thus disposed of the main argument by which the author wished to
show “the utter futility” of the ordinary mechanical explanation of the
molecular states of matter on the basis of the atomic theory, we may add a
few words concerning Herbert Spencer’s argument alluded to by the author.
The law of actions inversely proportional to the squares of the distances
is true for each primitive element of matter, but it is not applicable to
molecules acting at molecular distances, as we have proved in another
place.(184) Hence Spencer’s argument, which assumes the contrary, is
entirely worthless. On the other hand, were the argument admissible, we do
not see how the proposition, “The constituent atoms of a body, if they are
_in equilibrio_ at any particular distance, must be equally _in
equilibrio_ at all other distances,” can justify the conclusion that
“their density or state must be invariable.” It seems to us that a change
of molecular distances must entail a change of density; but, of course, we
are behind our age.

_Relativity of material realities._—“It has been a favorite tenet, not
only of metaphysicians, but of physicists as well, that reality is
cognizable only as absolute, permanent, and invariable, or, as the
metaphysicians of the XVIth and XVIIth centuries expressed it, _sub specie
æterni et abroluti_. This proposition,” Mr. Stallo continues, “like so
many others which have served as pillars of imposing metaphysical
structures, is the precise opposite of the truth” (p. 223). Do you
understand, reader? Metaphysicians and physicists of all centuries count
for nothing; they were blind, every one of them; but a great luminary has
appeared at last, a Mr. J. B. Stallo, whose superior wisdom, if not
philosophical infallibility, opens a new era of thought, and dispels the
darkness which has been thickening around us up to the present day. Yet
even the sun has spots; and Mr. Stallo will permit us to remark that his
statement of the metaphysical doctrine of the ancients is not altogether
correct. They did not teach “that reality is cognizable _only_ as
absolute, permanent, and invariable”; they well knew and taught that there
were realities cognizable, both relative and changeable. Substance, of
course, was considered by them, and it is still considered by us, as an
absolute reality; but they never imagined that the essence of such a
reality was cognizable except through its constituent principles as
related to one another, and therefore through an intelligible relation.
This relation, as intelligible, was considered necessary and invariable,
but, as an actual reality in nature, was considered contingent and
changeable; the intelligible essence of things was known _sub specie
æterni_, but their existence was known _sub specie contingentis_. Now, on
what ground does Mr. Stallo impugn this doctrine? How does he prove that
it is “the precise opposite of truth”? Alas! we should be exceedingly
simple were we to expect proofs. Progress consists nowadays of stout
assertions on the part of the writer, and of a silly credulity on that of
most readers. Hence our author, instead of proving what he had rashly
asserted, gives us a strain of other assertions equally rash and
ridiculously absurd.

He says: “All material reality is, in its nature, not absolute, but
essentially relative. All material reality depends upon determination; and
determination is essentially limitation, as even Spinoza well knew. A
thing ‘in and by itself’ is an impossibility” (_ibid._) Spinoza! a great
authority indeed! But we should like to know how the proposition,
“Determination is essentially limitation,” can lead to the conclusion that
“a thing in itself and by itself is an impossibility.” To make a logical
connection between the two propositions, it would be necessary to assume
that “nothing finite can be in itself and by itself.” But the assumption
is so foolish that even Spinoza, who based on it his revolting system of
Pantheism, could never support it except by a false definition of
substance, and by giving to the phrases “in itself” and “by itself” an
extravagant interpretation, which proved, if not his malice and bad faith,
at least his profound philosophical ignorance. Let Mr. Stallo consult any
good philosophical treatise on this subject, and he will see how stolid a
man must be to fall a victim to the gross sophistry of the Jewish
dogmatizer.

What shall we say of the other assertion, “All material reality is, in its
nature, not absolute, but essentially relative”? Can anything be
_relative_ without at the same time being _absolute_? Can relation exist
without two absolute terms? Relativity connects one absolute thing with
another; the things thus connected acquire a relative mode of being, but
they do not for that lose their absolute being. Thus Mr. Stallo may be an
American citizen without ceasing to be a man, though he cannot be a
citizen without being endued with a relation not involved in his nature as
roan. So, also, husband and wife are essentially relative; yet we hope the
author will not say that the relative _Husband_ annihilates the absolute
_Man_, or that the relative _Wife_ excludes the absolute _Woman_.

These remarks apply to all relations, whether merely accidental or founded
in the essence of things. Pantheists imagine that creatures cannot have
any absolute being, because their being is essentially dependent, and
therefore relative. They should consider that a creature is a _created
being_—that is, a being related to its Creator. Such a creature, inasmuch
as it is a being, _is_; and inasmuch as it is related, _connotes_ its
Maker. Now, to be and to connote are not identical. The first means
_existence_, the second _dependence_; the first is perfectly complete in
the creature itself, the second is incomplete without a correlative term;
and therefore the creature is in possession of absolute being, while it is
endued with an essential relativity. Take away the absolute being; nothing
will remain of which any relativity may be predicated.

Perhaps the author, when pronouncing that “all material reality is in its
nature essentially relative,” alludes to the essential constitution of
material realities, and to the essential relation of matter and form. If
such is his meaning, the utmost he can claim is that the reality of the
form is essentially connected with the matter, and the reality of the
matter essentially connected with the form. This every one will concede;
but no one will infer that therefore the reality which results from the
conspiration of matter and form is not an absolute reality. For as the
matter and the form are the principles of one essence, and as their mutual
relativity connotes nothing extrinsic to the same essence, but finds in it
its adequate consummation, it is evident that the resulting reality is
intrinsically complete, and subsistent in its individuality. Hence this
resulting reality is an _absolute_ reality; and only as such can it become
the subject of relativity, and acquire the denomination of _relative_.

Our author, entirely taken up by Spinoza’s views, proceeds in the
following strain: “All quality is relation; all action is reaction; all
force is antagonism; all measure is a ratio between terms neither of which
is absolute; every objectively real thing is a term in numberless series
of mutual implications, and its reality outside of these series is utterly
inconceivable. A material entity, absolute in any of its aspects, would be
nothing less than a finite infinitude. There is no absolute material
quality, no absolute material substance, no absolute physical unit, no
absolutely simple physical entity, no absolute constant, no absolute
standard either of quantity or quality, no absolute motion, no absolute
rest, no absolute time, no absolute space.... There is and can be no
physical real thing which is absolutely simple” (p. 225).

This string of blunders needs no refutation, as no reader who has a
modicum of common sense can be deceived by what is evidently false. Yet,
as to the assertion that “there is and can be no physical real thing which
is absolutely simple,” it must be observed that there are two kinds of
simplicity, as there are two kinds of composition. A being is physically
simple when it is free from physical composition; whilst it is
metaphysically simple, if it has no metaphysical components. Now, God
alone is free from metaphysical as well as physical composition; and
therefore God alone is absolutely simple. Hence, created beings, though
physically simple, are always metaphysically compound.

What follows is a curious specimen of Mr. Stallo’s philosophical
resources. He says: “Leibnitz places at the head of his Monadology the
principle that there must be simple substances, because there are compound
substances. _Necesse est_, he says, _dari substantias simplices, quia
dantur compositæ_. This enthymeme, though it has been long since exploded
in metaphysics, is still regarded by many physicists as proof of the real
existence of absolutely simple constituents of matter. Nevertheless, it is
obvious that it is nothing but a vicious paralogism—a fallacy of the class
known in logic as fallacies of the suppressed relative. The existence of a
compound substance certainly proves the existence of component parts,
which, _relatively to this substance_, are simple. But it proves nothing
whatever as to the simplicity of these parts in themselves” (p. 226).

Our reader will ask when and how Leibnitz’ enthymeme has been “exploded.”
We shall inform him that it has _not_ been exploded, though the attempt
has often been made; because in the whole arsenal of metaphysics no powder
could be found that would produce the explosion. The enthymeme, therefore,
is as good and unanswerable now as it was in Leibnitz’ time; and it will
be as good and unanswerable hereafter, notwithstanding Mr. Stallo’s
efforts against it. He says that “it is nothing but a vicious paralogism”;
but he himself, while endeavoring to prove this latter assertion, resorts
to a paralogism (_vicious_, of course) which we may call “fallacy of the
suppressed absolute.” The existence of a compound proves the existence of
its component parts, as the author admits. These parts are either compound
or simple. If simple, then there are simple substances. If compound, then
they have components; and these parts are again either compound or simple.
We must therefore either admit simple substances, or continue our analysis
by further subdivisions of the compound substance without any chance of
ever coming to an end. But if the analysis cannot come to an end, the
compound has no first components; and thus it will be false that “the
existence of a compound substance proves the existence of the component
parts.” The fallacy of the author consists in stopping his analysis of the
compound before he has reached the first components. If the parts he has
reached are still compound substances, why does he not examine their
composition and point out their components? For no other reason, we
presume, than that he did not wish to meet with an _absolute_ substantial
unit, which he was sure to find at the end of the process. His argument is
therefore nothing but a despicable fraud.

In his fourth article (January, 1874) Mr. Stallo remarks that “the recent
doctrine of the correlation and mutual convertibility of the physical
forces, as a part of the theory of the conservation of energy, has shaken,
if not destroyed, the conception of a multiplicity of independent original
forces” (p. 350). Of course, there are men whose convictions can be
shaken, or even destroyed, by the sophistic generalizations of the modern
school; but there are men also whose convictions rest on too solid a
ground to be destroyed or shaken; and these latter have ere now challenged
the abettors of the “recent doctrine” to clear up their case with
something like logical precision—a thing which modern thinkers must have
found impossible, since they have constantly ignored the challenge. We
have proved elsewhere(185) that “the mutual convertibility of physical
forces,” as understood by the champions of the theory, confounds movement
with action and the effects with their causes. The facts on which the
theory is based are true; but the theory itself is false, for it
attributes to the powers by which the phenomena are produced what
exclusively belongs to “the phenomena”, besides deforming the nature of
the phenomena themselves by denying the production and extinction of
movement. It is plain that such a theory can have no weight in philosophy;
and it is no less plain that no philosopher will, for the sake of the new
theory, renounce his firm conviction concerning “the multiplicity of
independent original forces.”

“I have endeavored,” says the author, “to show that there are no absolute
constants of mass; that both the hypothesis of corpuscular atoms and that
of centres of forces are growths of a confusion of the intellect, which
mistakes _conceptual_ elements of matter for _real_ elements; that these
elements—force and mass, or force and inertia—are not only inseparable, as
is conceded by the more thoughtful among modern physicists, but that
neither of these elements has any reality as such, each of them being
simply the conceptual correlate of the other, and thus the condition both
of its realization in thought and of its objectivation to sense” (p. 350).

As we have already discussed all the points which the author vainly
endeavored to establish, we shall only remind the reader that the matter
and the form have no separate existence; and therefore have no reality in
nature, unless they are together. The author, therefore, is right when
affirming that neither of them has any reality _as such_; but he is wrong
in inferring that they have no reality _as united_. As action has no
reality without passion, nor passion without action, so also matter has no
reality without form, nor form without matter; but as action producing
passion is real, so also is a form actuating matter; and as passion is no
less real than the action whence it proceeds, so matter also is no less
real than the form by which it is actuated. Both are, of course, only
metaphysical realities.

The author says: “The mathematical treatment of mechanical problems, from
the nature of the methods, necessitates the fiction that force and mass
are separate and distinct terms” (p. 351). By no means. It is not the
nature of the methods, but the nature of the things that compels the
distinction of the two terms. Their distinction, therefore, is not a
“fiction.” But the author’s remark has no bearing on the question of the
constitution of matter; for mechanical forces are not substantial forms.

He adds: “A material object is in every one of its aspects but one term of
a relation; its whole being is a presupposition of correlates without....
Every change of a body, therefore, presupposes a corresponding change in
its correlates. If the state of any material object could be changed
without a corresponding change of state in other objects without, this
object would, to that extent, become absolute. But this is utterly
unthinkable, and therefore utterly impossible, as we have already seen....
Mechanically speaking, all force, properly so‐called—_i.e._, all potential
energy—is energy of position.... Whatever energy is spent in actual motion
is gained in position; ... thus we are led to the principle of the
conservation of energy” (p. 351).

This is a heap of absurdities. If a material object is the term of a
relation, it is absolute in itself, as we have shown. Again, the change of
a body presupposes only the exertion of active power, and not the change
of another body, as the author imagines. That the absolute is unthinkable
he has failed to prove. Lastly, mechanical force, properly so‐called, is
the product of a mass into its velocity, whilst “energy of position” is a
myth.(186)

But the author says: “Force is a mere inference from the motion itself
under the universal conditions of reality, and its measure, therefore, is
simply the effect for which it is postulated as a cause; it has no other
existence. The only reality of force and of its action is the
correspondence between the physical phenomena in conformity to the
principle of the essential relativity of all material existence. That
force has no independent reality is so plain and obvious that it has been
proposed by some thinkers to abolish the term _force_, like the term
_cause_, altogether. However desirable this might be in some respects, it
is impossible, for the reason that the concept _force_, when properly
interpreted in terms of experience, is valid; and, if its name were
abolished, it would instantly reappear under another name.... The reality
of force is purely conceptual; ... it is not a distinct and individual
tangible or intangible entity” (p. 354).

Here the author treats us to a luxury of contradictions. Force is “a mere
inference from motion,” yet it causes motion; for it is active. Hence the
causality is a mere inference of its effect. It is therefore the effect
that gives existence to its cause, and the cause “has no other existence”
than that which may be imbibed in the effect for which it is postulated.
What, then, becomes of the “force, properly so‐called”—that is, of the
potential energy, or of the energy of position, which has no actual
effect? Again, “the reality of force, is purely conceptual.” This means
that the reality of force is unreal; which would just amount to saying
that Mr. Stallo’s intellect is unintelligent or that his writings are
unwritten. Again, the “reality of force and of its action is the
correspondence between the physical phenomena”; but, if the reality of
force is merely conceptual, the correspondence between the physical
phenomena must be merely conceptual; which would prove that the concept
“force,” when properly interpreted in terms of experience, is _not_ valid,
though the author maintains the contrary. Moreover, what can the author
mean by “the action of force”? Is this action real or unreal? If unreal,
it is no action at all; and if real, it implies a real active power. We
defy Mr. Stallo to conceive a real action of an unreal force. We are
informed that “some thinkers” wish to abolish the term “force,” like the
term “cause,” and we are told that this proves how plain and obvious it is
that force has no independent reality. This, however, proves only that
some so‐called “thinkers” are either lunatics or knaves. After all, if
force is purely conceptual, as the author pretends, its reality must be
denied without any restriction. Why, then, does he deny merely that force
has an “independent” reality? Has it any “dependent” reality if it is
“purely conceptual”?

But we must come to an end. Mr. Stallo’s conclusion is that “the very
conception of force depends upon the relation between two terms at least,”
and that therefore “a constant central force, as belonging to an
individual atom in and by itself, is an impossibility” (p. 355). In this
argument the term “force” is used equivocally. It stands for _active
power_ in the consequence, while it stands for _action_ or for _movement_
in the antecedent. Hence the conclusion is worthless. “I have shown,” says
he, “that there are and can be no absolute constants of mass. And it is
evident now that there are similarly no constant central forces belonging
to, or inherent in, constants of mass as such” (p. 356). We say in our
turn: No, Mr. Stallo, you have not shown what you imagine; and, if
anything is evident, it is not that there are no constant central forces,
but that philosophical questions cannot be solved without good logic and a
clear knowledge of metaphysical principles.




The Blind Student.


When Ernest D’Arcy left the University of ——, all the glorious
possibilities of life seemed to unfold themselves invitingly before him.
He was young, he was clever, he was ambitious. Unlike too many American
students, he had not wasted the golden hours of college life in idleness,
dissipation, or even social enjoyment. He had been a hard, indeed, an
enthusiastic, student; but on commencement day, when his brow was bound
with victorious wreaths, he felt rewarded for having scorned the seductive
pleasures of youth, and rejoiced that he had lived laborious days and
nights.

But D’Arcy did not consider his education finished because he had passed
through the university brilliantly. He well knew that the college was only
the vestibule to the temple of learning. Through this vestibule he had
passed; and now he wished to enter the noble temple itself. But on its
very threshold he found himself suddenly stopped. A dangerous disease
attacked his eyes. The most eminent oculists were consulted at once;
absolute rest alone could save him from total blindness. He was forbidden
to read or write a line. This was indeed a terrible blow to the ambitious
young student. His golden hopes left him; his sweet dream of fame faded
away; his bright career was blighted in the very bud. Unsustained by the
holy influence of religion, a deep and dangerous despondency seized him;
he abandoned himself to despair, and could not follow the advice of Burke,
“Despair, but work even in despair,” for the affliction that caused his
despair prevented him from working. So depressed was he at times that he
contemplated suicide as a happy relief.

The D’Arcy family were of Norman origin. The grandfather of Ernest escaped
from France in the early days of the Revolution, bringing with him to the
United States the fortune that had descended to him through a long line of
ancestors. Like so many French gentlemen of the last century, M. D’Arcy
had imbibed the fashionable scepticism of the time of Voltaire and the
Encyclopædists. After coming to America, he married a Catholic lady, and
his scepticism gradually settled into a form of mild indifferentism.
Ernest’s father was a devoted Catholic, but he died while his children
were in their infancy. His wife was a Protestant, a woman of fashion,
whose highest ambition was to be a leader of society. Her children, Ernest
and his sister Mary, were brought up from their infancy on the
Chesterfieldian model: _to shine in society_. To this end everything else
was sacrificed. From the nursery they went to the dancing‐school, and had
masters to teach them all those superficial accomplishments which make up
a modern fashionable education. Ernest’s clever and original mind saved
him from the evil effects of such an education. But, unfortunately, he did
not escape a worse danger. With no one to direct his studies, at the
susceptible age of seventeen he began to read the infidel French
literature of the XVIIIth century, which formed a large part of his
grandfather’s library. Fascinated by the diabolical wit of Voltaire,
Ernest’s young and undisciplined mind mistook sophistry for argument,
ridicule for reason, wit for wisdom. The fashionable religion of his
mother had never possessed any charm or interest for him, and now,
rejecting all belief, he became a free‐thinker.

Ernest entered the University of —— in his eighteenth year, eager for
distinction and determined to succeed. Succeed he did; and when he
graduated, four years later, he was the first student of the university
and unanimously chosen the commencement orator. No student ever left the
University of ——, which has been the Alma Mater of so many distinguished
men, with a brighter future before him than Ernest D’Arcy. But it was a
future for this world, and for this world alone. Fame was the god of his
idolatry. His residence at the University of ——, which boasts the absence
of all religious teaching, had strengthened his scepticism. But the
scepticism of Ernest D’Arcy was a scepticism of the head, not of the
heart. His natural love for the true, the beautiful, and the good had kept
him pure, even at the most dangerous period of youth, when the blood is
warm, the passions strong, and the will weak. While the heart is good and
pure, however the head may err, there is always hope. The unbelief of
Ernest D’Arcy was not the cold, heartless, satisfied unbelief of the
hardened scoffer rejoicing in his infidelity. It was the natural result
upon an eager and active intellect of an education without religion, a
home without God.

The same year that Ernest left the university his sister “finished” at the
Academy of the Visitation of ——. Mary D’Arcy was not a brilliant girl, but
very sweet, gentle, and interesting. Three years at the convent school had
removed all traces of her unfortunate home education. Mary’s most intimate
friend at the convent was Edith Northcote, a young Catholic girl from the
South. When they parted on distribution day, it was with the understanding
that Edith should pass the next winter with Mary, and the two young ladies
enter society together.

One morning, towards the end of October, Ernest was sitting in the
library, surrounded by the most enchanting literature of the world, and
not allowed to read a single line. D’Arcy was no sentimental dreamer or
aimless student.


            “To sleep away his hours
    In desperate sloth, miscalled philosophy.”


He wished to be a man among men. His ambition was first to teach himself,
and then to teach the world. He wished to elevate the tone of society; to
raise it from its fallen state. His was no splendid dream of
revolutionizing the social world; he had no fond hope of creating an
Utopia out of this busy, bustling America of the XIXth century. But he
knew that life was too precious to be dedicated solely to the one selfish,
absorbing pursuit of wealth; that the entire surrender of mind and heart
and life itself to the accumulation of money was corrupting our people and
exercising a baleful influence over the whole nation. Our merchants rival
the merchant princes of Italy in wealth and enterprise; why should they
not rival them also in their princely tastes? The palaces, the gardens,
the galleries, the libraries, of Florence, Venice, and Genoa, “all tell
the story of great thoughts and noble tastes which gold and trade may
nurture when nobleness and greatness deal with them.” We should take time
to cultivate the beautiful as well as the useful; the poetical as well as
the practical. The artist should be patronized as well as the artisan.
Time should be given to the refinement, the grace, the sweetness of life.
We have followed too long and too earnestly the false philosophy taught in
“Poor Richard’s Almanac,” that money‐getting is a sort of secular
religion, and “there will be sleeping enough in the grave.” Our American
life is one long “fitful fever.” We give no time to rest. Repose, a
cultivated leisure, is not idleness. An elegant essay on this
subject—leisure(187)—by a distinguished Baltimore lawyer, should be read
and pondered by our eager and restless people, who are devoured by their
business as Actæon was by his own dogs. “I mean,” says this writer, “the
rest which is won and deserved by labor, and which sweetens and
invigorates it and furnishes its reward. Whence comes this doctrine, that
life, to be anything, must be for ever in motion? There is no process of
physical development which does not need and depend upon repose. To all
the green and beautiful things that deck the earth—the flowers that give
it perfume, and the fruits and foliage that make it glad—there is needful
the calm sunshine and the peaceful shade, the gentle rain and the yet
gentler dew. Not a gem that flashes but has been crystallized in the
immovable stillness of the great earth’s breast. I believe that to be
false philosophy which denies to individuals their seasons of leisure and
meditation; teaching them that existence was meant to be nothing but a
struggle.” Our very amusements are unwholesome and dangerous: the midnight
“German,” the lascivious drama, the race‐course, the steamboat excursion,
the political meeting. The priceless time of youth should have some better
employment than dancing and novel‐reading. Our young men should be taught
that life is too valuable, time too precious, to be frittered away in idle
pleasures, in frivolous amusement, in heartless dissipation. Our young
women should be taught that there is something nobler in life than the
passing triumphs of the ball‐room, gay flirtations, and dazzling toilets.

Thoughts like these occupied Ernest D’Arcy on that bright October
morning—thoughts that stirred his heart and mind, and made him eager for
the glorious work. With a soul longing to “be up and doing,” he was
compelled to sit idle in the golden prime of his manhood. These were the
moments of his greatest despondency, when all the brightness seemed gone
from his life, and all the hope from his soul. Sitting there in the
library that morning, D’Arcy recalled the beautiful lines of Miss Procter
in “My Picture”:


            “He had a student air,
    With a look half sad, half stately,
    Grave, sweet eyes and flowing hair.”


The library‐door was opened, and there came in one who was always
welcome—Mary D’Arcy.

“Ernest, I have a letter from Edith Northcote,” Mary said. “She will be
here to‐morrow.”

“I am glad to hear it. From all you have told me about Miss Northcote, I
think I shall like her.”

“I am sure of it,” returned his sister. “If you don’t, my opinion of your
taste is gone for ever.”

“She is nothing of the bread‐and‐butter miss, I hope? I have all Byron’s
antipathy, you know, for that class.”

“Byron himself could have found no fault with Edith on that ground,” said
Mary.

“Well, I am relieved of no little apprehension,” said Ernest. “I have a
perfect horror of the common run of girls, who haven’t an idea above the
last novel and the last fashion.”

The next day Edith arrived, and her appearance certainly realized all of
Ernest’s expectations. She was nineteen—an age when the sweet graces of
girlhood still linger and lend an additional charm to the blooming woman.
Her features were not regularly beautiful, but her face possessed a charm
and an interest which no faultlessly beautiful face ever had. If a true
woman’s soul, full of the sweetest sympathy, ever brightened and
beautified a human face, it was that of Edith Northcote. Then, her voice
was so sweet and cordial and warm—and what is more attractive than a low,
sweet voice in woman? Edith was scarcely the medium height, but
exquisitely formed, and perfectly natural and graceful in all her
movements, in charming contrast with the trained glances and artificial
manners of our fashionable society belles. Like Alexandrine, in _A
Sister’s Story_, there was an air of refinement about this lovely girl as
rare as it was delightful; she had all the freshness and fragrance of the
rose without the rose’s thorns. Mrs. D’Arcy, who was a female Turveydrop
in the matter of deportment, said she had never seen in any society
manners so elegant and at the same time so sweet and natural as the
manners of Edith Northcote. Such praise from such a woman was in itself
fame.

Edith soon became the life and joy of the house; she was an elegant lady
in the parlor, an intelligent companion in the library, and the charming,
sweet girl everywhere. The influence of her bright presence pervaded the
whole household. Even stately Mrs. D’Arcy yielded to the general
enthusiasm, and declared that Mary was fortunate in having such a friend.
But of all the family, Ernest felt the influence of Edith’s society the
most. The library, where he had passed so many hours in gloom and
despondency, was now brightened by her daily and hourly presence. She read
beautifully, and with a voice and manner that threw a charm around
everything. Her true, womanly heart sympathized deeply with Ernest in his
great affliction, and she at once determined to do all in her power to
relieve it. So it soon became the custom for Ernest and Edith to retire to
the library every morning after breakfast, where she read the morning
paper to him while he smoked his cigar. Then two or three hours were
devoted to serious study. The books, so long neglected, were again
resumed. The literary work, which Ernest loved so well, was again taken
up. Edith was his librarian, his reader, his amanuensis. He had the true
student’s dislike of any person touching his books and papers; but Edith’s
touch seemed to have magic in it, for she could do what few ladies can
ever do—put papers in order without putting them out of place.

But not only as his literary assistant was Edith serviceable to Ernest;
she was his sweet and gentle companion, his kind and sympathetic friend,
ever ready in all things to make him forget his blindness and his
consequent dependence. Inspiring and stimulating him to renewed exertion,
she also directed his ambition to the noblest ends. She opened a new life
to the brilliant young student—a life full of love and sweetness and
humanity. Her bright and joyous influence banished from his soul the dark
despair that had been enthroned there so long, and again there was raised
in his heart


                                    “A hope
    That he was born for something braver than
    To hang his head and wear a nameless name.”


Edith found time for everything; duty, as well as pleasure, had each its
allotted place in her daily life. Before the rest of the family were awake
she was up and off to early Mass. In the winter twilight, when other young
ladies were returning from the fashionable promenade, Edith could often be
seen with a little basket on her arm, carrying delicacies to the sick, or
more substantial food to relieve the necessities of Christ’s suffering
children. Ernest sometimes accompanied her on these errands of mercy, and
it was a new revelation to him to see Edith, so gay, sparkling, and
fascinating in society, visiting the humble homes of the poor, cheering
and comforting the sick and destitute. Her very presence seemed like a
sunbeam in their dreary dwellings. Edith did not think she was performing
any heroic virtue by these things. She knew she was only following the
injunction of Him who loved the poor so well that he became like one of
them. She knew the Catholic poor were the blessed inheritance of the
Catholic Church. Many Catholic young ladies, delicately nurtured and
fastidiously refined, are daily doing what Edith did.

Ernest was benefited by attending Edith on those missions of love. His
warm heart was touched and all the latent sweetness of his nature brought
out by the distress which he witnessed, and of which he had never dreamed
amidst the luxuries of his own elegant home. There was one case that
particularly interested him; unfortunately, there are many such in this
age of boasted religious liberty. It was that of a Mrs. White. She was a
woman of education and refinement, and had been accustomed to all the
comforts of life in her father’s house. Early in life she married a poor
but worthy young man. He was a clerk, and labored for his wife and
children with an industry that knew no flagging. By constantly bending
over his desk he literally worked himself into consumption. After
lingering a few months, during which all his little savings were spent, he
died, leaving his family in utter destitution. During his sickness he had
been visited by several Catholic ladies, who attended to his wants with so
sweet a charity that his heart was touched, and he longed to know more of
a religion which taught such blessed humanity. As the Author of all truth
has declared that he who seeks shall find, so Mr. White found the truth
which he sought, and died a most beautiful and edifying death. His wife
soon afterwards became a Catholic, converted by the example of the good
ladies who had so kindly ministered to her dying husband. In the extremity
of her distress Mrs. White appealed to her father, who had refused to have
any intercourse with her since her marriage. What do you think was the
answer of this father to a daughter whose only offence was that she had
left _father and mother to cleave to her husband_? We blush for the
humanity that could send to a grief‐stricken and desolate daughter so
brutal a message as this:

“Now your chosen husband is dead, I will receive you back, provided you
give up, at once and for ever, the Catholic religion, which you have
recently professed. Otherwise, you may die as you have lived—a pauper and
an outcast.”

And so she lived and died a pauper and an outcast; but, so living and so
dying, her lot was more enviable than that of her cruel and unnatural
father. Her last moments were comforted by the promise of Ernest D’Arcy to
provide for her two children. The elder, a bright little fellow of
thirteen, he placed in a lawyer’s office; the other, a boy nine years old,
was admitted into a Catholic orphan asylum.

Thus visiting the sick and relieving the poor, and frequently meeting
Catholic priests and Catholic Sisters in pious attendance on death‐beds,
the conversation of Ernest and Edith naturally took a religious turn. One
evening, after returning from one of their charitable visits, they were
sitting in the library before the great wood‐fire (for Ernest would not
allow that abomination, miscalled a modern improvement, a furnace‐flue, in
his _sanctum_), as they generally did before tea. Ernest was unusually
thoughtful that evening, so much so that Edith observed it and asked him
the cause.

“I am thinking about you and myself—about all your goodness to me,” he
said; “about what I was before I knew you, and what I may be by your noble
example. Edith, the daily beauty of your life makes mine ugly. My father
was a Catholic, and I am—nothing. The cold and fashionable religion of my
mother neither satisfied my mind nor interested my heart. I became a free‐
thinker, an infidel, but never a scoffer at religion. I did not believe,
because I did not know what to believe.”

“We must read together Chateaubriand’s _Genius of Christianity_—that
magnificent tribute to the truth and beauty of the Christian religion,”
Edith replied. “You know the story of his conversion: in his extreme youth
he yielded to the gay scepticism which at the time controlled French
society, and he, a son of the Crusaders, became a disciple of Voltaire,
and wrote in the interest of infidelity. The death of Chateaubriand’s
mother, whose last moments had been saddened by his scepticism, and whose
last words were a prayer for his conversion, recalled him to a sense of
that religion in which he had been educated. ‘_I became a Christian_,’
Chateaubriand wrote. ‘_My conviction came from the heart. I wept and I
believed._’ He resolved to devote to religion the eloquent pen which had
been used against her. The result was his immortal work the _Genius of
Christianity_. The beautiful style, the vast information, the glowing
descriptions of art, scenery, poetry, and music cannot fail to delight and
interest you.”

The next day Edith commenced Chateaubriand’s great masterpiece. As, day
after day, the reading continued, Ernest grew deeply interested. He saw
clearly demonstrated the noble and inspiring fact that “the Christian
religion, of all the religions that ever existed, is the most favorable to
liberty and to the arts and sciences; that the modern world is indebted to
it for every improvement: from agriculture to the abstract sciences; from
the hospitals for the reception of the unfortunate to the temples reared
by the Michael Angelos and embellished by the Raphaels.”

Other books were read, all breathing the same divine spirit, the same
exalted Christian charity, the same sweet human sympathy. The warm, tender
heart of Ernest D’Arcy was fascinated by the beautiful and noble
sentiments expressed in the volumes which were now a part of his daily
reading. He compared them with the false philosophy of a Voltaire and the
senseless sentimentality of a Rousseau, which taught how to destroy, but
not how to save; whose end was the destruction, not the amelioration, of
society. These books certainly opened a newer and a sweeter world to the
student. But it must not be supposed that the young D’Arcy saw immediately
the truth of Catholicity in all its divine beauty. Few, like S. Paul, are
miraculously changed from the enemy to the friend of God’s church. Few,
like Chateaubriand, can say: “I wept and I believed.”

With the opening of spring Edith returned home, and Earnest was again left
alone with his books. But how changed seemed everything! The brightness
was gone from the library. The pleasure was gone from his studies. He
sadly missed her who had been his constant companion for so many months.
Fortunately, about this time his eyes improved sufficiently to allow him
to read for a short time every day. He continued the reading to which
Edith had introduced him. This was some consolation to him, now that he
was separated from her. But, alas! it was a consolation not long allowed
to him. If that stern old moralist, Dr. Johnson, acknowledged that he
found it easier to practise abstinence than temperance in wine, it will
not be surprising that so ardent a student as Ernest D’Arcy found it
absolutely impossible to practise temperance in reading when he read at
all. And now he had a greater incentive to work than ever before. He felt
that he must make himself worthy of the sweet girl whom he loved. The
delicately refined nature of this perfect gentleman would not allow him to
make a formal declaration of love to Edith while she was a guest in his
mother’s house, but that unerring, never‐failing instinct which belongs to
woman enabled her to see plainly that he was deeply, fondly interested in
her. Nor was Edith insensible to the many attractive qualities of Ernest
D’Arcy; his cultured mind, his noble heart, his high ambition, his exalted
sentiments of honor and morality, claimed her enthusiastic admiration,
while the romantic character of their constant intercourse pleased her
girlish fancy.

D’Arcy’s Catholic reading had enchanted his impressible mind. As an
historical institution, the church delighted and astonished him. He saw it
rise triumphantly on the ruins of the empire of the Cæsars; he saw it
conquer and civilize the barbarians of Germany and the North; he saw it
tame the fierce passions of the Franks and Goths; he saw it in the middle
ages standing between the people and princely despots; he saw it always on
the side of right and always against wrong, always raising its powerful
voice in favor of the oppressed; he saw it in the XVIth century
successfully sustain itself against the most formidable religious
revolution the world had ever known; he saw it in the XIXth century serene
in the midst of tumbling thrones and political convulsions, teaching one
faith and one doctrine, while heresy was broken into a thousand
indistinguishable fragmentary sects.

With his mind fresh from these new and interesting studies, Ernest D’Arcy
began to write the story of his mental life, which he called _From
Darkness to Light_. Like Milton, he became so engrossed in his work that
his eyes grew rapidly worse; and, like him also, he was unwilling to
discontinue his studies, until at length study was impossible. Edith
Northcote heard of this new trial through Ernest’s sister Mary; for Ernest
himself was too manly, too considerate, to annoy Edith with his troubles.
She determined at once to make a Novena to Our Lady of Lourdes to obtain
the cure of Ernest’s eyes. She procured some of the celebrated miraculous
water, and sent it to Ernest, telling him that on a certain day she would
commence the Novena, requesting him to apply the water to his eyes each
day, and say the prayer to Our Lady of Lourdes contained in the little
book recently published. The account of the apparition greatly interested
Ernest, and, though not yet a Catholic, he did not hesitate to comply with
both of Edith’s requests.

Thousands of unrecorded miracles have been wrought by the water of
Lourdes, and the restoration of Ernest’s eyes was one of them.(188) As the
darkness left his eyes, the divine light of faith entered his soul; and he
who had been both mentally and physically blind, now saw with the eyes of
the body and saw also with the eyes of the soul. He saw the truth, the
beauty, and the goodness of the Catholic religion; seeing, he believed;
believing, he professed; professing, he practised. Ernest D’Arcy became a
Catholic—a devout, a zealous, a fervid Catholic.

Ernest did not inform Edith by letter of the happy effects of the water of
Lourdes. He visited her in her Southern home. Simply saying a friend
wished to see her, he awaited her entrance with no little impatience. At
length she appeared. Ernest advanced to meet her. The few words he spoke
explained everything: “_Edith, I am a Catholic._”

The next few weeks were the sweetest Ernest had ever known—sweeter than he
had ever dreamed of. He had found what he had so long sought in vain—the
true religion; and in finding the religion which was to make him happy in
heaven, he also found the being who was to make him happy on earth.




Turning From Darwin To Thomas Aquinas.


UNLESS in thought with thee I often live,
  Angelic Doctor! life seems poor to me.
  What _are_ these bounties, if they only be
Such boon as farmers to their servants give?
That I am fed, and that mine oxen thrive,
  That my lambs fatten, that mine hours are free—
  These ask my nightly thanks on bended knee;
And I _do_ thank Him who hath blest my hive
  And made content my herd, my flock, my bee.
  But, Father! nobler things I ask from thee.
Fishes have sunshine, worms have everything!
  Are we but apes? Oh! give me, God, to know
I am death’s master; not a scaffolding,
  But a true temple where Christ’s word could grow.




The Future Of The Russian Church.


By The Rev. Cæsarius Tondini, Barnabite.



III.


In presence of the melancholy reality of to‐day, and in expectation of a
yet sadder morrow, those Russians who are sincerely attached to their
church, and who have at heart the interests of their faith, will perhaps
ask themselves if it be not needful to labor in some direct manner to
deliver the Russian Church from a protection which has been so fatal to
her.

The question is a very serious one; we do not venture to decide upon it.

As Catholic, and precisely because we are Catholic, we must, in a question
of this kind, consider souls. Now, to work _directly_ to overthrow the
religious autocracy of the czars might easily, considering the actual
circumstances of Russia, hasten this morrow we have been considering, and
that without any efficacious remedy being at hand to accompany or to
follow quickly upon so great an evil. If it were not to be feared that,
under present circumstances, the overthrow of the official church would
cause the unbelief of the higher classes to descend also among the lower,
thus rendering it general, and endangering the existence of every faith in
the Russian people, the question would be easy to answer; but so long as
this doubt exists it is quite a case to which to apply the principle that
of two evils we must choose the least. From this point of view we prefer
the continuance of the present state of things, because it seems to us the
lesser evil.

There exist, however, other doubts, and their existence is of an extreme
gravity, in determining the attitude of Russians toward their church; they
are these:

Will the czars, even should they change their policy and show themselves
for the future true protectors and not masters, be able long to continue
to the Russian Church the support of the laws?

Again: Will Russia much longer have the czars?

These doubts are not chimerical.

In the first place, it appears to us unlikely that the czars should be
able to continue indefinitely to refuse liberty of conscience. Already, at
this present time, the Russian authorities shut their eyes to many
infractions of the laws relating to the different religious communions;
the ever‐increasing and multiplied relations of Russia with other
countries, and of her people with foreigners, and foreigners with
Russians, might easily create serious embarrassments, and even give rise
to political complications, if there were a desire to apply the religious
laws in all their rigor.

Nevertheless, it seems to us equally difficult to imagine that Russia
should, at one bound, arrive at declaring the civil law to be atheistical,
and to repel all solidarity between material interests and the religious
interests of the people. During some time Russia will probably offer to us
the same spectacle as in England, the classic land of religious license,
where every one, _except the sovereign_, is free to believe what he
pleases, and where at the same time _convenances_ and multiplied interests
keep the official church standing. But the Anglican Church has a far
different past and far other memories—above all, a very different
literature—from the Russian Church. In continuing this comparison the
reader will find an explanation of the vitality shown by the state‐church
of England, and at the same time the motives which do not allow us to
predict for that of Russia either able defenders or even a lingering
death.

If, then, the Russians ought not to labor directly to overthrow the
religious autocracy of the czars, seeing that, in present circumstances,
the overthrow of this autocracy might be the cause of still greater
disasters than those of the past, they nevertheless ought not to fold
their arms and contemplate with indifference the probability that this
overthrow may be brought about at no distant period by the mere force of
circumstances.

There remains the other doubt: Will Russia much longer have the czars?

This doubt, considering the epoch in which we live, scarcely needs to be
justified. What sovereign is there who can promise himself that he shall
end his days upon the throne? One alone—the Pope, because even in a
dungeon he is obeyed just as if he were upon a throne.

Let Russians who have at heart the interests of their faith boldly face
this second doubt and the fears to which it gives rise. Never, perhaps,
could history offer us a more remarkable spectacle than that of an
orthodox church, and a perfect automaton; to‐day receiving speech,
movement, and action from an orthodox emperor, and to‐morrow receiving
them from the head of a Protestant government, perhaps a Jew, perhaps an
atheist. In fact, the organization of a church reckoning nearly fifty
millions of adherents cannot be changed in twenty‐four hours, especially
if this organization is identified with the state to the degree of
confusing herself with the latter. What will then become of the Synod we
do not know, but neither do we know whether the new government will
readily consent to lose the profit of so powerful an _instrumentum regni_
as the church organized by the czars.

In presence of these eventualities, which, on account of the rapid march
of modern revolutions, are far from improbable, and may take place any
day, is there anything the Russians can do in order to save orthodoxy?
There is one thing, and, we believe, one only. We will say what that is,
though we greatly doubt whether it will be accepted; too many prejudices,
too many objections, will oppose themselves to it; everything else will be
tried, rather than have recourse to it; a great confidence especially will
be placed in the triumph of the panslavist idea; but each new attempt will
but prove this one plan to be the only efficacious one, and the ill‐
success of all the others will gradually lead minds to ally themselves to
it. In the alternative of accepting this, or else of letting orthodoxy
perish, Russians sincerely attached to their faith will not indefinitely
hesitate. Besides, a Providence watches over states and peoples; in that
Providence we place our trust, and it will not be in vain.

If, calling things by their names, we were to say plainly that this only
way is the reunion of the Russian with the Catholic Church, a Russian who
might do us the honor to peruse these pages would perhaps throw down the
book, and, however well disposed he might be, would see nothing more in it
than vain and dangerous imaginations. This alarm, however, would prove,
more than anything else, the exceeding power of the words. We will
endeavor to express the same idea in another manner; and, without
flattering ourselves that we shall gain acceptance for it, we hope at
least to obtain for it serious examination.

What is Russian orthodoxy? It is the collection of the dogmas accepted and
taught by the Russian Church. Now, these dogmas, with the exception of
some few misunderstandings,(189) are the same as those of the Catholic
Church; the point which really separates the two churches is the denial,
on the part of the Russians, of the jurisdiction of the Pope over the
universal church. At the utmost, a real doctrinal disagreement should be
admitted respecting the infallibility of the Pope defining _ex cathedrâ_
on faith or morals. But however important this disagreement may be in the
eyes of Catholics, it has no importance in the eyes of Protestants and
rationalists. Those who admit no revelation would not certainly prefer
orthodoxy merely because there is in it one article less to believe. As to
Protestants, the difficult point is to make them admit a visible authority
taught by God himself, and having the right and mission to explain the
Scriptures and to make a practical application of them to our lives. Now,
is it likely that, in their eyes, an authority residing in the dispersed
church, without the necessary bond which unites the bishops to each other,
would be much more acceptable than a central authority, always living,
always ready to declare its oracles, and, by that very fact, independent
of the obstacles which an inimical government or any other adversary might
raise against it to prevent it from declaring itself? For the rest, the
_Spiritual Regulation_ will let Protestants know whether a church
organized as is that of Russia at the present time can alone make a free
word to be heard.

Protestants and rationalists are, then, common adversaries of the Russian
and also of the Catholic Church. Common adversaries also, on doctrinal
grounds, are all those who cannot be exactly classed with either
Protestants or rationalists, but against whom the Russian Church will no
less have to defend herself—Jews, Mahometans, and, lastly, the Raskolniks
also, unless, indeed, a portion of the latter should not prefer to ally
themselves to the Catholic Church rather than to the Synod, if only they
can be persuaded that in becoming Catholics they do not by any means cease
to be Russians. Now, when in the XVIIth century the heresy of Calvin was
for a moment seated on the patriarchal throne of Constantinople in the
person of Cyril‐Lucar, and when that patriarch had published his _Orthodox
Confession of the Christian Faith_,(190) which was full of Calvinistic
errors, the gravity of the danger to orthodoxy was then sufficiently
powerful to render the Greeks far from being disdainful of the support
offered to them by Catholics, and even by the Pope himself, for the
purpose of guarding in safety the articles of the common faith.

Nothing was found too hard to be said against Catholics and Rome, because
of their intervention in the deposition of the heretical patriarch and the
condemnation of his doctrine. For their justification we may be permitted
to refer the reader to a publication which, upon its appearance, had the
importance of a great event, and this is No. 42 of the _Tracts for the
Times_, which, in England, opened the way to the Catholic faith.(191)

This historical precedent will not, we hope, remain without its
consequences in history. Already Catholic theologians unconsciously afford
a solid support to orthodoxy, with regard to the defence of the dogmas
which are common to us with the Russians. Our theological works find
entrance into Russia, and are there studied and quoted; whilst it is
rarely, if ever, that we find modern authors of the Greek Church quoted,
unless it be to draw from them arguments against the primacy of the Pope,
and to perpetuate the misunderstandings relating to the Procession of the
Holy Ghost and to purgatory.

From the time of Peter the Great orthodoxy has done nothing but lose
ground in Russia; neither the patriarchs of the East nor the other heads
of the various branches of the Orthodox Church appear to be solely
occupied with it. One might say that any heresy inspires them with less
horror than the Catholic doctrine about the Pope, and that they consider
the rejection of this doctrine a sufficient proof of a healthy orthodoxy.
But the day will come when every Russian who loves orthodoxy above all
else will no longer regard with so much horror as now a church which is
far better calculated than the Greek Church to furnish him with arms
wherewith to defend the divinity of Jesus Christ, the Real Presence, the
sacraments, the veneration of Mary and the saints. The same horror with
which we Catholics still inspire many orthodox Russians we formerly
inspired Anglicans. Relations with us, and _study_, have disabused many
credulous minds; in Russia, moreover, the double sentiment will operate in
our favor of the danger to which orthodoxy will be exposed, and the
insufficiency of the succor which can arrive to it from any quarter except
the Catholic Church alone.

But Protestants, rationalists, Jews, Mahometans, and Raskolniks are not
the only adversaries which the Russian Church must prepare to combat, and
against whom she will find no help more efficacious than that which
Catholics can afford. Among her adversaries she may reckon the government,
atheism in the legislation, obstacles of every kind created against the
propaganda of orthodoxy, compulsory irreligious instruction, unbelief and
materialism “crowned” by the academies—in a word, all the constituted
authorities upon which the people depend. Can the Russian Church promise
herself that she will be able successfully to contend against such
adversaries? No one will maintain that the past history of this church
offers a certain guarantee that she will; her existence, especially since
Peter the Great, has been too monotonous, and has had a sphere of action
too circumscribed, to allow her to make trial of her strength. Alas! there
is something more; however monotonous may have been her existence, it
nevertheless offers one characteristic feature, and this is, the facility
with which she has permitted the czars to impose their laws upon her, and
to obtain from her that which nothing would have forced from the great
doctors and fathers of the Greek Church. Now, if the Russian Church has
been so feeble in presence of the czars, is it very certain that she would
instantaneously recover her energy, were she to find herself face to face
with a government inspired by principles the most hostile to Christianity,
and the declared enemy, no longer of the whole Christian church only, but
of Jesus Christ himself? We are no prophet; but, after all, it is not
absolutely impossible that, at a period more or less distant, some Russian
socialist may find himself seated in the place of the czars.

Thus the past history of the Russian Church is far from being a sure
warranty that she will know how to wrestle with impious governments. What
succor, in fact, can she expect from churches which, in presence of the
sultan, and of the sovereigns of the other countries where they are
established, have shown themselves fully as feeble as the Russian Church
has been in presence of the czars? The sultan—to speak of him only—has not
he himself settled the Bulgarian question? And, besides, will not these
churches have enough to do to defend themselves at a time when political
importance decides everything? What influence in the religious affairs of
Russia can be exercised by little states occupying scarcely the third or
fourth rank among the states of Europe?

Should the Russian Church accept the aid of the Catholic Church, it will
be a very different matter. In the same way that history shows us the
latter as having already had to deal, on doctrinal ground, with every sort
of error, and of having fought against it, thus offering, with the weight
of her experience, the aid of a science as vast as the variety of errors
against which it has combated; so also has the Catholic Church already
encountered, on practical ground, every sort of obstacle, and has passed
through storms and tempests which would a thousand times over have
submerged her were she not divine. The number, variety, and gravity of the
struggles she has maintained also against governments and nations give her
the right to repeat with a calm security, each time that the signs of a
fresh persecution appear: _Alios vidi ventos aliasque procellas_—“Other
tempestuous winds and other storms have I seen.” She possesses
institutions born of these struggles and adapted to those of the future,
which will also create new ones in their turn. Her missionaries and her
priests present us with the spectacle of an army as numerous as it is
varied, answering to all the needs of war and to all the possible
eventualities of the field of battle. Still more: in the existence of the
church warfare is, so to speak, the normal condition, and peace the
exception; it thus follows that the powers of the Catholic Church are kept
in continual exercise, and that the science of the means of victory is
never reduced to simple memories.

This, from the history of the past, is what may be with certainty
foreseen, whether with regard to the inefficiency of the help which the
Russian Church may promise herself from the various branches of the
orthodox communion, in a struggle against unbelief and impious
governments, or with regard to the solid support which, in this case, she
would find from the Catholic Church. But this prevision is not only
justified by history. History has done nothing more than throw light upon
that which had been foretold to us by a terrible declaration of Jesus
Christ; and it is in this declaration that lies the deep reason and the
true explanation of that which history causes to pass before our eyes.
_Omne regnum in seipsum divisum desolabitur_—“Every kingdom divided
against itself shall be brought to desolation” (S. Luke xi. 17), Our Lord
has said.

The Orthodox Church is a divided kingdom—divided into as many branches as
there are states in which she counts her adherents; divided to such a
degree that, without the consent of sovereigns, no communication is
possible between these divers branches; so divided that it is also the
will of sovereigns which regulates and measures the relations which the
bishops of the eparchies (dioceses) of one self‐same state may hold among
themselves. The Orthodox Church is a kingdom divided against itself—so
divided that nowhere is there to be found an authority which, being itself
the source of jurisdiction, can terminate the litigations about
jurisdiction without appeal; so divided that a little boldness and
obstinacy sufficed to enable Greece to withdraw herself from the
jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople; that a little boldness
and obstinacy sufficed to gain the cause for Bulgaria, when, not long ago,
she also shook off the authority of the same patriarch; and that a little
boldness and obstinacy always suffice to enable the revolted definitively
to shake off the yoke of their pastors.(192)

Alas! it is not even here that the desolation of this kingdom ends. Of the
Orthodox Church it may be truly said that the desolation has no bounds. It
has no bounds because already the principle has been established that the
church of each state ought to be independent, and that each separate
nation also ought to have its distinct and independent church. It is
endless because to these principles—subversive of all order and all
stability, and which make ecclesiastical jurisdiction depend no longer
upon the laws and customs of the church, but on the chances of war, the
valor of conquerors, and the craftiness of conspirators—the Orthodox
Church can oppose nothing but vain protestations; it is endless because
the very bishops themselves of the Orthodox Church take the lead in
upholding these principles, and are the first to treat with contempt the
complaints of those of their brethren whose jurisdiction is injured.

And, in fact, it was by invoking its political independence that the
recently‐formed kingdom of Greece declared itself, in 1833, freed from the
jurisdiction of the Patriarch of Constantinople. This declaration was made
and carried by _all_ the bishops of the kingdom, assembled at Nauplia; not
a single voice appears to have been raised to require that the patriarch
should at least be first consulted. The patriarch appealed to the canons
of the church, and protested—and they let him protest. For seventeen years
he went on protesting, until at last, in 1850, his successor recognized
the accomplished fact; had he not done so, he would have been allowed to
protest to an indefinite period, as long as he might be inclined. It was
by appealing to the principle of nationality (_phyletism_) that the
Bulgarians shook off the authority of the same patriarch. Their bishops
nominated an exarch, and long before the sultan had definitely settled
this affair they gave no more heed to the patriarch’s protestations than
for seventeen years had been given by the bishops of the Hellenic kingdom.
In the hope of leading back the Bulgarians to obedience, the patriarch, in
1872, convoked a great council in the Church of S. George at
Constantinople. He made his complaints against his rebellious children,
and without apparently considering the effect which might be produced by
the publicity given to his words, he there related that, having summoned
the recalcitrant bishops to return to obedience, one of them had answered
him, _by the telegraph_, that he should go and receive the reply from the
exarch.

The council thereupon proceeded to excommunicate the Bulgarians, who had
already so willingly excommunicated themselves, sure beforehand that they
would none the less continue to be considered members of the Orthodox
Church— a certainty which could not fail to be realized. The example of
Greece had borne its fruit. Besides, this council was not œcumenical;
amongst others, the Russian bishops did not sit there at all; a letter of
the Synod had the mission of representing them, probably unknown to
themselves, and certainly without their permission. By what right, then,
could the council separate the Bulgarian nation from _the whole_ church?
By what right did it speak in the name of _the whole_ church? It had so
much the less right, also, from the fact that the Patriarch of Jerusalem,
Cyril, who happened to be then at Constantinople, determinedly refused,
for reasons which gave evidence of more than unwillingness, to appear at
its sittings.(193)

Will it be said that the Bulgarians were excommunicated by virtue of the
canons of the church; that the council applied to them an anathema already
decreed by the fathers and the œcumenical councils against those who
violated the canons? We have some acquaintance with these canons; and, if
they are to be taken literally, we would not take upon ourselves to prove
that the whole Orthodox Church has not long ago fallen under some
excommunication pronounced by her own canons; such, at any rate, would be
the case with regard to the Russian Church, which forms its principal
portion. To escape this somewhat embarrassing conclusion, it becomes
necessary to admit that the canons must be understood, as it is commonly
expressed, _cum grano salis_, and that they are susceptible of a mild
interpretation. It is this which the Bulgarians believe themselves to have
done. They have found in the past history of their church _several_
examples authorizing an interpretation of the canons conformable to their
wishes; amongst others, that of Peter the Great, who, _without ever
ceasing to be considered orthodox_, abolished the patriarchate of Moscow,
instituted the Synod, made it the principal authority of the Russian
Church, and declared himself to be the “Supreme Judge” thereof; after
which he informed the Oriental patriarchs of what had happened, and
demanded of them an approbation which he was fully determined to do
without, in case it should be refused. The crime of the Bulgarians
consisted in interpreting the canons as they had been interpreted by the
numerous bishops who had not on that account been, by any means, expelled
from the church; and if the letter of the Russian Synod, the mandatory of
the Russian episcopate at the council of 1872, blamed them, besides that,
in their revolt, they were sustained by Russia.(194) The Bulgarians called
to mind that it was Russia, too, which had the most strenuously labored to
induce the Patriarch of Constantinople to recognize the independence of
the Church of the Hellenic kingdom as an accomplished fact. With memories
such as these, the anathema of the Council of Constantinople of 1872 could
scarcely disquiet the Bulgarians.

And this is not all. This council made a decision which is, in truth, a
_doctrinal_ decision by declaring that the exterior constitution of the
church is independent of the principle of nationality, and in condemning
the application of this principle to the church, as being contrary to the
Scriptures and to the Fathers. By what right did this council, not being
ecumenical, make a decision of this kind, and what value could it possess?
Will it be said that this council did nothing more than define and affirm
what was contained in the Scriptures and the Fathers? It was precisely
this to which the Bulgarians would not agree, and of which the Patriarch
of Jerusalem—to mention him only—was by no means convinced; in short, that
which only a truly ecumenical council could _authoritatively_ decide. In
presence of a merely nominal doctrinal authority, it was perfectly natural
that the Bulgarians should keep their own view of the matter.

But still more embarrassing by far would be the consequences resulting to
the Orthodox Church if it were admitted that this council possessed a
really doctrinal authority, and that its decisions were obligatory on the
consciences of the orthodox faithful. In this case the Orthodox Church
would have added yet another definition to those already recorded in the
seven Ecumenical Councils allowed by her. This church has always boasted
of having _added nothing_ to the doctrine expressed in the seven
Ecumenical Councils, in which, according to her, the Holy Ghost has
deposited, _once for all_,(195) whatever it is necessary to believe. She
is so persuaded that nothing can be added to them that she takes pleasure
in recognizing in these councils the seven pillars of wisdom, the seven
mysterious seals, spoken of by S. John—pillars and seals which will
eternally remain seven in number, without any possible chance of reaching
even to the number eight. Therefore it is that she throws in our faces our
western councils and their definitions, and therefore that she reproaches
us with _new dogmas_. But the Immaculate Conception of Mary and the
doctrinal Infallibility of the Pope—these two dogmas which the church has
found in the Scriptures and in the Fathers—were they newer in the eyes of
the Bulgarians than the dogma defined at the Council of Constantinople in
1872, that “the church, in her exterior constitution, is independent of
the principle of nationality”—a dogma condemned, implicitly at least, by
the previous practice of a large portion of the Orthodox Church?

Finally, why should the Bulgarians have submitted to the decision of a
particular council—a decision, carried by the Greeks _judices in causâ
propriâ_, when the Russian Church, as all the world knew, thought so
lightly of the doctrine and practice of the whole Greek Church in a matter
of far greater importance, _the validity of baptism_? Baptism by infusion
is in fact recognized at St. Petersburg and Moscow as valid, while at
Constantinople it is null and void. A Protestant or a Catholic baptized by
infusion, who should ask to be received into the Orthodox Church, would be
accepted unconditionally in Russia: but at Constantinople he would be
required to be rebaptized. A Christian in the dominions of the czar, he
would become a pagan at Constantinople; and yet this is one and the same
church!(196)

Yes, the shock has been given. The Council of Constantinople of 1872 has
not been able to hinder the defection of the Bulgarians, but it has
attracted the attention of the Christian world to the fact that the
Orthodox Church has no authority which can force consciences to reject as
heretical the application to the exterior constitution of the church,
either of the principle of nationality, or any other principle upon which
might be based the political constitution of nations. And further, the
acts of the Council of Constantinople of 1872 give evidence of the
hesitation and uncertainty existing among the representatives of the
orthodox faith(197) with regard to a question so momentous, and which
concerns the very life of that church. The shock has been given. Error has
a terrible logic. Where will the divisions, the sub‐divisions, and the
parcellings‐out of the orthodox communion end?

And what consequences may result from the want of exterior unity, not only
for the independence, but also for the faith, of the church, we have just
glanced at; but it will be revealed by the _Ecclesiastical Regulation_ in
a manner more convincing and more sad.

Assuredly the future had not been foreseen when, in the _Confession of the
Orthodox Faith_, the great catechism of the whole Oriental Church, it was
considered sufficient to explain as follows the unity of the church:

“The church is one, ... according to the teaching of the apostle: _For I
have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste
virgin to Christ_ (2 Cor. xi. 2). For even as there is but one Christ,
even so his spouse can be but one; as it is written in the fourth chapter
of the Epistle of S. Paul to the Ephesians (iv. 5, 6): _One Lord, one
faith, one baptism: there is but one God, the Father of all._”(198)

Nor was the future any more foreseen when, in the catechism of Mgr.
Philarete, the unity of the church was defined:(199)

“Q. Why is the church one?

“A. Because she represents one _spiritual_ body, animated by one sole and
only divine Spirit, and having one head only, who is Christ.”

Let us now turn away our gaze from the Orthodox Church, in which the
terrible declaration of Jesus Christ finds only too fully its
accomplishment. Another church appears before us. She is not a divided
kingdom: on the contrary, if there be one characteristic mark by which she
may be at once recognized by all who seek for her, it is the imposing
unity of her exterior organization. The pope forms this unity. Let us ask
of history what the pope has done for the church.

And history answers: The pope has saved the church. The pope alone has
been able to hinder this church from breaking up, as the Orthodox Church
has done, into so many national churches, at first under the protection,
then under the authority, and finally under the rod, of sovereigns who
were at first kings, then presidents of a republic, sometimes
Robespierres. It is the pope, and the pope only, who has maintained, not
merely the vague notion, but the living sentiment of Catholic fraternity—a
sentiment which inspires the adversaries of the church with a fear which,
in spite of themselves, they betray. It is the pope, and the pope alone,
who has caused the sap of Christian piety to circulate in the whole
Catholic world, by the honors of the altars accorded to the saints of
every land, and by those institutions which, originating in one country,
belong to all countries, as powerful, in the realization of their vast
aspirations, as zeal and charity themselves. It is the pope who makes the
treasures of virtue and learning which he discovers in any particular
locality the common property of the world—in a word, it is the pope who
causes the church always to survive, not only the enemies who desire her
death, not only the false prophets who, for centuries past, have gone on
announcing this death as imminent, but all kingdoms and all empires, their
institutions, and even their remembrance. This is what the pope is for the
Catholic Church.

Thus we see, on the one side, division, and, as its consequence, the
dissolution foretold by Jesus Christ; on the other side, unity, and, with
unity, victory and strength. This is the signification of the church
having or not having a pope. Besides, the unity of government is so
necessary to arrest the indefinite parcelling out of one church into a
number of independent churches, and as a safeguard to the common faith,
that each separate branch of the Orthodox Eastern Church has not been able
to maintain its integrity without the aid of a supreme and central
authority. Instead of the pope, this is a patriarch, or it is a synod, or
it is the sovereign of the country, but everywhere and always the very
adversaries of the Papacy themselves render an involuntary homage to the
Catholic dogma which declares a visible head, a pope, necessary to the
church.

Yes, a pope is necessary for the church—necessary to her existence, and
necessary for the fulfilment of her mission.

Let us consider it with regard to the most powerful of the various
branches of the orthodox communion—the Russian Church. Even could this
church (by hypothesis) maintain herself alone, and could she continue her
work without the operation of the laws; could she alone combat unbelief,
and alone make head against impious governments, the pope would be none
the less necessary for her. And why? Because the Russian Church calls
herself _Catholic_; that is, _universal_. Now, it is not enough for a
church which calls itself Catholic, and the one church of the Saviour of
all, to be able to maintain her ground in that part of the world in which
she is now enclosed; it is not enough that she should combat unbelief in
the empire of the czars, nor that she should be able to resist an impious
government which may succeed to theirs.

If she is Catholic, she ought, the Russian Church herself, to be equal to
penetrating _everywhere_, and everywhere to maintain herself; to combat
_everywhere_ heresy and unbelief, and everywhere to sustain collision with
the government. If she is Catholic, let her issue from the limits of the
country of the czars, and at least _attempt_ the conquest of Italy,
Germany, France, England, all Europe; America, the whole world; let her,
in the name of Jesus Christ, utter words of authority to the conquerors of
the earth, brave the hatred which the consciousness of her rights would
draw upon her, and dare to declare to crowned heads that all Christians
belong to her; let her not confine herself to raising in capital cities
Russian temples for the use of the Russian embassies, but let her require
every government to recognize the orthodox worship; let her missionaries
penetrate, whether welcomed or repelled, into all the countries of the
earth with the sole credentials of the apostles, and, strong in this
single right, let them return whither they are driven out, and sprinkle
with their blood the soil wherein they sow the seed of orthodoxy. Then,
and only then, will the Russian Church show herself Catholic; that is to
say, universal; that is to say, the church of the Saviour of all. Until
then in vain may she call herself Catholic while the title is denied by
the fact.

But these things the Russian Church will never be able to accomplish
without a pope.

From whom, in fact, will her priests hold their commission? To whom will
they recur for counsel, protection, and support? In whose name will they
speak to governments and kings? To whom will they refer the latter to
authenticate the validity of their mission, to propose objections, or to
lodge complaints? If we except Russia, Turkey, the Hellenic kingdom,
Roumania, Servia, and some provinces of the Austro‐Hungarian Empire, the
rest of the world is missionary ground for the Orthodox Church, just as
much as is China for the Catholic Church. Let us suppose the Russian
Church wishing only to undertake the conversion of France. Paris already
possesses a Russian temple; it is now the Synod, in concert with the
government, which nominates the persons attached to this temple. When the
official church shall have fallen, and all the Russian bishops shall be
canonically equal, or at least independent of each other, to which among
them will the charge of this mission belong?

Paris is a place to stimulate the zeal of many bishops. It is allowable to
believe that a settlement will not be very quickly made. Let us suppose it
made, however, and moreover that even there is established a college _De
Propaganda Fide Orthodoxâ_ at St. Petersburg or Moscow. What would be the
attitude of the Greek Church of Constantinople? Will the latter possess,
or will she not possess, the right to evangelize France, and there to
exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction? If it be allowed that she has this
right, the same question presents itself also for the three patriarchates
of Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem; it also presents itself for the
Greek Church of the Hellenic kingdom, for the Church of Roumania, for that
of Servia, for the Orthodox Church of the Austro‐Hungarian Empire, and
even for that of Montenegro. Here is already an accumulation and
intermingling of jurisdictions liable to give rise to numerous contests.
Who shall decide amongst them? Will they come to a mutual agreement? But
an agreement will be everlastingly impossible between the Greek and
Russian Churches, at least so long as the question of the validity of
baptism by infusion remains undecided. We will say Catholics are to be
“converted” to orthodoxy: the Russian ministers will not rebaptize them.
The Greek Church knows it—this church, as we have just said, which regards
baptism by infusion as null. If the Greek Church consents that the Russian
missionaries shall evangelize France, it declares, by that consent, that
baptism is no longer necessary for belonging to the church. If, however,
she opposes their so doing, who is to decide between them? And the simple
ones who had previously let themselves be incorporated into the Russian
Church—would they be very certain that they really belonged to the church?
Which, then, will be the true missionaries?

We confine ourselves to this example. Let us apply ourselves carefully to
realize, in imagination, what would be the situation of a church
attempting to do without a pope that which must be done by a church
believing herself divine, and invested by God with a commission to convert
the world—wishing to do, without a pope, what is done by the Catholic
Church every day. Then it will be easy to understand whether there can be
a divine church without a pope.

And this pope, without which the Russian Church will never be the
universal church of Jesus Christ nor fulfil the mission of that
church—where would she seek him? Would she, on account of the needs
created by her new situation, confer upon one of the bishops all the
authority which is now concentrated in the hands of the Synod? Will she
say to him, Help me to fulfil the mission of converting the world? But
this charge, this part, would it not with greater right belong to the
Patriarch of Constantinople, who, so powerful is the need of unity, has
already declared, upon one solemn occasion, that on him rests the _care of
all the churches?_(200) We are supposing in the Russian Church, and in the
other branches of the orthodox communion, enough self‐denial to consent to
this. But when this great event shall have been accomplished, what will
have been done?

It will have been acknowledged before the face of all the world that it is
not Rome who made the schism. It will have been confessed that during ten
centuries it has been charged as a crime upon the Catholic Church that she
has not sacrificed that which, after ten centuries of disasters, the
Eastern Church has found it necessary to force herself to regain under
pain of ceasing to exist. There will have been rendered to the Catholic
Church the most splendid of testimonies, in confessing that she alone
possesses the true sense of the words of Jesus Christ, and that the rock
on which Jesus Christ has built his church is Peter.

Indeed, from that day forward there will be no more excuse for schism.
Between a rock designated by men of the XIXth century, and that rock of
which the manifest existence goes back to Jesus Christ himself, and has
been pointed out by him, who that but knows how to read and write can
hesitate for an instant?

Such, therefore, is the alternative: either the Orthodox Church will be
forced to give herself a pope, to show that she is really that which she
entitles herself, “Catholic,” or universal, and to fulfil the mission
imposed by this name, or she will never be able to justify her
appreciation of this title. What will happen in the former case, we have
just said; if, on the contrary, the Orthodox Church delays to give herself
a pope, the rapid march of events, and the revolutionary storm from which
neither Russia nor the East will by any means be preserved, will, before
very long, prove to us that it is not upon the sand that Jesus Christ has
built his church.

To Be Concluded Next Month.




Burke And The Revolution.


Bacon’s grand testamentary vindication of his life, “bequeathing his name
and memory to foreign nations and his own countrymen after some time be
passed over,” might have been written with even greater justice of
himself—because free from any imputation of moral weakness—by the master‐
mind of the XVIIIth century in England in the domain of political
philosophy—Edmund Burke, the illustrious orator and statesman, the author
of _Reflections on the Revolution in France_. To‐day, when France,
“incessantly agitated by a propaganda of the most pernicious
doctrines,”(201) still vindicates the sagacity which foresaw the
disastrous course of the Revolution, while England, which he saved from
the same propaganda, uninterruptedly illustrates the “beneficial influence
of the regular action of the public powers,” it may not be amiss to recall
some of the opinions to which he gave utterance at the beginning of the
storm. Burke’s genius, like Bacon’s, was indeed too refulgent not to be
acknowledged even in his own day. But the burning questions upon the
discussion of which and their solution, so far as human reason can go, he
has built up an enduring fame—_monumentum ære perennius_—lighted up
passions too gigantic and furious in the tremendous conflict then
inaugurated to allow of contemporary justice being done to his labors. Nor
did their negatory influence upon his fame end with his death; two allied
causes have conspired to partially obscure the clear and immortal flame of
his genius, even to our time:

First, the jealousy of the political and literary followers of Charles
James Fox.

Second, the inimical spirit of the Revolution.

Burke, as it is well known, had to contend, during his parliamentary
career, not only against the Tory prejudices of the country party,
represented by such men as William Lord Bagot and Col. Onslow, but also
against the ill‐concealed jealousy and oligarchical exclusiveness of his
nominal allies, the Whig aristocracy. But this influence of caste, which
in his lifetime placed over his head his political pupil, Charles Fox, as
the representative of the Whig family compacts, has been succeeded since
his death by a more acrimonious spirit of personal jealousy in defence of
the fame of his younger rival. The partisans of Fox have never been able
to forgive Burke’s renunciation of his alliance with the eloquent Whig
leader; and so large a share of literary and political criticism during
the last half‐century has come from the pens of that small but popular
band of writers who took their inspiration from the traditions of Holland
House, that the acknowledgment of Burke’s profound and prophetic genius
has been unduly circumscribed by the desire of elevating the “great man”
of the family. Macaulay and Earl Russell have given expression to this
feeling; the former by covertly insinuating a doubt of Burke’s judgment,
while lavishly extolling the splendor of his imagination; the latter by
open denunciation of his course at the outbreak of the Revolution; Earl
Russell with unconscious self‐satire quoting these lines from La Fontaine:


    “L’homme est de feu pour le mensonge
    Il est de glace pour la vérité.”


The efforts of a powerful literary and family connection to elevate its
idol, Charles Fox, at the expense of Burke, have had, however, but small
effect in limiting the measure of the latter’s fame, compared with the
hostile spirit of revolution animating the current periodical literature
of England and America. If the apostles of the Revolution, who steal
Burke’s thunder without acknowledgment, when it suits their purpose,
against the despotism of power, could bury out of sight his protests
against that worse despotism of unchained human passions, which is their
ideal of liberty, they would gladly place him in their Pantheon. But the
mind of the great political philosopher was too grandly comprehensive to
be narrowed within the grooves of that fashionable “liberalism” which
covers even the basest tyranny, if directed against the Catholic Church.
His humanity was too broad and true not to be aroused into flaming
denunciation of the abuse of power, whether it assumed the shape of
“opulent oppression” in India or democratic priest‐slaughter in France.
Hence it is that Burke holds but a half‐allegiance of the Liberal party;
that his fame has been, as it were, truncated, so far as they have been
able to effect it; and that his magnificent vindications of the cause of
liberty, bounded by no limitations of race, government, or creed, are
circumscribed in their minds by his ante‐revolutionary labors.

But it is not in the power of any class of critics, least of all of the
light artillery of “liberalism,” to narrow or permanently diminish Burke’s
kingdom over human thought. His fame will not be dependent upon the
fashion of this or any single age. The _consensus_ of humanity has crowned
him among the Immortals. When Macaulay and Russell shall have become
obscure names, the works of Burke will endure as monuments of our
civilization. His place will be with Demosthenes and Cicero, and in the
estimation of a more remote posterity he will probably overtop them both.

The long, lean figure, with spectacles on nose, once familiar to the
caricaturists of the third George’s reign, has faded a good deal from the
eyes of the present generation. We now turn over with a smile the prints
of the “concealed Jesuit” from S. Omer’s, _barrette_ on head, and long
_soutane_ clinging to his heels; or the more portly figure of the
highwayman, blunderbuss in hand, waylaying, in company with North and Fox,
the “savior of India” (Warren Hastings); or the “Watchman” of the
constitution, in heavy cloak, lantern in hand, and spectacles on the
formidable nose, ferreting out the revolutionary preacher, Dr. Price, in
his midnight study. The gravers of Gilray and Sayer have yielded to those
of the caricaturists for _Punch_. The figures of Gladstone, Disraeli, and
Bright have supplanted those of Pitt, Fox, and Burke. The great orator and
statesman has taken his place as a classic on the shelves of all
libraries, but is popularly known only by a few rounded extracts from his
speeches, or by Macaulay’s description of the entrance on the
parliamentary stage of Lord Rockingham’s young Irish secretary, “who to an
eloquence surpassing the eloquence of Pitt, and an industry that shamed
the industry of Grenville, united an amplitude of comprehension to which
neither Pitt nor Grenville could lay claim.” But if Burke has shared the
fate of all great writers not strictly popular in being conventionally
admired but practically neglected by the general reader, no political
author is more diligently studied by the “middlemen” of thought, the
makers and leaders of public opinion. He is the private tutor of public
teachers; the _vade mecum_ of the orator and politician. Most of the
questions of political ethics which have been the subjects of discussion
during the present century have been profoundly treated of by him.
Catholic emancipation, parliamentary reform, the freedom of the press,
ministerial responsibility, the relations of church and state, the
abolition of the slave trade, the amelioration of the criminal law—all
have received from him their most ample and brilliant illustration.

Of all the events of his time, however, the Revolution of 1789 gave the
chief exercise to his powers. Born in 1730, he was then at the zenith of
his fame, in the full maturity of his massive yet acute intellect. Earl
Russell’s senile complaint in his life of Fox of “the wreck of his
(Burke’s) judgment” betrays only the dotage of his own. Advancing age had
better fitted him for the contest. His mind had, as Macaulay truly says,
bloomed late into flower, although the rhetoric of the essayist has
caricatured the sterility of his youth. The giant trunk was now crowned
with a luxuriant and graceful foliage, which added to its beauty, while it
detracted nothing from its strength. The experience of “his long and
laborious life,” the accumulated stores of his prodigious industry,
furnished him with weapons of finest temper and irresistible force. Thus
armed, stepping to the front as the champion of civilization and religion
against the Giant Despair which had broken its bonds in Europe, it was
with striking appropriateness that his friend, Sir Joshua Reynolds,
applied to him, at the moment of his rupture with Fox and the opposition,
the lines written under the engraving of 1790 from the portrait of
1775—lines in which Milton describes the faithful Abdiel striding forth,
solitary, from amid the rebel host:


    “So spake the fervent angel, but his zeal
    None seconded: .....
    ...... Unmoved,
    Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified,
    His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal;
    Nor number nor example with him wrought
    To move from truth, or change his constant mind,
    Though single. From amidst forth he passed
    Long way through hostile scorn, nor of violence feared aught;
    And with retorting scorn, his back he turned
    On those proud towers to swift destruction doomed.”


The efforts of Burke’s single mind at this critical moment decided the
course of events in England. His speeches in Parliament and the
publication of his _Reflections on the Revolution in France_ aroused a
national feeling that all the efforts of the revolutionary propagandists
were unable to stem; which Pitt followed rather than led; and which
enabled England to carry on without flinching, to a triumphant close, the
long and bloody war in national self‐defence into which she was driven by
the aggressive spirit of the Revolution. Pitt only gave utterance to the
national feeling when he declared at the close of Burke’s speech on the
Army Estimates, in which he flung down the gauntlet to the Revolution,
“that not only the present generation but the latest posterity would
revere his name for the decided part he had that day taken.”

It was Burke’s fortune to witness the temporary triumph, but not the
succeeding repulse, of the first outbreak of the Revolution. He died at
the full tide of its fury. Yet the tremendous blows he dealt its
principles, single‐handed, before all that was mortal of him was laid at
rest at Beaconsfield, undoubtedly saved England from succumbing to its
influence in his own day, and their conservative force is still felt in
the government of that country. “This man,” said Schlegel, “has been to
his own country and to all Europe—and, in a particular manner, to all
Germany—a new light of political wisdom and moral experience. He corrected
his age when it was at the height of its revolutionary fury; and without
maintaining any system of philosophy, he seems to have seen further into
the true nature of society, and to have more clearly comprehended the
effect of religion in connecting individual security with national
welfare, than any philosopher or any system of philosophy of any preceding
age.” True words, and worthy of attention at this moment, when Germany has
entered on a new and dangerous course of political action.

From the first mutterings of the revolutionary storm Burke had distrusted
its character and future violence. Alarmed by what he had seen of the
undisguised levity and scepticism of Parisian society during his visit to
France in 1772, he had taken occasion in one of his speeches, as early as
1773, to point out “this conspiracy of atheism to the watchful eyes of
European governments.” The outrages in the name of liberty which were
simultaneous with its outburst determined his course, although his keen
political vision had long before penetrated the hollowness of its
professions. The old political gladiator, “in whose breast,” as he proudly
and truly said of himself, “no anger, durable or vehement, had ever been
kindled but by what he considered as tyranny”; whose potent voice had re‐
echoed across the Western ocean in support of the American colonist, had
pleaded for the African slave and Hindoo laborer, and had instilled fresh
hope, in the broken heart of the Irish “Papist,” roused himself now to his
last and most powerful effort in defence of the fugitive French
“aristocrat” and hunted priest.

“I have struggled,” he said, “to the best of my power against two great
evils, growing out of the most sacred of all things—liberty and authority.
I have struggled against the licentiousness of freedom, I have contended
against the tyranny of power.” Nearly ten years before, in his speech on
the Marriage Act, defending himself against the charges of “aristocrat”
and “radical” which had been alternately levelled against him, he had
predicted his course in these noble words:


    “When indeed the smallest rights of the poorest people in the
    kingdom are in question, I would set my face against any act of
    pride countenanced by the highest that are in it; and if it should
    come to the last extremity, and a contest of blood, my course is
    taken. I would take my fate with the poor, and low, and feeble.
    But if these people come to turn their liberty into a cloak for
    mischievousness, and to seek a privilege of exemption, not from
    power, but from the rules of morality and virtuous discipline, I
    would join my hand to make them feel the force which a few united
    in a good cause have over a multitude of the profligate and
    ferocious.”


Burke’s theory of true reform, illustrated by the honorable labors of his
whole public career, was in fact so radically opposed to that of the
French constitution makers that no standing‐ground common to both could be
found. He foresaw plainly enough what were the secret aims and aspirations
of the revolutionary leaders from the first, whatever might be their
humanitarian professions; that whatever their changes of leaders or
watchwords, their goal would always be the same—the destruction of
existing society; not reparation, but ruin. He would have seen in M.
Gambetta’s programme of a _nouvelle couche sociale_, enunciated at
Grenoble in 1872, only a new reading of M. Marat’s schemes of universal
confiscation in 1792. Neither would have found more favor in his eyes than
in those of any English reformer from S. Thomas à Becket to Hampden. He
believed with Bacon that there could be no wise design of reform which did
not set out with the determination “to weed, to prune, and to graft,
rather than to plough up and plant all afresh.” Sixty years afterwards
another writer, after an elaborate and prolonged study of the _ancien
régime_, and a lifetime’s experience of the results of the Revolution,
arrived at the point from which Burke started. The writer was Alexis de
Tocqueville. Those who are familiar only with the _Democracy in America_,
the work of his inexperienced youth, would do well to read his _Memoir and
Letters_ by De Beaumont. Writing to M. Freslon in 1853, after the events
of 1848‐51 had pretty well cured him of liberalism, he said:


    “When one examines, as I am doing at Tours, the archives of an
    ancient provincial government, one finds a thousand reasons for
    hating the _ancien régime_, but few for loving the Revolution; for
    one sees that the _ancien régime_ was rapidly sinking under the
    weight of years and a gradual change of ideas and manners, so
    that, with a little patience and good conduct, it might have been
    reformed without destroying indiscriminately all that was good in
    it with all that was bad. It is curious to see how different was
    the government of 1780 from that of 1750. One does not recognize
    the government or the governed. The Revolution broke out not when
    evils were at their worst, but when reform was beginning. Halfway
    down the staircase we threw ourselves out of the window, in order
    to get sooner to the bottom” (_Memoir and Remains_, vol. ii. pp.
    242, 243, Eng. ed.)


Burke had an invincible distrust of the crude theories and rash
speculations of the _doctrinaires_ of the Revolution. “Follow experience
and common sense,” he says in a hundred different ways; “these are the
arguments of statesmen! Leave the rest to the schools, where only they may
be debated with—safety.” “In politics,” he says, “the most fallacious of
all things is geometrical demonstration.” Again: “The majors make a
pompous figure in the battle, but the victory of truth depends upon the
little minors of circumstances.” He compares the socialist theorist ready
to plunge into the volcano of revolutionary experiment to the Sicilian
sophist—_ardentem frigidus Ætnam insiluit_. The atrocious principles of
the literary and philosophical guides of the Revolution seemed to him
almost more portentous than the brutalities of the mob. “Never before this
time,” he says, “was a set of literary men converted into a gang of
robbers and assassins. Never before did a den of bravoes and banditti
assume the garb and tone of an academy of philosophers.”

Remarkable sayings then, and true of experience anterior to his time. But
had Burke lived in our day, he would have witnessed with astonishment the
full development of the spirit he denounced, in the terrible spectacle of
an aggressive infidel philosophy, and an almost universal infidel press,
sometimes truculent, sometimes frivolous, but always shamelessly boastful
of its pagan principles. He would have seen a school of pseudo‐philosophy
professing its open design to destroy the foundations of revealed
religion; filled with the spirit of the apostate Julian; as audacious and
boastful as he, but destined to meet as shameful an end.

Let us compare, then, Burke’s theory of true liberty, and his opinion of
what France might have gained by a large and loyal measure of reform, with
the desperate counsels and futile outrages which followed the surrender of
the movement by the French conservatives into the hands of the Jacobins.
“You would,” he says, had such a course as he recommended been pursued,
“have rendered the cause of liberty venerable in the eyes of every worthy
mind in every nation. You would have shamed despotism from the earth by
showing that freedom was not only reconcilable, but, as when well
disciplined it is, auxiliary to law. You would have had a protected,
satisfied, laborious, and obedient people, taught to seek and recognize
that happiness is to be found by virtue in all conditions; in which
consists the true moral equality of mankind, and not in that monstrous
fiction which, by inspiring false ideas and vain expectations into men
destined to travel in the obscure walks of laborious life, serves only to
aggravate and embitter that real inequality which it never can remove.”

Burke’s frequent definitions of true liberty are as beautiful as they are
true. “You hope, sir,” he says, writing to De Menonville, “that I think
the French deserving of liberty. I certainly do. I certainly think all men
who desire it deserve it. It is not the reward of our merit or the
acquisition of our industry. It is our inheritance. It is the birthright
of our species. We cannot forfeit our right to it but by what forfeits our
title to the privileges of our kind. I mean the abuse or oblivion of our
natural faculties, and a ferocious indocility which is prompt to wrong or
violence, destroys our social nature, and transforms us into something a
little better than a description of wild beast. To men so degraded a state
of strong restraint is a sort of necessary substitute for freedom, since,
bad as it is, it may deliver them in some measure from the worst of all
slavery, that is, the despotism of their own blind and brutal passions.
You have kindly said that you began to love freedom from your intercourse
with me. Permit me, then, to continue our conversation, and to tell you
what that freedom is that I love. It is not solitary, unconnected,
individual, selfish liberty. It is social freedom. It is that state of
things in which the liberty of no man and no body of men is in a condition
to trespass on the liberty of any person or any description of persons in
society. The liberty, the only liberty, I mean, is a liberty connected
with order; that not only exists along with virtue and order, but which
cannot exist without them.”

“Am I,” he asks, in answer to the shibboleth of the “rights of man,”—“am I
to congratulate a highwayman and murderer, who has broke prison, upon the
recovery of his natural rights? This would be to act over again the case
of the criminals condemned to the galleys and their heroic deliverer, the
knight of the ’sorrowful countenance.’”

If we turn from Burke’s satire upon the revolutionary actors to his
opinions on its probable onward course and changing fortunes, we shall
find a series of the most remarkable political prophecies on record. At a
time when Fox and the opposition hailed the Revolution as already
accomplished, with nothing before it but a future of ideal progress and
happiness; when Pitt and the government seemed lulled into a still more
fatal inaction, Burke proclaimed in decisive tones that the contest
between socialism and all constituted governments had only begun. We group
together a few of these remarkable predictions, which time has so amply
verified: “He proposed to prove,” he said in his _Appeal from the New to
the Old Whigs_, “that the present state of things in France is not a
transient evil, productive, as some have too favorably supposed, of a
lasting good; but that the present evil is only the means of producing
future and, if that were possible, worse evils. That this is not an
undigested, imperfect, and crude scheme of liberty, which may be gradually
mellowed and ripened into an orderly and social freedom; but that it is so
fundamentally wrong as to be incapable of correcting itself by any length
of time.” Again: “We are not at the end of our struggle or near it. Let us
not deceive ourselves; we are at the beginning of great troubles.”
Predicting the changing features of the Revolution, he said: “In its
present form it can hardly remain; but before its final settlement it may
have to pass, as one of our poets says, ’through great varieties of
untried being,’ and in all its transmigrations to be purified by fire and
sword.” The very spirit of the Commune is thus foreshadowed in a letter to
M. de Menonville, 1790: “But if the same ends should hereafter require the
same course which had been already pursued, there is no doubt but the same
ferocious delight in murder and the same savage cruelty will be again
renewed.” _Tous les évêques a la lanterne_ was the watchword of both
outbreaks of the Revolution.

Compare with these sayings the remarks, fifty years later, of another
observer, of great acuteness, but moulded in less heroic proportions than
Burke. “This day fifty‐one years,” writes De Tocqueville, the author of
_Democracy in America_, “the French Revolution commenced, and, after the
destruction of so many men and institutions, we may say it is still going
on. Is not this reassuring to the nations that are only just beginning
theirs?”(202) De Tocqueville, it is well known, during the early part of
his career, was tainted with the prevalent liberal Catholicism of his day
in France. He wished to unite the church with the Revolution—chimerical
task, of which advancing years and experience convinced him of the sinful
folly! Happily for himself, he died a good Catholic in the bosom of the
church.


    “I scarcely dare hope,” he says, “to see a regular government,
    strong and at the same time liberal, established in our country.
    This ideal was, as you know, the dream of my youth, and likewise
    of the portion of my mature age that has passed. Is it possible
    still to believe in its realization? For a long time I thought
    (but long before February this belief had been much shaken) that
    we had been making our way over a stormy sea, on which we were
    still tossing, but that the port was at hand. Was I not wrong? Are
    we not on a rolling sea that has no shore? Or is not the land so
    distant, so unknown, that our lives and those of our children may
    pass away before it is reached, or, at least, before any
    settlement is made upon it?... I am indeed alarmed at the state of
    the public mind. It is far from betokening the close of a
    revolution. At the time it was said, and to this day it is
    commonly repeated, that the insurgents of June were the dregs of
    the populace; that they were all outcasts of the basest
    description, whose only motive was lust for plunder. Such, of
    course, were many of them. But it is not true that they were all
    of this kind; would to God that they had been! Such wretches are
    always a small minority; they never prevail; they are imprisoned
    or executed, and all is over. In the insurrection of June, besides
    bad passions, there were, what are far more dangerous, false
    opinions. Many of the men who attempted to overthrow the most
    sacred rights were carried away by an erroneous notion of right.
    They sincerely believed that society was based upon injustice, and
    they wished to give it another foundation. [Compare Gambetta’s
    _nouvelle couche sociale._] Our bayonets and our cannon will never
    destroy this revolutionary fanaticism. It will create for us
    dangers and embarrassments without end. Finally, I begin to ask
    myself whether anything solid or durable can be built on the
    shifting basis of our society? Whether it will support even a
    despotism, which many people, tired of storms, would, for want of
    a better, hail as a haven? We did not see this great revolution in
    human society begin; we shall not see it end. If I had children, I
    should always be repeating this to them, and should tell them that
    in this age and in this country one ought to be fit for
    everything, and prepared for everything, for no one can count on
    the future.”(203)


A conversation apropos of a Benedictine survivor of 1789, given from Mr.
Senior’s _Journal_ (_Memoir_, vol. ii. p. 1), illustrates the final
opinion of the author of _Democracy in America_ upon the Revolution. It
took place only one year before his death:


    “And what effect,” I asked, “has the contemplation of seventy
    years of revolution produced on him (the Benedictine)? Does he
    look back, like Talleyrand, to the _ancien régime_ as a golden
    age?” “He admits,” said Tocqueville, “the material superiority of
    our own age, but he believes that intellectually and morally we
    are far inferior to our grandfathers. And I agree with him. These
    seventy years of revolution have destroyed our courage, our
    hopefulness, our self‐reliance, our public spirit, and, as
    respects by far the majority of our higher classes, our passions,
    except the vulgarest and most selfish ones, vanity and
    covetousness. Even ambition seems extinct. The men who seek power
    seek it not for itself, not as a means of doing good to their
    country but as a means of getting money and flatterers.”(204)


What more remarkable testimony to Burke’s prophetic vision could be
offered?

If any were needed, it would be found in an opposite quarter, in the
revelations of Cluseret and his accomplices as to the premeditated burning
of Paris and the destruction of the Vendôme Column in 1871, viewed in
connection with Burke’s positive and reiterated assertions that the worst
excesses of 1789 were not the result of sudden passion, nor accidental,
“as some believed or pretended to believe, but were systematically
designed from the beginning.” It is known that among his correspondents in
1789‐90 were the notorious Tom Paine and the eccentric cosmopolite,
Anacharsis Baron de Clootz, both of whom strove to enlist Burke in the
defence of the revolutionary cause before he had decisively pronounced
himself. Paine and Clootz, congenial birds of prey, had both flown to
Paris (anticipating the course of their disciples in 1871), smelling the
approaching carnage afar off; and from them there is reason to believe
Burke gathered ample hints of the full measure of the revolutionary
programme. Striking also is Burke’s remark that the revolutionary
subdivision of France would induce a demand for communal or cantonal
independence. “These commonwealths,” he says, “will not long bear a state
of subjection to the republic of Paris”—a prediction wonderfully verified
by the attitude of Lyons and Marseilles during the late war and the period
of the Commune, as well as by the cantonal programme of the Spanish
revolutionists.

Burke’s theory of the true basis of government was as moderate and well
conceived as the revolutionary schemes were destructive and unsound. “We
know,” he says, “and, what is better, we feel, that religion is the basis
of society and the source of all good and all comfort. A man full of warm,
speculative benevolence may wish his society otherwise constituted than as
he finds it; but a good patriot and a true politician always considers how
he shall make the most of the existing constitution of his country. A
disposition to preserve and an ability to improve taken together, would be
my standard of a statesman. Everything else is vulgar in the conception,
perilous in the execution.” His defence of the cause of religion in
France, and his glowing tribute to the virtue and learning of the French
clergy, then, as now, the mark of the deadliest shafts of the Revolution,
are eloquent and inspiring, but too long to quote in this article.

Equally remarkable with Burke’s prophetic warnings of the successive
crimes and follies of the Revolution and its offspring, the Commune, are
his speculations on a supposed restoration of the monarchy. More than a
quarter of a century after his death their wisdom was illustrated in the
events of the inglorious reign of Charles X. His words are almost
startling in their applicability to the present posture of French affairs,
the Septennate, and the conflicting aspirations of the Comte de Chambord
and the Prince Imperial:


    “What difficulties,” he says, referring to a Restoration, in his
    letter on the policy of the allies, “will be met with in a
    country, exhausted by the taking of its capital, and among a
    people in a manner trained and actively disciplined to anarchy,
    rebellion, disorder, and impiety, may be conceived by those who
    know what Jacobin France is; who may have occupied themselves in
    revolving in their minds what they were to do if it fell to their
    lot to re‐establish the affairs of France. What support or what
    limitations the restored monarchy must have may be a doubt, or how
    it will settle or pitch at last; but one thing I conceive to be
    far beyond a doubt—that the settlement cannot be immediate, but
    that it must be preceded by some sort of power equal, at least in
    vigor, vigilance, promptness, and decision, to a military
    government. For such a preparatory government no slow‐paced,
    methodical, formal, lawyer‐like system; still less that of a
    showy, artificial, trifling, intriguing court, guided by cabals of
    ladies, or men like ladies; least of all a philosophic, theoretic,
    disputatious school of sophistry—none of these ever will, or ever
    can, lay the foundations of an order that will last.”


“A judicious, well‐tempered, and manly severity in the support of law and
order”—this was Burke’s advice to princes. He advocated freedom of the
press as understood in England; “but they indeed,” he said, “who seriously
write upon a principle of levelling, ought to be answered by the
magistrate, and not by the speculatist.” We conclude our quotations by the
following portrait of the “Legitimate Prince”:


    “Whoever,” says Burke, “claims a right by birth to govern there,
    must find in his breast, or conjure up in it, an energy not always
    to be expected, not always to be wished, in well‐ordered states.
    The lawful prince must have in everything but crime the character
    of an usurper. He is gone if he imagines himself the quiet
    possessor of a throne. He is to contend for it as much after an
    apparent conquest as before. His task is to win it. He must leave
    posterity to adorn and enjoy it. No velvet cushions for him. He is
    to be always—I speak nearly to the letter—on horseback. This
    opinion is the result of much patient thinking on the subject,
    which I conceive no event is likely to alter.”


Burke’s tremendous onslaught on the Revolution drew forth swarms of
opponents in his own day, most of whom are now forgotten. More than
emulating the besotted conceit of those early apologists of anarchy,
“liberal” writers are still to be found so infatuated with hostility to
the Catholic Church, so purblind to the experience of nearly a hundred
years—of the bloody chapters of 1793, of 1830, of 1848, of 1851, of
1871—so unawakened by the ruin the same accursed spirit has wrought in
Spain, as to be heard chanting the glories of the Revolution and bewailing
the possibility of “a priestly reaction” as the “destruction of all that
has been gained by the national agonies of the last century.” What has
been gained which would not have been gained in the gradual progress of
society? What rather has not been lost in national honor and domestic
virtue and happiness which would have been retained “if men had not been
quite shrunk,” as Burke said, “from their natural dimensions by a
degrading and sordid philosophy”? Let a witness like De Tocqueville
answer!

The great political philosopher’s warnings against the real spirit of the
Revolution are still worthy the attention of all governments. Time has
added to their value, not diminished it. “Against these, their ‘rights of
men,’ let no government,” he says, “look for security in the length of its
continuance or in the justice and lenity of its administration. They are
always at issue with governments, not on a question of abuse, but on a
question of competency and a question of title.”

His advice is vigorous and plain. “Never,” he says, “succumb to the enemy.
It is a struggle for your national existence. If you must die, die with
the sword in your hand! But I have no fear for the result!”




Robert Cavelier De La Salle. Concluded.


On the 6th of April La Salle discovered that the river was running through
three channels. The following day he divided his company into three
parties, of which he led the one that followed the western channel; the
Sieur de Tonty, accompanied by Father Membré, took the middle channel, and
the Sieur Dautray took the eastern channel. Father Membré relates that
these channels appeared to them “beautiful and deep.” The water began to
get brackish; then two leagues further down it became perfectly salt; and
now, O glorious sight!


    “The sea! the sea! the open sea,
    The blue, the fresh, the ever free,”


was spread out before the eager and enchanted eyes of those brave and
noble voyagers. Their first impulse was to return thanks to the King of
kings for the protecting arm of his providence, that had thus guided them
safely to this glorious consummation of their hopes; their second was to
honor the King of France for his favor and protection. For these purposes,
on the 9th of April, a cross and a column were erected with appropriate
ceremonies. The entire company, under arms, joined with the minister of
religion in chanting the hymn of the church, _Vexilla Regis_, and the _Te
Deum_, and then followed a discharge of their muskets and shouts of “Long
live the King!” The column bore the following inscription: “Louis the
Great, King of France and Navarre, reigns; the 9th of April, 1682.” At the
foot of a tree La Salle caused a leaden plate to be buried, bearing the
arms of France and a Latin inscription commemorative of the first
navigation of the Mississippi, from the Illinois to its mouth, by La
Salle, Tonty, Membré, and twenty Frenchmen. An authentic act, in the form
of a _procès verbal_, was drawn up by La Metairie, the notary of the
expedition, and signed by La Salle, Father Membré, Tonty, and the other
principal members of the company. La Salle took formal possession of the
country, which he was the first to call Louisiana, for the King of France;
also of the natives and people residing therein, the seas, harbors, and
all the streams flowing into the Mississippi. The great river itself he
called the St. Louis.

In the midst of their rejoicings they were suffering for food. They found
some dried meat prepared by the Indians, of which they partook with
relish, and, as the good missionary says, “It was very good and delicate.”
What must have been their feelings when they discovered that they had
partaken of human flesh! Scarcity of food compelled them to turn their
canoes up‐stream. La Salle paid a visit to the hostile Quinipissas, with
whom he resorted to his usual address to propitiate their friendship, and,
though invited to a banquet, his men partook of it with their guns at
their sides. A treacherous treaty of peace was entered into, but was used
as a cover for an attack next morning upon the Europeans. But the ever‐
watchful La Salle was prepared for them. The two parties were engaged in a
contest of two hours, in which the Quinipissas were worsted, and sustained
a loss of ten men killed and many wounded. This is the only occasion in
which the hostile dispositions of the natives did not yield to skill and
diplomacy. His men, exasperated at the conduct of the treacherous natives,
urged him to allow them to burn their village; but he adopted the wiser
and more humane policy of refraining from alienating still more by
unnecessary cruelty those whom he wished to make devout worshippers of the
King of heaven and loyal subjects of the King of France. During the
remainder of the return voyage, with the exception of the Koroas, who had
now become allies of the Quinipissas, he met with the same hospitable
treatment from the tribes on the banks of the river as he had received
while going down. They were now regaled on the fresh green corn of the
fields. La Salle with two canoes pushed forward from the Arkansas, in
advance of his party, as far as Fort Prudhomme. Here he became dangerously
ill, and could advance no further, and on the 2d of June was joined by the
entire company. His malady became so violent that he was compelled to send
Tonty forward to convey early information to the Comte de Frontenac of the
great discovery. Father Membré remained with La Salle, doing all in his
power to alleviate the sufferings of his cherished leader, whose illness
continued forty days. The expedition by slow advances reached the Miami
late in September, where they learned of several of Tonty’s military
expeditions undertaken after he left the main body. Intending to make the
voyage of the Mississippi again in the spring, and plant colonies along
its shores, La Salle appointed Father Membré his messenger to the king;
and this zealous man, accepting the commission with promptness, proceeded
to Quebec, and on the 2d of October sailed for France, to lay before the
French court accurate information of La Salle’s discoveries. During the
next ten or twelve months La Salle remained in the Illinois country,
cementing his friendly alliances with the Indians, and pushing forward his
trading interests. Having seen Fort St. Louis completed, he left Tonty in
command of it, and for his plan of colonization he substituted the project
of applying to the French government for co‐operation in a much more
extensive one. He reached Quebec early in November, and sailed for France
to render an account of his fulfilment of the royal orders, and to enlist
the good offices of the government in his future plans, and landed at
Rochelle on the 23d of December, 1683.

The following allusion to La Salle’s services to France in extending the
province of New France by the exploration of the Mississippi, by Gov.
Dongan, of the rival English province of New York, is interesting.
Alluding to a map of the country which he was sending home to his
superiors, Gov. Dongan writes: “Also, it points out where there’s a great
river discovered by one Lassal, a Frenchman from Canada, who thereupon
went into France, and, as it’s reported, brought two or three vessels with
people to settle there, which (if true) will prove very inconvenient to
us, but to the Spanish also (the river running all along from our lakes by
the back of Virginia and Carolina into the Bay of Mexico); and it’s
believed Nova Mexico cannot be far from the mountains adjoining it, that
place being in 36° North Latitude. If your lordships thought it fit, I
could send a sloop or two from this place to discover that river.”(205)

La Salle now conceived the plan of approaching the mouth of the
Mississippi by sea, exploring the country, and founding powerful colonies
therein. The evil reports of his enemies had preceded him to France, and
these were strengthened by the disparaging representations which De La
Barre, Frontenac’s successor as Governor of Canada, had been sending home.
But the Marquis de Seignelay, the son of the deceased minister Colbert,
again favored La Salle’s enterprises, and secured for them the favor of
the king. The government provided a fleet of four vessels for the
expedition: the _Joly_, a royal ship, a frigate of thirty‐six tons,
commanded by Capt. de Beaujeu, a Norman gentleman, who was also commander
of the squadron; the _Belle_, of six tons, a present from the king to La
Salle; the _Aimable_, a store‐ship of three hundred tons burden, on board
of which were the goods, implements, and effects of the expedition; and
the _St. Francis_, a ketch containing munitions and merchandise for San
Domingo. M. de Chevalier d’Aire was lieutenant to Capt. de Beaujeu, and
the Sieur de Hamel, a young gentleman full of fire and courage, his
ensign. Father Le Clercq, the narrator of the expedition, exclaims: “Would
to God the troops and rest of the crew had been as well chosen!”

A new commission was issued to La Salle, by which he was authorized to
found colonies in Louisiana, and to govern the vast country and its
inhabitants from Lake Michigan to the borders of Mexico. The commander of
the squadron was to be subject to his orders, except in navigating the
ships at sea—an arrangement which the jealous and sensitive mind of
Beaujeu permitted to embitter him against La Salle, and which led to
difficulties between them. Besides marines and one hundred soldiers, the
company to embark in the expedition amounted to about two hundred and
eighty persons, amongst whom were several persons of consideration. The
Sieur Moranget, and the Sieur Cavelier, nephews of La Salle, the latter
only fourteen years old; Planterose, Thibault, Ory, Joutel, Talon, a
Canadian gentleman with his family, and some other families, consisting of
men and young women, also joined the expedition as volunteers. One of La
Salle’s first cares was to provide for the spiritual wants of his
followers and colonists and the conversion of the heathen nations he
expected to visit. For ten years the zealous Recollect Fathers had
seconded and promoted the efforts of La Salle to Christianize the natives
of the New World, and he now made it an essential point to obtain some of
these holy men to accompany his great expedition. His application to their
superior, the Rev. Father Hyacinth le Febvre, was cordially complied with,
and accordingly Fathers Zenobe Membré, Anastace Donay, and Maxime Le
Clercq were selected from this order for the task. M. Tronçon, superior of
the Sulpitians, was not behind the Recollects in zeal for the good work,
and accordingly three secular priests, Cavelier, the brother of La Salle,
Chefdeville his relative, and Majulle, were chosen. These constituted the
ecclesiastical corps of the expedition. Nothing was left undone, either by
the superiors of the Recollects or of the Sulpitians, nor by the Holy See,
for carrying the faith of Christ to those remote and benighted regions.
Ample powers and privileges were conferred upon the good missionaries, so
as to relieve them from the necessity in emergencies of resorting to the
distant ordinary of Quebec.

But in selecting soldiers, artisans, and laborers, the most culpable
disregard of duty was chargeable to the agents of La Salle, who, while he
was engaged at Paris, filled up the ranks by receiving from the streets of
Rochelle worthless vagabonds and beggars, who were wholly ignorant of the
trades for which they were chosen. La Salle was only partially able to
remedy this evil before sailing. Bancroft thus describes the composition
of this part of the expedition: “But the mechanics were poor workmen, ill‐
versed in their art; the soldiers, though they had for commander Joutel, a
man of courage and truth, and afterwards the historian of the grand
enterprise, were themselves spiritless vagabonds, without discipline and
without experience; the volunteers were restless with indefinite
expectations; and, worst of all, the naval commander, Beaujeu, was
deficient in judgment, incapable of sympathy with the magnanimous heroism
of La Salle, envious, self‐willed, and foolishly proud.” La Salle arrived
at Rochelle on the 28th of May, 1684, and during his stay of some weeks
the unhappy misunderstanding between him and the commander of the
squadron, which proved so great a drawback on the enterprise, began to
manifest itself. The four vessels sailed from Rochelle on the 24th of
July, but the breaking of one of the masts of the _Joly_ in a storm caused
them to put in at Chef‐de‐Bois, and finally, on the 1st of August, they
set sail again, steering for San Domingo. During the voyage to San
Domingo, La Salle and Beaujeu could not proceed together with cordiality
or harmony, and the former was unfortunate in gaining the ill‐will of the
subordinate officers and sailors by interfering to protect his own men
from what he regarded as an absurd and unnecessary procedure. It was the
custom among sailors to require all who had not before crossed the tropic
to submit to the penalty of being plunged into a tub of water by their
veteran companions for the amusement of others, or pay liberally for a
commutation of the penalty. La Salle peremptorily forbade his men being
subjected to this alternative; hence the hostility of those who failed to
realize the usual fun or fine at their expense. After a prosperous voyage
a storm overtook the squadron as they approached San Domingo. It was
agreed that the _Joly_ should put in at Port de Paix in the north of the
island; but Beaujeu changed his course of his own will, and carried her to
Petit Gonave, far to the south. In four days the _Belle_ and _Aimable_,
which had been separated from her by the storm, joined her there. The _St.
Francis_ was surprised and captured by two Spanish pirogues, which was a
serious loss to the expedition and a sore affliction to La Salle.

At Petit Gonave La Salle did all in his power for the relief of the sick.
He was, however, stricken down himself by a violent illness that for a
while rendered his recovery hopeless. He recovered in time sufficiently to
attend to the prosecution of the voyage. He and Fathers Membré and Donay,
Cavelier, Chefdeville, and Joutel, were transferred to the _Aimable_, and
thus the two commanders were happily separated. In their misunderstanding
Beaujeu was greatly at fault in accepting a command inferior to that of La
Salle, as he well knew it to be, and in embarrassing by his petulant and
jealous course an undertaking which his instructions and his obvious duty
obliged him to promote. La Salle, too, would have acted more wisely and
discreetly in conciliating one whose good‐will and co‐operation were so
necessary to his success. The squadron, now reduced to three vessels,
sailed from Petit Gonave on the 25th of November.

After pursuing their course safely along the Cayman Isles, and anchoring
at the Isle of Peace (pines), where they stopped to take in water, and at
Port San Antonio, in the Island of Cuba, they entered the Gulf of Mexico
on the 12th of December. Sailing ten days longer, they descried land at
once from the _Belle_ and _Aimable_. So utterly unknown was the latitude
of the coasts, and so erroneous the sailing information given to them at
San Domingo, that no one could tell where they were; but it was
conjectured after much consultation that they must be in the Bay of
Appalachee, which is nearly three hundred miles east of the Mississippi.
On the contrary, they were near Atchafalaya Bay, about one hundred miles
west of the main mouth of the Mississippi. Guided by the general opinion
as to their locality, they now coasted to the westward, going still
further from the object of their search. No information could be obtained
from the natives on the shore, and finally, after twenty days’ sailing, it
was ascertained that they were approaching the borders of Mexico, near
Magdalen River and the Bay of Espiritu Santo. The _Joly_ now came up, and
the unfortunate misunderstanding between La Salle and Beaujeu was renewed,
in consequence of the latter charging that he had been designedly left
behind. The superior sailing capacity of the _Joly_, and Beaujeu’s evident
indifference about keeping company with the other vessels, flatly
contradicted this irritating charge. All now desired to return in the
direction of the Mississippi, except Beaujeu, who would not go without a
new supply of provisions. La Salle offered a supply of fifteen days, the
best he could do; but Beaujeu rejected the offer as insufficient. In the
meantime the vessels proceeded twenty miles along the coast, reaching the
outlet of the Bay of St. Bernard, to which La Salle gave the name of St.
Louis, now called Matagorda Bay. Joutel and Moranget were sent to explore
the bay, and afterwards La Salle joined them at a river they could not
cross without a boat. The pilots having reported insufficient depth of
water, the _Aimable_ was lightened and her captain ordered to run her into
the bay. The pilot of the _Belle_, knowing the harbor, was sent to his
assistance; but the captain of the _Aimable_ refused him admittance on
board, saying that he knew how to manage his own ship. The _Aimable_ was
soon upon a shoal. She bilged, and was a ruin. A portion of the cargo was
saved, Beaujeu himself sending his boats to assist, but most of the
implements and tools intended for the colony were lost. There was no
doubt, says Joutel, of the treachery of the captain of the _Aimable_ in
this affair. La Salle from the shore had the mortification of seeing all
his orders disobeyed, and witnessed this deplorable accident to the store‐
ship. He was embarking, in order to remedy the false movements of his
vessels, when over a hundred Indians made their appearance. First putting
them to flight, and then offering them the calumet, he made them his
friends. He also gave them presents, purchased some of their canoes, and
all seemed to promise a lasting friendship, from which great advantages
would have resulted to the expedition. But, alas! all upon whom La Salle
had to depend did not possess his prudence nor always follow his
injunctions. By the imprudence of some of his men a serious difficulty
sprang up with the Indians. A bale of blankets from the wreck of the
store‐ship was thrown ashore and seized by the Indians. La Salle ordered
his men to recover it by peaceable means; but they pursued just the
opposite course, by demanding its restoration with pointed muskets. They
became alarmed and fled, but returned at night, and, finding the sentinel
asleep, attacked the camp, killing the Sieurs Ory and Desloges, two of La
Salle’s most valued friends, two cadets, and dangerously wounding
Moranget. This and the numerous other disasters which they encountered
caused many a heart that started out full of hope and courage to falter or
despond, and many talked of abandoning the enterprise. But La Salle’s
example of calm determination and unflagging spirit sustained them under
the appalling gloom and ill‐luck that seemed to hang over the adventure.
But Beaujeu, whose hostility to La Salle and his enterprise increased with
the misfortunes of the latter, now resolved to return to France. All the
cannon‐balls were in his vessel, and he refused to deliver them, because
it would be necessary to remove a part of his cargo in order to get them
out. Thus the cannons were left with the colony, and the balls carried
back to France. He took on board the treacherous captain and crew of the
_Aimable_, and the 12th of March sailed for France. In the meantime the
company left at the fort sustained a severe loss in the death of the Sieur
de Gros from the bite of a rattle‐snake. Also, a conspiracy was set on
foot in the fort, with the design of murdering Joutel, and then escaping
with such effects as they could carry off. But the designs of these
traitors were discovered in time to be defeated. The colony now consisted
of about one hundred and eighty persons besides the crew of the _Belle_,
and their own faithful guns were their only means of obtaining food in
that vast and distant wild. A temporary fort was erected with the _débris_
of the _Aimable_ for their protection, and Moranget was left in command of
it. La Salle, accompanied by Fathers Membré and Le Clercq, started out
with fifty men to explore the shores of the bay, ordering the _Belle_ to
sail along to make soundings. Anchoring opposite a point—where a post was
established, to which Hurier gave his own name (being appointed to the
command of it), serving as an intermediate station between the naval camp
and that which La Salle intended to establish further on—in their course a
large river was discovered, to which La Salle gave the name of Vaches, or
Cow River, from the great number of cows he saw on its banks; and here the
intended station was erected. Holy Week and Easter intervening, were
celebrated with solemnity and fervor by these Christian colonists in the
wilderness, “each one,” as Father Membré remarks, “receiving his Creator.”
About the middle of July the entire colony, with their effects and
whatever could be of service, were transferred to this encampment from
those of Moranget and Hurier, which were destroyed. Here the men were
employed in cultivating the soil and in sowing seeds brought from France,
which, however, did not succeed, either because they had been injured by
the salt water or because the season was not suitable. They were next
engaged in erecting a habitation and fort, which was a work of huge labor
and hardship, as the trees for the timber had to be cut three miles off
and dragged to the spot, and many of the men sank under the toil. The
Sieur de Villeperdy and thirty others were carried off within a few days
by disease contracted at San Domingo, and among them was the master‐
carpenter, whose services could not well be spared. While under these
calamities the spirits of all around him were sinking, La Salle remained
firm and cheerful. Setting them the example himself, he kept all the
healthy men at work. He took the place of architect and chief carpenter
upon himself, marked out the beams, tenons, and mortises, and prepared the
timbers for the workmen. The fort occupied an advantageous position, was
soon finished, mounted with twelve pieces of cannon, and supplied with a
magazine under ground. It was called St. Louis, and placed under the
command of Joutel. The insolence of the Indians compelled La Salle to give
them a proof of his power. For this purpose he waged war upon them, but
only with sufficient rigor to make them respect him and his companions.
Among the captives was a very young girl, who was baptized, and died a few
days afterwards; of whom Father Le Clercq said: “The first‐fruits of this
mission, and a sure conquest sent to heaven.”

Detained some time by the sickness of his brother, La Salle did not resume
his exploration of the bay till towards the last of October, when, putting
his clothes, papers, and other effects on the _Belle_, he ordered the
captain to sail along the western shore in concert with his movements.
Wishing to ascertain how near the shore the _Belle_ could approach, he
sent the pilot and five men to make soundings, with instructions that all
should return on board at night. Attracted by the peaceful beauty of the
country, and proposing to cook and enjoy the supper on shore, the pilot
and five men, leaving their arms and canoe at low water, advanced a gun‐
shot on the upland. After their supper they fell asleep. La Salle,
becoming uneasy at their absence, went in search of them, and to his
horror found them all lying on the ground murdered, their bodies half
devoured by wild animals, and their arms and canoe destroyed. It was with
sad hearts that the survivors paid the last honors to their slaughtered
companions; for disasters followed in such quick succession that no one
could foresee the time or circumstances of his own fate. Of the colony now
described Bancroft remarks: “This is the settlement which made Texas a
part of Louisiana. In its sad condition it had yet saved from the wreck a
good supply of arms and bars of iron for the forge. Even now this colony
possessed from the bounty of Louis XIV., more than was contributed by all
the English monarchs together for the twelve English colonies on the
Atlantic. Its number still exceeded that of Smith in Virginia, or of those
who embarked in the _Mayflower_. France took possession of Texas; her arms
were carved on its stately forest‐trees; and by no treaty or public
document, except the general cessions of Louisiana, did she ever after
relinquish the right to the province as colonized under her banners, and
made still more surely a part of her territory because the colony found
there its grave.”

La Salle now determined to seek the mouth of the Mississippi by land
around the eastern part of the bay. Leaving provisions for six, he set out
with his brother, the Sieur Cavelier, and twenty men. He explored in
canoes every stream that might prove an outlet of the great river, and was
enchanted with the beautiful region which he traversed. But all was in
vain. After an absence of four months, and satisfying himself that none of
the outlets of the Mississippi emptied into the bay, and after losing
twelve or thirteen of his men, he returned in rags to Fort St. Louis. He
now sent out a party in search of the _Belle_, whose long absence caused
him great uneasiness; for in her were centred all his hopes of reaching
the mouth of the Mississippi by sea, of procuring assistance from San
Domingo, or of sending information of their forlorn condition to France,
or, perhaps, in his extremest necessity, of saving his colony from a
horrid death by famine or at the hands of the savages.

La Salle, with his characteristic courage and perseverance, now resolved
to undertake a journey to the distant Illinois, in order to obtain relief
from the faithful Tonty, whom he had stationed there on departing for
France. He selected as his companions on this dangerous and toilsome
journey his brother, Cavelier, Father Anastasius Donay, Father Le Clercq,
Moranget, Behorel, Hurier, Heins, a German surgeon who joined him at San
Domingo, and Nika, the Indian hunter, who was ever at his side, and
others, making in all twenty persons. The preparations for this great
journey consisted of four pounds of powder, four pounds of lead, two axes,
two dozen knives, as many awls, some beads, and two kettles. They first
repaired to the chapel, where the Divine Mysteries were celebrated and the
blessing of heaven invoked upon their undertaking. Committing the colony
left behind to the care of Joutel, La Salle and his companions set out on
the 22d of April, 1686, from Fort St. Louis. Their route lay in a
northeasterly direction and through a country of immense prairies and
mighty rivers, inhabited by various Indian tribes, who were exceedingly
friendly and hospitable; even the women, who were usually timid and
undemonstrative, coming forward to greet the wayworn, mysterious
travellers. In some instances they found that the Indians had had some
intercourse with the Spaniards. La Salle and the zealous Father Donay
endeavored on every occasion to instil into their minds some knowledge of
the one true God. It is supposed by some that La Salle was attracted in
this direction by the fame of the rich mines of Santa Barbara, the El
Dorado of Northern Mexico. They found large quantities of wild cattle,
which supplied them with meat. They crossed numerous rivers, such as the
Colorado, Brazos, and Trinity, which they knew by different titles, and
upon which they bestowed new names in honor of members of the party. They
endured incredible exposure, hardship, and toil, and many faltered and
gave out under their sufferings. In crossing the Brazos (which they called
the river Misfortune) on a raft of canoes, with one‐half of his party,
including his brother, La Salle and his companions were hurried violently
down the current, and almost immediately disappeared from sight. The
interval between this and evening was one of intense anxiety to those who
witnessed the accident; but at nightfall the raft and its occupants were
discovered safely disembarked on the opposite bank, their onward course
having been providentially arrested by the branches of a large tree in the
river. Those who remained on the other side had to cross over and join La
Salle on a raft of canes, the men having to wade into the water and draw
the raft ashore. Father Donay says: “I was obliged to put my Breviary in
my cowl, because it got wet in my sleeve.” He also says: “We had not eaten
all day, but Providence provided for us by letting two eaglets fall from a
cedar‐tree; we were ten at this meal.” The manner in which they crossed
these mighty rivers was to make one of the men swim to the other side and
fell trees across the stream, while those who remained did the same, so
that the trees from the opposite sides, meeting in the centre, formed a
bridge, upon which they crossed. This was done more than thirty times
during their journey. The Indians were in most instances friendly and
hospitable, and La Salle’s discernment and prudence always enabled him
either to conciliate their friendship in the first instance, or to
overcome by force of character and courage any hostile feeling they might
exhibit. Many of the tribes displayed evidences of civilization in their
dress, implements, and dwellings, and in the ease and cordiality with
which they received and entertained strangers. Horses were abundant among
them, and La Salle procured several, which proved of great service. Among
the Coenis Indians they found Spanish dollars and smaller coins, silver
spoons, lace, and clothes of European styles. One of the Indians became so
enamored with Father Donay’s cowl that he offered the father a horse in
exchange, but the good religious preferred to walk rather than to part
with the cherished habit of S. Francis. After crossing the Trinity River
La Salle and his nephew, the Sieur Moranget, were attacked by a violent
fever, which brought them very low and greatly retarded their march. Just
before this four of the party, unable to endure the fatigues and hardships
of the journey, deserted and retired to the Nassonis Indians; another was
swallowed by a crocodile while crossing a river; and Behorel was lost.
Their powder now began to give out; they had not advanced more than one
hundred and fifty leagues in a straight line, and one thousand miles of
travel lay before them; sickness, delay, and desertions had impaired their
ability to proceed; and they had no food except what the chase afforded.
Under these circumstances La Salle resolved to return to Fort St. Louis.
The extreme terminus of their travel is supposed to have been midway
between the Trinity and Red Rivers, near the head‐waters of the Sabine,
and fifty or sixty miles northwest of Nacogdoches. On the return the party
were greatly assisted by the horses procured from the Indians. After a
full month’s march they arrived on the 17th of October, the feast of S.
Bernard, and were welcomed by their friends at the fort with mingled
feelings of joy and sadness. Father Donay remarks: “It would be difficult
to find in history courage more intrepid or more invincible than that of
the Sieur de La Salle; in adversity he was never cast down, and always
hoped with the help of heaven to succeed in his enterprises, despite all
the obstacles that rose against him.”

Sad events awaited La Salle on his return. In a few days he saw to his
astonishment a canoe approaching in which were Chefdeville, Sablonnière,
and some others from the _Belle_. In this fact he read the sad story of
the vessel’s destruction, which was soon confirmed by their own lips. That
vessel, his last hope, had, by the negligence of the pilot, stranded on
the beach of the southern coast of the bay. The returning men,
providentially finding a canoe on the shore, were able to escape. In the
_Belle_ were lost thirty‐six barrels of flour, a quantity of wine, the
clothes, trunks, linens, and most of the tools. Among the few things saved
were the papers and clothes of La Salle. The good Father Le Clercq closes
his narrative of this sad accident, which completely disconcerted all of
La Salle’s plans, with the remark: “His great courage, even, could not
have borne up had not God aided him by the help of extraordinary grace.”
“Heaven and man,” says Bancroft, “seemed his enemies; and, with the giant
energy of an indomitable will, having lost his hopes of fortune, his hopes
of fame; with his colony reduced to about forty, among whom discontent had
given birth to plans of crime; with no Europeans nearer than the river
Panuco, no French nearer than Illinois, he resolved to travel on foot to
his countrymen at the north, and return from Canada to renew his colony in
Texas.”

During his absence Joutel had been under the necessity of guarding against
savage attacks upon his hunting parties from without, and against
disaffection from those within, the fort. The false Duhaut returned to the
fort, where he incited the men to mutiny—a task of no great difficulty
among men who had endured so many disappointments and hardships. And
though Joutel succeeded in suppressing the mutiny, disaffection lurked
behind. But the routine of the fort was occasionally relieved by gayety
and merriment, as was the case on the marriage of the Sieur Barbier to one
of the young women who came out with the expedition. The gentleness,
prudence, and experience of Father Membré went far to ameliorate the
condition of the company and make easy the duties of Joutel. Before
leaving them, La Salle provided for the greater comfort and accommodation
of those at the fort. As he was about to depart he was again stricken down
with illness, and was retarded ten weeks.

On his recovery La Salle selected from seventeen to twenty companions,
amongst whom were Father Donay, Cavelier the priest, young Cavelier the
nephew, Joutel, Moranget, Duhaut, Larcheveque, Heins, Liotel, Toten, De
Marle, Teissier, Saget, and the Indian hunter Nika. La Salle addressed
them in thrilling and encouraging words, and, as Father Donay says, “with
that engaging way which was so natural to him,” and on the 12th of
January, 1687, their simple preparations being made, it only remained for
them to turn their steps northward,


    “And, like some low and mournful spell,
    To whisper but one word—farewell.”


As they journeyed on they had to cross many large rivers—resorting to the
same means as in their trip towards New Mexico—and to traverse vast
prairies, to visit and be entertained by the Indian tribes on the route,
to conciliate their friendship, to secure most of their food by hunting,
and, in fine, encounter similar scenes and incidents as on their previous
excursions. On the 15th of March they arrived at a place where La Salle
had caused a quantity of Indian corn and beans to be buried, and he sent
Duhaut, Heins, Liotel, Larcheveque, Teissier, Nika, and his footman,
Saget, for it. The corn and beans had disappeared, discovered, probably,
by the unerring scent of the Indians; but the gun of Nika supplied their
place with two buffaloes. They sent Saget to request La Salle to allow
them horses to bring the meat, and he accordingly despatched Moranget, De
Marle, and Saget with two horses for that purpose. On arriving at the
scene Moranget found that the meat, though quite fresh, had been smoked,
and that the men had selected certain parts of it and set them aside for
their own enjoyment, as was usual with them. In a moment of anger Moranget
reproved them, took away both the smoked meat and reserved pieces, and
threatened to do as he pleased with it. Duhaut, in whose heart an old
grudge against Moranget still survived, became enraged, and adopted the
guilty resolve of ridding himself of his enemy. He enticed Liotel and
Heins into a conspiracy to murder not only Moranget, but also Saget and
Nika, whose faithful gun had so often saved them from famine. Liotel was
the willing instrument to do the horrid deed; at night, while they were
buried in sleep, he despatched his victims. A blow extinguished the life
of Nika; a second that of Saget; but Moranget lingered for two hours,
“giving every mark of a death precious in the sight of God, pardoning his
murderers, and embracing them,” till De Marle, who was not in the plot,
was compelled to complete the bloody tragedy.


                              “Come, thick night,
    And pall thee in the dunnest smoke of hell!
    That my keen knife see not the wound it makes;
    Nor heaven peep through the blanket of the dark
      To cry, Hold! hold!”


The bloodthirsty desperadoes did not, alas! stop at this triple murder;
adding treason to their horrid purposes, they resolved upon the death of
their commander, the great and good La Salle, who had ever been to them a
father no less than a leader. Three days elapsed, and the dark purpose was
only the more firmly fixed in their guilty souls. In the meantime La Salle
became alarmed for the safety of Moranget, and, as if anticipating what
had happened, he asked in the encampment if Duhaut and his associates had
not shown signs of disaffection. He resolved at once to go in search of
his faithful friend. The remainder of this bloody tragedy we will give in
the language of Father Donay, who was an eyewitness of it:


    “Asking me to accompany him, he took two Indians and set out. All
    the way he conversed with me of matters of piety, grace, and
    predestination; expatiating on all his obligations to God for
    having saved him from so many dangers during the last twenty years
    that he had traversed America. He seemed to me particularly
    penetrated with a sense of God’s benefits to him. Suddenly I saw
    him plunged into a deep melancholy, for which he himself could not
    account; he was so troubled that I did not know him any longer. As
    this state was far from being usual, I roused him from his
    lethargy. Two leagues after we found the bloody cravat of his
    lackey (Saget), he perceived two eagles flying over his head, and
    at the same time perceived some of his people on the edge of the
    river, which he approached, asking them what had become of his
    nephew. They answered us in broken words, showing us where we
    should find him. We proceeded some steps along the bank to the
    fatal spot where two of these murderers were hidden in the grass,
    one on each side, with guns cocked; one missed M. de La Salle, the
    other at the same time shot him in the head. He died an hour
    after, on the 19th of March, 1687.

    “I expected the same fate; but this danger did not occupy my
    thoughts, penetrated with grief at so cruel a spectacle. I saw him
    fall a step from me, with his face all full of blood; I watered it
    with my tears, exhorting him to the best of my power to die well.
    He had confessed and fulfilled his devotions just before we
    started; he had still time to recapitulate a part of his life, and
    I gave him absolution. During his last moments he elicited all the
    acts of a good Christian, grasping my hand at every word I
    suggested, and especially at that of pardoning his enemies.
    Meanwhile his murderers, as much alarmed as I, began to strike
    their breasts and detest their blindness. I could not leave the
    spot where he had expired without having buried him as well as I
    could, after which I raised a cross over his grave.

    “Thus died our wise commander; constant in adversity, intrepid,
    generous, engaging, dexterous, skilful, capable of everything. He
    who for twenty years had softened the fierce temper of countless
    savage tribes was massacred by the hands of his own domestics,
    whom he had loaded with caresses. He died in the prime of life, in
    the midst of his course and labors, without having seen their
    success.”


It has not been precisely ascertained where the place of La Salle’s death
is located; but it is supposed to have been on one of the streams flowing
into the Brazos, about forty or fifty miles north of the present town of
Washington, in the State of Texas.

As soon as Father Donay re‐entered the encampment, the good and
apostolical Cavelier, the brother of the deceased, read the sad tragedy in
his friend’s countenance, and exclaimed: “Oh! my poor brother is dead.”
The grief of Cavelier, Joutel, and the other faithful companions of La
Salle was uncontrollable. When the assassins entered the encampment to
plunder the effects of their murdered commander, they found these faithful
men on their knees, prepared for death. But the sight of the venerable
Cavelier, and perhaps some regret at the deed they had committed, stayed
their bloody work; and these were spared, on condition that they would not
return to France, though they several times afterwards heard the murderers
say among themselves that they must get rid of them, in order to save
themselves from the avenging arm of justice. The assassins seized upon the
effects of La Salle, elected Duhaut their leader, and resolved to return
to the Coenis Indians. During several days they travelled together, these
wretches treating the missionaries and friends of La Salle as servants,
imposing upon them every hardship in crossing the many rivers they
encountered. “Meanwhile,” says Father Donay, “the justice of God
accomplished the punishment of these men, in default of human punishment.”
A dispute arose between Duhaut and Heins over the stolen property of La
Salle, in which the various guilty members of their party took the one
side or the other. Heins, two days afterwards, seizing the opportunity,
shot Duhaut through the heart with a pistol in the presence of the whole
company. He died upon the spot. At the same moment Ruter shot Liotel, the
murderer of Moranget, who survived several hours; and, while thus
lingering, another fired a blank cartridge near his head, which set fire
to his hair and clothes, and he expired amidst the flames. Heins now
assumed command, and would have killed Larcheveque, a third member of the
band of assassins, but for the intercession of Joutel. On reaching the
Coenis camp they found these warriors about to start with a large army
against the Kanoatins, and Heins, dressed in the rich mantle of La Salle,
to the great disgust of his surviving relatives and friends, went with
them to join in fresh deeds of carnage and crime. Father Donay, Cavelier
the priest, Cavelier the nephew of La Salle, Joutel, De Marie, Teissier,
and a young Parisian named Barthelemy, now took their departure for the
Illinois, and, after journeying till the 24th of July, they were greatly
relieved at beholding on the opposite side of the river a large cross and
log hut, at the junction of the Illinois and Mississippi, and in a few
moments they were united with a small detachment stationed there by Tonty.
After remaining a few days for rest and refreshment, they started again on
the 1st of August, and on the 14th arrived at Fort Crevecœur, where they
were led immediately to the chapel, and chanted the _Te Deum_, in
thanksgiving for their safe deliverance from so many dangers, to which
others had fallen victims. Tonty was absent from the fort on their
arrival, on a visit to the Illinois; but on his return he received them
with great kindness, and supplied them with every assistance. They
concealed from the faithful and devoted Tonty the death of his beloved
friend and commander. In the spring of 1688 they left the fort for Quebec,
whence they sailed for France in August, arriving there in October.

The fort in St. Bernard’s Bay was, after the death of La Salle, attacked
by the Indians, and the whole company massacred except three sons and a
daughter of Talon and a young Frenchman named Eustace de Breman, who were
led into captivity. The Spaniards also, hearing of La Salle’s movements
and of the presence of Frenchmen among the Coenis Indians, sent out a
military force, who captured Larcheveque and Grollet, who were sent to
Spain, where for some time they were confined in prison, and afterwards
sent to Mexico to work in the mines. The Talons were rescued and sent to
Mexico. The two elder brothers entered the Spanish navy, but were
afterwards restored to their country by the capture of their vessel. The
younger brother and his sister were retained some time in the service of
the Viceroy of Mexico, and afterwards accompanied him to Spain. Nothing
further is known of Breman and the others who were taken captives by the
Indians.

The will of La Salle, bearing date the 11th of August, 1681, leaves his
property to his cousin, M. François Plet, in gratitude for his kindness
and the assistance he rendered to the great explorer in his expeditions.

The following notice of La Salle is given by a Catholic writer:


    “Robert Cavelier de La Salle, the first explorer who navigated
    Ontario, Erie, Michigan, and Huron, deserves to be enumerated
    among the great captains. A native of Rouen, early employed in the
    colonies, he had been instigated by the reports of missionaries to
    seek, through the northern lakes, a passage to the Gulf of Mexico.
    Building a schooner on the Cayuga Creek, he ascended the lakes in
    1679, chanting the _Te Deum Laudamus_. Carrying his boats over
    land from the Miami to a branch of the Illinois River, he forced
    or found his way into the upper Mississippi. For many years, with
    most heroic constancy, this soul of fire and frame of iron was
    devoted to the task of opening routes between the Gulfs of St.
    Lawrence and of Mexico, until he perished in his enterprise by the
    hands of two of his own unworthy followers, on an excursion into
    Texas, in 1687. The Catholic character of La Salle is marked in
    every act of his life. He undertook nothing without fortifying
    himself by religion; he completed nothing without giving the
    first‐fruits of the glory to God. He planted the cross wherever he
    landed, even for an hour; he made the western desert vocal with
    songs, hymns of thanksgiving and adoration. He is the worthy
    compeer of De Soto and Marquette; he stood, sword in hand, under
    the banner of the cross, the tutelary genius of those great States
    which stretch away from Lake Ontario to the Rio Grande. Every
    league of that region he trod on foot, and every league of its
    water he navigated in frail canoes or crazy schooners. Above his
    tomb the northern pine should tower; around it the Michigan rose
    and the southern myrtle should mingle their hues and unite their
    perfumes.”(206)


In reviewing the history of the last great enterprise of this remarkable
man, we can but recognize three principal reasons of its failure: first,
the inferior character of the men selected at Rochelle by his agents to
accompany the expedition—a cause of disaster which the virtues and
capacity of a Tonty, Joutel, and Moranget could not neutralize; second,
the hostility and narrow‐minded jealousy of Beaujeu, upon whose co‐
operation so much depended; and, third, the misinformation in regard to
the Gulf of Mexico which he received at San Domingo, and the prevailing
ignorance of the times of the bearings of the coast and of the latitudes,
which caused his expedition to miss the object of its search. Mr. Sparks,
while according to him the possession of the highest qualities of mind and
soul, considered him wanting in those qualities which are necessary in
order to secure the hearty co‐operation of men, to win their affections as
well as their obedience, and, by yielding a little to their weaknesses,
secure the benefit of their faithful services. It may be said, however,
that no man ever had more faithful, self‐sacrificing, and devoted
followers than he, and those who did not sympathize with him were too
ignorant and sordid to appreciate his noble character or his magnificent
plans. The learned historian at the same time remarks that La Salle labors
under the disadvantage of having to be judged from the accounts of others,
not all of whom were his friends, and knew little of his plans; for “not a
single paper from his own hand, not so much as a private letter or a
fragment of his official correspondence, has ever been published, or even
consulted by the writers on whose authority alone we must rely for the
history of the transactions in which he was concerned.”

Mr. Sparks then pays the following well‐merited and eloquent tribute to
the character and services of the illustrious commander:


    “On the other hand, his capacity for large designs and for
    devising the methods and procuring the resources to carry them
    forward, has few parallels among the most eminent discoverers. He
    has been called the Columbus of his age; and if his success had
    been equal to his ability and the compass of his plans this
    distinction might justly be awarded to him. As in great battles,
    so in enterprises, success crowns the commander with laurels,
    defeat covers him with disgrace, and perhaps draws upon him the
    obloquy of the world, although he might have fought as bravely and
    manœuvred as adroitly in one case as in the other. Fortune turns
    the scale and baffles the efforts of human skill and prowess. In
    some of the higher attributes of character, such as personal
    courage and endurance, undaunted resolution, patience under
    trials, and perseverance in contending with obstacles and
    struggling through embarrassments that might appall the stoutest
    heart, no man surpassed the Sieur de La Salle. Not a hint appears
    in any writer that has come under notice that casts a shade upon
    his integrity or honor. Cool and intrepid at all times, never
    yielding for a moment to despair, or even to despondency, he bore
    the heavy burden of his calamities manfully to the end and his
    hopes expired only with his last breath. To him must be mainly
    ascribed the discovery of the vast regions of the Mississippi
    Valley, and the subsequent occupation and settlement of them by
    the French; and his name justly holds a prominent place among
    those which adorn the history of civilization in the New World.”




The Log Chapel On The Rappahannock.


Erected A.D. 1570—The First Christian Shrine In The Old Dominion.

Virginia is proud of her antiquity. She assumes the title of Old Dominion;
she was long styled the Mother of Presidents. But really her antiquity is
greater than many know. Before the English settlers landed on the shores
of the James, Stephen Gomez and other Spanish navigators had entered the
waters of the Chesapeake and consecrated that noble sheet of water to the
Virgin daughter of David’s line, as the Bay of St. Mary, or the Bay of the
Mother of God.

The soldier of the cross followed hard on the steps of the explorer. As
early as in 1536 St. Mary’s Bay is laid down on Spanish maps. Oviedo
mentions it in 1537, and from that time pilots ranged the coast, David
Glavid, an Irishman, being recorded as one who knew it best. All agree as
to its latitude, its two capes, the direction of the bay, and the rivers
entering into it, identifying beyond all peradventure our modern
Chesapeake with the St. Mary’s Bay of the early Spanish explorers. Though
his attention was called to it, the latest historian of Virginia, misled
by a somewhat careless guide, robs his State of the glory which we claim
for her. The sons of S. Dominic first planted the cross on the shores of
the Chesapeake, and bore away to civilized shores the brother of the chief
of Axacan or Jacan, a district not far from the Potomac. Reaching Mexico,
this chief attracted the notice of Don Luis de Velasco, the just, upright,
disinterested Viceroy of New Spain—one of those model rulers who, amid a
population spurred on by a fierce craving for wealth, never bent the knee
to Mammon, but lived so poor that he died actually in debt. This good man
had the Virginian chief instructed in the Christian faith, and, when his
dispositions seemed to justify the belief in his sincerity and faith, the
chieftain of the Rappahannock was baptized, amid all the pomp and splendor
of Mexico, in the cathedral of that city, the viceroy being his god‐
father, and bestowing upon him his own name, Don Luis de Velasco, by which
the Virginia chief is always styled in Spanish annals.

Meanwhile, Coligny’s French Huguenots attempted to settle Florida, but
their colony, which was doomed to early extinction from its very material
and utter want of religious organization or any tie but a mere spirit of
adventure, was crushed with ruthless cruelty by Pedro Melendez, a brave
but stern Spanish navigator and warrior, in whose eyes every Frenchman on
the sea was a pirate. Soon after accomplishing his bloody work, which left
Spain in full possession of the southern Atlantic coast, Melendez, who had
sent out vessels to explore the coast, began his preparations for
occupying St. Mary’s Bay. The form of the northern continent was not then
known; much indeed of the eastern coast had been explored, but so little
was the line of the western coast understood that on maps and globes the
Pacific was shown as running nearly into the Atlantic coast, as may be
seen in a curious copper globe possessed by the New York Historical
Society, but which once belonged to Pope Marcellus II. Believing that the
Chesapeake, by the rivers running into it, would easily lead to the
western ocean, Melendez spent the winter of 1565 studying out the subject
with the aid of Don Luis de Velasco and Father Urdaneta, a missionary just
arrived from China by the overland route across Mexico. Combining all the
information, he was led to believe that, by ascending for eighty leagues a
river flowing into the bay, it was necessary only to cross a mountain
range to find two arms of the sea, one leading to the French at
Newfoundland, the other to the Pacific. To many this will seem wild; but
it is evident that Don Luis referred to the great trail leading from the
Huron country through the territory of the Five Nations to the land of the
Andastes on the Susquehanna, by which the last‐named tribe sold furs on
the upper lakes, which went down to the French at Brest on the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, while the upper lakes were the arm of the sea stretching
westward, as was supposed, to China. An adventurous Frenchman, Stephen
Brulé, some few years later followed this trail from the St. Lawrence to
the Susquehanna. Melendez, however, misinterpreted it. To his mind the
upper waters of the Chesapeake, the Potomac and Susquehanna, then known as
the Espiritu Santo and Salado, were to be the great carrying place of
eastern trade.

Anxious to secure for his own country so important a pass, Melendez, in
1566, despatched to St. Mary’s Bay a vessel bearing thirty soldiers and
two Dominican Fathers to begin a station in Axacan or Jacan, near the
Chesapeake. These pioneers of the faith were escorted or guided by Don
Luis de Velasco. Of these missionaries we seek in vain the names. Perhaps
their fellow‐religious now laboring on the banks of the Potomac will be
stimulated to trace up these early labors of the sons of S. Dominic;
though we must admit that Spanish chronicles do not speak of them with
praise. In fact, they assert that these missionaries, corrupted by an easy
life in Peru, had no taste for a laborious mission in Virginia, though
perhaps they learned the real state of affairs in that land, and, taught
by Father Cancer’s fate, felt that the attempt would be fatal to all.
Certain it is that the whole party took alarm. They forced the captain to
weigh anchor, and, leaving the capes on either hand, steer straight to
Spain. The Dominican missions in Spanish Florida, which began with the
glorious epic of Father Cancer’s devoted heroism, closed with this feeble
effort to plant the Gospel on the shores of the Chesapeake; yet they, too,
like the earlier discoverers, undoubtedly consecrated to Mary and the
Rosary the land which in its names, Virginia and Maryland, yet recalls the
Blessed Virgin Mary, to whom the bay was first consecrated.

Four years later saw Melendez himself in Spain, full of his projects, and
bent on carrying them out. The sons of S. Ignatius Loyola, full of the
early vigor of their institute, were in Florida. The new mission, begun in
1566, had already a martyr in Father Peter Martinez, of Celda, in the
Diocese of Saragossa, who was shipwrecked on the coast, and put to death
by the Indians not far from St. Augustine. It had its devoted laborers in
Father John Rogel, of Pamplona, Father Sedeño, and Brother Villareal, who
sought to win to Christ the Indians near St. Augustine and Port Royal, and
who had established an Indian school at Havana to help the great work,
Brother Baez being the first to compile a grammar. To extend these
missions as far as the Chesapeake was a subject which Melendez laid before
S. Francis Borgia, then recently made general of the order, after having
acted as commissary of the Spanish missions. A letter of S. Pius V.
encouraged Melendez, and with the co‐operation of these two saints the
projected mission to the Chesapeake took form at last. Perhaps some of the
clergy in Maryland and Virginia remember the personal interest of these
saints in the field where they are now laboring; but we fear that the fact
has been forgotten. Let us trust that more than one church of S. Pius V.
will be monuments of his interest in the land where the next pope that
bore his name established the first episcopal see on the coast—that of
Baltimore—and religion has taken such gigantic steps under the fostering
care of Popes Pius VII. and Pius IX.

When the founder of Florida was thus earnestly engaged in Spain in
promoting the spiritual welfare of the colony, Don Luis de Velasco, the
Virginian chief, was still beyond the Atlantic, a grave, intelligent man
of fifty, well versed in Spanish affairs, to all appearance a sincere and
correct Christian and a friend of the Spaniards. With every mark of joy he
offered to return to his native land of Axacan, and there do all in his
power to further the labors of the missionaries who should be sent to
instruct his brother’s tribe. So powerful a coadjutor was welcomed by all,
and ere long Don Luis stood on the deck of a staunch Spanish ship, with a
band of Jesuits destined to reinforce those already laboring on the
Florida mission. This pious party consisted of Father Luis de Quiros, a
native of Xerez de la Frontera, in Andalusia, with Brothers Gabriel Gomez,
of Granada, and Sancho de Zevallos, of Medina de Rio Seco, all selected
for the great work by S. Francis Borgia himself. In November the vessel
anchored before the Spanish fort Santa Elena, which stood on the island of
South Carolina’s famous Port Royal, that still bears the name of the
sainted mother of Constantine.

The Jesuit mission of Florida had been erected into a vice‐province under
Father John Baptist Segura. This estimable religious was a native of
Toledo, who had, while pursuing his theological course of study, entered
the Society of Jesus at Alcalà on the 9th of April, 1566. S. Francis, who
knew him well, entertained the highest esteem for Segura’s virtues and
personal merit, and took him from the rectorship of the College of
Vallisoleta in 1568 to assume the direction of the vice‐province of
Florida. For two years had he labored with sad discouragement in the
forbidding field among the Floridian tribes, cheered by letters of his
superiors rather than by any hope of success that as yet seemed to dawn on
his exertions.

He was at Santa Elena when Father Quiros arrived, bearing the instructions
for the establishment of the new mission on the shores of the Chesapeake.

That missionary had become discouraged and disheartened. All his labors
and those of his associate missionaries among the Calos Indians, on the
southern coast of Florida, had proved utterly unavailing. No impression
could be made on the flinty hearts of those treacherous and cruel tribes,
which, indeed, to the end resisted the calls of divine grace. The labors
of the Jesuit missionaries on the coast of South Carolina were scarcely
more encouraging. The attempts to civilize and convert found hearers only
as long as food and presents were given.

Father Segura resolved for a time to abandon the unpromising field, and
turn all their energies to an Indian school at Havana, where children from
the Florida tribes could be carefully instructed, so as to form a nucleus
for future Christian bands in their native tribes. But the voice of S.
Francis recalled him to sterner labors, and he resolved to go in person to
the new field opened to them in Axacan, where the influence of Don Luis
and the character of the tribes seemed to promise more consoling results.
He accordingly directed the experienced Father Rogel to remain at Santa
Elena in charge of the missions there, and selected eight associates for
his new mission. These were Father Luis de Quiros, Brothers Gabriel Gomez
and Sancho Zevallos, already mentioned, with Brother Peter de Linares and
John Baptist Mendez, Christopher Redondo, and Gabriel de Solis, who with
Alphonsus, destined to be the sole survivor, seem to have been four Indian
boys from their school at Havana, and regarded as novices, trained already
to mission work as catechists. Such was the missionary party that was to
plant the cross in Axacan and open the way for Christianity to China by a
new route.

With the influence and support of Don Luis they would need no Spanish aid;
and as experience had shown them that soldiers were sometimes a detriment
to the mission they were intended to protect, these devoted missionaries
determined to trust themselves entirely, alone and unprotected, in the
hands of the Indians.

On his side Don Luis made every promise as to the security of the persons
of the missionaries confided to his care by the adelantado of Florida.
“They shall lack nothing,” he declared. “I will always be at hand to aid
them.”

On the 5th of August, 1570, this little mission colony sailed from Santa
Elena, and in that enervating heat must have crept slowly enough along the
coast and up the Chesapeake; for it was not till the 10th of September
that they reached the country of Don Luis, which is styled in Spanish
accounts Axacan or Jacan.

Where was the spot termed “La Madre de Dios de Jacan”?—Our Lady of Axacan
(or, as we should write it, Ahacan or Hacan). Precisely where no map or
document has yet been found to show. It was evidently near the Susquehanna
(Salado) or the Potomac (Espiritu Santo), the two rivers at the head of
the bay known to Melendez, and by which he hoped to reach China. That it
could not have been the Susquehanna seems clear from the fact that, being
to the eastward, it would not naturally be the shortest route; and,
moreover, that river was in those days, and till far in the ensuing
century, held by a warlike tribe of Huron origin, living in palisaded
towns, while the tribe of Don Luis, who dwelt at Axacan, were evidently
nomads of the Algonquin race.

We are therefore led to look for it on the Potomac, the Espiritu Santo of
the early Spanish navigators. The vessel that bore the devoted Vice‐
Provincial Father Segura and two other Spanish vessels some time
afterwards ascended this river for a considerable distance to a point
whence they proceeded to the country of Don Luis, which, as letters show,
lay on a river six miles off, and which they might have reached directly
by ascending that river, though it was always passed by the pilots, being
regarded, apparently, as less navigable and safe. The Rappahannock at once
suggests itself as answering the conditions required to explain the
Spanish accounts.

On the Potomac there is to this day a spot called Occoquan, which is near
enough to the Spanish Axacan to raise a suspicion of their identity. Not
far below it the Potomac and Rappahannock, in their sinuous windings,
approach so closely as to increase the resemblance to the country
described.

The land that met the eyes of the missionary pioneers in the wilderness of
Virginia was not one to raise fond hopes or sustain delusions. A long
sterility had visited Florida and extended even to the Chesapeake. Its
effects were even more striking. Of all that the descriptions of Don Luis
had prepared them to find in Axacan there was absolutely nothing to be
seen. Just come from Florida and its vicinity, with its rich, luxuriant
vegetation, with fruits of spontaneous growth, they beheld a less favored
land, bare and parched with a six years’ sterility, with the starving
remnants of decimated and thrice decimated tribes. The wretched
inhabitants looked upon Don Luis, their countryman, as if sent from
heaven, and, seeing him treated with honor, they received the Spaniards
with every demonstration of goodwill, though they were so destitute that
they could not offer the newcomers any fruit or maize.

With the winter fast approaching, it seemed almost madness for Father
Segura and his companions to attempt to establish themselves in this
unpromising land; but the previous failure of the Dominican Fathers, the
almost chiding words of S. Francis Borgia, and the deep interest
manifested by Melendez in the success of the attempt, apparently decided
the question against all ideas of expediency or mere worldly prudence.

The researches of the late Buckingham Smith in the Spanish archives not
only brought to light many points tending to fix the position of Axacan,
but were also rewarded by finding two letters written at this point by
these early apostles of Virginia. The father provincial wrote to the king;
his associate, Father Quiros, addressed his letters to Melendez, and
Father Segura added a few words, urging prompt relief. These last have
fortunately thus reached us. Father Quiros wrote: “Seeing, then, the good‐
will which this people displayed—although, on the other hand, as I said,
they are so famished that all expected to perish of hunger and cold this
winter, as many did in preceding winters, because it is very hard for them
to find the roots on which they usually sustain themselves—the great snows
which fall in this land preventing their search—seeing also the great hope
there is of the conversion of this people and the service of our Lord and
his Majesty, and a way to the mountains and China, etc., it seemed to the
Provincial Father Segura that we should venture to remain with so few
ship‐stores and provisions, though we ate on the way two of the four
barrels of biscuit and the little flour they gave us for the voyage.”

They resolved to stay, seeing no danger except that of famine; for they
urged speedy relief. “It is very necessary that you should endeavor, if
possible, to supply us with all despatch; and if it be impossible to do so
in winter, at least it is necessary that in March, or, at the furthest,
early in April, a good supply be sent, so as to give all these people
wherewith to plant.”

The pilot of the vessel, short of provisions from the time lost on
reaching Axacan, put the missionaries hastily ashore on the 11th of
September, and the next day sailed, “leaving us in this depopulated land
with the discomforts already described,” say the missionaries.

It was arranged between the missionaries and this pilot that, about the
time of his expected return, they would have Indians on the lookout,
apparently at the mouth of the river, who were to build signal‐fires to
attract attention. On seeing these beacons he was to give them a letter
for the missionaries.

The little band of Christians beheld the vessel hoist her sail and glide
down the river. They stood alone in a wild land, far from aid and
sympathy. Two priests, three religious, Don Luis, and four other Indian
converts, formed the little Christendom. But their destination was not yet
reached. Guided by Don Luis, they took up their march for the river six
miles off, Indians bearing some of their scanty supplies, the missionaries
themselves carrying their chapel service, books, and other necessaries.
After this portage they embarked on the river—which they might have
ascended, and which seems evidently the Rappahannock—and thus penetrated
some two leagues or more further into the country to the villages of the
tribe.

Yet, even before they left the banks of the Potomac they were called upon
to commence their ministry. “The cacique, brother of Don Luis, having,”
says Father Quiros, “a son three years old very sick, who was seven or
eight leagues from here, as it seemed to him to be on the point of death,
he was instant that we should go to baptize it; wherefore it occurred to
the vice‐principal to send one of us by night to baptize it, as it was
very near death.”

The Indians on the Rappahannock did not dwell in palisaded towns, like the
Conestogas on the Susquehanna, and their kindred, the Five Nations, in New
York. From the Spanish accounts they dwelt in scattered bands, each
forming a little hamlet of a few cabins, each house in the midst of its
rude garden; for they cultivated little ground, depending on the
spontaneous productions of the earth: acorns, nuts, berries, and roots.
Such were they when Smith described them thirty years later, when
Powhatan, residing on the James, ruled over the scattered bands as far as
the Rappahannock. It was evidently among that tribe, so well known to us
by Smith’s descriptions, that Father Segura and his companions began their
labors, and Powhatan may well have been a son of the cacique, brother of
Don Luis.

The accounts of the subsequent proceedings of the little mission colony
are derived from Alphonsus, one of the Indian boys, and are somewhat
obscure. They make the journey to the hamlets of the tribe a weary one
through wood and desert and marsh, loaded with their baggage, and living
on roots, and not the short journey which Father Quiros anticipated. His
letter stated that the Indian canoes were all broken; it was probably
found impossible to attempt to repair them, and the whole party trudged on
by the riverside to their destination.

The hamlet first reached was a wretched one, tenanted only by gaunt and
naked savages, who bore the famine imprinted on their whole forms. Here
amid the tent‐like lodges of the Indians, made of poles bound together and
covered with mats and bark, Father Segura and his companions erected a
rude house of logs, the first white habitation in that part of
America—first church of the living God, first dwelling‐place of civilized
men; for one end was devoted to their chapel, while the other was their
simple dwelling. Here doubtless, before the close of September, 1570, the
little community recited their Office together, and, under the tuition of
Don Luis, began to study the language. Here, at this modest altar, the
Holy Sacrifice was for the first time offered by the two priests. Nowhere
on the continent to the northward were the sacred rites then heard,
unless, indeed, at Brest, in Canada. Greenland, with its bishop and clergy
and convents, was a thing of the past; Cartier’s colony, on the St.
Lawrence, had been abandoned. The Chapel of the Mother of God, at Jacan,
was the church of the frontier, the outpost of the faith.

As Father Segura had foreseen that he must winter there, and might not
receive any supplies before March or April, he doubtless began, like his
Indian neighbors, to lay up a store of provisions for the long winter.
Acorns, walnuts, chestnuts, and chinquapins were regularly gathered by the
natives, as well as persimmons and a root like a potato, growing in the
swampy lands. Game must have been scarce on that narrow peninsula between
two rivers, and they had no means of hunting. Though the rivers of
Virginia teemed with fish, we find no indication that the missionaries
were supplied with means of deriving any food from that source.

For a time Don Luis remained with them, showing all deference and respect
to Father Segura. In his letter to Melendez Father Quiros gives the
impression he had made upon them up to that time, and from which it is
evident that they had no suspicion of his treachery. “Don Luis,” says he,
“acts well, as was expected of him, and is very obedient to all that the
father enjoins on him, with much respect as well for the provincial as for
the rest of us that are here, and he commends himself earnestly to your
worship, to all his other friends and masters.”

This good disposition may have been sincere at first, but, as too often
happens in such cases, old habits returned; he became Indian with the
Indians, rather than Spanish with the Spaniards. Ere long he abandoned the
missionaries altogether, and went off to another hamlet, distant from it a
day’s journey and a half.

The mission party were not yet sufficiently versed in the language to
dispense with the aid of Don Luis as interpreter, and his influence was
constantly needed among the lawless natives. Feeling this, Father Segura
several times sent one of the young men to urge Don Luis to return, but he
put them off constantly with false statements or unmeaning promises. In
this way the winter wore away, with gloomy forebodings in the hearts of
the pioneer priests in the log chapel on the Rappahannock. The only hope
that cheered and sustained them was that the ship would speedily return
from Santa Elena with the supplies they needed for themselves and the
seed‐corn for the natives, whom they hoped to persuade to cultivate more,
and depend less on the precarious means of sustenance. Meanwhile, as
January, 1571, was drawing to a close, Father Segura resolved to make a
last effort to move the heart of the recreant Don Luis. He sent Father
Quiros, with Brothers de Solis and Mendez, to the hamlet where he resided,
to make a last appeal. The priest, who had so long known him, endeavored
to recall him to higher and better feelings. The unhappy man made many
excuses for his absence, and continued to beguile the missionary with
promises; but his heart was given up to deadly malice. He had renounced
Christianity, and doomed its envoys to death. As Father Quiros and his two
companions turned sadly away to depart from the place and rejoin their
suffering companions, a shower of arrows whizzed through the air. Quiros
and his companions fell, pierced by the sharp flinty arrows of the
apostate and his followers. Virginia had its first martyrs of Christ.
Their bodies were at once stripped and subjected to all the mutilations
that savage fancy inspired.

Father Segura, with the three brothers and two other Indian youths, had
spent the interval in prayer, anxiety deepening as no sign of Father
Quiros appeared. On the fourth day the yells and cries that were borne on
the chilly air announced the approach of a large party, and in a short
time Don Luis appeared, arrayed in the cassock of Father Quiros, attended
by his brother, the cacique, and a war party armed with clubs and bows. He
sternly demanded from the missionaries their knives and axes used for
chopping wood, knowing that with them alone could they make any defence.
These were surrendered without remonstrance. Father Segura saw that the
end was come. The long‐delayed ship would be too late. He prepared his
companions to die. They doubtless gathered around the altar where the Holy
Sacrifice had just been offered. Then the apostate gave a signal, and his
warriors rushed upon the defenceless and unresisting mission party, and
slaughtered all but Alphonsus, who was protected by a brother of Don Luis,
more humane than that fallen man.

The bodies of his victims, Father Segura, Brothers Gomez, Linares, and
Zevallos, and the Indian novice, Christopher Redondo, were then, we are
told, buried beneath their chapel‐house. The shrine of the Mother of God
was doubtless pillaged, perhaps demolished; the lamp of Christian light
was extinguished, and pagan darkness again prevailed in the land.

As nearly as could be ascertained, the martyrdom of Father Quiros occurred
on Sunday, the 4th of February, 1571; that of Father Segura a few days
later.

Why had their countrymen in Florida so cruelly neglected them, in spite of
the urgent letters taken back by the pilot? It was probably because,
Melendez being absent, the letters were sent to Spain, and the pilot did
not fully reveal the destitute condition in which he had left the mission
colony. Brother Vincent Gonzalez was urgent to bear relief to the vice‐
provincial, but he was put off with the pretext that no pilot could be
found to run along the coast from Port Royal to the Chesapeake. It was not
till spring that the good brother succeeded in getting a vessel and some
Spaniards to proceed to the relief of his superior, as to whose welfare
great anxiety was now felt. They ran up the Potomac, and reached the spot
where Segura had landed. Indian runners had descried the vessel when it
entered the river, and, when the Spanish craft came to anchor, Indians
were there to meet them, and the garb of the missionaries was seen in the
distance. But the treacherous red men failed to lure them ashore with this
device, although some came forward, crying, “See the fathers who came to
us. We have treated them well; come and see them, and we will treat you
likewise.”

On the contrary, suspecting treachery from the fact that the pretended
fathers did not hasten down to meet them, the Spaniards not only avoided
landing, but, seizing two of the treacherous natives, sailed back to Port
Royal.

Melendez, soon after returning from Spain, heard their report, and with
characteristic energy resolved to punish the crime. Taking a small but
staunch and fleet vessel, with a sufficient force, he sailed in person to
the Chesapeake in 1572, bearing with him Father Rogel and Brother
Villareal. He evidently ran up the Potomac, as the other vessel had done,
to the spot already familiar to the pilots. Here he landed the Spanish
soldiers, and unfurled the standard of Spain on the soil of Virginia.
Marching inland, this determined man soon captured several Indians. They
were interrogated, and at once confessed that the whole mission party had
been cruelly murdered, but they laid the blame of the terrible crime on
the apostate Don Luis. Apparently, by one of them Melendez sent word to
the tribe that he would not harm the innocent, but he insisted on their
delivering up Don Luis. But that false Christian, on seeing the Spanish
vessel, fled with his brother, the cacique, and all attempts to arrest
them failed. The brother who had saved the Indian boy Alphonsus, however,
came forward to meet Melendez, bringing to him the only survivor of Father
Segura’s pious band. The adelantado received him with every mark of
pleasure.

From this boy was obtained a detailed account of all that had happened
after the departure of the vessel which left the missionaries on the bank
of the Potomac. The statement is, of course, the basis of all the accounts
we possess of the fate of the log chapel on the Rappahannock and the
little Jesuit community gathered to serve it.

The Spanish commander arrested a number of Indians; and when Alphonsus had
pointed out those concerned in the tragedy, Melendez hung eight of them at
the yard‐arm of his vessel. Father Rogel prepared them all for death,
instructing them, we presume, by the aid of the young survivor, and had
the consolation of baptizing them.

After this summary act of retributive justice, the founder of St.
Augustine, with his mail‐clad force, embarked, and the Spanish flag
floated for the last time over the land of Axacan.

Father Rogel was loath to leave the country without bearing with him the
precious remains of his martyred brethren; but Melendez could not venture
so far from his ship, and his force was too small to divide. The Jesuit
Father could bear away, as a relic, only a crucifix which had been in the
log chapel. Divine vengeance is said to have overtaken those who profaned
the sacred vessels, and especially an attempt to injure this crucifix;
first one, then two others, having been struck dead. It was subsequently
placed by Father Rogel in the College of Guayala.

Some thirty‐five years later an English colony entered a river, to which
they gave the name of Mary Stuart’s son. The Indians from that river to
the Rappahannock were ruled by Powhatan; and it is worthy of remark that
Raphe Hamor, one of the earliest settlers, states that Powhatan’s tribe
were driven from their original abode by the Spaniards. They were
Algonquins, and did not come from Florida. They were, in all probability,
the very tribe among whom Father Segura laid down his life. Powhatan,
represented as then a man of sixty, might, at twenty‐five, have witnessed
or taken part in the martyrdom.

Such is the history of the first community of the Society of Jesus in the
Old Dominion, of which they were the first white occupants. Dominicans
began the work by converting Don Luis, Jesuits followed it up by actual
possession, by erecting a chapel, by instituting a regular community life,
by instructing, baptizing, and hallowing the land by the Holy Sacrifice of
the Mass.

The flag of Spain and the flag of England have alike passed away, but on
the banks of the Potomac Jesuit and Dominican are laboring side by side
three hundred years after the martyrdom of Segura, Quiros, and their
companions.

Fredericksburg, which cannot be far from the early Chapel of the Mother of
God, revives its name in her Church of St. Mary of the Immaculate
Conception; and other churches of the same invocation seem to declare
that, as of old, so now we may say, “This is indeed the Blessed Virgin’s
land.”




New Publications.


    A LETTER ADDRESSED TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF NORFOLK, ON THE
    OCCASION OF MR. GLADSTONE’S RECENT EXPOSTULATION. By John Henry
    Newman, D.D., of the Oratory. New York: The Catholic Publication
    Society, 9 Warren Street. 1875.


This _Letter_ has two aspects. It is a reply on behalf of the Catholics of
England to Mr. Gladstone’s charge. It is also a polemical pamphlet
respecting a domestic controversy with other leaders of the Catholic body
in England. In its first aspect it is not only masterly in style and
argument, and marked with the evidence of rare learning, as anything from
the author’s pen is sure to be, but, to a certain point, conclusive and
unanswerable. It proves that Mr. Gladstone’s appeal to English Catholics
to separate themselves from the doctrine and polity of their spiritual
sovereign, the Pope, is an arrow shot in the air. It proves that his
charge against the Catholic hierarchy of having changed in spirit and
principle, in dogma and in action, in attitude and in aims, is baseless
and absurd. It refutes the charge that Catholics are intellectually and
morally in a state of servile bondage. Several other minor and incidental
things are proved, and on the whole it makes an important point in the
controversy about the relation of the Catholic religion to civil
sovereignty, and the civil rights and duties of the temporal order, as
distinct from the spiritual. It does not, and could not be expected to,
establish the great fundamental truth opposed to Mr. Gladstone’s error,
viz., the positive Catholic doctrine of the relation of the church to the
state, _in se_, and the firm, immovable basis which that doctrine places
for just political sovereignty and corresponding subjection to rest on,
while securing the divine rights of the church and her members, and the
duties correlative to those rights.

It is Dr. Newman’s misfortune that a base and dishonest act of some one of
the pestilent set of detectives of the press, or the other sneak‐thieves
who prowled about the purlieus of the Vatican Council, filching secret
information in order to make eligible paragraphs in newspapers, placed him
in a position before the world embarrassing both to himself and to many of
his warmest friends. The embarrassment of which we speak did not imply any
falling away from the faith of a Catholic or the holiness of a religious
priest. Yet it left a sentiment of disappointment, which the present
pamphlet does not altogether remove, that Dr. Newman failed to add lustre
to his arms, instead of merely preserving unstained what he had already
acquired.

The fading impression of this disappointment would have been wholly
effaced if Dr. Newman had not, in his reply to Mr. Gladstone, renewed it
by a certain manner of vague and general expression of discontent with a
number of his fellow‐Catholics considered by him as extreme or injudicious
in their doctrine, or way of expressing it, or their measures for
promoting the growth of the Catholic Church. There may, very well, be
individuals deserving his severe language. We have occasion in this
country to lament at extravagant representations of Catholic doctrines,
harsh and unjust censure of persons or opinions, and other excesses on the
part of individuals professing to be specially orthodox and devoted to the
Holy See. We think, however, that Dr. Newman’s language will be understood
to apply generally to those persons and those writers for the press in
England and Europe who were active and zealous in promoting the definition
of infallibility by the Vatican Council. If it is true that it has this
extension, we feel bound to express our painful sense of the wrong done to
a body of the best and truest advocates of the Catholic cause who are to
be found among our ranks.

In respect to the infallibility and supreme authority of the Pope, we
consider that Dr. Newman, whose doctrinal soundness was always really
unquestionable, has given new and explicit evidence which must satisfy
every careful reader of the pamphlet who is competent to judge of
theological matters. We have carefully scrutinized every phrase and
proposition, and find nothing which in our judgment is contrary to
Catholic doctrine. In respect to the theological opinions and the tone of
argument and expression of the venerable and illustrious author, we think
he is sometimes open to criticism, as at least ambiguous, if not
inaccurate; and in respect to one point, which does not occur as a direct
statement of opinion, but as a record of a doubt in his mind expressed in
a letter to a friend written several years ago, viz., the famous question
of “moral unanimity,” that the position there taken is altogether
untenable.

Dr. Newman frankly assumes the _rôle_ of a “minimizer,” in which his
_confrère_, Father Ryder, figured with so much ability in his controversy
with Dr. Ward. We have always thought that Father Ryder proved fairly that
his own positions, essentially considered, are within the limits of that
liberty of opinion which the Catholic doctrine permits. To a certain
extent we approve of “minimizing.” That is, we approve of not exacting as
a test of orthodoxy, and as _per se_ obligatory under pain of sin, belief
in more than the law _certainly_ requires. But we are most cordially
hostile to the system of economy in teaching and practice, which
inculcates and recommends only the minimum in doctrine, pious opinion, or
devotion. We do not attribute the advocacy of such a system to Dr. Newman,
yet we think it important to caution the readers of his pamphlet against
drawing such an inference from his language.

In speaking of the Syllabus, in particular, we fear that he has spoken in
such a way that some readers will infer that they may disregard it
altogether. He says it has no dogmatic authority. That it has not, by
itself, the quality of a complete and independent dogmatic document, we
may concede. It is a supplement to a whole series of doctrinal
pronouncements, of the nature of a catalogue of the errors condemned in
them. Yet all the errors enumerated are really condemned by virtue of the
sentence pronounced against them in the whole series of pontifical acts.
It is not lawful for any Catholic to hold any one of them. Their
interpretation is to be sought, by those who are competent to do so, in
the original doctrinal pronouncements of the Holy Father, and by the rest
of the faithful in the explanation of their pastors, and others who
explain them under their sanction. So also, although a condemnation of
some particular system of mixed education—_e.g._, in Ireland—does not
involve infallibility, but only authority to which obedience is due, yet
an _ex cathedrâ_ judgment of the Pope defining as a general proposition
that mixed education is dangerous, is an infallible judgment on a question
of morals.

Moreover, although the condemnation of errors frequently leaves a margin
for discussion respecting the full import and extent of the condemned
error and the precise limits of the contradictory truth which is affirmed,
there is always something positively and certainly decreed, over and above
the fact that there is an error of some sort. Frequently, the meaning is
obvious; and, at least generally, it is soon settled by the agreement of
theologians, so far as its essence is concerned. We cannot criticise in
detail every particular statement or expression in this pamphlet which, in
our view, falls short of a clear and unmistakable and complete expression
of correct theological doctrine. Dr. Newman’s particular line has led
through so many caveats, exceptions, limitations, so much subtle balancing
of opposite weights, and of what he consents to call “minimizing,” with
which ordinary readers are not familiar, that he leaves the impression
that truth, infallible teaching, the authority of the church, even the
Catholic faith, is something to be afraid of, to be guarded against,
somewhat as Englishmen feel about a standing army. We would prefer that,
instead of being apparently so solicitous to assure weak brethren and
timid converts that they need not believe so much as they are afraid of
being made to, he would speak out with a more clear, ringing, and full
note of his own peculiar, unequalled melody, to persuade and encourage
them to believe and confide in the church of God and in their prelates,
joyously, fearlessly, enthusiastically, with the noble spirit worthy of
the children of God. We do not like to hear our enemies call Dr. Newman
the head of a party of liberal Catholics in England, and set him over
against his archbishop, and pervert his language into a weapon against the
Council of the Vatican. We do not like to have to vindicate him from the
praise of anti‐Catholic writers, and to qualify the approbation which we
would like to give to the productions of his subtile and erudite genius by
“minimizing” criticism. He once wrote of himself,


    “Time was, I shrank from what was right,
    For fear of what was wrong.”


Something of the same mood seems to have come over his sensitive heart in
his seclusion from active, ecclesiastical life, during the Council of the
Vatican, and to have not quite withdrawn its penumbra. We are reminded of
S. Gregory Nazianzen, complaining of councils and of S. Basil, as he went
away weary from Constantinople into retirement; and of S. Colman,
gathering up his relics to quit Lindisfarne and escape from S. Wilfrid.
These were weaknesses of saints, but still weaknesses, and it was their
heroism and not their weakness which made them worthy of our veneration.
We trust that Dr. Newman will remember that there are some others to be
thought of besides those who are weak in the faith and his own _petite
clientele_ in England; and that he will not close his career without one
more deed of prowess, which shall discomfit the enemies of the Holy See
and the Catholic faith, and show that his pennon still flutters beside
those of his fellow‐champions.


    FATHER EUDES, APOSTOLIC MISSIONARY, AND HIS FOUNDATIONS,
    1601‐1874. By the Chevalier De Montzey. With a brief of approval
    from his Holiness Pius IX. Boston: Patrick Donahoe. 1874.


We have read this book with pleasure, and have been glad to learn
something of the Congregation of Eudists—one which deserves especial honor
for its loyalty to the Holy See and the glorious death of some of its
members at the massacre of the _Carmes_ in Paris during the French
Revolution. The author, who is a grand‐nephew of Father Eudes and of the
famous historian Mezeray who was his brother, is a soldier by profession,
and his style has a freshness and novelty about it quite refreshing in
hagiography, and contrasting very favorably with some other specimens,
which reflect more credit on the piety than on the literary qualifications
of their writers. Father Eudes was originally an Oratorian; but after the
death of Father de Condren, when the Oratory became infected with
Jansenism, he left it to found a new congregation of priests, living in
community without religious vows, and devoted to missions and the
instruction of young ecclesiastics in seminaries. He was a truly apostolic
man, and his work was crowned with success. Dispersed by the French
Revolution, his congregation has been since revived, and appears to be at
present chiefly engaged in the work of secular education. The history of
the French Oratory is both singular and instructive. An institute formed
by Cardinal de Berulle, and including among its members such men as
Malebranche, Massillon, Mascaron, Father de Condren, and Father Eudes,
would seem to have promised a most complete success. Yet it perished
utterly and ignominiously through the deadly contamination of Jansenism.
It has been restored within a few years past, and is now as strongly
marked by fidelity to the Holy See and to the spirit of its saintly
founders as it was by faithlessness to both in the period of its
dissolution. Yet its past history will ever remain a grave and warning
lesson of the deadly effects of tampering or compromising with unsound
doctrines, and deviating into new and dangerous ways. Father Eudes
succeeded in accomplishing what the founders of the Oratory attempted but
did not carry out, though at the cost of much persecution, and in a way
comparatively obscure and humble. His character was an original and
admirable one, his institute seems to have been judiciously and solidly
organized, and we both trust and desire that his successors may carry out
the excellent work which he commenced to the most ample results. We
recommend this life particularly to all who are engaged in similar
undertakings.


    THE RELIGIOUS STATE ACCORDING TO THE DOCTRINE OF S. THOMAS. By
    Jules Didiot, D.D. Translated from the French. London: Burns &
    Oates. (New York: Sold by The Catholic Publication Society.)

    THE PERFECT LAY‐BROTHER. By Felix Cumplido, S.J. Same publishers.

    THE MISTRESS OF NOVICES ENLIGHTENED UPON HER DUTIES. By M. L’Abbé
    Leguay. New York: The Catholic Publication Society. 1875.


The first of these three books, specially intended for religious, needs no
other recommendation than its title. The second is considered by the
Jesuits to be one of the best of its kind, and is equally useful for that
most excellent class of religious persons, the Lay‐Sisters, as for
brothers. The third will be welcome to the ladies in charge of the
numerous and crowded novitiates which are the most beautiful feature in
our American Catholic Church, and, from the recommendations it has
received, we have no doubt will prove satisfactory, though we have not had
time even to glance at its contents.


    MARGARET ROPER. By Agnes Stewart. London: Burns & Oates. 1874.
    (New York: Sold by The Catholic Publication Society.)


Miss Stewart is one of our best female writers. The sketch she has given
of Margaret Roper, in her usual felicitous style, is in the main
historical, with a little fictitious coloring to give it life.


    CHARACTERISTICS FROM THE WRITINGS OF JOHN HENRY NEWMAN. Arranged
    by W. S. Lilly, with the author’s approval. New York: Scribner,
    Welford & Armstrong. 1875.


The American publishers have imported their edition at the retail price of
$2.50. It is a London‐printed book, which is all that need be said for its
typography. The selections are miscellaneous and made with taste and
discrimination. The volume must be welcome to thousands of admirers of the
matchless writings of a man who is one of the modern glories of English
literature, as well as one of the brightest ornaments of religion and the
church in the present century. One of the best portraits of Dr. Newman
which we have seen, an admirably‐executed engraving from a recent
photograph, is a welcome addition to the volume.


    THE COMPLETE OFFICE OF HOLY WEEK, according to the Roman Missal
    and Breviary, in Latin and English. New and revised edition. New
    York: The Catholic Publication Society. 1875.


This little book will be found very useful to those of the laity who have
an opportunity of attending the Holy Week services, and it will also be
interesting to those who may wish to know what those services are which so
occupy the church during the “Great Week,” as the work contains all the
devotions of Holy Week, with the day and night office. There is an
abundance of spiritual reading in the Scripture lessons and prophecies, so
that those whose duties prevent them from attending the services may reap
much profit by a perusal of the offices at home. Each day is preceded by
an Introduction, explaining the meaning of the principal ceremonies. There
is also added the ritual for the blessing of the holy oils, which is
performed by the bishop on Holy Thursday.


    PEACE THROUGH THE TRUTH. SECOND SERIES. PART I. By Rev. J. Harper,
    S.J. London: Burns, Oates & Co. 1875. (New York: Sold by The
    Catholic Publication Society.)


This ponderous volume is employed with the topic of the Levitical
impediments to matrimony, and its weight of learning and argument is in
proportion to its size.


    THE PHILOSOPHY OF SPIRITUALISM, AND THE PATHOLOGY AND TREATMENT OF
    MEDIOMANIA. Two Lectures. By Frederic R. Marvin, M.D., Professor
    of Psychological Medicine and Medical Jurisprudence in the New
    York Free Medical College for Women. Read before the New York
    Liberal Club, March 20 and 27, 1874. New York: Asa K. Butts & Co.,
    Publishers, No. 36 Dey St. 1874.


Asa K. Butts & Co. have published this small book with a long title in a
very cheap and economical manner, very well suited to its scientific and
literary value. It is decidedly the production of a medio‐monomaniac.


    ON THE WING: A SOUTHERN FLIGHT. By the Hon. Mrs. Alfred
    Montgomery, author of _The Bucklyn Shaig_, _Mine Own Familiar
    Friend_, _The Wrong Man_, etc. London: Hurst & Blackett. 1875.


Those of our readers who enjoyed this “flight” during the summer and
autumn in the pages of THE CATHOLIC WORLD will need no assurance from us
regarding the pleasure of the trip. To others we will simply say that the
volume contains some admirably‐told travelling experiences, graphic
descriptions of Italian life and scenery, together with romantic episodes
in which sundry characters, real or imaginary, pass through a variety of
piquant incidents.

ANNOUNCEMENT.—In addition to the new serial already commenced in THE
CATHOLIC WORLD, we shall begin in the April number the publication of
another story by the author of “Laughing Dick Cranstone,” “How George
Howard was Cured,” etc.





[Transcriber’s Note: Obvious printer’s errors have been corrected.]






FOOTNOTES


    1 We say “indefinite,” because this virtual sphere in its continuous
      expansion wanes away insensibly, and has no definite limiting
      surface.

    2 That the matter of a primitive element is mathematically unextended
      will be rigorously proved in the next following articles.

    3 “A Speculation touching Electric Conduction and the Nature of
      Matter.” _Philos. Magazine_, 1844, vol. xxiv. p. 136.

    4 THE CATHOLIC WORLD, August, 1874, p. 584.

    5 He says: “What do we know of the atom apart from its force? You
      imagine a nucleus which may be called _a_, and surround it by forces
      which may be called _m_: to my mind the _a_, or nucleus, vanishes,
      and the substance consists in the powers of _m_. And, indeed, what
      notion can we form of the nucleus independent of its powers? What
      thought remains on which to hang the imagination of an _a_
      independent of the acknowledged forces?”

      We answer that there remains the _inertia_, the _passivity_, and the
      _local position_, which are not the property of the _m_, but of the
      _a_. The _a_, even according to Faraday, is the real centre of a
      sphere, and therefore it cannot vanish while the sphere exists,
      except inasmuch as it must be conceived without bulk, according to
      the theory of simple elements which he adopts.

    6 Opusc. _De Principiis Naturæ._

    7 Aliquid esse semper et ubique potest intelligi dupliciter. Uno modo,
      quia habet in se unde se extendat ad omne tempus et ad omnem locum,
      sicut Deo competit esse ubique et semper. Alio modo, quia non habet
      in se quo determinetur ad aliquem locum vel tempus. _Summa Theol._,
      p. 1, q. 16, a. 7.

    8 Universale est ubique et semper; materia etiam prima, quum sit in
      omnibus corporibus, est ubique. Neutrum autem horum est Deus. Ergo
      esse ubique non est proprium Dei.—Ad primum dicendum, quod
      universale et materia prima sunt quidem ubique, sed non secundum
      idem esse. _Summa Theol._, p. 1, q. 8, a. 4.

    9 _Questi che mai da me non fia divizo._

   10 Formerly September was the 7th month.

   11 This is the title of a remarkable poem by the Rev. John Keble,
      unpublished until after his death.

   12 Dr. Irons, in his book entitled _New Legislation for the Church: Is
      it needed?_ says: “The most discreditable because the most insincere
      of all the pleas for new legislation is the cry that the ritualists
      are encouraging popery amongst us. To say that we are in danger of
      becoming papists is about as rational as to say that we are becoming
      ‘Plymouth Brethren,’ ” (one of the many new sects which have sprung
      up of late years in England).

   13 At a meeting of a High Church society, called the English Church
      Union, recently held, a member of this Low Church association who
      was present rose and informed the assembly that that body further
      existed “for the purpose of teaching the bishops the law”—a
      statement which must have been interesting to the Bishop of
      Lichfield and his two coadjutor‐bishops who were present.

   14 Upon this the _Times_ remarks: “There can be no department of
      administration ... without a large deposit of discretionary powers
      in the best hands that can be found. The Church of England has
      always had to submit to that law, for it sees its prelates appointed
      alternately by the opposite political and religious sides, and has
      had to see the ecclesiastical patronage of populous counties
      bestowed for a whole generation on men of one school, and then as
      long on men of the other.” Could any words more graphically depict
      the shuttlecock existence of Anglican ecclesiastical arrangements
      than these?

   15 See _Peace through the Truth_, by the Rev. F. Harper, S. J., whose
      words we occasionally venture to adopt, as expressing so much more
      completely the state of the case than could be done by any of our
      own: “In the authorized formularies of the Church of England there
      is only one single instance in which confession is distinctly
      alluded to, namely, in the Service for the Visitation of the Sick.”
      But let us hear what is said by the great Anglican authority,
      Archbishop Whately, with regard to the rubric to which we refer, his
      work being a text‐book which nearly every Anglican bishop recommends
      to his candidates for ordination. After quoting Marshall and Potter
      as authorities in his favor, he says: “No authority can be urged
      from thence for the applying of God’s pardon to the conscience of a
      sinner, or for absolving him from any otherwise than from the
      censures of the church,” (_Whately on the Common Prayer_, ch. XI.,
      sec. 5, p. 430, London, 1840). And the late Bishop of London, Dr.
      Blomfield, in one of his charges (1842) speaks of auricular
      confession as “a practice wholly unknown to the primitive church,
      one of the most fearful abuses of that of Rome, and the source of
      unspeakable abominations.” From all which it ought to be clear to
      Anglicans themselves that, if they would find authorized confession
      and valid absolution, they must seek it elsewhere than from the
      self‐authorized confessors of their own communion.

   16 F. Harper.

   17 See “Our Paris Letter” in the _Church Times_ for June 12, 1874,
      which might be fitly described as two closely printed columns of
      exasperating mendacity.

   18 We are told that “one striking feature of the evening as regards the
      tone pervading the assemblage was the manifest repudiation of the
      idea ... that, if the bill were pressed, the extreme men would
      secede and free the church from their annoying presence.” When Mr.
      Hillyard, of S. Lawrence’s, Norwich, who presented himself as one of
      the “extremest of the extreme,” told how a parishioner of his had
      said to him, “Sir, if fifteen years ago there had been such services
      and spiritual privileges at S. Lawrence as there are now, I should
      never have turned Roman Catholic,” he “fairly brought down the
      house.” The idea of “sorrowful departure,” ... when referred to by
      one of the speakers, was received with _shouts of derisive
      laughter_. Another clergyman stated that he had “reconciled a great
      number of Roman Catholics to the church” (!), which announcement was
      received with “great cheering.”

   19 And Mr. B., moreover, would be able for his part to appeal to the
      “Black rubric” (so named by the Tractarians), and which is appended
      to the Communion Service, and Art. XXVIII. The former, apologizing
      for the order contained in the office for communicants to receive
      _kneeling_, declares that “thereby no adoration is intended or ought
      to be done, either unto the sacramental bread or wine there bodily
      received, or unto any Corporal Presence of Christ’s natural Flesh
      and Blood. For the sacramental bread and wine remain still in their
      very natural substance, and therefore may not be adored (for that
      were idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians).” Article
      XXVIII. declares that “Transubstantiation cannot be proved by Holy
      Writ; but it is repugnant to the plain words of Scripture,
      overthroweth the nature of a sacrament, and hath given occasion to
      many superstitions.... The Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper was not by
      Christ’s ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, or
      worshipped.”

   20 Mr. H. Wilberforce.

   21 “As the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch have erred, so
      also the Church of Rome hath erred, not only in their living and
      manner of ceremonies, but also in matters of faith.”—Art. XIX.,
      _Book of Com. Prayer_.

   22 “Ludens in orbe terrarum,” Prov. viii. 31.

   23 Animorum nulla in terris origo inveniri potest, nihil enim est in
      animis mixtum atque concretum, aut quod ex terra natum atque fictum
      esse videatur nihil ne aut humidum quidem, aut flabile, aut igneum.
      His enim in naturis nihil inest, quod vim memoriæ, mentis,
      cogitationis habeat, quod et præterita teneat, et futura provideat,
      et complecti possit præsentia: quæ sola divina sunt; nec invenietur
      unquam unde ad hominem venire possint, nisi a Deo. Singularis est
      igitur quædam natura atque vis animi, sejuncta ab his usitatis
      notisque naturis.—_Tusc. Quæst_, lib. 1, c 27.

   24 Laguile, in his _History of Alsace_, regards these apostles as the
      real disciples of S. Peter. He finds a proof of it in the writings
      of S. Irenæus (who lived in the IIId century), which allude to the
      churches of Germany.

   25 An old tradition attributes the foundation of this château to the
      Emperor Maximin, and declares that the rotunda was formerly
      consecrated to the worship of the pagan divinities. This rotunda was
      destroyed in 1734. An inn now stands on the spot.

   26 This abbey, at a later day, adopted the rule of S. Benedict, and in
      the VIIIth century became of great importance, being rebuilt and
      endowed by Duke Garnier.

   27 The remains of St. Deodatus have been preserved in this church.
      Formerly they were borne in procession with great pomp around
      Ebersheim‐Münster on the 19th of May, the festival of this saint.

   28 S. Odile was particularly attached to Ebersheim‐Münster. After the
      foundation of the Convent of Hohenbourg she appointed the abbot
      director of her community, and made to it some donations on
      condition that some of the monks of Ebersheim‐Münster should
      celebrate divine service at Hohenbourg on certain festivals, and the
      abbot himself on the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Déobald,
      Abbot of Ebersheim‐Münster, had the particular confidence of
      Charlemagne. He travelled with him to Saxe in 810.

   29 The remains of Adalric were, long after his death, removed from
      Hohenbourg to Ebersheim‐Münster, and were for a long period
      venerated by the pilgrims.

   30 Chroniclers speak particularly of the wonderful beauty of Odile’s
      fair locks.

   31 “If Pilatus wears his hood
      The weather surely will be good;
      But if Pilatus dons his sword,
      Then rain will soon be the award.”

   32 “To the fidelity and courage of the Swiss.”

   33 See Spelman’s _History and Fate of Sacrilege_.

   34 _Les Premières Civilisations: Études d’Histoire et d’Archéologie._
      Par F. Lenormant. Paris.

   35 Cf. Isaias xxxix. 1.

   36 Renan, _Livre de Job_, Introd., p. lxiii., 1860.

   37 Lenormant, _Premières Civilisations_, tom. ii. p. 21.

   38 See Genesis. x. 10.

   39 Cf. Isaias xxxvii. 38.

   40 Is. xlvi. 1.

   41 This is the value of the ideographic sign by which the abode of the
      dead is designated. It also bears two other names, which are of
      great importance, as proving that the Semites, far from borrowing
      from the Greeks their belief in another life, have, on the contrary,
      furnished the latter with the names which they have bestowed on the
      regions of the departed. In the poem of the descent of Istar into
      hell this region is, in fact, denominated _Eribus_, probably meaning
      “the house of darkness,” from _Ereb_, “evening,” from whence the
      Erebus of the Greeks; and _bit edie_, “the house of the eternities,”
      from _ed_, “eternity,” from whence comes doubtless the Greek Hades.
      The etymology αίδης is not historical, and may easily be an
      arbitrary invention. Acheron, also, seems very probably derived from
      _Acharon_, the West, the place of darkness, the land of the dead.
      (See Talbot, _Transactions of the Society of Biblical Archæology_.)

   42 _Prem. Civ._ The original text of this poem is given in _Choix de
      Textes Cuneiformes_, pp. 100, 105.

   43 _Transactions of the Soc. of Bibl. Archæol._ vol. i., p. 107, and
      partially translated by Lenormant, _Prem. Civ._

   44 See the two articles by M. Renan upon, or rather _against_, the
      “Expédition en Mesopotame” of M. Oppert, in the _Journal des
      Savants_, 1859.

   45 “Let my mouth be filled with thy praise, alleluia, that I may sing,
      alleluia; my lips shall greatly rejoice when I shall sing to thee,
      alleluia, alleluia.”

   46 The Germans call a graveyard God’s acre.

   47 A street of that name.

   48 The old man.

   49 Tiberius’ leap.

   50 _New American Cyclopædia_, v. Spiritualism.

   51 The Strada di Toledo, where the maskers assemble, and the combats
      with _confetti_ take place during the Carnival.

   52 _Bals masqués._

   53 The name of the place where large public and private balls are given
      by the Neapolitan nobility, to whom one must belong to have the
      right to subscribe.

   54 Thursday before Lent.

   55 The girls.

   56 An enclosure planted with maize, vines, and orange‐trees.

   57 “That is, Dennis O’Flinn, with whom was this book during a year,
      namely, from the seventh month of the year 1815 to the eighth month
      of the year 1816, _i.e._, viz., D. O’F., of Shandon Street, in Cork,
      of Great Munster, and that put it carefully in this form, as say the
      stanzas above.”

   58 The writer acknowledges his indebtedness to Mr. James O’Farrell for
      this translation and other valuable assistance.

   59 Pronounced Karr.

   60 _The Lay of the Last Minstrel_, canto i. st. vi.

   61 _History of Westmoreland and Cumberland_, Introd.

   62 “In world is naught, nature has wrought, that shall stay.
      Therefore serve God, keep well the rod, thy fame shall not decay.”

   63 The chronicles do not say how she passed her time at Brisgau. They
      merely state that she lived there about a year as a hermitess and
      mendicant.

   64 S. Attale became the superior of the chapter of S. Etienne at
      Strasbourg, founded by her father and composed of thirty canonesses.
      She lived to a good old age, and died in the odor of sanctity, her
      soul wafted to heaven by a troop of angels and their Queen. Her
      feast is celebrated at Strasbourg on the 3d of December.

   65 S. Eugénie succeeded S. Odile as abbess of Hohenbourg, and died in
      735. She was buried in the Chapel of S. John, and her tomb remained
      entire till the Lutheran soldiers of Mansfeldt broke it open in
      1622. Her relics were collected by the clergy, and afterwards
      restored to the convent. Later, the Swedes cast them to the winds.
      Only a portion is preserved at Oberehnheim, and still exposed on her
      festival, Sept. 16.

      S. Gundeline became the second abbess of Niedermünster. Her remains
      were once in a shrine of silver beside the grand altar, but were
      mostly lost in the Thirty Years’ War. What remain are at Einsiedeln.

   66 Roswinde, who had renounced the world before the Monastery of
      Hohenbourg was erected, lived holily under the direction of her
      sister. She was buried in the chapel of SS. Peter and Paul. The name
      of S. Roswinde is found in an ancient litany formerly chanted in the
      Diocese of Strasbourg.

   67 To endow this monastery with relics, he made a pilgrimage to Rome.
      Pope Adrian I. gave him the bodies of S. Sophie and three other
      saints, which he solemnly enshrined at Eschau. He died March 20,
      783, and was buried at Eschau. He is revered as a saint.

   68 This chalice was still at Hohenbourg in 1546. All the chronicles
      declare that no one could ever tell of what it was composed. The
      Abbey of Hohenbourg had a chalice on its coat‐of‐arms.

   69 Probably about the year 720. The year is disputed. A popular legend
      says she lived to be one hundred and three years old, which would
      make the year of her death 760.

   70 This will is to be found in the _Histoire de l’Eglise de
      Strasbourg_, by Grandidier.

   71 This precious work was carefully preserved in the Library of
      Strasbourg until the late siege. It is greatly to be hoped that it
      was transferred to a place of safety, and did not share the fate of
      that noble library. The manuscript throughout is by the hand of
      Herrade. It is composed of three hundred and twenty‐four leaves of
      parchment. It is especially interesting because it shows the state
      of the sciences and literature, the manners, and the public and
      private usages of the XIIth century.

      This work is a systematic collection of extracts taken from
      ecclesiastical history and from the fathers, mingled with
      reflections and observations on astronomy, geography, philosophy,
      history, and mythology, naturally introduced by the subject the
      author is treating of. To these are joined the poems of Herrade. It
      is illuminated with naïve and charming miniatures.

      This work is dedicated by the illustrious abbess to her spiritual
      children. She explains in the preface, written in prose, the object
      she had in view in undertaking it. “Like a bee,” she says, “I have
      amassed in this book the honey drawn from the sacred and
      philosophical writings, that I may form a honey‐comb to delight you
      and lead you to honor our Lord and the church. Seek herein an
      agreeable food for the soul, refresh hereby your fatigued minds,
      that you may always be occupied with your heavenly Spouse,” etc.,
      etc.

      She then enters upon the work. After speaking of God and his
      attributes, the angels and their fall, she comes to the creation,
      discusses man before and after his fall, passes in review the Old
      Testament in its relations with the New, with the history of the
      human race, the development of the arts, sciences, and philosophy.

      She comes finally to the mystery of the Redemption, to which she
      joins the genealogy of our Saviour, traced upon a mysterious tree
      planted by the Divinity. She gives an account of the life, miracles,
      teachings, and parables of Christ. Then follow numerous extracts
      from the Acts of the Apostles, to which are annexed very curious
      paintings.

      The history of the Roman emperors is naturally connected with the
      development of the Christian Church, and there are ingenious
      miniatures representing allegorically the virtues of the faithful
      followers of Christ, the hideousness of sin, the vanities and
      temptations of the world, the assaults of hell, and the means we
      should use to oppose them.

      Finally, Herrade represents, in a series of considerations and
      paintings, the dignities, rights, and obligations of the
      ecclesiastical state.

      This work, by the Abbess of Hohenbourg, is the production of a
      thoughtful mind, and is one that required much time. She very
      carefully indicates the numerous and authentic sources whence she
      draws her materials.

      Herrade has also left a list of all the popes from S. Peter to
      Clement III., and several astronomical works, which also are, or
      were, in the Library of Strasbourg.

   72 The relics of S. Odile venerated in other places are not of our
      saint. There are three other saints of that name—one a companion of
      S. Ursula; a second, Abbess of Hohenbourg in the XIth century; and a
      third, who was a widow of Liege.

   73 See Silliman’s _Principles of Physics_, n. 20.

   74 The word “matter” ordinarily signifies “material substance”; but
      among philosophers material substance is that in which one of the
      constituents is _the_ matter, the other being the form. Physicists
      also take the word “matter” in the sense of one of the constituents
      of material substance, whenever they distinguish _the_ matter from
      the active power of matter. We are surprised to find that Father
      Tongiorgi denies in his _Cosmology_ (n. 102, 103) that the primitive
      atoms are constituted of matter and form. Of what, then, are they
      constituted? He replies that those atoms have no constituents.
      “Philosophers,” he says, “ask what are the constituents of the
      atoms; and we answer that constituents of the atoms there are none,
      whether with regard to their essence or to their
      quantity”—_Quæstionem proponunt philosophi quœnam sint constitutiva
      atomorum. Cui respondemus, constitutiva atomorum nulla esse, nec
      quoad essentiam, nec quoad quantitatem_ (n. 119). This is a curious
      doctrine indeed; for it admits that a thing may be constituted
      without constituents, and not only ignores the metaphysical analysis
      of the primitive being, but implicitly declares it to be absurd.
      That all created substance essentially consists of act and potency
      we have shown in THE CATHOLIC WORLD for March, 1874, p. 824.

   75 We propose to treat this question separately.

   76 THE CATHOLIC WORLD.

   77 Itaque ubi habetur distinctio unius ab altero, ibi habetur unitatum
      pluralitas, seu multitudo, etiamsi quæ distincta sunt, unita sint,
      atque adeo communi termino copulentur, ut in continui partibus
      contingit.—_Cosmol._, n. 174.

   78 _Cosmol._, n. 59.

   79 Mysterium philosophicum; est hæc difficultas in qua ratio plus
      probat, quam possit intelligere; plus objicit, quam possit
      solvere.—Goudin, _Philos._

   80 Quando dicitur continuum esse divisibile in partes in infinitum
      divisibiles, hoc intelligendum est mathematice, non physice; id est
      considerando, quantitatem præcise secundum se, ut eam sumit
      mathematicus, non vero ut est proprietas formæ corporeæ, sicut eam
      considerat physicus; nam perveniri tandem posset ad partem ita
      minimam, ut minorem nulla forma naturalis pati posset. Attamen,
      mathematice loquendo, in illa minima parte adhuc essent duæ
      medietates, et in illis duabus medietalibus aliæ medietates, et sic
      in infinitum.—_Ibid._

   81 A childish amusement resorted to the evening of the first Sunday in
      Lent, as a kind of supplement to the Carnival.

   82 Carey’s _Dante_.

   83 A prolongation of the Carnival peculiar to Milan, where it lasts
      four days longer than elsewhere.

   84 Claudio Monteverde, an Italian musician, born at Cremona in 1565;
      died at Venice in 1649. The age of modern music can easily be
      computed.

   85 _Résumé Philosophique de l’Hist. de la Musique._ Par M. Fétis.

   86 _Dictionnaire de Plain Chant_, art. Tonalité.

   87 We were surprised to find that we had written “_diminished_” seventh
      for the chord _Sol, Si, Re, Fa_, in our last article. The
      accompanying example, however, showed our meaning, and, for
      musicians, corrected the error.

   88 We would also like to know why “church music” introduced by
      composers into their operas is so unlike the music they have
      composed for the church.

   89 A marked characteristic of Gregorian chant, Rousseau, in his _Essai
      sur l’Origine des Langues_, examining the influence of music,
      observes: “Thus melody, beginning _to be less adherent to speech_,
      took, insensibly, a separate existence, and music became more
      independent of the words. As a consequence, little by little those
      prodigies which it had produced while it was only the accent and the
      harmony of poetry, and which gave to it that power to subdue the
      passions which it would in the future exercise only upon the reason,
      ceased.”

   90 “And when they had said a hymn, they went forth unto the Mount of
      Olives.” “Id est, hymno cantato,” says Estius; and also S.
      Augustine: “Ubi non est cantus, non est hymnus;” and S. Chrysostom:
      “Hymnum cecinit, ut et nos similiter faciamus.” Suppose the Passion
      to have taken place in our day, would our Lord and his disciples
      have sung their “Communio” _à la_ Mozart, _alla_ Palestrina, or in
      the style of Gregorian Chant? “_Et nos similiter faciamus._”

   91 Come to his assistance, all ye saints of God; meet him, all ye
      angels of God; receive his soul, and present it before the Lord. May
      Jesus Christ, who called thee, receive thee, and may the angels
      conduct thee to the bosom of Abraham.

   92 Eternal rest grant unto them, O Lord! and let perpetual light shine
      upon them.

   93 May the angels conduct thee to paradise; in thy coming may the
      martyrs receive thee and lead thee into the holy city Jerusalem. May
      the chorus of angels receive thee, and with Lazarus, once poor,
      mayest thou obtain eternal rest.

   94 _Bothwell: A Tragedy._ By Algernon Charles Swinburne. London: Chatto
      & Windus. 1874.

   95 _Alexander the Great_: A Dramatic Poem. By Aubrey de Vere. London:
      H. S. King & Co. 1874. New York: The Catholic Publication Society.

   96 _Brownson’s Review_, July, 1874, pp. 301, 304.

   97 Some of Des Cartes’ works were, however, required to be corrected,
      and placed on the Index with that note.

   98 _Défense de l’Ontologisme_, p. 1.

   99 _De Orig. Idearum_, art. v. obj. 3.

  100 CATHOLIC WORLD, vol iii. p. 294.

  101 Meaning the _understanding_.

  102 Ib. p. 519.

  103 Ib. p. 520.

  104 Ib. vol. iv. p. 660.

  105 Carlyle, _French Revolution_, vol. i.

  106 Neapolitan for a nervous attack.

  107 _Catholic Orthodoxy._ By Rev. Dr. Overbeck.

  108 _The Elements of Molecular Mechanics._ By Joseph Bayma, S.J.,
      Professor of Philosophy, Stonyhurst College. London and Cambridge:
      Macmillan and Co. 1866.

  109 THE CATHOLIC WORLD, August, 1874, p. 581.

  110 _The Elements of Molecular Mechanics_, pp. 28, 29.

  111 Tongiorgi, _Cosmol._, n. 53.

  112 In olden times it was the custom to ring on the chimes the hymns of
      the church, not the worldly or vulgar airs now too often heard.

  113 _On the Manners and Customs of the Ancient Irish_: A series of
      Lectures delivered by the late Eugene O’Curry, M.R.I.A., Professor
      of Irish History and Archæology in the Catholic University of
      Ireland, etc., by W. K. Sullivan, Ph.D., Secretary of Ireland, etc.
      Edited, with an Introduction, Appendixes—the Royal Irish Academy,
      Professor of Chemistry to the Catholic University, etc. 3 vols.
      London: Williams & Norgate. (New York: Sold by The Catholic
      Publication Society.)

  114 Harps.

  115 Otherwise known as Finn McOoul, General of the Militia of Ireland
      A.D. 283.

  116 Oghams.

  117 Félempesi, _La Vérité toute Entière_, p. 173.

  118 Jourgniac, _Thirty‐eight Hours in the Abbaye_.

  119 Mme. de Montasson, second wife by a morganatic marriage of the late
      Duke of Orleans, Egalité’s father.

  120 “Until the day dawn and the day‐star arise in your hearts.”—2 S.
      Peter i. 19.

  121 The technical term for a scarlet coat (worn by fox hunters) when it
      has seen service, and the tails have become _pink_ through exposure
      to the weather.

  122 _Saturday Review_, Feb. 21, 1874, art. “Highland Constituencies.”

  123 “Welch eine höchst weise Einrichtung! Wie glücklich ist Russland vor
      vielen Römisch‐Katholischen Ländern!”—_Hupel_, “Die kirchliche
      Statistik von Russland,” in the _Nordische Miscellanien_, part XI.,
      Riga, 1786, p. 88.

  124 First Series, vols. iii‐vii.

  125 See Pékarski, _Learning and Literature in Russia under Peter the
      Great_. (In Russian) St. Petersburg, 1862. Vol. ii., pp. 469‐481.

  126 Amongst the various writings in which Prokopovitch develops this
      thought might be noticed one which has for its title _An Historical
      Disquisition on the quality of pontiffs or high‐priests of idol‐
      worship possessed by the Roman emperors, both pagan and Christian;
      for what reason, and in what sense they possessed it, and whether,
      in the Christian law, Christian sovereigns can be called Bishops and
      Pontiffs, and in what sense_. St. Petersburg, 1721. See _Pékarski_,
      _op. cit._, vol ii., p. 519.

  127 Mgr. Plato, _Orthodox Doctrine; or, Christian Theology Abridged_.
      (In Russian) St. Petersburg, 1st ed., 1765; 2d ed., 1780.

  128 See “The Act of Succession to the Throne of Russia,” April 5, 1797,
      _Compl. Coll._, Vol. xxiv. (17,910).

  129 See the Ukases of the 3d Nov., 1798 (18,734), and of the 11th Dec.,
      1800 (19,684). See also on this subject our book: _The Popes of Rome
      and the Popes of the Oriental Church_. London: Longmans, 1871, pp.
      78‐81.

  130 _La Russie sera‐t‐elle Catholique?_ Par le Père J. Gagarin, S.J.
      Paris: Douniol, 1856.

  131 See the _Ukases_, Nos. 18,734 and 19,684.

  132 In the eastern provinces of the Russian Empire the Mahometans carry
      on an active propagandism at the expense of orthodoxy.

  133 _Code of the Laws of the Russian Empire_, vol. xiv. “Statute for the
      Prevention and Extirpation of Offences against the Faith,” Arts. 92
      and 97. Ed. 1857, pp. 18, 19.

  134 To mention only the _Panslavists_, whose formula is well known:
      “Orthodoxy and nationality are synonymous.” If all Russians thought
      the same, the Catholics might spare themselves the trouble of any
      further controversy.

  135 _Réglement ecclésiastique de Pierre le Grand, etc._, part i., p 16.
      Paris: Library of the Bibliographical Society, 75 Rue de Bac, 1874.

  136 “The emperor, as a Christian sovereign, is the supreme defender and
      protector of the dogmas of the dominant faith, the guardian of
      orthodoxy and of all that concerns good order in the holy
      church.”—_Code of the Laws of the Russian Empire_; Fundam. Laws,
      art. 42, ed. 1857, p. 10.

  137 We have it from an authentic source that the emperor had had made
      for himself, for this purpose, a set of (sacerdotal) vestments of
      sky‐blue velvet, and was so bent upon carrying out his intention
      that his principal favorite, Count Rostoptchin, only succeeded in
      dissuading him by reminding him that he had been twice married, and
      was therefore, according to the canons of the church, disqualified
      for offering the Holy Sacrifice.

  138 Father Gruber, General of the Jesuits, who was in great favor with
      Paul, presented to the czar a project for reunion. By command of the
      czar the Archimandrite Eugenius (Volkhovichinoff), afterwards
      Metropolitan of Kieff, published in 1800 an answer to this project,
      in the form of a canonical dissertation, _On the Authority of the
      Pope_. See _The Russian Clergy_, by Père Gagarin, S.J., pp. 118,
      119.

      It appears that this affair was under consideration for several
      years, and even in the reign of Catherine II. And in fact Hupel, in
      a note of the manuscript in which we found the opening passage of
      this essay, mentions the rumors read by the newspapers that a
      complete (_pollige_) reunion of the Russian with the Catholic Church
      was about to be accomplished, and attributed these same rumors to
      the ex‐Jesuits. Hupel wrote in 1736. See _op. cit._ p. 88, note.

  139 Schnitzler (J. L.), _Histoire intime de la Russie sous les Empereurs
      Alexandre et Nicolas_, Paris, Renouard, 1847, vol. i., note xiii.;
      _Dispositions religieuses de l’Empereur Alexandre_, p. 463, note
      xi.; _La Sainte Alliance et Mme. de Krudener_. See also a writing by
      the Protestant pastor, Empaytaz, _Notice sur Alexandre, Empereur de
      Russie_. Geneva, 1828.

  140 We have endeavored to elucidate this point of history, without
      having arrived at any definite result; we have some reason to
      believe that all which was known of the last days of the Emperor
      Alexander has not been made public. The notes which we had collected
      upon this subject would here be out of place.

  141 It was in consequence of this event that, not long afterwards,
      appeared the two works, respectively entitled _Persécutions et
      souffrances de l’Eglise Catholique en Russie_. Par un ancien
      Conseiller d’Etat en Russie (le Comte Arsène d’Harrer) Paris: Gaume,
      1842; and _Vicissitudes de l’Eglise Catholique des deux rites en
      Pologne et en Russie_. Par le P. Theiner, prêtre de l’Oratoire. The
      French edition of this last work appeared in 1842, preceded by a
      remarkable introduction from the pen of Count de Montalembert.
      Paris: Sagnier and Bray.

  142 Statute for the prevention and extirpation of offences against the
      faith, _Code_, etc., vol. xiv., ed. 1857, art. 97, p. 19.

  143 See _Description of the Country Clergy in Russia_ (Paris, Franck,
      1858); _The Russian Clergy_ (in Russian), Berlin, 1859; _Of the
      Organization of the Ecclesiastical Schools in Russia_ (in Russian),
      Leipsic, Wagner, 1863; _Of the Orthodox Clergy, Black and White, in
      Russia_ (in Russian), Leipsic, Wagner, 1866; the Père Gagarin on
      _The Russian Clergy_ (London, Burns & Oates, 1872); Eckardt, _Modern
      Russia_ (London, 1870), etc., etc.

  144 Schédo‐Ferroti, _La Tolérance et le Schisme Religieux en Russie_.
      Berlin: Behr, 1863, pp. 292, 293.

  145 _Id._, _ib._, p. 293.

  146 The reader will find in the _Réglement Ecclésiastique_, just brought
      out in Paris, the passage to which we allude (p. 192, note).

  147 _Schédo‐Ferroti_ (_op. cit._, pp. 328 and 318).

  148 During the last few years endeavors have been made to raise the
      _status_ of the Russian clergy, and although it remains
      fundamentally the same, the government has given proof of no less
      good will than intelligence in its endeavors. In fact, terrible
      reprisals are in store for the upper classes whenever the people
      shall have lost all faith.

  149 NOTE FROM THE AUTHOR.

      CURRAGH CHASE, ADARE, IRELAND, Nov. 24, 1874.

      REV. AND DEAR SIR: The public has taken recently such deserved
      interest in the _Memoir and Letters of Sara Coleridge_ that it has
      struck me that the last of the letters which I wrote to her before
      making my submission to the Catholic Church, in which I stated fully
      my reasons for taking that step, might be of use to many enquirers.

      Readers of Sara Coleridge’s _Letters_ have often asked me, “But
      where is your part of the correspondence?” They may perhaps be glad
      to read at least one of those letters, to which many of hers were
      replies.

      That letter I send you, with some preliminary remarks, this day, by
      book‐post. It is quite at your service, if you think it worth
      publishing in THE CATHOLIC WORLD....

      I remain very truly yours,
      AUBREY DE VERE.

  150 This statement is ambiguous. There are doubtless many persons, who
      have been brought up Catholics, who have never formally renounced
      the Catholic profession, and who are ready to declare their belief
      of many Catholic doctrines, but who doubt or disbelieve some one or
      more articles of faith, and have ceased to give unreserved
      allegiance to the authority of the church. Such persons have lost
      faith, and are not really Catholics, though they may call themselves
      by the name, and still enjoy some of the rights of members of the
      church. But every baptized member of the church has, at least, the
      habit of faith, if he has not destroyed it by a contrary act,
      _i.e._, by a formal sin against faith.—ED. C. W.

  151 _Lehrbuch der Universalgeschichte_, von Dr H. Leo, 3d edit., vol. i.
      pp. 13, 14.

  152 As a case in point, we may cite the law of the Pontifical States,
      which leaves the regulation of marriage among Jews to their own
      synagogue.

  153 O Virgin Mother, daughter of thy Son!

  154 _Following of Christ_, book iii. chap. v.

  155 _The History of New South Wales._ With an account of Van Diemen’s
      Land, New Zealand, Port Phillip, Moreton Bay, and other Australasian
      settlements. By Roderick Flanagan. 2 vols. London: Sampson Low.
      1862.

      _Reminiscences of Thirty Years’ Residence in New South Wales and
      Victoria._ With a supplementary chapter on transportation and the
      ticket‐of‐leave system. By R. Therry, Esq., late one of the judges
      of the Supreme Court of New South Wales. London: Sampson Low. 1863.

  156 See THE CATHOLIC WORLD for March, 1874, p. 828.

  157 See THE CATHOLIC WORLD for March, 1874, p. 831.

  158 By a strange irony of fate the same grotesque coat he had worn on
      the feast of the _Etre Suprême_ exactly six weeks before!

  159 Shea.

  160 _Narrative of Father Memôré._

  161 With regard to the Anglican clergy, it may be observed that the
      state church of England is almost entirely for the benefit of the
      aristocracy, which sees its younger sons enter her “orders” all the
      more gladly because their subsistence is thus provided for without
      the patrimony of the head of the family being much diminished—the
      children of the aristocracy thus aiding to maintain an institution
      to which in a great measure its influence is owing. As to the German
      Protestant clergy, they are neither so influential nor so respected
      as the Anglican.

  162 “Sir Galahad.”

  163 Martinet, _L’Emmanuel, ou le remède à tous nos maux_. Paris;
      Lecoffre. 1850.

  164 _Schédo‐Ferroti, op. cit._ ch. xv. p. 293.

  165 It is not without reason that we insist upon this circumstance of
      being _in contact with the people_. If indeed the Russian Church
      were to unite herself to the Catholic Church, and the latter,
      following the toleration granted to the united Greeks, allowed the
      secular Russian clergy liberty to marry, the inconveniences we have
      noticed would be less felt, for the reason that, besides the fact
      that the Catholic Church would merely _permit_—never, either
      directly or indirectly, _compel_—priests to marry, there would
      always be a regular and celibate clergy side by side with the
      secular and married priests, and equally with them in contact with
      the people.

      However, the barrenness in apostolic labors, and the inferior
      condition of all the Christian communities of Oriental rite among
      whom a married priesthood is permitted, oblige us to recognize in
      this permission a simple concession to human frailty; and their
      condition is a powerful argument in favor of the immense advantages,
      if not of the moral necessity, of ecclesiastical celibacy.

  166 Tennyson, _Poetical Works_, “Sir Galahad.”

  167 _Schédo‐Ferroti, op. cit._ p. 293.

  168 _Schédo‐Ferroti_, _op. cit._ pp. 295, 296.

  169 There are times, in the history of nations, when the moral necessity
      of certain institutions in the Catholic Church makes itself felt,
      even by the most incredulous. It is in Germany, as is well known,
      that the ecclesiastical law of the celibacy of priests has been most
      eagerly attacked; and it is from Germany that has come to us the
      most splendid apology for the firmness displayed by the Catholic
      Church with regard to this point of discipline. Those priests who
      are at this moment so valiantly wrestling against persecution and
      braving the loss of income, braving fines, prison, exile, and death
      itself—can one suppose they would be equally intrepid, did the
      existence of a wife and family depend upon their own?

  170 We shall be excused from considering as an universal history of the
      Orthodox Church certain little manuals which we have found indicated
      in the catalogues of Russian bibliography. Besides, it is not only
      of Russia, but of all the countries of the Orthodox communion, that
      we ask for one single ecclesiastical history like those of Fleury,
      Rohrbacher, Henrion, the Abbé Darras, etc. (to quote French names
      only.) The Εκκλησιαστικὴ Ἱστορία (_Ecclesiastical History_) of Mgr.
      Mcletius, Metropolitan of Athens (Vienna, 1783‐95), cannot certainly
      be compared to them.

  171 Voltaire, _Histoire de Pierre le Grand_, part ii. ch. xiv.

  172 In the greater part of the country‐places the popes have not been in
      any seminary at all. They have been taught to read and write, to
      make themselves acquainted with the ceremonies of the church and the
      regulations of the czars, and then they have been ordained priests.

  173 Mgr. Eugenius, _Historical Dictionary of the Ecclesiastical Writers
      of the Græco‐Russian Church who have lived in Russia_. (In Russian)
      St. Petersburg, 2d. ed., 1827.

  174 We are so far from objecting to the exercise of censure upon
      writings which treat upon religious matters that, in a note to the
      _Réglement Ecclésiastique_ (p. 178), we in some sort express a
      desire for it, even with regard to what is uttered in the pulpit.
      Only we require as a condition that this censure should be exercised
      by a _competent authority_. Now, in Russia it is no longer the
      bishops, but the state, which, not as protector, but as lord and
      master of the church, rules and measures the manifestation of
      religious thought. It is against this illegitimate censure that we
      contend. Very far removed is the sentiment which bows its head
      before the religious autocracy of the czars from the submission of
      the Catholic, who bows before the church _because he owns in her a
      divine authority_. The submission of the Catholic is that which is
      due to the truth and to God. It elevates and ennobles.

  175 We could mention cases in which the pope who wishes to speak to his
      bishop must fall on his knees at the door, even, of the room, and
      drag himself along thus to the prelate, to whom he must only speak
      kneeling.

  176 _Statuti Generali ed altri documenti dei Framassoni pubblicati per
      la prima volta con note dichiarative._ Roma: 1874.

      _Rituali Massonici del primo e del trentesimo grado detti di
      Apprendista e di Cavaliere Kadosh, per la prima volta pubblicati e
      commentati._ Roma: 1874.

  177 The French Reformers were reproached for inserting this article, but
      it is found in the statutes of the Scottish Rite printed at Naples,
      the centre of Italian orthodoxy. Perhaps it was left an innocuous
      relic of bygone servitude, when royal Freemasons insisted on
      fettering the craft with this clause. But its value was as well
      understood then as now.

  178 It is also explained, but not at this stage, that the invocation of
      S. John as patron of the lodges is a deception, _Janus_ being the
      real protector.

  179 A living member of the French Academy, famous for his anti‐Christian
      writings, on his admission to this grade, struck the Pontifical mask
      with such violence that the poniard broke and wounded his hand,
      which he carried bandaged for some time after.

  180 Eugénie de la Ferronays.

  181 October, 1873, p. 707.

  182 See the _Elements of Molecular Mechanics_, p. 147.

  183 THE CATHOLIC WORLD, October, 1874, p. 1.

  184 THE CATHOLIC WORLD for September, 1874. p. 729. Mr. Stallo might
      also see the _Elements of Molecular Mechanics_, book vi., on the
      constitution of molecules.

  185 See THE CATHOLIC WORLD, March, 1874, p. 757. Also, August, 1874, p.
      644 et seq.

  186 See THE CATHOLIC WORLD, March, 1874, pp. 764, 765.

  187 _Leisure: Its Moral and Political Economy._ By Severn Teackle
      Wallis. Baltimore: Printed by John Murphy & Co.

  188 A fact.

  189 At the incorporation of the Uniates of Lithuania into the Orthodox
      Church, under the Emperor Nicholas, the Synod of St. Petersburg
      declared in its celebrated decree of March 5, 1839, as follows: “The
      solemn confession expressed in the synodal act (of the apostate
      bishops), that the Lord God our Saviour Jesus Christ is alone the
      true Head of the only and true church, and the promise of dwelling
      in unanimity with the most holy orthodox patriarchs of the East, and
      with the most holy Synod, _leaves nothing more to require of the
      united Greek Church for the veritable and essential union of the
      faith_, and, for this reason, there remains nothing which can oppose
      itself to the hierarchical reunion” (_Persécutions et Souffrances_,
      etc., p. 118). Now, if there existed between the Catholic Church and
      the Russian Church a veritable doctrinal disagreement with regard to
      the Procession of the Holy Ghost, the Synod of St. Petersburg, in
      not requiring of the apostate bishops any retractation on this
      point, would have been guilty of an inconceivable compromise of the
      faith. We leave to orthodox Russians the task of defending it.

      It has been stated also that there is a disagreement between us and
      the Russians on the subject of purgatory. We here give what we find
      in the catechism of the late Mgr. Philarete, in use in the schools.
      We make use of the French translation, which appeared in Paris, with
      the concurrence of the Russian government and the Synod.

      Q. “What remark remains to be made respecting the souls of those who
      have died in the faith, but whose repentance has not had time to
      bear fruit?

      A. “That, to obtain for them a happy resurrection, the prayers of
      those who are yet on this earth may be to them a great assistance,
      especially when joined to the unbloody sacrifice of the Mass and to
      the works of mercy, done in faith and in memory of the departed”
      (_Catéchisme détaille de l’Eglise Catholique orthodoxe d’Orient,
      examiné et approuvé par le Saint Synode de Russie._ Paris:
      Klinsiock, 1851. On the eleventh article [of the Nicene Creed], p.
      89).

  190 Ανατολικὴ Ομολογία τῆς χριστιανικῆς πίστεως. The first edition
      appeared in Latin, at Geneva, in 1629; the second, four years later,
      in Greek and Latin. The _Confession_ of Cyril‐Lucar was inserted by
      Kimmel in his work _Libri Symbolici Ecclesiæ Orientalis_. Jenæ,
      1843. (Second ed. under the title of _Monumenta Fidei Ecclesiæ
      Orientalis_. Jenæ, 1850.)

  191 The title of this tract is, _Protestantism and Churches in the
      East_. The cause of its appearance was the pretension of the Church
      of England—which, not without analogy with the Russian Church,
      recognized the sovereign of the country as its head, after Jesus
      Christ—in giving to the East a bishop invested by a mandate of Queen
      Victoria, with a jurisdiction embracing the whole of Syria, Chaldæa,
      Egypt, and Abyssinia. Finally, its object is to examine the formula,
      “No peace with Rome, but union and agreement _at any price_ with the
      Syrians, the Abyssinians, and the _Greeks_,” and to prove the
      absolute impossibility of the Anglican and the Orthodox Churches
      being able honestly to agree together in point of doctrine.

      If it be true that, in consequence of the marriage of the Duke of
      Edinburgh, a great sympathy with the Anglican Church has taken
      possession of the aristocracy of St. Petersburg, No. 42 of the
      _Tracts for the Times_ ought to be reprinted in English, translated
      and printed in Russian, and widely disseminated in the two
      languages. It is the honesty itself of the two churches which is at
      stake.

  192 The reader will not take it amiss if he should find here several
      points already developed in our former essay, _The Pope of Rome and
      the Popes of the Oriental Orthodox Church._ (London: Longmans,
      1871.) It is almost impossible, in touching upon the same subject,
      entirely to avoid repetition; and, besides, there are certain ideas
      which require to be put forward pretty frequently, if they are
      sufficiently to arrest public attention.

      Well, then, there is one idea, which we would willingly call the
      “providential idea” of the times, of so decisive a tendency does it
      appear to us for hastening the end of the schism and the return of
      the Græco‐Russian Church to Catholic unity. It is the idea to which
      we now return, and which forms the subject of the entire third
      chapter of the essay just mentioned. We live in a century of
      revolutions; now, whilst the Catholic Church, in presence of the
      general overturning of thrones, dynasties and political
      constitutions, only strengthens, with her marvellous unity, the
      powers of her government, the Orthodox Eastern Church is given up
      defenceless to all the chances of political revolutions, and
      condemned, in her various branches, to submit to the form of
      government which these revolutions impose upon her. This fact alone
      is of a nature to lead back a goodly number of our separated
      brethren. We have not here to discuss lofty and abstract matters; we
      have to reflect whether Jesus Christ could thus have given up his
      church to the mercy of political revolutions. The man of the people,
      the illiterate, the workman, whose every moment is precious because
      he must live by the labor of his hands, can decide this question as
      easily as the theologian, the philosopher, and the statesman. It is
      a reflection which requires neither study nor any form of reasoning,
      nor even time; it is an argument self‐evident to all—the “popular
      argument,” which must decide between the Catholic Church and the
      Orthodox Eastern Communion.

      After this our repetitions will be treated with indulgence, as will
      also our inability to make any promise not to recur, even more than
      once, to this same subject—in short, our desire will be found
      legitimate that the _religious press of every country_ should make
      the idea which we have just expressed its own; that it should
      develop and popularize it, and make it really “the providential idea
      of the times.”

  193 This patriarch was afterwards deposed _on account of his refusal to
      sign the declaration of the council_, and the Sublime Porte was
      obliged to nominate a successor.

  194 Scarcely was the Patriarch of Jerusalem, Cyril, arrested and
      imprisoned, before Russia began to take reprisals against the Greek
      Church.

  195 Expression of the manifesto of the Synod of St. Petersburg, _On the
      Reunion of the Uniates with the Orthodox Church in the Russian
      Empire, printed by order of the Most Holy Synod of St. Petersburg_.
      Synodal Press, 1839. See _Persécutions et Souffrances_, etc., pp.
      157‐166.

  196 From what we have been able to ascertain, the conduct of the Russian
      Church upon this point is not so invariably uniform as to make it
      impossible to quote some exceptions to what we have just mentioned.
      It is very certain, however, that these exceptions do not regard
      great personages, who are always dispensed from submitting to
      baptism by immersion. To mention a recent example: the Princess
      Dagmar was admitted into the Russian Church without being required
      to receive a second baptism. The same thing was done in the last
      century. Voltaire having shown himself persuaded that the Russian
      Church baptized Protestants, baptized by infusion, was reproved by
      Catherine II. in the following terms: “As head of the Greek Church,
      I cannot honestly leave you unrebuked in your error. The Greek
      Church does not rebaptize at all. The Grand Duchess, etc.” (Vide
      _Kegl. Eccles._, p. 86, _note_.) What Catherine here calls the Greek
      Church is the Russian. Besides, Catherine herself had been received
      into the Russian Church without being rebaptized, and it was of this
      example that William Frederick Lütiens, the Lutheran author of the
      _Dissertatio de Religione Ruthenorum Hodierna_, did not fail to
      avail himself, in maintaining that upon this point also the Russians
      were in agreement with the Lutherans. “If the Russians of former
      days” (_Rutheni veteres_), writes Lütiens, “did not recognize as
      valid the baptism (by infusion) of our church, it cannot be
      attributed solely to their belief in the necessity of their
      ceremonies, but also to the hatred which, from the calumnies of the
      Romanists, they nourished against our Lutheran Church ...”
      (_Dissert._, etc., pp. 86, 7).

      Besides, we find the following in the _Russian Clergy_ of Father
      Gagarin: “The _Ecclesiastical Talk_ (Doukhovnaia Beseda) of Sept.
      17, 1866, was seeking for a means of reconciling on this point the
      Greek and Russian Churches. Nothing is stranger than the idea it has
      entertained. If we are to believe the _Ecclesiastical Talk_, the
      Greek Church fully admits the validity of baptism otherwise than by
      immersion, but has been obliged to exact a new baptism from those
      Latins seeking admission into her bosom, _in order to draw a deeper
      line of demarcation between Greeks and Latins, from fear of a
      reconciliation_, and to this end has attempted nothing less than _to
      make the Greeks believe_ that the Latins were not Christians. We
      should never dare to attribute to the Greek Church such a
      proceeding. Lying, calumny, profanation of a sacrament that cannot
      be repeated—all this, according to the _Ecclesiastical Talk_, the
      Greek Church would knowingly and willingly do! Reading this, we
      cannot believe our eyes. And this journal is published by the
      Ecclesiastical Academy of St. Petersburg, under the eye and with the
      approbation of the Synod!” (_The Russian Clergy, translated from the
      French of Father Gagarin, S.J._, by Ch. Du Gard Makepeace, M.A.
      London: Burns and Oates, 1872; p. 272.)

  197 The Council of Constantinople of 1872 has been acknowledged by one
      portion of the Orthodox Church, and rejected by the other. The
      church of the Hellenic kingdom maintains the authority of the
      council; a portion of the Russian Church rejects it. The Orthodox
      Church is thus divided into two camps; and, according to the tenor
      of the acts of the Council of 1872, all that portion of the Russian
      Church which does not admit the authority of the council is,
      therefore, at this present time excommunicate.

  198 _Confessio Orthodoxa Fidei, Catholicæ et Apostolicæ Ecclesiæ
      Orientalis._ Quæst. lxxxiii. in Kimmel’s work, _Libri Symbolici
      Ecclesiæ Orientalis_, p. 153.

  199 _Catéchisme Détaillé._ On the ninth article, p. 95.

  200 It is thus that Anthimus, the Patriarch of Constantinople, expressed
      himself in a document concerning the independence of the Orthodox
      Church of the Hellenic kingdom. See _The Pope of Rome_, etc., p.
      142. French ed., p. 227.

  201 Message of Marshal MacMahon to the French Assembly.

  202 Letter to M. Stoffels, Nov. 30, 1841 (_Memoir and Remains of Alexis
      de Tocqueville_).

  203 Letter to Stoffels, July 21, 1848.

  204 Mr. Senior’s _Journal_, April 26, 1858.

  205 _Doc. Hist. N. Y._, v. i. p. 158.

  206 McGee’s _Cath. Hist. America_.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CATHOLIC WORLD, VOL. 20, OCTOBER 1874‐MARCH 1875***



CREDITS


November 20, 2017

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at <http://www.pgdp.net/>. (This
            file was produced from images generously made available by The
            Internet Archive.)



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 56022‐0.txt or 56022‐0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/6/0/2/56022/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law
means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the
Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States
without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect
the Project Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a
registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the ebooks,
unless you receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this ebook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use
this ebook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works,
reports, performances and research. They may be modified and printed and
given away — you may do practically _anything_ in the United States with
ebooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to
the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works
based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are
removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™
mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing
Project Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement
for keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States
    and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
    restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re‐use
    it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with
    this ebook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org. If you are not
    located in the United States, you’ll have to check the laws of the
    country where you are located before using this ebook.


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from texts
not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating
that it is posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can
be copied and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying
any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a
work with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on
the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    – You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

    – You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e‐mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

    – You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    – You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The Project Gutenberg Trademark
LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation
as set forth in Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not
protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg™
collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works,
and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such
as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data,
transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property
infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer
virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS‐IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle‐aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64‐6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business
office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801)
596‐1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date
contact information can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official
page at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep
ebooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each ebook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the ebook’s ebook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our ebooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new ebooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new ebooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new ebooks.






***FINIS***
