CHAPTER IV

THE MANIFESTATION OF THE LIFE PRINCIPLE


We must bear in mind that what we have now reached is a principle, or
universal potential, only we have located it in the individual. But a
principle, as such, is not manifestation. Manifestation is the growth
proceeding _from_ the principle, that is to say, some Form in which the
principle becomes active. At the same time we must recollect that, though a
form is necessary for manifestation, _the_ form is not essential, for the
same principle may manifest through various forms, just as electricity may
work either through a lamp or a tram-car without in any way changing its
inherent nature. In this way we are brought to the conclusion that the
Life-principle must always provide itself with a body in which to function,
though it does not follow that this body must always be of the same
chemical constitution as the one we now possess. We might well imagine some
distant planet where the chemical combinations with which we are familiar
on earth did not obtain; but if the essential life-principle of any
individual were transported thither, then by the Law of the Creative
Process it would proceed to clothe itself with a material body drawn from
the atmosphere and substance of that planet; and the personality thus
produced would be quite at home there, for all his surroundings would be
perfectly natural to him, however different the laws of Nature might be
there from what we know here.

In such a conception as this we find the importance of the two leading
principles to which I have drawn attention--first, the power of the Spirit
to create _ex nihilo_, and secondly, the individual's recognition of the
basic principle of Unity giving permanence and solidity to the frame of
Nature. By the former the self-recognizing life-principle could produce any
sort of body it chose; and by the latter it would be led to project one in
harmony with the natural order of the particular planet, thus making all
the facts of that order solid realities to the individual, and himself a
solid and natural being to the other inhabitants of that world. But this
would not do away with the individual's knowledge of how he got there; and
so, supposing him to have realized his identity with the Universal
Life-Principle sufficiently to consciously control the projection of his
own body, he could at will disintegrate the body which accorded with the
conditions of one planet and constitute one which accorded just as
harmoniously with those of another, and could thus function on any number
of planets as a perfectly natural being on each of them. He would in all
respects resemble the other inhabitants with one all-important exception,
that since he had attained to unity with his Creative Principle he would
not be tied by the laws of matter as they were.

Any one who should attain to such a power could only do so by his
realization of the all-embracing Unity of the Spirit as being the
Foundation of all things; and this being the basis of his own extended
powers he would be the last to controvert his own basic principle by
employing his powers in such a way as to disturb the natural course of
evolution in the world where he was. He might use them to help forward the
evolution of others in that world, but certainly never to disturb it, for
he would always act on the maxim that "Order is Heaven's First Law."

Our object, however, is not to transfer ourselves to other planets but to
get the best out of this one; but we shall not get the best out of this one
until we realize that the power which will enable us to do so is so
absolutely universal and fundamental that its application in this world is
precisely the same as in any other, and that is why I have stated it as a
general proposition applicable to all worlds.

The principle being thus universal there is no reason why we should
postpone its application till we find ourselves in another world, and the
best place and time to begin are Here and Now. The starting point is not in
time or locality, but in the mode of Thought; and if we realize that this
Point of Origination is Spirit's power to produce something out of nothing,
and that it does this in accordance with the natural order of substance of
the particular world in which it is working, then the spiritual ego in
ourselves, as proceeding direct from the Universal Spirit, should be able
first, to so harmoniously combine the working of spiritual and physical
laws in its own body as to keep it in perfect health, secondly to carry
this process further and renew the body, thus eradicating the effects of
old age, and thirdly to carry the process still further and perpetuate this
renewed body as long as the individual might desire.

If the student shows this to one of his average acquaintances who has never
given any thought to these things, his friend will undoubtedly exclaim
"Tommy rot!" even if he does not use a stronger expletive. He will at once
appeal to the past experience of all mankind, his argument being that what
has not been in the past cannot be in the future; yet he does not apply the
same argument to aeronautics and is quite oblivious of the fact that the
Sacred Volume which he reverences contains promises of these very things.
The really earnest student must never forget the maxim that "Principle is
not bound by Precedent"--if it were we should still be primitive savages.

To use the Creative Process we must Affirm the Creative Power, that is to
say, we must go back to the Beginning of the series and start with Pure
Spirit, only remembering that this starting-point is now to be found _in
ourselves_, for this is what distinguishes the individual Creative Process
from the cosmic one. This is where the importance of realizing only ONE
Originating Power instead of two interacting powers comes in, for it means
that we do not derive our power from any existing polarity, but that we are
going to establish polarities which will start secondary causation on the
lines which we thus determine. This also is where the importance comes in
of recognizing that the only possible originating movement of spirit must
be Self-contemplation, for this shows us that we do not have to contemplate
existing conditions but the Divine Ideal, and that this contemplation of
the Divine Ideal of Man is the Self-contemplation of the Spirit from the
standpoint of Human Individuality.

Then the question arises, if these principles are true, why are we not
demonstrating them? Well, when our fundamental principle is obviously
correct and yet we do not get the proper results, the only inference is
that somewhere or other we have introduced something antagonistic to the
fundamental principle, something not inherent in the principle itself and
which therefore owes its presence to some action of our own. Now the error
consists in the belief that the Creative Power is limited by the material
in which it works. If this be assumed, then you have to calculate the
resistances offered by the material; and since by the terms of the Creative
Process these resistances do not really exist, you have no basis of
calculation at all--in fact you have no means of knowing where you are, and
everything is in confusion. This is why it is so important to remember that
the Creative Process is the action of a Single Power, and that the
interaction of two opposite polarities comes in at a later stage, and is
not creative, but only distributive--that is to say, it localizes the
Energy already proceeding from the Single Power. This is a fundamental
truth which should never be lost sight of. So long, however, as we fail to
see this truth we necessarily limit the Creative Power by the material it
works in, and in practise we do this by referring to past experience as the
only standard of judgment. We are measuring the Fifth Kingdom by the
standard of the Fourth, as though we should say that an intellectual man, a
being of the Fourth Kingdom, was to be limited by the conditions which
obtain in the First or Mineral Kingdom--to use Scriptural language we are
seeking the Living among the dead.

And moreover at the present time a new order of experience is beginning to
open out to us, for well authenticated instances of the cure of disease by
the invisible power of the Spirit are steadily increasing in number. The
facts are now too patent to be denied--what we want is a better knowledge
of the power which accounts for them. And if this beginning is now with us,
by what reason can we limit it? The difference between the healing of
disease and the renewal of the entire organism and the perpetuation of life
is only a difference of degree and not of kind; so that the actual
experience of increasing numbers shows the working of a principle to which
we can logically set no limits.

If we get the steps of the Creative Process clearly into our minds we shall
see why we have hitherto had such small results.

    Spirit creates by Self-contemplation;
    Therefore, What it contemplates itself
      as being, that it becomes.
    You are individualized Spirit;
    Therefore, What you contemplate as
    the Law of your being becomes the
    Law of your being.

Hence, contemplate a Law of Death arising out of the Forces of the Material
reacting against the Power of the Spirit and overcoming it, and you impress
this mode of self-recognition upon Spirit in yourself. Of course you cannot
alter its inherent nature, but you cause it to work under negative
conditions and thus make it produce negative results so far as you yourself
are concerned.

But reverse the process, and contemplate a Law of Life as inherent in the
very Being of the Spirit, and therefore as inherent in spirit in yourself;
and contemplate the forces of the Material as practically non-existent in
the Creative Process, because they are products of it and not causes--look
at things in this way and you will impress a corresponding conception upon
the Spirit which, by the Law of Reciprocity, thus enters into
Self-contemplation on _these_ lines from the standpoint of your own
individuality; and then by the nature of the Creative Process a
corresponding externalization is bound to take place. Thus our initial
question, How did anything come into existence at all, brings us to the
recognition of a Law of Life which we may each specialize for ourselves;
and in the degree to which we specialize it we shall find the Creative
Principle at work within us building up a healthier and happier personality
in mind, body, and circumstances.

Only we must learn to distinguish the vehicles of Spirit from Spirit
itself, for the distinction has very important bearings. What distinguishes
the vehicles from the Spirit is the Law of Growth. The Spirit is the
Formless principle of Life, and the vehicle is a Form in which this
principle functions. Now the vehicle is a projection by the Spirit of
substance coordinate with the natural order of the plane on which the
vehicle functions, and therefore requires to be built up comformably to
that order. This building up is what we speak of as Growth; and since the
principle which causes the growth is the individualized Spirit, the rate at
which the growth will go on will depend on the amount of vitalizing energy
the Spirit puts into it, and the amount of vitalizing energy will depend on
the degree in which the individualized Spirit appreciates its own
livingness, and finally the degree of this appreciation will depend on the
quality of the individual's perception of the Great All-originating Spirit
as reflecting itself in him and thus making his contemplation of It nothing
else than the Creative Self-contemplation of the Spirit proceeding from an
individual and personal center. We must therefore not omit the Law of
Growth in the vehicle from our conception of the working of the Spirit. As
a matter of fact the vehicle has nothing to say in the matter for it is
simply a projection from the Spirit; but for this very reason its formation
will be slow or rapid in exact proportion to the individual spirit's
vitalizing conception. We could imagine a degree of vitalizing conception
that would produce the corresponding form instantaneously, but at present
we must allow for the weakness of our spiritual power--not as thinking it
by any means incapable of accomplishing its object, but as being far slower
in operation now than we hope to see it in the future--and so we must not
allow ourselves to be discouraged, but must hold our thought knowing that
it is doing its creative work, and that the corresponding growth is slowly
but surely taking place--thus following the Divine precept that men ought
always to pray and not to faint. Gradually as we gain experience on these
new lines our confidence in the power of the Spirit will increase, and we
shall be less inclined to argue from the negative side of things, and thus
the hindrances to the inflow of the Originating Spirit will be more and
more removed, and greater and greater results will be obtained.

If we would have our minds clear on this subject of Manifestation we should
remember its threefold nature:--First the General Life-Principle, secondly
the Localization of this principle in the Individual, and thirdly the
Growth of the Vehicle as it is projected by the individualized spirit with
more or less energy. It is a sequence of progressive condensation from the
Undifferentiated Universal Spirit to the ultimate and outermost vehicle--a
truth enshrined in the esoteric maxim that "Matter is Spirit at its lowest
level."

The forms thus produced are in true accord with the general order of Nature
on the particular plane where they occur, and are therefore perfectly
different from forms temporarily consolidated out of material drawn from
other living organisms. These latter phantasmal bodies are held together
only by an act of concentrated volition, and can therefore only be
maintained for a short time and with effort; while the body which the
individualized spirit, or ego, builds for itself is produced by a perfectly
natural process and does not require any effort to sustain it, since it is
kept in touch with the whole system of the planet by the continuous and
effortless action of the individual's sub-conscious mind.

This is where the action of sub-conscious mind as the builder of the body
comes in. Sub-conscious mind acts in accordance with the aggregate of
suggestion impressed upon it by the conscious mind, and if this suggestion
is that of perfect harmony with the physical laws of the planet then a
corresponding building by the sub-conscious mind will take place, a process
which, so far from implying any effort, consists rather in a restful sense
of unity with Nature.[4]

And if to this sense of union with the Soul of Nature, that Universal
Sub-conscious Mind which holds in the cosmos the same place that the
sub-conscious mind does in ourselves--if to this there be superadded a
sense of union with the All-creating Spirit from which the Soul of Nature
flows, then through the medium of the individual's sub-conscious mind such
specialized effects can be produced in his body as to transcend our past
experiences without in any way violating the order of the universe. The Old
Law was the manifestation of the Principle of Life working under
constricted conditions: the New Law is the manifestation of the same
Principle working under expanding conditions. Thus it is that though God
never changes we are said to "increase with the increase of God."





