Chapter XVI.
IN WHICH M. SÉGUIER, KEEPER OF THE SEALS, LOOKS MORE THAN ONCE FOR THE
BELL


It is impossible to form an idea of the impression these few words made
upon Louis XIII. He grew pale and red alternately; and the cardinal saw
at once that he had recovered by a single blow all the ground he had
lost.

“Buckingham in Paris!” cried he, “and why does he come?”

“To conspire, no doubt, with your enemies, the Huguenots and the
Spaniards.”

“No, _pardieu_, no! To conspire against my honor with Madame de
Chevreuse, Madame de Longueville, and the Condés.”

“Oh, sire, what an idea! The queen is too virtuous; and besides, loves
your Majesty too well.”

“Woman is weak, Monsieur Cardinal,” said the king; “and as to loving me
much, I have my own opinion as to that love.”

“I not the less maintain,” said the cardinal, “that the Duke of
Buckingham came to Paris for a project wholly political.”

“And I am sure that he came for quite another purpose, Monsieur
Cardinal; but if the queen be guilty, let her tremble!”

“Indeed,” said the cardinal, “whatever repugnance I may have to
directing my mind to such a treason, your Majesty compels me to think
of it. Madame de Lannoy, whom, according to your Majesty’s command, I
have frequently interrogated, told me this morning that the night
before last her Majesty sat up very late, that this morning she wept
much, and that she was writing all day.”

“That’s it!” cried the king; “to him, no doubt. Cardinal, I must have
the queen’s papers.”

“But how to take them, sire? It seems to me that it is neither your
Majesty nor myself who can charge himself with such a mission.”

“How did they act with regard to the Maréchale d’Ancre?” cried the
king, in the highest state of choler; “first her closets were
thoroughly searched, and then she herself.”

“The Maréchale d’Ancre was no more than the Maréchale d’Ancre. A
Florentine adventurer, sire, and that was all; while the august spouse
of your Majesty is Anne of Austria, Queen of France—that is to say, one
of the greatest princesses in the world.”

“She is not the less guilty, Monsieur Duke! The more she has forgotten
the high position in which she was placed, the more degrading is her
fall. Besides, I long ago determined to put an end to all these petty
intrigues of policy and love. She has near her a certain Laporte.”

“Who, I believe, is the mainspring of all this, I confess,” said the
cardinal.

“You think then, as I do, that she deceives me?” said the king.

“I believe, and I repeat it to your Majesty, that the queen conspires
against the power of the king, but I have not said against his honor.”

“And I—I tell you against both. I tell you the queen does not love me;
I tell you she loves another; I tell you she loves that infamous
Buckingham! Why did you not have him arrested while in Paris?”

“Arrest the Duke! Arrest the prime minister of King Charles I.! Think
of it, sire! What a scandal! And if the suspicions of your Majesty,
which I still continue to doubt, should prove to have any foundation,
what a terrible disclosure, what a fearful scandal!”

“But as he exposed himself like a vagabond or a thief, he should have
been—”

Louis XIII. stopped, terrified at what he was about to say, while
Richelieu, stretching out his neck, waited uselessly for the word which
had died on the lips of the king.

“He should have been—?”

“Nothing,” said the king, “nothing. But all the time he was in Paris,
you, of course, did not lose sight of him?”

“No, sire.”

“Where did he lodge?”

“Rue de la Harpe. No. 75.”

“Where is that?”

“By the side of the Luxembourg.”

“And you are certain that the queen and he did not see each other?”

“I believe the queen to have too high a sense of her duty, sire.”

“But they have corresponded; it is to him that the queen has been
writing all the day. Monsieur Duke, I must have those letters!”

“Sire, notwithstanding—”

“Monsieur Duke, at whatever price it may be, I will have them.”

“I would, however, beg your Majesty to observe—”

“Do you, then, also join in betraying me, Monsieur Cardinal, by thus
always opposing my will? Are you also in accord with Spain and England,
with Madame de Chevreuse and the queen?”

“Sire,” replied the cardinal, sighing, “I believed myself secure from
such a suspicion.”

“Monsieur Cardinal, you have heard me; I will have those letters.”

“There is but one way.”

“What is that?”

“That would be to charge Monsieur de Séguier, the keeper of the seals,
with this mission. The matter enters completely into the duties of the
post.”

“Let him be sent for instantly.”

“He is most likely at my hôtel. I requested him to call, and when I
came to the Louvre I left orders if he came, to desire him to wait.”

“Let him be sent for instantly.”

“Your Majesty’s orders shall be executed; but—”

“But what?”

“But the queen will perhaps refuse to obey.”

“My orders?”

“Yes, if she is ignorant that these orders come from the king.”

“Well, that she may have no doubt on that head, I will go and inform
her myself.”

“Your Majesty will not forget that I have done everything in my power
to prevent a rupture.”

“Yes, Duke, yes, I know you are very indulgent toward the queen, too
indulgent, perhaps; we shall have occasion, I warn you, at some future
period to speak of that.”

“Whenever it shall please your Majesty; but I shall be always happy and
proud, sire, to sacrifice myself to the harmony which I desire to see
reign between you and the Queen of France.”

“Very well, Cardinal, very well; but, meantime, send for Monsieur the
Keeper of the Seals. I will go to the queen.”

And Louis XIII., opening the door of communication, passed into the
corridor which led from his apartments to those of Anne of Austria.

The queen was in the midst of her women—Mme. de Guitaut, Mme. de Sable,
Mme. de Montbazon, and Mme. de Guémené. In a corner was the Spanish
companion, Donna Estafania, who had followed her from Madrid. Mme.
Guémené was reading aloud, and everybody was listening to her with
attention with the exception of the queen, who had, on the contrary,
desired this reading in order that she might be able, while feigning to
listen, to pursue the thread of her own thoughts.

These thoughts, gilded as they were by a last reflection of love, were
not the less sad. Anne of Austria, deprived of the confidence of her
husband, pursued by the hatred of the cardinal, who could not pardon
her for having repulsed a more tender feeling, having before her eyes
the example of the queen-mother whom that hatred had tormented all her
life—though Marie de Médicis, if the memoirs of the time are to be
believed, had begun by according to the cardinal that sentiment which
Anne of Austria always refused him—Anne of Austria had seen her most
devoted servants fall around her, her most intimate confidants, her
dearest favorites. Like those unfortunate persons endowed with a fatal
gift, she brought misfortune upon everything she touched. Her
friendship was a fatal sign which called down persecution. Mme. de
Chevreuse and Mme. de Bernet were exiled, and Laporte did not conceal
from his mistress that he expected to be arrested every instant.

It was at the moment when she was plunged in the deepest and darkest of
these reflections that the door of the chamber opened, and the king
entered.

The reader hushed herself instantly. All the ladies rose, and there was
a profound silence. As to the king, he made no demonstration of
politeness, only stopping before the queen. “Madame,” said he, “you are
about to receive a visit from the chancellor, who will communicate
certain matters to you with which I have charged him.”

The unfortunate queen, who was constantly threatened with divorce,
exile, and trial even, turned pale under her rouge, and could not
refrain from saying, “But why this visit, sire? What can the chancellor
have to say to me that your Majesty could not say yourself?”

The king turned upon his heel without reply, and almost at the same
instant the captain of the Guards, M. de Guitant, announced the visit
of the chancellor.

When the chancellor appeared, the king had already gone out by another
door.

The chancellor entered, half smiling, half blushing. As we shall
probably meet with him again in the course of our history, it may be
well for our readers to be made at once acquainted with him.

This chancellor was a pleasant man. He was Des Roches le Masle, canon
of Notre Dame, who had formerly been valet of a bishop, who introduced
him to his Eminence as a perfectly devout man. The cardinal trusted
him, and therein found his advantage.

There are many stories related of him, and among them this. After a
wild youth, he had retired into a convent, there to expiate, at least
for some time, the follies of adolescence. On entering this holy place,
the poor penitent was unable to shut the door so close as to prevent
the passions he fled from entering with him. He was incessantly
attacked by them, and the superior, to whom he had confided this
misfortune, wishing as much as in him lay to free him from them, had
advised him, in order to conjure away the tempting demon, to have
recourse to the bell rope, and ring with all his might. At the
denunciating sound, the monks would be rendered aware that temptation
was besieging a brother, and all the community would go to prayers.

This advice appeared good to the future chancellor. He conjured the
evil spirit with abundance of prayers offered up by the monks. But the
devil does not suffer himself to be easily dispossessed from a place in
which he has fixed his garrison. In proportion as they redoubled the
exorcisms he redoubled the temptations; so that day and night the bell
was ringing full swing, announcing the extreme desire for mortification
which the penitent experienced.

The monks had no longer an instant of repose. By day they did nothing
but ascend and descend the steps which led to the chapel; at night, in
addition to complines and matins, they were further obliged to leap
twenty times out of their beds and prostrate themselves on the floor of
their cells.

It is not known whether it was the devil who gave way, or the monks who
grew tired; but within three months the penitent reappeared in the
world with the reputation of being the most terrible _possessed_ that
ever existed.

On leaving the convent he entered into the magistracy, became president
on the place of his uncle, embraced the cardinal’s party, which did not
prove want of sagacity, became chancellor, served his Eminence with
zeal in his hatred against the queen-mother and his vengeance against
Anne of Austria, stimulated the judges in the affair of Calais,
encouraged the attempts of M. de Laffemas, chief gamekeeper of France;
then, at length, invested with the entire confidence of the cardinal—a
confidence which he had so well earned—he received the singular
commission for the execution of which he presented himself in the
queen’s apartments.

The queen was still standing when he entered; but scarcely had she
perceived him then she reseated herself in her armchair, and made a
sign to her women to resume their cushions and stools, and with an air
of supreme hauteur, said, “What do you desire, monsieur, and with what
object do you present yourself here?”

“To make, madame, in the name of the king, and without prejudice to the
respect which I have the honor to owe to your Majesty a close
examination into all your papers.”

“How, monsieur, an investigation of my papers—mine! Truly, this is an
indignity!”

“Be kind enough to pardon me, madame; but in this circumstance I am but
the instrument which the king employs. Has not his Majesty just left
you, and has he not himself asked you to prepare for this visit?”

“Search, then, monsieur! I am a criminal, as it appears. Estafania,
give up the keys of my drawers and my desks.”

For form’s sake the chancellor paid a visit to the pieces of furniture
named; but he well knew that it was not in a piece of furniture that
the queen would place the important letter she had written that day.

When the chancellor had opened and shut twenty times the drawers of the
secretaries, it became necessary, whatever hesitation he might
experience—it became necessary, I say, to come to the conclusion of the
affair; that is to say, to search the queen herself. The chancellor
advanced, therefore, toward Anne of Austria, and said with a very
perplexed and embarrassed air, “And now it remains for me to make the
principal examination.”

“What is that?” asked the queen, who did not understand, or rather was
not willing to understand.

“His majesty is certain that a letter has been written by you during
the day; he knows that it has not yet been sent to its address. This
