letter is not in your table nor in your secretary; and yet this letter
must be somewhere.”

“Would you dare to lift your hand to your queen?” said Anne of Austria,
drawing herself up to her full height, and fixing her eyes upon the
chancellor with an expression almost threatening.

“I am a faithful subject of the king, madame, and all that his Majesty
commands I shall do.”

“Well, it is true!” said Anne of Austria; “and the spies of the
cardinal have served him faithfully. I have written a letter today;
that letter is not yet gone. The letter is here.” And the queen laid
her beautiful hand on her bosom.

“Then give me that letter, madame,” said the chancellor.

“I will give it to none but the king, monsieur,” said Anne.

“If the king had desired that the letter should be given to him,
madame, he would have demanded it of you himself. But I repeat to you,
I am charged with reclaiming it; and if you do not give it up—”

“Well?”

“He has, then, charged me to take it from you.”

“How! What do you say?”

“That my orders go far, madame; and that I am authorized to seek for
the suspected paper, even on the person of your Majesty.”

“What horror!” cried the queen.

“Be kind enough, then, madame, to act more compliantly.”

“The conduct is infamously violent! Do you know that, monsieur?”

“The king commands it, madame; excuse me.”

“I will not suffer it! No, no, I would rather die!” cried the queen, in
whom the imperious blood of Spain and Austria began to rise.

The chancellor made a profound reverence. Then, with the intention
quite patent of not drawing back a foot from the accomplishment of the
commission with which he was charged, and as the attendant of an
executioner might have done in the chamber of torture, he approached
Anne of Austria, from whose eyes at the same instant sprang tears of
rage.

The queen was, as we have said, of great beauty. The commission might
well be called delicate; and the king had reached, in his jealousy of
Buckingham, the point of not being jealous of anyone else.

Without doubt the chancellor Séguier looked about at that moment for
the rope of the famous bell; but not finding it he summoned his
resolution, and stretched forth his hands toward the place where the
queen had acknowledged the paper was to be found.

Anne of Austria took one step backward, became so pale that it might be
said she was dying, and leaning with her left hand upon a table behind
her to keep herself from falling, she with her right hand drew the
paper from her bosom and held it out to the keeper of the seals.

“There, monsieur, there is that letter!” cried the queen, with a broken
and trembling voice; “take it, and deliver me from your odious
presence.”

The chancellor, who, on his part, trembled with an emotion easily to be
conceived, took the letter, bowed to the ground, and retired. The door
was scarcely closed upon him, when the queen sank, half fainting, into
the arms of her women.

The chancellor carried the letter to the king without having read a
single word of it. The king took it with a trembling hand, looked for
the address, which was wanting, became very pale, opened it slowly,
then seeing by the first words that it was addressed to the King of
Spain, he read it rapidly.

It was nothing but a plan of attack against the cardinal. The queen
pressed her brother and the Emperor of Austria to appear to be wounded,
as they really were, by the policy of Richelieu—the eternal object of
which was the abasement of the house of Austria—to declare war against
France, and as a condition of peace, to insist upon the dismissal of
the cardinal; but as to love, there was not a single word about it in
all the letter.

The king, quite delighted, inquired if the cardinal was still at the
Louvre; he was told that his Eminence awaited the orders of his Majesty
in the business cabinet.

The king went straight to him.

“There, Duke,” said he, “you were right and I was wrong. The whole
intrigue is political, and there is not the least question of love in
this letter; but, on the other hand, there is abundant question of
you.”

The cardinal took the letter, and read it with the greatest attention;
then, when he had arrived at the end of it, he read it a second time.
“Well, your Majesty,” said he, “you see how far my enemies go; they
menace you with two wars if you do not dismiss me. In your place, in
truth, sire, I should yield to such powerful instance; and on my part,
it would be a real happiness to withdraw from public affairs.”

“What say you, Duke?”

“I say, sire, that my health is sinking under these excessive struggles
and these never-ending labors. I say that according to all probability
I shall not be able to undergo the fatigues of the siege of La
Rochelle, and that it would be far better that you should appoint there
either Monsieur de Condé, Monsieur de Bassopierre, or some valiant
gentleman whose business is war, and not me, who am a churchman, and
who am constantly turned aside for my real vocation to look after
matters for which I have no aptitude. You would be the happier for it
at home, sire, and I do not doubt you would be the greater for it
abroad.”

“Monsieur Duke,” said the king, “I understand you. Be satisfied, all
who are named in that letter shall be punished as they deserve, even
the queen herself.”

“What do you say, sire? God forbid that the queen should suffer the
least inconvenience or uneasiness on my account! She has always
believed me, sire, to be her enemy; although your Majesty can bear
witness that I have always taken her part warmly, even against you. Oh,
if she betrayed your Majesty on the side of your honor, it would be
quite another thing, and I should be the first to say, ‘No grace,
sire—no grace for the guilty!’ Happily, there is nothing of the kind,
and your Majesty has just acquired a new proof of it.”

“That is true, Monsieur Cardinal,” said the king, “and you were right,
as you always are; but the queen, not the less, deserves all my anger.”

“It is you, sire, who have now incurred hers. And even if she were to
be seriously offended, I could well understand it; your Majesty has
treated her with a severity—”

“It is thus I will always treat my enemies and yours, Duke, however
high they may be placed, and whatever peril I may incur in acting
severely toward them.”

“The queen is my enemy, but is not yours, sire; on the contrary, she is
a devoted, submissive, and irreproachable wife. Allow me, then, sire,
to intercede for her with your Majesty.”

“Let her humble herself, then, and come to me first.”

“On the contrary, sire, set the example. You have committed the first
wrong, since it was you who suspected the queen.”

“What! I make the first advances?” said the king. “Never!”

“Sire, I entreat you to do so.”

“Besides, in what manner can I make advances first?”

“By doing a thing which you know will be agreeable to her.”

“What is that?”

“Give a ball; you know how much the queen loves dancing. I will answer
for it, her resentment will not hold out against such an attention.”

“Monsieur Cardinal, you know that I do not like worldly pleasures.”

“The queen will only be the more grateful to you, as she knows your
antipathy for that amusement; besides, it will be an opportunity for
her to wear those beautiful diamonds which you gave her recently on her
birthday and with which she has since had no occasion to adorn
herself.”

“We shall see, Monsieur Cardinal, we shall see,” said the king, who, in
his joy at finding the queen guilty of a crime which he cared little
about, and innocent of a fault of which he had great dread, was ready
to make up all differences with her, “we shall see, but upon my honor,
you are too indulgent toward her.”

“Sire,” said the cardinal, “leave severity to your ministers. Clemency
is a royal virtue; employ it, and you will find that you derive
advantage therein.”

Thereupon the cardinal, hearing the clock strike eleven, bowed low,
asking permission of the king to retire, and supplicating him to come
to a good understanding with the queen.

Anne of Austria, who, in consequence of the seizure of her letter,
expected reproaches, was much astonished the next day to see the king
make some attempts at reconciliation with her. Her first movement was
repellent. Her womanly pride and her queenly dignity had both been so
cruelly offended that she could not come round at the first advance;
but, overpersuaded by the advice of her women, she at last had the
appearance of beginning to forget. The king took advantage of this
favorable moment to tell her that he had the intention of shortly
giving a fête.

A fête was so rare a thing for poor Anne of Austria that at this
announcement, as the cardinal had predicted, the last trace of her
resentment disappeared, if not from her heart, at least from her
countenance. She asked upon what day this fête would take place, but
the king replied that he must consult the cardinal upon that head.

Indeed, every day the king asked the cardinal when this fête should
take place; and every day the cardinal, under some pretext, deferred
fixing it. Ten days passed away thus.

On the eighth day after the scene we have described, the cardinal
received a letter with the London stamp which only contained these
lines: “I have them; but I am unable to leave London for want of money.
Send me five hundred pistoles, and four or five days after I have
received them I shall be in Paris.”

On the same day the cardinal received this letter the king put his
customary question to him.

Richelieu counted on his fingers, and said to himself, “She will
arrive, she says, four or five days after having received the money. It
will require four or five days for the transmission of the money, four
or five days for her to return; that makes ten days. Now, allowing for
contrary winds, accidents, and a woman’s weakness, there are twelve
days.”

“Well, Monsieur Duke,” said the king, “have you made your
calculations?”

“Yes, sire. Today is the twentieth of September. The aldermen of the
city give a fête on the third of October. That will fall in wonderfully
well; you will not appear to have gone out of your way to please the
queen.”

Then the cardinal added, “_A propos_, sire, do not forget to tell her
Majesty the evening before the fête that you should like to see how her
diamond studs become her.”




