IV

THE HERITAGE OF PAIN


IN the foregoing pages has been set forward some attempt to explain how
the transmuting action of the creed of optimistic suffering operates in
a progressive revelation of the spiritual unity of the Whole of Life,
whereby pain appears as the agent of the Will of a God of Love in the
conversion of evil into good, and whereby the perfecting consciousness
of Creation may be drawn into willing co-operation with the Creator.

Such an interpretation of the presence of evil and pain in the world is
in agreement with that advanced by Science in support of the supposition
that evolutionary growth entails the susceptibility of organisms to
contrasting sensations. But is it also compatible with that other
explanation of the origin of evil which holds the sin of Adam
accountable for the suffering of the whole world, and upon which is
based the ecclesiastical doctrine of the need of the Christian
Atonement?

While affirming the interdependence of sin and suffering, there is drawn
a careful distinction between the two, observation of which is necessary
by the man who would avail himself of the Church's aid in the salvation
of his soul. Supported as allegorical truth, if not as actual historical
occurrences, the Hebrew legends of the Creation and the Fall have been
adopted as an explanatory foundation for the need of a new covenant
between man, whose sinful conduct marred an originally perfect world,
and his justly offended Deity.

Before the advent of Christ the souls of men are held to have been in
bondage to the spirit of evil. But through the death of Christ the wrath
of God was appeased, and redemption of the sins of all who should
acknowledge His redemptive power was secured.

The Catholic Church, as the accredited representative of the divine
authority of Christ, teaches that by sacramental agency men may obtain
remission and absolution of sins. But there is no concomitant remission
of suffering, which is the consequence of evil-doing. The painful labour
of men and the travail of women are the result of sin committed by their
progenitors, Adam and Eve. It is one thing to forgive a wrong action,
but another to arrest its mischievous effects. Man, having marred God's
scheme of Creation, must suffer to the end of time from the ineradicable
presence of evil in the world, although individual responsibility for
its existence is secured by belief in the power of absolution claimed by
the Catholic Church in the carrying on of Christ's mission of
redemption.

Ecclesiasticism hails Christ as the Saviour of the world, inasmuch as
His death was a sacrifice sufficient to atone for the sins of all men.
But it is reserved for Science to confirm the truth of this spiritual
recognition of the Divine Redeemer, Love, by evidential testimony
adduced from proven facts of so-called natural law, whereby Christ is
seen as the expounder of doctrine that controverts the theory of evil
and suffering as opposing forces to the Will of a God of Love, and
reveals their purpose in the spiritual evolution of mankind.

To the scientific mind, sin is non-existent apart from recognition of
moral law. Reason asserts that a knowledge of evil is necessary to a
knowledge of good, discrimination between the two being preliminary to
the establishment of moral law; that such discrimination is chiefly
obtained through the sensibility of organisms, the degree of whose
susceptibility determines their relative positions in the evolutionary
scale--a degree which terminates in man, who manifests the highest
consciousness, estimated by his ability to feel, and the highest form of
intelligence of any known creature.

Although sensory consciousness may be regarded as a register by which
the relative positions of organisms in the evolutionary scale may be
determined, the increasing inability to speak positively with regard to
distinction between living and non-living matter forbids any dogmatism
as to the impropriety of applying the term "conscious" to the inorganic
world.

It is, perhaps, here permissible to suggest a possible point of
reconciliation between the natural desire of men to obtain evidence of
their spiritual survival of organic decay and that disregard of
individual importance and advantage which is characteristic of a purely
secular interpretation of the laws of Nature. The Christian, whose creed
includes immortality as the birthright of his soul and the crown of his
religious faith, resents the exclusion of all personal interest from the
consideration of natural phenomena. For instance, with regard to the
effect which physical death is supposed to exercise on his
individuality, Science and Religion, regarding the phenomenon from
different points of view, appear to be in opposition of opinion. But is
this really the case? Is there not in reality fundamental unity between
the secular and sacred aspects of all natural phenomena?

It has been suggested that the sliding scale of physical consciousness
has its psychical counterpart in moral ideals, from which the
aspirations and perceptions of men reach out towards spiritual
apprehension. Can endorsement of this supposition be drawn from the
realm of Natural Science? What reasonable evidence is forthcoming in
support of the conjecture?

Although dogmatic distinction between the organic and inorganic kingdoms
can be of no permanent value (since what is to-day classified as
non-living matter may possibly to-morrow be declared to belong to the
organic world), yet there is justification--drawn from observation of
the simple characteristics of clearly defined organic and inorganic
matter--for remarking the former to be distinguished by apparent
sensory consciousness, which may therefore be called an active
ingredient of manifested life; but the latter shows no such apparent
consciousness, and can therefore be called a passive ingredient. Both
forms of matter react upon each other, and are inextricably present in
life contemplated as a whole. And both forms of matter are
interdependent upon a logical sequence of action, by which the supreme
Spirit of Life pervades and controls all manifested life. By this
maintained interaction, perpetual manifestation of life is carried on,
and the cycle of Birth and Death as a recurring demonstration of being
is shown to be the transmuting accompaniment of the progressive will of
the Spirit of Life. Continuance of sensation in an individual is
dependent upon the maintenance of correspondence between its
organisation and its environment, cessation of which is synonymous with
death. In other words, matter hitherto possessing an individual
consciousness, manifested by response to its environment, is resolved
into particles of matter which show no united susceptibility to
environment, and which are therefore not deserving of description as an
individual living organism. Conversely, birth is a resolution of (in the
above sense) inorganic matter into organic.

The more complicated an organism the wider its environment, and to the
degree of its susceptibility the more liable to resolution into
inorganic matter, unless a corresponding degree of ability to protect
itself from danger continues to accompany its evolution. In the case of
man, knowledge of how to maintain his bodily health must keep pace with
intellectual development if the balance between physical consciousness
and psychical apprehension is to be properly sustained. Psychical
apprehension can be translated into physical comprehension only through
the medium of sense, and appreciation of the meaning and value of
spiritual life through the medium of the brain. Health of body is
necessary for health of mind, and the co-operation of mind and body is
necessary for the apprehension of spiritual truths.

Now consciousness, both in its physical and psychical aspects, is
manifested by the response of an organism to its environment, and in the
case of organisms characterised by the possession of brain, more
particularly by the power to register sensation. Human consciousness is
achieved largely by an ability to perceive and register _contrast_ in
the impressions conveyed to the understanding, and it is the exercising
of this faculty which leads to an established recognition of Moral Law.
Appreciation of the existence of shadow and darkness presupposes the
existence of light, and distinction between these contrasts is
summarised by the sense of sight. In like manner, the perception of
truth rests upon the power to recognise falsehood, and an estimation of
what constitutes honesty on a corresponding idea of dishonesty. The
sensation of pleasure is obtained from the possession of a
correspondingly acute capacity to feel pain, discrimination placing
value on either polaric contrary proportionate to the sensory capacity
involved. In short, the register of abstract qualities is more or less
dependent upon an appreciation of their antitheses--the moral worth of
virtue being determinable by the degree of perceptive discrimination
displayed in recognition of its contrast. Just as vision is a result of
light, only known to us as vision and formulated as such by reason of
its contrast or absence, darkness, which spells blindness, so the idea
of good is only known to us by force of its contrast, evil. Registration
of the alternating sides of the swing of this polaric machinery of sense
makes for an advance in moral and spiritual, as well as in physical
consciousness. Evil, on the moral plane of consideration, is as entirely
a result of ignorance and absence of good as blindness on the physical
plane of actuality is the consequence of perpetual darkness, or
insensibility to light. The negative elements of both conditions possess
a potential possibility of transmutation into positive elements--the
operation of psychical and physical alchemism forming the dual
revelation of a God of Love, whereby those who are blind in spirit and
body are made to see, to the end that the whole consciousness of man may
be confirmed by his increasing knowledge of the glory of his Creator.

To be unable to suffer would entail insensibility to pleasure, and no
moral meaning could in this case be evolved from and attached to the
idea of feeling. But it is precisely by reason of his attainment of a
high degree of consciousness, manifested by the ability to register
sensation, that man can claim a comparatively high position in the
evolutionary scale; and if suffering and death be indeed a result of his
prehistoric interference with an originally painless scheme of Creation,
it is difficult to reconcile the benefits he appears to have thereby
gained with the idea of such being a punishment for his wrong-doing
inflicted upon him by God. For since perception of contrast in abstract
quality is absolutely necessary for the obtaining of conscience on the
moral plane of thought--that is, for recognition of good and evil, and
for the ability to transmute evil into good--it follows that where such
perception does not exist there can be no moral responsibility attaching
to individual action, no possibility of attaining a dominant spiritual
consciousness, and no question of sharing the redemptive mission of
Love. In the words of Christ, "If ye were blind, ye should have no sin:
but now ye say, We see; therefore your sin remaineth" (St John ix. 41).

It is conceivable that just as that which to the eyes of men appears as
darkness is not in the same degree dark to creatures whose habits have
developed visual organs differing from those of man, so on the moral
plane that which appears as evil to one man may to his differently
developed brother seem less evil, and to creatures less highly organised
than man, even good. No quality, physical, moral or spiritual, can be
restricted or finally actualised; and no one man's opinion of what is
estimable can stand as a perfectly true expression of any but his own
ideas.

To sum up. The existence of pain is as necessary to the appreciation of
pleasure as the existence of evil is to the appreciation of good.
Therefore we may regard the sliding scale of consciousness as a register
of sensation, a scale adapted to actual physical life and necessary for
its continuity and development; and a scale which has its exact
psychical counterpart in moral ideals, from which the evolving
aspirations and perceptions of men reach out towards spiritual life. The
degree of all quality, physical and moral, appears to be primarily
dependent upon the capacity to feel--the capacity of consciousness. And
upon the perception of contrast rests the possibility of attaining to a
dominant plane of spiritual consciousness, and the power to become an
active and willing agent in the divinely ordered transmuting,
redemptive, and progressive government of life.

It is especially with regard to the spiritual consciousness of man, and
of man's participation in the divine government of life, that the
doctrine of Christ controverts the idea of suffering as an evil. In His
verbal teaching, and in His rite of communion established as a symbolic
epitome of His spiritual convictions, there is a clear acknowledgment of
the fundamental unity of Nature--a basic point of argument which is also
adopted to-day by every scientist in all departments of research. Christ
laid particular emphasis upon the spiritual unity of man with God, He
Himself speaking as a son of God--a manifestation of the divine Spirit
of Life. He urged the following of His example upon His disciples,
trying to open the blind eyes and deaf ears of men who had as yet so
imperfect an understanding of spiritual things. He tried to teach them
to look at life from His point of view. Did He not regard the son of man
as the expression of God, recognition of which spiritual truth gave
Him, as it can give to all, assurance of eternal life? The Spirit of
Life which is in every man cannot die, for it is part of God, who is
Life without beginning and without end. Only the expression or medium of
spirit, only the finite form, is mortal. Spirit is infinite and
immortal.

Such sayings as the following, attributed to Christ and His disciples,
are expressive of the relation of man to God, and each may be seen to
form a logical corollary of the other:--

"I and my Father are one" (St John x. 30). This is the simple summary of
Christ's conviction of fundamental union between the Spirit of Life,
God, and manifested being.

"My Father is greater than I" (St John xiv. 28) expresses the fact that
the Spirit of Life as a whole is greater than its manifested parts,
although those parts are contained by the whole and are at one with the
whole.

"He that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (St John xiv. 9). Here
Christ speaks of Himself as a manifested part of the Spirit of Life, in
which sense every man can see in his fellow-creatures the same
manifested Spirit, who is God. He who looks at the son of man as the
incarnate Son of God is following the example of Christ, who taught the
brotherhood of man.

"No man hath seen God at any time" (St John i. 18)--shows the futility
of imagining it possible to confine the supreme Spirit of Life in any
one form at any one period of time. All form is manifested Spirit, but
the Spirit of Life is not only in all, but over all.

The following, among very many other sayings, are also susceptible of
the same interpretation:--

"I came from the Father, and am come into the world; again, I leave the
world, and go to the Father" (St John xvi. 28).

"As the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to the Son to have
life in himself" (St John v. 26).

This doctrine of Christ, indicative of His sense of union between God as
the supreme Spirit of Life and of individual being--a union unbroken by
the incidents of birth and death attendant upon the manifestation of the
Spirit--harmonises with the scientific doctrine of the unity of nature,
and if accepted as a fundamental clue to His reported words and deeds,
very many of the difficulties and supposed inconsistencies apparent in a
purely ecclesiastical interpretation of His person and mission melt
away, leaving a beautiful coherency of religious truth in accord with
the revelations of natural science.

When men look at life from Christ's point of view, thereby attaining
recognition of God as their Father, they become spiritual creatures who
hold the moral responsibility of their beings in trust to the Spirit of
Life. Christ lived in advance of the intellectual thought of His day,
having intuitive knowledge of the unity of nature, but no scientific
evidence to offer in its support. But His life and doctrine afford
convincing illustrations of His spiritual convictions, and the key to
the mystery of His miraculous works of love may perhaps be found in our
realisation of His sense of kinship with all living creatures. His
acquiescence with natural laws, known by Him to be the working of the
will of the Spirit of Life, gave Him influence over all persons with
whom He was able to establish a spiritual relation--with all who were
willing to co-operate with Him in the alchemistic law of love. His own
self-command gave Him dominion over those weaker than Himself, who did
not resist His will, who, in the language of Scripture, "had faith in
Him." Without such faith we are told He could do no mighty works. But
given this receptive attitude of mind, He was able to infuse strength
into a sick person and thus to stimulate the Spirit to resume its normal
correspondence with the functions of the flesh.

Realisation of union with God as the supreme Spirit of Life entails an
awakening to the significance of the unity of nature, and calls for an
adjustment of the physical equipment of sense into accord with what is
perceived to be the will of the Spirit of Life. With the desire to be at
one with the Will of God, consciousness of those influences hitherto
dimly apprehended to control existence as though by autocratic law,
widens into perception of a progressive government of the whole of life,
in the ordinance of which men may take an active part. Here, surely, is
that recognition of God possible to all, to which Christ referred in the
words, "God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
spirit and in truth" (St John iv). This is that heaven of light and
truth, to be excluded from which is to dwell in the outer darkness of
spiritual ignorance. And this is the new birth unto righteousness with a
death unto sin which is the epitome of the ethical teaching of Christ.

But, it will be asked, how does this view of life eliminate suffering as
an evil from the world? How can it be shown that disease and death, the
fear and danger of which cast a perpetual shadow over life, are not evil
things, responsible as such for the suffering of all creatures? Granted
that man has attained his present high position in the evolutionary
scale chiefly through his ability to feel, to suffer; granted that the
establishment of morality, brought about largely by registration of
contrast in sensation, leads directly to realisation of spiritual life;
granted that we may be privileged thereby to exercise a transmuting
influence upon evil and its effects, thus making us partakers in the
progressive government of life; if our future evolution, proceeding on
the same lines of development, entails an ever greater capacity to
suffer, is it a desirable thing? Have not less highly organised
creatures, with correspondingly lower degrees of consciousness and with
less knowledge of the governing principle of life and their own
responsibility towards that government, happier lives than men? Whither
are we tending? What is the ultimate goal of the recurring cycle of
birth and death, manifested by the operation of natural laws, in the
general scheme of life in which the evolution of man is but a part?

The welfare of individual man has no meaning apart from its relation to
the benefit of mankind as a progressive whole. If a man participate in
the common habits of his fellows, he must take his share in those
dangers to individual existence which the development of his race
necessitates. The advantages which we to-day derive from our employment
of social and scientific contrivances common to civilised communities
have been wrought from the effort and suffering of men of past times. We
are debtors to our ancestors who, by their own labour and sacrifice,
have given us a better equipment for the battle of life than was their
own inheritance from their forefathers. We are under an obligation to
our race which, whether we discharge it willingly or no, is drawn from
us by the operation of forces beyond our own control, as the just
equivalent of our gain. We cannot separate ourselves, humanly speaking,
from our kind. Inasmuch as the spirit of humanity reaches out towards
immortality from one generation to another, our lives are not our own.
Rather are they hostages to fortune, to that evolutionary principle
which, while allowing us as individuals to participate in the benefits
actualised to-day as the results of the labours of past generations of
men, also exacts from us our own contribution towards the slow
perfecting of our kind.

It is indubitable that suffering is an important factor in the evolution
of the mind as well as of the body of man. Inefficiency and defect in
scientific and social contrivances are made apparent by accident, which,
having entailed human suffering, is therefore productive of effort to
rectify the cause of danger, and thus of reducing the risk of further
punishment.

Could perfect correspondence between an organism and its environment be
perpetually maintained, physical death could only occur as the final
stage in the gradual decline of the medium of the spirit. Such natural
dissolution appears to be part of the order of manifested life,
requisite for its continuity and for the evolution of species, and
necessary for the development of the spiritual desire for immortality.
It is not of necessity a painful process, since the slow decline in
physical vitality implies a corresponding decrease in sensibility, or,
in other words, a decrease of physical consciousness. Premature death,
the result of disease and accident, and accompanied by more or less
suffering, constitutes the wages of ignorance, and only in this sense
can pain and death be said to be a punishment for sin inflicted by God.
If man, individually and socially, does not know how to protect himself
from danger, he must pay the penalty for ignorance. Only a perfected
organism, maintaining a permanent correspondence with its environment,
could be permanently capable of combating physical death. And since the
cycle of the birth and death of all forms of life constitutes the
central principle of natural law, it is difficult to imagine an eventual
eternal preservation of individual physical life to be the ordained end
of the evolution of humanity.

When life is looked at as a whole--a point of view entailing perception
of God as the supreme Spirit of Life informing and governing all
matter--there appears no injustice in the suffering of the human race,or
of other organisms whose evolution requires their conscious
susceptibility to environment. Men must suffer for their ignorance in
order to become wise, and to get wisdom they must eat from the tree of
good and evil. Those who are ignorant of what is necessary for the
preservation of health receive the wages of their imperfection--suffering,
and premature death unto the third and fourth generations--not as the
vindictive vengeance of an offended Deity, but as the remedial
vindication of a persisting will of love, a transmuting process which
must endure until the result of fatal ignorance is expurgated from a
progressive world.

If individual thought, individual free-will and action, were more
generally recognised to be the prime factors by which human evolution is
forwarded or deterred; if concern for the preservation of individual
advantage were dominated by a desire to promote the welfare of the race;
if the willing transmutation by vicarious suffering of the effects of
evil into elements of good were more readily accepted as the privilege
of the members of the communion of love; we are justified in believing
that unnatural suffering and death, with their manifold accompaniment of
sorrow and fear, would be gradually eliminated from the lives of men
according as they grew into a more perfect wisdom and understanding of
the meaning and purpose of life.

Like Christ, we must be perfected through suffering. The whole creation
groaneth and travaileth together, to the end that the incarnate purpose
of life may be fulfilled, and that the increasing sum of the spiritual
consciousness of creation may be brought into co-operation with the
Divine Creator and so actively and willingly share in the divine
government of life.




