
  Transcriber's Notes:

    Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by =equal
    signs=.

    Small uppercase have been replaced with regular uppercase.

    Characters after a carat are superscripts.

    Blank pages have been eliminated.

    Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been left as in the
    original.




The Incarnate Purpose




  The
  Incarnate Purpose

  Essays on the Spiritual Unity of Life

  By
  G. H. Percival

  London
  Williams & Norgate
  14 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden
  1908




Contents


  CHAP.                                  PAGE

  1. THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH                    1

  2. THE EVIDENCE OF THINGS UNSEEN         21

  3. THE ALCHEMY OF LOVE                   48

  4. THE HERITAGE OF PAIN                  65

  5. THE VESTURE OF GOD                    91

  6. SPIRITUAL CORRESPONDENCE             122




The Incarnate Purpose




I

THE SPIRIT OF TRUTH


THERE exists in certain religious circles the idea that criticism of
Christian doctrine is an undesirable thing, because indicative of a
spirit of irreverence and faithlessness that is at variance with the
fundamental principles of Christianity. According to Catholic teaching,
the Church is founded upon divine revelation, to doubt the reality of
which is to question the truth of the Word of God. It is not to be
supposed that the finite understandings of men can fathom the infinite
mysteries of God. Does not the conception that it _is_ possible for the
divine truths of religion to be comprehended by means of the same
evidential methods adopted in the acquisition of secular knowledge,
imply a practical denial of the existence of a supreme God, since the
creature would thus be made to appear as equal in wisdom and power with
the Creator?

Most seekers after the Word of God meet at one time or other with some
such argument against the propriety of their endeavours to obtain
evidence of the intrinsic truth of Christian teaching. But the charge of
irreverence brought against honest inquiry is powerless to affect the
belief, held by many educated men and women, that a pure desire to know
and to do the will of God necessitates the exercising of intellectual as
well as of spiritual faculties, in order that what is true in the
teaching offered to them in the name of Christ may be separated from
what is false, to the greater glory of God and to the furthering of the
divine purpose of Life.

Hostility towards criticism of religious doctrine appears to all
impartial minds to be not only of doubtful service to the cause of
Religion as a whole, but also to cast discredit on the ability of any
particular creed to sustain an examination in detail of its articles. In
an era when most things touching the health and general well-being of
men are subjected to critical inquiry, it would be strange if their
spiritual welfare should escape remark. Science has much to say about
the food we eat, the clothes we wear, the habits of our daily lives; and
we listen to what is said with due respect, because we know the aim of
Science to be the improvement of the conditions of life through the
elimination of error and harmful prejudice from the paths of progress;
and because, by regulating our conduct by the reasonable principles
recommended, we may contribute towards the amelioration of those
conditions under which future generations of men will enter upon their
inheritance of the earth. Is the authority claimed and exercised by the
Church over the souls and minds of men to be unquestioned? Is the
training of spiritual consciousness less important than the education
and nourishment of the body? Scientific criticism may not be perfect,
or its judgments infallible; but such as it is to-day, why may not its
methods be applied to the elimination of falsehood and ignorance from
things religious as well as from things secular?

The acquisition of knowledge has afforded throughout recorded history a
perpetual basis for controversy on all matters which have excited
sufficient interest or curiosity to command serious attention. It is
difficult to think of any so-called natural phenomenon that has not at
one time or other given rise to critical investigation, pursuit of which
has sharpened the perceptions and widened the understandings of those
whose energies have been engaged, and has thus contributed towards
elucidation of the controverted subject. Especially is this remarkable
in the declared differences between the exponents of scientific and
religious doctrine. By reason of an intimate concern with the affairs of
men, the methods of acquiring and imparting knowledge employed by the
authoritative instructors of sacred and secular consciousness, offer an
open field for controversy and challenge the criticism of all thinking
persons. It will be admitted that the manner in which discussion is
carried on, no less than the character of the conclusions arrived at,
exerts an educative influence upon all questions of contemporary
interest, so that, apart from the elucidation of Truth (which is the
ideal end of controversy, but rarely its immediate outcome), an
examination of the merits of conflicting opinions, or, in other words, a
criticism of opposing opinions, would appear desirable if only as
prefatory to the attainment of a more complete comprehension of the
matter under dispute. The ultimate value of all such controversy is to a
large extent determined by criticism, which acts as a salutary check on
the tendency of most disputants to devote more attention to the question
of who is right than of what is true; and where discussion is unattended
by such restraint, a certain vagueness of purpose and procedure is apt
to seduce controversy from the path of rectitude into a ramble among the
byways of personal prejudice, which argues ill for the elucidation of
the original subject under dispute.

But in considering the utility of controversy between the exponents of
scientific and religious doctrine, it should be borne in mind that a
victory accruing to either disputant can be of tentative value only
unless and until its permanent worth be certified by course of time to
be indeed demonstrated evidence of intrinsic verity. Until this is so
proven the last word has not been said, although the path towards a more
complete settlement of the point at issue may have been in some measure
cleared of an impeding refuse of erroneous ideas and prejudices.
Therefore verdicts determining the merits of conflicting opinions
relating to abstract or speculative thought can rarely be regarded as
final, and it appears unreasonable for either priest or scientist to
resent as an outcome of controversial differences an issue favourable
to his opponent, since only in the event of a subsequent endorsement of
its intrinsic truth by inclusion in the commonly accepted facts of
natural knowledge can the ruling of the judgment remain in force.
Therefore, since the avowed object of both disputants is the elucidation
of Truth, which process necessitates a concomitant elimination of
Falsehood, neither priest nor scientist should resent such a
satisfactory outcome of their contentions. For if the results of
controversial criticism be not endorsed by the course of time, but are
shown instead to be errors of judgment, rectifiable by succeeding
generations of men whose advance in power of discernment is attested by
the ability to eradicate from doctrine errors hitherto undemonstrable as
such, the justification of controversy is even so sufficiently proven,
inasmuch as its employment has brought about an expurgation of
Falsehood, which accomplishment is, in the dual interests of Science and
Religion, as important as the affirmation and confirmation of Truth.

A retrospective view of religious and scientific doctrine does indeed
reveal controversy, accompanied by criticism, as a considerable factor
in the evolution of knowledge, and its employment is clearly
recognisable as a means of expurgating much that was false in ideas held
in former days. It is reasonable to suppose that the same drastic spirit
of controversial criticism so apparent in the past and so active in the
present, will continue to operate in the future. But an examination of
the controversial methods exercised to-day shows a remarkable change of
tactics from those in use, say two hundred years ago--a change that is
the direct result of the displacement of ancient weapons of war by
modern arms. Evidence has supplanted the use of subtle verbal argument
and carefully constructed syllogisms, whose premises were frequently
contrived to corroborate foregone conclusions--a method not compatible
with that earnest desire for truth above all things which is the
war-cry of modern times. Evidence is everywhere proclaimed as the proper
test for truth; and he who enters the field of controversy to-day,
whether he be the champion of scientific or of religious doctrine, must,
if he wish to obtain a serious hearing, come equipped with evidence of
the truth of what he propounds, and with evidence of the falsehood of
what he refutes.

This change in the method of controversial criticism affects all
branches of learning, and is gradually bringing about a reform in
educational matters that bids fair to shake the foundations of many
lines of long-established conventional thought. Nowhere is the change
more apparent than in the working of our schools. A child is no longer
punished for asking the reason of what he is taught; lessons learnt by
rote are a disgrace alike to schoolmaster and scholar. It is not the
pupil who is impertinent in demanding, but the teacher who is
inefficient and culpable if he cannot supply satisfactory evidence of
the truth, the reality, the reason of his instruction. The kindergarten
system; the elaborate construction of object-lessons contrived by means
of illustration to exercise the child's reasoning faculties; the nature
study, so swiftly establishing its place in the national curricula--all
these are the outcome of the demand for evidence as the proper test of
supposed truth, and are significant of the spirit of the age. Young
people are encouraged to think for themselves; to accept authority only
when there is evidence forthcoming of its right to be so acknowledged;
to look for evidential testimony of all that they are called upon to
receive as facts.

Upon the subject of education, Science and Ecclesiasticism are now
engaged in what, seen in the light of after days, may well appear as one
of the most important controversies of the age. And it is upon the very
question of the fitness of evidence as a legitimate test of truth,
especially with regard to the suitability of its application to
religious as well as to secular instruction, that the chief difference
turns. While Science, convinced of the efficacy of evidential testimony,
employs the principle as a weapon of attack and defence in controversial
warfare, the ambiguous attitude of Ecclesiasticism towards a similar
mode of procedure places her at a hopeless disadvantage against her
antagonists, deprives her of influence in most matters of intellectual
importance, and stamps her as a deterring factor in the progress of the
world. What fighting power, equipped with obsolete weapons of the
eighteenth century, would be justified in hoping to meet with success in
an engagement with a foe who carried modern arms?

If children are taught to regard evidence as a proper test of truth in
matters of secular interest, and to disregard that principle in
connection with their religious instruction, it follows as a matter of
course that a line of distinction must be drawn between secular and
religious education. It is regrettable that, interwoven as the two
elements have been for centuries in the training of children, their
division now seems necessary and imminent. Had they continued to work
harmoniously together, the present differences between scientific and
ecclesiastical methods of instruction might have been averted. But it is
lamentably evident that in adopting an attitude of disapproval towards
criticism of her articles, the Church is bringing about a division in
educational matters that is becoming more and more pronounced. What
kingdom divided against itself can stand? How can we expect to train our
children in the ways of Truth if we give them no consistent standard for
estimating what is true? How dare we hope to rear a generation worthy of
its inheritance of nearly twenty centuries of established Christianity,
when we formulate a religious standard of integrity in opposition to
that of the secular knowledge of the world?

But it is not only over the Education Question that Science and
Ecclesiasticism are virtually at war, although the conflicting
principles underlying this controversial difference are illustrated by
that dispute. It is not only children who suffer bewilderment by being
asked to reconcile irreconcilable elements in their education. Both
Science and the Catholic Church profess to be searchers after and
upholders of Truth, yet year by year a chasm between them widens as
their fundamental differences in procedure become defined; and year by
year the number of honest thinkers who cease to regard themselves as
members of the Church, or as under her authority, increases. So long as
Ecclesiasticism continues to maintain an attitude of resentment towards
criticism of religious doctrine, so long must this exodus of
intelligence from the Church induce a practical development of the
Christian ideals outside ecclesiastical circles.

It cannot be too vigorously affirmed that criticism of the pretensions
of Ecclesiasticism is not necessarily an attack upon Christianity.
Scientific research has never harmed or demolished the truth in
doctrine attributed to Christ. Indeed, the simplicity and beauty of His
teaching (in so far as this can be ascertained from a careful study of
the Gospels) never shines so convincingly, and never exerts greater
influence for good upon mankind, than when, under rational criticism, it
is freed in some measure from the accumulation of centuries of
superstitious ideas too long supported by the approval of
Ecclesiasticism. Science has no quarrel with Christianity as such. A
Christian Church, cleansed from all that obscures and dishonours
Truth--a Church devoted to the practical furtherance of the ideals
contained in Christ's Gospel of Love--would always have the ready help
and support of Science. It is not from the Gospel of Love that men turn
away to-day, but from dogmas antagonistic to reason, substituted for
that gospel and taught by the Church as Truth in the name of Christ. It
is not out of a spirit of irreverence that men demand evidence of the
truth of what the Church offers them as Christian doctrine, but from an
earnest desire to be faithful to that ideal of Truth which is surely the
religious, as well as the secular, glory of life.

The figure of Christ stands as the centre of certain axioms professedly
conducive to a right understanding of life and the right conduct of men,
and He drew to Himself as supporters of His doctrine all sorts and
conditions of men who became more or less imbued with the ideas of their
Master. The accounts of His three years' mission which have come down to
us in the present forms of the Gospels may or may not truly report His
actual sayings and doings, and may or may not contain doctrine actually
taught by Him. What is written, or by whom written, matters less than an
assurance of its intrinsic truth when such is interpreted as doctrine
applicable to the spiritual needs of men to-day. All that is true in the
writings connected with the mission of Christ requires no miraculous
accompaniment to demonstrate its truth: the only requisite standard by
which its verity should be tested is that afforded from generation to
generation by the current standard of knowledge. Is not the application
of scientific methods of criticism to that grand conception of life and
its responsibilities which we associate with the name of Christ, the
highest compliment we can pay to His memory? For whether He really spoke
certain words, did certain deeds, and taught certain doctrines, as in
the Gospels He is reported to have done; whether He shared the errors of
His age and is directly responsible for the introduction of teaching
that is incompatible with known scientific facts; or whether He has not,
perhaps, been made the scapegoat for the ignorance of those who came
after Him--are questions of insignificant importance compared with the
necessity for eliminating falsehood, by whomsoever spoken or written,
from doctrine put forth as spiritual truth for thinking men of to-day.

In the estimation of many educated and unprejudiced persons, the fabric
of Church government seems to have its origin in the perverted
imaginations of men rather than in the ethical teaching of Christ, so
far as this can be ascertained by a careful study of the books
constituting the New Testament. Considering the discrepancies in the
various sayings and doings of Christ as reported by the authors of those
several books, the solution of the question as to what He really said
and did becomes very difficult, and is complicated in all branches and
phases of the history of the Christian Faith by subsequent accretions,
finding their origins in the superstitions of the age, and for which no
reasonable warrant seems to exist. We have, therefore, in an endeavour
to reconcile the teaching of the Church with the supposed teaching of
Christ, to fall back on the internal evidence of the intrinsic truth
contained in His accepted sayings and doings. Acceptance of these as
true occurrences depends upon how far they are consistent with
established scientific facts. Truth is Truth, whether its unveiling to
the understanding be achieved by Science or Religion. Investigation of
the evidence of a supposed truth either, by certifying its verity, leads
to its surer stability, with proportionate increase of honour; or, by
tracing and eliminating error, gives higher value to the remaining
purified residue. If the supposed teaching of Christ were found to be
consistent with the modern teaching of Science, the mutual endorsement
would be a further guarantee of the verity of the question in point,
both in its religious and its scientific aspect. But if an examination
of Christian doctrine reveals the presence of dogma utterly
irreconcilable with known scientific facts, then, if the cry for Truth
raised by both teachers is sincere, the rejection of that which defiles
Truth is incumbent upon the disciples of Religion as well as upon those
of Science.

The belligerent attitude of Ecclesiasticism towards criticism of her
doctrine reflects indirectly discredit upon the Founder of Christianity.
To bolster up falsehood taught and written in Christ's name is no
honour to Him. The magnification of natural into supernatural
occurrences, out of mistaken zeal for His glory, and the refusal to
accept the verdict of rational investigation of the evidence for the
truth of such occurrences, is not the way to further the ends of
Christianity. Is it conceivable that the founder of a code of ethics
calculated to meet the needs of men could desire exemption from an
examination of the doctrine he taught and believed to be true, or, still
less, of doctrine taught in his name, for the truth of which he has
given no guarantee? Is it possible that Christ would have resented the
idea of a future amplification of His doctrine on the lines of truth by
men who perceived the spirit of His teaching, and who desired to honour
Him by freeing it from its envelope of superstition, reflecting the
errors of the ages through which it had passed? Did not He promise to
men a Comforter who would abide with them for ever: "Even the Spirit of
Truth, whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither
knoweth him.... The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.... When the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from the Father, he shall testify of
me" (St John xiv. and xv.).

Did not Christ thus challenge the criticism of the future? Did not He
plead for His teaching to be tested by the Spirit of Truth which,
proceeding from God, the Father of all life, is present in the world as
the guiding principle of all knowledge then, now, and to come? What is
that sin against the Holy Ghost impossible of forgiveness, but sin
against the Spirit of Truth, which is a deliberate falling short of the
glory of God?




