The Project Gutenberg EBook of Laddie, by Gene Stratton-Porter

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Laddie

Author: Gene Stratton-Porter

Release Date: April 3, 2008 [EBook #286]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LADDIE ***













LADDIE

A TRUE BLUE STORY


by

GENE STRATTON-PORTER




To

LEANDER ELLIOT STRATTON

"The Way to Be Happy Is to Be Good"




Contents


CHAPTER

     I.  Little Sister
    II.  Our Angel Boy
   III.  Mr. Pryor's Door
    IV.  The Last Day in Eden
     V.  The First Day of School
    VI.  The Wedding Gown
   VII.  When Sally Married Peter
  VIII.  The Shropshire and the Crusader
    IX.  "Even So"
     X.  Laddie Takes the Plunge
    XI.  Keeping Christmas Our Way
   XII.  The Horn of the Hunter
  XIII.  The Garden of the Lord
   XIV.  The Crest of Eastbrooke
    XV.  Laddie, the Princess, and the Pie
   XVI.  The Homing Pigeon
  XVII.  In Faith Believing
 XVIII.  The Pryor Mystery




LADDIE

CHARACTERS

  LADDIE, Who Loved and Asked No Questions.
  THE PRINCESS, From the House of Mystery.
  LEON, Our Angel Child.
  LITTLE SISTER, Who Tells What Happened.
  MR. and MRS. STANTON, Who Faced Life Shoulder to Shoulder.
  SALLY and PETER, Who Married Each Other.
  ELIZABETH, SHELLEY, MAY and Other Stanton Children.
  MR. and MRS. PRYOR, Father and Mother of the Princess.
  ROBERT PAGET, a Chicago Lawyer.
  MRS. FRESHETT, Who Offered Her Life for Her Friend.
  CANDACE, the Cook.
  MISS AMELIA, the School Mistress.
  Interested Relatives, Friends, and Neighbours.




CHAPTER I

Little Sister

  "And could another child-world be my share,
  I'd be a Little Sister there."


"Have I got a Little Sister anywhere in this house?" inquired Laddie at
the door, in his most coaxing voice.

"Yes sir," I answered, dropping the trousers I was making for Hezekiah,
my pet bluejay, and running as fast as I could.  There was no telling
what minute May might take it into her head that she was a little
sister and reach him first.  Maybe he wanted me to do something for
him, and I loved to wait on Laddie.

"Ask mother if you may go with me a while."

"Mother doesn't care where I am, if I come when the supper bell rings."

"All right!" said Laddie.

He led the way around the house, sat on the front step and took me
between his knees.

"Oh, is it going to be a secret?" I cried.

Secrets with Laddie were the greatest joy in life.  He was so big and
so handsome.  He was so much nicer than any one else in our family, or
among our friends, that to share his secrets, run his errands, and love
him blindly was the greatest happiness.  Sometimes I disobeyed father
and mother; I minded Laddie like his right hand.

"The biggest secret yet," he said gravely.

"Tell quick!" I begged, holding my ear to his lips.

"Not so fast!" said Laddie.  "Not so fast!  I have doubts about this.
I don't know that I should send you.  Possibly you can't find the way.
You may be afraid.  Above all, there is never to be a whisper.  Not to
any one!  Do you understand?"

"What's the matter?" I asked.

"Something serious," said Laddie.  "You see, I expected to have an hour
or two for myself this afternoon, so I made an engagement to spend the
time with a Fairy Princess in our Big Woods.  Father and I broke the
reaper taking it from the shed just now and you know how he is about
Fairies."

I did know how he was about Fairies.  He hadn't a particle of patience
with them.  A Princess would be the Queen's daughter.  My father's
people were English, and I had heard enough talk to understand that.  I
was almost wild with excitement.

"Tell me the secret, hurry!" I cried.

"It's just this," he said.  "It took me a long time to coax the
Princess into our Big Woods.  I had to fix a throne for her to sit on;
spread a Magic Carpet for her feet, and build a wall to screen her.
Now, what is she going to think if I'm not there to welcome her when
she comes?  She promised to show me how to make sunshine on dark days."

"Tell father and he can have Leon help him."

"But it is a secret with the Princess, and it's HERS as much as mine.
If I tell, she may not like it, and then she won't make me her Prince
and send me on her errands."

"Then you don't dare tell a breath," I said.

"Will you go in my place, and carry her a letter to explain why I'm not
coming, Little Sister?"

"Of course!" I said stoutly, and then my heart turned right over; for I
never had been in our Big Woods alone, and neither mother nor father
wanted me to go.  Passing Gypsies sometimes laid down the fence and
went there to camp.  Father thought all the wolves and wildcats were
gone, he hadn't seen any in years, but every once in a while some one
said they had, and he was not quite sure yet.  And that wasn't the
beginning of it.  Paddy Ryan had come back from the war wrong in his
head.  He wore his old army overcoat summer and winter, slept on the
ground, and ate whatever he could find.  Once Laddie and Leon, hunting
squirrels to make broth for mother on one of her bad days, saw him in
our Big Woods and he was eating SNAKES.  If I found Pat Ryan eating a
snake, it would frighten me so I would stand still and let him eat me,
if he wanted to, and perhaps he wasn't too crazy to see how plump I
was.  I seemed to see swarthy, dark faces, big, sleek cats dropping
from limbs, and Paddy Ryan's matted gray hair, the flying rags of the
old blue coat, and a snake in his hands.  Laddie was slipping the
