CHAPTER IV

OLD ABERDEEN: A REGENT IN KING’S COLLEGE

1751-1764


Reid’s movement from New Machar to the academic home opened for him in
Old Aberdeen placed him and his young family amidst surroundings that
touch imagination by their natural beauty and historic associations.
For centuries the College, founded by Bishop Elphinstone, and at first
presided over by Hector Boece, with its chapel and crowned tower, in the

                    old university town,
    Between the Don and the Dee,
    Looking over the grey sand dunes,
    Looking out on the cold North Sea,

has shed intellectual light over the North of Scotland, especially among
the Celts in the Highlands. At King’s College one sees a miniature Oxford
almost under the shadow of the Grampians. Perhaps Reid’s temperament was
too prosaic to contemplate his new surroundings with the sentiment which
the city at the mouth of the Don afterwards called forth in Thackeray,
who, in ‘a delightful tour in the north, was charmed with Inverness, and
fell in love with Old Aberdeen—an elderly decayed mouldering old beauty
who lives quietly on the seashore, near her grand new granite sister of
a city.’ The affectionate recollection with which Sir James Mackintosh
recalled his student days at King’s College, and the companionship
there of Robert Hall, is another testimony to its charms. The arena in
which these two, called by their fellow-students ‘Plato and Herodotus,’
encountered one another most frequently was in morals and metaphysics.
‘After having sharpened their weapons by reading, they often repaired to
the spacious sands upon the seashore, and still more to the picturesque
scenery on the banks of the Don above the old town and the Brig of
Balgownie, to discuss with eagerness the problems of existence. There was
scarcely an important position in Berkeley’s _Minute Philosopher_, in
Butler’s _Analogy_, or in _Edwards on the Will_, over which they did not
debate with the utmost intensity.’ From these discussions in the environs
of the ‘old university town,’ Mackintosh was wont to say that he ‘learned
more than from all the books he ever read.’

It was in the canonist’s manse, pleasantly placed nearly in front of the
College, immediately north of the Snow Church, at the entrance to Powis
House, that Reid found himself in the winter of 1751.[7] It was rented
by him from the University. The quaint manse, nestled among trees, with
its low thatched roof,[8] has disappeared, and with it other picturesque
old houses, which added charm to the neighbourhood when Reid taught in
King’s College nearly a hundred and fifty years ago. The crown tower
of the College chapel rose almost in front of the manse, the rival of
St. Giles’s at Edinburgh and of St. Nicholas’s at Newcastle, unique in
Scottish academical architecture. Eastwards in the quadrangle was the
Hall in which the students dined, a memorial of Bishop Elphinstone, and
the dormitories of the students, which were of later date. General Monk’s
tower stood in the eastern corner; behind the Hall was the kitchen, and
near it the College well, whence the links stretched to the shore, ‘the
grey sand dunes’ in those days unbroken by tame streets and modern villas.

       *       *       *       *       *

The professorial system of divided work, which assigns special
departments of learning to supposed experts, had not superseded in King’s
College the method of regency which prevailed in the early history of all
the universities of Scotland. The regent was intrusted with the education
of his pupils from the first matriculation to graduation; or when Latin,
Greek, and pure mathematics were each provided for professorially,
regents in philosophy each taught in successive sessions the various
branches of natural and physical science, and of moral and metaphysical
philosophy. This system was followed in all the Scottish universities
until last century. It was modified by the Commission of 1690, which
ordained that, besides a separate professor of Latin, one of the four
regents should profess Greek only, and take charge of undergraduates in
their first year. By about the middle of the century ‘regenting’ was
wholly abolished in four of the five Universities—in Edinburgh in 1708,
in Glasgow in 1727, in St. Andrews in 1747, and in Marischal College
and University in 1753. But in King’s College the various branches of
Philosophy, natural and moral, were still regented when Reid began to
teach. He was thus required to teach mathematics and the sciences of
matter, as well as psychology and moral philosophy. He thus gave lectures
on the philosophy of mind only every third year. One of the other two
years was given to natural history and the easier parts of physical
science; the second to mathematics and natural philosophy.

During 1751-52, which was his first session, Reid as regent taught
natural philosophy to undergraduates of the third year; in the following
winter the same students, in their fourth year, were still in his
charge. His full sequence, accordingly, did not commence till 1753-54,
when for the first time he took the second class, consisting of those
beginning philosophical studies. So his successive three years courses
ran thus:—1753-56, 1756-59, 1759-62. In the last year of each course,
as ‘promoter,’ he presented his undergraduates to receive the Master’s
degree, and also delivered a graduation thesis. His theses (still extant
in manuscript at Birkwood) were in Latin; they deal chiefly with the
methods and human conditions of philosophical inquiry.

Two-thirds of Reid’s lectures at King’s College were in this way
concerned with natural history and applied mathematics: only one-third
was given to the central object of his intellectual interest at New
Machar. I have examined a manuscript volume of notes of the lectures in
‘Natural Philosophy’ which he gave in 1757-58. They comprehend, after an
introductory exposition of the province and methods of physics, the laws
of motion, astronomy, optics, electricity, and hydrostatics. The notes
show that Reid was well abreast of the physical science of his time.

At the time of Reid’s appointment as a regent of philosophy in King’s
College, the alternative of regency or professoriate was discussed in
the University. He entered readily into this and other questions of
University reform, and prevailed on his colleagues to make some important
changes. Largely through his influence the teaching session was extended
from five to seven months; the Humanity or Latin class was better
organised; the bursary endowments were redistributed for competition;
and in the order of undergraduate study, the sciences concerned with the
outward world were made to precede psychology and ethics, which were
reserved for the last year, as more consistent with the development
of the human mind in its natural ascent from external observation to
reflection. An account of the changes was published in 1754.

It is curious that it was through Reid’s influence that the regency
system was retained in King’s College, in preference to the professorial,
which, in order to secure division of labour among the teachers,
under the growth of knowledge, had been already adopted in the other
Universities. His hand may be traced in the following statement of
reasons for this conservative policy:—‘Every professor of philosophy
in this University is also tutor to those who study under him; and it
seems to be generally agreed that it must be detrimental to a student to
change his every session. And though it be allowed that a professor who
has only one branch of philosophy for his province may have more leisure
to make improvements in it for the benefit of the learned world, yet it
does not seem extravagant to suppose that a [regent] professor ought
to be sufficiently qualified to teach all that his pupils can learn in
philosophy [natural and moral] in the course of three sessions.’ Half
a century later the higher academical ideal implied in a professoriate
prevailed, according to which the professor is responsible for promoting
his branch of human knowledge, as well as for the instruction of youth—in
educating influence more powerful, when he incites to study by the
vitality which original research is apt to communicate to his lectures.
The development of a university, it has been remarked, is prompt and
easy when each department of its cyclopædia is separately taught by
an able professor; whereas a university which abandons instruction to
regent-tutors must be content not only to teach little, and that little
ill, but to continue to teach what is elsewhere obsolete and exploded.

In a letter of Reid’s in 1755, an account is given of the reformed, if
somewhat officious, academical discipline which then prevailed:—

    ‘The students here,’ he says, ‘have lately been compelled to
    live within the College. We need but look out at our windows to
    see when they rise and when they go to bed. They are seen nine
    or ten times throughout the day statedly, by one or other of
    the Masters—at public prayers, school-hours, meals, in their
    rooms, besides occasional visits which we can make with little
    trouble to ourselves. They are shut up within walls at nine
    at night. This discipline hath indeed taken some pains and
    resolution, as well as some expense, to establish it. The board
    of the first table is 50 marks per quarter, _i.e._ 54s. 2d.,
    and the second 40. The rent of a room is from 7 shillings to 20
    shillings in the session. There is no furniture in their rooms
    but a bedstead, tables, chimney-grate, and fender; the rest
    they must buy for themselves. All other perquisites from 12 to
    17 shillings.’

This discipline was more or less in vogue during the remainder of last
century. Nearly twenty years after the date of Reid’s letter, when
Johnson and Boswell visited Aberdeen, Johnson says that ‘in King’s
College there is kept a public table, but the scholars in the Marischal
College are boarded in the town.’ ‘The abandonment of this custom,’
Mr. Rait tells us, ‘seems to have been a gradual process, and to have
taken place during the first quarter of the nineteenth century. The
restraint of collegiate residence had become exceedingly irksome.’ With
the increasing age of entrants, schoolboy discipline might seem less
expedient.

Instruction in the art of dancing was, it seems, provided by the
University under the reformed regulations, to add manly grace to the rude
bodily vigour of the Scottish undergraduate. Reid in advocating this may
have remembered Locke’s advice in his _Thoughts on Education_: ‘Dancing
being that which gives graceful motions all the life, and above all
things manliness and a becoming confidence, I think it cannot be learned
too early. But you must be sure to have a good master, that knows and can
teach what is graceful and becoming, and that gives a freedom and ease to
all the motions of the body. One that teaches not this is worse than none
at all.’ How long this civilising art was cultivated in Reid’s College I
have not discovered.

In Aberdeen Reid found himself in the society of persons of more than
provincial eminence, destined, indeed, to leave their mark on the thought
and literature of Scotland. The Chair of Medicine in his College was
occupied by his cousin, Dr. John Gregory, a successful observer of
external nature and man. In Marischal College, Thomas Blackwell, the
Professor of Greek when Reid was an undergraduate, was now Principal;
soon followed by George Campbell, who became the philosophical theologian
of the Church of Scotland, by his criticism of Hume’s reasoning about
miracles, and a master in literary, biblical, and ecclesiastical
criticism,—in his _Philosophy of Rhetoric_, his Translation of the
Gospels, and his History of the development of the Christian Church.
Campbell was nine years younger than Reid, like him an alumnus of
Marischal College; he had been minister of Banchory-Ternan for nine
years before he was called to Aberdeen. He rivalled Reid himself in
analytic power and calm, candid, luminous reasoning. Alexander Gerard,
like Reid, a University reformer, and author of essays on ‘Taste’ and on
‘Genius,’ was Professor of Philosophy in Marischal College, and then of
Divinity there, and afterwards at King’s. There was William Duncan, too,
whose _Logic_ was for a time in vogue in Scottish Universities—a regent
in Marischal College when Reid began to teach philosophy at King’s; and
Reid’s lifelong friend Stewart was still in the Chair of Mathematics.
Perhaps the most widely known Aberdonian when he lived was James Beattie,
poet more than philosopher, Professor of Logic and Moral Philosophy
in Marischal College, whose essay on ‘Truth’ gave him a name in the
intellectual world, while the grace and pathos of the ‘Minstrel’ and the
‘Hermit’ appealed to a wider class, and secured a popular reputation.
Aberdeen and its neighbourhood were then the home also of accomplished
physicians and naturalists and scholars—Skenes and Ogilvies, Dunbars and
Gordons.

As I have said, Reid’s first years at King’s College were much given
to academical reform. His later years there were distinguished by his
connection with a Society for philosophical inquiry, then quickened in
Scotland by the fashionable scepticism of David Hume. Reid and Gregory
originated this ‘Aberdeen Philosophical Society,’ or ‘Wise Club,’ as it
was called. It was the parent of some of the most remarkable books in
Scottish philosophical literature in the latter part of last century.
The first meeting was on January 12, 1758, and the last was in February
1773. The original members were Dr. John Gregory, Dr. David Skene,
Professor John Stewart, Mr. Robert Trail, the Rev. George Campbell, and
Mr. Thomas Reid; to whom in the same year were added the Rev. Alexander
Gerard, the Rev. John Farquhar, Mr. Charles Gordon, and Mr. John Kerr.
James Beattie joined them in 1760, Dr. George Skene and Mr. William
Ogilvie in 1763, Mr. James Dunbar in 1765, and Mr. William Trail in 1766.
Reid was secretary of the Society, and the minutes for many years are
in his handwriting. It met once a fortnight on the second and fourth
Wednesdays of each month. ‘The members,’ Sir W. Forbes tells us in his
_Life of Beattie_, ‘met at five o’clock in the evening—for in those days
at Aberdeen it was the custom to dine early—when one of the members,
as president, took the chair, and left it at half an hour after eight,
when they partook of a slight and inexpensive collation, and at ten
o’clock they separated.’ At these meetings it appears that part of the
evening’s entertainment was the reading of a short essay, composed by
one of the members in his turn. Besides these discourses, a literary or
philosophical question was proposed each night, for discussion at the
next meeting. And it was the duty of the proposer of the question to open
the discussion; by him, also, the opinions of the members who took a part
in it were digested into an abstract, which was engrossed in the album
of the Society. I am told that the _Lion Inn_, on the Spital Hill near
Reid’s manse, and sometimes the _Lemon Tree Inn_, in the new town, were
the usual places of meeting. The common attendance was five or six. One
of the rules enjoined moderation and forbade toasts.

The meetings were given partly to essays by the members, and partly to
oral discussions of proposed questions. ‘Philosophy,’ according to the
rules, ‘comprehends every principle of science which may be deduced by
just or lawful induction from the phenomena either of the human mind or
of the material world.’ Perhaps no society of the kind in this country
has fulfilled its end so well. The ‘Rankenian Club’ and the ‘Select
Society’ in Edinburgh lasted longer, or enrolled more members, but
neither of them was the parent of so much good literature. The ‘Inquiry’
of Reid, Beattie’s essay on ‘Truth,’ Gerard on ‘Taste’ and on ‘Genius,’
and Campbell’s books on ‘Miracles’ and on ‘Rhetoric’ appear in fragments
or in germ in the minutes of the ‘Wise Club’ of Aberdeen. Its vitality
was sustained and stimulated by the sceptical speculations of Hume, which
were much in touch with educated opinion in the third quarter of last
century, when spiritual philosophy was languid in Britain and throughout
the world. The tone of those engaged in the philosophical vindication of
belief appears in one of Reid’s letters, who writes thus to David Hume in
1763:—

    ‘Your friendly adversaries, Drs. Campbell and Gerard, as well
    as Dr. Gregory, return their compliments to you respectfully.
    A little Philosophical Society here, of which all three are
    members, is much indebted to you for its entertainment. Your
    company, although we are all good Christians, would be more
    acceptable than that of Athanasius; and since we cannot have
    you upon the bench, you are brought oftener than any other man
    to the bar; accused and defended with great zeal, but without
    bitterness. If you write no more in morals, politics, and
    metaphysics, I am afraid we shall be at a loss for subjects.’

It is interesting to find in the records of the Society the subjects of
the dissertations contributed by Reid during the six years in which he
was its mainspring,[9] as well as the questions which he proposed for
debate. They signally illustrate the course of his thoughts in these
years. On May 24, 1758, ‘Mr. Reid intimat that he designed as the subject
of his discourse some Observations on the Philosophy of the Mind, and
particularly on the Perceptions we have by Sight.’ On June 17, 1758, he
read a paper ‘On the Difficulty of a just Philosophy of the Human Mind;
General Prejudices against D——d (_sic_) Hume’s System of the Mind; and
some Observations on the Perceptions we have by Sight.’ On March 14,
1759, he presented an ‘Analysis of the Sensations of Smell and Taste.’
On 26th February 1760 ‘Mr. Reid intimat that in his discourse he was
to continue his Analysis of the Senses’; and accordingly, on the 20th
of August in the same year, he gave notice of his intention of ‘taking
Dr. Gregory’s place and reading a paper on the Sense of Touch.’ In July
1761 he appears with a paper on the ‘Transit of Venus’ in that year;
and on the 26th January 1762 he gives a ‘Valedictory Address,’ as first
annual president of the Society (the members having previously taken the
chair by rotation)—on ‘Euclid’s Definitions and Axioms,’ in which he
returns to the favourite studies of his youth. In 1761 he had resumed
his investigation of the Senses, for in September he is credited with
another paper on the ‘Sense of Seeing.’ His last contribution, in October
1762, was on ‘Perception,’ which summed up his characteristic work in the
Society. And after reading this paper, ‘Mr. Reid declined to give it for
insertion in the Records, in regard that he proposed soon to send it to
the press, along with some other discourses which he had read before the
Society.’ A minute on 28th October 1764 announces that, ‘as Dr. Reid has
left this country, no discourse is to be expected from him.’

The following Questions for debate were proposed by Reid during the
six years of his membership:—1758, 13th and 26th July, ‘Are the Objects
of the Human Mind properly divided into Impressions and Ideas; and must
every Idea be a copy of a preceding Impression?’ This closely touches the
fundamental assumption of the sceptical philosophy. Those which follow
suggest a disposition to ethical and social discussion. 12th June 1759,
‘Whether Mankind with regard to Morals always was and is the same?’ 1st
April 1760, ‘Whether it is proper to educate Children without instilling
Principles into them of any kind whatever?’ (Beattie’s celebrated
experiment in the education of his son may be connected with this.) 15th
April 1761, ‘Whether Moral Character consists in Affections in which the
Will is not concerned, or in fixed, habitual, and constant Purposes?’ 8th
January 1762, ‘Whether by the encouragement of proper Laws the Number
of Births in Great Britain might be nearly doubled, or at least greatly
increased?’ Here we have a sort of inverted Malthusianism suggested. 22nd
November 1763, ‘Whether every Action deserving Moral Approbation must be
done from a persuasion of its being morally good?’

Beattie, in one of his letters to Sir W. Forbes, thus refers to the
Society and to his own philosophical relation to Reid:—

    ‘I have of late been much engaged in metaphysics; at least,
    I have been labouring with all my might to overturn that
    visionary science. I am a member of a club in this town who
    style themselves the Philosophical Society. I hope you will not
    think the worse of this Society when I tell you, that to it
    the world is indebted for a _Comparative View of the Faculties
    of Man_, and an _Inquiry into Human Nature on the Principles
    of Common Sense_. I have shown that all genuine reasoning does
    ultimately terminate in principles which it is impossible to
    disbelieve, and as impossible to prove; that, therefore, the
    ultimate standard of truth to us is Common Sense, or that
    instinctive conviction into which all true reasoning does
    resolve itself; that therefore what contradicts Common Sense is
    in itself absurd, however subtle the arguments which support
    it. My principles in the main are not essentially different
    from Dr. Reid’s; but they seem to offer a more compendious
    method of destroying scepticism. I intend to show (and have
    already in part shown) that all sophistical reasoning is
    marked by certain characters which distinguish it from true
    investigation; and thus I flatter myself I shall be able to
    discover a method of detecting sophistry, even when one is not
    able to give a logical confutation of its arguments.’

Beattie argued more in the temper of a partisan than Reid, who criticised
Hume in the spirit of a free and candid inquirer after truth.

On the 18th of January 1762 the honorary Doctorate of Divinity was
conferred on Reid by Marischal College.

His fame was now more than local. In December 1763 he accepted the
invitation of the University of Glasgow to fill the Chair of Moral
Philosophy which Adam Smith had resigned. Before he entered on this new
career he had given to the world an _Inquiry into the Human Mind on
the Principles of Common Sense_. This classic work embodies the result
of twenty years of steady reflection at New Machar and Aberdeen, in
quest of the actual foundation of human knowledge. Before we follow
him to Glasgow, we must examine this issue of his intellectual life in
Aberdeenshire—due to the challenge of modern agnosticism in the person of
David Hume.




