CHAPTER V. -- IMPLICATIONS FOR NURSING EDUCATION

In this chapter, we address the implications of our theory for nursing
education, including designing, implementing, and administering a
program of study. The assumptions that ground Nursing as Caring
also ground the practice of nursing education and nursing education
administration. The structure and practices of the education program
are expressions of the discipline and, therefore, should be explicit
reflections of the values and assumptions inherent in the statement of
focus of the discipline. From the perspective of Nursing as Caring, all
structures and activities should reflect the fundamental assumption that
persons are caring by virtue of their humanness. Other assumptions and
values reflected in the education program include: knowing the person as
whole and complete in the moment and living caring uniquely; understand
that personhood is a process of living grounded in caring and is
enhanced through participation in nurturing relationships with caring
others; and, finally, affirming nursing as a discipline and profession.

The curriculum, the foundation of the education program, asserts the
focus and domain of nursing as nurturing persons living caring and
growing in caring. All activities of the program of study are directed
toward developing, organizing, and communicating nursing knowledge, that
is, knowledge of nurturing persons living caring and growing in caring.

The model for organizational design of nursing education is analogous
to the dancing circle described earlier. Members of the circle include
administrators, faculty, colleagues, students, staff, community, and the
nursed. What this circle represents is the commitment of each dancer to
understanding and supporting the study of the discipline of nursing. The
role of administrator in the circle is more clearly understood when the
origin of the word is reflected upon. The term administrator is derived
from the Latin ad ministrare, to serve (Guralnik, 1976). This definition
connotes the idea of rendering service. Administrators within the circle
are by nature of role obligated to ministering, to securing and to
providing resources needed by faculty, students, and staff to meet
program objectives. Faculty, students, and administrators dance together
in the study of nursing. Faculty support an environment that values
the uniqueness of each person and sustains each person's unique way
of living and growing in caring. This process requires trust, hope,
courage, and patience. Because the purpose of nursing education is to
study the discipline and practice of nursing, the nursed must be in the
circle. The community created is that of persons living caring in the
moment, each person valued as special and unique.

We have said in Chapter 1 that the domain of a discipline is that which
its members assert. The statement of focus that directs the study of
nursing from this theoretical perspective is that of nurturing persons
as they live caring and grow in caring. The study of nursing is
approached through the use of nursing situations. The knowledge of
nursing resides in the nursing situation and is brought to life through
study. The nursing situation is a shared lived experience in which the
caring between the nurse and the one nursed enhances personhood or the
process of living grounded in caring. These situations, like the many
cited in earlier chapters, become available for study through the use of
story (recounting the situation in ways that convey the essence of the
lived experience). These stories create anew the lived experience of
caring between the nurse and the nursed, and bring to life the basic
values described in Chapter 1.

Story then becomes the method for studying and knowing nursing. Carper's
(1978) four patterns of knowing serve as an organizing framework for
asking epistemological questions of caring in nursing. Those patterns
include personal, ethical, empirical, and aesthetic knowing. Each of
these patterns comes into play as one strives to understand the whole of
the situation. Personal knowing centers on knowing and encountering self
and other, empirical knowing addresses the science of caring in nursing,
ethical knowing focuses on what "ought to be" in nursing situations,
and aesthetic knowing is the integration and synthesis of all knowing
as lived in a particular situation. The poem, "Intensive Care," a
representation of a nursing situation, is given here to illustrate the
organization of sample content.


                    INTENSIVE CARE
                       (centered)

        Did you see nurse that you can know me--
        The part that is me, my mind and soul is in my eyes
        These tubes that are everywhere-that is not me.
        The one in my throat is the worse of all--
        Now my whole being, the essence of me I
        must reflect
        through my hands but they are tied down,
        movements
        of my head but did you realize that
        uncomfortable for me
        or through my eyes and you do not notice them--
        except once today during my bath.
        You speak to me and look at the tubes--
        Don't you know my thoughts are all over my face
        Don't you realize your thoughts are on your face--
        In your touch and your tone of voice.
        I wrote a request on paper and you said "I'll take care
        Of it for you" your tone said "Why can't this
        woman
        Do anything for herself?"
        You positioned your hand to count my pulse but I
        Can't say you touched me-you wouldn't hold my
        hand that I may touch you.
        You walked in for the first time today with a grin
        on your face but your mouth is now tight
        you grimaced a lot as you bathed me.
        Don't you see nurse that you can know me--I'm not
        A chart or tubes of medication, monitors or all
        the other things you look at so intensely--I'm
        more than that
        I'm scared--just look in my eyes.
                          --S. Carr, 1991


Carper's (1978) patterns of knowing offer a framework for organizing the
content for studying this nursing situation.


PERSONAL KNOWING

  Who are the nurse and nursed as caring persons in the moment?
  How are the nurse and nursed expressing caring in this moment?
  What is the meaning of this situation to the nurse and nursed in
       terms of present realities and future possibilities?
  What is the meaning of vulnerability and mortality?
  What is the value of intuition in practice?
  Empirical Knowing
  What nursing and related research exists on modes of communication,
        the meaning of presence in practice, touch, objectification,
        recovery of cardiac patients, technological caring,
        understanding the experience of fear and loneliness?
  What factual knowledge is needed to be competent in this particular
        situation--e.g. knowledge of monitors, chest tubes,
         medications, cardiac care, diagnostic data?


ETHICAL KNOWING

  If nursing is practiced from the perspective of Nursing as Caring,
        what obligations are inherent in this situation?
  How is the nurse demonstrating the value that all persons are caring?
        Respect for person-as-person? Interconnectedness?
  What dilemmas are present in this story?


AESTHETIC KNOWING

  How is the nursed supported to live dreams of living and growing in caring?
  How could the nurse transcend the moment to create possibilities
        within this specific nursing situation?
  What metaphors might express the meaning of this nursing situation?


Students studying this nursing situation are challenged to know the
person as caring, as living caring uniquely in the moment, as having
hopes and dreams for growing in caring, and as being whole or complete
in the moment. The student is also challenged to know the nurse as
caring person in the moment and to project ways of supporting the nurse
as caring person.

Through the study of this situation, students and faculty identify
a range of calls for nursing as well as nurturing responses. In this
process, there is dialogue focused on knowing the nurse and nursed in
the story as caring person. We would contribute the following as our
knowing of the nursed as caring person. Through her honest expression of
"I'm scared--just look in my eyes," we know her as living hope, honesty,
and transcending fear through courage.

Calls for nursing might include a call to be known as caring person and
a call to have interconnectedness recognized and affirmed. The nurse's
response to these calls is individual and evolves from who one is as
person and nurse. Therefore, the range of responses is multiple and
varied--each reflecting the nurse's informed living of caring in the
moment. Each nurturing response is focused on nurturing the person as
he or she lives caring and expresses hopes and dreams for growing in
caring.

If the nurse is responding to the call of the person for recognition
and affirmation of interconnectedness, perhaps the nurse would express
hearing this call by being present with the intention of knowing
other as caring person. This may be communicated through active
patience--giving the other time and space to be known; through touch
which communicates respect and interconnectedness; through the nurse
sharing who he or she is as caring person in this relationship--perhaps
through tears as the resonance of commonality of this experience is
known; through music or poetry if a shared love of these has been
discovered.

Through dialogue, students and faculty openly engage in the study of
nursing. The dialogue encourages and supports students and faculty to
freely express who they are as person and nurse living caring through
the re-presented story. It provides an opportunity to affirm values
of self and discipline and to study how these values may be lived in
practice. It is in this dialogue of nursing that faculty communicate
their love for nursing. Time is needed for both faculty and students
to reflect on the meaning of being a member of this discipline and more
specifically, on the meaning of being a member of a discipline
focused on nurturing persons as they live and grow in caring. Dialogue
facilitates the integration of this understanding and is a key concept
in present and future transformations of nursing education. Common
engagement in dialogue as nursing stories are shared and studied is the
way of being.

The story lived anew provides students the opportunity to participate
in a lived experience of nursing and to create new possibilities. Since
nursing can only occur through intentionality and authentic presence
with the nursed, students and faculty share how they prepare to enter
the world of the nursed, and how they come to understand that world.
This process requires that students be encouraged to live fully their
personhood. To facilitate such living, faculty support an environment in
which students are free to choose and to express self in various ways.
For example, perhaps the holistic understanding of a nursing situation
would be expressed as aesthetic knowing through dance, poetry, music,
painting, or the like. We view this process of education as critical to
moral education. When students enter nursing situations to know other as
living and growing in caring, they are living out the moral obligation
that arises from the commitment to know person as caring. Here, then,
is an expression of a dynamic view of morality in which caring is always
lived in the moment.

In the study of the situation, Intensive Care, brought to the dialogue
are personal experiences of being alone, being afraid, and being with
someone and not being heard or seen as caring person. This
personal knowing fosters human awareness of our connectedness and
interdependence. In this context, the nurse does not study the empirics
of cardiac pathology to understand a perceived deficit but rather to
become competent in drawing forth the knowledge that is specific to
knowing this person as whole in the moment. The nurse comes to know
the person as living caring and growing in caring, situated within
a particular set of circumstances, some of which the nurse knows
explicitly. Each student entering the nursing situation will ask,
"How can I nurture this person in living and growing in caring in
this situation?" Because each nurse may hear calls for caring in many
different ways, nursing responses are many and varied. For nursing
faculty, openness to multiple possibilities presents a particular
challenge and an opportunity to suspend entrenched patterns of teaching
nursing.

Faculty and students study nursing together. Faculty join students in a
constant search to discover the content and meaning of the discipline.
Undoubtedly, this understanding of extant possibilities presents a
different view of the role of teacher. Yet, it is a view that engenders
the sort of humility essential to nursing for there is always more
to know. Although past methods of teaching of nursing may have been
comfortably structured through textbooks organized around medical
science, faculty are now empowered to question what should be the focus
of study in the discipline of nursing. Faculty are encouraged to take
risks and let go of the familiar. The perspective that Nursing as Caring
conveys--the fullness and richness of nursing--will allow faculty to
willingly assume the risks inherent in a new way of guiding the study of
nursing.

In teaching Nursing as Caring, faculty assist students to come to know,
appreciate, and celebrate self and other as caring person. Mayeroff's
On Caring (1971) provides a context for the generic knowing of self as
caring. Through dyads or small groups, students share life situations
in which they experienced knowing self and other as caring person.
Mayeroff's caring ingredients (knowing, alternating rhythm, trust,
honesty, hope, courage, humility, patience) also serve as a source for
reflection as one asks "who am I as caring person?". As students engage
in this exercise, their emerging reflections begin to ground them as
they grow in their understanding of person as they live and grow in
caring. Students will also draw on the knowledge gleaned in the study
of arts and humanities as they attempt to gain a deeper understanding of
person. The process of knowing self and other as caring is lifelong. In
an educational program grounded in Nursing as Caring, however, the focus
on personal knowing (in the study for every nursing situation) provides
a deliberate opportunity for greater knowing of self and other as caring
person.

Students, as well as faculty, are in a continual search to discover
greater meaning of caring as uniquely expressed in nursing; journaling
is an approach that facilitates this search. For example, in a special
form of journaling, students actively dialogue with authors whose works
they are reading and with the ideas expressed in their works. This
process enhances the students' understanding of caring in nursing.
Over time, students integrate and synthesize many ideas and create new
understandings. Examination is another process to facilitate learning.
From this theoretical perspective, essay examinations that present
nursing situations provide opportunities for students to express their
knowledge of nurturing persons living and growing in caring. Aesthetic
projects also allow the student the opportunity to communicate
understanding of a nursing situation. We would like to share with you
a project from a course in which the students were asked to express the
beauty of a nursing situation. In this nursing situation, the nurse,
Michelle, shared her gifts of therapeutic touch and voice as expressions
of caring for David in the moment, drawing on an earlier dialogue in
which David told her of his love of meditation and the Ave Maria, she
wrote:


                AVE MARIA
          AND THERAPEUTIC TOUCH
                FOR DAVID

          "David, let me know your pain;
          From fractured leg and heart,
          Share with me your private hell.
          Next to one who's far,
          Far away his own world:
          Moaning, crying, weak.
          What's it like to lie beside
          One who cannot speak?

          "Tell me David, what you do
          To cancel out the sound;
          Eliminate the smell of dung
          In which your roommate's found?
          Who can you complain about?
          Are you worse off than he?
          Tied to IV, traction lines
          You cannot be free.

          "David, I can see your pain.
          Tell me where you are.
          Tied in bed. Powerless.
          From loved ones you're apart.
          I can't move you from this place
          To take your pain away.
          But let me lay my hands on you
          And sing to you today."

          Ave Marie, gratia plena
          Maria, gratia plena.
          Ave dominus, dominus tecum.
          Benedicta to in mulieribus.
          Et benedictus
          Et benedictus, fructus ventris;
          Ventris tui, Jesu.
          Ave Maria

          I sang the song he loved and used
          To meditate and flee,
          Escape tormenting stimuli.
          He needed to be freed,
          To understand why he must bear
          This trial, this hell, this pain,
          I sang the tune; I touched with care
          To give him peace again.

                        --Stobie, 1991


Expressions of nursing such as this, which was partly sung, beautifully
portray the living of caring between the nurse and the nursed and
exemplify how caring enhances personhood. Faculty play a vital role in
fostering in students the courage to take such risks. Faculty encourage
self-affirmation in students, open, nonjudgmental dialogue, living the
caring ideal in the classroom and development of the students' moral
groundedness in caring (Boykin & Schoenhofer, 1990). Faculty also take
the risk of sharing self through their stories of nursing. The sharing
of nursing situations is, in essence, a sharing of our innermost core
of common identity and forms a type of collegiality among those who are
studying the discipline together.

How can faculty be supported to teach nursing in new ways? The
administrator of the program fosters a culture in which the study of
the discipline from the caring perspective, as presented here, can be
achieved freely and fully. All actions of the dean are directed toward
creating, maintaining, and supporting this goal. The theoretical
assumptions ground the activities of the dean in both internal and
external areas of responsibility.

Internally, the administrator, faculty, staff, and students model
commitment by creating an environment that fosters the knowing, living,
and growing of persons in caring. The dean "ministers" by assuring that
faculty, students, and staff are presented ongoing opportunities to
know themselves ontologically as caring persons and professionals and
to understand how caring orders their lives. Who we are as person
influences who we are as student, colleague, nurse, scholar, and
administrator. Therefore, attention must be directed to knowing self.
Time must be devoted to knowing and experiencing our humanness.

The constant struggle to know self and other as caring person nourishes
our knowing of the nursed. Through constant discovery of self, the other
is also continually discovered. This culture sensitizes each person
to ways of being with other that necessitate that each action reflect
respect for person as person. Therefore, when issues are to be
addressed, they are addressed openly and fully. Persons are encouraged
to bring forth who they are so there is congruence between actions and
feelings. Understanding each other's views is essential to the unfolding
of this culture. Dialogue assists one to know the other's needs and
desires, and to image oneself in the other's place. As such, the dean,
faculty, staff, and students become skilled in the use of the caring
ingredients, internalized as personally valid ways of expressing caring:
knowing, alternating rhythms, trust, hope, courage, honesty, humility,
and patience (Mayeroff, 1971).

Of utmost importance in fostering this culture are decisions regarding
selection of faculty. Although many prospective faculty have a fairly
traditional lens for the study of nursing (that is, the lens of medical
science or frameworks borrowed from other disciplines), this actually
becomes an insignificant factor in the process of selection. At the
heart of choosing new faculty is knowing their passion for and love of
nursing. A focus of the interview process is discerning the person's
devotion to the discipline. It is our belief that this attitude, this
love of nursing, is the music for the dancers in the circle. One way
to know if prospective faculty love nursing is to ask them to share
a significant story from practice. Having faculty share a story
illuminates their conceptualization of the discipline. Many faculty who
have not had the opportunity to teach nursing through an articulated
nursing lens, can yet communicate nursing clearly through story.

Faculty are supported in their struggles to conceptualize nursing in
a new way. Forums in which faculty come together and aesthetically
re-present and share their nursing story is one strategy that
effectively engages self and other in the knowing of nursing. It is also
a wonderful way to orient faculty as to how to use nursing situations to
teach nursing. Faculty support each other as colleagues in learning
to teach nursing in a new way, in becoming expert in the practice of
nursing education, and in living out the basic assumptions of this
theory. This need for support holds true not only for faculty-faculty
relationships but for all relationships. The comfort of faculty teaching
nursing from the perspective of Nursing as Caring is enhanced as the
value of knowing other as caring, as living our histories and as having
special nursing stories to share is appreciated.

The administrator, faculty, and staff assist in fostering an environment
that furthers the development of the students' capacity to care.
Competency in caring is a goal of the educational process. Students are
continually guided to know self and other as caring person as faculty
and administrators model actions that reflect respect for person as
person. Each student is known as caring person, as special and unique.
Policies allow for consideration of individual situations and diverse
possibilities. In this culture, the dean and faculty attempt to know the
student as caring person and student of the discipline. The intention of
the dean to know students in this way can be evident through invitations
for regularly scheduled dialogue in which students share openly their
conceptions about nursing. The administrator is truly with students to
know them as caring persons and to hear from them their understanding of
nursing as caring.

Externally, the dean "ministers" to faculty, students, and staff through
securing resources necessary to accomplish program goals. The dean
articulates to persons in the academic and broader community their
role in the dance of nursing. The role of these persons is to provide
resources such as scholarships, faculty development possibilities,
learning resources, and research monies. Although this may be a primary
responsibility of the dean by nature of the role, all persons in the
circle share in this process by virtue of their commitment to nursing.

The administrator brings to the circle a skillful use of the caring
ingredients. Alternating rhythms are used to understand and appreciate
each person's unique contributions that support the achievement of
program goals. For example, the budgetary process is essential to
creating an environment that reflects the valuing of nursing. Commitment
of the dean to securing resources necessary to accomplish the program
goals drives the budget rather than the budget driving the commitment.
The administrator's devotion to the discipline and to the basic
assumptions of the theory direct all activities. The administrator makes
decisions that reflect the basic beliefs of this theory. All decisions
would ultimately be made from this standpoint: "What action should
I take as administrator which would support the study of nursing as
nurturing persons living in caring and growing in caring?"


What we have tried to suggest here is that every aspect of nursing
education is grounded in the values and assumptions inherent in this
theoretical focus. Thus, not only is the curriculum a direct expression
of Nursing as Caring, but all aspects of program are similarly grounded.


REFERENCES

  Boykin, A., & Schoenhofer, S. (1990). Caring in nursing: Analysis of extant theory. Nursing Science Quarterly, 4, 149-155.
  Carper, B. (1978). Fundamental patterns of knowing in nursing. Advances in Nursing Science, 1, 13-24.
  Carr, S. (1991). Intensive Care. Nightingale Songs, PO. Box 057563, West Palm Beach, FL 33405-7563, 2 (1).
  Guralnik, D. (1976). Webster's new world dictionary of the American language. Cleveland: William Collings + World Publishing Co.
  Mayeroff, M. (1971). On caring. New York: Harper & Row.
  Nodding, N. (1988). An ethic of caring and its implications for institutional arrangement. American Journal of Education, 97, 215-230.
  Roble, M. (1991). Ave Maria and Therapeutic Touch for David. Nightingale Songs, P.O. Box 057563, West Palm Beach, FL 33405-7563, 1 (3).



[Illustration: Button]


