CHAPTER X.

A BREEZE FROM THE WEST.


They were rather late with their coffee the next morning, and while
they were taking it the bells of Santa Pudentiana, close to them, were
ringing a _morto_――one, two, three, and again one, two, three――with a
mournful persistence.

“It is just what we need,” the Signora said. “Our danger, at this
moment, is that we may be too lightly happy. Those bells mean that a
nun is dead, and that there is to be a High Mass for her in half an
hour or so. Shall we go?”

Marion, who had joined them, and was sitting beside Bianca, said to
her: “We are not afraid of seeing death, are we?”

“But we might be better for being reminded of it,” she said.

The ladies followed the people’s pretty fashion of putting black lace
veils on their heads instead of bonnets, and had the good taste, too,
to exchange their gay morning house-dresses for black ones before
going to the church.

“It is the one thing in which I would have my country-women imitate
the Roman ladies,” Mr. Vane said―― “in their sober costume for the
church.”

The sun was scorching when they went out, and shone so brightly on the
gold ground of the mosaic front of Santa Pudentiana that the figures
there flickered as if painted on flame. But the sunken court had a
hint of coolness, and when they entered the church they were very glad
to have the light wraps the Signora had told them to bring; for the
air was chilly and damp, the floor being a full story below the level
of the modern street, and not a ray of sunshine entering, except what
got in by the cupola. This was enough to light beautifully the mosaics
of the tribune, where it is hard to believe one does not see a
balcony, with the Saviour and the saints looking over, so real are the
forms.

The Mass which they had come to hear was, however, nearly ended,
having begun with a promptitude unusual in Rome. In a few minutes the
priest left the altar, the people went away, and the lights were put
out. Seeing two or three persons enter the sanctuary, and go to look
through an open panel in the side wall, our party followed them, and
found that the panel opened into a chapel, or chamber, beside the
grand altar. This chamber was so draped as to be perfectly dark,
except for the candles that burned at the head and feet of the dead
nun lying there. She lay close to the open panel, and in sight of the
altar where the divine Sacrifice had just been offered for her, if her
eyes could have seen it. It was the emaciated but beautiful form of a
woman of middle age, dressed in her religious costume, with her hands
crossed on her breast, the face composed into an expression of
unspeakable solemnity and peace. Awe-stricken and silent, they stood
and gazed at her. They had come here from charity, indeed, but rather
to temper their too earthly happiness with a merely serious thought,
as one cools a heated wine with ice, making it more delicious so, than
from any profound recognition of the dreadfulness of death and the
perils of life. But these sealed lips spoke volumes to them, and the
dark and silent church, now quite deserted, chilled them like the
valley of the shadow of death through which this soul had
passed――whither? It was a life dedicated to God, and given up assisted
by all the sacred rites of religion; yet that face told them that
death had not been met with any presuming confidence, and that before
the soul of the dying religious the stern simplicity and clearness of
the primitive Christian law had stood untempered by any glozings.

Marion was the first to move. Seeing Bianca look very pale, he drew
her away, and the others followed.

How strange the gay sunny world looked to them when they went out! The
unexpected solemnity of the scene had so drawn their minds from
everything else that they had been chilled and darkened in soul as
well as in body. Yet, though the warmth and light were grateful to
them, they had no wish to cast entirely off that sombre impression,
and would have remained in the church to pray awhile, but for the
imprudence, in a sanitary point of view. Seeing, however, the door of
the little church opposite, the Bambino Gesù, open, they went in there
a few minutes. This church of the Infant Jesus is attached to a
convent of nuns, and a company of young girls were just entering from
the sacristy to make their First Communion, ranging themselves inside
the sanctuary. They were dressed alike in white cashmere robes, and
long silk veils in such narrow stripes of blue and white as to look
like plain blue, fastened with wreaths of red and white roses.
Floating slowly in with folded hands and fair, downcast faces, they
knelt in a double ring about the sanctuary, leaned forward on the
benches set for them, and remained motionless as statues, awaiting the
coming of the Lord for the first time into their innocent hearts, as
yet uncontaminated and untried by the world. At each end of the line a
little boy, dressed as an angel, stood bearing a torch. For a week or
ten days these girls had all been in retreat in the convent,
instructed by the nuns; and when the Mass and their last breakfast
together should be over, they would separate to their own homes, never
to meet again, perhaps. Their parents and friends awaited them now in
the church.

When the household of _Casa Ottant’-otto_ went home, they found a pile
of letters and papers from America awaiting them, which they read and
talked over in pauses of the dinner. There were business
letters――short, if not sweet; long family letters, such as make one
feel at home again, with all their familiar details and touching
reminiscences; there were items of public news, descriptions of
pageants in which the New World had rivalled, or surpassed, the Old;
of fierce storms that had found the western continent a fitting stage
to sweep their tragic skirts across; and of inundations from great
crystalline rivers to which the classic Tiber is a mere muddy sewer.
There was nonchalant mention of immense frauds, of fires that had
devoured whole streets and squares, and reduced scores of persons to
penury in a few hours, and of gigantic schemes for building up or
pulling down. There were accounts of some popular indignation, in
which the people had spoken without riot and been listened to, and of
authority enforced, where law had conquered without bloodshed or
treachery; of public sympathy with great misfortunes where no
calculation of merit or reward cramped the soul of the givers, but the
heart overflowed generously into the hand. In fine, there was a
month’s summary of such events as those with which America, the fresco
painter of the age, sketches her long, bold lines and splashes her
colors on the page of time.

“America for ever!” cried Isabel, swinging a newspaper about with such
enthusiasm that she nearly upset the vinegar and oil bottles at her
elbow. “Do you know, my respected hearers, that at this instant my
country is looking across the ocean at me with a pair of eyes like two
suns. There isn’t another nation on earth that she couldn’t take
between her teeth and shake the life out of. Will you excuse me while
I go into the other room and play and sing just one stanza of the
‘Star-spangled Banner’?”

The Signora, who was breaking lettuce in the snowy folds of a towel,
smiled beamingly on the speaker, at the same time making haste to save
the imperilled cruets. “Season your admiration for a while till I have
made the salad,” she said. “I would rather not have my attention
distracted by patriotic music. Besides, nobody sings at noon. The
birds are taking their nap, and you might wake them. Besides, again, I
want you to save your voice for this evening. Some American people are
coming here, and it might please them to hear the songs of their
country in a strange land.”

The Americans who came that evening belonged to a party which was
making a flying tour of Europe, and two of them were representatives
of two distinct and extreme classes――that which scoffs at everything
foreign, and that which is enchanted with everything foreign. Both
were young, pretty, clever, and fairly educated, had gone through very
nearly the same training, and the one had come out almost, or quite, a
girl of the period, the other a girl of the past. The Signora found
herself obliged, as it were, to use the curb with one hand and the
whip with the other while talking with the two.

“Josephine and I are the best of friends,” said Miss Warder in her
free, rapid way, “and we prove it――I by being patient with her, and
she by trying my patience. The number of times in a day that girl goes
into raptures over things scarcely worth looking at is almost
incredible. I caught her yesterday filling a bottle with Tiber water
to carry home. I believe she thinks that brook is larger than the
Mississippi.”

“So it is, in one sense,” responded Miss Josephine in a soft and
tranquil voice. “If you should see a little river all of tears,
wouldn’t you think it more wonderful than a big river all of water?”

The Signora suggested that both might be excellent in their way.

“Then,” pursued the other, “she looks upon old families as she does
on attar of roses and sandal-wood――a condensation of all that is
exquisite, the rest being the refuse. Tell her that a vulgar soul
often gets itself into a privileged body, and she is shocked at you.
It is all I can do to keep my hands off her when I see her watching
with admiring awe the affected grandeur of these little great people.
For me, I laugh at them.” And she tossed her head with the scornful
laugh of the democrat, at which coronets tremble.

“My dear Miss Warder,” said the Signora in her gentlest manner, “a
great many wise people have looked at these things seriously.”

“Owls!” she pronounced with an air of great satisfaction. “Indeed,”
she owned with a little compunction, “I hope it isn’t very bad of me,
but I can’t be serious at anything I see here. To-day I nearly had a
fit over a fire-engine that passed our place. It was a little sort of
handcart affair with four small wheels, and a box bottom that might
hold half a barrel of water. A bar at each side supported seven
painted tin pails, holding about two quarts each, and there was a
small brass pump in the middle of the carriage. This machine was
wheeled along by five men dressed in gray pantaloons with stripes down
the sides, dark blue jackets, and blue caps with a gilt band. I
presume they all go home and put on that costume after the bell rings,
or whatever alarm they have is given. The arrangement was just about
suited to put out a bundle of matches, only the engine would be too
late. The matches would be burned before it got there. I wish they
could hear our electric fire-alarm once, and see our beautiful engines
come flying out of their houses before the first number was well
struck.”

“I am proud of our fire-engines and companies,” the Signora said; “but
they do not prevent our having conflagrations such as are never known
here. The little thought given to fire-extinguishing here proves the
little danger there is of fires. In judging of what people do it is
always well to take into consideration what is necessary to be done.
One would hardly find fault with the Greenlanders for not having large
ice-houses.”

“Their very _scirocco_ disappointed me,” the young woman went on,
unabashed. “I had the impression that it was a tearing high wind, like
a blast out of a furnace. Instead of that, it is only a warm and
unwholesome breath. How different from our sweet south winds at home!”

“Speaking of winds,” said Miss Josephine, “reminds me of the
trumpet-bands. How wild and stirring they are! They make on me an
impression as of mingled wind and fire.”

The Signora smiled on the gentle enthusiast.

“Then,” pursued Miss Warder, “the pokey, slow ways of these people,
and their ceremonies, and their compliments, and their relics――” She
stopped abruptly here, recollecting that she was in a Catholic
household, and had the grace to blush slightly.

“A little more ceremony and politeness would do our people at home a
great deal of good,” the Signora replied coldly. “As to the relics, it
need not, I should think, surprise even an unbeliever that faith
should preserve her mementos as jealously as art has preserved hers,
and that objects which belonged once to beings who now are the
companions of angels, and see God face to face, should have been held
as precious as those which have nothing but a physical beauty. Or even
if the relic should be of doubtful authenticity still a thing
worthless in itself, but which has been touched by the sincere
veneration of centuries, has a sort of venerableness not to be mocked
at. It is like the iron which has been touched by the lodestone, and
so magnetized, or the dull gray mist kissed by sunbeams till it
becomes beautiful and luminous. I do not know,” she added, smiling,
“but you have all heard the story I am going to tell you apropos of
false relics, but it was new to me when I heard it a few days ago from
a clergyman. Many, many years ago a man who was going to the East was
begged by a pious friend to bring him back a piece of the true cross.
The voyager promised, but forgot his promise till he was near home. He
did not wish to disappoint his friend; though, at the same time, he
had no faith whatever in relics, or, indeed, in anything supernatural.
So, after considering a while, he cut a tiny piece out of the mast of
the ship in which he was returning homeward, enclosed it in a
reliquary, and in due time presented it to his friend, who received it
without a doubt, and, of course, told everybody what a treasure he had
become owner of. The news, after awhile, reached the ears of a man
possessed by a devil, and he immediately begged that the sacred relic
might be brought to deliver him. The bit of the ship’s mast was,
accordingly, brought with all ceremony and reverence, the devil in
possession――who, of course, knew the trick that had been
played――laughing, undoubtedly, at the efforts about to be made to
drive him away. But when the necessary prayers had been said, no
sooner did the supposed relic touch the possessed man than the devil
felt himself thrust violently out and forced to fly. But he cried out
in parting: ‘It is faith that drives me away, and not your chip of the
old mast.’”

“That all answers perfectly, as far as the believers are concerned,”
Mr. Vane said. “But I would like to know what became of that Eastern
traveller.”

“The principal _dénoûment_ so overflowed and hid him out of sight that
I did not ask, or have forgotten,” the Signora said. “Girls, what
should have been done to the man who made the relic? Isabel?”

“He should have been at sea again in that very ship, at the time of
the miraculous cure,” Isabel said. “He should have been standing by
the very mast he had cut the bit out of, and a flash of lightning
should have struck him dead.”

“Oh! no, Bella,” said her sister. “He should have been standing by the
possessed man when he was cured, and should have been stricken with
compunction, and should have confessed, and been forgiven, and been,
for all the rest of his life, a model of faith and reverence.”

“Suppose,” Mr. Vane suggested, “that we should choose a medium between
extreme justice and extreme charity, and say that the devil which left
the possessed man entered immediately into that Eastern traveller, and
tormented him by taking him on constant voyages to Jerusalem, swinging
him to and fro like a pendulum, always in the same ship, till at last,
after many years, his victim was enabled to make an act of perfect
faith in the power and mercy of the God crucified, and so be freed
from his tormentor.”

Meantime, Mr. Coleman approached Miss Warder, timid but admiring, much
as one might approach a beautiful panther, and seated himself on the
edge of a chair near her.

“You like Rome?” he inquired in a conciliating voice, not meaning
anything whatever by the question, except to open a conversation. That
was always the first thing he said to a foreigner.

The bright, laughing eyes of the girl flashed over him in one scathing
glance. “It’s charming!” she said with enthusiasm. “One can ask so
many questions here without being thought inquisitive. To be sure, one
doesn’t always get answers to them. I asked to-day a very accomplished
Monsignore the meaning of the broken arch that one sees over nearly
all the altars, and he couldn’t tell me. May be you can.”

Mr. Coleman believed that it was an architectural corruption that came
in with the decline of art, but could not be positive.

“I wouldn’t mind so much,” she went on, “if only they did not set on
the sides of it a hu――an inhuman being, who would naturally be sure to
slide off if he weren’t nailed on, as, indeed, he is. It makes one
feel uncomfortable!”

The gentleman descended into the depth of his consciousness for some
other subject, and came up with――

“Have you ever been to Bologna, ma’am?”

“No,” she replied; “but I have eaten Bologna sausage.”

There was another silence. The young woman folded her hands, looked
modest, and awaited the next remark. It was rather slow in coming, and
feeble when it came. “There are a great many Americans in Rome this
winter, I believe.”

“Oh!” she said confidentially, “nothing to what there are in the
United States. The country is full of them. They bother the life out
of the foreigners.”

Mr. Coleman contemplated his companion’s serious face for some time
with bewilderment, and at length bethought himself to smile.

“I beg your pardon!” she said, looking at him inquiringly, and with a
mild surprise.

He instantly became crimson.

“I――that is, excuse me! I did not speak,” he stammered.

“Oh! you’re very excusable,” she replied, with an emphasis which gave
an exceedingly doubtful meaning to the words.

In the midst of the dreadful pause that followed a polite voice was
heard at the other side, where a second moth had approached this
flame. It was a young Italian who was learning English with such
enthusiasm that he would almost stop strangers in the street to ask
definitions from them. “Would you have the gentility to do me a favor,
miss?” he asked.

“That depends quite on what the favor may be,” she replied, looking at
him with surprise; for the gravity and ceremoniousness of his demeanor
were such as to imply that a very serious matter was in question. “I’m
sure I shall be very happy to oblige you, if I can.”

“Thanks!” he said, bowing. “I learn now your beautiful and noble
language, the which is also much difficult. To-day of it I have seen a
phrase, the which entangles me. At first I it believed to be a beast.
But in the dictionary I found another signification, but without to be
able to comprehend it. The phrase is ‘Irish bull.’ Will you do me the
favor to explicate me the expression?”

“Irish bull,” Miss Warder said, “means no thoroughfare. The sense goes
into the sentence and sticks there; it never comes out.”

The young man looked deeply interested, but not enlightened. He did
not dare to ask more, for his teacher looked at him with an air of
having made a lucid explanation which any one with common sense should
understand at once.

“It is a very noble language, the English,” he repeated faintly.

“I saw a perfect example of it this morning in a place the other side
of the Corso,” she resumed. “A man with a donkey-cart got out of a
great crowd into a place between two rows of houses, evidently
expecting to find an outlet at the other end. There was none, and the
passage was so narrow that to turn was impossible. Now, imagine that
man with his donkey-cart to be an idea, and the houses to be words,
and you will understand perfectly.”

“Oh! certainly. It is clear!” her pupil replied. “Thanks!” His eyes
twinkled, though his mouth was perfectly grave. “It is, then,
something that diverts. You hear the words spoken, you listen at the
other end for the signification to come out, you hear it moving about
here and there inside, but you never receive it. It is excellent. It
would be a good fortune for the world if the people who speak and
write foolish or wicked thoughts should serve themselves always of
this mode of expression.”

Isabel interrupted this lesson by coming to make some friendly
inquiries of her young country-woman, who, after a short conversation,
gave a slight sketch of her life and adventures, speaking with the
most entire frankness.

Meanwhile, Miss Josephine was talking to the Signora, who was charmed
by her looks and manner, both the essence of soft and graceful beauty.
She was fair, rather small, and plump, with the whiteness of an
infant, and pure golden hair in thick waves fastened back from a low
forehead and the most exquisite of ears with a long spray of myrtle.
Her dress was of the softest gray color, close at the wrists and
throat, where delicate laces turned out like the white edges of a gray
cloud. The only light to this tender picture was the hair, the blue
eyes, and an emerald cross, her only ornament.

“I have been to-day to see the relics of Santa Croce,” she said. “I
coaxed Miss Warder not to go, though the permission included her; for
she is such an unbeliever that she spoils all my pleasure in seeing
such things. I am not formally a Catholic, you know, but I more than
half believe. My heart is all convinced, but my head holds out yet a
little. Perhaps that is because I am not well instructed. Well, I
started early, so as to have a walk alone from St. John Lateran across
to Santa Croce. I loitered along under the trees, perfectly happy,
looking about, telling myself over and over again where I was, and
gathering daisies. I looked at those daisies before I came here this
evening, and every one of them had curled its little petals in, and
gone to sleep, like a company of babies. In the morning they will open
their eyes again. Well, I reached Santa Croce, and stood on the steps
there. Everything was so quiet and beautiful, with nature so sweet,
and art so magnificent. No one was near but two or three soldiers
about the convent door. I knew before that the government had taken
nearly all the convent. After a while I heard a trumpet-call inside,
and presently company after company of soldiers, half a regiment
certainly, came out and marched off to the avenue to drill. They were
dressed in gray linen and white gaiters, and looked like a crowd of
great moth-millers.

“A nice, bright-faced young officer was walking to and fro near me,
and I spoke to him, and asked some questions. He seemed pleased to
talk――I suppose he felt dull there; and when I told him about our
army, and what I had seen during the war, he asked me if I would like
to go in and see their quarters. Of course I said yes. So he led me
in, and over the two stories, and showed me the gardens and courts at
the back, and the splendid view from the south windows. What halls
they were!――long, wide corridors, arched, and bordered with pilasters,
with a grand stairway climbing up from one side. Unless for hospital
or barracks, with long rows of beds at the sides, I cannot imagine
what they were made for, except simply to look at, to walk through,
and to make a great pile on the outside. It seemed building for the
mere sake of building. All the beds had the mattresses folded up, with
gray blankets laid on them, and a little shelf of things over the
head. One room, occupied by two officers, was almost as simple. There
were none of the luxuries we have. Then the view! I fancied I could
see half of Italy spread out before me. ‘But I pity the poor _frati_
who have been turned out,’ I could not help saying to my guide. ’So do
I,’ he answered. The soldiers are not to blame, you know. They must
obey. Then I went out, and the others came, and we went up to the
relic chamber. You go up a good many stairs, and through a chapel hung
round with paintings, and then through low-vaulted stone passages, not
high enough for a tall man to stand up in. I should think that the
shape of the way we went would be like a great letter C. At the last
turn we found ourselves in the little chamber, where the great relics
had been set out on the altar. Behind the altar were the strong doors
of the closets in the wall where these relics are kept. On the wall at
the right of the door was the relic-case of Gregory the Great, about
two feet square, with a glass cover, and filled with an innumerable
collection of tiny relics. But all eyes were turned to the altar.

“The _frate_ who came with us put on a stole, after lighting the
candles; then we all knelt while he said a prayer. And then, one by
one, he brought forward the relics, and showed to each, and gave each
one to kiss and touch their beads or crucifixes to, if they wished. I
looked at them with wonder, and neither believed nor disbelieved. It
is so hard for us Americans, you know, to believe in the antiquity of
things, unless we have material proofs. The bone of the finger of St.
Thomas, the thorn from the crown of thorns, the nail――they were
impressive to me chiefly because saints had believed them authentic,
and centuries of Catholics had venerated them. But when, at last, he
took down the crystal cross from the centre of the altar, my heart
melted. I felt that it was real. I wanted to snatch it, and run away
by myself, and cry over and kiss it. I wished the others would kneel,
but they didn’t. They looked at the relic, and kissed it, and that was
all. Perhaps they were each wishing that some one else would kneel and
set the example. At length, when the last one had kissed it, I dropped
on my knees, and the others did the same, and the _frate_ gave us
benediction with the famous old relic of the true cross that Santa
Helena brought from Jerusalem. Then he put the lights out, and we came
away, and some of them bought fac-similes of the nail and the
inscription of the cross, and we came down all the passages again, and
the painted cardinals on the walls of the upper chapel looked at us as
we passed, to see if we were any better for the privilege we had
received, and so down through the quiet church, and out into the
sunshine again. But that crystal cross, with its three pieces of dark
wood inside, has been before my eyes ever since. It must be real, for
it speaks. When I think of it, I can hear all the centuries weep over
it.”

She stopped, smiling but choked a little.

“Dear child!” said the Signora, and pressed the girl’s hand. “You
should enter the church at once.”

There was no answer in words, but the eyes spoke in an earnest gaze,
half pleading, half inquiring.

“My dear,” her friend pursued hastily, “this is no time for us to talk
over such a subject; but if you would like to speak with me, and if I
can do anything for you, I shall be very happy, and you can come to me
quite freely at any time.”

“I shall come, then, very soon,” the girl replied, and kissed the
Signora’s hand.

She had another pleasant incident of the day to tell; for she had been
with a Catholic friend to see Monsignor Mermillod, who was visiting
Rome, and the celebrated Archbishop of Geneva had spoken some kind
words to her, and allowed her to look at his ring, in which was set a
relic and an exquisite tiny painted miniature of St. Francis of Sales.

“He spoke to us of the mission of women,” she said, “and of what power
women have for good and evil, and his illustration was from Dante, and
Beatrice was woman leading man to Paradise. He spoke so that all my
former life seemed to me trivial, and worse than lost. O dear Signora!
if all men whom we wish to respect would speak so! But it really seems
that to please them, and win an influence over them, to have even
their respect, we must be mean. Such a man as Monsignor Mermillod
requires our noblest qualities, and encourages us to be true. One
doesn’t need to be blatant in order to be kindly noticed by him, nor
to boast in order to be appreciated. He is so noble and clear-sighted,
and his very atmosphere is charity.”

“Yes, he practises what he preaches,” the Signora replied.

When the visitors were gone, the family had a little quiet talk before
separating for the night. The influence of the Signora and of Bianca,
falling on minds already prepared to receive it, had been such that
they took happiness, and all the delights of their daily life, not as
a wine that intoxicates to forgetfulness of duty, but as an incentive
to quicken their sense of duty, and a balm to alleviate the pains to
come in the future. Every new pleasure that the Heavenly Father’s
bounty lavished on them, day after day, was welcomed generously, but
with a tender fear. Amid all this constantly-recurring beauty and
sacredness they walked as among angels, hushing themselves.

A quiet word touched the key, and found all in tune; as, striking but
the rim of a true bell, we hear the chord float softly up from turn to
turn. Tacitly the first hesitating motion to separate was abandoned,
and they drew nearer together instead, and presently made a close
circle around the Signora’s chair.

“It gives the mind a stretch to hear different nations talking
together, by even their feeblest representatives,” Mr. Vane had
observed.

“Yes,” Marion replied, lingering, hat in hand. “It always gives me the
same feeling of space and grandeur that I have at sea, when I watch
the waves meet, as if the East and the West were rushing together to
kiss or to tear each other.”

“I wonder,” said Bianca, “if all our national differences are to be
obliterated in heaven, and if we shall have no more those little
piquant characteristics and discussions which make us like each other
even better here.”

The Signora sank into her armchair, quoting the famous recipe for
cooking a hare: “‘First catch your hare.’ My dear friends, we are not
yet in Paradise, and we have a good battle to fight before we shall
get there, and I move that we look to our armor. At all events, heaven
has been described for us by Him who makes it what it is.”

And then Mr. Vane came and stood at the high back of her chair, and a
little beside her, and Isabel took a footstool at the other side.
Marion and Bianca slipped into the sofa opposite.

“I have been thinking to-day,” she continued, “that, when we go to
hear Mass in the Crypt of St. Peter, as it is not probable we shall
ever meet there, all of us, again in this life, we ought all to think
it a duty to receive Holy Communion, if we can. It seems to me that
the special virtue we are to seek there is a stronger faith. I have
been there before, but it was in the company of strangers. We are a
company of sympathizing friends. I think we should look forward to
that visit as a call to make a profession of faith more resolute, if
possible, than we have yet made.”

A silence followed her little speech, which had struck deeper,
perhaps, than their expectations.

“Has no one anything to say?” she asked smilingly. “This is not a
lecture, but a _conversazione_. Are we always to skim the surface in
our talk?”

“You are quite right, Signora,” Mr. Vane said, “and the same thought
has passed through my own mind. I do not know if I shall be thought
prepared to receive so soon, but will ask. It would be something for
me to remember all my life that I had made my first communion there,
and in company with all my family.”

The daughters were silent, both looking down, touched and awed by
their father’s words. With all their affection and confidence, they
never had known anything of his deeper feelings or more serious
intentions than what their intuitive sympathy had divined. Some things
they tacitly guessed, some he tacitly acknowledged; but for a spoken
confidence, either given or demanded, they had each and all been more
free, sometimes, with strangers. And so accustomed had the girls
become to this real reserve under an appearance of perfect ease that
they listened at first almost with terror to the Signora’s challenge.

“I think the children would be pleased,” Mr. Vane added gently,
understanding their silence.

Then they both looked up with a quick smile and a simultaneous “Oh!
yes, papa,” but said no more.

There was still another thin ice that the Signora had to break. She
understood quite well the disposition and habits of Bianca’s lover,
and wished particularly to bring him in with them on this occasion. A
man of a noble and poetical nature, he was, perhaps, in danger of
resting contented with a religious feeling born of an enthusiastic
appreciation of the beauty of the church, and, while obeying its
express commands in the performance of duty, of waiting for the
command to be given. He watched with delight the steps of the Prince’s
Daughter, his loyal word or blow was always ready for those who
attacked her; but he seemed to prefer to be an admiring spectator
rather than an actor, and to do only so much as would keep him in the
acknowledged number of her followers. The Signora suspected that he
contented himself with an Easter Communion, and that there was many a
night when he lay down to sleep without recommending himself to God,
and many a morning when he rose without giving thanks for another day.
If he looked out at the early dawn with delight in its beauty, he felt
that he had praised God; and if, gazing up into the starry midnight,
he thought of the shadowy earth as a hammock swung by invisible cords
from a thick tree full of golden blossoms, it seemed to him that he
had kissed the hand that rocked him to sleep. Intoxicated by the
beauty of the works of God, he exulted in the freedom from baseness
which the magical draught gave him, and could scarcely believe that in
some unwary hour he might draw in a drop of poison with the honey. He
had been wont to say that the virtue of the long-suffering Job had
been preserved, not so much by shutting his bodily eyes and praying,
as by opening his eyes, and looking about where flood and stream, and
snow and hail and dew taught each its lesson, unmarred by earthly
glosses; that that man was surer to fear God who looked at the
leviathan making the deep boil like a pot, leaving a shining path
behind him over the waters, and saying this is the work of God, than
the man who, when he would raise his soul, left his senses behind, and
strove to climb to a knowledge of the power of God without them.

The Signora knew all this, and admired Marion, winged creature that he
was; but she wished him to practise a little more the plain and simple
duties of religion. She observed that he made no motion to assent to
her proposal, and made haste to take for granted that he would assent,
and spare him a promise.

“Then,” she said, “since we are to have this heavenly audience
together, let us make a small part of the preparation together. How
lovely it would be if we could every night say our prayers together,
or a part of them, at least! We will not have company late, and Marion
lives near us, and can take his little starlit walk half an hour later
without any inconvenience. Let us say certain prayers together
expressly in preparation for this communion. We are five. Each one
shall choose a prayer.”

She scarcely paused, feeling that there was still a shyness to
overcome, and that her proposal had been bold and unusual. The thought
fired instead of checking her.

“However closely we may be bound, however sure in our own minds to
spend many years together,” she added hastily, “we may be scattered
like the dust before another day passes. Till we, as closest and
dearest of friends, have prayed together, we have not well deserved
the power of speech nor the consolations of friendship.”

“I choose the Acts of Faith, Hope, Love, Thanksgiving, and
Contrition,” Mr. Vane said.

“I choose the Salve Regina,” Marion added.

Bianca named the Memorare, and Isabel three Our Fathers, three Hail
Marys, and three Glorias.

“And I choose the prayer to the Five Wounds,” said the Signora. “We
each will say our own prayer, and the others answer Amen. Mr. Vane
shall begin.”

They were astonished, not only into compliance, but into willingness
and pleasure. The Signora’s will and enthusiasm blew away all the
foolish scruples and false delicacy which would have for ever
prevented the others making such a proposition, and the five Catholics
knelt together in the room softly lighted by the night and the
Virgin’s lamp, and said their prayers together.

It was a strange yet sweet experience for all, this first union in
family prayers. Mr. Vane, uttering his prayers with an earnest
gravity, gave the tone to the others; and when Marion called on the
Queen of Heaven to hear their cry, as that of the poor exiled children
of Eve coming up from a valley of tears, the Signora’s proposition
showed no more an extraordinary one, but altogether proper and
necessary.

They rose when all was over, and stood silent a moment. It was a
silence full of peace and of a new sense of union.

Marion was the first to speak. “You have strung us to-night like beads
on a corona, “he said, taking the Signora’s hand. “May the chain
endure for ever!”

They parted very quietly, and for the first time Bianca and Marion
said good-night to each other without appearing to remember that they
were lovers, or remembering it so seriously that no one else was
reminded of it.

The Signora went to her room thankful and contented. In spite of her
courage, what she had done had been very difficult for her, and
nothing but her position toward the others of hostess and _cicerone_
had made it seem proper to her. The ice was broken, however, and
successfully; they had gone together to their Heavenly Father, and
they could never again be strangers to each other nor to him. She was
thankful and contented.


TO BE CONTINUED.




SOME QUAINT OLD CITIES.[195]


The Zuyder-Zee will soon be a thing of the past, and in the meanwhile
it is but little known. M. Henri Havard, known as an art-critic, has
given us a glimpse of it, with its decaying ports, its old-fashioned
population, its wonderful atmospheric “effects”; and his book is,
strange to say, newer to most readers than one treating of the South
Sea Islands or the Japanese Archipelago. Not only is the Zuyder-Zee
comparatively unknown to foreigners, but, according to Havard, “it is
more than probable that not ten people in Holland have made this
voyage, and among writers and artists I do not know a single one.”

The navigation of this sea is difficult and dangerous; narrow channels
run between enormous sandbanks hardly covered with water. Tales of
shipwreck abound in every page of the history of the Zuyder-Zee, and
great carcases of ships, breaking up or rotting away, call to mind its
dangers. There is no regular communication between the various ports,
and M. Havard and his companion, M. Van Heemskerck, had to hire a
vessel, engage a crew, and purchase provisions for the voyage. The
vessel was called a “tjalk,” and drew only three feet of water; her
burden was sixty tons. The crew consisted of the “schipper,” one
sailor or “knecht,” and the wife and child of the former. The
travellers put up partitions forming kitchen, dining-room, and
bed-room, and did the cooking by turns. They started in June, 1873,
leaving Amsterdam in the early morning; and, says the author, after a
minute description of the Preraphaelite country surrounding the
principal sea-port of Holland, “the sun which brightened this
magnificent spectacle rendered the atmosphere clear and of a silvery
transparence; reflected by the water, the effect was splendid.” The
first object of interest which they met with were the sluices at
Schellingwoude. “These blocks of granite, imported from distant
countries, massed one upon the other, form an immovable mountain; the
great gates, which allow five ships to enter abreast, have something
majestic about them which impresses the beholder. I know nothing finer
than these sluices, save, perhaps, those of Trolhätten in Sweden.”

The drowsy, pleasant, monotonous impression of the interminable green
meadows, or _polders_ (reclaimed from the sea), the huge windmills,
the few church-steeples of fantastic shapes and varied colors, the
yellow sand-banks, is minutely described, and then the travellers come
upon the island of Marken, like “a green raft lost in a gray sea.”
Seven villages are built on as many little mounds, with a mound used
as a church-yard. The wealth of Marken is in hay and fish. The meadows
are flooded once a year. Trees never grow on the island, and most of
the houses are raised on piles, and look like “great cages suspended
in the air.” There is a peculiarity about the bed-rooms which remind
us of the cupboard-beds common among the poorer classes in Scotland:
“The ground-floor is one large room divided into as many parts as may
be required by wooden partitions without ceilings; the roof――which is,
of course, leaning at an angle――is hung with nets and fishing
utensils.… The bed is the important article of furniture; this is let
into the wall in a kind of cupboard, into which are thrust the
mattresses and other necessary articles. Two little curtains are drawn
across.… It looks as much as possible like a large drawer. Sometimes
considerable luxury is displayed in the bed; the pillow-cases and the
sheets are embroidered with open-work, which is a special fabrication
of the women at Marken――white and yellow threads crossed, something in
the fashion of guipure.” The walls or partitions are mostly painted
blue, the shelves are heaped with common crockery and Japanese
porcelain, for which there is an extravagant demand all over Holland;
a Friesland cuckoo-clock stands in one corner, a carved oak chest in
another, and on this are tall glasses, bulging mugs of delf, and
miraculously-polished old candlesticks of yellow metal. One of the
chief worthies of Marken, Madame Klok, has the richest collection in
the island: china of all sorts (Dutch and Japanese) and all colors,
pictures, foreign curiosities such as sailors always fill their houses
with, are there in profusion; but what she is most proud of is her
carved oak chests, all of Dutch make, their panels sculptured with
great art, and seeming only just to have left the hands of the artist.
The women of Marken have clung to their distinctive dress, and, partly
on that account, are thought very uncivilized by the young Hollanders,
to whom freedom and Paris fashion have become synonymous terms. This
dress is very peculiar, and Havard says very picturesque. Here is part
of his description:

     “The head-dress is composed of an immense cap in the form of
     a mitre, white, lined with brown, to show off the lace and
     embroidery; it is tied close under the chin, pressing
     closely over the ears.… Long ringlets of blonde hair fall
     down to the shoulders or back, and the hair of the front is
     brought forward and cut square along the forehead a little
     above the eyebrows. The gown has a body without sleeves, and
     the skirt or petticoat is independent of it, and always of a
     different stuff. The body is brown, and generally of cloth
     covered with embroidery in colors, in which red
     predominates.… This requires years of labor. A _corsage_
     well embroidered is handed down from mother to daughter as
     an heirloom; the sleeves are in two unequal parts: one, with
     vertical lines of black and white, reaches the elbow, and
     the other, almost to the wrist, is of dark blue, and is
     fastened above the elbow.… The skirt is also divided into
     two unequal parts: the upper, which is about eight inches
     wide only, is a kind of basque with black lines on a light
     ground; the rest of the skirt is dark blue, with a double
     band of reddish brown at the bottom.… Such is the female
     costume of Marken, … so singular that no other costume is
     like it, or even approaches its bizarre appearance.”

These old Dutch settlements all possess many churches, but most of
them disfigured by paint and other monstrosities. The Premonstratensian
monks had a monastery at Marken, having come there from Leeuwarden;
but the old Marienhot, turned to other uses, was pulled down in 1845
on account of its ruinous condition. At Monnikendam, “the town of the
monks,” one of the dead cities――for Marken is only a cluster of
villages――there is what is now called the Great Church, but was
originally the Abbey of St. Nicholas. It has eighty great pillars in
the nave alone, and was built in the fifteenth century, though
according to the style of an earlier day. It is now a “_temple_”
(Calvinist meeting-house); the columns are whitewashed, there is a
modern, bulbous pulpit with green curtains, and the nave is full of
ugly, closed pews in the taste of the eighteenth century.

Havard describes Monnikendam as having a Chinese appearance through
its “green trees, the red and green coloring of the houses and roofs,
and the little gray wooden bridge.” In 1573 it had the honor of taking
a prominent part in the great naval battle of the Zuyder-Zee, when
Cornelius Dirkszoon, a native of Monnikendam, destroyed the Spanish
fleet and took the admiral, Count de Bossu, prisoner. The town kept
the count’s collar of the Golden Fleece as a trophy. Though the monks
have disappeared, the town still preserves its arms――a Franciscan
monk, habited sable (black), holding a mace in his right hand, the
shield being _argent_, or white. The tower of the Great Church is of
enormous height, and Havard, as he looked down on the rich plains
below, wondered at the insensibility of the inhabitants to the
treasures of nature and art within their reach. This deserted
place――where the arrival of two strangers was an event of universal
importance, to be talked of at least a month after they had gone, and
where the old office of town-crier was discharged by a wizened
individual in a black dress-coat, knee-breeches, and three-cornered
hat, whose duty of fixing notices to the doors of such houses as
contained patients attacked by a contagious disease reminds us of the
seventeenth century――was once “a flourishing commercial city, one of
the twenty-nine great towns of Holland, when the Hague was but a
village.”

Between Edam and Hoorn (the latter being the pearl of the dead cities)
the tjalk encountered a terrible storm of wind, which was succeeded by
as wonderful a calm. The author says:

     “I turned my head (towards the eastern horizon) and saw one
     of the most curious spectacles I ever contemplated in my
     life. From the hull of the boat to the top of the mast, from
     the zenith to the nadir, all was of the same tint. No waves,
     no clouds, no heavens, no sea, no horizon were to be
     distinguished――nothing but the same tone of color,
     beautifully soft; at a short distance a great black boat,
     which seemed to rest on nothing, and to be balanced in
     space. The sea and the sky appeared of a pearl-gray color,
     like a satin robe; the boat looked like a great blot of ink.
     Nothing can give an idea of this strange spectacle; words
     cannot describe such a picture. Turner, in his strangest
     moods, never produced anything so extraordinary.”

     The harbor of Hoorn is now “bordered by masses of verdure,
     great trees, and flowers. The place of these charming
     plantations and gardens was once occupied by ship-building
     yards, from whence sailed annually whole fleets of
     newly-constructed ships. Hoorn is really one of the
     prettiest towns which can be found, and at the same time the
     most curious. It is entirely ancient. All the houses are old
     and attractive, covered with sculptures and charming
     bas-reliefs――every roof finishing in the form of stairs.
     Everywhere wide _auvents_ jutting out over doors and
     windows; everywhere carved wood and sculptured stone. The
     tone of color of the bricks is warm and agreeable to the
     eye, giving these ancient habitations an aspect of gayety
     and freshness which contrasts in a singular manner with
     their great age and ancient forms.… It seems almost
     ridiculous to walk about these streets in our modern
     costumes. It almost appears to me that there are certain
     towns where only the plumed hat, the great trunk-hose and
     boots, with a rapier at our side, are in keeping with the
     place; and Hoorn is one of these places.”

The emptiness of the streets, the want of all animation, is the shadow
of the picture, and the author brings to mind the former bustling
prosperity of Hoorn, “filled by an active population, covering the
seas with their fleets and the Indies with their counting-houses.
Every week a thousand wagons entered the markets, bringing in
mountains of cheese from the rich countries around.… Each year there
was a bullock fair, first established in 1389, which drew visitors
from all corners of Europe. Frenchmen, Danes, Frisons, Germans, and
Swedes flocked into the town, and thus augmented its astonishing
prosperity. Hoorn then counted twenty-five thousand inhabitants.” It
had “massive towers and monumental gates,” and bastions and ramparts,
whose place is now occupied by beautiful gardens, shaded by fine
trees, and boasting of the few remaining ruinous towers and gates as
of picturesque adornments――nothing else. The gate at the entrance of
the harbor is of “magnificent proportions and superb in its details.…
Among the sculptures I remarked a cow which a peasant-girl is seen
employed in milking――a homage to the industry of the country which
once enriched the town.” On the top of the other old gate――the
Cowgate――is a group of two cows, and on the side facing the town four
cows are represented standing, while the heraldic lions by their side
support the escutcheon of the town, the arms being a hunting-horn. The
remains of the old commerce of Hoorn may be seen on Thursdays, when a
market is held in the town, and quantities of cheeses still arrive.

     “The numbers of people on foot who pour into the town, the
     carved and heterogeneously-painted wagons, carts, tilburies,
     and all kinds of old-fashioned conveyances passing through
     the east gate, almost incline one to believe that the good
     old times have once more returned to this city. Farmers and
     cattle-dealers and their wives arrive in the carriages, for
     the market-day is a holiday; … they sit stolidly in or upon
     these antediluvian vehicles. I say stolidly; for I do not
     know a better term to express the calm, silent, reflective
     look of both husbands and wives.… At ten o’clock the
     market-place resembles a park of artillery whence the guns
     have been withdrawn. The red cheeses piled up by thousands
     represent to the life the cannon-balls rusted by exposure to
     the air and rain.”

In the Guildhall is preserved Count Bossu’s silver-gilt drinking-cup;
he was a prisoner in Hoorn for three years after his defeat and
capture by the insurgent Dutch. The churches are inferior to the
dwellings, having been spoilt by whitewash and plaster and absurd
Greek peristyles, perhaps supposed at the Reformation to chase away
the evil spirits of an age of superstition. The result is deplorable,
and has unfortunately outlasted the fanaticism of the moment, which
was responsible for these disfigurements. Although the people of Hoorn
claim that their town was rich and famous at the end of the thirteenth
century, the first authentic documents point to the middle of the
fourteenth as the date of regular municipal incorporation, and the
walls were not built till 1426. Hoorn has produced many distinguished
men――Abel Janzoon Tasman, who discovered Van Dieman’s Land and New
Zealand; Jan Pietersz Kœn, who founded Batavia (Java) in 1619; Wouter
Corneliszoon Schouten, who in 1616 doubled Cape Horn, which he named
after his native town; Jan Albertsz Roodtsens, a portrait-painter
known to art-critics as Rhotius, according to the foolish fancy of the
Renaissance for Latinizing one’s “barbaric” name, and others less well
known――doctors and lawyers with Latinized names, honorably mentioned
as learned men in the archives, and brave seamen, patriotic and
enterprising, the Sea-Beggars of the War of Independence against
Spain, and successful explorers in tropical seas.

Having passed through Enkhuizen, the birthplace of the painter Paul
Potter, Havard goes on to Medemblik, the former capital of West
Friesland, and the seat of King Radbod’s power. Here, like a true
artist, he was struck by a beautiful scene painted by nature, who in
these regions, as everywhere else, has so many changing beauties to
offer, to distract one’s attention from even the most perfect human
works of art. “The town, with its towers and steeples and with its
ancient castle, rose up before us against a background of sky of a
rosy tint, fading into lilac-gray and a variety of tints; the town
itself appearing of a blackish green, while over our heads the sky was
of celestial blue; at the very foot of the town the sea repeated all
these splendid colorings and completed the picture. A painter who
should reproduce this scene without alteration would not be believed;
it would be said he had invented the coloring.” Then follows the same
story of desertion, emptiness, and decay, that mark the “dead cities,”
of which this is perhaps the oldest of all. For the well known
incident of King Radbod (repeated seven centuries later by a cacique
of Mexico), and his choice of eternal torments with his forefathers
rather than heaven with strangers to his blood, we have no room. It
illustrates the clannish qualities of the old Teutonic stock. Crossing
part of the peninsula least tainted by “improvement,” the author, on
his way to Texel, passed through many villages such as we have heard
about, but the accounts of which we have believed to be exaggerated.
But these are not to be found on the beaten track, and he who has seen
the typical Brock has only seen an artificially-preserved specimen,
handy and hackneyed, kept on exhibition with the avowed consciousness
of its attraction to strangers. “Every one has heard of the marvellous
cow-houses, paved with delf-tiles and sanded in different colors,
cleaner even than the rooms, where one must neither cough, smoke, nor
spit; where one must not even walk before putting on a great pair of
_sabots_, or wooden shoes, whitened with chalk――cow-sheds in which the
beautiful white-and-black cows are symmetrically arranged upon a
litter which is constantly changed, and whose tails are tied up to the
ceiling for fear of their becoming soiled. Well, it is in these
hamlets that one meets with all this.… Sometimes at the end of the
stable or cow-shed one sees a parlor with a number of fresh young
girls, with their high caps and golden helmets, working at some fancy
work or knitting all sorts of frivolity; the fact is that many of
these peasants are millionaires living among their cheeses with the
greatest simplicity.”

Of Texel and Oude-Schild the author says:

     “When you land, it seems as if you entered a great round
     basin lined with a thick carpet of verdure; an endless
     prairie with a few trees … all the country surrounded by
     high dikes and dunes, which limit the view.… We felt as if
     we were in an Eden under the waters, with the heavens open
     above――a bizarre sensation difficult to describe, but which
     is very strange and original. The dike that protects the
     south of the island is almost as grand and important as that
     of the Helder.… At the place from whence these works spring
     it was necessary to work under water at a depth of above one
     hundred feet.… On the North Sea side are moving sands,
     which, from their desolate aspect, contrast with the rich
     and verdant meadows they guard from the encroachments of the
     sea. These dunes are certainly not the least interesting
     part of the island; they can be entered only on foot or on
     horse-back. The feet of the horse or man who attempts to
     cross them sink either to the ankle of the man or the
     fetlock of the horse. The green meadow suddenly ceases at
     their edge, and an arid solitude, burnt by the sun, extends
     beyond our view――we should say a strip of the African desert
     rather than of the soft and humid soil of Holland.”

This passage into the North Sea has seen some of the largest flotillas
in the world leave its shelter, and not only great commercial fleets
and war fleets, but hardy expeditions of scientific discovery, such as
that of the first explorers who sought for a Northwest Passage through
the ice of the Pole. Although it failed in this, it discovered Nova
Zembla. Twice did the brave William Barends attempt this journey, and
the second voyage was his last, while his associate, Jacob Van
Heemskerck, returned to Holland to be invested with the command of the
navy in 1607, and to attack, under the guns of Gibraltar, the large
Spanish fleet commanded by Alvarez d’Avila. Like Nelson, he died in
the moment of victory, and fifty years later almost the same fate
befell the indomitable Van Tromp. Space forbids to more than mention
Harlingen, a resuscitated city, which has managed to regain much of
its old prosperity, but is not architecturally very interesting. One
of its claims to present attention is the picture-gallery of a
self-made man and discriminating amateur――M. Bos; and one of its
historical claims dates from 1476, when Menno Simonsz, the founder of
the sect of Mennonites, of whom some thousands lately emigrated to
this country, was born within its territory, in the province of
Witmarsum. From this place the travellers started by canal-boat, or
_treckschuit_, a barge drawn by a trotting horse through a level,
productive country. The boat has a first-class and a second-class
compartment, long seats well cushioned for sleeping, a large table for
meals, and, as there is no vibration, it is the laziest, pleasantest
way of travelling, if one is not in a hurry. The breeding of those
splendid black horses, whose long tails sweep the ground, well known
throughout Europe, is still one of the sources of wealth of this
Frison land, and much of the marvellous wood-carving now stored up in
English collections comes from the Frison villages; but of the old
costume of the women nothing remains but the golden helmet.
Circumstances, however, have preserved the old fashion of skating
races, which take place every winter, and are the occasion of regular
festivals. The youth of a whole neighborhood gathers together, and the
prizes are handed down as heirlooms in the families of the winners. In
old times military manœuvres used to be gone through on skates, and
these “reviews” were well worth seeing. The Frison skate is a straight
iron blade, with which, though you cannot go in any other than a
straight line, you can glide along with much greater speed than with
the ordinary curved one we use. The only skating ground of
Holland――the straight canals――are a sufficient explanation of the
difference.

On Leeuwarden we will not dwell, as it is an inland city and by no
means dead, but must notice a funny item in one of its collections of
curiosities――that is a “landdagemmer,” or small pail that state
members used to carry when going to council, and in which they put
their bread and butter or whatever else they had by way of a luncheon.

From Leeuwarden the traveller carries us with him to Franeker, “well
built, well lighted, and certainly one of the cleanest and best-kept
towns in Friesland,” formerly a famous centre of learning. “Such men
as Adrian Metius, the mathematician; Pierius Winsemius, the historian;
Sixtus Amama, the theologian; Ulric Huberus, the jurist; and George
Kazer, who knew every subtlety of the Greek language, with a mass of
other learned scholars, indoctrinated the youth of that age in the
sciences, theology, law, history, and dead languages. The spirit of
learning became contagious, and the whole city was seized with a
desire to acquire knowledge. The students imbued the citizens with a
love of the sciences, and the inhabitants, not content with imbibing
learning themselves, spread it about on the public walls; and one can
still see on the front of the houses, over the doors, and even on the
walls of the stables, numbers of wise inscriptions, moral precepts,
and virtuous sentences” in Latin, signifying, for instance, “Know
thyself”; “Well, or not at all”; “Nothing is good but what is honest,”
etc. The Guildhall, built in the same style as the Leeuwarden
Chancellerie, but daubed over with paint, contains two or three rooms
with their walls literally hidden by gloomy old portraits, said to be
those of the professors of the old academy. Among them is that of a
woman, Anna Maria Schaarman, called by her contemporaries the modern
Sappho, and who, besides poetry, music, painting, engraving, and
modelling, was a proficient in Latin, Greek, Hebrew, and Ethiopian.
Her works were published at Leyden in 1648.

Franeker has a unique exhibition in the shape of a _Planetarium_, or a
small blue-room, with a movable ceiling, representing the vault of
heaven, where the planets, in the form of gilded balls, and by means
of a mechanical process, rotate around the sun, which stands in the
middle of the room in a kind of half obscurity. The room itself is
only lighted by one candle. The whole apparatus is shown by a woman,
said to be the grand-daughter of the great mathematician, Eise
Eisinga, who devoted seven years of his life, from 1773 to 1780, to
making this planetarium.

The tjalk, which the travellers had left at Harlingen, now carried
them over to Hindeloopen, a sea-port and ancient city, but not one of
those which have to complain of the whims of fortune; for it never
rose to great importance at any time of its thousand years of
existence. Just outside the harbor “the wind suddenly lulled, and one
of those dead calms peculiar to these curious shores overtook us. The
clouds seemed to stand still in the heavens, the very water lapping
against our bows grew still, and, but for a bird skimming the horizon,
a sea-dog touching the surface of the waves, or some _bruinvisch_
leaping in pure joy under the calm waters, all nature appeared as if
wrapped in a deep sleep.” The town began by being a hamlet in the huge
forest of Kreijl (most of whose area is now the bottom of the
Zuyder-Zee), and its name signifies “the hind’s run,” while a running
hind forms the municipal arms. The harbor, which in 1225, three
hundred years after the origin of the town, was endowed with certain
privileges, was never large enough for heavily-freighted ships; and
though the inhabitants praiseworthily tried to enrich themselves by
forming fishing companies, the boats had to be built in other ports,
and the interest of Hindeloopen in these expeditions had always more
or less of an artificial character. Notwithstanding the real claims of
the town to notice, it has escaped the mention of historians;
Cornelius Kempius ignores it altogether; Guicciardini merely refers to
it; Blaeu the geographer, in spite of his minute exactitude, only
gives it a dozen dry lines; and a later writer, the author of _Les
Délices des Pays-Bas_ (1769), is not more complimentary, though he
allows it some “commercial interest.” It often needs an artist’s eye
to look with favor on these world-forgotten places, and draw out
details which make us wonder how it was possible that they have been
hitherto so persistently overlooked. It is often a greater pleasure,
we confess, to read of such places than of those greater ones, the
pilgrimages of the world, where each successive generation of scholars
and explorers flocks to bring to light some fact or some stone, and
where, when all that is likely to be important has been found, they
still pore devotedly over dust and fragments, eager to tell the world
how the ancients ate or dressed, and how their present descendants
retain or have lost or modified the old manners and customs. Havard,
accordingly, says of Hindeloopen:

     “Small as it was, it had its arts, its special costume, a
     style of architecture, and a language only spoken within its
     walls――which is a fact so singular that it would appear
     incredible were it not for traces and incontestable proofs
     of their existence.[196] The most remarkable of its
     peculiarities was, and is still, the costume worn by the
     women.… Not content with having a dress different to other
     nations, the inhabitants of Hindeloopen regulated the style
     of their costume, and adjusted it according to the age and
     position of the woman in its smallest detail. From its very
     birth a child is put into the national costume: its little
     legs are wrapped in the usual linen, but the upper part of
     its body is subjected to the prevailing habit of the
     country. Its head is covered with a double cap――one of
     linen, the other of silk garnished with the usual kerchief;
     above this again is placed another calico kerchief, and on
     that again a third of larger dimensions, scarlet in color
     and trimmed with lace. The tiny body is cased in a
     close-fitting jacket, over which is an embroidered bib, and
     the baby’s hands are put into calico mittens.”

Then follows a description of the changes of, or rather additions to,
the costume from the age of eighteen months upwards. The marriageable
girls wore the most complicated, everything, even the “floss-silk
stockings,” being of a certain regulation make, color, and stuff.
Married women wore their hair entirely covered by the headdress of
square pieces of red cloth embroidered in gold, above the cap itself.
Widows wore the same articles, but all black and white; and, besides
this daily costume, there were others worn on festival days, chiefly
distinguished by a cape or overall, with other details yet, belonging
some to Whitsuntide, some to Corpus Christi, and others to betrothed
girls, and relating to circumstances, weddings, and funerals, to the
length of time a woman had been married, and if she was a mother,
etc., etc., in endless and minute array. The town women have already
discarded their costume, but it is still universally worn in the
country round about. The ancient industries of Hindeloopen――alas! very
degenerate nowadays――included a _spécialité_ in furniture. It was of
carved wood painted, and many specimens in Dutch and foreign
collections still exist. Havard says of it:

     “Its general forms have a very decided Oriental cast. Its
     decorations of carved and gilded palms and love-knots,
     relieved by the strangest paintings it is possible to
     imagine, have no equal except in Persian art. As a rule, the
     colors are loud and gaudy――red or pink, green or blue――but,
     strange to say, the whole appears harmonious. It is peculiar
     and striking but not disagreeable to the eye. Most of the
     single pieces of furniture, such as tables and stands, and
     sledges are ornamented with red and blue palms, around which
     are interlaced numbers of Cupids of dark rose-color, the
     whole on a red ground. Sometimes these constantly-recurring
     Cupids (always in dark rose-color) are placed among a bed of
     blue flowers against a background of red, lightened here and
     there by white dots and touches of gold. But this medley of
     discordant colors produces a harmonious and dazzling effect,
     which I can only liken to the cashmeres of India. This same
     style of ornamentation is adopted in private houses, though
     the colors are somewhat modified. Red yields to dark blue,
     and flowers, love-knots, and palms are toned down into soft
     blue, green, and white, on a background of the finest[197]
     shade of indigo. The effect thus produced is very curious. I
     cannot say it is fine or pleasant, but it is not
     disagreeable to the eye, and certainly possesses the
     advantage of not being vulgar or common.”

Stavoren, the former capital of Friesland, is one of the towns whose
traditional annals, like those of Medemblik, reach back into
unhistorical times, and whose founder, Friso, a supposed contemporary
and ally of Alexander the Great, built here a temple to Jupiter, and
adorned his town with walls, palaces, and theatres. The fifth century
of our era is its real earliest date, and then it was only what the
first settlement of a barbaric clan always is――half-camp,
half-village――but it had gained a footing which it never abandoned
since. As the centuries passed, we find this town, at the mouth of the
Flevum, “the capital and royal residence of Friesland,” and with a
“considerable commercial and industrial reputation. Treaties of
alliance and trade were entered into with the Romans, Danes, Germans,
and Franks, who came to Stavoren to barter their goods.… The Flevum
was easy to navigate, thus rendering the port convenient for commerce;
able to hold a large fleet whose intrepid sailors explored distances
in the North inaccessible to the vessels belonging to other nations.
At this epoch the Zuyder-Zee was not in existence, and one could walk
on dry land from Stavoren to Medemblik.… A palace was built at
Stavoren (by Richard I.) which later on became the sumptuous residence
of the kings, his successors,” and Charles, Duke of Brabant, journeyed
to Stavoren with a numerous suite to see and admire its wonderful
splendors. This was burnt in 808, but in 815 a still more splendid
church was built by Bishop Odulphus. It was some Stavoren sailors who
first passed through the Sound and opened the way into the Baltic, and
the King of Denmark rewarded the town by exempting its ships from dues
on entering Dantzic. Treaties with Sweden and Scotland conceded to the
town similar privileges, rendering the merchants of Stavoren able to
enter the lists with those of the richest and most influential towns
in the world. A sixteenth-century chronicler[198]――though we incline
to take the statement as typical of the prosperity of the town rather
than in its literal sense――says “the vestibules of the houses were
gilded, and the pillars of the palaces of massive gold.” This,
however, applies to the thirteenth century, the age of Marco Polo and
general redundancy of imagination, colored by the traditions of the
_Arabian Nights_. But it is true that Stavoren was one of the first
towns forming part of the Hanseatic League, and even in the sixteenth
century she still held the third rank. Her downfall was due as much to
the nature of things as to adverse circumstances. Prosperity spoiled
the haughty town: “Her inhabitants had become so rich and opulent that
they were literally intoxicated with their success, and allowed
themselves to grow insolent, exacting, and supercilious beyond
endurance. They were called the spoiled, luxurious children of
Stavoren――‘_dartele ofte vervende Kinderen van Stavoren_.’ Strangers
ceased to trade with them, preferring the pleasanter manners of the
inhabitants of Hamburg, Lübeck, and Bruges. In proportion as trade
declined the spirit of enterprise forsook the population, and the
town, once so rich and flourishing, now found herself reduced from the
first to the tenth rank.” This happened in the fourteenth century, and
by the sixteenth “there were scarcely fifty houses in a state of
preservation in this city, which formerly was the highest and noblest
of all.” Its appearance at the present time is still more sad: “There
are about a hundred houses, half of which are in ruins, but not one
remains to recall in the vaguest manner the ancient glory of its
palaces. It would be difficult to call the place a village even; it is
more like one large cemetery, whose five hundred inhabitants have the
appearance of having returned to earth to mourn over the past and lost
glories of their country and the ancient splendor of their kings.”
Outside the harbor is a large sand-bank, called the “Lady’s Bank,”
which for several centuries has blocked up the entrance so that no
great ships can enter, and tradition has seized upon this to point a
moral eminently appropriate to the former proud merchants of this
hopelessly dead city. It is said, and repeated by Guicciardini, that a
rich widow, “petulant and saucy,” freighted a ship for Dantzic, and
bade the master bring back a cargo of the rarest merchandise he could
find in that town. Finding nothing more in requisition there than
grain, he loaded the ship with wheat and returned. The widow was
indignant at his bringing her such common stuff, and ordered him, if
he had loaded the grain at _backboort_, to throw it into the sea at
_stuerboort_, which was done, whereupon there immediately rose at that
place so great a sand-bank that the harbor was blocked; hence the bank
is still called “_Le Sable_,” or “_Le Banc de la Dame_.”

At Urk, a truly patriarchal fishing village, where “every one, as at
Marken, wears the national costume, from the brat who sucks his thumb
to the old man palsied with age,” and where the inhabitants “consider
themselves related, forming one and the same family,” and are “just as
hospitable and polite as at Marken,” Havard spent a few very pleasant
hours. This place is anterior to the Zuyder-Zee, and was already, in
the ninth century, a fishing settlement on one of the islands in Lake
Flevo. Havard thinks that the women, with their healthy beauty and
graceful but evident strength, are good samples of the race that
inhabited these lands a thousand years ago.

On entering the mouth of the Yssel the travellers left the tjalk and
went across country to Kampen, admiring on their road the beautiful
fields with the cows almost hidden in the long grass, the farms on
little hillocks looking like miniature fortified castles, and the
other farms surrounded by tall trees, where all is of a blue color,
from the small milk-pails to the wheelbarrow, and the ladder leading
to the loft. Kampen dates only from the thirteenth century, but it
grew rapidly, and two hundred years later became an Imperial town,
governed itself, and had the right of coining money. At the
Reformation there was no breaking of images or destruction of works of
art, neither was there any outbreak against the religious orders.
Large, massive towers with pointed roofs overhang the quay and flank
an enormous wall, through which an arched doorway leads into the town.
The Celle-broeders-Poort dates from the sixteenth century, and is
built of brick and stone, with octagonal towers, oriel windows, and
carved buttresses, besides a gallery projecting over the door. This
gate was named after the convent of Brothers of the Common Life,
formerly situated in the street leading to the Poort. The order has
been made famous by the author of the _Imitation_. It was one of the
most popular in the Low Country, and was founded at Deventer by
Gerhard Groot, a young and luxurious ecclesiastic, whose life reminds
one of De Rancé, and who, giving up his preferments, retired to his
own house, where he lived with a few other men in apostolical
simplicity. The services of his followers were invaluable during the
plague, or Black Pest, in the fourteenth century. His successor was
Florent Radewyns, a learned priest, also in high ecclesiastical favor,
but who gave up his canon’s stall at Utrecht to embrace the life of a
Brother of the Common Life. This institute is not unlike the original
one of St. Francis of Assisi, founded in Italy a hundred years
earlier; only these brothers lived by the work of their hands, mostly
as copyists, and as revisers of the manuscripts scattered over the
town, comparing them with the originals and rectifying the mistakes of
inexperienced or careless copyists. Pope Gregory XI. sanctioned the
regulations of the order in 1376, and in 1431, 1439, and 1462 Eugenius
IV. and Pius II. confirmed the privileges of the rapidly-growing
community, which counted convents by the score all over Holland. About
this time they opened schools for the young, and “their instruction
was everywhere courted, and their virtues, as well as their great
talents, made them welcome even in the most distant countries. Their
colleges were dedicated either to St. Jerome or St. Gregory, and
multiplied with astonishing rapidity.… In their convent (at Brussels)
they had a printing-office.” Their devotion to the poor and
uneducated, and their endeavors to counteract the progress of the
Reformation by expounding to the people the authorized version of the
Scriptures in the vulgar tongue, and also uniting their hearers in
prayers and offices in Dutch, Flemish, and other vernacular, were
misrepresented by their enemies, and twisted into evidence of their
heretical leanings.

Kampen was rich in religious orders; there were the Minorites
(Franciscans), whose church was built in the fourteenth century, and
is still the most ancient monument in the town, but is now used as a
school; the Recollects, the Carthusians, the Alexians, besides six
convents for women. The church of St. Nicholas, with its double aisles
and its grand simplicity, its beautiful antique pulpit and Renaissance
panelling in the choir, is well worth a visit, were it not for the
detestable impression likely to be made on the visitor by the excesses
in plaster and paint that disfigure the building. Notre Dame, a church
almost as large and as old, has been restored, and its sombre, simple,
and grand decoration, its panelling in imitation of the Gothic, and
its careful imitation of the spirit of ancient ornamentation make it a
more satisfactory object of pilgrimage. But the pearl of Kampen is the
_Stadhuis_, or Guildhall――or rather what remains of it; for part of it
was destroyed by fire in 1543. The façade is very much like the
Chancellerie at Leeuwarden, and the niches still contain their
original statuettes of the sixteenth century. “This corner of the
townhall is a real delight to behold, and to come upon a relic of this
sort, religiously preserved from ancient times, is a great source of
joy to an artist.” But the special attractions are in the interior,
especially in “two rooms, unique in their way, … decorated with carved
wainscoting, which have remained intact from the early part of the
seventeenth century, when they were used as the council-chamber and
judgment-hall.… The walls are furnished with flags, standards,
halberds, pikes, … and above the door I noticed some formidable-looking
syringes in polished leather, shining like gold, which were used in
former times to squirt boiling oil on those of the assailants who
approached too close. A magnificent balustrade, crowned by an open
gallery with columns supporting arched openings, separates this hall
from the other, through which the persuasive eloquence of the
advocates penetrated the council-chamber.… Running round the chamber
is a huge carved bench, divided into stalls by jutting pedestals which
support a pillar of Ionic base and Composite capital. An entablature
also running the round of the room, projecting above the pillars, but
receding over the stalls, completes this kind of high barrier between
the councillors, and adds considerably to the majestic elegance which
charms and impresses one. At the end of the hall there is a fine
chimney-piece, comprising four divisions. To mention its date, 1543,
is quite enough to give an idea of the beauty of its workmanship and
the elegance of its curves.” Among its curiosities are some fine
silver goblets given to the town, and some pieces of gold-plate
belonging to the old guilds, as well as the _box of beans_, which
served to determine the election of the municipality. It is a small
_bonbonnière_ holding twenty-four beans, six silver-gilt and eighteen
of polished silver. “When it was a question of deciding which of the
members of the council should be chosen for the administration, the
beans were put in a hat, and each drew out one by chance, and those
who drew forth the silver-gilt beans immediately entered on their new
functions. This custom was not confined especially to Kampen, as it
was formerly in vogue in the province of Groningen.”

Zwolle (not a sea city) is a very old town, but has a modern life
tacked on to it, and few of its public buildings, churches included,
are worth commenting upon at length, though its history is interesting
and stirring. It was the birth-place and home of Thomas à Kempis,
known in his own day as Hamerken, but the convent where he lived has
unfortunately disappeared.

Harderwyk, on the Zuyder-Zee, or the “Shepherd’s Refuge,” was founded
at the time of the disastrous flood which made the present sea. Some
shepherds collected there from the flooded meadows, and were joined by
a few fishermen. A hundred years after its incorporation as a town, it
was already prosperous enough to be named in the Hanseatic Union by
the side of Amsterdam, Kampen, and Deventer; but it can boast of a
better claim to notice than its material prosperity alone, for it had
a famous academy, founded in 1372, and specially devoted to theology
and what was then known of physical sciences. Except during an
interval of half a century, after an inundation that devastated and
unpeopled the little city, this school existed uninterruptedly till
the French occupation, a little less than a hundred years ago, and
among its native scholars, many of whom are honorably known in the
history of science, it reckons the botanist Boerhaave. Linnæus spent a
short time there in study and research, and the town is not a little
proud of having been sought out by distant scholars as a centre of the
natural science of that day. Both these famous men have a memorial in
Harderwyk, the former a bronze statue, and the latter a bust in the
public gardens. One of the few interesting remains of the old town is
the square tower of Notre Dame, where fires were burnt, by way of a
beacon, to guide fishermen and sailors out at night, and indicate the
position of Harderwyk. “The sea,” says Havard, “is very wayward in
these parts. Formerly it was at some little distance from the town,
but gradually it advanced, and ended by washing its walls; now,
however, it has in some measure receded.… When the tide is low,
fishermen often discover under the sand roads washed up by the waves,
paved with stones and bricks, which prove that at some distant period
streets existed where now the sea rules.” At present Harderwyk is the
depot of the troops intended for the Indian and colonial army of
Holland, and is, in consequence, rather a gay little place.

The charming, antique, and formerly turbulent town of Amersfoort, the
birth-place of the heroic Jan van Olden Barneveldt, truly the “father
of his country,” was the last comparatively forgotten place where our
author passed before he got back to the beaten track of travel,
through Utrecht down the Dutch Rhine to Amsterdam. Of this hardy,
learned, and brave people of the Netherlands he says but too truly
that they are unknown outside their own frontiers. “Nobody outside”
(of course he speaks of popular, world-wide reputation; for they are
known in scientific and literary circles) “knows that among the Dutch
are to be found honesty, cordiality, and sincere friendship; they do
not know that the language of Holland is rich and poetic; that the
Netherlanders have exceptionally fine institutions, sincere
patriotism, and absolute devotion to their country.” He complains,
however, that the country or its representative, the government, does
not sufficiently encourage native artists, authors, and _savants_, and
forces her statesmen to “submit to paltry coteries.” He also says that
the decay of trade in the “dead cities” is partly attributable to the
supineness of the inhabitants themselves, though that certainly does
not tally with their enterprising spirit of old, and adds that
Amsterdam, when threatened with the same danger――the moving sands and
the encroaching waters, which have turned the harbors of the once
wealthy Hanseatic cities into deserts――did not “sleep,” but “with all
their ancient energy, not fearing to expend their wealth,” the
inhabitants “cut through the whole length of the peninsula of Noord
Holland, and created a canal 40 miles long and 120 feet wide, wide
enough for two frigates to pass one another”; and when that was found
insufficient for their commerce, “they again cut through the width of
the peninsula, as they had cut through its length, giving to ships of
the heaviest tonnage two roads to their magnificent port. This was how
the sons of old Batavia fought against the elements――nothing stopped
them; and we see that the generations which succeed them are animated
by the same spirit, the same firm will, the same calm energy, never to
be beaten by difficulties.” And now the last news of importance from
the same spot is that of the projected draining of the Zuyder-Zee,
which is a plan of gigantic magnitude, the cost being estimated at
£16,000,000 sterling――_i.e._, not far from $100,000,000――but the
allotted time scarcely more than two years. The Dutch is a race
tenacious of vitality and power, and its future in its colonial
empire, which it is now thoroughly and scientifically surveying, bids
fair to rival its past. Even these “dead cities,” when they cease to
be fishing hamlets and relic-museums, and, by the draining of the
inland sea, have to turn for their support to new industries, have a
chance of revival. The last marvellous Dutch work――the completion of
the North Sea Canal――is a proof that the old energy is yet there, and
that great things may yet be expected, nautically, scientifically,
commercially, and even agriculturally, of the sturdy old stock of the
“Sea Beggars.”


     [195] _The Dead Cities of the Zuyder-Zee_: A voyage to the
     picturesque side of Holland. By Henri Havard. Translated by
     Annie Wood. London: Bentley & Son.

     [196] The author has unfortunately omitted to give some of
     these proofs, and we have only his word for this assertion.

     [197] Probably _lightest_.

     [198] Cornelius Kempius.




THE GREAT STRIKE AT ERRICKDALE.


Errickdale is famous for its coal-pits. It has dozens of them. All
night long their fires glow red through the darkness, and all day the
sound of pick and hammer, and the creak of rusty iron chains dragging
heavily-loaded cars up the slope of the mines into the light, and the
cry of the miners, and the tramp of their hob-nailed shoes as they
come and go, fill the place with noisy life. It is a lonely place
otherwise, close to the sea-coast. A ponderous stone wharf juts far
out into the water, and a tramway runs down to it for the use of the
cars which take the coal to the vessels that are constantly loading.

The village of Errickdale, at the time of our story, consisted of the
black buildings connected with the mines, the rows of tumble-down
tenements where the miners lived, and one spacious, rambling,
old-fashioned dwelling, built a century previous by the first owner
and opener of the mines, and preserved intact ever since, in its
antique and solid elegance, by each new owner of the place. Eight
months of the year it was closed, with the exception of a few rooms
occupied by the agent, the old housekeeper, and two servants; one
other apartment being always kept in readiness to receive the master
whenever, for any reason, he chose to make his appearance.

But for four months, from June to October, the whole house was thrown
open and filled with a brilliant company, who spent the summer days in
merry idleness, and made Errickdale a scene of delight. Beautiful it
was always, in spite of its loneliness――a loneliness so extreme that
not another town or village, or house or hut, was to be met with for a
dozen miles around it, except Teal, lying hidden from sight behind the
hills, and five good miles away at that, and the lighthouse which rose
up eerily on the summit of the dangerous, ugly rock-ledge in the
centre of Errick Bay. That bay gave ample opportunity for sailing,
rowing, bathing, fishing; the beach was firm and good for those who
cared to walk; the rocks were bold and tempting for those who cared to
climb. In the fields the wild pink roses bloomed, and strawberries,
raspberries, baked-apple berries, and blueberries followed one upon
the other in superabundance. The heaps of coal-dust, the begrimed men,
the care-worn women and dirty children, the comfortless dwellings,
marred very much the beauty of the place; but what would be the place
without them? The guests who came there soon forgot such trifles as
the days sped by in merry-making; and in the city of Malton a summer
at Errickdale was spoken of as a season of unrivalled pleasure.

It was in Malton that John Rossetti, the present owner of Errick
mines, had his palace-like city home. There he had collected such
treasures as few men could boast, even in that city, famed for its
eager pursuit of the beautiful and the costly; and all of them he
lavished upon the only being who made life dear to him――the daughter
whom his idolized young wife had left to him when, at the child’s
birth, she died.

It is a marvel that Eleanora Rossetti grew up as amiable and gentle as
she was; for she scarcely knew what it meant to have a wish thwarted
or the merest whim of her fancy ungratified. Delicate and fair like
some sheltered plant, she won love and tenderness wherever she went,
and it seemed to her only as the air she breathed――she knew nothing
else. That she should yield her will to another’s never entered her
mind; that she was to do anything for others was an idea quite unknown
to her. Life was hers to enjoy; hearts were hers to command; let her
do what she would, no one wished to hinder her. She saw the beggars in
the streets of Malton, she saw the poorly-clad people in Errickdale,
but they never weighed upon her heart in the least. They must be very
lazy or very shiftless, she thought――if she ever thought of them at
all.

With the approaching winter of her eighteenth birthday――the winter of
that great strike at Errickdale which was to set the country
ringing――there came many prophecies of want and famine, but Eleanora
did not heed them. She had a little dinner-party one evening. They
were sitting around the table loaded with costly silver and
delicately-painted china and rare viands. “Papa,” cried Eleanora from
the head of the board, where she presided in girlish state, her clear
voice ringing down to him like a flute and attracting every one’s
attention――“papa, I mean to keep my eighteenth birthday by a
masque-ball at Errickdale.” And then, glancing along each file of
delighted and expectant guests with her brightest smile, “You are all
invited at once,” she said, “without further ceremony. The night of
the 20th of January, remember. How I hope there will be snow underfoot
and stars overhead and a biting frost! There will be bed and board for
all, though some of the beds may have to be on the floor; and sleighs
or carriages will be waiting at Teal station. Oh! how delightful it
will be!”

Nobody waited to see if permission would be granted her. Eleanora
Rossetti always had her way. At once a Babel of voices arose.

“We will make summer of winter,” Eleanora said. “The whole
conservatory shall be sent down. It shall be a ball of the old
_régime_; and mind, all of you, no one shall be admitted who does not
come dressed as a courtier of some sort to grace my palace halls. I
shall never be eighteen again, and I mean to celebrate it royally.”

“She looks like a princess this moment,” said a youth on her right,
loudly enough for her to hear, and to make her blush with pleasure;
and like a princess she looked indeed, slender and tall and stately,
in her heavy purple robe, with ermine and rare laces at the neck and
wrists, and diamonds in her ears that sparkled no more brightly than
her eyes.

Down in Errickdale that night a northeast gale was blowing, the waves
were dashing their spray high up over the wharf and against the
cliffs, and the rain drove in slant sheets across the bay, where the
red eye of the lighthouse glared steadily.

In a cottage of three rooms, apart from the tenements, yet little
better than they, another John is sitting. John O’Rourke this, an
Irishman, come eighteen years since from the old country; and with him
sits his only daughter, who will be eighteen in February. Bridget
O’Rourke has no need to fear the verdict if she is compared with the
heiress of Errickdale; she is full as tall and stately, and her dark,
severe beauty would be noticeable anywhere. But there is no sparkle in
her eyes, that are heavy with unshed tears, and no smile is on her
lips.

These people are not poor, as Errickdale counts poverty. It is much,
very much, to have a house to yourself, even though it be of three
rooms only, and floor and walls are bare. It is much to wear whole
clothes, though the dress is cotton print and the coat is fustian. It
is much to have plenty of bread and cheese and a bit of cold meat on
your table, and to have a decent table to sit at. Errickdale counts
these things luxuries. John O’Rourke is a sort of factotum for the
agent, and, next to him, has higher wages than any other man on the
place; but, for all that, his brow is lowering to-night, and as he
sits in moody silence his fingers work and his hands are clenched, as
though he were longing for a fight with some one.

“You’re not eating, Bridget, my girl,” he said at last, draining the
last drop of his cup of tea. “You’re not as hungry as I.”

She pushed her plate away. “I can’t eat, father,” she said. “Down in
the hollow Smith’s wife and babes are crying with hunger, and over at
Rutherford’s the girls haven’t a shoe to their feet in this bitter
weather.”

“And so you must go hungry too, girl?” he asked.

“I can’t eat,” she said again. “It chokes me. Why should I have good
things, and they go starving? I wish I was starving with them!”

“Tut, tut, girl! What help would that be? And what’s Smith, anyhow,
and Smith’s boys, but Orangemen, that hoot at ye Sundays, and laugh at
your going ten miles, all, as they say, to worship images?”

Bridget smiled faintly. This righteous John O’Rourke was no very
fervent Catholic in his deeds, whatever his words might go to prove.
It was seldom that he found himself able to foot those good ten miles
with her, though she did it regularly, in spite of ridicule and
difficulty.

“Orangemen or not,” she answered, “they’re flesh and blood like me.
God made ’em. If I try to eat, I think I see them with nothing, and I
long to give all I have to them.”

“I tell ye,” O’Rourke exclaimed, “times are bad enough now, but
they’ll be worse soon, if master don’t take heed. There’ll be a strike
in Errickdale before the winter’s out.”

“O father! no. I hope not. Nothing like that would ever move the
master. He’s that set in his own way, he would only hold out stronger
against ’em――he would.”

“I think so myself, girl――I think so myself. I’ve known him well these
eighteen years; he’s firm as rock. But the men don’t credit it. They
are murmuring low now, but it will be loud shouting before we know it.
Bridget, I’ll to Malton and see the master myself, come morning.”

“Yes, father,” said Bridget; “and I’ll go with you and speak with Miss
Eleanora.”

A few hours later, the city lady and the Irish girl stood face to face
in Eleanora’s boudoir. There was a startled look in Eleanora’s eyes.
What strange story is this which Bridget tells her? There must be some
mistake about it.

“They are very poor in Errickdale,” Bridget said slowly, keeping down
the quiver from her voice and the tears from her eye. “House after
house they have nothing but potatoes or mush to eat, and nothing but
rags to wear. I don’t think it’s the master’s fault maybe. Sometimes I
fear the agent is not all he should be, miss.”

As if John Rossetti did not know the character of the man whom he had
left in power among his miners! Alas for Bridget! and alas for
Errickdale!

“But do _you_ suffer, Bridget?” and Eleanora looked at her
compassionately, and then with deep admiration. She had let her talk,
had let her stay, where carelessly she would have sent off any other,
because it was such a delight to her to see that face in its grave and
regular beauty, and to hear the rich voice with its sorrowful cadence
like the minor note of an organ chant. Even had she been of like
station and wealth with herself, Eleanora would have felt no pangs of
jealous fear; for her own beauty and that of Bridget were of too
perfect and delicious a contrast for that, and her trained artistic
taste was considering it with pleasure all the while that their talk
went on.

“Not that way,” Bridget answered her. “I’ve food and clothes a plenty
myself. But it’s as if the hunger and want were tugging at my heart
instead of my body, by day and by night. The lean faces and the
wailing come between me and all else. Miss Eleanora, I wish you could
once see them――only once.”

“What’s this! Bridget O’Rourke here too? A well-planned plot, truly.”
And John Rossetti strode into the room as though on the point of
turning the girl out from it, only his daughter, coming to meet him,
stepped unwittingly between.

“Yes, papa,” she said, “it’s Bridget, come to the city, I suppose, for
the first time in her life. And, papa, she tells such a sad story
about Errickdale. Will you please send them some money at once?”

“Not a penny,” her father answered. “Not one penny of mine or yours
shall they have. These people think to force me to their will by a
strike! They shall learn what manner of master they have. Do they not
know that Errick mines might lie idle a year, and I hold my head above
water bravely? And do they dream there are no men willing and glad to
be hired for the price they cavil at? Let them strike when they
please. That is the only message John O’Rourke has to carry home with
him for his pains, and all that you shall have either, Bridget. Take
it and be gone.”

“Oh! no, Bridget, not yet,” Eleanora cried. “I am not ready. Papa,
what can you be thinking of――sending her away when I am not ready to
have her go? Let us consider for a minute, papa. She is so troubled”;
and, indeed, Bridget’s face was livid in its distress, and when she
strove to speak her voice died away in a moan. “How much do the people
want, papa?”

He laughed grimly. “I shall grant them nothing,” he said. “However,
since you are curious, they do not want as much as your ball will cost
me, my love. How would you like to give that up for them?”

“My ball! Of course not. What a ridiculous idea! All Malton knows of
it by this time, and twenty people are invited already, and I have
sent for my dressmaker. Of course I could not give that up for
anything! But you were only jesting, papa dear. I know you could not
mean it. Bridget, papa knows best, you may be sure. I never trouble my
head about business. But I will tell you what you shall do. I am going
to have a masque-ball at Errickdale in January――such grand doings as
were never known there before――and you shall come to it! You shall be
where you can see the splendid court-dresses and the flowers and the
feast, and hear the music――the very best music that Malton can
furnish. So don’t worry any more, Bridget, and you shall surely be
there.”

Bridget looked slowly round the room, full of warmth and light, and
comfort and beauty. From the picture-frames haggard eyes seemed to
stare at her; in the corners, and half hidden by the velvet hangings,
figures wasted by want seemed to stretch their bony fingers towards
her; through the canary’s song and the splash of the scented fountain
voices weak with fasting seemed to call on her for aid. But it had
become impossible for her to utter another word in their behalf. A
plan, a hope, flashed through her mind.

“Yes, Miss Eleanora,” she said, “I will come to your ball.” And
waiting for no more words, she went away.

“She is worrying her life out,” Eleanora said pityingly. “I don’t
believe she eats properly.” And taking more trouble for a poor person
than she had ever done before, she wrote to the housekeeper at
Errickdale to send Bridget O’Rourke every day substantial and tempting
food enough for an entire meal. Then she dismissed the whole matter;
or rather the dressmaker was announced, and the important question as
to whether her balldress should be of velvet or satin drove all minor
subjects, such as hunger and cold and nakedness, from her mind.

Meanwhile, Bridget strove to calm her father’s wrath, which he poured
forth volubly as the train carried them home; and when he was still,
she thought out to its full scope the plan which had occurred to her.
She would go to the ball, and, when the guests were assembled, she
would step forth from her hiding-place, and stand before them all, and
plead the people’s cause. But the more she thought of it the more her
heart misgave her. Why should she hope they would heed her then rather
than to-day? Would not the master only be the more incensed against
his miners, because of the shame to which he would be exposed? Yes,
she felt sure that this would be the result. And then the long, long
days and weeks which must elapse before the chance would come at all!
How could she endure it? She put that sudden hope and plan away.
Instead of it, she prayed again and again with smothered sobs: “O
Christ! who for love of us died for us, save thy people now.”

But she walked the long walk home from Teal station without fatigue,
and came into Errickdale strong and well, to meet the woes she yearned
to heal. The children had learned to understand her pity for them.
They welcomed her return with cries for food; she gave them what she
could, and lay down supperless herself that night to rest. After that,
each day brought her a full meal from the great house, but she never
tasted of it; there were those who needed it more, she said.

Once, on her way to a poor family with a basket of these provisions,
the smell of the well-cooked food produced such a violent craving that
it seemed to her for a moment that she should go mad. With a great
effort she controlled herself and stood still. “Christ,” she prayed,
“have mercy! Shall I eat dainties while the children starve?”

The craving did not cease, but strength to resist it came. She entered
the wretched room to which she was bound, and fed the inmates who
crowded around her; then she hurried home. In the cupboard were a few
crusts and a bone already well picked. How sweetly they tasted! And
while she feasted on them a woman crawled feebly in. “I’ve fasted
long,” she said, and quietly Bridget gave her all she had.

Twice afterward she felt that horrible craving, and then it ceased.
Her father saw that she ate little, but never guessed how little it
really was; he saw that she grew pinched and pale, but fancied it was
grief alone that caused it. He did not know, and no one knew, that,
with what Errickdale counted “plenty” at her command, Bridget was
living like the poorest. The thirst for self-sacrifice, the thirst of
a supernatural love, consumed her. “HE did it,” she used to say to
herself. “He was poor for us, and he died for us.” From her room one
by one her possessions departed; she carried them to those who, as she
thought, needed them more, or she disposed of them for their use. Soon
the attic room, which no one but herself ever entered, held literally
nothing but the crucifix on the wall. Laying her weary limbs on the
hard floor at night, she thought of the hard cross whereon her Lord
had died. “Mine is an easier bed than his,” she said, and smiled in
the darkness. “May he make me worthier to share his blessed pains!”

But the nights were few that she spent on even so poor a couch as
this. There was sickness in Errickdale as well as want, and Bridget
was nurse, and doctor, and servant, and watcher beside the dead. And
in her princess life at Malton Eleanora Rossetti counted the same long
hours blithely, eager for her festival to come.

       *     *     *     *     *

The 20th of January! Stars overhead, and snow underfoot, and a biting
frost to make Errickdale as merry as its heiress wished. Winter
without, and want and woe perhaps; but who needed to think of that? In
the old mansion summer itself was reigning. Orange and lemon trees
mingled their golden fruits and spicy bloom in the corridors and halls
and up and down the winding stairs. Lamps burned some faintly-scented
oil, that filled the warm air with a subtle, delicious odor, and lamps
and tall wax tapers flooded the room with golden but undazzling light.
Fountains played among beds of rare ferns and exotics; and magnificent
blossoms lay in reckless profusion upon the floor, to be trodden upon,
and yield their perfume, and die unheeded. And in doublet and hose and
cap and plume, and all the gay festival gear of a king’s court of
mediæval times, hosts of servants waited upon Eleanora’s word.

The winter twilight fell soon over Errickdale. In its gathering
shadows John Rossetti was galloping home from Teal on his swiftest
horse, when the creature shied suddenly, then stopped, trembling all
over. A woman stood in the path, ghostly and strange to see through
the gloom. Fearless John Rossetti started at the unexpected sight.
“What do you want of me?” he asked.

“Food,” the woman answered, in a voice that thrilled him with
inexplicable awe; from some far-off land it seemed to come――a land
that knew nothing of ease and joy. “Your people die of want, and cold,
and pain,” it said. “In the name of God Almighty, and while you have
time, hear me and help them.”

Then this fearless John Rossetti sneered. “While I have time?” he
said. “I have no time to-night, I warrant you. Choose better seasons
than this for your begging, Bridget O’Rourke.”

He struck the spurs into his horse, but, though it quivered all over
again, it would not move an inch. The woman lifted her hands to
heaven. “God, my God! I have done all I can,” she said. “I leave it
now with thee.” And so she vanished.

In Errick Hall Eleanora was speaking to a servant. “Make haste,” she
said. “I had almost forgotten it. Make haste and bring Bridget
O’Rourke to me. I promised she should see it all.”

The servant hurried obediently to John O’Rourke’s cottage. Its owner
was crouching sullenly over the fire. “Where’s my girl?” he said.
“Miss Eleanora wants her to see the sights? See ’em she shall, then.
It’s little she gets of brightness now, poor thing. Bridget! Bridget!”

But though he called loudly, no one answered. He climbed the stairs to
the dark attic, and still no reply.

“Give me the light, boy,” he cried, with a dull foreboding at his
heart, and he and the servant entered the room together.

She was not there. What was more, nothing was there――literally
nothing――except the cross of Him who gave his all, his very life, for
men.

“I fear, I fear,” this John said, trembling; and he took the crucifix
down, and carried it with him for defence against invisible foes whom
he dreaded far more than anything he could see.

“We will go look for her, O’Rourke,” the servant said. “I must find
her for Miss Eleanora, if not for her own sake.”

In the kitchen supper was on the table, and the fire crackled on the
hearth. Her loving father had been waiting long for her. Where was the
child?

They asked the question at every tenement and every room. The people
joined them in the search for her whom they all held dear. On the
outskirts of the place, and where the road stretched out without
another sign of habitation for five miles to Teal, was a lonely hovel.

“She’s there,” one woman said to another. “’Course she’s there. Might
’a’ known it. Jake Ireton’s wife had twins yesterday, and it’s little
else they have. She’s there, caring for ’em.”

Yet they paused at the door, as if loath to open it. The whole throng
seemed to feel that vague foreboding which John O’Rourke had felt;
those who were able to crowd into the narrow room entered it timidly.
What was it that they dreaded?

In the grand saloon of Errick mansion, decked like a regal ballroom,
John Rossetti’s daughter, attired gorgeously like the French queen in
the famous painting which is Malton’s pride, received her courtiers;
and the band played the gay dance-music, and the light feet of the
dancers glided over the floors.

In the poorest hut of Errickdale John O’Rourke’s daughter received her
courtiers, too, in regal state.

It was dark and silent there before the torches were brought in. By
their flaring light the people saw the poor mother on a bed of rags
and straw.

“Be still as ye can,” she said softly. “Is’t thee, O’Rourke? Thy good
girl’s been wi’ me this four hours. One o’ my babbies died, thank God!
She laid it out there all decent.”

And then, in the dim light, they saw the outline of a tiny form beside
the bed; such being the roses and adornings of Bridget’s court.

“She heard a horse go trampling by, and went to see ’t,” the woman
said. “When she came back, says she: ‘’Twas master. I’ve pleaded my
last plea for my people. My heart’s broke.’ Then t’other babby cried,
and she took’t to still it, and she lay down wi’ it, and, ever since,
they’ve both been still, and I hope she’s sleepit and forgot her woes
awhile, God bless her!”

Sleeping on the hard floor, but she does not feel it. They bring the
torches near her; she does not heed the glare, though the baby on her
bosom starts and wakes and weeps. She does not hear it weep. In truth,
this queen has forgotten her woes in a dreamless slumber, and truly
God has blessed her; but with bitter wailing her courtiers kneel
before her in the court of Death, the king.

There is food on the table which her own hands had placed there; there
is fire on the hearth which her own hands kindled. She who lies there
dead has not died of cold or hunger; she has died of a broken heart.

And the viol and flute and harp ring sweetly, and the trumpet and drum
have a stately sound in Errick Hall, and youths and maidens dance and
make merry. The great doors were flung open, and in long procession
the guests passed into the banqueting-hall, where was room for every
one to sit at the magnificent tables, and Eleanora was enthroned on a
dais, queen of them all. Reproduced as in a living picture was a ball
of _Le Grand Monarque_. “John Rossetti has surpassed himself,” his
guests said with admiring wonder. In a pause of the music Eleanora’s
silvery laugh was heard; she looked with pride at her father, and
spoke aloud so that all might hear: “Yes, there never was such a
father as mine. His birthday gift is beyond my highest expectations.”

“_Rossetti of Errickdale!_”

From above their heads the strange voice came. Far up in the embrasure
of a window a man with a lighted torch was standing. John O’Rourke’s
eyes met John Rossetti’s, and commanded them, and held them fast.

“We mean no harm,” he said. “We come peaceable, if you meet us
peaceable; but if not, there’s danger and death all round ye. I warn
ye fairly. Miss Eleanora bade my Bridget come to see her feast, and
we’ve come to bring her. Ye’d best sit quiet, all of ye, for we’ve
fire to back us.” And he held his torch dangerously near to the
curtains. Errickdale hall and Errickdale master were in his power.

Coming through the hall they heard it――the steady, onward tramp of an
orderly and determined crowd; the notes of a weird Irish dirge
heralded their coming. Two and two the courtiers of Bridget O’Rourke
marched in.

Men in rags, their lips close-shut and grim, a rude and flaring torch
borne in each man’s hand; haggard women with wolfish eyes and scantly
clad, leading or carrying children who are wailing loudly or moaning
in a way that chills the blood to hear, while the women shrilly sing
that dirge for a departed soul――would the terrible procession never
cease? Blows and clamor would be easier to bear than this long-drawn
horror, as two and two the people filed around the loaded tables and
gayly-attired guests.

Rising in amazement at the first entrance of these new-comers,
throughout their coming Eleanora stood upright, one hand pressed upon
her heart, as if to quell its rapid beating. Beautiful, and queenly
despite her pallid cheeks, she stood there, yet two and two the people
passed slowly up the hall, and slowly passed before her dais, and made
no sign of homage. It was another queen who held them in her sway.

Was it over at last?――for the procession that seemed to have no end
ceased to file through the lofty doors. The men stood back against the
wall, still with their lips close-shut and grim; they lowered their
torches as banners are lowered to greet a funeral train. The women
flung up their lean, uncovered arms, and shrieked out one more wail of
bitter lamentation, then stood silent too. The very babes were still.
And all eyes were fixed upon the door――all except John O’Rourke’s,
that never stirred from John Rossetti’s face.

Borne in state, though that state was but a board draped with a ragged
sheet――her face uncovered to those stars and to that biting frost, her
feet bare to those snows for which Eleanora wished; the face marked by
a suffering which was far deeper than any that mere cold or hunger
causes, yet sealed by it to an uplifted look which was beyond all
earthly loveliness; the hands crossed on a heart that ached no longer,
over the crucifix which was this queen’s only treasure――so Bridget
O’Rourke had come to Eleanora’s feast.

And so they bore her up the hall; and before the regal dais this more
regal bier stood still.

Then at last Eleanora moved, and started, and stretched out her hands.
“What do you want of me?” she said. “What is it that you want of me?
Speak to me, Bridget O’Rourke. Speak to me.”

They were face to face again in their youth and beauty, but the
contrast between them now brought no delight. They were face to face
again; but let this heiress command as she might or beg as she might,
never again would the rich voice speak to her with passionate
pleading, or the grave eyes meet her own with a stronger prayer than
words. This Queen of Death made no answer to her royal sister, except
the awful answer of that silence which no power of earth can break.

“_Rossetti of Errickdale!_”

Once again from far above their heads they heard him calling――the man
whose earthly all lay dead before them.

“We threatened to strike for food, and we feared ye. We suffered sore
like slaves, for we feared ye. It’s ye that may fear us now, I tell
ye, for to-night we strike for a life. Give us my good girl’s life
again――my good girl’s life.”

He was wild with grief, and the people were wild with want and grief.
Echoing up to the arches, their shout rang loud and long. “We strike
for a life,” they cried. “Give us back that life, or we burn ye all
together.”

Owner of princely wealth was he upon whom they called. Seven hours ago
that life was in his gift――one act of pity might have saved it, one
doled-out pittance kept the heart from breaking. Let him lavish his
millions upon her now; he cannot make her lift a finger or draw a
breath.

“John O’Rourke!”

It was not the master’s voice that answered. For the first time John
O’Rourke’s eyes turned from the master and looked upon Eleanora. The
queen of a night held out her hands again to her who had gone to claim
the crown of endless ages.

“John O’Rourke,” she said, gently and slowly, so that each word
carried weight, “what is it that Bridget wants of me? What would she
ask if she could speak to me to-night? I will give her whatever she
would ask. _Does she want her life back again?_”

The unexpected question, the gentle words, struck home. Suddenly
O’Rourke’s defiant eyes grew dim; and through his tears he saw his
good girl’s face, with the deep lines of suffering plain upon it, and
the new and restful look of perfect peace. It pleaded with him as no
words could plead.

“Miss Eleanora,” he cried, “I wouldn’t have her back. Not for all the
world I wouldn’t call her back. She’s been through sore anguish, and I
thank God it’s over. Give us food and fair wages, miss――that’s all she
would ask of ye.”

He paused, and in the pause none dreamed how wild a fight the man was
fighting with his wrath and hatred. But still that worn and silent
form pleaded with him and would not be gainsaid. At length he spoke,
huskily:

“And she would ask of us, miss, not to harm one of ye, but to let
master and all go free for the love of God. Shall we do what Bridget
would ask of us, my men?”

His strained voice faltered, he burst into loud Irish weeping――a
lonely father’s weeping, touching to hear in its patient resignation.

“Yes! yes!” the men and women answered him; and in the hall rich and
poor wept and laughed together, for the great strike of Errickdale was
over, and peace was made, and want supplied. But through the tumult of
sorrow and rejoicing she alone lay utterly unmoved and silent who had
won life at the price of life.

The story is often told in Malton of a young girl, very beautiful and
much beloved, who renounced the world on the night of her eighteenth
birthday, in the very midst of a feast of unequalled splendor, and at
the threshold of a future full of brilliant promise. They say she
dwelt in lonely Errickdale, among the poor and ignorant, and lived
like them and for them. And now and then they add that, when once some
one ventured to ask her why she chose so strange a life, she answered
that she had seen death at her feast in the midst of pomp and
splendor, and had learned, once for all, their worth. But when she was
further asked if she could not be willing, like many others present at
that feast, to care for the poor and to give to them, and yet have joy
and comfort too, the fire of a divine love kindled in her eyes, and
she answered that she counted it comfort and joy to live for the
people for whom she had seen another content and glad to die.




MODERN MELODISTS.

SCHUMANN.[199]


Robert Schumann was the true successor of Schubert. The impassioned
admirer of him whom he designated as “the Prince of Melody,” Schumann,
though not equalling his inimitable predecessor, succeeded
nevertheless in winning for himself a lofty place among the masters of
lyric music.

We say that Schumann has not equalled Schubert; but it must not thence
be concluded that he is necessarily inferior to his rival each time
that he treats an analogous subject. Schumann has perhaps rendered all
the shades of human love with as much truth and depth as Schubert, but
scarcely ever has he reached the dramatic power of “The Erl King” and
“The Young Nun”; never has he found the brilliant coloring and light
which shines out in “The Mariner,” “The Departure,” and “The Stars.”
Thus Schumann’s _Hidalgo_ is evidently the same cavalier as he of
Schubert’s “Departure.” In Schubert he quits his German Fatherland and
hurries forth to seek new pleasures. Schumann takes him into Spain:
“Mine be fresh flow’rets rare,” he cries, “the hearts of ladies fair,
and mine the combat fierce.” Alas! _Quantum mutatus!_ The beauties of
Spain bring small inspiration, and Schumann’s bolero resembles the
joyous song of Schubert just as much as a military band of Madrid
resembles an orchestra of Vienna. In the same way, in dramatic
situations, Schumann is not always well inspired. Instead of being
simple, his thought is vulgar (as in “The Hostile Brothers” and “The
Two Grenadiers”), or else, in larger works, his search for the
dramatic accent gives a strained expression to his style and a
wearisome obscurity to his intention. This, however, is not always the
case. Who does not know the admirable “Funeral March” of his
Quintette, assuredly the most beautiful of his symphonic works, and
excelling all the _musique de chambre_ of Schubert?

The overture to _Manfred_ has many sombre beauties; but instead of
following these lugubrious accents by a plaint more melodious, more
human, and less infernal――instead of letting in a little light to make
his “darkness” yet more “visible”――Schumann only quits the shadows to
precipitate himself into utter blackness, and horror succeeds alarm.

We find, however, the true note of dramatic inspiration in the _Lied_
“J’ai pardonné,” with its cry of love betrayed and of terrible
malediction.

        “J’ai vu ton âme en songe,
   J’ai vu la nuit où sa douleur la plonge,
   Et le remords à tes pas enchainé.
   Et ton printemps aux larmes destiné.”[200]

The effect is all the more striking because absolutely new: an
harmonic sequence of incredible boldness, resolving itself into fresh
discords more audacious still, and, hovering above, a simple phrase of
song, which falls cold and solemn, like a malediction from on high!

Towards the middle the discords resolve themselves regularly; and
before resuming the original idea, before returning to the expressions
of anguish uttered by the first harmonies, Schumann allows us, through
eight bars, a breathing-time, on a very simple phrase which he keeps
in the proximate keys to the primitive. If, with regard to the
overture to _Manfred_, Schumann is to be reproached with having
allowed so little light to find entrance among its shadows, he has, at
any rate in this case, had the good sense to submit to the necessary
laws of contrast, and thus gains much by allowing us to breathe a few
moments, that we may realize more fully the depth of despair to which
he is about to drag us down. He returns to the first phrase, and we
hear again the chords which have already so deeply moved us; still the
melodic phrase enlarges and mounts upward, while the discords take a
new development. After this tempest of the soul we reach the haven,
the key returns to ut on the words _J’ai pardonne_ (“I have
pardoned”), and Schumann leaves us filled with admiration, not unmixed
with horror.

Strange eccentricity of the human genius! In this sublime _Lied_,
perhaps the most powerful page which Schumann has written, we can
discover the germ of those defects which too often mar his more
extended works, and begin to understand why Schumann has fallen into
the obscurities we just now named. What is, in fact, the especial
characteristic of this wonderful melody? Despair; but despair under
tortuous and exaggerated forms.

If only Schumann would have been content to paint the sufferings of
the heart, all might have gone well; but no, he exhausts himself in
attempting also to render the tortures of the mind, the anxious
doubting of Manfred, the absolute negation incarnate in Faust. Now, if
the torments of the heart furnish one of the most powerful elements of
the drama (_Orestes_, _Œdipus_, and _Phædrus_ prove this truth), there
is absolutely nothing artistic whatever in mental torments,
philosophic doubt, and scepticism. The true artist, by his very
nature, must believe and love.

If against this assertion Goethe, Byron, and Alfred de Musset are
quoted――three great poets, with whom Schumann has some analogy――we
would say: All three were poets, not because, but in spite, of doubt;
and, what is truer still, they are poets when they cease to doubt, or
when they struggle against it. Even Alfred de Musset was no sceptic
when he exclaimed in his immortal “August Night” (_Nuit d’Août_):

  “O ma muse, ne pleurez pas;
   A qui perd tout, Dieu reste encore.
   Dieu là-haut, l’espoir ici-bas!”[201]

Alas! Schumann also knew the evil of our time. Was it not doubt which
made him lose his way in the search after some impossible and
anti-artistic ideal? Was it not doubt which, by day and night,
tortured his sick soul and urged him on to commit suicide? Doubt, in
his impassioned mind, engendered madness; need we, after this, wonder
that his artistic ideas were confused, his tone unhealthy, and that
his music oftener makes us think of death than life, darkness than
light? But when Schumann succeeds in tearing himself from the fatal
embrace of scepticism, his musical inspirations take sublime flights.
When he sang of love he was truly great, because he believed in love.

While Schubert was content to throw off, one by one, without apparent
connection, his admirable _Lieder_,[202] Schumann gathered all the
shades of tenderness into a marvellous unity――as, for instance, in the
“Loves of a Poet” and “Woman’s Love,” in which we are made to traverse
all its phases.

Before saying any more about these two important works, we would name
several detached _Lieder_ of singular gracefulness: “Désir,” or
“Chanson du Matin” (A Morning Song), and “O ma Fiancée.” Nor must we
forget a reverie, “Au Loin” (Far Away), on which is the impress of an
infinite sadness. We seem in it to be listening, at the dead of night,
to the lament of an exile weeping at the thought of his country and
all whom he loves. It reminds us of a Daniel singing, on the banks of
the Euphrates, the divine plaint of captivity: _Super flumina
Babylonis, illic sedimus et flevimus_.

The “Loves of a Poet” open with a series of little melodies full of
poesy――a little nosegay of fragrant flowers which the poet offers to
his beloved. It is when, alas! he has been betrayed by the faithless
one that he sings his sublime song “J’ai pardonné”――a pardon which is,
nevertheless, worse than a malediction.

If only the “Loves of a Poet” ended with this admirable melody, the
work would be complete; and the effect marvellous. But no; Henri
Heine, the author of the poem, prolonged in an inexplicable fashion
the situation, henceforth without interest, and the betrayed poet
comes back to tell us that he is――unfortunate! Did we not know it
already? He repeats this stale bit of information _nine_ times over
consecutively, in _nine_ “Lieder,” and under _nine_ different
forms!――a literary impossibility which inevitably reminds us of the
despair of the Cid, persistently offering his head to Chimenes.

At the fourth reapparition Heine seems at last to begin to suspect
that the plaintive tone is wearisome; but he finds nothing better, by
way of a change, than to throw his hero into the humoristic style――we
had almost said the grotesque. Our readers shall judge:

  “A man loves a woman,
   Of whom one, more fortunate, has the love.”

Already we have a trio of lovers. We continue:

  “But he who reigns in this heart
   Fancies another, in _his_ turn.”

Here, then, is an interesting quarternion of people who cannot
contrive to come to an understanding with one another; but we are not
at the end. Enter another individual――Number 5.

  “The fair one, in revenge,
   Makes choice of an unknown.”

And now, place for the last lover,

   Whose “hand and heart alike
   Will be for the first comer.”

A jurisconsult would simply have told us: _Primus_ amat _Secundam_,
quæ _Tertium_, qui _Quartam_, quæ _Quintum_, qui Sextam … (cætera
desiderantur)――which, at any rate, would have had the merit of
clearness; and, on remarking immediately that the _species_ contained
three feminine terminations and three masculine, he would have
celebrated three marriages.

Even the genius of Goethe, which imagined the _Elective affinities_,
would never have sufficed to create these _Repulsive affinities_. But
the one most to be pitied is the unfortunate Schumann, who had
condemned himself to set this _theory of Elective Repulsions_ to
music. In his place one would have preferred, like Rameau, to seek
one’s inspirations fron the _Gazette de Hollande_.

Henri Heine, after this _tour de force_, has nothing left but to kill
his poet; and he kills him accordingly. After a few more insipidities
which fill the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth
_Lieder_, the poet will order his coffin――

      “Of wood encircled with iron,
   Bigger than the tun of Heidelberg,
   Longer than the bridge of Treves
       Or that of Frankfort,” etc.

The last feature might have been touching, if it had been better
managed. “Know you,” asks the poet, “what makes my coffin so heavy?

  “It is that it contains my joy,
   My sorrow, and my love.”

The music of Schumann is affected by the feebleness of the poem. The
melodies which follow “J’ai pardonné” are inferior to the preceding
ones. It is only towards the end that the musician escapes from the
material hindrances of the subject; the air gains in freedom, the
harmonies in richness; the poor poet recovers some of his first
accents when he sings: “It is that it contains my joy, my sorrow, and
my love.”

“A Woman’s Love.” Here is a little poem far superior to the preceding.
The author is Adalbert de Chamisso, well known for his _Wonderful
History of Peter Schlemihl_. This time poet and musician identify
themselves with each other marvellously, and Schumann lives and
breathes in every verse of the poet.

In the first song the young girl owns her love:

  “Have I, then, had a dream?
     But him I see!

       *     *     *     *     *

   What makes me tremble thus,
   And takes my sleep from me,
   And makes my heart beat fast?
     ――Yes; it is he!”

Throughout this melody one is conscious of a deep and inward
happiness, which is not without a pleasing touch of melancholy.

In that which next follows the young girl sings her beloved. The
rhythm is lofty, the melody brilliant. There are, however, in this
_Lied_ parts which are not equal to the preceding, and which are
wanting in naturalness. But listen; she is loved:

  “Why tremble thus? why doubt, my heart?
   Thou beatest nigh to breaking. Ah!
   Me has he chosen among all;
   And thou, my heart, believ’st it not!”

The enthusiasm which fills this melody makes it comparable to the
deepest melodies of Schubert. What we feel peculiar in it to Schumann
is a feverish tone, a shade of delirium, if we may say so, which we
might seek for in yain in Schubert. The ternary rhythm, especially
when the measure is rapid, is singularly suitable to impassioned
movements. A chord, detached not too strongly falls upon the first
beat of each bar; the hurrying melody stops upon the word _Ah_, on a
concord of the seventh, very simple, but of a pleasing effect after
the regular ascent of the bass. Then it continues, rapid and fevered,
and the first phrase closes in C, on the words: “And thou, my heart,
believ’st not.”

Then, more slowly, the maiden caresses her precious memories:

  “His mouth has said to me:
   I love thee.”

The melody softens, the phrase is more free and becomes freshly
animated on the words, “A dream bewilders me,” then bursts out
powerfully when the young girl exclaims:

  “O Heaven! if this is but a dream,
   Then may I wake no more.”

This phrase, by its lofty accent and a certain lyric transport,
pleasantly recalls certain movements of Gluck’s.

When, in a low voice, the maiden resumes, “Why tremble thus,” etc., we
might think the melody terminated. But the artist has kept us a few
last notes, breathed from the depths of his soul. After an eager
repetition of the words, “Me has he chosen among all, and thou, my
heart, believ’st it not,” she once more utters them, very slowly and
very softly, in a melodic phrase full of tenderness and supplication.
She is more calm; her heart belies her mouth, and she believes.

The fourth and fifth _Lieder_ are two songs of an affianced maiden.
The young girl at first sings to herself of her betrothed, and the
sentiment of the music is inward, tranquil, and deep; but on quitting
her father’s roof to meet her husband the _fiancée_ sings to her
sisters, with a youthful pride and gladness, “If I am fair, I owe it
only to my happiness,” and the melody breaks into a song of exceeding
beauty.

A wife, she murmurs soon into her husband’s ear, “I hope,” and in the
following _Lied_ we see her as a mother. She presses her little one to
her heart, and a melody of exquisite sweetness expresses the words:

  “Fresh brightness and new love
   In a cradle are revealed.”

Alas! the eighth _Lied_ recalls us to sorrow, the great reality of
life. “O bitter woe! my best-beloved beneath the wing of death is
sleeping; forlorn, I shrink within myself, and solace my sad heart
with weeping.” Then the veil falls.

  “Again I see thee, happiness gone by
   Of former days.”

So ends the poem. But if the part of the poet is finished when he has
made this sorrowful appeal to the past, there is nothing to enchain
the inspiration of the musician. From the depth of his grief, at the
foot of this coffin, the poet has just evoked the memories of
happiness for ever fled. The musician will give a voice to that soul
which is called music――O marvellous power! Words would be misplaced;
harmonies are more discreet, more silent. There is nothing outward
here; it is the soul, contemplating the past, to which music lends its
poignant reality.

We cannot quit Schumann without a few words on the wife he so loved,
and who has shown herself worthy of his love by a steadfast devotion
to the memory of her husband, so long and so unjustly unappreciated.
The author of a number of remarkable _Lieder_, Mme. Clara Schumann
deserves a place among the most distinguished representatives of the
melodic style. Her place should be elsewhere, among living composers,
but we could not separate her even in thought from the husband to
whom, in death, she proves so faithful.

We have read with exceeding pleasure a little collection of _Lieder_,
of which the idea is touching. The husband and wife contributed each
their flowers (of melody) to the garland they have woven. We even
doubt whether the best page of this collection is not a melody by Mme.
Schumann, entitled “Love for Love.”

If we were asked, What is the style of Mme. Schumann? we should
answer, That of Robert Schumann. Can we wonder at it? They loved each
other so much that their souls must gradually have come to bear a
mutual resemblance, and they would have but one inspiration, as they
had but one love.

Schubert and Schumann are the two composers of the past who occupy the
first rank in the melodic style; they have in common that the _Lied_
has been carried by them to its highest expression, and that in return
they owe to it their most lasting renown.

In a complete work we should have now to inquire what the different
great composers have been at the time when they were drawn by their
inspirations on melodic ground. Without entering into disquisitions
which would here be out of place, we ought nevertheless, from the fear
of being too incomplete, bring forward certain _Lieder_ which, however
small a place they may claim among the works of the masters of whom we
are about to speak, none the less reveal an illustrious origin. Haydn,
Mozart, and Beethoven have written a tolerably large number of
melodies, very little known until twenty years ago, when an
intelligent editor had the happy idea of collecting in one volume
forty of these melodies, chosen from the most beautiful.[203] It needs
no long examination to show that Haydn and Beethoven, always inspired,
but above all symphonists, generally take some large phrase which one
would suppose borrowed from one of their symphonies. Thus Haydn’s
“Love Song” reminds us of those fine themes with which his andantes
open; and in the same manner Beethoven, who, by exception, has found
in his charming “Adelaide” the true form of the melody, surprisingly
recalls, in the canzonetta, “In questa tomba,” the admirable adagio of
the grand Sonata Appassionnata in F minor.

Mozart, who was more of a melodist[204] than these two masters, has
composed real _Lieder_, in which, at times, we seem to have a
presentiment of Schubert. Thus, “The Cradle Song” might very suitably
bear the signature of the author of “The Young Mother.” Elsewhere, on
the contrary, in “L’Amour Malheureux” and “Loin de toi,” we find the
style and the dramatic accent of the author of _Don Juan_ and _The
Magic Flute_.

The _Lieder_ of Weber and Mendelssohn, of Meyerbeer, of Berlioz and
Richard Wagner, will not detain us longer. These illustrious masters
have cultivated the _Lied_ with too little zeal to have won from it
any lasting fame. Even Meyerbeer would gain nothing by our dwelling on
this subject in regard to him. He has a certain “Monk” upon his
conscience, of which the less we say the better. On the other hand,
other artists, greatly inferior to those just named, have given in
their melodic compositions the full measure of their talent. We may
quote, as examples, Niedermeyer, an accomplished musician, whose
“Lake” has obtained a great and deserved success; Monpou, the author
of “Castibelza,” whose merit must not be confounded with that of such
contemporaries as Abbadie, Arnaud, and Loïsa Puget.

In Italy Rossini and Donizetti have left melodies to which they have
given the singular name of _Soirées_. Our readers will recall
Rossini’s “Mira la bianca luna,” which has a real charm, but which
reminds one rather of the author of the “Gazza ladra” than of the
inspired singer of “William Tell.”

In the “Abbandonata” Donizetti reaches a truth of expression of which,
unfortunately, he has not been too lavish. In listening to those
prettinesses, written chiefly to obtain pleasing vocal effects, and
which, in the hands of writers like Bordogni, Gordigiani, and their
compeers, have been lowered to the level of the most vulgar
vocalization, we find ourselves regretting the old masters of the
Italian school――Scarlatti, Lotti, Marcello, Durante, whose melodies
are incontestably more youthful and fresh than the romances of the
modern Italian composers.


     [199] See “Les Mélodistes,” by M. Arthur Coquard in _Le
     Contemporain_ for Nov. 1, 1872.

     [200] “In dreams I have seen thy soul; I have seen the night
     in which she hides her woe; I have seen remorse to thy
     footsteps chained, and thy springtime doomed to tears.”

     [201] “Weep not, my Muse; oh! weep no more. God stays with
     him who loses all beside――God on high, and hope below!”

     [202] We hope that in a former notice we have shown that
     there is an artistic connection between them. (See THE
     CATHOLIC WORLD for February, 1877.)

     [203] _Quarante Mélodies de Beethoven, Mozart, et Haydn,
     chez Flaxland._

     [204] We say _melodist_, and not _melodic_. One may be a
     musician of the first order without being a great melodist.
     Thus Meyerbeer, so great in other respects, is a poor
     melodist; but will any one say that he is not melodic?




NEW PUBLICATIONS.


  THE BROWN HOUSE AT DUFFIELD; or, Life within and without the Fold.
    By Minnie Mary Lee. Baltimore: Kelly, Piet & Co. 1876.

A good Catholic novel is still, we fear,

  Nigro simillima cygno.

The great majority of semi-controversial tales which have been written
during the last twenty years, by well-intentioned but injudicious
writers of our faith, have no claim to be recognized as works of art;
for their execution has been in general too hasty to admit of that
careful study and elaboration indispensable to the production of an
enduring work. Neither can they be fairly considered as natural or
practical illustrations of the influence of our holy religion in
social and domestic life, still less as successful means of initiating
outsiders into the beauties of the church’s doctrines. It is not the
legitimate aim of a novel to be prosaically didactic. One page of
Bellarmine or Petavius contains more sound doctrinal position than the
fresh cut leaves of any modern controversial tale. Of course in
master-hands the difficult task of blending narrative and dogma has
succeeded, but it took no less a writer than Cardinal Wiseman to
render _Fabiola_ interesting, and it required the pen of Father Newman
to write _Loss and Gain_. Narrative is better suited than controversy
to most of our lay writers. In every case the silent example of a
noble character is more potent for good than the most ingenious
arguments or most earnest exhortations. The book before us is not free
from the strictures we have passed on its numerous train of
companions. There is much improbability in the plot, and a decided
lack of naturalness in the characters. It is a mistake to elevate an
ordinary heroine to the highest plane of wisdom; she ceases to be
flesh and blood, and then our interest in her ceases likewise.

The tale is replete with the holiest examples for imitation and the
highest lessons in self sacrifice, devotion, and duty.


  FRANK BLAKE. By Dillon O’Brien. St. Paul: Pioneer Press Co. 1876.

So long as works of fiction constitute an important department of
literature of which the supply is rarely in excess of the demand, it
is well for critics to insist that at least no morbid products of
fancy tinged with a vile pruriency be admitted to take rank under this
head. We are glad that the author of _Frank Blake_ has appreciated
this truth; for though he has worked up some delicate situations, he
has been a most strict observer of propriety and has tempered
sentiment with sense. _Frank Blake_ is an oft-told Irish story. The
incidents are not such as we meet in _Orlando Furioso_, but still such
as are calculated to enlist a sober interest. The plot is natural and
ripens with ease. For once the Irish peasant is represented as though
seven centuries of English misrule had at least enabled him to acquire
a decent knowledge of the language of his subjugator. But he is not by
any means Saxonized, as is made evident by his unmistakable Celtic wit
and adequacy to meet and make the best of sudden emergencies.


  THE WISE NUN OF EASTONMERE, AND OTHER TALES. By Miss Taylor.
    Baltimore: Kelly, Piet & Co. 1876.

This unpretentious volume derives its chief attraction from the fact
that every line bears testimony to the modest estimate the writer has
formed of her powers. We will not vouch for the amount of instruction
to be derived from Miss Taylor’s little book, but there can be no
doubt that it is edifying, and in a wise, sober sense. Its simplicity
in style and construction makes up for the absence of more conspicuous
qualities.

  “And few, of all, at once could make pretence
   To royal robes and rustic innocence.”




Transcriber’s Note:

Words and phrases in italics are surrounded by underscores, _like
this_. Dialect, obsolete, alternative, and misspelled words were not
changed.

Obvious printing errors, such as duplicate words, backwards, upside
down, unprinted, or partially printed letters and punctuation, were
completed. Letters were added that had been dropped in typesetting
when a word was hyphenated and split between two lines. Final stops
missing at the end of sentences were added. Missing punctuation was
added or corrected at beginning and ends of sentences, lines of
poetry, and abbreviations.

The copyright line at the bottom of the first page of each monthly
volume was moved to follow the volume number and date. Footnotes were
numbered sequentially and moved to the end of the article in which
the related anchors occur.

The following were adjusted:

  added anchor for Footnote [188]
  added hyphens:
    bare-headed, … waits bare-headed …
    sister-in-law, … her sister-in-law, and other …
    Fitz-James, … said Sir John Fitz-James in a low voice …
  added close parenthesis, … (Ps. xc. 11, 12.[87]) …
  changed accent marks:
    Ou to Où, … Où allons nous …
    Hyeres to Hyères, … wishing for news from Hyères …
    caléche to calèche, … return in the calèche …
    Châteaubriand to Chateaubriand, … in his mouth by Chateaubriand.

Noted, left unchanged: there is no decimal between dollars and
cents in price of books in New Publications sections.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Catholic World, Volume 24, October,
1876, TO March, 1877, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CATHOLIC WORLD, VOLUME 24 ***

***** This file should be named 56955-0.txt or 56955-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/9/5/56955/

Produced by David Edwards, Carol Brown, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

