CHAPTER VII.

AN UNEXPECTED PROPOSAL.

The next morning coffee was brought to the bed-rooms at the first peep
of dawn, and when the little party went out for their walk the sun had
only just begun to set the sea-line on fire.

They stepped for a moment into the Franciscan church next door, then
went down the road leading past it to the Campagna. Fresh and sweet
the morning air touched them as they sauntered along――not the morning
breeze of New England, simple in associations as the breath of a
newly-created being, but like the breath of one, immortally beautiful,
about whom Calliope, Clio, and Erato have circled in their stately
dance through the unfading centuries. Not only every spot of earth,
but every waft of air, was haunted.

Mr. Vane stopped them presently with a silent gesture, and pointed to
a near height, where a solitary cloud, softly resplendent in all its
beautiful undulations, was slowly and loathly detaching itself to
float upward and disappear in the sky, as if the door of a sapphire
palace had opened to receive it. “Is it Diana?” he whispered.

“The Jew has touched nature with a pen of fire,” the Signora said as
they walked on again; “but the pagan has dominated, and still in a
certain sense possesses that beautiful realm. If, as Milton sings,
‘the parting genius was with sighing rent’ from tree and grove at the
birth of Christ, its ghost still haunts the spot, and Milton himself
uses pagan language when he sings the beauties of nature. Why does not
some Christian Job dislodge these ‘mythic fancies,’ and make nature
live with a life that is something more than the rustling of a
garment? Job made the lightnings go and return at the command of God,
saying, ‘Here we are!’ and he speaks of the ‘store-houses of the
snow.’ The Christian poet seems to fear his imagination, to find it
tainted, and, instead of purifying it, and setting it flying, like a
bird or a butterfly, through the garden of the earth, he puts it in a
cage or under a glass along with the pagan images he only glances
askance at. Now and then one meets with a saint whose heart overflows
in that direction, like St. Francis of Assisi, calling the birds his
sisters. Blessed Fra Egidio made the flowers bear witness, as when he
proved the miraculous motherhood of the Virgin to the doubting
_Predicatore_. At each of the three strokes of his staff in the road,
following his three assertions of Our Lady’s purity, up sprang a
beautiful lily. Our Lord set the example in his reference to the
lilies of the field: they toiled not, neither did they spin, yet the
Creator had arrayed them as Solomon in all his glory was never
arrayed. Did he talk to his mother about the flowers, I wonder? When
the boat was tossed by a tempest, he spoke to the waves, as to living
creatures, saying, ‘Peace, be still!’ Do spirits troublesome and
troubled take shape, or, stretching their invisible hands, catch the
shapes of nature as weapons, and lash with foam or strike with
lightning? We cannot know, and we need not know; and we must not
assert. It is not, however, forbidden to fancy. Nature may serve as
the playground wherein our imagination and fancy shall exercise
themselves and prepare our minds for the wonders of the spiritual
life. Fancy and imagination are as really a part of ourselves, and as
truly and wisely given by God, as reason and will. They are the sweet
little enticements inviting us to fly off

  ‘From the dark edges of the sensual ground,’

as the bird-mother coaxes her young to try its wings in little flights
from twig to twig before it soars into the heavens. No, it is not
forbidden to the fancy to play around the mysterious life that makes
the bud swell into the flower and the seed grow into the lofty tree,
so long as we see all in God, and see in God the Trinity, and, in the
aspiring flame of created adoring spirits, behold Maria Santissima as
the white point that touches the foot of the throne.”

The Signora had been speaking slowly and dreamily, pausing now and
then; but at the last, growing earnest, had, as it were, waked
herself, and become aware that she was talking aloud and was listened
to.

Smiling, and blushing too a little, “_Scusino!_” she said. “I cannot
help it. I preach as the sparks fly upward.”

“I speak for a seat in your meeting-house for the rest of my life,”
Mr. Vane replied promptly.

“Apropos of meeting-houses,” she said, “what do you think of those for
spires?” pointing to four gigantic cypresses in the villa they were
passing.

This villa was a strange, deserted-looking place just above the
Campagna. Nothing in it flourished but the four cypresses, which rose
to a magnificent height, their huge cones sloping at the top to a
feather so slender that it was always tipped to one side. Stern, dark,
and drawn close together, they looked down on the place as if they had
cursed it and were waiting to see the consummation of its ruin. All
their shadows were full of a multitudinous grit of cicali voices that
sounded like the sharp grating together of teeth. At their feet stood
the house, half-alive, half-dead, hidden from the street by the walls
it was not high enough to overlook. It was like the upper part of a
house that the earth had half swallowed. At each side of the door
stood a statue dressed in some antique fashion, hat on head and sword
on thigh. They might have been two men who were petrified there long
before. At each side of the gate, inside, a stone dog, petrified too,
in the act of starting up with open jaws, crumbled in a blind rage, as
if a paralyzed life yet dwelt under the lichen-covered fragments, and
struggled to pour forth its arrested anger.

A little farther on was another decaying villa, where green moss and
grasses grew all over the steps, half hid the paving-stones of the
court, and choked the fountain dry. The house, once a gay and noble
mansion, had now got its shutters decently closed over the sightless
windows, and resigned itself to desolation. The long, dim avenues had
a damp, unhealthy breath, and not a flower was to be seen.

They went in and seated themselves on the steps, where the shadow of
the house, covering a verdant square in the midst of the sunshine,
looked like a block of verd-antique set in gold.

“It reminds me of the funeral we went to in St. Peter’s,” Mr. Vane
said, glancing about the sombre place, and over the walls into the
outside splendor. “The mournful pageant looked as small in that bright
temple as this villa in the landscape.”

The two girls gathered grasses and leaves and bits of moss, binding
them into tiny bouquets to keep as mementos, and Bianca made a sketch
of the two villas. They talked but little, and, in that silent and
quiescent mood, perceived far more clearly the character and influence
of the scene――the melancholy that was not without terror; the proud
beauty that survived neglect and decay, and might at any time burst
into a triumphant loveliness, if but some one should care to call
forth the power hidden there; the dainty graces that would not thrust
themselves forward, but waited to be sought. Yet it needed that summer
and sunshine should be all about to keep the sadness from being
oppressive. With those cheering influences so near and so dominantly
larger, the touch of melancholy became a luxury, like a scattering of
snow in wine.

Isabel came back to the steps from her ramble about the place, and
found her father and the Signora sitting there with no appearance of
having uttered a word since she left them.

“It is just the time to read something I found and brought with me
from Rome,” she said. “I tucked it into my note-book, see, and
something at this moment reminded me of it. Bianca was saying that if
the place should be sprinkled with holy water, she did not doubt that
flowers would immediately begin to grow again, and the track was not
long from her notion round to this poem. It had no name when I found
it, but I call it ‘At Benediction.’ The Signora told me that it was
rude and unfinished; but no matter.” She read:


   AT BENEDICTION.

  “Like a dam in which the restless tide
     Has washed, till, grain by grain,
   It has sapped the solid barrier
     And swept it down again,
   The patience I have built and buttressed
     Like a fortress wall,
   Fretted and undermined, gives way,
     And shakes me in its fall.

  “For I have vainly toiled to shun
     The meaner ways of life,
   With all their low and petty cares,
     Their cold and cruel strife.
   My brain is wild with tangled thoughts,
     My heart is like to burst!
   Baffled and foiled at every turn――
     My God, I feel accursed!

  “It was human help I sought for,
     And human help alone;
   Too weary I for straining
     To a height above my own.
   But thy world, with all its creatures, holds
     Nor help nor hope for me;
   I fly to sanctuary,
     And cast myself on Thee!

       *     *     *     *     *

  “The priest is at the altar
     Praying with lifted hands,
   And, girdled round with living flame,
     The veilèd Presence stands.
   Wouldst thou kindle in our dying hearts
     Some new and pure desire,
   That thou com’st, my Lord, so wrapt about
     In robes of waving fire?

  “Hast thou come, indeed, for blessing,
     O silent, awful Host?
   Thou One with the Creator,
     One with the Holy Ghost!
   Hast thou come, indeed, for blessing,
     O pitying Son of Man?
   For if that thou wilt bless me,
     Who is there that can ban?

  “Hast thou come, indeed, for blessing,
     Within whose knowledge rest
   The labyrinthine ways of life,
     The cares of every breast?
   My doubting hope would fain outshake
     Her pinions, if she durst;
   For if truly thou wilt bless me,
     I cannot feel accursed!

  “The _Tantum Ergo_ rises
     In a chorus glad and strong,
   And, waking in their airy height,
     The bells join in the song.
   And priest, and bells, and people,
     As one, in loud accord,
   Are pouring forth their praises
     Of the Sacramental Lord.

  “’Tis as though, from out of sorrow stepping,
     And a darksome way,
   The singers’ eyes had caught the dawn
     Of the celestial day.
   ’Tis as though, behind them casting off
     Each clogging human load,
   These happy creatures, singing, walked
     The open heav’nly road.

  “The hymn is stilled, and only
     The bells ring on above.
   Oh! bless me, God of mercy;
     Have mercy, God of love!
   For I have fought a cruel life,
     And fallen in the fray.
   Oh! bless me with a blessing
     That shall sweep it all away!

       *     *     *     *     *

  “It is finished. From the altar
     The priest is stepping down;
   His incense-perfumed silver train
     Brushes my sombre gown.
   The mingled crowd of worshippers
     Are going as they came;
   And the altar-candles drop to darkness,
     Tiny flame by flame.

  “Silence and softly-breathing Peace
     Float downward, hand in hand,
   And either side the threshold,
     As guardian angels stand.
   I see their holy faces,
     And fear no face of man;
   For when my God has blessed me,
     Who is there that can ban?”

The Signora rose rather hastily. “If we are going to Monte Compatri
this afternoon, we have no time to linger about reading rhymes,” she
said.

They went out into the sunshine, already burning hot, and stole along,
one by one, in the shadow of the high wall, walking over crowds of
little pale, pink morning-glories, that crept humbly on the ground,
not knowing themselves to be vines with a power to rise and climb to
the height of a man, any more than dear Hans Andersen’s ugly duck knew
that he was a swan, though at one point they might have seen, through
an opening in the stonework, better-instructed morning-glories
climbing hedge and shrub, and blowing out a rhythmic joy through their
great white trumpets far up in the air. The greatest pride or
aspiration these little creatures seemed capable of was when, now and
then, one grew, breath by breath, over some small obstacle in its
path, and bloomed with its pretty pink cheek against a gray bit of
stone. The whole ground blushed softly with their sweet humility.

They entered the shaded avenue that circles the lower part of the
town, and saw the beautiful city climbing on the one hand, and the
beautiful Campagna spread out on the other; passed the little wooden
_chalet_ where Garibaldi was holding his court――a wooden house is such
a wonder in Italy!――and the public garden, sweet with the infantine
breath and bright with the infantine hues of countless petunias, and
at length found refuge in Villa Torlonia.

Thick and dark, the lofty trees knit their branches over the seats
where the travellers sat and looked at the grand fountain-front, with
its stone eagle and rows of huge stone vases along the top, and its
beautiful cascade and basin in the centre. At either side this
cascade, in the ten or twelve niches, tall stone vases overflowed with
wild-flowers that had once overflowed with water, the masks above
still holding between their dry lips the pipes from which the sunny
streams had sprung. Far above could be seen, in the rich green gloom
of overarching trees, cascade after cascade dancing down the steep
slope, and, farther yet, the top of a great column of water that
marked the uppermost fountain.

“It is too late to go up now,” the Signora said; “but you can see the
way. It goes round in a circling avenue, or up the steps that are at
each side of the ten cascades. I think there are ten. But the steps at
the right are constantly wet with the spray, and covered with ferns
and moss. You go up at the left, which the sun sometimes touches, and
which is always dry. Below here, too, there are two ways of going up,
either by the parting avenues or by the little dark door you see
beside the cascade. That door leads through a dim passage, where the
walls are all a green tremble with maidenhair fern growing as thick as
feathers on a bird, and up a little dim winding stair that brings you
out beside the stone eagle there. I gathered one of those ferns once
that was half a yard long. You see they build palaces here for waters
as well as for princes.”

The day went by like a dream, steeped in dazzling light, embalmed with
the odors of flowers growing in a luxuriance and beauty new to their
northern eyes, sprinkled over with a ceaseless fountain-spray, sung
through by countless larks, and made magnificent by palace after
palace, and by constantly-recurring and incomparable views. For many a
year to come they would remember the honey-snow of the orange-trees
and the clustered flames of the pomegranates; they would compare their
rose-bushes with the tree which, in one of these gardens, held its
tea-roses nodding over their heads, nor love their own shyer gardens
the less, indeed; and in their trim walks, and loath and delicate
blooming, they would sometimes think with longing of the careless
profusion of the land where the best of nature and the best of art
dwelt together in the familiar and graceful intercourse of daily life.

An hour before sunset they were again in their carriage, and, after a
short drive, found themselves following the long loops of the road
that lead leisurely up the side of Monte Compatri, through the rich
woods, through the pure and exquisitely invigorating air, with all the
world unrolling itself again before their eyes in a view almost equal
to that of Tusculum.

They were obliged to alight in the piazza of the fountain; for the
steep and narrow streets did not admit of carriages. From this piazza
the streets straggled, climbing and twisting, breaking constantly into
little flights of stairs, and sometimes ending in a court or at a
door.

“Prepare to be stared at,” the Signora said, as they took their way up
the _Via Lunga_. “We are the only ladies in the town whose headgear is
not a handkerchief; and as for Mr. Vane, they are very likely to take
him for Prince Borghese. And, come to think of it,” she said, looking
at him attentively, “you are very much like the prince, Mr. Vane.”

The gentleman smiled quietly, without answering. He recollected what
the Signora had forgotten――that she had once expressed the greatest
admiration for Prince Borghese. He took the lady’s parasol and
travelling-bag from her hand, and offered his arm, which the steep way
and her fatigue made acceptable, and the two girls followed, searching
on every side with bright and curious eyes, and murmuring little
exclamations to each other. The irregular stone houses, so near each
other, face to face, that one could easily toss a ball from window to
window across the street, were quite vacant, except for pigeons that
flew in at the windows, or a cat that might be seen sleeping on a
chair or window-ledge, or, perhaps, for a few hens searching for
crumbs. The families were all out of doors. In one little corner
portico sat a handsome woman, with her dark hair beautifully plaited,
and a bright handkerchief laid over her massive shoulders. Her hands
were folded in her lap, and she sat smiling, chatting with a neighbor
now and then, and enjoying a conscious queenship of the place. At
either side of her was a young girl, slim, dark, and bright, a mere
slip of the mother. These girls kept their eyes cast down, and
appeared to think only of their knitting. On the next step was
Carlin’s group. Further on, a young mother steadied her year-old child
between her knees and a chair, while she darned a stocking. One
perceived that the whole and snowy-white stockings worn even by the
poorest were not kept in order without constant care and labor. Near
by, an old woman with a distaff spun flax, and entertained a company
of men with her lively talk. This antique goddess was, perhaps, the
wit of the place. She was, however, in no manner allied to the graces;
for the thin gray hair gathered tightly with a comb to the top of her
head, and entirely uncovered, and the white kerchief knotted round her
neck, instead of being draped in the becoming Italian fashion, showed
that she had long since ceased to hold by even the shadow of a
personal charm. Outside the door of a little _café_, the only one in
the place, half a dozen men sat at tables, drinking coffee and
smoking, while on the door-step a man with a furnace and rotary stove,
and a basket of charcoal beside him, roasted coffee to keep up the
supply, lazily turning the crank while he listened to the gossip going
on at the tables. On a neighboring step were gathered several women in
a little sewing-circle. To these came a woman up the street, bearing
on her head a tub covered over with nodding fern-leaves, which she set
down on the wide top of the balustrade. The circle suspended their
work while the woman displayed a sample of her wares――twelve frogs run
on to a stick. She was met with shrugs and exclamations of
disapproval.

“Poor frogs!” said Isabel. “They look like little white babies.”

They were very poor little babies indeed, thin and small as spiders.

The frog-merchant, nothing disconcerted, laid aside her first sample
and displayed another. “Oh! those are better,” the women cried, and
immediately began to chaffer about the price.

Children swarmed everywhere. The close little town was as full of them
as the shoe where the old woman we all know so well dwelt with her
tribe of young ones. It did not need a powerful imagination to picture
the place boiling over like a pot some day, with a many-colored froth
of _bambini_ down the mountain-side. It was out of the question that
there should be room for the rising generation to stay in the town
when they should have become a risen generation; for they were six or
seven in a family, and already the houses were full.

“Perhaps one of them will go to America, and set up on some sidewalk a
furnace for roasting chestnuts,” Bianca said. “And perhaps, some day,
ten or fifteen years hence, we may stop and ask such a person what
part of Italy he came from, and he will answer, ‘From Monte Compatri’;
and we will say, ‘Ah! we have been there, at such a time; and perhaps
it was you we saw playing in _Via Lunga_ or in the _piazza_?’ and he
will brighten an instant, and then, all at once, begin to cry. And
Isabel will almost cry for him, and will give him her best
handkerchief to wipe his tears away, perhaps wiping them for him; and
I will buy all his chestnuts, which will be cold by the time we get
home, and papa will slip some money into his hand, and ask him if he
wants work to do, and we will all tell him where we live, and to come
to us if he should get into trouble. And then we will go home and talk
for all the rest of the day about nothing but Italy, and that day we
went up Monte Compatri. And Isabel will insist that she recognizes the
fellow perfectly, and try to coax papa to take him for a gardener or
something.”

“And then,” resumed Mr. Vane, continuing the story, “we shall have the
lazy vagabond coming to us every day begging, and we shall miss things
out of the room where he is left alone a few minutes, and Isabel will
give him my clothes, till I shall have nothing left to wear.”

“Meantime, what will the Signora be doing?” that lady demanded,
finding herself left out. “Is she to have no part?”

She did not see the pleasant glance that fell on her from the eyes of
the gentleman at her side. She was looking down, a little hurt, she
hardly knew why. For was it not a matter understood that her home was
in Italy, and theirs in America?

“Why, you,” said Isabel――“you will be in _Casa Ottant’Otto_, thousands
of miles away, and we shall be writing you all about it.”

“Not so!” Mr. Vane said. “She will be with us at the time, I think,
and will correct all our mistakes, and reward all our well-doing with
her approbation.”

“There, that sounds comfortable,” the lady said, smiling. “I was
really feeling neglected and left out in the cold.”

They had come to the street that encircles the town, and on the
outside of which a row of houses hangs on the mountain-edge. In one of
these they were to spend the night, and, as she spoke, the Signora
looked up brightly, and beckoned some one in a window above to come
down and open the door for them.

Mr. Vane spoke rather hastily in answer to her remark, and apparently
for her ear alone. “If you should be outside, the cold will then be
inside the circle,” he said. “It is you who are to choose.”

“Oh! thank you,” she replied lightly. “And now mind the steps. They
are rather dark.”

The street from which they entered this house was so narrow, and the
houses so joined, that they seemed to be still in the heart of the
town; but when they had passed the dusky stairs, and entered the long,
low _sala_ at the head of them, they found the place like a nest in a
tree-top. The mountain-side dropped sheer from under the very windows,
and the view swept round from Rome and the sea to Palestrina and the
mountains.

In this _sala_ the whole family of the _padrone_ had assembled to
welcome and stare at the strangers before giving the room up to their
use. A dozen or so smiling faces, full of good-will and curiosity,
clustered about without the slightest sign of any thought that they
might be intruding, or that there was to be any limit to the free use
of their eyes. An old woman leaning on a cane muttered unintelligible
blessings and made innumerable little bows right and left, a hale
young matron talked and welcomed, a servant smiled unceasingly, a
young girl with a baby in her arms asked abrupt questions in a loud
voice, and children of all ages filled up the gaps.

The young ladies resigned their clothes to examination, and began
shyly petting the little ones, and the Signora gave orders for their
entertainment. While she was talking the servant and two of the boys
ran skurrying out of the room and presently returned with an air of
great pride, bearing in their hands beautiful white pigeons, which
they caressed while displaying.

The young ladies admired them and smoothed their snowy plumage,
without being in the least aware why they had been brought.

“They are for our dinner to-morrow,” the Signora remarked with great
composure.

There was a little duet of dismayed exclamations. “I thought they were
family pets!” Bianca said, recoiling.

“And so they are, my dear,” was the reply. “They pet them up to the
moment of killing them, and praise while they are eating them. Their
fondness never ceases. And now let us take off our bonnets and have
supper.”

The room was long, low, and paved with coarse red bricks. The ceiling,
crossed by several large beams, was papered in compartments
representing squares of blue sky with light clouds floating over, and
a bird or two here and there in the space, and the flowery walls were
nearly hidden by great presses holding linen, by sideboards laden with
dishes, and by the high backs of patriarchal old chairs, very
picturesque to look at and very penitential to sit in.

All the centre of this room was taken up by a long table, at one end
of which their supper was speedily prepared. There was bread, as good
as could be had in Rome, and such a salad as could scarcely be had in
any city, the oil as sweet as cream, and the lettuce so crisp and
delicate that it could be almost powdered between the hands. Just as
they sat down a large decanter of gold-colored wine, ice-cold from the
grotto, was placed before them. For in these little Italian towns,
however they may lack the necessities of life, they are never without
the luxuries.

They sat down merrily, only one of the family remaining to wait on
them, the others hovering about the door, and watching the faces of
their guests as they ate, to see how the food pleased them.

“Papa,” said Isabel, pointing to a plate before her, on which a small
onion shone like silver, “do you recognize that vegetable?”

“I recog_nose_ it,” replied Mr. Vane, who would sometimes play upon
words.

“Well, I propose that we agree to divide it in four parts, each a
little larger than the last, the largest for you, the smallest for
Bianca, and that we all eat our portions, and so find no fault with
each other.”

Bianca instantly declined the invitation, and blushed deeply when they
rallied her on her daintiness.

“These onions are very delicate and sweet,” the Signora said. “I used
to avoid them, till one day I received a call from a personage of the
most dignified position and unexceptionable manners, from whose breath
I perceived, in the course of the conversation, that he had been
eating these little onions. But the faint odor that reached me as he
spoke was as though a rose and an onion had been grafted together.
Since then I have eaten without scruple.”

But Bianca still declined, still blushing. Why? Was it that her
affection for the friend ever tenderly remembered had so consecrated
her to him that nothing but what was sweetest and purest must touch
where his image was enshrined, whether he were present or absent? She
was quite extreme enough in her sensitive delicacy for such a thought.

Supper over, they went out into a _loggia_ attached to their _sala_
and overhanging the steep mountainside, and watched the sun go down
over the sea. The globe of fire had already touched the water-line,
that by day showed only like a line of purple cloud, and kindled it to
an intense lustre; and, as they looked, there was half a sun above the
horizon, and another half visible as though seen through the
transparent edge of the world over which it disappeared; then, without
diminishing, it dropped out of sight, leaving an ineffable, silent
glory over the scene. The fire of the sea faded to a faint gold, the
rosy violet of the Campagna changed to a deep purple, and Earth,
raising her shadowy hands, put aside the curtaining light of day, and
looked out at the stars.

The sisters withdrew presently, and left the two elders to admire the
beauties of nature at their leisure. Isabel, screened off in one
corner of the _sala_, made voluminous notes of her experiences, and
planned a wonderful story, into which they should all be woven. Seated
on a footstool, with a brass lamp hanging to the back of a chair near
her, and her writing on her knees, she saw one character after another
emerge from the shades and take form and individuality before her
eyes, as if they grew there independent of her will. They spoke and
moved of themselves, and she only looked and listened. Now and then
some trait, some feature, some word, was such as she had seen in real
life, but these people were not portraits, though they might have such
resemblances, and even might have been suggested by persons she had
known. The shades grew more and more alive, gathering into substance.
Stone walls built themselves up silently and with a more than
Aladdin-like celerity, and gardens burst into instantaneous bloom. If
she willed the sea present, its waves rolled up to her feet in foam,
or caught and tossed her in their strong arms; if she called for
forests, swiftly their darkening branches shut her in, and her light
feet trod their dry, crackling twigs and rich, disordered flowers. The
very accidents of a great pine-cone to stumble over, or an unexpected
lizard running across the path, were there. The dull walls of the room
she sat in, the rough bricks under her feet, the crowded town about
her, were as though they were not. She was free of the world.

O precious gift of the magical lamp! which, at a touch, calls about
its possessor all that men wish, and work, and strive for of earthly
good, without the pain or responsibilities of earthly possession;
which gives the rose without its thorn, the wine without its lees, the
friend without the doubt, the triumph without disappointment! Happy
they who, when what we call real life presses too hard or becomes too
dull, can put it aside for the time, and enter a world of their own,
for ever beautiful and satisfying, who, walking the common street, see
things unseen of common eyes, and for whom many a beauty smiles under
an ugly mask.

Bianca was in no such exalted mood of fancy, but, withdrawn to the
chamber she was to occupy with the Signora, was lifting the holier
eyes of faith, and, with childlike simplicity and confidence, laying
all her heart open to God, sending up her petitions for earthly
happiness on a cloud of the Acts, said after her own manner: “O my
God! I believe in thee, I hope in thee, I love thee, I thank thee, and
I am sorry for having offended thee”; and then, as a thought or wish
more earthly thrust itself forward, presenting it, unafraid and
undoubting. Living and dead, friends and strangers, the poor, and
those who had no one to pray for them――all were remembered by this
tender heart; but ever, like the refrain of a song, came back the
petition, “Bless, and guard from all ill of soul or body, him who is
so much more to me than all other men, and, if it be thy will, give
him to me for a friend and companion as long as I shall live.”

The two in the balcony, left to themselves, were talking quietly,
having no mind to separate. The Signora found in the society of Mr.
Vane a pleasure altogether new to her――the pleasure of being able to
depend on some one. It was only now, when she was surrounded with a
constant, friendly care, that she became aware how unprotected and
unhelped her former life had been, and how sweet was that repose which
the protected enjoy. Besides, Mr. Vane’s care was of a particularly
agreeable kind. It did not, by watching and seizing on opportunities
of serving, suggest the existence of an emotional care which might
change to neglect, but was simply a calm readiness, which assumed, as
a matter of course, that it should help when help was needed.

“I shall never be sufficiently thankful for having been led to make
this European journey,” Mr. Vane said after a little silence. “It has
done me good in many ways, and promises more even than it has
performed as yet.”

“I am glad you say thankful instead of glad,” the Signora said,
smiling. “Perhaps, too, I should say, I am thankful you say so.”

He thought a moment before speaking, and recollected that only a few
months before he would not have used the word. The change had come so
gradually that he had scarcely been aware of it. “Yet I believe that I
always recognize the Source from which all good flows,” he resumed
seriously. “At least, I never denied it. Here religion is such a
household affair, one falls after awhile into the habit of expressing
what before was only felt, and felt, perhaps, unconsciously.”

“It is better so,” was the reply. “We strengthen a true feeling when
we give it utterance. Besides, we may thus communicate it to others.”

“One of my causes of thankfulness,” he resumed, “is that my daughters
should be associated with you. I wish you could make them more like
yourself, and I am sure that their admiration and affection for you
will lead them naturally to imitate you and to receive your
instructions willingly. They have been to me a source of great
anxiety, and I feel myself utterly incapable of directing them; for,
while I wish them to be modest and womanly, on the one hand, I as
certainly wish them to be capable of finding in life an object and a
happiness which shall not depend on any other person. It would please
me to see them well married; but God forbid that an unmarried life
should be for them a disappointed life! What I could do for them I
have done, but with an immense self-distrust; and I have felt safer
when leaving them to themselves than when interfering or seeking to
guide them.”

“I should think you had done well both in guiding and in leaving them
free,” the lady replied. “Many parents do too much either one way or
the other. Does not the result satisfy you so far?”

She was surprised at the emotion with which he spoke, not knowing
anything of his married life.

“The result is not yet. Everything depends on their marriage, or their
reason for not marrying.” He hesitated, then went on, as if incapable
of keeping silence longer on a subject of which he had never spoken:
“The fate of their mother is to me a constant warning and a constant
pain. In one respect I can save them from that; for I shall never urge
them to marry, and shall never oppose any choice of theirs, unless it
should be a manifestly bad one. But I cannot guard them from the
tyranny of some mistaken sense of duty, or mistaken pride or delicacy
which they might conceal from all the world.”

Startled by this half-revelation, his companion kept silence, waiting
for him to speak. It was impossible he should not speak after such a
beginning.

“I do not know which was the more deeply wronged, I or my poor
Bianca,” he said presently. “It all came from the blundering
coarseness of parents who overstepped, not their authority――for they
never commanded her――but their power to influence, which, with one
like her, was quite as strong. Their mistake has taught me to
interfere and control less the gentle, silent one than the one who
speaks her mind out clearly and loudly. I have always thought that the
mother of my daughters had some preference which she never
acknowledged. Often, more often than not, these preferences come to
nothing and are soon forgotten; but not always. She did not wish to
marry me, but she consented without hesitation, and I believed that
the slight reserve would vanish with time. Perhaps she believed it
too. Her conscience was as pure as snow. She did perfectly, with all
her power, what she believed to be her duty. But that preoccupation,
whether for another person or for a single life, was never vanquished.
You have, perhaps, chased a butterfly when you were a child, beaten it
with your hat from flower to flower, and at last imprisoned it under a
glass; or you have caught a hummingbird that has strayed into your
room, and flown from you as long as it had strength. Neither resisted
when it was caught; but the down was brushed off the butterfly’s
wings, and the bird was dead in your hand. My wife omitted nothing
that a good will could accomplish. She was grateful for my efforts to
make her happy; she was calm, and even cheerful; and I am sure that
she never said to herself, even, that she was sorry for having married
me. But the only beaming smile I ever saw on her face was when she
knew that she was going to die.”

His voice trembled a little, and he stopped a moment, as if to steady
it before going on.

“Was not I wronged too? Was not the unwilling jailer as unfortunate as
the unwilling prisoner? I say nothing of my own personal
disappointment, though that was great. The mutual confidence, the
delightful companionship, the perfect union, to which I had looked
forward, and which were my ideal of marriage――where were they? In
place of them I never lost the feeling that I had a victim for ever at
my side. I felt as if I had been unmanly and cruel; yet the fault was
not mine. She gave herself to me in all that she could, yet she was
never mine.”

He paused again; yet this time his voice trembled more in resuming
than in leaving off his story.

“I rejoiced in her release; and I look forward to no future meeting
with her that shall be different from that meeting which we are
permitted to look forward to with all the good in heaven. If other
husbands and wives expect some closer partnership in heaven, I neither
expect nor wish it. I have resigned her absolutely and for ever. I do
not think that I am morbid. You should know her peculiar character to
understand well how I could be made to feel that crystal wall that
always stood between us. I felt it so that I really believe, if the
children were not demonstrative in their affection for me, I should
not have the courage to show any fondness for them. I used, when they
were little ones, to look at them sometimes with a kind of terror when
I came home, to see if they would smile brightly, and run to me as if
they were glad from the heart to see me. I always waited for them,
and, thank God! they never failed me. Duty and submission are there,
but a perfect affection makes them almost unnecessary.”

Finishing, he glanced for the first time at his companion, and saw
that she was in tears.

“My dear friend!” he exclaimed, “how selfish I have been! Forgive me!”

“No,” she replied gently, wiping her eyes, “you are not selfish. It
seems to me that you are one of the least selfish of men. I am glad
you have confidence enough in me to tell me such a story, which, I can
well believe, you seldom or never speak of. It is quite natural that
you should confide it to some one, and you could not expect any one to
hear it unmoved.”

What an exquisite moonlight covered the world, and made a fairy-like,
silvery day in the little balcony where the two sat! The air sparkled
with it, and one tear still hanging to the Signora’s eyelashes shone
like a diamond in its beams.

“You are the first person to whom I have ever spoken on this subject,
and the only person to whom I could confide it,” Mr. Vane said. “Can
you guess why, Signora?”

She looked at him with a startled glance and read his meaning, and, in
the first astonishment and confusion, was utterly incapable of
replying.

“Shall I tell you why?” he asked.

She rose hastily, blushing and distressed.

“Do not say any more!” she exclaimed, and was on the point of leaving
him abruptly, but checked herself, and, turning in the open low
window, held out her hand to him. “You have called me friend. Let us
remain friends,” she said.

He touched the hand, and released it without a word, and they
separated.

Half an hour afterward Bianca’s face peeped out into the moonlight.
“Are you still here, papa?” she said, and went to him. “Good-night,
dear.”

He embraced her gently, and echoed her good-night, but did not detain
her a moment.

“What! papa romancing here all alone?” exclaimed Isabel in her turn.
“It isn’t good for your complexion nor for your disposition. Late
hours and too much thinking make one sad.”

“Therefore you should go to bed directly,” was his reply.

She kissed him merrily and left him alone.


TO BE CONTINUED.




MIVART’S CONTEMPORARY EVOLUTION.[100]

If in our contemporary evolution a great genius should appear, worthy
to continue the work of St. Thomas, it would be requisite that he
should combine in himself the gifts and acquirements of a
metaphysician, a theologian, and a master of natural science. We
accentuate strongly the last of these requisites, because we are not
so much in need of pure metaphysics and theology, possessing both
already in a state of high perfection and completeness, as we are of
the mixed science in which the relations of the higher and the lower
orders of being, truth and good, are developed and manifested. There
have been some men already, since the modern period began, who have
combined metaphysical and natural science in a remarkable degree. Such
a man was Leibnitz. The famous Jesuit Boscovich was perhaps superior
intellectually, as he certainly was morally, even to this prodigy of
talent and learning. He was a great mathematician and physicist, a
great metaphysician, and a great statesman, besides being eminent in
Christian perfection and apostolic zeal. Balmes was a man of a similar
stamp, though especially eminent in social science. Among living men a
high place belongs to Father Bayma as a metaphysician, mathematician,
and physicist, although he has published little under his own name,
except his remarkable work on _Molecular Mechanics_. Such men are
invaluable at the present time. And for all those who are aiming at a
thorough education for important positions in the service of the
church and humanity, the conjoined cultivation of these various
branches of science, in the due proportion for acquiring what we have
called the mixed science, is of the highest importance. We are happy
to know that it is not neglected, and is likely to be advanced to a
higher and more extensive state of excellence in the near future. One
who has the chance of looking over the theses in physics which are
prepared for the examinations at Woodstock will be convinced that
there is one Catholic seminary, at least, in this country where such
matters receive due attention. The articles published from time to
time in the Catholic reviews of Europe, as well as an occasional
volume from the pen of a Catholic professor, are another evidence of
what we have stated. The English hierarchy, aided by the band of
gifted and learned priests and laymen who adorn the Catholic Church of
England, is distinguishing itself in the promotion of this scientific
culture. Dr. Mivart is one of this band. We have, in former numbers,
taken occasion to notice several of his works, and express our high
estimation of the courage and ability with which he is constantly
laboring for the advancement of true, Catholic science. Dr. Mivart’s
specialty is natural science; but he is not a mere physicist or
scientist. He has the genuine philosophical spirit, and shows in his
writings that he has studied to some purpose metaphysics, theology and
ethics, history, politics, and _belles-lettres_. The essays contained
in the volume we are at present reviewing were first published in the
_Contemporary Review_, with the exception of the last one, which
appeared in the _Dublin Review_. We propose, at present, to do little
more than give an analysis of their contents and of the author’s
argument.

The title informs us that his topic of discussion is, “Some great
Social Changes.” These social changes, in his idea, are very deep and
universal alterations in the social fabric which have been going on
during the entire post-mediæval period, are still in progress, and are
likely to proceed much further as time goes on. It is in view of their
bearing on the perpetuity and action of the Catholic Church that they
are considered. In the introductory chapter a general view is taken of
their nature, origin, causes and probable development, and the plan to
be followed in pursuing the particular scope of the essay is laid
down. The second chapter is on Political Evolution. The third presents
the three ideals of social organization, which are proposed by as many
different classes of political philosophers: 1. The pagan, or
monistic. 2. The civic, or that which is based on some maxims of
natural right and expediency. 3. The theocratic or mediæval. The
fourth chapter treats of Scientific Evolution, the fifth of
Philosophical and the sixth of Æsthetic Evolution.

We may as well premise a statement of Dr. Mivart’s idea of evolution
before we proceed to analyze his argument. It is a procession from an
indefinite, incoherent homogeneity to a definite, coherent
heterogeneity, whose origin is God as first cause, whose ultimatum is
God as final cause or end, whose principle of continuity is the
intelligent volition of God as ruler, embracing all the phenomena of
the universe, physical, biological, political, moral, and religious,
in one enchainment of activities, which rise in a graduated series
from the lowest to the highest toward their Ideal in God.[101] A
similar idea is laid by Leo at the foundation of his _Universal
History_: “The Christian view of the history of the world takes all
facts, not as something new superadded by the power of man to the
creative act of God, but only as a further _evolution_ of the facts of
creation.”[102] In the introductory chapter Dr. Mivart begins by
noting the fact that there are crises or great epochs in this
historical evolution, and expressing his conviction that the present
is one of these, and particularly marked by being a period of
_conscious_ development. As the outcome of the changes occurring in
the past, he traces its logical connection with the periods of the
French Revolution, the revolt of the sixteenth century, the
Renaissance, and the conflict of Philip the Fair with the Holy See.
The process of this evolution is designated as a struggle of reviving
paganism to reject the domination of mediæval theocracy, which,
gradually obtaining success, is likely to be carried to a much further
point than it has yet reached. Two questions are proposed for
consideration: 1. “The effect on Christianity of the further
development of the great movement.” 2. “The probable result of the
renewed conflict between such a modified Christianity and a revived
paganism.”

In order clearly and fully to understand the author’s method of
treating these questions, it is necessary to place and keep distinctly
in view with whom he is arguing and on what principles. It is not with
professed Christians or Catholics that he primarily intends to discuss
these topics, on their principles, but with those who are mere
naturalists, and who admit nothing but what is evident or provable by
purely scientific and rational arguments. The truth of revelation and
the Catholic faith is therefore left on one side, and nothing is taken
into consideration except “obvious or admitted tendencies of known
natural forces and laws.” It is the author’s purpose to extort from
the enemies of revelation and the Catholic Church, by using their own
principles and ideas, evidence for the ability of the church to cope
with, overcome, and bend to her own superior force of intelligence and
will the new and hostile environments, political, scientific, and
philosophical, by which she is surrounded. In respect to the political
aspect of the question, he argues that, supposing the changes in this
order to proceed in their evolution until a complete disintegration of
the mediæval, theocratic system is effected, an interior, latent
capacity will be evolved in the church, by which she will be
integrated and strengthened for a more complete and extensive triumph
than was ever before achieved. Briefly, his argument amounts to this:
Violent, red-republican, or despotic subversions of the liberty of the
masses and social order cannot be lasting. Some kind of basis for
liberty with order must be found in natural law and right, consisting
of maxims of ethical truth and expediency. The political maxims of
England and the United States are referred to for illustration, and
the author anticipates for the English-speaking nations, their maxims
of policy and their language, an universal, predominating influence in
the future. Now, the church, he argues, can avail herself of this
liberty. The laboring classes, once liberated from and raised above
that misery and oppression which are the active cause of their
hostility against both the hierarchy and the aristocracy, can be won
over to the cause of the church. Religious orders, founded on poverty
and labor, whose members are drawn from these classes and associated
with them, can gain new life, power, and extension. Opposition and
persecution will only purify and invigorate the intellectual and moral
constitution of the church, and intensify its unity of organic life
and action. That part of society which is corrupted by pagan
immorality will be weakened and diminished by its errors and vices,
while the Catholic portion will become always stronger and more
numerous by the effect of its ethical maxims carried out in practice.
The past history of the church enables us to augur for her future
history that there are no circumstances, however difficult and
apparently destructive to her life, which she cannot surmount, and
over which she cannot achieve a complete triumph, in virtue of the
organic strength which she possesses. At the end of his long and
minute process of argument, in which he says he has “endeavored
dispassionately to estimate what, at the very utmost, must be the
destructive effects on Christianity of the greatest amount of
anti-theocratic change which can possibly be anticipated,” the author
considers that a Catholic may be fairly entitled to express the
following conviction: “By the continuance, then, of this evolutionary
process, there is plainly to be discerned in the distant future a
triumph of the church compared with which that of mediæval Christendom
was but a transient adumbration――a triumph brought about by moral
means alone, by the slow process of exhortation, example, and
individual conviction, after every error has been freely propagated,
every denial freely made, and every rival system provided with a free
field for its display――a triumph infinitely more glorious than any
brought about by the sword, and fulfilling at last the old
pre-Christian prophecies of the kingdom of God upon earth.”[103]

One-half of the volume is taken up with the consideration of political
evolution and the three political ideals. Nevertheless, the author
considers that the questions respecting science and philosophy are
much the most important. For, although he concludes from his course of
reasoning that political changes will be harmless to the church, and
even give her increased strength, coherence, and efficiency, so that a
Catholic may reasonably expect for her all that triumph which he
thinks her Author has foretold, in spite of such changes; yet, in
arguing with an unbeliever, such a ground of confidence cannot be
assumed. If the claims of the church to authority, and the dogmatic
truth of her doctrine, can be successfully assailed by science and
philosophy, then scientific and philosophical evolution must be fatal
to Christianity, and political changes will facilitate and hasten the
catastrophe, though they are powerless to produce it by their own
solitary, unaided force. Here we arrive at that part of the subject
which is to us the most interesting, and which the author has treated
in the most satisfactory manner. On this field Dr. Mivart is at home;
for it is his own peculiar ground, where he has already labored with
eminent success, and where we confidently hope he will hereafter
gather a still greater and richer harvest.

We anticipate a great revolution in the attitude of what is in common
parlance rather incorrectly called “science”――_i.e._, the complex of
various branches of physics――toward the Catholic Church. A hostile
attitude is wholly unnatural. Second-class scientists, sciolists in
knowledge, men of an imperfect and one-sided culture, are
intellectually swamped in the morass of facts, theories, and
hypotheses in which they pass their lives. The imperfect beginnings of
natural sciences present phases of apparent contradiction to revealed
truths. Imperfect theological systems, and opinions which rest on
merely human authority, but are erroneously supposed to be revealed
doctrines, frequently clash with science, or with scientific
hypotheses which are more or less probable or plausible. But there is
in genuine natural science, in the methods by which it proceeds, in
the spirit which actuates its great masters, something eminently
favorable to genuine sacred science and akin to it. The wild,
anti-Christian hypotheses which are put forth under the name of
science are not unfrequently crushed by the masters in science, even
though they are not themselves Christians. Inductive science is
modest, calm, impartial, slow, and just, in its procedure. It is like
the law in its accepting and examining evidence on all sides of every
question. The masters in science who are unbelievers are so in spite
of, and not because of, their scientific spirit and method. If they
are actively hostile to Christianity, it is because of some false
philosophy which is accidentally connected with their science, or by
reason of their ignorance of real Christianity. No false system can
stand the application of the genuine principles and method of
scientific inquiry. It is precisely by that method and those
principles that the truth of the Catholic Church is established,
corroborated, and confirmed. An amiable friend, a Unitarian minister,
once remarked to us that men’s minds were going back, by a circuitous
route, to the Catholic Church. This is what Dr. Mivart endeavors to
show. Having tried all false routes and traced up all errors to their
ending in No-Land, men work back across lots and through thickets to
the old travelled road which they abandoned through caprice.

In respect to physical science, Dr. Mivart’s principal line of
argument goes to show that it has nothing to do directly with
theology, because it is conversant exclusively with “phenomenal
conceptions.” Facts as to the coexistences and sequences of phenomena
do not furnish the philosophy by which they are to be explained. This
philosophy, and the theology which rests on it as its natural basis,
have their own distinct sphere. It is only where theology affirms
something as a revealed truth respecting facts of this kind――_e.g._,
that the sun revolves around the earth, that creation began four
thousand years before Christ, and was completed in six literal
days――that it comes upon the common ground where it can clash with
physical science. In regard to Catholic doctrine, he shows that such
affirmations are but few, and that none have ever been made into
dogmas by the authority of the church which have been afterwards
proved by scientific evidence to be false. The complete revolution in
cosmology effected by the demonstration of the Copernican system is
referred to as an instance of apparent conflict between science and
dogma which turned out to be no conflict at all. So, also, the
apparent conflict between evolutionary biology and Christian dogma,
which the author has more fully discussed in other works, is
succinctly treated. The antagonism between physics and theology,
though of long standing, is accidental, and “physical science should
be considered, alike by the philosophic Christian and anti-Christian,
as neutral and indifferent.” The only influence, therefore, which
physical science can have on Christianity is through the philosophy
which is connected with it. It is philosophy which affords the real
battle-ground for the final and decisive conflict between the
Christian and anti-Christian forces. Notwithstanding the
narrow-minded, ignorant, and absurd contempt for philosophy which many
modern scientists express, and which has been quite common for some
time past, the author thinks that the scientists themselves, even by
their destructive efforts, are aiding powerfully in bringing about a
great philosophic reaction. The author most justly observes that
fundamental questions of philosophy underlie all physical science, and
that, for this reason, the great development and wide popularity of
physical science must drive many minds into philosophy. Reviving
paganism, which is only a return to the old Aryan predilection for
pantheistic naturalism, and is theoretically based on ancient
philosophical ideas revived in new dresses by modern sophists, can
only come into that internecine conflict with Christianity, after
which it pants, on the ground of philosophy. Both sides must therefore
give themselves to philosophical study and discussion, and they have
already begun to do so. The supreme question, therefore, in respect to
the movement of contemporary evolution, is the philosophical direction
it is likely to take.

We arrive, then, at the last topic but one considered by Dr.
Mivart――viz., Philosophic Evolution, and the process by which he
endeavors to “form a final judgment as to the result of the great
conflict between reviving paganism and the Christian church.”

In Dr. Mivart’s opinion――one in which we need not say we most heartily
concur――what is needed is a return, “not to a philosophy, but to _the_
philosophy. For if metaphysics are possible, there is not, and never
was or will be, more than one philosophy which, properly understood,
unites all speculative truths and eliminates all errors: _the_
philosophy of _the_ philosopher――Aristotle.”[104] Moreover, he
declares his conviction that evolution will infallibly bring about
this return. In his view, scholastic philosophy simply went out of
fashion in the same way that mediæval architecture came to be despised
as barbarous, and will again resume its sway just as the architectural
glories of northern Europe have come to be universally appreciated.
One or two testimonies to the grandeur of the mediæval philosophy from
distinguished opponents are given. The widespread and earnest revival
of the same among Catholics all over the world is a fact too patent to
need any proof. Dr. Mivart’s almost chivalric enthusiasm for
scholastic philosophy is of itself a signal instance of a movement in
this direction from a new quarter――_i.e._, from the ranks of the
devotees of physical science. It would seem that he himself has been
led through science to philosophy, and therefore his views and
reasonings on the matter have a peculiar interest. He presents two
distinct phases of the question. One represents the inability of the
anti-Christian scientists to construct a philosophy which may
successfully oppose Christianity. The other presents positive
tendencies in scientific evolution toward the peripatetic philosophy
of the Christian schools. In respect to the first, his line of
argument shows that these anti-Christian scientists are at war with
each other and can never agree upon any one system; furthermore, that
their reasonings end in absolute scepticism, and thus undermine their
own foundations. Human nature and common sense invariably cause a
reaction against idiotic and suicidal systems of this sort. Even the
cultivation of natural science, therefore, must produce a tendency to
seek for a satisfactory system of psychology and ontology. And as the
philosophy which Des Cartes brought into vogue, ending with the
transcendentalism of Kant and his successors, is no better than a
philosophy of scepticism, it seems that a return to the mediæval and
Grecian school, to Aristotle and St. Thomas, is unavoidable. There is
but one other system which holds out the promise of a refuge from
materialism and scepticism――that of the Ontologists. This system,
however, is too contrary to the spirit and method of the natural
sciences to offer any attractions to minds seeking for a synthesis of
the spiritual and the material. The exposition of positive tendencies
toward Catholic philosophy in the evolutionary processes of modern
thought is on too abstruse and extensive a range to admit of being
more compendiously treated than it actually is in the author’s text.
We will, therefore, content ourselves with quoting his own words, in
which he summarily expresses the result of his arguments in his
conclusion: “Glancing backward over the course we have traversed, it
seems borne in upon us that the logical development of that process
which Philip the Fair began is probably advancing, however slowly, to
a result very generally unforeseen. But if such result as that here
indicated be the probable outcome of philosophical evolution,
Christianity has once more evidently nothing whatever to fear from it.
A philosophy which as a complement unites in one all other systems
will harmonize with a religion which as a complement synthesizes all
other religions, and not only religions properly so called, but
atheism also. Atheism, pantheism, and pure deism, running their
logical course and mutually refuting each other, find an ultimate
synthesis in Christianity, as we have before found them to do in
nature. Christianity affirms the truth latent in atheism――namely, that
God, as He is, is unimaginable and inscrutable by us; in other words,
no such God as we can _imagine_ exists. It also affirms the truth in
pantheism, that God acts in every action of every created thing, and
that in him we live and move and are. Finally, it also asserts the
truths of deism, but by its other assertions escapes the objections to
which deism is liable from opposing systems. Similarly, Christianity
also effects a synthesis between theism and the worship of humanity,
and that by the path, not of destruction, but through the nobler
conception of ‘taking the manhood into God.’

“Our investigations have led us to what we might have _à priori_
anticipated――the conclusion that the highest and most intellectual
power is that which must ultimately dominate the inferior forces.
Neither political nor scientific developments can avail against the
necessary consequences of philosophical evolution. No mistake can be
greater than that of supposing that philosophy is but a mental luxury
for the few. An implicit, unconscious philosophy possesses the mind
and influences the conduct of every peasant. Metaphysical doctrines,
sooner or later, filter down from the cultured few to the lowest
social strata, and become, for good or ill, the very marrow of the
bones, first of a school, then of a society, ultimately of a nation.
The course of general philosophy, it is here contended, is now
returning to its legitimate channel after a divergence of some three
centuries’ duration. This return cannot affect prejudicially the
Christian church, but must strengthen and aid it; and thus that
beneficial action upon it of political and scientific evolution,
before represented as probable, will be greatly intensified, and the
great movement of the RENAISSANCE hereafter take its place as the
manifestly efficient promoter of a new development of the Christian
organism such as the first twenty centuries of its life afforded it no
opportunity to manifest.”[105]

The author’s last chapter, on Æsthetic Evolution, is a kind of
appendix to the essay――which is really concluded with the passage just
now quoted――but it is nevertheless an ingenious and elaborate essay in
itself. The author begins by remarking that the question of evolution
in religion is one which would furnish an interesting subject of
inquiry. He then pays a very high but just tribute to the genius of
Dr. Newman, whose influence over Dr. Mivart’s mind may be traced in
all his writings, as the one who, in his great essay on Development,
has elucidated with a master-hand the evolutionary process within the
church, and anticipated the doctrines of Spencer, of Darwin, and of
Haeckel. With a passing allusion to the great Vatican decree as the
culmination of this process and the keystone of the great arch of
civil and religious liberty; and to the two distinct though intermixed
processes of evolution outside the church, one simply pagan, the other
sectarian; and to the process of disruption and dissolution which is
tending to carry the adherents of the sects either toward anti-theism
or toward the church――the author turns aside to consider a subject
closely connected with religious evolution: the probable effect of the
great modern movement of contemporary evolution upon Christian art.
Most of his remarks are upon architecture, although he touches lightly
upon music, painting, and sculpture. In music he appears to give his
vote for St. Gregory and Palestrina. In respect to painting and
sculpture, he anticipates progress in these arts by the blending of
the best elements of the Preraphaelite period and those of the
Renaissance. In handling the topic of architecture he analyzes the
arguments for and against both the Gothic and Italian styles, and ends
by declining to advocate the side of the exclusive champions of either
of the two styles. After discussing some of the general principles of
the art, he proposes a return to the style which prevailed before the
introduction of the pointed arch, as a starting point for an improved
style combining some features of the Gothic with some others of the
Romanesque style of architecture. One consideration which he presents
respecting the use of stained-glass windows strikes us as especially
worthy of attention. As ornaments and as objects of devotion, the
paintings upon glass in church-windows are far inferior to statues and
pictures, and they nevertheless exclude them and occupy their place by
reason of the quality of the light which is reflected through stained
glass. It is desirable, therefore, to find some way of making the
windows beautiful and ornamental as well as useful, and at the same
time admitting light of that quality and in that direction which is
requisite in a church decorated with paintings and statuary. Dr.
Mivart says: “In the first place, the absence of any rigid rule of
symmetry will allow the admission of light just wherever it may be
required. Secondly, the windows may be of any shape found the most
convenient――square, elongated, and narrow windows, rose-windows or
semi-circular windows, as in the nave of Bonn cathedral. They may also
be made ornamental by mullions, while tracery need not by any means be
confined to the upper part of each window, since each window may be
all tracery, the stone-work being of such thickness as may combine
strength and security with a copious admission of light. The absence
of that beautiful but self-contradictory feature, _brilliant_ stained
glass, will allow an ample supply of light without too great a
sacrifice of wall-space, and without any impairment of stability. Not
that the glazing should not be ornamental and artistic; the pieces of
glass might be so designed that their lead frame-work may form elegant
patterns, while the glass itself, of delicate grays and half-tints,
will afford a wide scope for the skilful designer.”[106]

Finally, the author winds up by expressing his belief in a future
development of Christian art in language which we condense a little
from his concluding pages: “_Nullum tempus occurrit ecclesiæ!_ The
ever-fruitful mother of beauty and of truth, of holy aspirations and
of good works, has not come to the end of her evolution even in the
world of art, and it may be affirmed that there appear to be grounds
for thinking that in the whole field of art, music, painting,
sculpture, and architecture, our successors may witness a vast, new,
complex, and stable artistic integration of a special and distinctly
Christian character――a self-consciousness, as it were, in Christian
art such as never was before, and which will appropriately serve to
externally clothe and embody that vast and magnificent Christian
development for which all phases of evolution are preparing the way,
and to which Christians may look forward with joy and hope as the one
supreme end of the whole evolutionary process, so far as the Author of
nature has revealed to us his purposes either by the lessons which the
universe of mind and matter displays before our eyes, or by
supernatural revelation.”[107]

The essay of which we have given an analysis, and all the other works
of Dr. Mivart, are well worthy of attentive perusal. Their great merit
lies in the fact that they break up new ground and lead the way to
investigations in new fields of thought. Of course it could not be
expected that subjects so wide-spreading and far-reaching as those
which the author has discussed in this volume should be thoroughly and
completely handled within so small a compass. Each chapter would
require an elaborate volume even for the full elucidation of the
author’s own ideas. Whatever difference of opinion may exist in regard
to particular views and theories, there is one grand, predominant idea
pervading them all, in which Dr. Mivart expresses in his own peculiar
way what is a very common belief and expectation of great numbers of
the most illustrious champions of the Catholic Church in the present
eventful period.

That this is really a great and critical era in the church’s history,
and that present changes and events, however painful and unpromising
they may be, are preparing the way for one of her grand and decisive
triumphs, is a general conviction in the minds of her devoted
adherents, the truth of which her most embittered enemies seem to
forebode with a dread anticipation. All things created by God have a
potentiality in them which is infinite. Much more, the greatest of his
works on this earth, the church. The mere observation of what she has
done, and of the capabilities which are contained within her, looked
at from a purely rational viewing-point, is sufficient for
prognosticating a future evolution to which no limits are assignable.
A Catholic must, however, look upon her origin, her past action, and
her future destiny as belonging to the supernatural order. She has
been created to fulfil God’s purpose. That his purpose is the final
triumph of good over evil is certain. But, in particulars, we only
know how far, how long, and in what way this triumph is decreed to
take place on this earthly arena where the church is militant; in so
far as the purposes of God are made manifest to us by actual history
or by prophecy. The general sense of the most approved interpreters of
prophecy in the sacred Scriptures justifies the expectation of some
signal triumph of the church on the earth yet to come. There seems to
be a presentiment in the hearts of the faithful that it is now drawing
near. We have a strong warrant for attributing this presentiment to a
secret movement of the Holy Spirit, in the repeated and emphatic
utterances of the august and holy Vicar of Christ upon earth, our
gloriously reigning Sovereign Pontiff Pius IX. As to the time, the
means, the nature, and the duration of this triumph of the church upon
earth, and the exact, precise sense of the unfulfilled prophecies
respecting the temporal kingdom of Jesus Christ, there is room for
much diversity of opinion. The great social changes and evolutionary
movements of which Dr. Mivart writes present a problem to a thoughtful
Christian mind very difficult of solution. “_Où allons nous!_” is the
anxious exclamation of Bishop Dupanloup in respect to France, and a
similar questioning of the future agitates the minds of men throughout
the world. Whoever has any sagacious and well-reasoned answer to this
interrogation is, therefore, likely to find eager and interested
listeners, and deserves a respectful hearing. Dr. Mivart thinks that
he sees the way out of present complications, and discovers signs
which herald the advent of a new and long period of human history
under the influence of Christianity which will be the culmination of
God’s work on the earth. Whatever may be thought by different persons
of this horoscope and of the signs in our present sky, all must admit
the ingenuity and force of reasoning which the author has displayed,
admire his chivalrous and generous spirit, and recognize the great
amount of valuable knowledge and genuine truth, both in physics and
metaphysics, contained in the volume now reviewed and in Dr. Mivart’s
other productions.


     [100] _Contemporary Evolution._ An Essay on some Recent
     Social Changes. By St. George Mivart. (Dedicated to the
     Marquis of Ripon.) Henry S. King & Co., London. 1876. (An
     American edition of the work is announced by the Messrs.
     Appleton.)

     [101] See p. 194.

     [102] _Lehrb. der Univ. Gesch._, vol. i. p. 17.

     [103] P. 121.

     [104] P. 179.

     [105] P. 215.

     [106] P. 247.

     [107] P. 253.




THE DEVIL’S CHRISTMAS GIFT.


Let fastidious and fashionable people say what they will about
shanties, there was something in Mike Roony’s humble dwelling that was
really attractive. Perched on the top of a broad and lofty rock near
the corner of Broadway and Forty-ninth Street, it commanded a
magnificent view of the Hudson River and the Sound; and as the only
way to reach it was by a flight of steps which Mike had cut in the
rock, ’twas known among the neighbors by the name of Gibraltar. Some
said Roony was a squatter; that he paid neither tax nor rent for the
small piece of Manhattan Island which he occupied. Well, be this as it
may, one thing is certain――he always declared his readiness to move
when they blasted him out. Nothing grew upon this homestead――not a
bush, not a weed, not a blade of grass; it was a little desert, roamed
over by a goat, and swept clean by the winds, which made it their
romping-ground from every quarter of the compass.

But Mike had a wife who loved flowers, and in the window fronting
south stood a flower-pot wherein there bloomed a sweet red rose.
Helen――for this was her name――had the true instincts of a lady, albeit
her garment was not of silk and she sometimes went barefoot. She kept
herself scrupulously neat――for water does not cost anything――and was
fairer to behold than the flower she cherished. Born in America, of
Irish parents, hers was one of those ideal faces which we not seldom
meet with among American women. A freckle or two only helped to set
off the perfect whiteness of her skin; her eyes had taken their hue
from the blue sky of her native land, and like the raven’s wing was
the color of her hair.

But although Helen knew that she was beautiful, and there was a small
mirror in the shanty, she did not waste any time before it, unless,
perhaps, of a Sunday morning ere going to High Mass. A true helpmate
was this wife in every sense of the word. She arose betimes, no matter
how cold the weather might be, to prepare her husband’s breakfast,
and, if a button was missing off his coat, always found time to sew it
on before he went to his work. The floor of the shanty was daily
sprinkled with fresh sand; the pictures on the wall――one of the
Blessed Virgin at the foot of the cross, the other of St. Joseph――were
never hung awry; you saw no broken panes in the windows; and the faces
of her two little children, Michael and Helen, were kept as bright and
clean as her own. She never quitted home during her husband’s absence
to gossip and talk scandal with other women; and, monotonous as her
life may seem, ’twas a happy one. Mike, too, was happy, and no mariner
homeward bound ever watched for the beacon-light on his native coast
more impatiently than he watched for the light which Helen used to
place in the window, whence he might see it from afar as he trudged
back from his day’s work. And no matter how hard it might be raining,
or snowing, or freezing, at the first glimpse of its welcome rays Mike
always burst out into a merry song. In the evening she would read him
to sleep with some story from the _Catholic Review_; then, when his
head began to nod, she gently drew the pipe out of his mouth and
whispered: “Love, ’tis bed-time.”

Oh! happy were those days――so happy that Helen would sometimes
tremble; for surely they could not last for ever――otherwise it would
be heaven on earth.

But, sober and inoffensive as Roony was, he was not without enemies;
indeed, for very reason of his sobriety and inoffensiveness some hated
him. And one evening――Christmas eve――he and his young wife were seated
by the stove, talking about the Black-eye Club, whose head-quarters
were in a liquor-store close by, and whose members had sworn vengeance
on Mike for refusing to join them. “They have threatened to beat me,”
he said; “but if they only give me fair play, I’ll be a match for the
biggest of ’em.”

“Ay, fair play!” said Helen, shuddering. “Savages like them always
take a man unawares, and, like wolves, they hunt in packs.”

“They carry pistols, too,” added Mike, “while I carry nothing but my
fists.”

“Well, bad as I feel about it, husband dear, I’d a thousand times
rather have you brave the whole villanous gang than see you join them;
for now we are so happy.” Here Helen twined her arm round his neck,
then, gazing on him with loving eye, she continued: “You have never
touched liquor, you do not get into fights, you are so good; and this
rock is dearer to me than the greenest farm in the land.”

“With you any spot would be a paradise,” rejoined Mike; “and I hope
to-morrow will be the last Christmas that we’ll go without a turkey
and some toys for the children.”

“Oh! I’m sure it will,” said Helen. “But you are right to pay all our
debts first; and already the boards which the shanty cost are paid
for, and so is the stove, and there is nothing owing except the coal”;
then, with a smile: “And I’ve promised a pailful of coal to Mrs.
McGowan, who lives on the next rock. You see, poor as we are, we can
afford to give something away. Oh! isn’t that sweet?”

“It is indeed,” answered Roony; then, after a pause: “But now tell me,
wife, who do you think is going to preach to-morrow?”

“Father H――――.”

“Really! Oh! I’m so glad; he always knows when to stop.”

“A good sermon can’t be too long,” said Helen.

“Well, I own it isn’t easy to leave off when once you get a-going. I
was a brakeman five years, and know what it is to stop a train of
cars. But if I was in the pulpit I’d know how to do it.”

“How?”

“Well, I’d just fix my eye on the sleepiest-looking fellow in the
congregation, and the very moment his head began to nod I’d lift up my
hand and say, ‘A blessing I wish you all.’” Here Helen laughed, and
while she was laughing Mike added: “And I’ve sometimes thought Father
H―――― kept his eye on me.”

While they were thus chatting by the little stove the northwest wind
went howling round the house, and Jack Frost tried his best, his very
best, to get in, but did not succeed, not even through the keyhole;
for Roony was not sparing of fuel, and the stove-pipe was red hot.
Indeed, ’twas rather pleasant to hear the voice of the blast and the
rattling of the window-panes; while at times the whole building seemed
to rise up off the rock, and then Helen would throw an uneasy glance
at her husband, who would grin and say: “It’s well anchored, darling;
never fear.” At length the clock struck midnight, and the children,
who had been sleeping on their parents’ laps, were taken gently up and
put to bed――so gently that their slumber was scarcely broken. Then
husband and wife retired too; but, ere placing their heads on the
pillow, they knelt and gave thanks to God for the many blessings they
had enjoyed since last Christmas. Oh! sweet was the sleep which
followed the prayer, and happy were their dreams; and when Christmas
morning came, the sun did not rise on a happier home than this one.
Scarcely had its rays flashed through the east window when Mike sprang
up, and, clapping his hands, shouted: “O Helen, Helen! open your eyes
and see what Santa Claus has brought you.”

Obedient to his call, Helen awoke; and sure enough, to her great
surprise, discovered one of her stockings dangling from the latch of
the door, and there was something in it, but what it might be she had
not the least notion, nor her husband either.

“Oh! go quick and see what it is,” she said. “I’m so curious to know.”

Accordingly, Mike went to the stocking; then, plunging his hand into
it, drew forth――a bottle, and on it was marked, “Whiskey.”

“Well, I declare,” he said, grinning, as he held it up, “here is
something, Nell, to drink your health with this Christmas day.”

But the wife’s bright look had vanished in a moment when she heard
what the bottle contained; and now, in a grave tone, she answered:
“No, dear, do not drink my health with that. Thank God! you have never
yet touched liquor, so do not begin the bad habit on this sacred day,
nor on any other day. Throw the bottle out of doors――do!”

“Well, now, can’t a fellow take just a sip in honor of Santa Claus,
who brought it?”

“No, no; the devil brought it. Don’t take even one drop; throw the
poison away――quick!”

“Oh! but it’s a bitter cold morning, Nell, and the fire isn’t lit, and
a sip of whiskey’ll keep me warm while I make it――only just one sip.”

“Husband, I beg you”――here the wife clasped her hands――“I implore you
to get rid of the devil’s gift as quick as possible. I see that you
are already tempted. O husband! listen to my voice.”

To calm her――for she seemed much excited――Roony opened the door, and,
stepping out into the frosty air, struck the neck of the bottle
against the rock, so as to make her believe that it was broken in
pieces; but only the neck came off. “Really,” he said within himself,
after moistening his lips with a drop, “this doesn’t taste bad; surely
a little won’t hurt me.” Then, concealing the bottle in the
goat-house, he went back and told his wife what he had never told her
before――a lie.

“You broke it! Oh! I’m so glad,” she exclained, “so very glad!” But
there was a tear in her eye as she spoke; then, while Mike busied
himself kindling the fire, Helen knelt down and remained a good while
on her knees.

“Why, Nell, what ails you?” he asked, drawing near her after she had
finished the prayer. “This is Christmas morning; let’s be merry.”

“Oh! yes, I must be merry,” she replied, trying to assume a cheerful
air. But there was something in her tone which struck Mike as
peculiar, and for a moment he blushed. Did she suspect the untruth
which he had told? No; her faith in him was unbroken, and she could
not account to herself for the heavy weight upon her heart, which even
the prayer had not taken away; and now, despite the glorious sunbeams
flooding the room and the sweet voices of her children, Helen felt
sad. Who had entered their happy home in the stillness of night, and
placed that ill-omened gift in her stocking? Might it really be the
Evil One? And while she wondered over this mysterious occurrence, she
thought of the many families, once happy and well-to-do, who had come
to grief and misery through intemperance. Was her own day of trial
approaching? What did this Christmas gift portend? “But no, no; I will
not be sad; I’ll be cheerful. For Michael’s sake I will,” she said to
herself. Then, as the bright look spread over her face, Mike clapped
his hands and shouted: “That’s right, my darling. Hurrah!”

And so the early hours went by; and when ten o’clock struck, they set
out for St. Paul’s Church, which was about nine blocks off, the mother
holding her little boy by the hand, the father carrying little Nell,
who was not yet old enough to walk so far. But when they were within a
few paces of the church door, Roony stopped and declared that he had
forgotten to feed the goat. “Well, dear, it’s too late now,” said
Helen. “Nanny can wait; you’ll miss Mass if you go back.”

“O wife! how would you like to miss your breakfast?” rejoined Mike.
“Nanny is hungry. I must return.”

“And lose Mass?” she said, with a look of tender reproach. Roony did
not answer, but turned on his heel and went away, leaving her too
overcome with surprise to utter another word.

The priest was already at the altar when Helen arrived, and the church
very full; yet more people continued to push their way in, and ever
and anon she would look round to see if her husband were among the
late-comers. She tried to keep her thoughts from wandering, but did
not succeed. Never had Helen felt so distracted before, and the
foreboding of evil which had oppressed her in the early morning now
returned and shrouded her in such gloom that she could hardly pray.
But, troubled as the poor woman was, no suspicion of the truth had yet
entered her mind. She was very innocent, and did not doubt but Mike,
having come late, was hidden among the crowd by the door.

At length the service ended; and now she felt quite certain that he
would join her. But five minutes elapsed, and then ten――a whole
quarter of an hour passed away. The congregation was fast dispersing;
still, her husband did not appear. “Oh! where can he be?” she asked
herself. “Where can he be?” At every voice that greeted her Helen
started; for many knew her and wished her a merry Christmas, and Mrs.
McGowan, who had a keen eye, exclaimed: “Why, what ails you, Mrs.
Roony?”

How lonesome the wife felt as she plodded homeward! Yet her children
were prattling merrily, and the street was full of happy people. She
was blind to them all, she was deaf to every word that was spoken, and
kept murmuring again and again: “Where can Michael be?”

Finally Helen reached home, and was about to cross the threshold, when
suddenly she paused and uttered a cry which might have been heard
afar, ’twas so loud and piercing; while little Mike and Nell exclaimed
at one breath: “Mamma, look at papa sleeping.”

Yes, there lay their father stretched upon the floor, breathing
heavily. But ’twas not the pleasant slumber into which Helen loved to
see him fall when he returned weary from a hard day’s work; and after
gazing on him a moment with an expression impossible to describe, she
buried her face in her hands. Poor thing! well might she weep; and if
a feeling of disgust mingled with her grief, may we not forgive her?
He was breathing heavily; by his right hand lay an empty bottle with
the neck broken off, and the air of the room was tainted with the
fumes of liquor.

“Stop! let your father sleep,” she said to her son, who had knelt down
and was playfully brushing the hair off his parent’s face. But this
precaution was needless; the latter was too deep in his cups to be
roused by the touch of the child’s hand, and presently, with a heavy
heart, Helen turned away and set to work to prepare the dinner. There
was no turkey to cook; still, she had intended to provide a somewhat
better repast than ordinary, it being Christmas day. But, alas! she
hardly knew what she was doing as she bustled about the stove; and
when, by and by, dinner was ready, she tasted not a mouthful
herself――all appetite had fled. The children, however, ate heartily,
pausing now and again to say: “Mamma, why don’t you call papa?”

It was evening when Roony awoke, and the moment Helen perceived that
his eyes were open she began to tremble; for, though she did not doubt
but he was sober by this time, she felt as if another man were near
her, and not the one whom she had once so honored and trusted. And as
he stared at her from the floor, he did indeed appear changed; there
was a silly, vacant look on his face, his eyes were bloodshot, and it
was almost five minutes before he attempted to rise. Then, without
opening his lips, he got up and went out of the house, closing the
door behind him with a slam.

“Well, I declare,” he said, tossing away the broken bottle――“I declare
I’ve been drunk; and, what’s more, I told a lie and missed Mass. Will
she ever forgive me?” Then stamping his foot: “Oh! what a fool I’ve
been――what a wicked fool!”

Presently, while he was thus lamenting his sins, the door opened and a
voice said: “Come to me, dear; come to me.”

“O Helen!” he cried, turning toward her, “can you forgive me, will
you?”

“Come to me,” she repeated, opening wide her arms, but at the same
time drawing back a step from the threshold; for curious eyes were
watching them from a neighboring rock. Quick Roony flew into the
shanty, then, dropping down on his knees, burst into tears. The wife
wept too, while little Mike and Nell looked on in childish wonder at
the scene.

“But, darling, why do _you_ cry?” he exclaimed presently, rising to
his feet. “_You’ve_ done nothing wrong.”

Helen made no response, but brushing the tears away, twined her arms
around his neck.

“Well, speak, darling. What have _you_ done to cry?” repeated Roony.

“O Michael!” she answered in faltering accents, “you have been such a
good, kind husband to me. We have been so happy together――so very,
very happy. God has blest us with two darling children. We might live,
perhaps, years and years in this sweet spot; and when at length death
parted us, ’twould not be for long――we should meet again in heaven. O
Michael! I weep because all this may be changed――because death might
part us for ever and ever!”

“No, no, darling, it shall not! It shall not!”

“Well, I will pray with heart and soul, husband dear, that you may not
fall a second time. Alas! if the habit of drink once fasten upon you,
it may be impossible to shake it off; and intemperance not only ruins
many a family, but damns many a soul.” At her own words the wife
shuddered and began to weep anew.

“Well, I say never fear. Not another drop of liquor will I touch,”
said Mike――“no, not another drop as long as I live.”

“Oh! thank God!” exclaimed Helen, “thank God!”

“Yes, yes, I solemnly promise it. And now, darling, try and forget all
about my wickedness to-day, won’t you?”

“Yes, I’ll forget all about it,” she answered. With this Helen began
to sing a merry song, in which her husband joined, while the children
went romping around the room, and the cricket came out of his tiny
hole beneath the stove and chirped merrily too. But although Helen had
forgiven him, yet Mike’s conduct had wrought a deep impression on her;
and when bedtime arrived and they retired, he slept soundly enough,
but she lay awake for hours. And whenever the wind shook the house,
she would tremble; and once the door seemed to open. But no, this was
merely fancy. The noise, however, which startled her at midnight was
real and not imagination. It proceeded from the den where the
Black-eye Club was celebrating Christmas, and mingled with their yells
were horrible oaths. Helen did not doubt but a fight was going on;
perhaps some one was being beaten to death. Then she turned toward her
husband, and even touched him, to make quite sure that he was lying
beside her.

The following day Roony went off to work as usual, and came back in
the evening, cheered as usual, too, by the light in the window; and
immediately its welcome rays flashed upon him, he exclaimed: “Oh! what
a good wife I have. God bless her!”

Ay, Helen is good! Her heart is with you, Mike, wherever you go; and
at this very moment she is kneeling by the little beacon, praying that
it may guide you safely to her side, and that you may not be tempted
to stray into the bar-room on the corner.

But not the next day only, the whole week, Roony was his old,
good-natured, hard-working, sober self; and what had marred the joy of
Christmas was fast fading from Helen’s memory. But one Saturday
evening, as he was trudging homeward with his pocket full of wages,
there came over him a sudden craving for spirits; the broken bottle
out of which he had taken his maiden drink seemed to rise up before
his eyes; the delicious taste of the whiskey was on his lips afresh.
In fact, the craving was so very strong, so wholly unexpected, that it
startled him, and his heart beat violently.

“Oh! I never thought I should be seized in this way,” he groaned. “How
very strange! I can’t resist; yet I must. O Helen! would to God I had
not taken that first drink.” The words were scarcely breathed when the
beams of the home-light flashed upon him. ’Twas still a good distance
off, and the air was muggy and thick, yet it shone brighter than Mike
had ever seen it shine before. For about a minute he watched it
yearningly; he even quickened his steps and twice groaned, “O Helen!”
Then, muttering a curse upon himself, he turned his eyes away from the
light, and at the same time, swerving out of the dear home-path, he
hurried on to the liquor-saloon.

“Three cheers for Mike Roony!” was the salutation which greeted him
from a dozen voices as he entered. “I knew you’d join us afore long,”
said the President of the Black-eye Club, advancing and shaking him
warmly by the hand; then, motioning to the others, their empty glasses
were refilled and the new-comer’s health toasted. Presently Roony
wanted to treat; but “No, no,” they all shouted; “’tis our privilege
to treat you this evening.” Whereupon the bottle was passed round
again; while poor Mike, flattered beyond measure by this unlooked-for
reception, thought to himself: “What a fool I was not to join the club
long ago!”

And so on they went carousing, and Helen’s husband growing more and
more intoxicated, until at length, when he was barely able to stand, a
voice exclaimed: “Now, boys, let’s christen him.” Quick as lightning a
violent blow on the eye followed these words; then down dropped Roony
unconscious to the floor.

“Where can he be?” said the anxious wife, seeing that he did not
return at the usual hour. “I pray God nothing has happened. The dear
fellow came near being killed by a blast last year. O my God! I hope
nothing has happened.” After waiting for him awhile, Helen and her
young ones took their places at the supper-table; but not a morsel did
she eat. A vague fear possessed her. The children spoke, but the
mother answered them not; the cricket chirped――she was deaf to its
merry song; and every few minutes she would open the door, and look
out and listen. But no husband appeared. And now, without him, how
everything seemed to change! The rock, the shanty, the pretty rosebush
she cherished, even the children whom she loved ten thousand times
more than the rose――all appeared different to her eyes; nothing was
the same when he who was the corner-stone of home was missing; and
Helen realized as never before what a link of adamant bound her heart
to his. “Oh! if anything has happened. If he is killed, ’twill kill me
too,” she sighed. Then, when little Mike asked, “Where is papa?” she
answered, “Coming soon.” And even to speak these words brought her a
moment’s peace of mind, and she would try to think of some good cause
which might detain him. But the clock went on ticking, and the
hour-hand moved further and further toward midnight; still, no husband
came. The children were put to bed, and soon were fast asleep; the
fire in the stove died out; the cricket became silent; but the wife
grew more and more wakeful, while ever and anon she would go to the
window and nervously snuff the candle burning there. Then again she
would open the door and listen――listen with all her ears; but she
heard only the throbbing of her heart and boisterous voices in the
direction of the liquor-saloon.

“Well, I’ll watch and pray till he arrives,” said Helen; then kneeling
beside the crib where her children were sleeping, she lifted her
thoughts to God. But the many hours she had been awake, the busy day
prolonged so far into night, proved at last too much for her; and just
as the clock struck one her weary eyes closed and her guardian angel
took up the prayer which she left unfinished.

How long Helen slept she did not know; but when she awoke the candle
had burned out and the chamber was pitch dark. “Oh! what is the
matter? What did I hear? Was it only a dream?” she cried, starting to
her feet.

“Come, now, I want my supper!” growled Mike, staggering further into
the room. “Where’s my supper?”

Pen cannot describe the wife’s feelings as she groped about for the
match-box. And when finally, after letting three or four matches drop
out of her quivering fingers, she succeeded in lighting a fresh
candle, what a sight did she behold! Was this man scowling at her,
with one eye battered and swollen, her own Michael?

“I say, where’s my supper?” he repeated with an oath.

Without uttering a word, but with a sinking of the heart which she had
never experienced till now, Helen made haste to kindle a fire and heat
up the potatoes and pork which she had laid aside for him in the
evening. While thus employed Roony dropped down on a bench; then,
after grumbling at her a few minutes, began suddenly to giggle. “I
want you to know,” said he, “that I’m now a member of the Black-eye
Club. But that’s plain enough by looking at me, eh? And when I’ve
eaten supper, I’m going to make you cut my hair――cut it short to
fighting trim.”

“O husband!” replied Helen, in a voice of sorrowful entreaty, “do not
break my heart, I love you so.”

“Break your heart! Ha! ha! that’s a good joke.” Then, glancing up at
the clock: “Well, by jingo, Nell, I’d better call this meal breakfast.
Why, it’s pretty nigh four, isn’t it?”

Encouraged, perhaps, by the somewhat milder tone in which these last
words were spoken, she now approached him, and, bending down,
proceeded to examine his wounded eye. “Yes, bathe it for me,” he
continued. “But, for all it hurts, I’m deuced proud of it; for it’s
the christening mark of the Black-eye Club.”

“Oh! hush, dear. Don’t mention that wicked gang any more,” said the
wife. “I hate them; they are fiends.”

“Fiends? Ha, ha! Well, well, hurry up with my breakfast or supper,
whichever you choose to call it; then get the scissors and cut off my
hair.”

“Let me bathe your poor eye first,” she answered; “then, after you
have done eating, ’twill be daylight, and I want you, love, to come to
Mass this morning, and to see the priest; we’ll go together. O
Michael! dark clouds are lowering over us; come with me to the
priest.”

“To the priest? No, indeed! The Black-eye Club have nothing to do with
priests.”

“O husband! do not talk so; save yourself before it is too late,” she
went on, as she sponged the clotted blood off his cheek.

“I can’t, wife. The craving for spirits is too strong. It all comes, I
know, from that one little drink Christmas morning. Now I’m not master
of myself; I believe there’s a devil in me.”

A long, shadowy silence followed, during which Helen wept, while ever
and anon Roony would say, “It’s no use crying.” While he was at his
breakfast she once more begged him to go with her to Mass. But again
he refused, saying, “Our club don’t go to Mass; nor must you, until
you have trimmed my hair.”

“Why, ’tis short enough,” replied Helen.

“Is it? Look!” And as Mike spoke he clutched a fistful of it, then
gave a pull. “Now, don’t you see that some chap might grab me and get
my head in ‘chancery’? I want my hair short as pig’s bristles, and
well greased too; then I’ll be like an eel, and grab me who can.”

The wife obeyed without a murmur, performing the operation to his
entire satisfaction; after which, approaching the crib where her
children were sleeping, she gave each a soft kiss, then went off by
herself to church.

Helen had never been wanting in devotion; her faith had always been
strong. But now, as she took her way along the lonely street, with the
morning star still shining in the heavens, she felt as though God were
come nearer to her; and all her former prayers were cold compared with
the prayers which she offered this morning at the foot of the altar.
And when Mass was over and she turned her steps homeward, ’twas with a
more cheerful heart and a firm resolution to be a loving and faithful
wife to the end, the bitter end, whatever it might be.

When Helen entered the shanty she found her husband gone. But little
Mike was there, and he looked so like his father; and little Nell was
there too. Oh! surely they would not be abandoned. “No, God is with
us,” she murmured. “My prayers will be heard, and Michael will one day
be what he used to be. Yes, yes! I know it.” As she spoke a radiant
look spread over her face; then, making the sign of the cross, she
straightway set about her daily duties as if nothing had happened. O
blessed Faith! which makest the darkest hour bright; richer, indeed,
in gifts than a gold-mine art thou, and stronger than a mountain to
lean upon in moments like these!

When evening came round, Helen placed the candle in the window as
usual, although she had faint hope that Mike had been at work. And
again she set up till a very late hour, keeping the fire burning and
taking good care not to fall asleep this time.

It was one o’clock when Roony returned. He was not tipsy, but surly,
and when she laid her hand on his arm he flung it away, saying, “Now,
I want no preaching and petting; I want my supper.” The poor woman was
a little frightened, and waited upon him awhile in silence.

“Yet I must speak,” she murmured; “I must brave his anger. No husband
was ever kinder than he, no spouse happier than I have been till now;
I must make one more effort to save him from ruin.” With this, she
again gently touched his arm and said, “Dear love――”

“D―――― your preaching; I won’t listen to it,” he snarled, cutting
short her words, and in a voice so loud that it awoke the children.
Then, presently, shrugging his shoulders, “Oh! you needn’t whimper.
I’m bound to be master here.”

“Have I ever denied your authority?” inquired Helen, looking calmly at
him through her tears.

“Oh! hush. Don’t bother me,” continued Roony, lifting up his plate.
Then, as if he had changed his mind about throwing it at her, he
dashed it into shivers on the floor.

“Alas! what a curse liquor is,” she cried in a tone of passionate
energy. “What a terrible curse!”

“Well, I’m not drunk, am I?”

“But you have been drinking; and the poison is in your veins. O
Michael! for God’s sake abandon the villanous set you belong to!” Here
he clenched his fist. But heedless of the threat she went bravely on:
“Think how happy we were, Michael. This bare rock was more lovely than
a garden to us. And we have two dear children; look at them yonder!
Look at them!”

“I say, woman, go to bed and leave me alone,” thundered Roony,
bringing down his huge fist on the table with a thump which made
everything in the shanty rattle.

Poor, poor Helen! With a heart torn by anguish, she obeyed. But not a
wink of sleep came to her――no, not a wink, and never night seemed
longer than this one. But her husband slept like a top, nor opened his
eyes until ten the next morning; then, as soon as he was dressed, and
without waiting for breakfast, out he went to take a drink.

“Oh! what is coming? What is going to happen now?” thought Helen, as
she watched him enter the bar-room. Then kneeling down, she said a
prayer.

The clock had just struck noon when Mike returned, accompanied part of
the way by another man, who helped him mount the difficult path which
wound up the rock; and Roony needed assistance, for even when he
gained the summit he could not walk straight, and fell within a yard
of his door. Quick Helen ran to him; for, although his condition
filled her with disgust, yet she could not abide the thought of other
eyes than hers discovering him thus. “Come in, husband, come in the
house,” she said, taking his arm. Scarcely, however, had she got him
on his feet again when he caught her by the throat and exclaimed, in
the voice of a wild beast, “Ah, ha! now I’m going to beat you.” But in
an instant Helen broke loose from him; then rushing back into the
shanty, she called her children and bade them hurry out on the rock.
The little things obeyed, too innocent to know what the trouble was.
Then facing her husband, who was scowling at her from the threshold,
“Now enter,” she said, “and beat me if you will. Here, at least,
nobody will witness the deed.” Roony staggered in and Helen closed the
door.

That evening, after pressing her children many times to her poor
bruised heart, Helen went away. She quitted the home where she had
once been so happy, and, as she went, she said to herself: “If on my
wedding day an angel from heaven had told me this, I should not have
believed him.”

But the step she was now taking was all for the best. In his madness
Roony had threatened to kill her. “And he might do it,” she sighed,
“for when he is intoxicated he doesn’t know what he is doing. And then
all his life afterward he would be haunted by remorse. Poor Michael! I
believe he still loves me. For his own sake I am going away.”

It was Helen’s intention to seek refuge with a family who dwelt not
far off, and for whom she had once done some work. They received her
very kindly, and wondered ever so much at the ugly cut under one of
her eyes, from which the red drops were still oozing; and her upper
lip, too, was cut. But Helen refused to tell who had ill-used her.
“Pray, ask no questions,” she said. “Only furnish me with employment;
I’ll drudge; I’ll do anything to earn a little money.” Accordingly,
they gave her a number of shirts to make; and being a deft hand at
needle-work, she was able to gain quite a good livelihood. But it was
not for herself that Helen labored, ’twas for those whom she loved
better than herself. And every evening, when the stars began to
twinkle, she visited her old home, and there, peeping through the
window, would watch little Mike and Nell with yearning eyes. And once
she saw her husband seated by the stove, eating a piece of the bread
and meat which she had left at the door the previous evening.

“Oh! thank God!” she said, “that I am able to support him and the
children. Perhaps ere long my prayers will be heard, and I shall be
happy again.”

But Roony was still drinking steadily; even now, as he ate the cold
victuals, he was barely able to sit on the chair, and so the poor
woman did not venture to show herself. Next day, however, the fifth
since she left home, the longed-for opportunity presented itself; Mike
was sober, and with bounding heart Helen went into the shanty.

“O wife!” he exclaimed, rising to meet her, “’tis an age since I laid
eyes on you. Where have you been?” Then his countenance suddenly
growing dark as a thundercloud, “but, by heaven! what’s happened? How
came those bruises on your face? Somebody has ill-treated you! Tell me
the villain’s name, that I may take his heart’s blood.”

“I’ll never tell his name,” answered Helen, in a low but firm voice.
“Never!”

For about a minute Roony gazed on her in silence; the mournful, the
shocking truth seemed to be gradually dawning upon him. “Oh! is it
possible? Could I have done it――done such a wicked, brutal thing?” he
asked himself. Then, falling on his knees, he bathed her feet with
bitter tears. Helen wept also, while the children ceased their gambols
and wondered what was the matter. But presently the wife bade him
rise, then, twining her arms round his neck, gave him a tender
embrace, by which he knew that he was forgiven. And now for a brief
half-hour, oh! how happy he was, and how happy she was! During the
dark days which followed Helen often looked back to those fleeting
moments; ’twas like a gleam of sunshine flung across a scathed and
desolate landscape.

“Now, husband dear,” she said after he had fondled her a little while,
“let me put things to rights.” Whereupon she took her broom, swept the
floor, and sprinkled it with clean sand; the pictures were dusted; the
clock set agoing; the rosebush watered; nor was the poor goat
forgotten. And delighted, indeed, was the half-starved creature to see
her again.

“Helen!” exclaimed Mike, while she was thus employed, “a wife like you
is a priceless treasure. Would to Heaven I had listened to you
Christmas morning! What a different man I’d be now!”

“Well, love, all is bright once more,” answered Helen, cheerily. He
made no response save a deep sigh.

“Why, husband dear, what troubles you?” she asked, her look of joy
vanishing in a moment.

“No slave was ever bound by such chains as bind me,” he groaned,
dropping his forehead in his hands. “And it all comes from that one
fatal drink.”

“Well, pray, dear, pray to God, and I will pray with you.”

“Too late! The craving for liquor which seizes me at times is
irresistible; ’tis seizing me now――the demon!”

“O my Saviour!” cried Helen, trembling and turning pale. The words had
hardly left her lips when the door opened and a strange face――at least
it was new to her――peeped in.

“Time!” spoke the chief of the Black-eye Club in a voice which caused
Roony to start to his feet.

“Begone!” cried Helen, advancing boldly toward the intruder.

“Time!” he repeated, now holding up a pistol. But, nothing daunted,
she was about to try and close the door on him, when her husband
slipped past, and ere she could recover from her amazement they were
both beyond the rock and half way to the grog-shop.

That night the poor woman remained in the shanty, watching, and
weeping, and praying. But her husband did not come back till sunrise;
and then he was so crazy with drink that she deemed it best to quit
her home once more. Accordingly, she returned to the kind people who
had given her shelter and employment. But it was not easy to settle
down anew to her sewing; the needle would drop from her fingers and a
cold fear thrill through her veins as she thought of the repulsive,
sin-stamped face which had peeped into the shanty and enticed her dear
Michael away. We may imagine, also, her agony of mind when it was
reported that a burglary, accompanied by murder, had been committed
during the night, and that suspicion pointed to certain members of the
Black-eye Club. But, to her unspeakable relief, Mike was not among
those who were arrested. The chief of the gang, however, was; and
condemned, too, to be hanged; which sentence would doubtless have been
carried out had he not managed to escape from prison. This incident,
far from ruining the Black-eyes, only afforded them a pleasing
excitement; like rats when the cat comes, they dived into their holes
for a space; then out they came as flourishing as ever, and Roony was
one of their most popular members.

But let us be brief with our story. Why linger over poor Helen’s
misery? Why tell of all the brutal treatment she suffered?

Month after month rolled by. Spring came; summer followed spring. Yet
there was no change for the better in Mike. His shanty, once the
prettiest and cleanest of all the shanties on Manhattan Island, grew
to be the dirtiest and most forlorn-looking. The door was kicked off
its hinges, ugly rags and papers fluttered in the broken windows, and
occasionally the Black-eye Club assembled on the rock, making it the
scene of a drunken revel. But brave, faithful Helen continued to visit
her children every evening after dark, carrying them food and
clothing. She would not remove them from the spot which she still
called home, for she hoped that the sight of the little innocents
would sooner or later call her husband back to his old self again. And
every day Helen went to St. Paul’s church and made the Stations of the
Cross; this was her favorite devotion. “And if my Saviour suffered so
much,” she would say, “oh! surely, I can bear my load.” Yet there were
moments when she seemed well-nigh ready to sink under it. Ay, more
than once Hope wrestled with Despair; but Hope always came off
victorious.

If the wife’s faith was still glowing, if her trust in God continued
strong as ever, nevertheless in one respect a woful change appeared in
her. Oh! sad was the havoc which this year of grief, of cruel
ill-treatment wrought on her once bright and lovely face! ’Twas as if
a coarse hand had rubbed off the delicate tints of that sweet picture,
and left behind, not the ruins of her beauty, but the ruins of those
ruins.

And now in time’s monotonous circle winter is come round again;
another Christmas is at hand. Evergreens and toys, laughing children
and good-humored parents, with well-filled purses, all tell it to you.
And papa and mamma, as they dash hither and thither in their jingling
sleighs, doubt not but everybody else is happy too: Santa Claus will
visit every home; Santa Claus will fill every stocking. Why, who could
help feeling merry at this holy season?――unless, perhaps, the turkeys.
Yes, it is Christmas Eve.

“How well I remember last Christmas!” sighed poor Helen as she leaned
back in her chair and gazed with tearful eyes at the shirt which,
alas! she was unable to finish. How could she finish it? She was
barely able to see. Yet those livid, tell-tale marks on her visage,
painful as they are, are easier to bear than the curses and unfeeling
words which have broken her heart at last. As night approached, snow
began to fall and the wind to blow――a keen, angry wind from the
north-east; one of those winds we love so to hear howling round the
house while we sit toasting our slippers by the fire. But, bitter cold
as it was, Helen did not shrink from going to church; although
half-blind, she could still find the way there.

She went; she made anew the stations of the Cross, and said, as she
had so often said before, “If my Saviour suffered so much, oh! surely
I can bear my load.” As she breathed these words to herself the ugly
black-and-blue marks which disfigured her seemed to fade away, a glow
of heaven shone in her face, and for a moment, one brief moment, she
became once more the beautiful Helen――Helen, “the Belle of the
Shanties,” as Mrs. McGowan used to call her――then suddenly she gave a
start and the mien of rapture changed to a look of wonder and alarm.
Who had spoken her name? There was nobody near; who could it be? While
Helen was gazing about her, she heard the voice again. “Who is calling
me?” she asked, her heart now throbbing violently. The words were
scarcely uttered when for the third time, and more distinctly,
“_Helen!_” sounded in her ear. “It is Michael!” she exclaimed,
hastening to the door. “Yes, it is he calling me.” But ere she passed
out of the church she broke off a sprig of evergreen and dipped it
into the holy-water font. Then hiding it in her bosom, so that the
angry wind might not snatch it away, she sped homeward on winged feet.

But ’twas no easy matter to get to the rock at this hour with her poor
bruised eyes and in such a driving storm. Yet she did find the way.
And up the rude path she climbed with marvellous agility; ’twas as
though an invisible hand were leading her on.

The sight which Helen beheld on entering the shanty might have
appalled any heart but hers. Her husband, his face streaming with
blood, was engaged in a deadly struggle with a horrible-looking being
much larger than himself, who seemed striving to make him drink from a
cup which he pressed to his lips. “O Ellen!” cried Michael in a tone
of despair, “save me! save me!” Quick she flew towards him, stretching
forth at the same time the branch of evergreen. In another instant
’twas in his hand; then, just as he grasped it, his strange adversary
uttered a demoniac cry and the cup fell to the floor, shattered in
many pieces.

“Oh! I am saved,” exclaimed Roony――“saved! saved! Thank God!” But
while his joyful words were ringing through the house, the fiend
turned upon his deliverer and out into the black night Helen was
driven. Vainly she struggled; a powerful hand, which seemed mailed in
iron, thrust her out, and presently, when released from its ruthless
grip, she found herself blindly groping here and there in the
darkness. Round and round the house she wandered――near it always, yet
never finding it.

And during these sad moments, the last moments of her life, her
husband was anxiously seeking her. But it was easy to miss each other
in such a snow-storm, and when he shouted her name the wild wind
carried away her response, until at length, numbed by the cold, she
answered him no more. And so, within a few feet of home, the brave
Helen, the faithful Helen, was wrapt in a winding-sheet of snow.

       *     *     *     *     *

Next morning――sweet Christmas morning――the sun rose in a cloudless
sky; and as its bright beams flashed from window to window, from spire
to spire, every object, the humblest, the least beautiful, became
suddenly transformed into a thing of beauty. Ay, even those two icy
hands peeping above the snow hard by Mike Roony’s shanty door sparkle
as if they were covered with gems and have a golden halo round them.
They were clasped as if in prayer, and when poor Mike discovered them
he cried aloud: “Oh! she prayed for me to the last; she prayed for me
to the last!”

His wail was heard at the next rock, and far beyond it. Then a crowd
began to collect, a very large crowd; for Helen was known to many, and
her husband was not the only one who shed tears over her remains this
bright Christmas morning.

“I had a feeling that something was going wrong,” spoke Mrs. McGowan.
Then, when Roony told of the infernal being who had attacked him, and
how he had been rescued by the blessed evergreen which Helen had
brought, the good woman solemnly shook her head, and whispered: “This
house ought to be exorcised――indeed it ought.”

“Well, one thing I vow by all that’s holy,” ejaculated Mike, crossing
himself and lifting his voice so that the crowd might hear him――“I vow
never again to touch liquor――never, never, never!”

“I join you!” exclaimed a bystander.

“So do I!”

“And I too!”

“And I!” shouted a number of voices. And those who spoke were members
of the notorious Black-eye Club. Then they all knelt around the body
and swore, hand-in-hand together, never to drink another drop of
intoxicating spirits.

And thus by Helen’s death many sinners were converted, many a
drunkard’s home made happy again; for the ways of the Lord are
mysterious. Good is not seldom wrought out only through tears and
suffering. Oh! who will say it was not well for Helen to die?

But poor Mike was inconsolable. He who had once been so blithe and
frolicsome now spoke scarcely a word. Days and weeks rolled by, yet he
did not change. We may pity him indeed! There was no light in the
window now to welcome him from afar as he trudged back from his work
in the dusk. And when he sat down to warm himself by the stove,
instead of lighting his pipe as of yore and falling into a pleasant
doze, he became strangely wakeful.

Then the spectre remorse would glide out of some shadowy corner and
whisper bitter words in his ear. If at times he succeeded in silencing
its voice, and would give himself up to a reverie of other days, when
this miserable shanty was more gorgeous to him than a palace, oh! the
pleasure which the sweet vision brought was like music heard from
withinside a prison wall, like sunshine seen through the bars; for
those golden days would come never more. Eternity stood between him
and them.

Then back remorse would creep and whisper: “You beat her――you broke
her heart――you killed her――you did――you did!”

And one evening, while these torturing words were wringing his soul,
he threw up his right hand――the hand which had struck her so
often――and groaned aloud: “Oh! this is hell. Where’s the axe?”

Forlorn wretch! well it was that as he bared his arm and clutched the
axe――ay, well it was that at that very moment the minister of God
appeared to check the rash deed he contemplated, to speak soothing
words, to save him, perhaps, from madness.

And as from this hour forth a new life began for Michael Roony, we end
our tale with the closing advice which the priest addressed him. “My
dear friend,” he said, “do not weep any more, for tears will not bring
back your wife. There is nothing in this world so vain as regret.
Therefore cease to mourn; strive your best to be cheerful.” Then
pointing to little Mike and Nell, who were playing at his feet, “work
hard, too, for these children whom she bore you. For their sake, as
well as your own, keep true to the pledge of temperance, and so live
here on earth that one day you may meet again your dear Helen in
heaven.”




SIENA.

_Cor magis Sena pandit._

The railway from Empoli to the south passes through a rough, hilly
country, following its sinuosities, spanning the valleys on gigantic
arches, or plunging through the tunnelled mountains. One tunnel is a
mile long――through the hill of San Dalmazzo; and when you issue from
it, you see before you another hill, on which rises, stage after
stage, the strange, mediæval city of Siena, to the height of nearly a
thousand feet above the level of the sea. It was rather a
disappointment not to enter it, as carriages from Florence do, by the
celebrated Porta Camollia, where the traveller is greeted by the
cordial inscription, _Cor magis Sena pandit_――Siena opens her gates
even more willingly than her heart――testifying to the hospitable
character of the inhabitants. The city is built on three hills, with
deep ravines between them. These hills are crossed by three main
streets, meeting at the Piazza del Campo, around which the city
radiates like a star. There is scarcely a level spot in the whole
place. Even the central square descends like the hollow of a cone.
Nothing could be more favorable to the picturesque. The old brick
walls of the thirteenth century, with their fortifications and
thirty-eight gate-ways, go straggling up the heights. Narrow,
lane-like streets, inaccessible to carriages, rush headlong down into
deep ravines, sometimes through gloomy arches, the very houses
clinging to the steep sides with a giddy, top-heavy air. On one of
these three hills stands the cathedral, with its lofty arches and
magnificent dome, a marvel of art, full of statues and bronzes,
carvings and mosaics. On another is the enormous brick church of San
Domenico, for ever associated with the divine raptures of St.
Catharine of Siena. Palaces, as well as churches, adorn all the
heights――palaces grim and time-worn, that bear old, historic names,
famed in the great contests between the Guelphs and Ghibellines, in
which live, secluded in their own dim halls, the aristocratic owners,
keeping up their ancient customs, proud as the imperial Ghibellines or
lordly Guelphs from whom they sprang. Amid all the towers, and domes,
and palaces, rises, from the central square, light and slender, the
tall, arrow-like Torre del Mangia, which shoots up to a prodigious
height into the sapphire sky, crowned with battlements, as if to
defend the city against the spirits of the air.

Yes, Siena is singularly picturesque and striking as no other city in
Italy is, but sad and melancholy with its recollections of past
grandeur. It cannot forget the time when it sent forth its legions to
triumph over the Florentines, and had two hundred thousand
inhabitants. Now it has only about a tenth of that number. Once it was
great in war. It was a leader in art. Eight popes sprang from its
territory, among whom were Pius II., the poet, diplomatist, and lover
of art, from the Piccolomini family; the great Hildebrand, so
prominent in the history of the church; and Alexander III., who
deposed Frederick Barbarossa, and gave his name to a city――styled by
Voltaire himself the benefactor of the human race. And like so many
stars that blaze in the heaven of the Italian Church――nay, the church
universal――are the Sienese saints, wondrous in life and glorified by
art.

The first place into which the traveller inevitably drifts, if he
attempts to explore the city alone, is the Piazza del Campo, now
called, of course, Vittorio Emmanuele, in spite of Dante. This piazza
is singularly imposing from its unchanged, mediæval aspect. It slopes
away like an amphitheatre, being intended for public games and
spectacles; Murray says, like a shell. Yes, a shell that whispers of
past storms――of the tempestuous waves that have swept over the city;
for it has witnessed many a popular insurrection, many a struggle
between the nobles and people. Among the interesting associations we
recall the haughty Ghibelline leader, Provenzano Salvani, whose name,
as Dante says:

                    “Far and wide
  Through Tuscany resounded once; and now
  Is in Siena scarce with whispers named.”

It was here, when a friend of his, taken prisoner by Charles of Anjou,
lay under penalty of death, unless his ransom of a thousand florins in
gold should be paid within a certain time, that Provenzano, the first
citizen of the republic, the conqueror of Monte Aperti, unable to pay
so large a sum, humbled himself so far as to spread a carpet on this
piazza, on which he sat down to solicit contributions from the public.

  “When at his glory’s topmost height,
   Respect of dignity all cast aside,
   Freely he fixed him on Siena’s plain,
   A suitor to redeem his suffering friend,
   Who languished in the prison-house of Charles;
   Nor, for his sake, refused through every vein to tremble.”

Dante, who meets him in Purgatory, alludes to the grandeur of this act
as atoning for his ambition, which

  “Reached with grasp presumptuous at the sway
   Of all Siena.”

So stanch a friend would seem to have deserved a less terrible fate.
On the disastrous day of Colle he was taken by the Florentines, who
cut off his head, and carried it around the battle-field, fastened on
a lance.

On one side of the piazza is the massive Palazzo Pubblico, bristling
with battlements. On its front blazes the holy name of Jesus, held up
by St. Bernardin of Siena for the reverence of the whole world. The
busy throng beneath looks up in its toilsome round, and goes on, the
better for a fleeting thought. Below is a pillar with the wolf of
pagan Rome that bore Siena. From this palace rises the beautiful tower
_del Mangia_, seen far and wide over the whole country, so called from
the automaton which used to come forth at mid-day, like the Moor at
Venice, to strike the hours. This figure was to the Sienese what
Pasquino was to Rome. To it were confided all the epigrams of the city
wits; but, alas for them! one day, when it came forth to do its duty,
a spring gave way, and it fell to the ground and was dashed in pieces.
This tower commands an admirable view. North, the country looks
barren, but the slopes of Chianti are celebrated for their wines, and
Monte Maggio is covered with forests. South and west, it is fresher
and more smiling, but leads to the fatal marshes of Maremma. Santa
Fiora, the most productive mountain, annually yields vast quantities
of umber. The happy valleys are full of olives and wheat-fields.
Farther off, to the south, the volcanic summits of Radicofani,
associated with Boccaccio’s tales, blacken the horizon. To the east
everything is bleak and dreary, the whole landscape of a pale, sickly
green.

At the foot of the tower is a beautiful votive chapel of the Virgin,
built in the fourteenth century after a pestilence which carried off
eighty thousand people from Siena and its environs. It is like an open
porch resting on sculptured pillars. Over the altar within are statues
and a fresco of the Madonna, before which are flowers and lamps
burning in the bright sunlight――all open to the air, as if to catch a
passing invocation from the lips of those who might otherwise spare no
thought, amid their toils, for heaven.

Siena is peculiarly the city of Mary. Before the great battle with the
Florentines,

  “That colored Arbia’s flood with crimson stain,”

the Sienese solemnly placed their city under the protection of the
Virgin, and vowed, if victorious, to regard her as the Sovereign Lady
of the land, from whom they would henceforth hold it as her vassals.
After their triumph they came to lay their spoils at her feet, and had
her painted as Our Lady of Victory, throned like a queen, with the
Infant standing on her knee. When Duccio, some years later, finished
his Madonna, he wrote beneath it: _Mater sancta Dei, sis causa Senis
requiei!_――Give peace to Siena!――and the painting was transported,
amid public rejoicings, to the cathedral. Business was entirely
suspended. All the shops were closed. The archbishop, at the head of
the clergy and magistrates, accompanied it with a vast procession of
people, with lighted tapers in their hands, as if around a shrine. The
trumpets sounded; the bells rang; nothing could equal the enthusiasm.
The picture was placed over the high altar of the church.

This was during the height of Siena’s grandeur, when the wisdom of its
laws corresponded to the depth of its religious sentiments, so that,
while most of the Italian republics were ruined by intestine
commotions between the nobles and people, Siena had the wisdom to
modify its constitution in such a way as to admit the representatives
of both parties to the government, and so preserve the vigor of the
nation. It was thus she was enabled to extend her dominion and win the
great victory of Monte Aperti, in which ten thousand Florentines were
left dead on the field.

On one side of the piazza is the palace of the Sansedoni, one of the
great Ghibelline families belonging to the feudal aristocracy of
Siena――a frowning, battlemented palace, with a mutilated tower built
by a special privilege in 1215. In it is a chapel in honor of the
Beato Ambrogio Sansedoni, a Dominican friar who belonged to this
illustrious family. It was he whom Pope Clement IV., after a vain
effort to save the unfortunate Conradin of Souabia from death, sent to
administer the sacraments and console the young prince in his last
moments. Ambrogio distinguished himself as a professor of theology at
Paris, Cologne, and Rome.

Close beside the Palazzo Buonsignori, one of the finest in the city,
is the house said by tradition to have been inhabited by the unhappy
Pia de Tolomei, indebted for her celebrity to Dante, rather than to
her misfortunes. He meets her in the milder shades of Purgatory, among
those who had by violence died, but who, repenting and forgiving,

  “Did issue out of life at peace with God.”

Her death was caused by the deadly miasmas of “Maremma’s pestilential
fen,” to which her cruel husband had banished her.

It was a member of the Tolomei family――the Beato Bernardino――who, in
the fourteenth century, founded the Olivetan Order. He was previously
a professor at the university of Siena, but, being struck blind while
discussing some philosophical subject in his lecture-room, he
resolved, though he soon recovered his sight, to embrace the religious
life; and when he next appeared in his chair, instead of resuming his
philosophical discussions, he astonished his audience by insisting on
the vanity of all earthly acquirements, and the importance of the only
knowledge that can save the soul. Several of his pupils were so
impressed by his words that they followed him when he retired to one
of the family estates not far from Siena, which he called Monte
Oliveto, whence the name of the order. Bernardino fell a victim to his
zeal in attending to the sick in the time of a great plague. The
convent he founded became a magnificent establishment, with grounds
luxuriantly cultivated, a church adorned by the arts, and apartments
so numerous that the Emperor Charles V., and his train of five
thousand, all lodged there at once.

The Palazzo Bandanelli, where Pope Alexander III. was born, is gloomy
and massive as a prison, with iron gratings at the arched windows,
brick walls black with age, from which project great iron rings, and
on the doors immense knockers of wrought iron, made when blacksmiths
were genuine artists. But, however dismal his birthplace, Alexander
III. was enlightened in his views. It was in 1167 he declared, in the
name of a council, that all Christians ought to be exempted from
servitude.

To go back to the Piazza del Campo. Before the Sansedoni palace is the
Fonte Gaja――so called from the joyful acclamations of the people, when
water was brought into the square in 1343. It is surrounded by an
oblong basin of white marble, elegantly sculptured by Giacomo della
Quercia, to whom was henceforth given the name of Del Fonte.

Siena, being on a height, was, from the first, obliged to provide
water for its inhabitants at great expense. Aqueducts were constructed
in the time of the Romans. But a still grander work was achieved in
the middle ages, when water was brought from the neighboring mountains
by an aqueduct about twenty miles long, that passed beneath the city,
giving rise, perhaps, to the derisive report in Dante’s time that the
hill was tunnelled in search of the river Diana:

            “The fancied stream
  They sought, of Dian called.”

These vast subterranean works so excited the admiration of Charles V.
that he said Siena was more wonderful below ground than above. Now
there are three hundred and fifty-five wells in the city, and eighteen
fountains. The deep well in the cloister of the Carmine is called the
Pozzo di Diana.

The most noted of the fountains is Fonte Branda, whose waters were so
famous in Dante’s time for their sweetness and purity that he makes
Adamo of Brescia, the coiner of counterfeit money, exclaim, amid the
flames of the Inferno, that to behold the instigators of his crime
undergoing a like torture would be sweeter to him than the cool waters
of Fonte Branda:

  “For Branda’s limpid font I would not change
   The welcome sight.”

This fountain has also been celebrated by Alfieri, who often came to
Siena to visit his friend, Francesco Gori, with whom he remained
months at a time. He liked the character of the people, and said, when
he went away, that he left a part of his heart behind. And yet Dante,
perhaps because a Florentine, accused the Sienese of being light and
vain:

                  “Was ever race
  Light as Siena’s? Sure, not France herself
  Can show a tribe so frivolous and vain.”

Formerly, if not still, giddy people in Tuscany were often asked if
they had been drinking water from the Fonte Branda, as if that would
account for any excess.

The Sienese are proud of the fame and antiquity of this fount, which
is known to have existed in 1081. It flows at the very bottom of one
of the deep ravines which makes Siena so peculiar, between two
precipitous hills, one crowned by the Duomo, and the other by the
church of St. Dominic, and you look from one to the other in silent
wonder. The whole quarter is densely populated. The people are called
Fontebrandini――mostly, as five centuries ago, tanners, dyers, and
fullers, who are reputed to be proud, and are to Siena what the
Trasteverini are to Rome. The streets around diverge from a
market-place, on one side of which is the fount under a long, open
arcade of stone, of immense thickness, built against the hillside. You
go down to a paved court, as to something sacred, by a flight of steps
as wide as the arcade is long. Here are stone seats around, as if to
accommodate the gossips of the neighborhood. Three pointed archways,
between which lions look out with prey between their outstretched
paws, open into the arcade, where flow the waters, gathered from the
surrounding hills, by three apertures, into an enormous stone
reservoir. The surplus waters pass off into other tanks beyond the
arcade, for the use of the workmen of the quarter. Lemon-trees hang
over the fount, and grape-vines trail from tree to tree. The steep
hillside is covered with bushes and verdure up to the church of San
Domenico, which stands stern and majestic, with its crenelated tower
amid the olive-trees.

An old Sienese romance is connected with the Fonte Branda. Cino da
Pistoja, a poet and celebrated professor of jurisprudence at Siena in
the fourteenth century, whose death Petrarch laments in a sonnet,
promised his daughter, a young lady of uncommon beauty, to any one of
his pupils who should best solve a knotty law-question. It was a young
man, misshapen in form, to whom the prize was adjudged, and the poor
girl, in her horror, threw herself into the Fonte Branda. Her suitor,
sensible of the value of the prize, plunged in after her, and not only
saved her life, but fortunately succeeded in winning her affections.

Turning to the right, and ascending the Costa dei Tintori, you come in
a few moments to the house of St. Catharine of Siena, once the shop of
her father, a dyer, but now a series of oratories and chapels,
sanctified by holy memories and adorned by art. It is built of brick,
with two arched galleries, one above the other, of a later period.
_Sposæ XPI. Katharinæ Domvs_ is on the front, with a small head of the
saint graven in marble, and another tablet styling her the Seraphic
Catharine. Below hang tanned skins, probably for sale. The memories of
the place are truly seraphic, but the odors would by no means be
considered so by those who do not believe in the dignity and
sacredness of labor; for the whole quarter――at least, when we were
there――was redolent of tan. Skins hung on all the houses. Tan-cakes
for fuel were displayed on shelves for sale at every door. Everybody
seemed industrious. There was none of the _far niente_ we like to
associate with Italy. It was a positive grievance to find great heaps
of tan around the Fonte Branda, so poetical to us, because associated
with the Divine Poet. But it was still harder to have the same odors
follow us to the very house of the seraphic St. Catharine, the mystic
Bride of Christ. Very little change can have taken place during the
last five centuries in the neighborhood where bloomed this fair lily
of the church, and, in one sense, this is a satisfaction. The house
itself is of the most touching interest. There are the stairs
Catharine, when a child, used to ascend, with an _Ave_ at every step,
and over which the legend says she was so often borne by the angels.
Everywhere through the passages are the emblematic lily and heart. An
oratory has been made of the kitchen which became to Catharine a very
sanctuary, instead of a place of low cares, where she served Christ
under the form of her father, the Blessed Virgin under that of her
mother, and the disciples in the persons of her brothers and sisters.
Her father’s _Bottega_ has also been converted into an oratory. In the
garden where she loved to cultivate the symbolic rose and lily and
violet for the altar, is a chapel in which hangs the miraculous
crucifix painted by Giunta of Pisa, framed in pillars of black marble,
over the altar. Before this crucifix she received the stigmata in the
church of St. Christina at Pisa. In these various oratories are a
profusion of paintings by Sodoma, Vanni, and other eminent artists.
Del Pacchia has attained the very perfection of feminine beauty in his
painting of St. Catharine’s visit to the shrine of St. Agnes of Monte
Pulciano――a genuine production of Christian inspiration. Salimbeni
represents her calm amid the infuriated, ungrateful Florentines after
her return from Avignon; and Sebastian Folli, her appearance before
Gregory XI.

But the most sacred part of the house is her chamber, a little, dark
cell about fifteen feet long and eight or nine wide. A bronze door now
opens into this sanctuary. Here you are shown the board on which she
slept, and other relics of the saint. Here she passed nights in prayer
and converse with the angels. Here she scourged her frail body,
unconscious that her mother was weeping at the door. Here she wrote
the admirable letters so remarkable for their purity and elegance of
style. Here took place the divine _Sposalizio_ which, immortalized by
art, we see all over Italy. Here, when calumniated by the repulsive
object of her heroic charity, she came to pour out her pure soul, that
shrank from the foul accusations, before the heavenly Bridegroom; but
when he appeared with two crowns, one of gold set with jewels, and the
other of thorns, she unhesitatingly chose the latter, pressing it deep
into her head, thus becoming for all time, in the world of art, the
thorn-crowned Catharine. Pius IX., when he visited the house in 1857,
prayed long in this cell, where lived five centuries ago the obscure
maiden who, for a time, almost guided St. Peter’s bark.

On St. Catharine’s day the house is richly adorned and resplendent
with light. The walls are covered with emblems and verses
commemorating her life. The altars have on their finest ornaments. The
neighboring streets are strewn with flowers and hung with flags.
Hangings are at all the windows. A silver statue of the saint is borne
into the street by a long procession of clergy and people. The
magistrates join the _cortège_, and they all go winding up to San
Domenico with chants, perfumes, and flowers, where a student from the
college Tolomei pronounces a eulogy on their illustrious townswoman.
When night comes on, the whole hill around Fonte Branda is
illuminated, the rosary is said at the foot of the Madonnas, and hymns
are sung in honor of the saint.

St. Catharine’s life, in which everything transcends the usual laws of
nature, has been written by her confessor, the Blessed Raymond of
Capua――the life of one saint by another. He was not a credulous man
easily led away by fantasies of the imagination, but one of
incontestable ability and knowledge, who relates what he witnessed in
the soul of whose secrets he was the depositary, who scrutinized every
prodigy, but only to give additional splendor to the truth.

Raymond was a descendant of Piero della Vigna (the celebrated
chancellor of Frederick II.), whose spirit Dante finds imprisoned in
“the drear, mystic wood” of the Inferno, and, plucking a limb
unwittingly from

  “The wild thorn of his wretched shade,”

to his horror brings forth at once cries and blood. For nineteen years
Raymond was general of the Dominican Order. Pope Urban VI. confided
the most delicate and difficult missions to him; called him his eyes,
his tongue, his feet, and his hands; held him up to the veneration of
princes and people; and would have raised him to the highest dignities
but for the opposition of the saint. No one, therefore, could have
greater claims to our confidence.

Catharine Benincasa was born in 1347. From her earliest years she was
a being apart, and favored with divine communications. Uncomprehended
at first by those around her, her home became to her a place of
trials. Her parents tried to draw her into the world, and she cut off
her long, golden hair. They wished her to marry, and she consecrated
herself to a higher love. They then subjected her to household labor,
but she found peace in its vulgar details. She worked by day. At night
she prayed till lost in ecstasy, insensible to everything earthly. She
wished to enter the Third Order of St. Dominic, but was refused
admission because she was too young and beautiful. It was only after
an illness that made her unrecognizable that she was received; but she
continued, like all the members, an inmate of her father’s house. Her
soul was peculiarly alive to the sweet harmonies of nature. She liked
to go into the woods, at springtime, to listen to the warbling of the
birds and watch the mysterious movements of awakening vegetation. She
loved the mountain heights, with their wild melodies of winds and
torrents, as well as the gentle rustling of the air among the leaves,
which seemed to her like nature’s whispered prayer. She said, as she
looked at the ant, a thought of God had created it. She loved flowers.
She had a taste for music, and liked to sing hymns as she sewed. The
name of Mary from her lips was said to leave a singular harmony in the
ears of her listeners. She sympathized in every kind of misery to aid
it; lent a helping hand to every infirmity, and often served in the
hospital, choosing those who were abandoned by the rest of the world
as the objects of her care. She rose above the wants of the body. From
her childhood she never ate meat, the very odor of which became
repugnant to her. For years she subsisted from Ash Wednesday till
Whitsuntide solely on the Holy Eucharist, which she received every
morning. She entered into all the troubles of the times, diffusing
everywhere the pure light of divine charity. Though without human
instruction, she astonished the doctors of the church by her profound
knowledge of theology. “The purest Italian welled from her untutored
lips.” She wrote to popes, cardinals, princes, and republics. Some of
her letters are to Sir John Hawkwood, or, as the Italians call him,
Giovanni Aguto, the ferocious English _condottiere_, who stained the
flag of the church, and then entered the service of her enemies. She
takes a foremost rank among the writers of the age――that of Boccaccio,
who lacks her touching grace and simplicity.

Siena, at the time of St. Catharine, was no longer the powerful,
united city it had been a century before, but in its turn had become
the prey of anarchy and division. The different classes of people were
at war with each other. They proscribed each other; and private hatred
took advantage of the disorder to indulge in every kind of revenge.
The Macconi were at variance with the Rinaldini; the Salimbeni with
the Tolomei; the Malvotti with the Piccolomini.

War reigned all over Italy. Milan and all Lombardy were ravaged by the
Visconti. Naples was a prey to the excesses caused by Queen Joanna.
Florence, that had been devoted to the church, was now governed by the
Ghibellines, who went to every extreme against the Guelphs, whose
cause, says Dean Milman, “was more (!) than that of the church: it was
that of freedom and humanity.” The States of the church were ravaged.
Rome itself, widowed and abandoned, “with as many wounds as she had
palaces and churches,” as Petrarch says, was in a complete state of
anarchy.

Amid all these horrors St. Catharine moved, an angel of peace. God
gave her a wonderful power of appeasing private resentments and
calming popular tumults. Inveterate enemies clasped hands under her
influence. Veteran warriors, and republics themselves, listened
respectfully to her voice. She wrote to Pope Gregory XI. at Avignon,
pleading the cause of all Italy, and urging him to return to Rome,
where he could overrule the passions that agitated the country, and
restore dignity to the Apostolic See. Her heart bled at the sight of
so much misery and crime. “Peace! peace!” she wrote to the
pope――“peace for the love of a crucified God! Do not regard the
ignorance and blindness and pride of your children. You will perhaps
say you are bound by conscience to recover what belongs to holy
church. Alas! I acknowledge it; but when a choice is to be made, it
should be of that which is most valuable. The treasure of the church
is the Blood of Christ shed for the redemption of souls. This treasure
of blood has not been given for temporal dominion, but for the
salvation of the human race. If you are obliged to recover the cities
and treasures the church has lost, still more are you bound to win
back the souls that are the true riches of the church, which is
impoverished by losing them. It is better to let go the gold of
temporal than the gold of spiritual wealth. You must choose between
two evils――that of losing grandeur, power, and temporal prosperity,
and the loss of grace in the souls that owe obedience to your
Holiness. You will not restore beauty to the church by the sword, by
severity and war, but by peaceful measures. You will combat more
successfully with the rod of mercy and kindness than of chastisement.
By these means you will recover what belongs to you both spiritually
and temporally.”

Noble liberty on the part of the dyer’s daughter! And it is to the
honor of Pope Gregory that he listened to her with respect. It was
time to pour oil on the troubled waters. The proud republic of
Florence, after revolting against all spiritual authority, torturing
the priests, declaring liberty preferable to salvation, and exciting
the papal cities to rebellion, had been laid under an interdict. The
people began to feel the disastrous effects on their commerce, and
came to solicit Catharine’s intervention with the pope. She went to
Avignon, where she made known her mission in a public consistory. “She
passed from her father’s shop to the court of princes, from the
calmness of solitude to the troubles of factions; and everywhere she
was in her place, because she had found in solitude a peace above all
the agitations of the world, and a profound charity.”

Pope Gregory left her to dictate the terms of peace with the
Florentines, though he foresaw their ingratitude. Nay, more: after
some hesitation he decided to return to Rome. Nor was St. Catharine
the only woman that urged him to do so. St. Bridget of Sweden added
the influence of her prophetic voice. Ortensia di Gulielmo, one of the
best poets of the day, thus begins a sonnet:

  “Ecco, Signor, la greggia tua d’intorno
   Cinta da lupi a divorla intenti.
   Ecco tutti gli onor d’Italia spenti,
   Poiché fa altrove il gran Pastore soggiorno.”[108]

Catharine’s return to Siena was celebrated by festive songs:

  “Thou didst go up to the great temple,
   Thou didst enter the mighty consistory;
   The words of thy mouth were full of power;
   Pope and cardinals were persuaded to depart.
   Thou didst direct the course of their wings towards the See of
        Peter. O virgin of Siena! how great is thy praise――soul prompt
        in movement, energetic in action.”

On the tomb of Gregory XI., in the church of St. Francesca at Rome,
St. Catharine is represented walking before the pope’s mule as he
makes his triumphal entrance into the city――a symbol of her guiding
influence. From this time she took a prominent part in all the affairs
of Italy. But the re-establishment of the papal throne at Rome was her
last joy on earth. At the death of Pope Gregory fresh disorders broke
out. Catharine’s life slowly wasted away, inwardly consumed, as she
declared, for the church. She died in Rome at the age of thirty-three,
and lies buried under the high altar of the Minerva, surrounded by
lamps and flowers. Her countryman, Pius II., canonized her, not only
at the request of the magistrates of Siena, but of several of the
sovereigns of Europe.

Siena boasts of other saints: St. Ansano, the first apostle of the
country, beheaded on the banks of the Arbia in the time of Diocletian;
Galgano di Lolo, who led an angelic life in the mountains; the founder
of Monte Oliveto, whose order sheltered Tasso; Ambrogio Sansedoni, the
confessor of Conradin, noted for his eloquence and sanctity; St.
Bernardin, on whose breast glows the potent Name; Beata Nera Tolomei,
noted for her ascetic charity; the poor Pietro Pettinajo, who devoted
himself to the plague-stricken in the hospital della Scala;
Aldobrandescha Ponzi, who wished to be crowned with thorns like
Christ; the Blessed John Colombini, whose only passion was to be like
Jesus; and many more besides. But St. Catharine――the heroine of divine
love――is the most sublime expression of Sienese piety, and of her is
the city especially proud. Her statue was placed by the republic on
the front of its glorious cathedral, and she is represented in the
gorgeous picture of Pinturicchio in the library, where, as Mrs. Stowe
says, “borne in celestial repose and purity amid all the powers and
dignitaries of the church, she is canonized as one of those that shall
reign and intercede with Christ in heaven.”

From St. Catharine’s house you go winding up under the mulberry-trees
to San Domenico, soon leaving the tops of the houses below you. On the
way is the place where Catharine, when a child, coming down the hill
one evening with Stefano, her favorite brother, turned to look back,
and saw the heavens opened above the campanile of the church, and the
Great High-Priest seated on a radiant throne, around which stood SS.
Peter, Paul, and John, who seemed with uplifted hands to bless her.
Keeping on to the top of the hill, you come to a large green, silent
and deserted, before the church. The street that properly leads to it
is well named the _Via del Paradiso_. The church of St. Dominic is
vast and imposing, though of severe simplicity of style, offering a
marked contrast to the richness of the Duomo. It is shaped like the
letter T, without aisles or apsis. Rafters support the vault, but at
the entrance to the transepts is an enormous arch of singular
boldness. There is something broad and expansive about the atmosphere
of the church, as often found in the churches of the Dominican Order.
Even with a considerable number of worshippers it would seem solitary.
In one of its chapels is a Madonna, celebrated in the history of art,
long attributed to Guido of Siena, but now proved to be by Guido di
Graziano, a contemporary of Cimabue, whose Madonnas it resembles, with
its oblique eyes, large head, and a certain angular stiffness. Among
other noted paintings is one of Santa Barbara by Matteo da Siena, very
beautiful in expression. She sits, crowned by two angels, with a palm
in one hand and a tower-like tabernacle in the other, in which the
Host is exposed above a chalice. SS. Magdalen and Catharine are at her
side.

A domed chapel, protected by a balustrade of alabaster, has been built
on the east side of the church, in which is enshrined the head of St.
Catharine――evidently the most frequented part of the church, from the
numerous seats before it, mostly with coats of arms and carved backs.
Framed prayers, as is common in Italy, are chained to a
_prie-Dieu_――one to St. Catherine with the anthem: _Regnum mundi et
omnem ornatum sæculi contempsi propter amorem Domini mei Jesu Christi,
quem vidi, quem amavi, in quem credidi, quem dilexi_. Three lamps were
burning before the relics of St. Catharine. The walls are covered with
exquisite paintings by Sodoma, which were lit up by the morning sun.
Nothing could be more lovely than St. Catharine swooning at the
Saviour’s apparition――a figure full of divine languor, grace, and
softness. Two nuns tenderly sustain her. Her stigmata are radiant. An
angel bears a lily. The whole painting is delicate, ethereal, and
heavenly as a vision. It is on the gospel side of the altar; on the
other side she kneels between two nuns with her eyes raised to heaven,
where, above the Virgin and Child, appears the _Padre Eterno_. Angels
bear the cross and crown of thorns. Another brings the Host. A death’s
head and lily are at her feet. The whole is of wonderful beauty.

On the left wall, as you enter the chapel, is painted the execution of
a young knight, beheaded at Siena for some slight political offence.
St. Catharine went to comfort him in his despair, and induced him to
receive the sacraments. She even accompanied him to the block, where
his last words were “Jesus” and “Catharine,” leaving her inundated
with his blood, but in a state of ecstasy that rendered her insensible
to everything but his eternal welfare. The odor of his blood seemed to
intoxicate her. She could not resolve to wash it off. She only saw his
soul ransomed by the blood of the Lamb, and, in describing her state
of mind to her confessor, she cries: “Yes, bathe in the Blood of
Christ crucified, feast on this Blood, be inebriated with this Blood,
weep in Blood, rejoice in Blood, grow strong in this Blood, then, like
an intrepid knight, hasten through this Blood to defend the honor of
God, the liberty of the church, and the salvation of souls.” Her
letters often begin: “I, Catharine, servant and slave of Jesus Christ,
write you in his precious Blood,” as if it was there she derived all
her strength and inspiration. In the picture before us nothing could
be more peaceful than the face of the young knight just beheaded,
whose soul two beautiful angels are bearing to heaven.

On the pavement is traced in the marble Adam amid the animals in
Paradise, among whom is the unicorn, the ancient emblem of chastity.

At the extreme end of the church is the Chapel delle Volte, to which
you ascend by six steps. Over the door is this inscription:

  En locus hic toto sacer | et venerabile orbe,
  Hic Sponsũ Catharina suum | sanctissima sepe,
  Vidit ovans Christum | dictu mirabile, sed tu
  Quisquies ades hic funde | preces venerare beatam
  Stigmata gestantem | Divini insignia amoris;――

Behold this place, sacred and venerable among all on earth; here holy
Catharine rejoicing often beheld, wondrous to say, the Christ, her
spouse. But thou, whosoever approachest, here pour forth thy prayers,
to venerate the holy one who bore the sacred stigmata, the insignia of
divine love.

This chapel, the scene of so many of St. Catharine’s mystic visions,
is long and narrow, with one window. The arches are strewn with gilt
stars on a blue ground. The floor is paved with tiles, with tablets
here and there. On one, before the altar, are the words: _Cathâ. cor
mutat XPUS_――Christ changes the heart of Catharine; for it was here
she underwent that miraculous change of heart which transformed her
life. Our Saviour himself appeared to her, surrounded by light, and
gave her a new heart, which filled her with ecstatic joy, and inspired
a love for all mankind.

Over the plain altar is an authentic portrait of St. Catharine by the
poetic Andrea Vanni, a pupil of Sano di Pietro. He was one of her
disciples and correspondents, though a _Capitano del Popolo_. He
painted this portrait in 1367, while she was in an ecstatic state in
this very chapel. It represents her with delicate features, a thin,
worn face, and must have been a charming picture originally, but it is
now greatly deteriorated.

On one of the pillars of the chapel is the inscription: _Catâ. cruce
erogat XPO_――Catharine bestows the cross on Christ; referring to the
silver cross she one day gave a beggar in this church, which was
afterwards shown her set with precious stones. And on another pillar
is: _Catâ. vesti induit XPUM_――Catharine clothes Christ with her
garment; in memory of the tunic she here gave our Saviour under the
form of a beggar, who showed it to her some hours after, radiant with
light and embroidered with pearls――acts of charity full of
significance. Three lovely little paintings by Beccafumi, at the Belle
Arti, represent the three mystic scenes commemorated in this chapel.

In the adjoining convent, now a school-house, lived for a time St.
Thomas of Aquin and the Blessed Ambrogio Sansedoni, whose tomb is in
the cloister. Here, in 1462, was held a chapter of fifteen hundred
Dominicans, and here Pius II. blessed the standard of the Crusaders.

On our way to the Porta Camollia we turned down at the left, by a
steep, paved way, to the church of Fonte Giusta, erected in memory of
a victory over the Florentines. It is a small brick church with four
small windows, four pillars to which are attached four bronze angels
holding four bronze candlesticks, and on the walls hang four paintings
of note. One is a beautiful coronation of the Virgin with four saints,
by Fungai. Then there is a Visitation by Anselmi, in which two
majestic women look into each other’s eyes, as if to fathom each the
other’s soul. In an arch of the right aisle is the sibyl of Peruzzi――a
noble figure――said to have been studied by Raphael when Agostino
Chigi, the famous banker of the Farnesina palace (a Sienese by birth),
commissioned him to paint the celebrated sibyls of the _Della Pace_ at
Rome――sibyls that have all the grandeur of Michael Angelo, and the
grace that Raphael alone could give.

But what particularly brought us to this church was to see the Madonna
of Fonte Giusta, to which Columbus made a pilgrimage after the
discovery of America, and presented his sword, shield (a round one),
and a whale’s bone, which are still suspended over the entrance. The
Madonna turns her fair, sweet face towards you, while the Child has
his eyes turned towards his mother, with his hands crossed on his
breast. Both have on silver crowns, and pearls around their necks. The
picture is in a frame of cherubs’ heads, surrounded by delicate
arabesques. Beneath is the inscription:

  Hic requies tranquilla,
  Salus hic dulce levamen:
  Hic est spes miseris ꝕsidiũq reis――

Here is tranquil repose; here safety and sweet consolation; here is
hope for the wretched, and for the guilty an unfailing refuge.

Columbus’ devotion to the Blessed Virgin is well known. It was under
her auspices he undertook, in a vessel called by her name, the
discovery of a new world. He daily said her office on board ship from
a valuable MS. given him by Alexander VI. before his departure and
afterwards bequeathed to Genoa, and the _Salve Regina_ was sung every
evening by his followers.

Porta Camollia is not remarkable in an architectural point of view,
but it has its sacred associations. It was here St. Bernardin of Siena
used to come every night, when a boy, to pray before the tutelar
Madonna of the gate. His aunt, hearing him speak of going to see the
fairest of women, followed him at a distance one night and discovered
his secret.

The chapel of the Confraternity of San Bernardin is a museum of art.
The walls are covered with fine frescoes of the life of the Virgin by
Beccafumi, Sodoma, and Pacchia. One of the most beautiful is Sodoma’s
“Assumption,” in which Mary――_pulchra ut luna_――in a mantle like a
violet cloud, is borne up to her native heaven by angels full of
grace. The apostles, with thoughtful, devout, but not astonished
faces, stand around the tomb, out of which rise two tall lilies amid
the white roses. St. Thomas lifts his hands to receive the sacred
girdle.

Everywhere about this chapel is the sacred monogram so dear to San
Bernardin. The holy name of Jesus is inscribed on the front, on the
holy-water basin, on the walls; placed there in more devout times,
when even genius sought to

              “Embalm his sacred name
  With all a painter’s art and all a minstrel’s flame.”

There are more than sixty churches and chapels at Siena, but perhaps
not one without some work of art that is noteworthy. Siena was the
cradle of art in the thirteenth century, and has its aureola of
artists as well as of saints. The school of Florence only dates from
the fourteenth century. Guido da Siena, Bonamico, and Diotisalvi were
the glorious precursors of Cimabue, and Simone Memmi, a century later,
shared with Giotto the friendship and admiration of Petrarch.

  “_Ma certò il mio Simon fû in Paradiso._”

The old Sienese artists were profoundly religious. In their statutes
of 1355 they say: “We, by the grace of God, make manifest to rude and
ignorant men the miraculous events operated by virtue, and in
confirmation, of our holy faith.” The efflorescence of the arts is one
of the expressions of a profound faith. We have only to visit the
galleries of Italy, filled with the sad spoils of numberless churches
and convents, to be convinced of this. And there is not a tomb of a
saint of the middle ages out of which does not bloom some flower of
art, fair as the lilies that spring from the sepulchre of the Virgin.
What wreaths of art entwine the tombs of St. Francis, St. Dominic, and
St. Antony of Padua!

The collection of paintings at the Academy of Siena is very
interesting. Here Beccafumi represents St. Catharine receiving the
stigmata. She is in soft, gray robes, with a lovely face, kneeling
before a crucifix under an archway, through which you see the
landscape. A dead, thorny tree is behind her. By way of contrast to
her beauty and grace is the austere St. Jerome, haggard and worn, with
his lion, before one of the pillars of the arch. At the other is a
Dominican in black and white garments. Above are the Madonna and Child
attended by angels. The whole picture is very soft and charming.

Sodoma has also here a St. Catharine with a delicate, thoughtful face,
and a crucifix in her pierced hands.

Perhaps the most striking picture in the gallery is Sodoma’s “Christ
Bound,” which is wonderful in expression. The face and form are very
human and of grand development. From under the crown of thorns flows
the long, amber hair. The eyes are sad, inexpressibly sad, and the
bleeding form is infinitely pathetic. “It is a thing to stand and weep
at,” says Hawthorne.

  “I suffer binding who have loosed their bands.
     Was ever grief like mine?”

Sodoma’s “Judith,” in a blue dress and orange mantle, stands beside a
leafless tree, holding up the bloody knife with one hand, and the head
of Holofernes with the other. She has a gleaming jewel on her
forehead, though the old rabbis represent her with a wreath of lilies,
believed by the ancients to be a protection against witchcraft and
peril.

The university of Siena existed in the thirteenth century. Among its
noted members was Cisto da Siena, a Jew, who became a Catholic and a
monk, and finally a Calvinist. Condemned to death for his apostasy, he
was indebted for his life to the friendship of Pope Julius III. and
Cardinal Ghislieri, afterwards Pius V.

M. Taine speaks of the deplorable ignorance of the present Sienese,
and says there is no library, not a book, in the place.[109] As he
seems, by his journal, to have been there only two days, he probably,
like many travellers, noted down his preconceived opinion. The library
of Siena, one of the oldest in Italy, has always been famous. It was
founded by Niccolo Oliva, an Augustinian friar, and contains fifty
thousand volumes――a respectable number for an inland town. About seven
hundred belong to the very first age of printing. There are also five
thousand manuscripts, among which are a Greek Gospel of the tenth
century that came from the imperial chapel at Constantinople, bound in
silver, and many other rare MSS. and documents, such as the original
will (in Latin) of Boccaccio, and autograph writings of Metastasio,
St. Catharine, and St. Bernardin.

Siena has several charitable institutions. The asylum for deaf mutes,
founded by Padre Pendola is spacious and agreeable. The great hospital
della Scala, opposite the cathedral, founded by Fra Sorore, is one of
the most ancient in Italy. It is vast and sunny, with a fine view over
the valley around Siena. Its atmosphere is thoroughly religious, with
its walls frescoed by the old masters, its numerous altars and
religious emblems. St. Catharine used to come here to attend the sick.
It is now served by Sisters of Charity.

It is dreadful to say, but the first glimpse we had of the Duomo, with
its striped wall of black and white marble, reminded us of good old
Sarah Battles――“now with God”――and her cribbage-board, which Charles
Lamb tells us was made of the finest Sienese marble, and brought by
her uncle from Italy. But on coming nearer to it every trivial thought
vanishes before its grandeur and expressive richness of detail. The
impression it makes on the mind is so profound, M. Taine says, that
“what we feel on entering St. Peter’s at Rome cannot be compared to
it.” He calls it “a most admirable Gothic flower, but of a new species
that has blossomed in a more propitious clime, the production of minds
of greater cultivation and genius, more serene, more beautiful, more
religious, and yet healthy; and which is to the cathedrals of France
what the poems of Dante and Petrarch are to the _chansons_ of the
French _trouvères_.”

On the pavement before the entrance is represented the parable of the
Pharisee and the Publican who went up into the Temple to pray――a
lesson to ponder over as we enter the house of prayer. The façade is
of marvellous workmanship. Amid angels and prophets and symbolic
sculpture, delicate as lace-work, are St. Ansano, St. Catharine, and
San Bernardin――the special patrons of Siena. On entering the church
you are at first dazzled by its richness. The pavement is unrivalled
in the world, with its pictures in niello, by an art now lost, where
we find page after page from the Scriptures, some written by the
powerful hand of Beccafumi, whose cartoons are to be seen at the Belle
Arti; sibyls noble as goddesses; Trismegistus, who received his
knowledge from Zoroaster, offering the Pimandra in which is written:
“The God who created all things, the maker of the earth and starry
heavens, so greatly loved his Son that he made him his Holy Word”; and
Socrates climbing the mountain of Virtue, who sits on its summit,
holding forth a palm to him, while with the other hand she offers the
book of wisdom to Crates, who empties a casket of jewels to receive
it. The walls are covered with paintings, by Duccio, of twenty-six
scenes of the Passion, full of life and power, dramatic and yet
strictly Scriptural, forming a book one is never weary of studying as
Christian or artist. The stalls by Fra Giovanni, the Olivetan monk,
are the very perfection of intarsia work, which here, as Marchese
says, “almost rises to the dignity of painting.” The wondrous pulpit,
with its nine columns resting on lions, its sides covered with scenes
from the life of Christ by Nicholas of Pisa, and the seven sciences on
the central octagonal pillar, is a prodigy of richness and elegance.

The frieze around the nave is adorned with the heads of the popes down
to Alexander III. Among these, strange to say, was once Pope Joan,
such hold had that popular error on the public mind. It was Florimond
de Raymond, a counsellor of the parliament of Bordeaux, and a friend
of Montaigne and Justus Lipsius, who, in the sixteenth century,
protested against such an insult to the Papacy, and by his efforts had
it effaced. He wrote to the Sovereign Pontiff himself: “Avenge the
injury done to your predecessors. Order this monster to be removed
from the place where Satan, the father of lies, has had it set up. Do
not suffer an image to remain of that which never existed. If there
was no body, let there be no shadow”; and he calls upon the pope to
destroy this idol, raised to the disgrace of the church. Besides this,
he wrote a book, now rare, completely exploding the fable, showing by
incontestable documents there was not the least place for Joan in the
succession of popes. This work, together with his appeal, produced
such an effect as to procure the removal of her portrait from the
cathedral of Siena. The illustrious Cardinal Baronius wrote to him in
1600 that it had just been removed by order of the Grand Duke of
Tuscany according to his wishes, and he congratulated him in
magnificent terms on such a triumph.

On an altar in the left nave is the crucifix borne by the Sienese at
the battle of Monte Aperti, and beneath the arches are still
suspended, after so many centuries, the long flag-poles captured from
the Florentines Sept. 4, 1260, the most glorious day in the history of
Siena.

At the right is the chapel of the Madonna del Voto, built by Alexander
VII., a Sienese pope (Fabio Chigi), with its Byzantine-looking Virgin
amid paintings, bronzes, mosaics, and precious stones.

The family of Piccolomini is glorified in this church. To it belonged
the great Æneas Silvius, as well as Pius III., also a lover of the
arts, and Ascanio Piccolomini, Archbishop of Siena, a friend of
Galileo, to whom he gave hospitality when he came forth from what
people are pleased to call the dungeons of the Inquisition at
Rome――that is, from pleasant apartments in the delightful palace of
the Tuscan ambassador on the Trinità de’ Monti, now the French
Academy. The Piccolomini chapel has five statues sculptured by Michael
Angelo, and the beautiful hall, known as the Library, is world-famous
for its frescoes of the life of Pius II. by Pinturicchio.

The whole church is a temple of art, with its sculptured altar, its
bronze tabernacle, its rare paintings, its beautiful pillars of
differently-colored marbles, and its rich windows of stained glass.
Nothing could be more serene and calm than the atmosphere of this
glorious church. Amid the sacred silence, the struggling light, with
the grandest symbols of religion on every side, you feel lifted for a
moment out of your own mean imprisonments into a very heaven of art
and piety.


     [108] Behold, O Lord! thy flock surrounded by wolves eager
     to devour it. Behold all the honor of Italy spent, because
     its Chief Pastor sojourns in a foreign land.

     [109] “_Point de bibliothèque: aucun livre_,” are his words.




SIR THOMAS MORE.

_A HISTORICAL ROMANCE._

FROM THE FRENCH OF THE PRINCESSE DE CRAON.

XVI.

Whilst Margaret and Pierre Gilles were thus conversing, above their
heads, in a magnificent gallery flashing with gilt, and adorned with
portraits of all the archbishops who had occupied this palace,
destined for their residence, the court had assembled, and there the
jury was called which was to try, or rather to condemn, Sir Thomas
More.

At the extremity of this hall, upon an elevated platform all covered
with carpet and fringe, were seated the new lord chancellor, Thomas
Audley; near him, Sir John Fitz-James, Lord Chief-Justice; and beyond,
Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury; the Duke of Norfolk, several lords
of the Privy Council, among them the Duke of Suffolk, the Abbot of
Westminster, and Cromwell, who on this occasion acted as secretary. To
the left of the court, and near the jury, was seated Richard Rich, the
creature of Cromwell, and his worthy associate, newly appointed, on
account of his efficient services, solicitor-general.

“Sir Thomas Palmer, knight?” said the clerk. “Sir Thomas Peint,
knight? George Lowell, esquire? Thomas Burbage, esquire? Geoffrey
Chamber, gentleman? Edward Stockmore, gentleman? Joseph Leake,
gentleman? William Brown, gentleman? Thomas Bellington, gentleman?
John Parnell, gentleman? Richard Bellam, gentleman? George Stokes,
gentleman?”

All responded to their names.

“Sir Thomas More,” said the lord chancellor, in a slow and hard tone,
“do you challenge any one of these gentlemen of the jury?”

“No, my lord,” replied Sir Thomas, who was standing up before the
court, leaning upon a cane he held in his hand, and which had been of
great assistance to him during the long sessions he had already been
obliged to endure in that fatiguing and inconvenient position.
Meanwhile, he anxiously watched the door through which the accused
entered, and was uneasy at not seeing the Bishop of Rochester; for
they met only in court, and it was a moment of relief when he beheld
his friend near him, although he every day remarked with sadness that
Rochester was failing in a lamentable manner.

“The accused challenges none of the members of the jury,” proclaimed
the lord chief-justice. He then arose, and began to recite the formula
of the oath to be taken by each member of the jury.

“Now, Sir Thomas,” said the chancellor, “I desire to address you yet a
last observation, and I wish with all my heart that you may yield to
it; because the king, not having forgotten your long services, is
deeply grieved at the perilous position in which your obstinacy, too
evidently the result of malice, has placed you. He has ordered us to
unbend again, and for the last time, so far as to implore you, in his
own name and for the love of him, to take the oath of obedience which
you owe to the statute of Parliament, and of fidelity to his royal
person――an oath he has a right to exact of you according to all laws,
divine and human.”

“In fidelity, my lord,” replied Sir Thomas, “in respect, in
attachment, I have never been wanting to the king. It has been a long
time, a very long time, an entire lifetime, since I took the oath. It
cannot be changed; therefore it can never be necessary to have it
renewed.”

“You persist, then, in your culpable obstinacy?” said the lord
chancellor.

“Nay, my lord, I am not obstinate.”

“Then say, at least,” cried Cranmer, wishing to appear animated by an
officious zeal, “what offends you in this oath, what word you would
reject――what is the reason, in fine, that prevents you from taking
it.”

Sir Thomas raised his head, and paused a moment to consider the court.
There was the Abbot of Westminster, who, during the days of his
prosperity and favor, had overwhelmed him with visits and surfeited
him with flattery; by his side the Duke of Norfolk, who without
emotion beheld him to-day near death, and yet he had formerly loved
him as a friend in whom he felt honored; Cromwell, whom he had always
treated with respect, in spite of the antipathy he felt for him; the
Duke of Suffolk, who had solicited him unceasingly, and almost gone
down on his knees to him to obtain money from the king or a place for
one of his creatures; Sir John Fitz-James, finally, to whom he had
rendered an eminent service, and who had in other times sworn eternal
gratitude to him, and to remain devoted to him in life and in death.
Now death was approaching him, and he counted Sir John Fitz-James
among the judges who were going to demand his head. Absorbed in the
sad and dolorous conviction that in this world he could rely upon no
one, he hesitated for a reply.

“You have heard, prisoner?” said Richard Rich brusquely.

“Pardon me, sir,” answered Sir Thomas gently; “but the lords have
already spoken so much about the king’s displeasure that, if I should
refuse to take this oath of supremacy, I fear to augment it still more
by giving the reasons.”

“Ah! this is too much,” cried all the lords. “You not only refuse to
take the oath, but you are not even willing to say why you refuse.”

“I would rather believe,” said Cromwell, “that Sir Thomas has returned
to reason, and that he is no longer so sure that the oath may wound
his conscience. Sir Thomas, is it not the case that you are now rather
in a state of doubt and uncertainty in this regard? You know,” he
continued, “that we owe entire obedience to the king; therefore you
should take the oath he demands of you, and the scruples you feel
would be removed by this imperious necessity.”

“It is true, my lord,” replied Sir Thomas, “that I ought to obey the
king in all things as a faithful subject――which I am, and will be
until death. But this is a case of conscience, in which I am not bound
to obey the prince. Listen to me, my lord of Canterbury,” he said,
fixing his eyes upon him with an expression full of benevolence. “I
would blame none of those who have taken the oath; but, at the same
time, I must say, if your argument was solid, there would be no more
cases of doubtful conscience, because it would be sufficient for the
king to pronounce yes or no in order to annihilate them all.”

“Truly,” cried the Abbot of Westminster, hurriedly interrupting him,
“you are very obstinate in your own opinions; you ought to see that,
from whatever point you view this question, you are necessarily
mistaken, since you are entirely in opposition to the chief council of
the kingdom, and that without doubt it possesses light enough to
remove and destroy the scruples of your conscience.”

“My lord,” replied Sir Thomas, “if it is true that I am alone in my
opposition to the entire Parliament, I ought certainly to feel
alarmed. Nevertheless, in refusing the oath I listen to and follow the
voice of the greatest of all counsellors――one to which every man
should listen before any other; a monitor which he carries always
within his own bosom. Besides, I will add that the opinion of the
English Parliament cannot overbalance that of the Council of all
Christendom.”

“Then you blame the Parliament, and refuse to adhere to the act of
succession it has established?” angrily exclaimed Norfolk, the uncle
of Anne Boleyn.

“My lord,” replied Sir Thomas, “your lordship knows that my intention
is not, as I have already explained, to find fault either with the act
or with the men who have drawn it up, nor to blame the oath nor those
who have taken it. As far as I am personally concerned, I cannot take
this oath without exposing myself to eternal damnation; and if you
doubt that it is my conscience which causes me to refuse, I am ready
to swear to the sincerity of my declaration. If you do not believe
what I say, it is a great deal better not to impose the oath; and if
you believe me, I hope you will not demand one in opposition to my
conscience.”

Norfolk made a gesture of impatience. Then Audley, lord chancellor,
turned toward his colleagues. “You see, you hear,” he said, “that Sir
Thomas believes that he knows more than all the priests in
London――than the Bishop of Rochester himself!” And he dwelt with a
slight tone of irony on the last sentence.

“What! the Bishop of Rochester,” cried Sir Thomas.

“Without doubt, the Bishop of Rochester,” repeated Audley. “Mr.
Secretary,” he said, turning towards Cromwell and giving him a
preconcerted signal, “communicate to the accused a certain fact in
which he is interested.”

Cromwell, descending from the platform, approached Sir Thomas and
whispered in his ear: “The Bishop of Rochester has consented to swear;
they have conducted him to the king, who has forgotten all his past
conduct, and intends to load him with new favors.”

“Fisher has sworn!” cried Sir Thomas; and he was struck with
consternation.

“Certainly!” said Cromwell, with an ill-disguised expression of irony
and satirical joy; “they concealed it from you, that it might not be
said you had pinned your opinion to the sleeve of another.”

“Sir,” answered More in a tone of profound sorrow, but with an
expression of dignity greater still, “rest perfectly satisfied they
will not say that. While bishops are appointed to do good and teach us
to do it, it does not follow that, if they fall into error, we should
imitate them. I am deeply afflicted by what you tell me, but do not
change my opinion for all that. My conscience alone has directed me;
now she alone remains with me, but I cannot, neither must I, cease to
listen to her. I blame nobody――nobody! O my friend! what anguish has
been reserved for me. My God! thou hast permitted it. Rochester has
fallen!” said More in a low voice. “Lord, if the cedars break, what,
then, will become of the reeds?”

Sir Thomas was unable to comprehend how Fisher could have been induced
to yield or become so weak, and he was reduced to a state of mortal
affliction.

“What!” said Cromwell, “can you not make up your mind?”

“Nay, sir, nay; I cannot make up my mind to this. There remains
nothing more for me to do in this world, and I pray the Lord to remove
me from it!”

“The accused refuses everything,” replied Cromwell in a loud voice, as
he turned away from him.

“What obstinacy!” exclaimed the lords in one voice. “Sir Thomas,
swear!――we conjure you in the name of all you hold most dear.”

“Alas!” said Sir Thomas to himself, “this is why he has not appeared.
Alas! each day when I have suffered so much seeing him stand so long
by my side, pale with fatigue and weakness, I was nevertheless happy.
To-day――can it be? No, he has not been able to endure their tortures
longer. God forgive them and save this country! Your pardon, my
lords,” he said, remembering that they had addressed him. “What were
your words to me?”

“He does not even listen,” they remarked. “We conjure you to swear; we
implore you to do so with all our power.”

“I cannot,” replied Sir Thomas firmly, “and I positively refuse.”

On hearing him pronounce these words, which left them no alternative,
there was a sudden commotion among the lords; they regarded each other
with anxiety.

“A man of such merit, of such virtue,” thought Fitz-James, filled with
remorse――“what business have I here?”

“Truly, Sir Thomas,” cried Secretary Cromwell, feigning compassion, “I
am sorely grieved to hear you speak thus, and I declare here, before
all this respectable assembly, that I would like better to lose an
only son than to see you refuse the oath in this manner. For very
certainly the king will be deeply wounded by it; he will conceive the
most violent suspicions, and will not be able to believe that you have
had no part in that affair of the Maid of Kent.”

“I am very much moved by your affection,” replied Sir Thomas; “but
whatever penalties I may have to undergo, it is impossible for me to
redeem them at the price of my soul.”

“You hear him, my lords,” said the chancellor, looking at his
colleagues. “Sir Thomas, deaf to all our prayers, forgetting the
favors with which the king has overwhelmed him for twenty years,
tramples under foot the authority of Parliament, the laws of the
kingdom, and persists traitorously, maliciously, and in your presence,
in refusing to take an oath which every subject of this kingdom cannot
and ought not to refuse. Consequently, I order the act of accusation
to be read to the court, after which it will render judgment and
pronounce its sentence.”

The clerk then began reading, in a nasal voice and monotonous tone, an
accusation so long, the grievances of which were so multiplied,
divided, extended, and diluted by a crowd of words and phrases,
inductions, prejudices, and all kinds of suspicions, that it would
require too much time to report them; but it was easy to see that it
had been fabricated in bad faith and with the absence of all
reasonable proofs.

This reading continued for two hours, and, when it was finished, the
lord chancellor began: “What have you to reply to all this?” said
Audley. “You see, Sir Thomas, and you should acknowledge, that you
have gravely offended his majesty; nevertheless, the king is so
merciful, and is so much attached to you, that he would pardon your
obstinacy, if you changed your opinion, and we would be sure of
obtaining your pardon, and even the return of his favor.”

He looked at Sir Thomas to see if he was relenting; for, except
Cromwell, who desired More’s death, all the others, while too
ambitious, too base, or too cowardly to dare sustain him, would have
preferred seeing him yield to their entreaties.

“It would rejoice us greatly!” said Sir John Fitz-James.

“Most surely,” cried the Duke of Norfolk.

“Ay, verily,” slowly repeated Cromwell.

“He will listen to nothing!” said the Abbot of Westminster.

“Noble lords, I am under infinite obligations to your lordships for
the lively interest you have manifested in my case; but, by the help
of God, I wish to continue to live and die in his grace. As to the
accusation I have just heard, it is so long, the hatred which has
dictated it so violent, that I am seized with fear in realizing how
little strength and understanding the sufferings of my body have left
in my mind.”

“He should be permitted to sit down,” said Sir John Fitz-James in a
low voice, the tears gathering in his eyes.

“Nobody objects,” said the Duke of Norfolk. “I demand it, on the
contrary,” he added, elevating his voice.

“This will never end, then,” murmured Cromwell.

“Let a chair be brought to the accused,” said Audley, who dared not
resist the Duke of Norfolk.

Sir Thomas seated himself for a moment, because he was able to stand
no longer; then, summoning all his strength, he again arose to his
feet, and spoke: “My accusation can be reduced, it seems to me, to
four principal heads, and I will try and take them in order. The first
crime with which I am accused is of being in my heart an opponent of
the king’s second marriage. I confess that I have said to his majesty
what my conscience dictated, and in that I can see no treason. But, on
the contrary, if, being required by my prince to give him my opinion
on a matter of such great importance, and which so deeply concerns the
peace of the kingdom, I had basely flattered him, then indeed I should
have been a treacherous and perfidious subject to God and to the king.
I have not, then, offended, nor wished to offend, my king in replying,
with the integrity of my heart, to the question he has asked me;
moreover, admitting that I have been at fault in this, I have been
punished for it already by the afflictions I have endured, the loss of
my office, and the imprisonment I have undergone. The second charge
brought against me, and the most explicit, is of having violated the
act of the last Parliament, in this: that being a prisoner and
examined by the council, I have not been willing, through a spirit of
malice, of perfidy, of treachery, and obstinacy, to say whether or not
the king was supreme head of the church, and that I have not been
willing to confess whether that act was just or unjust, for the reason
which I gave――that, having no other rank in the church than that of a
simple layman, I had no authority to decide those things. Now, I will
avow to your lordships that this was my reply: ‘I had neither done nor
said anything which could be alleged and produced against me on the
subject of this statute’; and I added that I no longer desired to
occupy myself with anything here below, in order to be entirely
absorbed in meditating on the Passion of my Saviour Jesus Christ in
this miserable world, where I have such a short time to remain; that I
wished ill to no one――on the contrary, every kind of prosperity; and
also, if that was not sufficient to preserve my life, I did not desire
to live; I had violated no law, and that I was not willing to
surrender myself as guilty of any crime of high treason――for there are
no laws in the world by which a man can be punished for his silence;
they can do no more than punish him for his words and actions, and it
is God alone who judges the heart.”

As Sir Thomas said these words, the advocate-general, Christopher
Hales, suddenly interrupted him: “You say you have not uttered a word
nor committed an act against this law; but you admit that you have
kept silence, which is a conclusive sign of the malice of your heart,
no good subject being able to refuse without crime to reply to this
question when it is set before him as the law ordains.”

“My silence,” replied More, “is not a sign of the malice of my heart,
since I have answered the king when he has consulted me on divers
occasions; and I do not believe a man can be convicted of having
attacked a law by keeping silence, since this maxim, ‘_Qui tacet
consentire videtur_,’ is adopted and recognized as true by all the
most learned and enlightened men of the law. With regard to what you
say about a good subject having no right to refuse a direct reply to
this question, I believe, on the contrary, that such is his duty,
unless, indeed, he wish to be a bad Christian. Now, it is better to
obey God than man, and it is better not to offend one’s conscience
than everything else in the world, above all when this conscience
cannot be the occasion of revolt against, or injury to, the king and
the country. I protest to you, on this subject I have not revealed my
opinion to any man living.”

“You know very well, on the contrary,” said the Duke of Norfolk
sharply, “that your example will be followed, and a great many will
refuse the oath on seeing you reject it.”

“Pardon me, my lord,” replied Sir Thomas; “but I have the right to
think thus, since a moment ago my lord the chancellor reproached me
with being the only one of my opinion in the kingdom. I can say, then,
that my silence is neither injurious to the prince nor dangerous to
the state.”

“How can you assert,” cried Christopher Hales, “that your refusal will
not be the cause of any sedition or of any injury toward the king? Do
you not know, then, that all his enemies have their eyes fixed on you,
in order to confirm themselves by your audacity, and take advantage of
the malice of which you have given proof? What, then, would you call
an injury, if not a refusal thus contemptuous and unlawful with
respect to the submission you owe to the will of your king, the living
image of God upon earth?”

“The king has no enemies, sir,” replied Sir Thomas; “he has only some
faithful subjects who wish to sigh in silence over the perfidious
counsel which has been given him. I will dare almost to say,” he
cried, laying his hand on his breast, “some tender and respectful
friends, who would have given all for his glory, sacrificed all for
his salvation, but who, for that same cause, cannot approve the error
into which he has been made to fall.”

“Alas! he is lost,” thought Sir John; and he turned away his head.

“Well,” said Cromwell to himself, “the case becomes clear; they cannot
draw back.”

While a low murmur of surprise and admiration arose among the jury,
their foreman leaned toward Mr. Rich, and whispered to him excitedly.

“Truly! It is so, sir!” said the latter, looking fixedly at him. “It
seems to me, Sir Thomas Palmer, that your remarks have much weight.
Have you been called here to interpret the wishes of the king, or have
you, by chance, a mind to make a short sojourn in the Tower or some
part of its environs?” And he made his fingers crack. “With your
short-sighted justice,” he replied, “do you believe that there are not
some great reasons, which they do not wish you to know, which have led
Sir Thomas to the bar of this tribunal? And if I should say to you――”
He paused. “The dogs!” he murmured, looking at the faces of the
jurors. “And if I should say to you,” he continued, “that this is an
extortioner, and that he has devoured the revenues of the
state――sucked――sucked the hearts’ blood of the poor people!”

“It cannot be possible!” said Palmer, awaiting each word of Rich,
which seemed to fall drop by drop from his lips. “What! like the
other?”

“Exactly, precisely like the other! Wonderful!” said Rich to himself.
“They themselves furnish me with the words, the fools! I hope, indeed,
that I may be exalted a grade from this; for this herd of jurors make
me sweat blood and water. They called them so well chosen! So it
appears; one goes to the right, the other to the left, a third to the
middle. To the death――that is too hard; no, confiscation, or rather
imprisonment. They wish to enter into the spirit of the law, as if
they regarded the law! Condemn him, sirs――that is all they ask of
you――and then go to your beds! Every one to his trade; theirs is not
to inquire what we do, but what we wish them to do!” And Rich, much
excited, shaking his great sleeves, leaned forward in order to listen.

“I come, then, to the third article of my accusation,” said Sir
Thomas, “by which I am accused of malicious attempts, efforts, and
perfidious practices against the statute, because, since being
confined in the Tower, I have sent several packages of letters to
Bishop Fisher, and in those letters I have exhorted him to violate
this same law, and encouraged him in the resistance he has made to it.
I have already demanded that those letters should be instantly
produced and read to the court; they could thus have acquitted me or
convicted me of falsehood. But as you say the bishop has burned them,
I am only able to prove what I advance here by my own words; therefore
I will state what they contained. The greater portion of those letters
related to my private affairs, especially to our old friendship; in
one of them alone I responded to the demand he had made to know how I
would reply in my interrogatory upon the oath of supremacy, and I
wrote to him thus: that I had examined this question in conscience,
and he must be content with knowing that it was decided in my mind.
God is my witness, as I hope to save my soul, that I have made no
other reply, and I cannot presume that this could be considered an
attack upon the laws.”

“Oh! no, by no means,” said several of the jurors. “Nevertheless, it
would be necessary to see these documents.”

“That is the custom,” said a voice loudly enough.

“The jury examines the documents,” said another; “that is always
done.”

“My lord judge! my lord advocate! it is necessary, it is
customary――indispensable――”

Audley looked angrily at Rich. “Gentlemen, the jurors are perfectly
right,” he cried in a shrill voice; “but these letters have been
destroyed. They will proceed to examine other documents; then the
witnesses of these facts will be heard.”

“Silence! silence!” cried the court usher.

“Gentlemen, do not interrupt the court,” said Cromwell gravely; “we
should listen religiously to the least word of the prisoner’s
defence.”

And thus he stifled by his awful voice the truth which had been
excited in those troubled hearts.

Fatigued and weary, More kept silence; he was thinking, moreover, of
his letters to the Bishop of Rochester. “If I had spoken more strongly
to my friend,” he sorrowfully reflected, “perhaps he would not have
succumbed. My God and my only Saviour! behold the afflictions that
overwhelm my soul; for I fear I have only listened to the cowardly
prudence of the children of men. And yet what could I do?”

More reproached himself with not having done enough, with having been
mistaken. He groaned in spirit and humbled himself to the dust before
God; whereas this tribunal by which he was being judged, in the face
of which he found himself placed, before which he was traduced, was
composed of men whom avarice, fear, and ambition caused to walk
rapidly and firmly, without remorse and without shame, in the road,
strewn with thorns, of vice, falsehood, and slavery.

“Speak on,” said Cromwell, provoked by his silence; “they will not
dare to interrupt you again.”

Sir Thomas raised his eyes to his face, and regarded him fixedly. So
much suffering, so many conflicting emotions, were weighing on his
mind, that he no longer knew how to resume his discoveries or where he
had left the thread of his ideas.

“You had replied to the third article,” said Cromwell, promptly
assisting him, for fear of giving the assembly time for reflection.
“Now, what else have you to say, and what have you to oppose to the
testimony of Master Rich, who has heard you say in the Tower that the
statute was a two-edged sword which killed necessarily either the soul
or the body?”

“What I have to reply to that,” said Sir Thomas, “is that Master Rich
called on me continually while they were removing the books I had in
my prison. Fatigued by his importunate demands, I replied to him
conditionally (which makes the case very different) that, if it was
true, it was equally dangerous to avow or disavow this act; and that
if it was similar to a two-edged sword, it was very hard to make it
fall on me, who had never contradicted the statute either by my words
or my actions. As to their accusing me of having drawn the Bishop of
Rochester into my conspiracy, and induced him to make a reply similar
to my own――alas! no, I have not done so. I have nothing more to add.”
And he took his seat without a word more.

“You have nothing more to say?” repeated the chancellor.

“No, my lord.”

“That is well,” said Audley.

“He is here no longer,” said More; and he looked around him. “Where
have they dragged him? To the king, perhaps. We should have received
our sentence together. O Fisher! O my friend! No, it cannot be,” said
More; “they are surely deceiving me! Does not falsehood flow naturally
from their lips? Oh! how I would joy to see him, for one moment only.
However, if he has not taken the oath, he will be here.” And he sank
again into his silent sadness.

“We will proceed to examine the witnesses,” said the chancellor.

Master Rich, relieving himself immediately of his great robe, slowly
descended from the platform and the chair from which he had surveyed
the jury, and took his seat in the midst of the hall, in front of the
tribunal.

He raised his hand and took the oath without hesitation. He then
related how, having entered the prison cell of Thomas More with Palmer
and Sir Richard Southwell, he had heard Sir Thomas express himself
strongly against the statute and declare that no Parliament in the
world would be able to submit to the question of the supremacy.

“You hear, Sir Thomas!” cried all the lords. “There is nothing to
reply to this.”

Sir Thomas arose immediately, and an expression of deep emotion showed
itself on his weary features. “My lords,” he replied, “if I was a man
who had no regard for my oath, I would not be here before you as a
criminal. And you, Master Rich,” he continued, turning toward him, “if
what you have declared be true, and the oath you have taken be not
perjury, then may I never look upon the face of God!――and this I would
not assert for all the world contains, if what you have testified was
the truth. Listen to me, my lords; judge between us, and learn what I
have said to Master Rich. When he came to carry away my books from the
dreary prison where I was confined, he approached me, took my hands,
overwhelmed me with compliments, and, protesting to me that he had no
commission touching the supremacy, during the course of a long
conversation he recalled all the circumstances of our childhood, and
proposed to me this question: ‘If Parliament recognized me as king,
would you recognize me? and would it be treason not to do it?’ I
answered that I would recognize him, but it was a _casus levis_. And
in my turn I said to him: ‘If an act of Parliament should declare that
God is not God, do you think it would be treason not to submit to that
act?’

“Then Master Rich said that this question was too remote, and they
could not discuss it. Whereupon he left me, and went away with those
whom he had brought with him.

“In good faith, Master Rich,” pursued Sir Thomas, “I am more concerned
on account of your perjury than because of the danger into which you
have so heartlessly thrown me, and I must tell you that neither I nor
any one else has ever regarded you as a man to whom they could confide
a thing of so much importance as this. You know that I am acquainted
with your life and conversation from your youth up to the present
time. We were of the same parish; and you know right well, although I
am very sorry to say and speak of it, that you always bore the
reputation of having a very flippant and very lying tongue, that you
were a great gambler, and you had not a good name in your parish and
in the Temple, where you have been reared.

“Your lordships,” continued Sir Thomas, “can you believe that, in an
affair of so great moment, I would have had so little discretion as to
confide in Master Rich, entertaining the opinion I do of his want of
truth and honesty; that I would have disclosed to him the secret of my
conscience touching the supremacy of the king――a subject upon which I
have been so strongly pressed, and which I have always refused to
reveal to any of his grave and noble counsellors, who, your lordships
know well, have been so often sent to the Tower to interrogate me? I
submit it to your judgment, my lords: does this appear to you credible
or possible?

“Moreover,” he immediately continued, “supposing Master Rich speaks
the truth, it should still be remarked that this might have been said
in a secret and private conversation upon some supposed questions and
without any offending circumstances. Therefore they cannot, at least,
say there was any malice on this occasion; and that being so, my
lords, I cannot believe so many reverend bishops, honorable
personages, so great a number of wise and virtuous men of which the
Parliament is composed, would wish to punish a man with death when he
has had no malice in his heart――taking, most certainly, this word
malice in the sense of ill-will and open rebellion. Finally, I would
again recall to your lordships’ attention the inexpressible kindness
his majesty has manifested toward me during more than twenty years
since he called me into his service, constantly appointing me to some
new charge, some new office, and finally to the position of lord
chancellor――an honor he had never bestowed on any lawyer before, this
dignity being the greatest in the kingdom, and coming immediately
after that of the crown; lastly, in relieving me of this charge, and
permitting me to retire, and allowing me, at my own request, the
liberty of passing the remainder of my days in the service of God, in
order that I might occupy myself no more with aught but the salvation
of my soul. And therefore I say that all the benefits his majesty has
for so long a time and so abundantly showered upon me, in elevating me
far beyond my merits, are enough, in my opinion, to break down the
scandalous accusation so injuriously formulated by this man against
me.” Having said these words, Sir Thomas was silent.

The tribunal looked at him. This earnest and truthful attack on the
reputation of Master Rich was hard to weaken, although the latter,
after having resumed his seat, had already cried out sneeringly three
or four times: “Palmer and Southwell will testify if I have told the
truth, yes or no.”

“Yes or no,” repeated Cromwell to himself――“the world is summed up in
those two words; only it is necessary to manage them well. Go, clerk,”
he said, “call Master Southwell.”

And the clamorous voice of the clerk resounded through the vast
enclosure where he kept the witnesses.

“Master Palmer! Master Richard Palmer!” he repeated; and Master Palmer
presented himself.

“You swear,” said Audley to the witness, “that the testimony you are
about to render before this court, and before the jury interposed
between your sovereign lord the king and the prisoner here present at
the bar, will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the
truth, so help you God!”

As the chancellor said these words, they brought the book of the Holy
Evangelists, and opened it, in order that Palmer might lay his hand on
it to swear.

“But, my lord,” said Palmer, anxiously looking around him, “I know
nothing, nothing at all, about what you are going to ask me.”

“Well, you need only tell what you know,” said Audley brusquely.

“Very well, then,” said Palmer in a low voice; and laying his hand on
the book, he was sworn in the usual manner.

“What did you hear while removing the books belonging to Sir Thomas?”

“Nothing, my lord. I threw the books as fast as possible into a sack.
They made some noise in falling one upon the other, and I heard
nothing else.”

“That is not possible!” said Audley. “The chamber is very small; you
would have been very near Sir Thomas and Master Rich, who were
conversing together, and you must have heard their conversation.”

“I have heard that Sir Thomas stooped down to pick up a book I let
fall from my hands, and that it seemed to give him pain when they took
his books away from him; so that when I saw the dismal little cell,
the pallet they had given him for a bed, the broken earthen pitcher
which was in one corner, with an old candle standing in the neck of a
bottle, and that they had forbidden him for the future to light that
candle――for fear, they said, that he might set fire to the prison――the
tears came into my eyes, and I felt my heart ache with sorrow as I
thought I had seen him lord chancellor such a little while ago. That
is all, my lord.”

“But,” said Cromwell, provoked by this recital, “Sir Thomas spoke; you
have declared that already.”

“Oh! he spoke, without doubt. I do not deny that he could speak;
certainly he spoke. For instance, when he saw the sack of books
carried away he said: ‘_Now that the tools are removed, there is
nothing more to do but close the shop._’ But we saw, in spite of this
pleasantry, that it distressed him very much,” added Palmer after a
moment’s silence.

“How prolix is this witness!” said the Abbot of Westminster in a
contemptuous tone.

“Come, that’s enough,” said Cromwell. “You know nothing more?”

“No, my lord, nothing more――nothing at all.” And he hastened to
withdraw.

As he retired, Richard Southwell appeared.

Audley immediately began to interrogate him.

“Your name?”

“Richard Southwell.”

“Your age?”

“Twenty-four years.”

“Your profession?”

“The king’s clerk.”

“You swear,” said the chancellor to the witness, “that the testimony
you are about to render before the court, and before the jury
interposed between our sovereign lord the king and the prisoner at the
bar, will be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so
help you God.”

“I have no testimony to offer,” said Richard.

“What!” exclaimed Audley. “Here is Master Rich, who cites you as
having been present at a conversation he had in the Tower prison with
Sir Thomas More.”

“Master Rich says just what it suits him to say. The truth is, I went
with Master Palmer to remove the books of Sir Thomas because I was
obliged to do it. I found Master Rich there, whereat I was surprised.
Everybody knows what Rich is, and what confidence should be placed in
anything he asserts. I will swear, then, to nothing, nor take any oath
on a matter of business in which he is mixed up, being well assured in
advance that it can only be something bad.”

Rich’s face became purple.

“My lord chancellor,” cried the new solicitor-general, “the witness
insults the court.”

“Master Rich, yes; but the court, no,” growled Audley. He answered
nothing, and had not the appearance of heeding what Richard Southwell
was saying, if even he was not pleased with it; for the vile and
corrupt men with whom Henry VIII. each day surrounded himself, in
order to serve his frenzies, abhorred him and sought only his
destruction, or to elevate themselves one above another by crushing
each other. “You refuse to swear, then?” said he to the witness,
without deigning to listen to the recriminations of Rich.

“Yes, my lord,” replied Southwell.

“The witness will pay a fine.”

“Very well, my lord! I know that I owe it.”

And Southwell retired. Then a profound silence reigned throughout the
assembly, because the decisive moment approached.

Meanwhile, the lord chief-justice, the timid Fitz-James, arose at a
sign given him by Audley, and in a trembling voice propounded the
following questions to the jury:

“Has Sir Thomas More rendered himself guilty of the crime of high
treason towards our lord the king in refusing, through a spirit of
malice, treachery, and obstinacy, the oath which he demands of him as
supreme head of the church on earth? Is Sir Thomas More guilty of
resisting the statute of Parliament which has conferred this dignity
on our lord and master, King Henry VIII.?”

The court officers struck a blow with their maces.

The judges all arose, and the court marched out majestically, while
the jury retired into another room.

“Now we shall see if Rich is sure of his jury,” said Cromwell to
himself, following them with his eyes; and not looking before him, he
trod on the train of the chancellor’s robe, who turned round,
impatiently saying that he had offended his dignity. Cromwell began to
laugh; for he cared little for the dignity of this chancellor of
recent date and mediocre worth――and he continued to look behind him.

“Well! this will soon be ended,” said Sir Thomas; and he asked the
yeomen who guarded him permission to approach one of the windows
looking out on the courtyard.

More humane than the tigers who had just gone out, these rude men
granted his request.

Sir Thomas looked out, but a broad, sculptured cornice extending
around the gallery prevented him from seeing if his daughter was still
below, and his eyes rested only on the magnificent view to be enjoyed
from the apartments of Lambeth Palace. The sun was reflected upon the
surface of the river, and he could see even the smallest boat that
glided on the water.

“Is she still there?” thought Sir Thomas, as he leaned his head
against the window. “Well, it is all over.” He stepped back, and gazed
out into the distance. “This whole city,” he said, “comes, goes,
stirs, agitates itself. What matters it to them that a man is
condemned in a corner? Had they need of my services, they would
run――‘Sir Thomas! there is Sir Thomas!’ They would follow; they would
call me. Now the crowd forgets us in two days! An immense abyss, an
entire chaos, almost a generation, separates the evening from the
morrow! My friends are afraid――those, at least, who remain to me. They
grieve in secret. The tears will be wiped from their eyes in
obscurity; but my daughter, who will dry hers? She will pass away like
myself, alone in this world; she will have need to pass quickly, and
without looking around her.”

He wiped his forehead; for it was damp and hot.

“It is impossible for them not to condemn me!” And he leaned against
the window-sill, scarcely able to stand on his feet; he experienced a
sort of faintness for which he could not account, and which obliged
him to change his posture every moment. “Nothing! There is no word
from them. My God! they are a long time. And for what purpose, when
all was decided in advance? O Rochester! where art thou? It is this
that lowers my courage. Well! they do not return. What can this jury
be doing? It seems to me that it is already two hours since they went
out.” He looked around him, and saw that the two guards had commenced
a game of cards.

“How much a game?” said the bigger of the two.

“A penny.”

“A penny!” cried the other. “Of what are you dreaming, Scotchman? The
profit of a week! A half-penny now, and more on trust if――You
understand me?” And he made a gesture as if drinking.

“Always drinking, always drinking!” replied his adversary.

They were dealing the cards, when the maces of the court officers
resounded on the floor, announcing that the deliberations were ended
and the court was returning.

“What!” cried the two gamesters, “they have finished already? How they
have hurried over this business! Ordinarily they take an hour, at
least.”

They hastened to gather up their cards and conceal them under their
jackets.

At a signal given by the officers Sir Thomas came hurriedly out from
the deep embrasure of the window where he was leaning. He then
observed a man and a young girl, who, alone in the midst of this vast
enclosure, were gazing in every direction, astonished at the solitude
in which they found themselves, and seeking him whom their hearts
loved.

“Margaret!” cried Sir Thomas――“Margaret here at this fatal moment! No
grief must, then, be spared me!”

At the voice of More his daughter rushed toward him. She covered his
face with kisses and tears. Pierre Gilles was at her side.

“Pierre Gilles here!” cried More.

Meanwhile, the heavy doors rolled on their hinges, and the judges
approached.

“O More! O my friend! is the trial ended, that I see you alone and at
liberty here?”

“Yes! it is over,” said More; “but not as you think,” he added,
lowering his voice. “My friend, in the name of our tender friendship,
take Margaret away! I will see you again in a moment. I pray you, one
minute, one minute only, go, take her out, if you love me, if you have
loved me! Ah! Pierre Gilles, thou here? I confide her to thee!” And
Sir Thomas cast on him a glance so imploring, and an expression so
deep, that the heart of one father was immediately comprehended by the
other.

Pierre Gilles made a rapid movement to lead the young girl out. He was
too late; the court had entered, and the judges had taken their
places. The chancellor remained standing in the midst of them, and,
turning to the foreman of the jury, who advanced, he put the terrible
question:

“Is the accused guilty?”

“Yes,” said the foreman, “upon all the counts.” And his voice failed
in adding the last words.

“Upon all the counts!” repeated Pierre Gilles.

“What did he say?” cried Margaret, transfixed with expectation and
terror. “My father guilty? No, never! Pierre Gilles, what did he say?
Guilty? Oh! no, no. My father!”

The young girl pronounced this word so tenderly, with a cry so
piercing, an accent of despair so heartrending, that Sir Thomas
trembled from head to foot, and it seemed his soul was shaken to its
very depths.

“In mercy take her away!” he said in a faint voice.

“Guilty!” repeated Margaret――“guilty! They have dared say it. Guilty!
Then all is finished! He is lost, condemned! O cowardice! O horror!
Guilty!”

And a change so horrible came over her features that Margaret was
unrecognizable.

“Sir Thomas More guilty before God and before man!” she pursued with a
smile of frightful bitterness, while her eyes remained dry. “Pierre
Gilles, you have heard it; have I not told you? O ignoble creatures!
Behold them, these bloody judges――this Cromwell, with his livid face,
and envy corroding his heart; this Audley, vender of consciences; this
Cranmer, renegade archbishop! No, you do not know them! There they are
before your eyes, and they invoke the name of Almighty God! One day,
yes, one day, we also will see them before the tribunal of the
Sovereign Judge――before that tribunal without appeal and without
mercy――to receive the reward of perjury and of murder. May Heaven hear
my cry; may my tears mount to the skies, and fall back upon them to
add new strength to the remorse which they have so long sought to tear
from their hearts!”

“What woman is this,” said Cromwell, “who dares to disturb the court?”

“Nay, Master Cromwell,” replied More in a stifled voice, “pardon her!
She is a child. Alas! you know her well.”

“Bear her away,” said Audley instantly.

“Officer, lead that woman out!” exclaimed Cromwell in a voice of
thunder.

“My daughter, my cherished daughter, follow Pierre Gilles! My friend,
take her out!” cried Sir Thomas.

“I will not go!” exclaimed Margaret, bracing her feeble feet against
the long stone slabs.

“Will you suffer a varlet to lay his hands on you, Margaret?” said
Pierre Gilles, whose tears streamed down his cheeks and stifled his
voice.

“Yes, anything! If I leave him, they will let me see him no more.”

“Sheriff, do you hear?” cried Cromwell.

“O Master Cromwell!” exclaimed Margaret, falling on her knees and
raising her suppliant hands toward him. “But, no,” she said,
immediately rising again, “I will not descend so low! Implore him? You
may annihilate but never demean me!” And casting a withering glance
upon Cromwell, she seized the arm of Pierre Gilles, and, dragging him
away, left the place without even looking toward her father.

This scene created some disturbance in the horrible assembly, and a
moment of silence and hesitation followed, when Cromwell made a sign
to the lord chancellor not to let it be prolonged.

Audley then began to pronounce the formula of the sentence, but Sir
Thomas interrupted him.

“My lord chancellor,” he said, “when I had the honor of being at the
head of justice, the custom was to demand of the prisoner, before
pronouncing sentence, if he had anything to say that might arrest the
judgment about to be rendered against him. I ask, then, to say a few
words.”

“And what can you have to say?” asked Audley brusquely.

“Much, my lord,” answered Sir Thomas; “for, now that I have been
condemned, and it can no more seem like presuming on my own strength
in exposing myself to death, I can discharge my conscience, and speak
freely and without restriction. I therefore declare, in the presence
of your lordships here present, that I regard the statute of
Parliament as entirely illegal and contrary to all laws, divine and
human, and my accusation, consequently, as being completely null.
Parliament has no right, and cannot in any manner have the power, to
give the church a temporal head. In conferring the spiritual
government of one portion of Christendom on another than the Bishop of
Rome, whose universal supremacy has been established in the person of
St. Peter, chief of the apostles, by the mouth of our Lord Jesus
Christ himself when he was present and visible on earth, Parliament
has exceeded the limits of its authority. There are not, therefore,
and there cannot be, among Catholic Christians, laws sufficient to
oblige a Christian to obey a power which might have been usurped in
order to prove this assertion. I will say, moreover, that the
Parliament of this kingdom can no more bind all Christendom by such an
act than one small portion of the church can make a law in opposition
to the general law of the church universal; or than the city of
London, which is only a member in comparison with the body of the
state, can make a law against an act of Parliament which would bind
the whole kingdom. I will add, furthermore, that this law is contrary
to all the statutes and to all the laws in force until this day, and
any yet reported, especially to these words written in the great
charter: ‘The English Church is free, her rights shall remain
untouched, and none of her liberties shall be cut off’; finally, that
it is contrary to the oath taken by the king at his consecration, in
presence of all the assembled people. And I say that there is far more
ingratitude in the English Parliament refusing to acknowledge the
authority and spiritual supremacy of the pope than there would be in a
child refusing to obey its father; because it is to Pope St. Gregory
that we are indebted for the knowledge of the Holy Gospel; it is he
who regenerated us――a heritage richer and more desirable than that
which any father according to the flesh can bequeath to his children.
Yes, noble lords, I confess before you that, since this question has
been raised among us, I have spent days and nights in examining it,
and I have been unable to find in the centuries passed, or in the
works of any doctors, a single example, or even a sentiment, which may
authorize a temporal king to usurp the spiritual government of the
church. And consider: this divine authority, necessary to the unity
and the purity of the Christian faith, would then be committed, in the
course of time, in following the order of succession established in
this kingdom, to the feeble hands of a woman or the blind keeping of
an infant in its cradle! Truly, my lords, it is a thing which shocks
not only the unchangeable rule followed up to our day, but even the
most ordinary judgment and common sense.”

“Then,” said Audley, interrupting him with a smile of mockery and
disdain, “you esteem yourself wiser than, and believe you possess a
knowledge and degree of enlightenment far above that of, the bishops,
the reverend doctors, the nobility, and the people of the kingdom
generally!”

“I doubt, my lord,” replied Sir Thomas firmly, “of there having been
this unanimity between them in which your lordship appears to believe;
but, supposing it existed, if we are to judge by the number, it must
be very much less even than that of the Christians who are spread
throughout the whole world, and of those who, having gone before them
in life, are now among the glorious saints in heaven.”

“Sir Thomas,” cried the Duke of Norfolk, reddening, “you show clearly
how far your malice and obstinacy extend.”

“Noble duke,” replied More, “you are mistaken: it is neither malice
nor obstinacy which makes me speak thus, but rather the desire and the
necessity of clearing my conscience; and I call upon God, who sees and
hears us, to witness that this is the only sentiment inspiring my
heart!”

Cromwell, in the meantime, grew very impatient at this debate, and
made signals in vain to Audley that he should impose silence on Sir
Thomas; but the former hesitated, stammered, and delayed pronouncing
his sentence, resolving in his mind not to take upon himself the
responsibility of the proceeding. All at once he turned toward the
lord chief-justice, Fitz-James.

“Why,” said he, “Sir John, do you not assist me with your opinion?
Could it be true that our sentence were unlawful? Speak! Are you not
the lord chief-justice?”

At this question a frightful apprehension arose in the soul of the
weak judge; he was conscious of the adroit snare into which he had
been drawn. They questioned him directly; they placed in the hollow of
his hand the weights which were to turn the balance and decide the
fate of Sir Thomas, his benefactor and friend. He paled visibly and
answered nothing.

“Well!” said Cromwell, “the chancellor interrogates you, my lord, and
it seems you hesitate in your reply!”

If he had had courage, he might, perhaps, have saved More; it failed
him. “I think,” he answered in an evasive way, less odious perhaps,
but none the less criminal, “that if the statute of Parliament was
illegal, the process of law would be equally so.”

“Assuredly,” said Cromwell with a bitter smile, “this is very
judicious. If there was no law, there could be no criminal; and if
there was no day, there would be no night――there are some things which
reason themselves so naturally that we cannot but concede them.” As he
said these words, he passed to the chancellor the sentence of
condemnation.

Audley read it in a very loud tone, which he lowered, however, when he
came to the details of the execution, which set forth that Sir Thomas,
after having been carried back to the Tower by Lieutenant Kingston,
should be dragged through the streets of the city on a hurdle; led
afterward to Tyburn, where, after having been hanged by the neck, he
should be taken down, when half dead, from the gallows, to be
disembowelled and his entrails cast into the fire; after which his
body should be cut into four pieces, to be placed above the gates of
the city, the head excepted, because the head must be exposed on
London Bridge in an iron cage.

While the sentence was being read the face of Sir Thomas More remained
impassible. At the end only a slight start seemed to denote some
feeling. He lowered his head, and it was seen, by an almost
imperceptible movement of his lips, that he prayed.

A profound silence reigned around him, and it seemed that no human
voice or respiration dared be raised in the presence of such cool
atrocity.

After a moment a slight sigh was heard.

“A death of infamy may not be,” murmured the Duke of Norfolk; “he has
been lord chancellor!”

He leaned over toward Cromwell. “You have deceived me,” he said.
“Decapitation is the only punishment which can be inflicted on him. He
has been lord chancellor! Have you thought of that?”

“But,” replied Cromwell, “the law is positive; such is the penalty
that follows the refusal of the oath.”

“The king will dispense with the gibbet,” said Norfolk angrily, “or I
am not chief of his council!”

“We will see,” said Cromwell. “That will matter nothing, provided he
dies,” he added to himself.

Lord Fitz-James had heard Norfolk’s remark, and, unable to restrain
his tears, addressed him. “My lord,” he said in an oppressed voice,
“the king might be willing to grant his pardon. Ask Sir Thomas if he
have not yet something to say. Perhaps, alas! perhaps he may be
induced to make some act of submission.”

Norfolk made a sign of approval. “Sir Thomas,” he said, “you have
heard what are the rigors of the law, and the penalty that your
inconceivable obstinacy calls down upon your head. Speak, then; have
you nothing to reply that may give us the means of mitigating it?”

Sir Thomas raised his head, and looked at him for a moment with an
expression of calmness, of gentleness, benevolence, and dignity which
it is impossible for any human pen to describe. “Noble duke,” he
answered, “no, I have nothing more to say; I have only to submit to
the sentence you have passed on me. There was a time when you honored
me with the name of friend; I dare believe that I still remain worthy
of it. I regard the words you have addressed to me as a souvenir of
that good-will, old and proven, which you have felt for me. I would
thank you for it at this last moment; for I hope that we may meet
again in a better world, where all these dissensions shall have passed
away. And even as the holy Apostle Paul, who was one of those who
stoned St. Stephen, is now united with him in heaven, where they love
with an eternal love, so I hope also that your lordships, who have
been my judges here on earth, and all those who have participated in
any way in my death, may be eternally reunited and happy in possession
of the salvation which our divine Saviour Jesus Christ has merited for
us on the cross. To this end I will pray from my heart for your
lordships, and above all for my lord the king, that God may accord him
faithful counsellors, and that the truth may no longer remain hidden
from him.”

And saying these words with much sweetness and fulness of heart, Sir
Thomas was silent.

As soon as he had ceased speaking the guards, by Cromwell’s order,
pressed around him. An axe was raised, the edge of which was turned
toward the condemned by a man who walked before him. And so he was led
back on foot, through the streets, to the Tower, there to wait until
the hour of execution should be appointed by the king, after he had
affixed his signature to the death-warrant.


TO BE CONCLUDED NEXT MONTH.




TESTIMONY OF THE CATACOMBS TO PRAYERS FOR THE DEAD AND THE INVOCATION
OF SAINTS.[110]

Mr. Withrow claims to have produced the only English book on the
Catacombs in which the latest results of exploration are fully given
and interpreted from a Protestant point of view. We must decline to
acknowledge the justice of his claim. His book is very far indeed from
giving the latest results of exploration, and he certainly is not the
first who has attempted to interpret them from a Protestant point of
view. He is, however, as far as we know, the last; and as he has
pretty faithfully repeated all the misstatements and mistakes of his
various predecessors in the same subject, only adding a few more of
his own, it will be worth while to set before our readers a short
refutation of some of them. Indeed, this work of refutation is the
more necessary because “the testimony of the Catacombs relative to
primitive Christianity” is daily increasing in value, as our knowledge
of the Catacombs is becoming more exact and scientific. Some years
ago, and to some intelligences even now, a painting or an inscription
from the Catacombs was “a monument of ancient Christianity,” and one
such monument was as good evidence as another of primitive Christian
doctrine. It has been reserved to the labors of De Rossi to introduce
light and order into this chaos; and those who profess to publish the
fruits of his discoveries ought not to withhold this most important
portion of them; at least, they ought scrupulously to follow the lines
of chronology which he has established, or else themselves to
establish others on surer foundations. Mr. Withrow’s neglect of these
distinctions――indeed, of all chronological order whatever――is quite
unpardonable. Whilst in the title of his work he promises to examine
“the testimony of the Catacombs relative to primitive Christianity,”
we sometimes find that the greater portion of the evidence he adduces
on some of the most important questions of Christian doctrine is not
even taken from the Catacombs at all. Let us look, by way of example,
at a single doctrine――the elementary doctrine of the Resurrection――and
see how he deals with it. “This glorious doctrine,” he says, “which is
peculiarly the characteristic of our holy religion as distinguished
from all the faiths of antiquity, was everywhere recorded throughout
the Catacombs. It was symbolized in the ever-recurring representations
of the story of Jonas and of the raising of Lazarus, and was strongly
asserted in numerous inscriptions” (p. 431). But of the inscriptions
which he proceeds to quote, one is spurious (_Alexander mortuus non
est_, etc.); others belong to the years 449, 544, etc., long after the
practice of burial in the Catacombs had ceased. And we shall presently
have occasion to notice other sins, scarcely less flagrant, against
every canon of chronology belonging to the subject which he professes
to handle. But first let us say a few words as to what those canons
are, and how they have been established.

It is only in our own day that the study of inscriptions generally,
and especially of Christian inscriptions, has received that
development which entitles it to a place among real sciences. It has
now acquired a light and a solidity which constitute it one of the
most trustworthy founts of ancient history. To confine ourselves,
however, strictly within the limits of our present argument, we will
speak only of the method which has been followed by De Rossi during
the thirty years he has devoted so assiduously to this subject, and
whereby he has been enabled to discover the laws which regulated the
gradual development of Christian epigraphy. If we must summarize his
method in a single word, we should say that his secret consists in a
minute study of the topography of all inscriptions. In every fresh
excavation――_i.e._, in every reopening of the galleries and chambers
of the Catacombs, and clearing away the _débris_ with which they have
been so long encumbered――he has carefully marked and registered every
stone, and even every fragment of every stone, bearing so much as a
single letter or symbol engraved upon it, and taken note of the
precise spot where it has been found. When a sufficient space has been
cleared to enable him to make a study of its contents, he collects all
the stones that have been discovered within this _area_; carefully
eliminates all those which have evidently fallen through the
_luminaria_, or in other ways have been introduced from the upper
world; next, makes a separate class of those whose place of origin is
doubtful――those which there is some reason, either from their size,
their shape, or for some other cause, to suspect may have come from
outside; and then there remain, finally, those only which beyond all
question belong to the subterranean cemeteries. Many of these he has,
perhaps, discovered _in situ_, still closing the graves to which they
were originally attached――and these, of course, are cardinal points in
his system of arrangement; of many others he knows the chamber or
gallery whence they came; and of all he minutely examines the
language, the symbols, monograms or other ornaments, the form of the
letters, the names, and, finally, the style and epigraphic _formulæ_;
and the minute study of the inscriptions of innumerable _areæ_ of
various cemeteries according to this strict topographical system has
led to wonderfully interesting and important discoveries, both as to
their history and chronology. This process of examination, it need
hardly be said, is laborious and wearisome in the extreme; even the
material difficulties which surround it are not slight. It sometimes
happens that within the limits of a single _area_――_e.g._, in that of
St. Eusebio’s monument in the cemetery of San Callisto――there are
upwards of a thousand fragments of epitaphs to be sifted and
classified. De Rossi, therefore, occasionally gives utterance to a
pathetic lament as to the dry and tedious character of the task he has
imposed upon himself. Nevertheless, he has persevered in it with the
most conscientious fidelity, even when at times the attempt at
arrangement seemed almost desperate, and the results have in the end
abundantly rewarded his labors. It is with these results that we are
at present concerned; and it is obvious that in these pages we can
only reproduce them: we cannot enter into an examination of the
evidence upon which they rest. This is the less necessary, however,
since even the most bitter of Protestant controversialists admit that
“De Rossi has the rare merit of stating his facts exactly and
impartially, precisely as he finds them,” and that “his assiduous
researches have been conducted with a sincere zeal for truth.”

Let us proceed, then, to state some of the conclusions to which De
Rossi’s researches have led him――first, upon the general subject of
the chronology of the inscriptions which have come to us from the
Catacombs, and next as to the dogmatic allusions contained in them.
And first, as to the inscriptions, it is patent that not one in ten
bears its date on the face of it. Are the other nine (speaking
generally) older or more recent? De Rossi pronounces quite positively
in favor of their greater antiquity. He says that the _most_ ancient
Christian epitaphs make no mention either of the day or year of
decease; that during the time of the first emperors there are very few
exceptions to this rule; that in the third century the mention of the
day and month of the decease was not uncommon, though the year was
still passed over in silence; finally, that in the fourth century this
also was added.[111] But he says that there are other tokens, such as
the number and character of the names or of the symbols employed, the
style of diction, the form of the letters, etc., which, if carefully
examined and compared with one another, enable us not unfrequently to
make a very probable statement as to the age of undated inscriptions
(_probabili non raro sententiâ definies_); if, in addition to this, we
know the place where the inscription was found, and have had the
opportunity of examining other inscriptions found in the same
neighborhood, then it will rarely happen that there is any doubt at
all about the age to which it belongs. It is not, of course, meant
that it is possible to fix the year, or even the decade or score of
years, perhaps, to which it belongs; but De Rossi would certainly fix
its chronology within the limits of half a century or less (_tum de
ætate latè saltem sumptâ vix unquam grave dubium supererit_); he
certainly would never be in doubt with reference to any particular
inscription, still less with reference to a whole class of
inscriptions, whether it belongs to the ages of persecution or to the
end of the fourth century.

Now, Mr. Withrow is either aware of these canons whereby the
chronology of the inscriptions from the Catacombs is fixed, or he is
not. If he is not, he is quite incompetent to follow by their means
(as he professes to do, p. 415) “the development of Christian thought
from century to century, and to trace the successive changes of
doctrine and discipline.” If he is aware of them, his reasoning is
most disingenuous when he first seeks to settle a disputed question by
the testimony of the dated inscriptions of the first three centuries
(p. 426)――which are not more than thirty in number altogether――and
then proceeds to argue that “if those inscriptions which apparently
favor Romish dogmas, of which we know the date, are all of a late
period, we may assume that those of a similar character which are
undated are of the same relative age, and therefore valueless as
evidence of the antiquity of such dogmas” (p. 446). There is no
necessity, and indeed no room, for “assumption” at all. The question
can be decided by scientific rules whether such and such inscriptions
belong to the third century or the fifth, and he ought honestly to
have told his readers as much, and to have stated what that decision
is. As he has failed to do so, we must supply the omission.

First, however, let the limits of our task be clearly defined. We are
not undertaking to establish any point of Christian doctrine by the
unaided evidence of inscriptions or paintings from the cemeteries,
though we are far from saying that there are none which might be so
established. But at present we are only concerned to refute Mr.
Withrow’s Protestant interpretation of these monuments, and to show
that they at least favor, if they do not demand, a Catholic
interpretation. We know that not even the writings of the Fathers
present a complete picture of the whole doctrinal system of the age to
which they belong, but must be studied by the light reflected upon
them from the more developed and systematic expositions of those who
came after them. Still less do we think it reasonable to look in a
collection of epitaphs for a clear statement of the articles of faith
professed by those who wrote them; the utmost that can be expected
is that they should contain what De Rossi calls “dogmatic
allusions”――more or less distinct, if you will, but always, or at
least generally, merely indirect and casual. And as to drawing any
trustworthy conclusions with reference to the antiquity of this or
that Christian doctrine from the supposed absence of all allusion to
it in the dated tombstones of the first three centuries, the mere
enunciation of such a theory is enough to demonstrate its absurdity.

Yet we are sorry to say that Mr. Withrow has been guilty of even worse
absurdity than this, if it ought not rather to be called dishonesty.
It is certainly worse than mere literary or dialectic trifling――it
looks like a wilful throwing of dust in the reader’s eyes――to assert
in the text (p. 517) that the order of acolytes, “discontinued in the
Protestant communion,” was “probably the offspring of the increasing
pomp and dignity of the bishops to whom they acted as personal
attendants, especially in public processions and religious festivals,”
and that “the only dated epitaphs of acolytes are of a comparatively
late period,” whilst forced to acknowledge in a note that “Cornelius,
Bishop of Rome in the third century” (A.D. 250)――_i.e._, at a time
when “the pomp and dignity of bishops” consisted in their being the
special objects of imperial persecution, and the only “public
processions” in which they can have taken part were those in which
they were led forth to public execution――that Cornelius, Bishop of
Rome in the middle of the third century, “says there were in that
church forty-two acolytes.” What does Mr. Withrow mean by placing
these two statements together in the way we have described? Does he
really wish to insinuate that the absence of an ancient dated epitaph
of a deceased acolyte ought to counterbalance the testimony of the
bishop to the existence of forty-two living ones? or does he think
that the Protestant public, for whose tastes he so unscrupulously
caters, will read his text and overlook his notes? or, finally, that,
reading the notes, they will nevertheless give greater weight to the
uncharitable suggestion of a Protestant clergyman in the nineteenth
century than to the testimony of an eye-witness, who was also pope, in
the third? Had the order of acolytes been retained instead of being
rejected by the Protestant communion, doubtless Mr. Withrow would have
recognized the conclusiveness of the evidence of Pope Cornelius; he
would have seen that the forty-two acolytes who were alive in A.D. 250
must sooner or later have died, and been buried in Christian
cemeteries, and consequently that the non-discovery there of any dated
epitaphs recording their decease is “valueless as evidence” against
the antiquity of their order.

But we will not detain our readers any longer by pointing out the
curiosities with which Mr. Withrow’s volume abounds, but proceed at
once to redeem our promise of setting before them the real state of
“the testimony of the Catacombs relative to primitive Christianity” on
one or two of the more prominent doctrines of the Catholic faith. We
have said that it is unreasonable to look for a profession of faith in
an epitaph. But there is one point on which we should be disposed to
make an exception to this remark. We think it is quite natural to
expect from a large collection of sepulchral inscriptions considerable
information as to the belief of those to whom they belonged with
reference to the present condition or future prospects of the dead,
and their relations with the survivors; and in this expectation the
inscriptions from the Catacombs do not disappoint us. Let us call them
into court, and hear what evidence they can give.

Mr. Withrow shall open the pleadings, and it must be allowed that he
does so with a very loud blast of his trumpet, and one which “gives no
uncertain sound” (p. 418). “There is not a single inscription,” he
says, “nor painting, nor sculpture, before the middle of the fourth
century, that lends the least countenance to the erroneous dogmas of
the Church of Rome. All previous to this date are remarkable for their
evangelical character, and it is only after that period that the
distinctive peculiarities of Romanism begin to appear.” Presently he
quotes what he calls “the first dated inscription possessing any
doctrinal character.” It belongs to the year 217, and states of the
deceased that he was “received to God” (_receptus ad Deum_) on such a
day; whereupon our author exclaims: “We have here the earliest
indication of doctrinal belief as to the condition of the departed. It
is not, however, a dark and gloomy apprehension of purgatorial fires,
but, on the contrary, the joyous confidence of immediate reception
into the presence of God.” Twenty pages later, however, he is obliged
to acknowledge that “there occur in the Catacombs frequent examples of
acclamations addressed to the departed, expressive of a desire for
their happiness and peace; and these acclamations have been quoted by
Romanist writers as indicating a belief in the doctrine of purgatory
and in the efficacy of prayers on behalf of the dead”; and he proceeds
to give a score of examples, such as these: _Vivas in Deo, in Deo
Christo_――Mayest thou live in God, in God Christ; _Vivas inter
sanctos_――Mayest thou live among the saints; _Deus tibi refrigeret,
spiritum tuum refrigeret_――God refresh thee, or refresh thy spirit;
_Pax tibi_――Peace be to thee, etc. But, he says, “it will be perceived
that these are not intercessions _for_ the dead, but mere apostrophes
addressed _to_ them; they were no more prayers for the souls of the
departed than is Byron’s verse, ‘Bright be the place of thy rest.’”
Mr. Withrow continues, and is presently obliged to make a still
further concession――viz., that “the wish _does_ sometimes take the
form of a prayer for the beloved one,” and he gives half a dozen
examples, one of which he curiously misunderstands, and another we do
not recognize as belonging to the Catacombs. However, five at least
are genuine, and we could have furnished him with a score or two of
others, all containing distinct prayers “to God,” “to the Lord,” “to
the Lord Jesus,” “to remember the deceased,” “to remember him for
ever,” “to refresh his spirit,” “not to suffer his spirit to be
brought into darkness,” etc. How is such evidence as this to be
withstood? Mr. Withrow shows himself quite equal to the occasion:
“They are intense expressions of affection of the ardent Italian
nature, that would fain follow the loved object beyond the barrier of
a tomb” (p. 443). “They are the only witnesses that keen Roman
Catholics can adduce from the Christian inscriptions of the first six
centuries,” but “no accumulation of such evidence affords the
slightest warrant for the corrupt practice of the Church of Rome.”

We need hardly say that Mr. Withrow is not the first who has thus
“interpreted” these epitaphs “from a Protestant point of view.” Mr.
Burgon had long since given the same explanation, and even quoted the
same poetical illustration from Byron. But we must confine ourselves
to Mr. Withrow, and follow him through his graduated scale of
confessions. They may be cast in this form: the earliest inscription
bearing on the subject of prayers for the dead discountenances them;
there are frequent examples of acclamations or good wishes for the
departed, but these are not prayers; moreover, they are, comparatively
speaking, few in number――Bishop Kip puts them as “half a dozen among
thousands of an opposite character”――and, being undated, we may
“assume” that they are of a late age; finally, there are a few
prayers, but these are only the untutored outburst of the ardent
Italian nature. Let us set side by side with these the statements of
De Rossi on the same subjects. And, first, as to the antiquity of
these _formulæ_. He says: “There are two distinct classes of epitaphs
to be found in the Catacombs; the one, brief and simple, written
apparently without a thought of handing down anything to the memory of
posterity, but designed by the survivors mainly as a means of
identifying, amid so many thousands of graves of the same outward
form, those in which they were specially interested.[112] These are
the more ancient, and most of them contain nothing beyond the name of
the deceased and some of those short acclamations or prayers of which
we have just given examples. Inscriptions of the second class record
the age of the deceased, the day of his death, or more specially of
his burial, and, in fact, omit nothing which is wont to be found on
sepulchral monuments. They are also often defaced by bombastic
exaggerations of praise and flattery; and _the pious acclamations or
prayers we have spoken of are rarely or never found_.” It appears,
then, according to the evidence of De Rossi――which on this question is
surely of supreme authority――that the presence on a tombstone of
acclamations or prayers for the dead, so far from being evidence of
the corruption of a later age, is an actual test or token of primitive
antiquity. Some indication of this may be gathered, by a careful
observer, even from an inspection of the volume of dated inscriptions
already published. “May you live among the saints” is engraved on a
tombstone of the year 249, and “Refresh thyself, or Be thou refreshed,
with the holy souls,” on another of 291; that is to say, there are two
distinct examples out of the 32 dated inscriptions prior to the
conversion of Constantine. Among the 1,340 dated inscriptions
subsequent to that event you will scarcely find another.

And next, as to the relative numbers of the epitaphs which speak
positively (in the indicative mood) of the present happiness of the
deceased, and of those which speak only optatively and breathe the
language of prayer. We cannot, indeed, give any exact statement of
figures until De Rossi’s great work on the inscriptions shall have
been completed and the whole number brought together in print. But
wherever we have had an opportunity of instituting a comparison, we
have always found the optative or deprecatory form in the ascendant.
It is so in the epitaphs collected in the Lapidarian Gallery of the
Christian Museum at the Lateran in Rome; it is so in the inscriptions
of each separate _area_ of the great cemetery of San Callisto, so
minutely registered by De Rossi in his _Roma Sotterranea_; and he
himself writes as follows: “Some of these acclamations are
affirmative, and these may be considered as salutations to the
deceased, full of faith and Christian hope, substituted for the cold,
hopeless dreariness of the pagan _vale_;[113] but _for the most part_
they are optative, and ask for the deceased life in God, peace, and
refreshment. We should inquire whether these have not often a real
deprecative value, and were not uttered or written with the intention
of praying to God for the peace and refreshment of the departed
souls.” A full and satisfactory answer to this question, he says,
cannot be given till all the inscriptions of this class have been
brought together, so that they may mutually explain and illustrate one
another. Nevertheless, he refers to what he had said in another
place[114] on the same subject; and there we read: “These auguries or
good wishes are not mere apostrophes, giving vent to the feelings of
natural affection (_sfoghi d’affetto_); some of them express
confidence that the soul received into the heavenly peace of God and
his saints is already in the enjoyment of a life of bliss, and these
speak positively――_vives_; others, again, are equivalent to real
prayers to obtain that peace, and are expressed in another
mood――_vivas_.”

Mr. Withrow, however, and his co-religionists, may plead that, though
constrained to yield to De Rossi’s statement of facts, they are not
bound by his interpretation of them. Waiving, therefore, all dispute
as to the number and antiquity of the inscriptions which seem to favor
the practice of prayers for the dead, they may still persist that they
should be taken, not as the voice of the church, but the errors of
individuals; or, as Mr. Withrow himself expresses it, “they are not a
formulated and authoritative creed formed by learned theologians, but
the untutored utterances of humble peasantry, many of whom were recent
converts from paganism or Judaism, in which religions such expressions
were a customary sepulchral formula.” If Mr. Withrow merely means to
say that Christian epigraphy was the spontaneous growth of the natural
feelings and supernatural faith of the people, rather than the result
of any written or traditional law devised and imposed by
ecclesiastical authority, we are heartily at one with him. We do not
doubt that it was the natural fruit of the religious feeling which
pervaded all classes of the new society, that was reflected in their
epigraphy as in a mirror. But Mr. Withrow clearly meant something
different from this; he intended to insinuate that these inscriptions
which are distasteful to himself would have been disapproved of also
by all well-instructed members of the church, especially by her
pastors and doctors. Yet Tertullian, at least, could hardly have
disapproved, who takes for granted in one of his treatises, and uses
it as the foundation of an argument, that every Christian widow will
be continually praying for the soul of her departed husband, and
asking for him refreshment (_refrigerium_), and offering sacrifice for
him on the anniversary of his decease. Neither could such prayers have
been deemed either objectionable or useless by St. Cyprian and his
predecessors in the see of Carthage, who decreed the loss of them as a
fitting punishment for any man who should presume to leave the care of
his children or of his property after his decease to a cleric, because
“he does not deserve to be named in the prayer of the priest at the
altar of God who has done what he could to withdraw a priest from the
service of the altar.”[115] However, it is not worth while, easy as
the task would be, to justify the inscriptions in question by a catena
of venerable authorities from among the bishops and teachers of the
primitive church; we will only mention one fact about them which seems
to us conclusive――viz., that they are in exact accordance, not to say
in verbal and literal agreement, with the most authoritative
formularies that have come down to us from ancient days; we mean the
ancient liturgies. The language of the public offices of the
church――if not an apostolic tradition, which Mr. Withrow would not
easily admit――was surely formulated by somebody and formulated
according to the dogmas of the faith, and not in a spirit of weak
indulgence to any poetical fancies or excess of passionate feeling,
whether of affection or of grief. We turn, then, to the oldest
sacramentaries,[116] and the prayers we find there run as follows: “We
pray that thou wilt grant to all who rest in Christ a place of
refreshment, light, and peace”; “Grant to our dear ones who sleep in
Christ refreshment in the land of the living”; “Refresh, O Lord! the
spirits of the deceased in peace”; “Cause them to be united with thy
saints and chosen ones”――the very words and phrases which we have read
on the ancient tombstones, and which we still hear from the lips of
all devout Catholics when they pray, either in public or in private,
for those who are gone before them.

Not without reason, then, does De Rossi describe these prayers for the
dead, which are of such frequent recurrence in the Catacombs, as a
faithful echo of the prayers of the liturgy. Of such an inscription as
this, _In pace Spiritus Silvani, amen_, he says very truly that one
seems to hear in it the last words of the solemn burial rite, just as
the tomb is being closed and the sorrowing survivors bid farewell to
the grave.[117]

But Mr. Withrow would have us look for the original of these prayers,
not to the Christian liturgy, but to the monuments of “paganism and
Judaism, in which religions such expressions were a customary
sepulchral formula.” No doubt there was in many pagan epitaphs an
address, or acclamation, or apostrophe――call it what you will――to the
deceased. But it was either a brief and sad farewell――an “everlasting
farewell,” as they mournfully felt it to be――or it was an idle wish
“that his bones might rest well,” or (far more commonly) “that the
earth might lie lightly upon him”; or there was a still more unmeaning
and unnatural interchange of salutations between the living and the
dead. The passer-by was exhorted to salute the deceased with the
customary _Ave_ or _Salve_, and the imaginary response of the dead man
stood engraven on the stone, ready for all comers. Surely it is
impossible that anybody (εἰ μὴ ζέσιν διαφυλάττων, as old Aristotle has
it) can be so blind as to confound this empty trifling of the pagan
with the hearty yet simple and touching prayers of the Christian.
Between the Christian epitaphs and those of the ancient Jews we might
naturally have expected a somewhat closer degree of affinity; and so
there is. Yet even here the closest point of resemblance that we are
able to find is this: that the Jews ordinarily spoke of death as
sleep, and very commonly wrote on the grave-stones, “His sleep is in
peace.” We do not remember ever to have seen one of ancient date in
which peace is _prayed for_, neither does Mr. Withrow produce one,
though it has suited his purpose to give a deprecatory form to his
translation of _Dormitio in bonis_. The Christian epitaphs, then, have
this in common with Jewish epitaphs: that they speak of the dead as
sleeping in peace; it still remains as peculiar to themselves that
they supplicate for the deceased life――life in God, life everlasting,
life with the saints――light, and refreshment.

But we must pass on to another point of doctrine connected with the
dead, on which inscriptions in the Catacombs might reasonably be
expected to throw some light, and on which the testimony they give is
sometimes disputed. Mr. Withrow shall again be permitted to make his
own statement of the case: “Associated with the Romish practice of
praying _for_ the dead is that of praying _to_ them. For this there is
still less authority in the testimony of the Catacombs than for the
former. There are, indeed, indications that this custom was not
unknown, but they are very rare and exceptional. In all the dated
inscriptions of the first six centuries there is only one invocation
of the departed.” It is of the year 380, and by an orphan. “But the
yearning cry of an orphaned heart for the prayers of a departed mother
is a slight foundation for the Romish practice of the invocation of
the saints. Previous to this date we have found not the slightest
indication of Romish doctrine.… The few undated inscriptions of a
similar character are probably of as late, or it may be of a much
later, date than this.”

We have already had occasion to expose the fallacy of this favorite
argument of Mr. Withrow’s founded on the paucity and relative
antiquity of dated inscriptions. We have pointed out its direct
contradiction to all the canons of chronology so laboriously and
conscientiously established by De Rossi. Here, however, we must be
allowed again to quote his testimony, given precisely upon this
particular subject: “Invocations of the deceased,” he says, “asking
them to pray for the survivors, are found only in the subterranean
cemeteries, not in those made above ground; always in epitaphs without
dates, never in those bearing dates of the fourth and fifth centuries.
They belong to the period before peace was given to the church, and
the new style inspired by the changed conditions of the times sent
them quickly into disuse.” The simple and natural character of earlier
Christian epigraphy gave place to colder and more artificial
announcements. But whilst the more ancient and more religious style
prevailed the following are fair specimens of the epitaphs that were
written: _Vivas in pace et pete pro nobis. Christus spiritum tuum in
pace et pete pro nobis. Bene refrigera et roga pro nos. Spiritus tuus
bene requiescat in Deo petas pro sorore tuâ. Vincentia in Christo
petas pro Phœbe et pro Virginio ejus. Vivas in Deo et roga. Spiritus
tuus in bono, ora pro parentibus tuis. In orationis tuis roges pro
nobis quia scimus te in Christo_――“Mayest thou live in peace, and pray
for us. May Christ refresh thy spirit in peace, and pray for us.
Mayest thou be well refreshed, and pray for us. May thy spirit rest
well in God; pray for thy sister. Vincentia in Christ, pray for Phœbe
and for her husband. Mayest thou live in God, and pray. Thy spirit is
in good; pray for thy parents. In thy prayers make petition for us,
because we know thee to be in Christ.”

In all these instances――and many more might easily be given, in Greek
as well as in Latin, some edited, others still inedited――it is clear
that the survivors had a firm hope that their departed friends had
been called by the ministry of angels to the enjoyment of the promised
bliss and heavenly peace, and this faith was the foundation of these
fervid petitions for their prayers. But, objects our author, “these
invocations are almost invariably uttered by some relative of the
deceased, as if prompted by natural affection rather than by religious
feeling.” No doubt the invocations that have been quoted are the
utterances of loving and sorrowing relatives; for to them it usually
belongs to bury their dead and to write the epitaphs on their
tombstones. But does it therefore follow that they were extravagant,
unwarranted, and out of harmony with the teaching of the church?
First, their very number and antiquity is _primâ facie_ evidence
against so unjust a suspicion; and, next, they in no way go beyond the
eloquent invocations of the martyrs, whether in the _graffiti_ on the
walls near their tombs or in the more formal inscriptions of the
bishops themselves――_e.g._, of Pope Damasus at the tomb of St. Agnes;
but, lastly and above all, these again are in exact agreement with the
public liturgy of the church. In a fragment of a very ancient liturgy,
only published in our own day, and bearing internal evidence of having
been used during the days of persecution, the priest is instructed to
pray “for grace to worship God truly in times of peace, and not to
fall away from him in times of trial,” and then, after the accustomed
reading of the diptychs――_i.e._, reading the names of the martyrs, the
bishops, and the dead for whom the Holy Sacrifice was being
offered――he proceeds as follows: “May the glorious merits of the
saints excuse us or plead for us, that we may not come into
punishment; may the souls of the faithful departed who are already in
the enjoyment of bliss assist us, and may those which need consolation
be absolved by the prayers of the church.” The different gradation of
ranks and the different sense of the liturgical commemoration of the
saints, the faithful who are dead and those who are still living,
could hardly be defined with greater distinctness in “a formulated and
authoritative creed formed by learned theologians.” We need hardly add
that the same doctrine is to be found more or less explicitly in all
the old liturgies――_e.g._, in a prayer that “Christ will, through the
intercession of his holy martyrs, grant to our dear ones who sleep in
him refreshment in the abode of the living”; “that the prayers of the
blessed martyrs will so commend us to Christ that he will grant
eternal refreshment to our dear ones who sleep in him,” and several
other petitions to the same effect. But we are already exceeding the
limits of space assigned to us, and we must be content with a general
reference to the old sacramentaries; neither can we find room for the
passages which are at hand from St. Cyril, St. Chrysostom, and other
patristic authorities containing the same doctrine.

We must not, however, altogether omit another branch of evidence
belonging to the Catacombs themselves――namely, the frescoes and other
monuments in which the saints are represented as receiving and
welcoming the deceased into heaven, conversing with them, lifting up
the veil, and introducing them into the garden of Paradise, etc.
Everybody knows the inscription scratched in the mortar round a grave
in the cemetery of Pretextatus fifteen centuries ago, and now brought
to light again some twenty years since, in which the martyrs
Januarius, Agapetus, and Felicissimus are invoked to refresh the soul
of some departed one, just buried near their own tombs; and the
anxiety of the faithful of old to obtain a place of burial near the
graves of the martyrs is too notorious to need confirmation in this
place. This practice had, of course, a doctrinal foundation. St.
Gregory Nazianzen, Paulinus of Nola, or other Christian poets may use
the language of mere poetical fancy when they talk of the blood of the
martyrs penetrating the adjacent sepulchres; but the spiritual meaning
that underlies their words is plain――viz., that the merit of the
martyrs’ pains and sufferings, and the intercession of their prayers
thus sought by the living, were believed to profit the souls of the
deceased. In a recently-discovered fresco in the cemetery of SS.
Nereus and Achilleus, a deceased matron, Veneranda, is manifestly
commended to the patronage of St. Petronilla, who is represented
standing at her side; and there are not wanting inscriptions in which
the survivors distinctly commend the souls of their children or others
whom they have buried to the care of that particular martyr in whose
cemetery they have been laid. We do not quote them at length, not only
from want of space, but also because this class of monuments belongs,
generally speaking, to the fourth century, when no one doubts that
invocation of the saints was in common use; and we have already quoted
a large class of inscriptions, more ancient and quite as conclusive to
all minds of ordinary candor. We mention them, however, because they
are links in the chain of evidence we have been inquiring
about――evidence given by the Catacombs――and yet more especially
because they remind us of the beautiful language of our ritual, which
none can forget who have ever heard it sung to the solemn chant of the
church: _In Paradisum deducant te angeli; in tuo adventu suscipiant te
martyres, et perducant te in civitatem sanctam Jerusalem_. We cannot
help suspecting that these prayers or acclamations are as old as the
monuments which they so faithfully interpret. The invocation of the
martyrs, and of them only amongst “the spirits of the just made
perfect” who have already “come to Mount Sion, and to the city of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to the company of many
thousands of angels,” seems to point to such a conclusion; it has a
flavor of quite primitive times about it, certainly of the age of
persecution. It may well have been contemporary with the following
inscription, at present in a private museum, but originally taken from
the Catacombs: “_Paulo filio merenti in pacem te suscipiant omnium
ispirita sanctorum_.”


     [110] _The Catacombs of Rome, and their Testimony relative
     to Primitive Christianity._ By the Rev. W. H. Withrow, M.A.
     New York: Nelson & Phillips. 1874.

     [111] _Inscr. Christ._, i. c. ix.

     [112] _Inscr. Christian._, i. c. x.

     [113] _R. S._, ii. 305.

     [114] Ib., i. 341.

     [115] Epist. i. aliter 66.

     [116] Bullett. 1875, pp. 17-32. Muratori, _Liturg. Rom._, i.
     749, 916, 981, 996, 1002; ii. 4, 694, 702, 779, 642, 653,
     646.

     [117] _R. S._, ii. 305.




  ON OUR LADY’S DEATH

  I.


  “And didst thou die, dear Mother of our Life?
     Sin had no part in thee: then how should death?
     Methinks, if aught the great tradition saith
   Could wake in loving hearts a moment’s strife”
   (I said――my own with Her new image rife),
     “’Twere this.” And yet ’tis certain, next to faith,
     Thou didst lie down to render up thy breath:
   Though after the Seventh Sword no meaner knife
   Could pierce that bosom. No, nor did. No sting
     Of pain was there, but only joy. The love,
       So long thy life ecstatic, and restrained
   From setting free thy soul, now gave it wing:
     Thy body, soon to reign with it above,
       Radiant and fragrant, as in trance, remained.

  II.

   Yes, Mother of God, though thou didst stoop to die,
     Death could not mar thy beauty. On thy face
     Nor time nor grief had wrinkle left or trace:
   It had but aged in God-like majesty:
   Mature, yet, save the mother in thine eye,
     As maiden-fresh as when, of all our race,
     Thou, first and last, wast greeted “full of grace”――
   Ere thrice five years had worshipped and gone by.
   Mortal thy body; yet it could not know
     Mortality’s decay. Like sinless Eve’s,
       It waited but the change on Thabor shown.
   And when, at thy sweet will, ’twas first laid low,
     Untainted as a lily’s folded leaves
       It slept――the angels watching by the stone.

  III.

  “At thy sweet will.” Then wherefore didst thou will
     To pass death’s portal? To the outward ear
     There comes no answer; but the heart can hear.
   Thy Son had passed it. Thou upon the hill
   Of scorn hadst stood beside his cross; and still
     Wouldst “follow the Lamb where’er he went.” Of fear
     Thou knewest naught. The cup’s last drop, so dear
   To Him, thy love must share――or miss its fill.
   But more. Thy other children――even we――
     Must enter life through death. And couldst thou brook
       To watch our terrors at the dark unknown,
   Powerless to stay us with a sympathy
     Better than any tender word or look――
       Bidding our steps tread firmly in thine own?




AMID IRISH SCENES.

The very thought of a journey to distant lands is invigorating. We
throw off the dust of old habits, quit the routine of daily life, shut
out the customary thoughts of business, and, with hearts that in some
mysterious way seem suddenly to have grown younger, turn towards other
worlds. Even the uncertainty which is incident to travel has a
peculiar charm. The love we bear our country and friends grows warmer
and assumes unwonted tenderness when we leave them, not knowing
whether it will be given us to look upon them again; and as the
distance widens, the bonds of affection are drawn closer. Amid strange
faces we reflect how sweet it is to dwell with those who love us; a
thousand thoughts of home and friends come back to us, the heart is
humanized, and we resolve to become more worthy of blessings for which
we have been so little grateful. Indeed, I think that the chiefest
pleasure of travel is in the thought and hope of communicating to
others our own impressions of all the lovely things we see.

Who would care to look on blue mountains, or ocean sunset, or green
isles, if he might never speak of their beauty, never utter the deep
feelings which they awaken? All strong emotion, whether of joy or
sorrow, seeks to express itself. Nature is beautiful only when we
associate it with God or man. No greater torment can be imagined than
to think and feel, and yet to live alone for ever with that which has
no thought or feeling. I remained in Ireland too short a time to be
able to form well-founded opinions or to reach just conclusions
concerning the present condition or the future prospects of the
country. I was compelled to travel hurriedly, and therefore observed
superficially; and in my haste I doubtless often failed to remark what
was most worthy of attention. At least, I approached the sacred island
with reverence. Whatever I might see, I knew that my feet were upon
holy ground, and that I was in the midst of the most Catholic people
on earth; I felt that if sympathy could give insight or reveal beauty,
I should not look in vain.

And now, with the liberty and quickness of thought, passing the vast
expanse of ocean, I shall place myself at Oban, on the western coast
of Scotland, opposite the island of Mull; for though we are not here
on Irish soil, yet this whole region is so full of Irish memories and
Irish glories that we may not pass it in silence. The scenery is
sombre, bleak, and wild. It is not lovely nor yet sublime, though
there is about it a kind of gloomy and desolate grandeur; and, indeed,
this is the general character of all scenery in the Scotch Highlands.
It is rugged, harsh, and waste. It does not invite to repose. Amid
these barren moors and fog-covered hills we are chilled, driven back
upon ourselves. We involuntarily move on, content with a passing
glance at dark glens and lochs from whose waters crags and peaks lift
their heads and frown in stern defiance. The gloomy tales of murder
and treachery, of war and strife, and the ruined castles which tell of
battles of other days, deepen the impressions made by nature’s harsh
aspect. Even in summer the air is heavy with mist and fog. A day
rarely passes without rain, and in the middle of August the traveller
finds himself in an atmosphere as damp, cold, and dreary as that of
London in November. Before us is the dark sea of the Hebrides, from
whose sullen waters a hundred naked and desert islands rise in rough
and jagged outlines. As we sail through the narrow straits of this
archipelago, we see nothing but barren rocks, covered with black fog.
There is no grass, there are no pleasant landscapes, no cultivated
fields. We hear only the moaning of the waves, the howling wind, and
the hoarse cry of the sea-bird. Nothing could be less beautiful or
less attractive; and yet it is in this wild sea and among these rocky
islands that we find the sacred spot from which Scotland and northern
England received religion and civilization. During the summer a boat
leaves Oban every morning to make the tour of the island of Mull,
taking Staffa and Iona in the route. The steamer stops at Staffa to
permit tourists to visit the Cave of Fingal, of which so much has been
written. This cave, which is about seventy feet high and forty feet in
width, with a depth of two hundred and thirty feet, opens into the
ocean on the southern coast of the little island of Staffa. Its front
and sides are formed of innumerable columns of basaltic rock,
precisely similar to those which are found in the Giant’s Causeway.
They are perfectly symmetrical, and one is almost tempted to think
they must have been shaped by the hand of man. But, apart from this
peculiarity, the only thing which struck me as very remarkable in this
celebrated cave is the mighty surge of the ocean, whose angry waves,
rushing into this gloomy vault, dash against its everlasting columns,
and, with wild and furious roar that reverberates along the high arch
in tones of thunder, are driven back, to be followed by others, and
still others. And so all day long and through the night, from year to
year, this concert of the waves far from human ears chants God’s awful
majesty and infinite power.

Nine miles south of Staffa lies Iona, St. Columba’s blessed isle. “We
were now,” wrote Dr. Johnson one hundred years ago, “treading that
illustrious island which was once the luminary of the Caledonian
regions, whence savage clans and roving barbarians derived the
benefits of knowledge and the blessings of religion. To abstract the
mind from all local emotion would be impossible if it were endeavored,
and would be foolish if it were possible. Whatever withdraws us from
the power of our senses, whatever makes the past, the distant, or the
future predominate over the present, advances us in the dignity of
thinking beings. Far from me and from my friends be such frigid
philosophy as may conduct us indifferent and unmoved over any ground
which has been dignified by wisdom, bravery, or virtue. That man is
little to be envied whose patriotism would not gain force upon the
plain of Marathon, or whose piety would not grow warmer among the
ruins of Iona.”

It was in 563, more than thirteen hundred years ago, that Columkille,
a voluntary exile from Erin, which he loved with more than woman’s
tenderness, landed upon this island. Twelve of his Irish monks had
accompanied him, resolved to share his exile. Others soon followed,
drawn by the fame of his sanctity, and in a little while Columkille
and his apostles issued forth from Iona to carry the religion of
Christ to the pagans who dwelt on the surrounding islands and on the
mainland of Scotland; and from this little island the light of faith
spread throughout the Caledonian regions. All the churches of Scotland
looked to it as the source whence they had received God’s choicest
gifts, and for two hundred years the abbots who succeeded St. Columba
held spiritual dominion over the whole country. The Scottish kings
chose Iona as their burial-place, in the hope of escaping the doom
foretold in the prophecy:

  “Seven years before that awful day
     When time shall be no more,
   A watery deluge will o’ersweep
     Hibernia’s mossy shore;
   The green-clad Isla, too, shall sink,
     While with the great and good
   Columba’s happy isle shall rear
     Her towers above the flood.”

In an age of ferocious manners and continual war this holy and
peaceful isle, far removed from scenes of strife and blood, might well
be regarded not only as the fit resting-place of the dead, but as the
happiest home of the living.

Even to-day, in its loneliness and desolation, there is a calm, sweet
look about it that makes one linger as loath to quit so sacred a spot.
But the simple, great ones of old are gone; their bones lie buried
beneath our feet.

                      “To each voyager
  Some ragged child holds up for sale a store
  Of wave-worn pebbles.…
  How sad a welcome!
  Where once came monk and nun with gentle stir,
  Blessings to give, news ask, or suit prefer.”

A few poor fishermen with their families dwell upon the island. They
are all Protestants. After the Reformation, the Calvinistic Synod of
Argyll handed over all the sacred edifices of Iona to a horde of
pillagers, who plundered and destroyed them. During the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries these ruins were given up to the ignorant
inhabitants of the island, who turned the cathedral into a stable,
used the church of the convent of canonesses as a quarry, and broke
and threw into the sea nearly all of the three hundred and sixty
crosses which formerly covered the island.

As late as 1594 the three great mausoleums of the kings were to be
seen, with the following inscriptions:

  Tumulus regum Scotiæ,
  Tumulus regum Hiberniæ,
  Tumulus regum Norwegiæ.

But these have also disappeared, and nothing remains but the site.
Here were buried forty-eight kings of Scotland, four kings of Ireland,
and eight kings of Norway; and it is even said that one of the kings
of France found here a last resting-place. Macbeth closes the line of
Scottish kings who were buried in Iona. His successor, Malcolm
Canmore, chose the Abbey of Dunfermline as the royal cemetery.
Shakspere does not fail to send Duncan’s body to Iona:

  “ROSSE. Where is Duncan’s body?

   MACDUFF. Carried to Colmekill,
   The sacred storehouse of his predecessors,
   And guardian of their bones.”

There are still many tombs in this cemetery, most of which are covered
with slabs of blue stone upon which figures are sculptured in relief.
Here a bishop or an abbot, in cope and mitre, holds the pastoral staff
of authority, and by his side lies some famous chieftain in full
armor. On one of these slabs the traveller may behold the effigy of
Angus MacDonald, Scott’s Lord of the Isles, and the contemporary of
Robert Bruce.

In the centre of the graveyard stands the ruin of a chapel which was
built at the close of the eleventh century by St. Margaret of
Scotland, and dedicated to St. Oran, the first Irish monk who died in
Iona after the landing of St. Columba. Near by is the ancient Irish
cross which is said to mark the spot where St. Columba rested on the
eve of his death, when he had walked forth to take a last view of his
well-beloved island. A little farther north lies the cathedral, ruined
and roofless, with its square tower, which is the first object to
attract the eye of the pilgrim as he approaches the sacred isle. Iona
is but three miles in length and about two miles wide. Unlike the
islands by which it is surrounded, it has a sandy beach, which slopes
to the water’s edge, and its highest point is but little over three
hundred feet above the level of the sea. The ruins all lie on the
eastern shore, and are but a few paces from one another. Some little
care is taken of them, now that the facilities of travel have turned
the attention of travellers to this former home of learning and
religion. The chapel of the nunnery is no longer used as a cow-house,
nor the cathedral as a stable, as in the time of Dr. Johnson’s visit.
Nevertheless, many interesting relics which he saw have since
disappeared. Still, enough remains to awaken emotion in the breasts of
those whom the thought of noble deeds and heroic lives can move. In
treading this sacred soil, and walking among the graves of kings and
princes of the church, surrounded by broken walls and crumbling arches
which once sheltered saints and heroes, we are lifted by the very
genius of the place into a higher world. The present vanishes. The
past comes back to us, and throws its light into the dim and awful
future. How mean and contemptible seem to us the rivalries and
ambitions of men! This handful of earth, girt round by the sea, holds
the glories of a thousand years. All their beauty is faded. They are
bare and naked as these broken walls, to which not even the sheltering
ivy clings. The voice of battle is hushed; the song of victory is
silent; the strong are fallen; the valiant are dead, and around
forgotten graves old ocean chants the funeral dirge. Monuments of
death mark all human triumphs. And yet St. Columba and his grand old
monks are not wholly dead. To them more than to the poet belongs the
_non omnis moriar_. Their spirit lives even in us, if we are
Christians and trust the larger hope. What heavenly privilege, like
them, to be free, and in the desert and ocean’s waste to find the
possibility of the diviner life; like them, to be strong, leaning upon
God only! The very rocks they looked upon seem to have gained a human
sense; in the air is the presence of unseen spirits, and the waves
approach gently as in reverence for the shore pressed by their feet.
To have stood, though but for a moment and almost as in a dream, amid
these sacred shrines, is good for the soul. It is as if we had gone to
the house of one who loved us, and found that he was dead. The world
seems less beautiful, but God is nearer and heaven more real.

We have lingered too long among the ruins of Iona. Our ship puffs her
sail, and we must go; but our faces are still turned towards the
blessed isle; the cathedral tower rises sadly over the bleak shore,
and in a little while the rough and rock-bound coast of the Ross of
Mull takes the vision from our eyes. And now I am in Ireland. Landing
at Belfast, I went south to Dublin; thence to Wicklow, where I took a
jaunting-car and drove through the Devil’s Glen, to Glendalough,
through Glenmalure and the Vale of Avoca, and back to Wicklow.

Returning to Dublin, I went southwest to the Lakes of Killarney,
passing through nearly the entire extent of the island from east and
west. Having made the tour of the lakes and visited Muckross Abbey and
Ross Castle, I went to Cork, where I took the train for Youghal, on
the Blackwater. I sailed up this beautiful river to Cappoquin, near
Lismore. From this point I visited the Trappist monastery of Mt.
Melleray. Again taking a jaunting-car, I drove over the Knockmeledown
Mountains into Tipperary, along the lovely banks of the river Suir,
into Clonmel, thence to Cashel, to Holy Cross Abbey and to Thurles.
Returning to Cork, I of course visited Blarney Castle, and then,
sailing down the noble sea-avenue that leads to Queenstown, went
aboard the steamer which was to bring me home again.

In Rome, it has been said, none are strangers. So much of what is
greatest and best in the history of the human race centres there that
all men instinctively identify themselves with her life and are at
home. In Ireland a Catholic, no matter whence he come, forgets that he
is in a foreign land; and in proportion to the love with which he
cherishes his faith is the sympathy that draws him to the people who
have clung to it through more suffering and sorrow than have fallen to
the lot of any other. More than other races they have loved the
church; more than others they have believed that, so long as faith and
hope and love are left to the heart, misery can never be supreme. The
force with which they realize the unseen world leaves them unbroken
amid the reverses and calamities of this life. They are to-day
what they were in ages past――the least worldly and the most
spiritual-minded people of Europe.

They live in the past and in the future; cling to memories and cherish
dreams. The ideal is to them more than the real. Their thoughts are on
religion, on liberty, honor, justice, rather than upon gold. They fear
sin more than poverty or sickness. When the mother hears of the death
of her son, in some distant land, her first thought is not of him, but
of his soul. Did he die as a Catholic should die, confessing his sins,
trusting in God, strengthened by the sacraments? When he left her
weeping, her great trouble was the fear lest, in the far-off world to
which he was going, he should forget the God of his fathers, the God
of Ireland’s hope; and when in her dreams she saw him back again, her
heart leaped for joy, not that he was rich or famous, but that the
simple faith of other days was with him still.

The life that is to be is more than that which is. The coldest heart
is warmed by this strong faith. In the midst of this simple and
pure-hearted people, so poor and so content, so wronged and so
patient, so despised and so noble, one realizes the divine power of
religion. Whithersoever our little systems of thought may lead us,
whatsoever mysteries of nature they may reveal, nothing that they can
give us could compensate for the loss of honest faith and child-like
trust in God. Whatever may be, this is the best. Better to die in a
hovel, yearning for God and trusting to him, than without hope “to
walk all day, like the sultan of old, in a garden of spice.” The first
and deepest impression made upon me in travelling through Ireland was
that it is a country consecrated by unutterable suffering. The shadow
of an almost divine sorrow is still upon the land. Each spot is sacred
to some sad memory. Ruined castles tell how her proudest families were
driven into exile or reduced to beggary; roofless cathedrals and
crumbling abbeys proclaim the long martyrdom of her bishops and
priests; tenantless cottages and deserted villages speak of the
multitudes turned upon the road to die, or, with weary step, to seek
shelter in a foreign land. We pass through desolate miles of waste
lands that might be reclaimed, through whole counties that have been
turned into sheep and cattle pastures, through towns once busy, now
dead; and John Mitchel’s cry of anguish, when last year, in triumphal
funeral march, he went to meet the electors of Tipperary, strikes upon
the ear: “My God, my God, where are my people?”

Go to the abandoned ports of Wexford, of Youghal, of Waterford, of
Galway, and you will be told of ships, freighted with human souls,
that sailed away and never returned. It seemed to me on those silent
shores that I could still hear the wail of countless mothers, wringing
their hands and weeping for the loss of children whom a cruel fate had
torn from them. Was ever history so sad as Ireland’s? Great calamities
have befallen other nations――they have been wasted by war and famine,
trodden in the dust by invading barbarians; but their evils have had
an end. In Ireland the sword has never wearied of blood. “The wild
deer and wolf to a covert may flee,” but her people have had no refuge
from famine and danger. Without home and country, they have stood for
centuries with the storm of fate beating upon their devoted heads, and
in their long night of woe some faint glimmer of hope has shone out,
only suddenly to disappear, leaving the darkness blacker. True were
the poet’s words of despair:

  “There are marks on the fate of each clime, there are turns in the
        fortunes of men,
   But the changes of realms or the chances of time shall never
        restore thee again.
   Thou art chained to the wheel of the foe by links which the world
        cannot sever;
   With thy tyrant through storm and through calm shalt thou go,
   And thy sentence is――‘Banished for ever.’

   Thou art doomed for the vilest to toil; thou art left for the proud
        to disdain;
   And the blood of thy sons and the wealth of thy soil shall be
        lavished, and lavished in vain.
   Thy riches with taunts shall be taken; thy valor with gibes is
        repaid;
   And of millions who see thee now sick and forsaken, not one shall
        stand forth in thy aid.
   In the nations thy place is left void; thou art lost in the list of
        the free.
   Even realms, by the plague or the earthquake destroyed, are revived;
        but no hope is for thee.”

I stood in Glendalough, by the lake

      “Whose gloomy shore
  Skylark never warbles o’er.”

The sun was just sinking to rest behind St. Kevin’s Hill, covered with
the purple heather-bloom. There was not a sound in the air, but all
the mountains and the valley held their breath, as if the spirits of
the monks of old were felt by them in this hour, in which, in the ages
gone, the song of prayer and praise rose up to God from the hearts of
believing men, and all the plain and the hillsides were vocal with
sweet psalmody. Here, a thousand years ago and more, a city grew up,
raised by the power of holiness. To St. Kevin flocked men who sought
the better way, and the Irish people, eternally drawn to religion and
to their priests, gathered round, and Glendalough was filled with the
multitude of believers. Those were the days which St. Columba sang
when in far-off Iona he remembered his own sweet land: “From the high
prow I look over the sea, and great tears are in my gray eye when I
turn to Erin――to Erin, where the songs of the birds are so sweet, and
where the monks sing like the birds; where the young are so gentle and
the old so wise; where the great men are so noble to look at, and the
women so fair to wed.”

From St. Kevin to St. Lawrence O’Toole, Glendalough was the home of
saints. When the Norman came, in the twelfth century, there was a
bishop there. The hills were dotted with the hermitages of anchorets,
and above the seven churches rose the round tower in imperishable
strength. To-day there is left only the dreariness and loneliness of
the desert. The hills that once were covered with rich forests of oak
are bare and bleak; the cathedral is in ruins; the churches are
crumbling walls and heaps of stones; the ground is strewn with
fragments of sculptured crosses and broken pillars; and amid this
wreck of a world are mingled in strange confusion the tombs of saints
and princes and the graves of peasants. Still stands the round tower
in lonely majesty, like a sentinel of heaven, to watch for ever over
the graves of God’s people. What a weight of awe falls upon us amid
these sacred monuments! We speak not, and scarcely breathe. An unknown
power draws us back into the dread bosom of the past. The freshness of
life dies out of us; we grow to the spot, and feel a kinship with
stones which re-echoed the footsteps of saints, which resounded with
the voice of prayer. It seems almost a sacrilege to live when the
great and the good lie dead at our feet.

But why stop we here? Is not Ireland covered with ruins as reverend
and as sad as these? Throughout the land they stand

              “As stands a lofty mind,
    Worn, but unstooping to the baser crowd,
  All tenantless, save to the crannying wind,
    Or holding dark communion with the cloud.”

What need of history’s blood-stained page to tell the sad story of
Ireland’s wrongs and Ireland’s woes? O’Connell never spoke as speak
these roofless cathedrals, these broken walls and crumbling arches,
these fallen columns and shattered crosses. The traveller who in
Jerusalem beholds the weary and worn children of Israel sitting in
helpless grief amid the scattered stones of Solomon’s Temple, need not
be told how the enemies of the Holy City compassed her about; how the
sword and famine and the devouring flame swallowed up the people; how
her walls were broken down, her holy of holies profaned, her priests
slaughtered, her streets made desolate, until not a stone was left
upon a stone.

The massacres of Wexford and Drogheda; the confiscation in a single
day of half the land of Ireland; the driving her people into the ports
of Munster to be shipped to regions of pestilence and death; the
expulsion of every Catholic from the rich fields of Ulster; the exile
of the whole nation beyond the Shannon; the violated treaty of
Limerick, are but episodes in this tragedy of centuries. Even the
Penal Code, the most hideous and inhuman ever enacted by Christian or
pagan people, tells but half the story.

That the Irish Catholic had for centuries been held in bondage by a
law which violated every good and generous sentiment of the human
heart, I knew. He could not vote, he could not bear witness, he could
not bring suit, he could not sit on a jury, he could not go to school,
he could not teach school, he could not practise law or medicine, he
could not travel five miles from his home; he could own nothing which
he might not be forced to give up or renounce his faith; he could not
keep or use any kind of weapon, even in self-defence; his children
were offered bribes to betray him; he could not hear Mass, he could
not receive the sacraments; in his death-agony the priest might not be
near to console him. All this I knew, and yet I had never realized the
condition to which such inhuman legislation must reduce a people. That
this Code, which Montesquieu said must have been contrived by devils,
and which Burke declared to be the fittest instrument ever invented by
man to degrade and destroy a nation, had failed to accomplish its
fiendish purpose, I also knew. The Irish people, deprived of
everything, and almost of the hope of ever having anything in this
world, remained superior to fate. With a fidelity to religious
conviction without example in the history of the world, they retained
the chastity, the unbroken courage, the cheerful temper and generous
love which had always distinguished them; and that in travelling among
them I should find it more and more impossible to doubt of this was
but what I had expected. But the generous, pure, and simple character
of the people only made the impression which I received of the
frightful wrongs and sufferings which have been and are still
inflicted upon them the more painful.

There is not in the civilized world another country where the evils of
tyranny and misrule are so manifest. One cannot help but feel that
Ireland does not belong to the Irish. It is not governed in their
interest; it is not made to contribute to their welfare or happiness.
They are not taken into account by its rulers; their existence is
considered accidental; a fact which cannot be ignored, but which it is
hoped time, with famine, poverty, and petty persecution such as the
age allows, will eliminate. The country belongs to a few men who have
no sympathy with the mass of the people, who do not even desire to
have any. They are for the most part the descendants of needy
adventurers who, under Elizabeth, Cromwell, and William of Orange,
obtained as a reward of their servility or brutality the confiscated
lands of Ireland; or if they belong to the ancient families, they
inherit their wealth from ancestors who owed it to a double apostasy
from God and their country. It was these men, and not England, who
enacted the Irish Penal Code. They are the traditional enemies of
Ireland, sucking out her lifeblood and trampling in contempt upon her
people. They have filled the land with mourning and death, with the
wail of the widow and the cry of the orphan; they have freighted the
ships which have borne the Irish exiles to every land under heaven;
they have within our own memory crowded her highways with homeless and
starving multitudes; have pushed out her people to make room for sheep
and cattle; in ten years have taken from her three millions of her
children. My heart grew sick of asking to whom the domains through
which I was passing belonged. It seemed to me that the people owned
nothing, that the _paucis vivitur humanum genus_ was truer here than
ever in ancient Rome. The very houses in which the Irish peasantry
live tell the sad tale that in their own country they are homeless.
Like the Israelites in Egypt, they must stand with loins girt and
staff in hand, ready to move at a moment’s warning. If the little hut
shelter them for a season, it is enough; for another year may find
them where rolls the Oregon or on the bitter plains of Australia. Ask
them why they build not better houses, plant not trees and flowers, to
surround with freshness and beauty that family-life which to them is
so pure and so sweet; they will answer you that they may not, they
dare not. The slightest evidence of comfort would attract the greedy
eye of the landlord; the rent would be raised, and he who should
presume to give such ill-example would soon be turned adrift. The
great lord wants cabins which he can knock down in a day to make room
for his sheep and cattle; he wants arguments to prove that the Irish
people are indolent, improvident, an inferior race, unfit for liberty.
I know that there are landlords who are not heartless. The people will
tell you more than you wish to hear of the goodness of Lord
Nincompoop, of the charity of Lord Fiddlefaddle. The intolerable evil
is that the happiness or misery of a whole people should be left to
the chance of an Irish landlord not being a fool and yet having a
heart. To any other people who had suffered from an aristocracy the
hundredth part of what has been borne by the Irish, the very name of
“lord” would carry with it the odium of unutterable infamy; among any
other people the state of things which, in spite of all the progress
that has been made, still exists in Ireland, would breed the most
terrible and dangerous passions. For my own part, I could not look
upon the castles and walled-in parks which everywhere met my view
without feeling my heart fill with a bitterness which I could rarely
detect in those with whom I spoke. What it was possible to do has been
done to hide the land itself from the eyes of the people. Around
Dublin you would think almost every house a prison, so carefully is it
walled in. The poor, who must walk, are shut in by high and gloomy
walls which forbid them even the consolation of looking upon the green
hills and plains which surround that city. In the same way the
landlords have taken possession of the finest scenery of the island.
If you would see the Powerscourt waterfall, you must send your card to
the castle and graciously beg permission. People who have no cards are
not supposed to be able to appreciate the beauty of one of the most
picturesque spots in Ireland. At the entrance to the Devil’s Glen the
traveller is stopped by huge iron gates, symbolical of those which
Milton has described as grating harsh thunder on their turning hinges;
and when he thinks he is about to issue forth again into the upper
air, suddenly other gates frown upon him to remind him of the
_lasciati ogni speranza voi ch’entrate_, of Dante. Mr. Herbert has
taken possession of half the Lakes of Killarney, and exacts a fixed
toll from all who wish to see what ought to be as free to all as the
air of heaven. If ten thousand dollars added to his annual income be a
compensation for such meanness, he is no doubt content. It is on the
demesne of this gentleman that lies the celebrated ruin of Muckross
Abbey. It stands embosomed in trees on a green slope, overlooking the
Lower Lake, and commanding one of the loveliest views to be had
anywhere. The taste of “the monks of old” in selecting sites for their
monasteries was certainly admirable. A church was erected on this spot
at a very early date, but was consumed by fire in 1192. The abbey and
church, the ruins of which are now standing, were built in 1340, by
one of the MacCarthys, Princes of Desmond, for Franciscan monks, who
still retained possession of them at the time of Cromwell’s invasion.
A Latin inscription on the north wall of the choir asks the reader’s
prayers for Brother Thadeus Holen, who had the convent repaired in the
year of our Lord 1626. That such a place should have remained in the
possession of the monks for more than a century after the introduction
of Protestantism is of itself enough to show to what extent the
Catholic monuments of Ireland had escaped the destroyer’s hand
previous to the incursion of the Cromwellian vandals. The ruins of
Muckross Abbey have successfully withstood the power of Time’s
effacing finger. The walls, which seem to have been built to stand for
ever, are as strong to-day as they were five hundred years ago; and to
render the monastery habitable nothing would be required but to
replace the roof.

The library, the dormitories, the kitchen, the cellars, the refectory
with its great fire-place, seem to be patiently waiting the return of
the brown-robed sons of St. Francis; and in the corridors the silence,
so loved of religious souls, is felt like the presence of holy
spirits. In the centre of the court-yard there is a noble yew-tree,
planted by the monks centuries ago. Its boughs droop lovingly over the
roofless walls to shelter them from the storm. In the church the dead
are sleeping, and among them some of Ireland’s princes. In the centre
of the choir a modern tomb covers the vault where in ancient times the
MacCarthys Mor, and later the O’Donoghue Mor of the Glens, were
interred. These are the opening lines of the lengthy epitaph:

  “What more could Homer’s most illustrious verse
   Or pompous Tully’s stately prose rehearse
   Than what this monumental stone contains
   In death’s embrace, MacCarthy Mor’s remains?”

This abbey, like most of the other sacred ruins of Ireland, is now
used as a Catholic cemetery. No Protestant is buried here. Mr.
Herbert, however, has got possession of it, and has secured the
entrance with iron gates, which open only to golden keys. The living
who enter here pay this needy gentleman a shilling, the dead half a
crown. Elsewhere we find the same state of things. Even the most
sacred relics of Ireland are in the hands of Protestants. It is not
easy to find a more interesting collection of antiquities than that of
the museum of the Royal Irish Academy in Dublin; but the pleasure
which we experience in contemplating these evidences of the ancient
civilization of the Irish people is mingled with pain when we see that
even their holiest relics have been taken from them and given to those
who have no sympathy with the struggles and triumphs with which these
objects are associated. We have here, for instance, the
“Sweet-sounding” bell of St. Patrick, together with its cover or
shrine, which is a fine specimen of the art of the goldsmith as it
flourished in Ireland before the Norman invasion. Here, too, is
preserved the famous “Cross of Cong,” upon which is inscribed the name
of the artist by whom it was made for Turlough O’Conor, father of
Roderick, the last native king of Ireland. No finer piece of work in
gold is to be found in any country of Western Europe. Those who
examine it will be able to form an opinion of the state of the
metallurgic and decorative arts in Ireland before she had been blessed
by English civilization. Another object of even greater interest is a
casket of bronze and silver which formerly enclosed a copy of the
Gospels that belonged to St. Patrick. The leaves of this, the most
ancient Irish manuscript, have become agglutinated through age, so
that they now form a solid mass. Another manuscript, almost as ancient
and not less famous, is a Latin version of the Psalms which belonged
to St. Columba. This is the copy which is said to have led to the
exile of the saint and to the founding of his monastery. This was the
battle-book of the O’Donnells, who in war always bore it with them as
their standard.

One cannot contemplate the exquisite workmanship and precious material
of these book-shrines without being struck by the extraordinary care
with which the ancient Irish preserved their manuscripts. These sacred
relics bear testimony at once to their religious zeal and to their
love of learning. They carry us back to the time when Ireland was the
home of saints and doctors; when from every land those who were most
eager to serve God and to improve themselves flocked to her shores, to
receive there the warm welcome which her people have ever been ready
to give to the stranger who comes among them with peaceful purpose.
Those were the days of her joy and her pride; the glorious three
centuries during which she held the intellectual supremacy of the
world; during which her sons were the apostles of Europe, the founders
of schools, and the teachers of doctors. Never did a nation give more
generously of its best and highest life than Ireland in that age.
These emblems of her faith and her science are in the hands of her
despoiler.

The great schools of Lismore and Armagh are no more. No more in the
streets of her cities are heard all the tongues of Europe, which at
matin hymn and vesper song lose themselves in the unity and harmony of
the one language of the church. They who were eager to teach all men
were forbidden to learn. Knowledge was made impossible, and they were
reproached with ignorance. But the end is not yet. In contemplating
the past we must not forget the present, nor the future which also
belongs to Ireland. The dark clouds which so long have wrapped her
like a shroud are breaking. In the veins of her children the full tide
of life is flowing, warm and strong, as in the day when Columba in his
wicker-boat dared the fury of the waves, or Brian drove the Dane into
the sea, or Malachi wore the collar of gold. They are old and yet
young; crowned with the glories of two thousand years, they look with
eyes bright with youthful hope to a future whose splendor shall make
the past seem as darkness.




LETTERS OF A YOUNG IRISHWOMAN TO HER SISTER.

FROM THE FRENCH.


JUNE 1, 1868.

What a beautiful Whitsuntide, _carissima_! Only a minute ago Marcella
was singing to me the _Tarantella della Madonna, “Pie di Grotta.”_ Do
you recollect the pretty child in rags who used to make such long
trills and quavers as she tossed back her dark tresses? How far off
now, dear Kate, seems our time at Naples!

Margaret sends me a _summons_ to go to her. I answer by telling her
how it is that we are detained in Brittany until July. You can
understand what the family journey will then be. Oh! it is so sweet
and good a thing to be together that it costs much to each one of us
to absent ourselves from the rest even for a day.

We have had High Mass and Vespers worthy of a cathedral. On leaving
the chapel Anna, whose musical organization leaves nothing to desire,
threw herself into my arms, exclaiming: “It must be like that in
Paradise!” We all had the same impression. What worldly festivities
are worth ours?

This morning a walk with René in the woods, among the thyme and early
dew. Made a resolution to go out in this way every day, quietly,
before a single shutter is opened. We pray and meditate. René draws me
on to heights of faith and love. If you heard him when he walks out
with the twins! And how they listen to him, with their large eyes
fixed on his!

Would you like to have news of Isa? “She is very thin,” Margaret tells
me, “but is still beautiful; she personifies the angel of charity. The
good she does all around her will never be known. Make haste, then,
dear, and come; it is not good of you thus to refuse yourself to our
desires.”

God keep you, my dear Kate!


LA TARANTELLA DELLA MADONNA, PIE DI GROTTA.

(_Neapolitan Ballad._)

  O lark that singest sweetly
    At the rising of the sun,
  Whose blithe wing bears thee fleetly
    To where the day’s begun!
  Rise, rise through rosy skies
  To the gate of Paradise.

  At that gate so fair
    What should be my quest?
  Shall I enter Paradise
    With the angels blest?

  Thou shalt pray our Mother fair,
  With azure eyes and golden hair,
  To touch our fruits with ripening hand,
  And bless the harvests of our land.
  By her soft eyes bending down,
  Watching over field and town――
  Eyes more fair than fairest day
  That from heaven hath strayed away――
  Entreat her from her throne above
  Thus to recompense our love.

  O my friends! I will do so,
    At the gate of Paradise:
  To Mary with the brow of snow
    I will breathe your ardent sighs.

  O lark that singest sweetly
    At the rising of the sun,
  Whose blithe wing bears thee fleetly
    To where the day’s begun!
  Rise, rise through rosy skies
  To the gate of Paradise.

  While at that gate so dear
    Your Mother I do pray
    To bless your hopes alway,
  Friends, what will appear?

  Thou shalt see our Mother there,
  On her throne of rubies rare;
  On her head the diamond crown
  Set thereon by Christ, her Son;
  Queen is she of Paradise.
  Mercy raineth from her eyes,
  Pity flows from out her hands
  Unto all the furthest lands.
  Heaven makes music round her throne,
  Happiness dwells there alone.
  Thou shalt see her shining fair,
  More bright than envied princes are――
  Our Queen all powerful, yet all sweet,
  With the sun beneath her feet.

  O friends! my heart would leave its place,
    The brightness daze my eyes.
  Were I to look on Mary’s face,
    The Queen of Paradise.

  O lark that singest sweetly
    At the rising of the sun,
  Whose blithe wing bears thee fleetly
    To where the day’s begun!
  Rise, rise through rosy skies
  To the gate of Paradise.

  And at that threshold dread
    Where all the angels throng,
  When the golden gates are open spread,
    What theme shall wake my song?

  To our Mother shalt thou say
  That for her hearts burn alway;
  That to us her love’s more sweet
  Than native flowers to exiles’ feet;
  That her image graven deep
  On our hearts doth never sleep;
  That gazing from this earthly shore,
  Above its tumult and its roar,
  In dreams that come like blessed balm,
  We see her heaven’s unshaken calm.

  I go, I go! Sweet friends, good-by;
  For you to Paradise I fly.

Dearest, the French is not equal to the naive language of the brown
little Neapolitan girl.


JUNE 12, 1868.

I have been ill, my beloved sister. What trouble they have all been
giving themselves on my account! Happily, it was nothing――fever,
headache, and general indisposition. The doctor orders much exercise,
and from to-morrow we organize a cavalcade. Adrien has had some superb
horses brought here; what riding parties we shall have!

But sadness mingles with joy. Lucy’s mother is very ill. They have
just set out; will they arrive too late? Oh! this journey, how full it
will be of anxiety and apprehension.

A despatch.… Poor Lucy! the goodness of God has spared her that last
moment, so full of cruel distress and yet of ineffable hope――she did
not see her mother die! What mourning! Why is death like our shadow,
pitilessly mowing down the existences which are dearer to us than our
own? But to what purpose is it to ask _why_? There is more true wisdom
in a _fiat_ than in curious researches. On Whitsunday, at the
“drawing” of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, my lot was the _Gift of
Piety_――love of God and of all that belongs to his service; and the
_Fruit of Patience_――generous acceptance of the crosses God sends us.
Must I own to you that this gift made me afraid? Oh! if my happiness
were to be destroyed. You will be scolding me for this dreaming, and
you will say to me with Mgr. Landriot: “If you would keep mind and
body in a healthy condition, avoid with extreme care these states of
reverie――the habit of taking aerial flights in which the heart and
understanding exhaust themselves on emptiness.” Dear Kate, my dreams
speak but of heaven.

Marcella, so long a captive beneath the yoke of others, regards
independence as the first of terrestrial benefits; on this subject our
opinions differ. The poor _Prisoner_ was quite right when he said to
the swallows:

  Il n’est dans cette vie
  Qu’un bien digne d’envie:
      La liberté![118]

Yes, assuredly, liberty is a great good, and therefore it is that our
soul has been made free, perfectly free. And how sweet it is to feel
one’s self free, and to bend generously beneath the yoke of love and
sacrifice! One of our first instincts is the need of liberty, and even
the word alone has in it a magic which carries the mind away with it,
and at critical times becomes the rallying word of revolutions. O my
God! grant that I may love only the holy freedom of thy children――that
freedom which can never be taken from me. Deliver the captives――the
captives of the world, and above all of sin! Deliver also Ireland!

Visits: an entire family, antique in dress and appearance, but modern
in language, grace, and heart. Good Bretons!――I love them. This
valiant faith, this sublime indignation, these courageous
protestations for the church and her Head in a race of granite, is an
incomparable spectacle. Brittany has indeed done well to preserve its
customs, its manners, and its ancient faith eternally young and
living. One of these ladies questioned us about Paris, whither she
wishes to accompany her son, who is attacked by the fever of the
times. I admire her maternal devotion. Imagine the astonishment of
this _Bretonne_ in the capital of _mud and gold_!

Dear Kate, Marcella and René have some _secrets_ to tell you. Love
from us all.


JUNE 16, 1868.

Our first ride has been most prosperous, dear sister. It was a
nineteen――an unlucky day, declares the superstitious Marianne. What
matters?――God protects us. “Who loves me follows me!” cried Adrien,
and away we went, cantering after him through the thickets. Don’t
suppose our expedition was for nothing but pleasure, however
legitimate, but to make a wide circuit of poor. What store of
benedictions we gathered on our way! A worthy _tad coz_[119] in his
enthusiasm kissed the hem of Marcella’s riding-habit, saying: “It is
certainly a saint who is come to us.” (Marcella already speaks Breton
as if it were Italian.)

We had taken provisions with us, and did not get home until nine
o’clock, tired out, but so happy! My mother followed us in the
carriage. She must be interested and have a little variety at any
price; the death of her friend (the mother of our sister) has greatly
impressed her. “It is,” she says, “the herald to warn me of the
approach of my own death.” May God spare her to us!

Yesterday, soon after day-break, the carriages were in readiness in
front of the entrance for a visit to the old _divor_, as the Poles
would call it: a sort of pilgrimage … to the _saint of the sea-coast_.
It is so distant that we accepted an invitation to stay the night, and
are come home this evening, not at all fatigued. We are to go there
again, but have meanwhile obtained a kind promise. The _châtelaine of
the lake_ will be here on the 2d of July. How shall I describe her to
you? On our way back we were speaking of the _prestige_ of beauty, and
Adrien quoted the words of an educational professor who says: “I have
passionately loved both nature and study; the fine arts have also made
me feel the power of their charms; but among all things under the sun
I have found nothing comparable to man when he unites noble sentiments
to physical beauty. He is truly the _chef-d’œuvre_ of the creation.”
“I have often thought,” observed René, “that, God being infinite and
sovereign Beauty, physical beauty is a reflection of the divine.
Without sin man would never have been ugly or plain. We have in the
soul the instinct of beauty, the love of the beautiful under every
form; and although we say and know very well that human beauty passes
in a day, that it is nothing, nevertheless there is no one living who
has not some time in his life experienced the unique and irresistible
charm which is shed around her by a creature who to high qualities of
mind and heart joins the attraction of beauty and regularity of
countenance.” And my mother: “The saints have a kind of beauty which I
prefer to every other; it is like a transfiguration. This miserable
mortal envelope which covers the soul becomes in some sort
transparent, so that one can see the peace, the calm and serenity, of
this interior in which God dwells by his grace and love. The sight of
a saint is a foretaste of Paradise. Oh! how beautiful must the angels
be. Why cannot our mortal eyes behold those who are here, near to us?”
“As Lamartine says,” added Marcella:

  “Tout mortel a le sien; cet ange protecteur,
   Cet invisible ami veille autour de son cœur;
   L’inspire, le conduit, le relève s’il tombe,
   Le reçoit au berceau, l’accompagne à la tombe,
   Et portant dans les cieux, son âme entre ses mains,
   La présente en tremblant au Maître des humains.”[120]

Dear Kate, do you not love these pious natures amongst whom God has
placed me? “Great souls, great souls,” exclaimed a bishop――“I seek
them, but I find them not; I call them, and none answer!” Yet some
there are in France, and especially in Brittany.

In the midst of the refinement of luxury and effeminacy of the times
in which we live, everything dwindles and diminishes; people act in
the midst of narrow and despicable interests; the life of the heart is
daily deteriorating, and “soon we shall know no longer how to love
with that generous love which thinks not of self, but whose
self-devotion places its happiness in the felicity of others.” How
happy a thing, then, is it to take refuge near to God, and within a
circle where he is loved!

I spoke of you to the _saint of the sands_. Let us love each other,
dear Kate.


JUNE 22, 1868.

Fénelon said: “Education, by a capable mother, is worth more than that
which is to be had at the best of convents.” This often comes into my
mind when I see Berthe cultivating with so much care the two choice
plants whose fragrance mounts so sweetly up to God. The surname of
_duchesse_ is abandoned for ever. At Mass, on the 1st of January,
Thérèse made the resolution to acquire humility; and she has attained
it. How many charming actions the angels must have seen with joy! Her
countenance, naturally haughty and self-asserting, has gained an
expression of sweetness and gentleness. She is delightful; and what
efforts it has cost her! Her mother has seconded, helped, and
sustained her. Raoul, the greater part of whose time is absorbed in
his literary labors, has not transferred to any one his own share in
the education of his daughters. Kate, since my marriage I have
regretted more deeply than ever that I never knew my father. I did not
know before from what strength of affection we had been severed. Thank
God! so long as my mother lived her heart was enough for us. Kind,
saintly mother! how I bless her memory. The twins no longer wear
anything but white. It reminds me of the early Christians’ preparation
for baptism. Their thoughtfulness is my admiration. They count the
days with a holy eagerness; they ask us for the hymns of Expectation.
We are making a retreat with them, and all our friends of Brittany
will fill the chapel on the 2d of July. This is a memorable date in
the family――the birthday of Raoul, Berthe, and the twins. What a
coincidence!――the wedding-day of the former, and the anniversary of
our mother’s First Communion. Marcella is singing:

  “O jour trois fois heureux! O jour trois fois béni!
   Viens remplir tous nos cœurs d’un bonheur infini!”[121]

Anna has this year shared in the life of the twins; she is only eleven
years old. Her mother hesitated, but M. le Curé has just given his
decision, and the delicate child embraced me with transports. She also
will be at the holy table; she also, clothed in white. “Entreat Mme.
Kate to pray for me.” Sweet little dove!

_Evening._――Do you know what I have just heard? The good little
hearts! Unknown to every one, even to the vigilant Berthe, the twins
and Anna rise every night to pray; and, besides this, they regularly
deprive themselves of their _goûter_[122] for the benefit of a poor
child who is also preparing herself for her First Communion. This
child has on her arm a horrible wound, and our little saints kiss it
on their knees. Do you not think you are reading the _Acta Sanctorum_?

Of the three, Picciola is still the most fervent. I am suspected of
partiality with regard to her. Oh! if you saw her kneeling in the
chapel, when a ray of sunshine plays upon her fair locks, you would
say she was an angel. Dearest Kate, the great day draws near! I say
nothing about our processions, our lovely _reposoirs_, the babies
scattering roses――I should write until to-morrow. Pray with me.


JUNE 26, 1868.

Dearest, I feel tired after my walk on the sands, and would fain rest
myself with you, and talk to you again of the twins and of Anna, whose
joy makes me fear for her, so fragile is her pretty frame. Marcella
has given me a holiday from my Greek; she and Berthe no more quit
their darlings. And I, who have no maternal rights over these almost
celestial souls, leave them a little to their mutual happiness, and
isolate myself the more with René. Our subjects of conversation are
always grave――God, heaven, eternity. We had visitors on the 24th;
beautiful fires of St. John in the evening. O son of Elizabeth and
Zacharias, voice of one crying in the desert, the greatest among the
children of men! give me of your humility, your love of penitence and
sacrifice.

Isa sends me a few lines, all enkindled with the love of God. Sarah,
returned from Spain, is much amused at certain _hidalgos_, and quotes
me the words of Shakspere: “Were it only for their noses, one would
take them for the counsellors of Pepin or Clothair, so high do they
carry them and so imposing is their mark.”

I have not told you of our _fête_ on the 19th for the twenty-second
anniversary of the elevation of the holy and venerated Pius IX to the
pontificate. What will arise out of all the trials of the Papacy?
Solomon, after tasting every kind of enjoyment and happiness,
exclaimed: “Vanity of vanities! all is vanity.” It is deeply sad
hitherto, but consolation will come at last; it is like a ray from
heaven. “All is vanity, except to love God and serve him.” Let us
love, then, let us serve, God, who is so full of love. Everything is
there! Isa writes to me: “When shall we say, _Quotidie morior_?” Alas!
I have not arrived at this perfection.

My good René has published, in an English periodical, a remarkable
article, about which I want to have your opinion. We are convinced
here that no means ought to be neglected that may serve the cause of
God, and that every Catholic’s sphere of action is wider than he
thinks. Oh! how right you are, dear Kate. “All our actions ought to
preach the Gospel.”

Was present at a funeral yesterday evening――a young girl of fifteen. I
thought of the beautiful verses by Brizeux on the death of Louise.
What a picture!――the poor and lowly funeral train amid the
magnificence of Nature, who gave to the youthful dead that which was
not afforded her by men. I seem still to behold the scene. The place,
also, is suitable. I am in presence of God’s fair creation; a thousand
birds are singing around me. Oh! these nests, these poor little nests,
_chef-d’œuvres_ of love. They showed me lately a goldfinch’s nest
suspended as if by miracle at the extremity of a branch at an immense
height.

  Ce nid, ce doux mystère,
  C’est l’amour d’une mère,
  Enfants, n’y touchez pas![123]

Children have an innate inclination for destruction. There are very
few who think of the mother of the nestlings when they take possession
of the nests; and the poet has reason to say to them:

  Ne pouvant rien créer, il ne faut rien détruire,
        Enfants, n’y touchez pas![124]

May the angel of mercy spread his wing over the cradles and the nests,
and may he protect you also, my beloved, and all of us with you!


JUNE 30, 1868.

The retreat and the singing take up all my time, dear Kate, but I want
to tell you that Lucy has come back to us, pale and weak, and
recommends herself to your prayers. Gaston was asking for me down
there. There is something so sad in this deep mourning; but Lucy looks
above this earth. Edouard’s voice was wanting to our choir; it will be
complete after to-morrow. Three poor children, clothed by your
Georgina, will accompany our chosen ones.

The SAINT OF THE SEA-COAST arrives to-morrow. She will be lodged near
to me. I wish she could be there always! Why cannot one gather
together in one same place those whom one loves?

Kate dearest, René and all _Brittany_ are for you.


JULY 2, 1868.

_Quam dilecta tabernacula tua, Domine!_

O Kate! what a day. And the vigil――the pious tears, the pardons, the
benedictions, the _watching of the arms_ in the chapel――how sweet it
was! This morning Berthe asked me _to be the mother_ of Madeleine. The
sweet child was clad in her virginal robes in my room. She was
touched, but not afraid. When ready to go down, she asked my blessing.
Oh! it is I rather who would have wished for hers. Then the Mass, the
hymns, the exhortations; then, as in a dream, these fair apparitions
prostrate before the altar, and God within our souls. What happiness
for one day to contain!

The saintly _châtelaine_ was there, absorbed in God. The day has gone
by like a flash of lightning. It is now eleven o’clock, and I say with
you the _Te Deum_. One of our neighbors was telling me this evening of
a lady whose little daughter, pious as an angel, shed tears, the
evening of her First Communion, for regret that the day was at an end.
This circumstance inspired the happy mother to write a charming poem,
which ended something as follows:

  Peu de jours dans la vie offrent assez de charmes
  Pour qu’on pleure le soir en les voyant finir![125]

Marcella wept in the chapel. Happy mother; beloved children; blessed
house; incomparable day!

_The saint_ is really a saint. Hear this: “Jesus in the Blessed
Sacrament visits me every morning; I know not how it is that I do not
die of love. God has allowed me everywhere to meet with souls who
understand mine, and who have loved me!”

Good-night, my sister.

I whispered to _my daughter_:

  My own sweet child, O soul all pure and fair!
    Pray, pray with me where holy feet have trod,
  And let thy sinless pleading on the air
    Mount like a perfume upwards to thy God!

  For the poor mother who her son doth weep
    A last farewell in tears that rain like blood,
  Let thy prayer, angel, mount the starry steep――
    Mount like a perfume upwards to thy God!

  For the poor orphan, who in dire distress
    Alone by fireless hearth hath famished stood,
  Oh! let thy prayer, with sister’s tenderness,
    Like a sweet perfume mount towards thy God!

  For the poor sinner who from God would flee,
    Who dies and turns him from the saving Rood,
  Oh! let thy prayer rise upward pleadingly――
    Like a sweet perfume mount towards thy God!

  For all the weary souls who weep and wail
    To the sweet Virgin raise thy voice aloud;
  Let thy clear tones for those who die and fail
    Like saving perfume rise towards thy God!

I used to say this at Venice to the pretty little Rutti, the little
American girl; do you remember her? Oh! how well she used to pray,
this little dove from the New World. Dear, I should like to cross the
ocean to have a nearer view of that unknown land which attracts me so
much, with its freedom, its immense spaces, its splendid vegetation,
and its beautiful sun! But, nevertheless, it is not Ireland, my
country, and the land of memories!

God keep you!


JULY 6, 1868.

Dear Kate, in two days we start for my dear green Erin, to the great
joy of Marcella, who is an enthusiast about O’Connell. Margaret feels
a _thrill_, she tells me, at the sound of a carriage. It is high time
to make acquaintance with the handsome baby. René has left me to
accompany _the saint_, whom I would fain have taken with us. She
smiled sadly in answer to my proposal: “The aged tree that grows in
lonely places cannot thus be rooted up.”

The _Annales Orléanaises_ speak of nothing but deaths: the Abbé
Debeauvais, Curé of St. Thomas d’Aquin, has just died at Mgr.
Dupanloup’s; Madame de Bannand; the Abbé Rocher, almoner of the
prisons, etc., etc. Prince Michael of Servia has been assassinated: it
is almost ancient history. I must see to my packages; so good-by for
the present, until we are with _la belle Anglaise_.


JULY 19, 1868.

It is from England, and from Margaret’s magnificent residence, that I
now think of you, dear Kate. A quick passage, splendid weather,
everybody well and strong, including baby Gaston. Lord William was
waiting for us on the pier; we were soon in the carriage, and next day
in the arms of Margaret, who cannot _fête_ us enough. The children
have already become used to English ways, to this people of many
footmen, to this pomp and splendor, and to the beauties of the _Isle
of Saints_. Margaret is in the full bloom of her happiness; her child
is superb, and resembles her.

Dear, dear Kate, how much I enjoy being here! What emotion I felt on
setting foot on this soil, Breton also, but different from the other!
I wept much, and feel ready to weep again. What is wanting to me? You,
you, and the best beloved of mothers! But you are both of you with
God――my mother in the heaven of heavens, and you in the heaven upon
earth! _Laus Deo_, nevertheless, and for ever.

Marcella understood the inward grief I felt, and delicately offered me
her friendly consolations. We shall soon see Isa. I shall undertake
the _pilgrimage of friendship_ with René, in which all the family will
join us: Mme. de T―――― has so arranged it, you can imagine with what
thought. Meanwhile, we are enjoying Margaret’s splendid hospitality.
Her mother-in-law pleases me. These few lines are only to say good-day.


JULY 24, 1868.

Adrien has brought here the numbers of the magazine containing the
articles on “Notre Dame de Lourdes,” by Henri Lasserre. We want to
persuade our dear English friends to make this pilgrimage with us in
November.

We have just come from London. How many things to see and to show!

This morning, our dear convent of ――――. I was very happy and
delighted; I love so much to meet friends again, and especially these
convent meetings――there is something so heavenly about them. Under
these black veils it seems as if nothing changes. When a child I used
to wonder because nuns did not seem to me to grow older.

  Ici viennent mourir les derniers bruits du monde:
  Nautonniers sans rivage, abordez, c’est le port.[126]

This life of union with God, and devotion to souls, has within it
something divine. We know not how great is the calm and serenity
resulting from the lofty choice of these hearts. To belong to God in
the religious life is heaven begun. Doubtless there, as elsewhere,
there are sufferings, trials, and crosses; the separation from all
those most dear to one, the crushing of nature, the complete and
absolute separation from everything which can charm in this world, to
give one’s self exclusively to God, in prayer and love, is a beautiful
thing, but no one, I think, can say that it is free from pain.
Assuredly the exchange of terrestrial affections for those which are
imperishable cannot be regarded as a loss, and yet what tears there
are in this last farewell of the religious, who while living consents
to die to all her affections!

Dear Kate, we spoke of you. How they love us in this peaceful place of
refuge!

  Oui, c’est un de ces lieux, où notre cœur sent vivre
  Quelque chose des cieux qui flotte et qui l’enivre;
  Un de ces lieux qu’enfant j’aimais et je rêvais,
  Dont la beauté sereine, inépuisable, intime,
  Verse à l’âme un oubli sérieux et sublime
  De tout ce que la terre et l’homme ont de mauvais![127]

16th.――Prayed much for France. “Since this morning,” my mother said to
me, “I have continually before my eyes the scaffold and the pale and
noble countenance of Marie Antoinette.” Poor saintly queen! what a
life and what a martyr’s death. After the first days of enchantment
which followed her arrival in France, what a long succession of
troubles! This Dauphine of fifteen years old was so exquisitely
beautiful that the Maréchal de Brissac could say to her, in his
chivalrous language: “Madame, you have there before your eyes two
hundred thousand men enamored of your person”; and a few years later
the people cried, “Death to the Austrian!” Never had woman such a
destiny. The Greeks could not imagine a great soul in a body that had
no beauty, nor beauty of person without a noble soul. Marie Antoinette
would have been their idol, their goddess. O holy martyrs of the
Temple! pray for France.

The magazine contains a story still more interesting than _Fabiola_,
if that is possible: _Virginia; or, Rome under Nero_.

19th.――Feast of St. Vincent de Paul, this man of miracles, this humble
and great saint, whose memory will live as long as the world, who
founded admirable works, who created the Sister of Charity――this
marvel, whom even the impious admire, whom the poor and needy, the
aged, the infirm, the wounded, call “sister”; whom one finds tending
abandoned children; at the asylum, the hospital, on the field of
battle, and in the prison. O charity!

Letter from Sister Louise, who is, it seems to me, drawing near to her
Eternity. She tells me that labor has worn out her strength, that she
cannot write any more, and sends me two very beautiful little
pictures, which have a sacredness in my eyes as the gift of a dying
person. Is Heaven so soon about to claim this sweet cloister-flower?

Kate, darling, you see that I cannot lose my favorite habit of
confiding to you my thoughts. Oh! why are you not here, admiring
Margaret, resplendent with youth, freshness, and joy? She is going to
write to you, to ask news of Zoë, etc.

God keep you, my beloved sister!


JULY 29, 1868.

Have I said anything to you about Margaret’s park? of her
conservatory, worthy of Italy, and where Marcella would like always to
remain? of her birds? of all the fairy-land which she knows so well
how to make us enjoy? Lucy’s mourning prevents our hosts from issuing
many invitations; but how much I prefer our home-party as it is!

Long excursions among the mountains. Many projects for next year.
Margaret desires that a friendly compact should be agreed to, which
would be a continual interchange of visits: Brittany, England,
Ireland, Orleans, and Hyères would by turns receive our Penates. O
dreams of youth, O balmy days, which never will return! stay with us
long.

Yesterday Lord B――――, who had heard of my arrival, hastened to come
and see us. “What! so soon grown up, Miss Georgina?” he exclaimed, to
the exceeding amusement of Alix.

To-morrow we start for Ireland, for my own home, where everything is
in readiness for our arrival. What a sorrowful happiness! Gertrude
lets me look through her manuscript books; the following lines which I
found there you will read with as much admiration as myself:

“This morning Hélène asked to speak with me, and this day and hour I
shall ever remember. The beloved child of my soul, of my thoughts, and
of my heart desires to become a daughter of St. Teresa; she wishes to
go, and speedily. I shall, then, see her no more but at long intervals
and behind a threatening grating; another mother will give her her
love, other hands than mine will guide her towards God. But she will
be thine, O Lord! and, while yet young, I have felt too much the
sorrows of this world not to be happy at seeing thee give to her the
better part. Her avowals, her innocent confidence, her purity of soul
and intention――all these appeared to me so peaceful that I also
experienced an ineffable sense of inward peace. Go, then, since God
calls thee, sweet angel of this home, in which thou wilt leave so
great a void――go; father and mother will not refuse thee to God, and
our prayers and blessings will follow thee!”

After these heavenly thoughts, dear Kate, I leave you.


AUGUST 6, 1868.

I have received your letter, dear sister, joy of my soul, and to-day
must not pass away without my writing to you. _O deliciosa!_ I behold
Ireland again, my country, my universe, the first place in my heart,
where I have loved my mother and you. O these memories!――the past and
present uniting their happiness, their harmonies, and their sweetness.

The house is the same as ever――a bit of heaven fallen upon the earth!
Prayed on our dear tombs. The rose-trees flourish which you planted
there. The good Reginald does everything as well as possible, as he
always does. But oh! to live here without you, to see your room――a
reliquary which no one enters without me, and where I have put
together whatever belonged to you. Dear, dear Kate, you say well that
God has given me other sisters――sisters loving and beloved, but who
cannot replace my Kate.

All the village came out to meet us. There were no songs――there were
tears: the Irish understand one another. Poor martyr-country! I am
seized with a longing desire to stay here to console these poor
people. Our dogs were wild with delight, like that of Ulysses. Dear
friend and sister, do not be uneasy; that which surmounts all else in
my heart is peace, and peace founded on hope, as on a foundation of
gold. God will deliver Ireland! He will give us back our forests and
our hills, and we shall no more return to the condition of the
proscribed. Do you remember the last book we read together, in the
great drawing-room on the venerated spot where we used to see our
mother? This book is still on a side-table, marked at the last page.
It is Rosa Ferrucci, the charming Italian, who so loved Milton.
Nothing is changed; the wide meadows, the splendid landscape, the
sunsets behind the _giants of the park_, the gold-dust gleaming
through the foliage, the decline of day which we used so to admire
together――I have seen it again in its fantastic magnificence――all is
there, even to the smallest tufts of ivy: but the absent and the dead!

“And they also are present,” René assures me. “They wish you to be
courageous and truly Christian. Death does not separate souls.”

A fraternal letter from Karl. “My heart feels all the impressions of
yours in Ireland. I pray God that he may shed happiness upon your
path, and I join in all your memories.”

Isa, Lizzy, Mme. D――――, and all our friends must come in turn, and all
together. Isa is with me, pale as a marble Madonna, with a heavenly
expression in her eyes. Her mother almost adores her, and clings to
her in order to live. Mme. D―――― fainted away on seeing me. Lizzy has
recovered her gayety and petulance, and would fain enliven Isa. Where
have I read some words of a Breton who, in speaking of a young girl
called to the religious life, says, “Her heart is like a desert”? Such
is Isa, athirst for God, in love with the ideal, a soul wounded with
the thorny briers of life.

Margaret takes in several French newspapers. We are reading in the
_Ouvrier, Les Faucheurs de la Mort_――the “Mowers of Death”――a
historical drama of unhappy Poland. It is heartrending. Poland and
Ireland, the two martyrs, understand each other. Will not God raise
them up a liberator?

Darling Kate, what benedictions are showered upon you in return for
your liberalities! What touching questions are put to me! O these good
people! how I love them.

For the _first time_ I am mistress of the house. René calms my
scruples, and tells me that he is proud of me. O the evening prayers
in our own tongue! Yesterday I thought I saw you in your old place,
and nearly cried out.

Send me your good angel, O best-beloved of sisters! Send him to me in
the land of O’Connell――

  “First flower of the earth, first gem of the sea.”

Dear Kate, I am going to enclose in my letter some beautiful lines by
Marie Jenna, the sweet poetess who delights me so much. This poetry is
almost _Irish_ to my heart:


  LE RETOUR.

  Oui, je te reconnais, domaine de mon père,
  Vieux château, champs fleuris, murs tapissés de lierre,
  Où de mes jeunes ans s’abrita le bonheur;
  Votre image a partout suivi le voyageur.…
  Vous souvient-il aussi des quatre têtes blondes
  Qui si joyeusement formaient de folles rondes?
  De nos rires bruyants, de nos éclats de voix,
  Nous faisions retentir les échos des grands bois,
  Sans craindre d’offenser leur majesté sereine,
  Et plus insouciants que l’oiseau de la plaine.
  Mais, ainsi qu’un parfum goutte à goutte épanché,
  Le bonheur s’est tari dans mon sein desséché.
  De ces bois, chaque été rajeunit la couronne,
  La mienne est pour toujours flétrie au vent d’automne;
  Au murmure des vents dans leurs rameaux touffus,
  Au concert gracieux de leurs nids suspendus.
  Au doux bruit du ruisseau qui borda leur enceinte,
  Aujourd’hui je n’ai rien à mêler qu’une plainte:
            Je ne ris plus.…

  Puis sous le marronnier voici le banc de pierre
  Où, pour nous voir de loin, s’asseyait notre mère.
  Oh! comme elle était belle et comme nous l’aimions!
  Oh! comme son regard avait de chauds rayons!
  J’étais le plus petit: souvent lorsque mes frères
  Gravissaient en courant les coteaux de bruyères,
  Bien las, traînant des fleurs et des branches de houx,
  Je revenais poser mon front sur ses genoux.
  Alors en doux accents vibrait sa voix chérie,
  Et dans mon sein d’enfant tombait la rêverie.
  Et maintenant traînant mes pas irrésolus,
  Parmi les chers débris de mes bonheurs perdus,
  Et les pieds tout meurtris des cailloux de la route,
  Je me retourne encor, je m’arrête et j’écoute:
            Je n’entends plus.…

  Et ce vieux monument, c’est toi, ma pauvre église,
  A l’ombre d’un sapin cachant ta pierre grise.
  J’ai salué de loin le sommet de ta croix
  Qui scintille au soleil et domine les bois.
  Ici, je m’en souviens, j’eus de bien belles heures,
  Qui me faisaient rêver des celestes demeures;
  Je contemplais, ravi, les séraphins ailés,
  Les gothiques vitraux, les lustres éloignés.
  J’entendais à la fois la prière du prêtre,
  Et les petits oiseaux jasant à la fenêtre,
  Les cantiques de l’orgue et des enfants de chœur,
  Et l’ineffable voix qui parlait dans mon cœur.…
  Oh! que Dieu soit béni! que les mains de l’enfance
  Au pied de son autel, sainte arche d’alliance,
  Des fleurs de nos sentiers répandent le trésor!
  Qu’on brûle devant lui l’encens des urnes d’or!
  Que tout vive et tressaille et chante en sa présence!
  Le bonheur en fuyant m’a laissé l’espérance:
            Je prie encor.…[128]


  _Translation of the foregoing._

  Yes, domain of my father, well I know thee again――
  Old _château_, flowery fields, walls tapestried with ivy,
  Which sheltered the happiness of my youthful years;
  Everywhere your image has followed the wanderer.…
  Also, remember ye the four flaxen headed children
  Who danced so joyously their merry rounds?
  Our noisy laughter and our cries and shouts
  Made the wide woods re-echo; nor did we fear
  Thus to offend their majesty serene.
  More careless we than wild birds of the plain;
  But like a perfume poured out drop by drop,
  So happiness is dried up in my breast.
  Each summer, of these woods renews the crown,
  The autumn winds for ay have withered mine.
  With the breeze murmuring in their tangled boughs,
  With the sweet warblings from their hanging nests,
  With the soft ripple of their engirdling stream,
  Now can I mingle nothing but a moan:
            I laugh no more.

  See the stone bench beneath the chestnut shade,
  Where mother sat, and watched us from afar.
  How beautiful she was, and how we loved her!
  And what warm rays beamed on us from her eyes!
  I was the youngest; often, when my brothers
  Climbed up and ran upon the heathy banks,
  I, wearily dragging my flowers and holly boughs,
  Would go and lean my head against her knees,
  And hear the gentle accents of her voice,
  While on my childish heart a reverie fell.
  Now I return again, I stop and listen;
            But hear no more.…

  And this old building――it is thou, poor church,
  Hiding thy gray stones ‘neath the pine-tree’s shade.
  The summit of thy cross I hailed from far,
  In sunshine gleaming, rising o’er the wood.
  Here, I remember, happy hours I spent,
  Which made me dream of heavenly abodes;
  I gazed, admiring, at the cherubim,
  The Gothic windows, candelabra high.
  I heard, together with the prayer of the priest,
  The little birds about the windows chirping,
  The organ, and the children of the choir,
  And the ineffable voice within my heart.…
  Blessed be God! Ever may childhood’s hands,
  Before his altar, the sacred Ark of the Covenant,
  Scatter the treasure of our way-side flowers!
  May incense burn in golden urns before him!
  May all things live, sing, gladden in his Presence!
  Happiness, fleeing, still has left me hope:
            And still I pray.…

I have wept over every line, dear sister; but as for me, I laugh
still, alas! Oh! what a treasure of memories hoarded within my soul of
those fair years which your love made so sweet.

Would you like to have one of my relics, dearest?


  SOUVENIR D’ENFANCE.

  C’était dans un bois, à l’ombre des chênes
  Et de nos sept ans, fières toutes trois,
  N’ayant pas encor ni chagrin ni peines,
  Nous remplissions l’air du bruit de nos voix.

  Nous chantions toujours, cherchant l’églantine,
  La fraise sauvage et le joyeux nid,
  Jouant follement sur la mousse fine,
  Et dans ces ébats la nuit nous surprit.

  Tremblantes de peur, dans la forêt sombre,
  Et pleurant tout bas, craignant de mourir,
  Quand autour de nous s’épaississait l’ombre,
  Nous ne songions plus à nous réjouir.

  Dieu! quelle terreur! Tout faisait silence.
  Sur le vert gazon tombait par instants
  Un rameau jauni, pour nous chute immense!
  Ah! quelle épouvante et quels grands tourments!

  Mais un cri lointain, le cri de nos mères,
  Un appel du cœur parvint jusqu’à nous;
  Nous vîmes là-bas briller des lumières.
  Oh! que ce moment pour toutes fut doux!

  Quels tendres baisers, quels aimés sourires
  Calmèrent soudain nos folles terreurs!
  Après les sanglots nous eûmes les rires,
  Et de nos récits tremblèrent nos sœurs.

  Seigneur, que toujours, à l’heure d’alarmes,
  Quand gronde l’orage, un ange gardien,
  Une mère tendre arrête nos larmes,
  Et pour nous guider nous donne la main![129]

What memories, dear sister! I had lost my way with Lizzy and Isa. My
mother was living then! How pale and trembling she was when I fell
into her arms! And you――you, my Kate!


AUGUST 12, 1868.

You have comforted me, dear sister. This place pleases me: everybody
likes it. Saw yesterday Karl’s family, as well as that of Ellen; the
day before yesterday, the W――――’s. Fanny is going to marry a German
with a great name, a fervent Catholic, in love with England, where he
intends to remain.

Our evenings are delightful. I had promised Margaret not to read _Père
Lacordaire_, by the Père Chocarne, without her. It is admirably fine.
The introduction is the definition of the priest such as is given by
the great orator of Notre Dame himself: “Strong as the diamond,
tenderer than a mother.” There are a thousand things in this book
which make my heart beat: “O paternal home! where, from our earliest
years, we breathed in with the light the love of all holy things, in
vain we grow old: we return to you with a heart ever young; and were
it not Eternity which calls us, in separating us far from you, we
should be inconsolable at seeing your shadow daily lengthen and your
sun grow pale!” “There are wants for which this earth is sterile.”
What a spring there is of faith and love in words like these: “Riches
are neither gold nor silver, nor ships which bring back from the ends
of the earth all precious things, nor steam, nor railways, nor all
that the genius of men can extract from the bosom of nature; one thing
alone is riches――that is love. From God to man, from earth to heaven,
love alone unites and fills all things. It is their beginning, their
middle, and their end. He who loves knows; he who loves lives; he who
loves sacrifices himself; he who loves is content; and one drop of
love, put in the balance with the universe, would carry it away as the
tempest would carry away a straw.” The Père Lacordaire speaks
admirably of cloisters: “August palaces have been built, and
magnificent tombs raised on the earth; dwelling-places well-nigh
divine have been made for God: but the wisdom and the heart of man
have never gone further than in the creation of the monastery.” The
first disciple and brother of Père Lacordaire, the saintly young
Hippolyte Réquédat (whose soul was so pure that when, at twenty years
of age, he threw himself at the feet of a priest, owning that he had
never, since his First Communion, been to confession, having nothing
of which to accuse himself, unless that he wished much evil to all the
enemies of France) used every day to say to the Blessed Virgin:
“Obtain for me the grace to ascertain my vocation――to learn the way in
which I could do the greatest possible amount of good, lead back the
greatest number of souls to the church, and be most chaste, humble,
charitable, active, and patient.”

He died of consumption at the age of twenty-two, and his death made a
deep wound in the heart of the Père Lacordaire. “Réquédat was a soul
as impassioned in its self-devotion as others are in selfishness. To
love was his life, but to love to give rather than to receive; to give
himself always, and to the greatest number possible――this was his
dream, his longing, his martyrdom. Devoted to an ardent pursuit of
that which is good, tyrannized over by this noble love, he had not
time to see any evil.” A friend of his was Piel, an eminent architect,
who joined him to become also a son of St. Dominic――“A lofty soul, an
heroic heart, incapable of a divided affection, and from the first
moment aspiring after the highest perfection, admirably formed to be a
great orator as well as a saint, of whom his friends used to say that
his language reminded them of the style of Pascal.” With the Père
Lacordaire was also Hernsheim, a converted Jew, a frank, intelligent,
and profound mind, from whence issued from time to time thoughts which
had a peculiar charm about them, mingled with a sweet and penetrating
unction. The Père Besson, an artist like Piel, and the _Fra Angelico_
of France, was also of the number; and, lastly, the Père Jandel, now
general of the order. Mme. Swetchine was like the good genius of Père
Lacordaire: “Who does not know this, now?” asks the Père Chocarne.
“Who has not read the life and works of this woman, whom death has
crowned with a glory all the more pure and radiant because she had so
carefully concealed it during her life? Who does not know this Russian
with a heart so French, this convert to the Catholic faith, so gentle
towards beliefs and opinions differing from hers, the masculine
understanding in the woman’s heart, the spirit of Joseph de Maistre in
the soul of Fénelon, the charity, so delicate and tender, of this
woman who said of herself: ‘I would no more be made known to the
children of men but by these words: She who believes; she who prays;
she who loves’!”

This is beautiful. Can you picture to yourself the impression made
upon us while Adrien is reading this aloud? Every one is breathless;
the twins and Anna, their eyes wide open, their hands joined, seem to
_devour_ this eloquence. The soul of the orator of Notre Dame has
passed into that of his son in Jesus Christ. All is magnificent, and
makes one deeply regret that the grand figure which appeared among us
with the double aureole of sanctity and genius so soon disappeared
from the world. A great and wonderful history is this, too little
really known! Have we not heard the most absurd fables told in
reference to Père Lacordaire?

I want your prayers, dear Kate, for a grand project: we wish to bring
Isa’s mother to agree to live with her sister. Lizzy would be the
daughter of the two, and the Lord’s dear chosen one would go to “the
place of repose which she has chosen.” It will be difficult to manage,
but I have a presentiment of victory.

Good-by, dear Kate, for the present.


AUGUST 20, 1868.

  O Temps! suspends ton vol, et vous, Heures propices,
      Suspendez votre cours;
  Laissez-nous savourer les rapides délices
      Des plus beaux de nos jours.[130]

We have been singing this while floating on the lake. Picciola
proposes to take up her abode for a year at Aunt Georgina’s. I have
installed her as dame and mistress of my little school. What joy!

Isa’s mother is beginning to understand. I have been getting so many
prayers for this! She yesterday said, after having listened very
calmly to what I had to say: “Dear Georgina, I feel that God inspires
you; but only think how I have been broken down, and what need I have
of Isa!” Poor mother! O these vocations!――a terrible secret which
rends so many souls. “Let the dead bury their dead!” I need all my
faith in the Gospel to admit that these words were said by our
merciful Saviour. St. Bernard, the _saint of Mary_, the _honey of
Mary_, will succeed in gaining this material heart, which hesitates
before the greatness of the sacrifice.

We have finished our splendid reading. This evening we shall take
_Klopstock_. We all find that nothing equals this intellectual
pleasure of interchanging our impressions while reading together. We
separate at eleven. I am taking some views, being desirous of
transporting my part of Ireland into France.

Margaret has written to Mistress Annah to offer her the post of
governess to the charming baby. We expect her answer to-day. The
baptism took place on the 15th. It was splendid.

Have seen Sarah, whose son has been ill――always amiable, with a tinge
of melancholy, caught, no doubt, by the side of the cradle.

My _duties_ are so multiplied that I should be quite unequal to them
without René. What a pleasure it is to do for others what they have
done for me!

Send me always your good angel, my best beloved.


AUGUST 26, 1868.

What a _fête_ for my mother, the evening of the 24th! All the echoes
resounded with it. In two days hence we are to go to Fanny’s marriage,
which takes place in Dublin. Great preparations; but Anna is unwell,
and this spoils our joy. Marcella has suffered so much that she
trembles at the least shock. Lucy will remain here with our Italians;
we cannot return for a week. But the great piece of news I have to
tell you is this: Isa enters the convent of ―――― on the 8th of
October. I have obtained this exchange. Carmel alarmed the poor mother
too much; and, besides, the health of our friend is too much shaken to
be able to support the austerities of St. Teresa. The two families of
the D―――― will go with us to Dublin, and we shall accompany Isa. What
a _Te Deum_ we ought to sing! The timid child had never owned to her
mother the ardor which consumed her; the death of George――the nephew
so passionately loved, sole heir of so noble a name, and betrothed to
Isa from childhood――appeared to Mme. D―――― the death of everything,
and she lived “_extinguished_.” Oh! how I rejoice at this success.
Margaret and Isa, both once so sad, and now with their hearts in an
eternal spring!

Let us bless God together, dear Kate! Do you recollect Mgr.
Dupanloup’s words: “One breathes, in this land of Ireland, I know not
what perfume of virtue which one finds not elsewhere.”


AUGUST 31, 1868.

René is writing to you. We know that Anna is well, and we are enjoying
the _worldlinesses_ of Dublin. Fanny was touching under her veil. Your
dear name, my beloved Kate, was mentioned, I know not how often. O
kind Ireland! If I had to tell you all the graceful things that were
said to me, I should fill my paper. How pleasant it is to be loved!
Fanny did not weep on seeing me; she and her mother are unequalled in
their serenity; consolation has been sent them from on high. A
_vision_ is spoken of. I did not like to ask any questions, but it is
certain that something extraordinary has occurred.

O dear Kate! how fair is life. I was saying so yesterday to René while
we were looking at the stars; for the night was splendid. Do you know
what he answered? “Heaven is fairer; earth is but its echo, its
far-off image, its imperfect sketch; and it is death which opens
heaven to us.” Words like these from the lips of René make me shudder.
Oh! to die with him would be sweet, but not to live without him. Père
Lacordaire said: “Death is man’s fairest moment. He finds assembled
there all the virtues he has practised, all the strength and peace he
has been storing up, all the memories, the cherished images and sweet
regrets of life, together with the fair prospect of the sight of God.
If we had a lively faith, we should be very strong to meet death.”

Fanny starts to-morrow for France, Switzerland, and Germany――a long
journey; we remain at present, so as in some measure to fill up the
void a little. Why are you not here to witness our reunion? Oh! how
strong is the love of one’s country. I am _inebriated_ with my native
air; we sing our old ballads; we turn over with Adrien the history of
the past. Ask of our good God that this may last a long time, dear
Kate! _Erin mavourneen! Erin go bragh!_


SEPTEMBER 6, 1868.

Mistress Annah is come, dear sister. I wept with all my heart on
embracing her. Dear old mistress Annah! how wrinkled and thin she has
become; always upright and stiff as an Englishwoman, and her memory
enriched with Italian stories which will charm baby’s childhood.
Margaret has chosen for the beautiful innocent the name of
_Emmanuel_――a blessed name, which well bespeaks the happiness of our
friend. Lord William made royal largesses to the poor in the name of
the new-born heir. Twelve orphans will be provided for at the expense
of _Emmanuel_. Mistress Annah is longing to see and hear you. Margaret
promises her this happiness for next spring. You may be sure that no
fatigue will be imposed on the dear old lady. The pension given her by
Lord William made her independent; but our _belle Anglaise_ feared the
isolation of old age for her devoted heart, and it will be a happiness
to both to watch the growth of baby. A messenger has just arrived. _Te
Deum_, dear Kate!――a little daughter is born to Lizzy. Everybody is
delighted; they have sent for us; I am going with René.

7th _September_.――In an hour the baptism, so that Isa may be present;
then she says farewell to her family, and we take her away. The angel
fallen from heaven is to be called Isa. Marcella, Adrien, and Gertrude
have joined us. Joy and grief meet at this moment. You will be
astonished at the sudden departure of our Isa; but Lizzy wishes it
thus, hoping that the poor mother will let herself be interested by
the festivities and the visitors.

The last number of the magazine has caused me a sensation. In it is an
account of the beautiful scene on the Pincio, in October, 1864, “at
the hour when the sun, sinking towards the sea of Ostia, lights with a
golden gleam the cross which surmounts the dome of St. Peter.” Do you
remember, dear Kate, the Pope appearing in the midst of the crowd,
which bent before him with so much reverence, and the long shouts of
_Viva Pio Nono_ which saluted his departure? O Rome, Rome, my other
country, the eternal country of those who believe, hope, and
love――Rome of St. Peter and of Pius IX.――I salute thy image and thy
memory!

Dear sister, Lizzy requests your prayers. She is well, radiant, and
full of gratitude to God. Her good husband is in transports, and the
little one so pretty under her gauzy curtains. She has not cried yet,
so we think she will resemble Isa, her godmother. Do you not like this
prognostic?

Let us both pray, dear Kate! Adrien has again read us the two _fair
contemporary pages_ about Ireland――Mgr. Dupanloup at St. Roch, and
Mgr. Mermillod at St. Clotilde. O these words!――“The first powers of
our time, the two most illustrious and rich, are a Prince despoiled
and a people in rags――Pius IX., who extends to you his royal hand, and
Ireland, who asks you for bread!”


     [118] There is in this life but one possession worthy of
     envy――Liberty.

     [119] Good or worthy father (old).

     [120] Each mortal has his own; this protecting angel,
           This invisible friend, keeps watch around his heart;
           Inspires and guides, uplifts him if he fall,
           Receives him at the cradle, stays by him to the tomb,
           And, bearing up to heaven his soul within his arms,
           Presents it, trembling, to the Lord of all.

     [121] O thrice happy, thrice blessed day! come to fill all
     our hearts with infinite happiness.

     [122] A slight refreshment taken by French children between
     the morning and evening meal.

     [123] This nest, this soft mystery, is a mother’s love.
     Children, touch it not!

     [124] Being unable to create anything, you must destroy
     nothing. Children, touch it not!

     [125] Few are the days in life which offer charms enough
           To make us weep when evening brings their close.

     [126] Hither the world’s last echoes come to die:
           Land, shipwrecked mariners; the port is here.

     [127] “Yes, ’tis one of those abodes where our heart feels
     itself enlivened by something of heaven which floats around
     it――one of those abodes which as a child I loved and of
     which I used to dream, whose beauty, serene, inexhaustible,
     penetrating, sheds upon the soul a serious and sublime
     forgetfulness of all that is evil on earth or in man.”

     [128] Marie Jenna, _Elévations Poétiques et Religieuses_.

     [129] MEMORIES OF CHILDHOOD.

          ’Twas in a wood, in the shadow of the oaks,
           We children three, all proud of our seven years,
           Unknowing yet of trouble or of care,
           With our resounding voices filled the air.

           Singing we wandered seeking the eglantine,
           Wild strawberries, and nests of singing birds,
           Gambolling wildly on the fine, soft moss,
           Till night o’ertook us in our careless play.

           Trembling with fear, within the forest dark
           We wept in silence, fearing we should die;
           And when around us thicker shadows fell,
           Never, we thought, should we see joy again.

           Heavens! what terror. Everything was still.
           On the green, mossy turf at times there fell
           A withered branch, to us a fall immense;
           For oh! what fear and torment were we in.

           But hark! a distant cry, our mother’s call,
           And loving voices reached our listening ears,
           While through the wood we saw the gleam of lights――
           Oh! to us all what sweet relief and joy.

           What tender kisses, and what welcome smiles,
           Now quickly tranquillized our foolish fears!
           After our sobs, we laughed for very joy,
           E’en while our sisters trembled at our tale.

           Lord, grant that ever, in our anxious hours
           And stormy days, an angel guardian,
           A tender mother’s hand, may dry our tears,
           And guide our steps along the path of life.

           [130] O Time! suspend thy flight, and ye, propitious Hours,
                      Suspend your course;
                 Suffer us to enjoy the swift delights
                      Of these our fairest days.




APHASIA IN RELATION TO LANGUAGE AND THOUGHT.

The relation of language to thought as a theme of discussion has
busied the pens of philosophical writers from very early times, and
the later aspects of the controversy do not promise a speedy agreement
of views. Whatever new light, therefore, recent discoveries in science
may shed on this much-vexed question ought to be welcomed as helping
to increase of knowledge concerning a matter which cannot escape the
serious consideration of the teachers of philology. At present Messrs.
Max Müller and Whitney most strongly incline to opposite views; and
before coming to the subject of aphasia as affecting the question, it
may be well to take a cursory view of the field of controversy.

The old or scholastic belief is that language was in the first
instance divinely communicated, and this opinion its upholders strove
to maintain by a variety of reasons. Authority and tradition were
chief among these, though they did not by any means neglect
philological and ethnological considerations. In France the Vicomte de
Bonald undertook the support of this view on the same line as that now
held by Max Müller――viz., that it is impossible to have a purely
intellectual conception without a corresponding word or series of
words to represent it; whence, according to him, it follows that the
word must have accompanied the thought, and, man being unable to
originate the one without the other, both must have been originally
communicated. Max Müller says: “As a matter of fact, we never meet
with articulate sounds, except as wedded to determinate ideas: nor do
we ever, I believe, meet with determinate ideas, except as bodied
forth in articulate sounds.” He strongly insists on the correctness of
this view, and argues it at length. Professor Whitney takes direct
issue with him, and maintains that there is the widest separation
between language and thought. According to him, language can be said
to be of divine origin only in so far as man was created with the
capacity for its formation just as he was created capable of making
clothes for himself, and of wearing them. Such being the state of the
question, we will proceed to consider that abnormal condition of the
nervous system which has been denominated aphasia, and afterwards
indicate our opinion as to which view the facts established by it go
to sustain.

Aphasia, defined by Dr. Hammond as a diseased condition of the brain,
was not understood till quite recently. It is an affection of that
organ by which the idea of language or of its expression is impaired.
It is not mere paralysis of the vocal chords, nor of the muscles of
articulation, nor the result of hysteria――which conditions are
denominated aphonia, or voicelessness――but depends on a lesion or
injury wrought in that portion of the brain which presides over the
memory of words and their co-ordination in speech. The loss of the
memory of words is styled amnesic aphasia, the other ataxic
aphasia――two Greek derivatives which explain very clearly the two
separate conditions. A single typical case will exhibit the usual
manner of the approach of this trouble, its development and
termination. An English banker, a resident of Paris, recently went out
in his carriage well as usual, and on his return, as he was stepping
to the sidewalk, fell heavily forward, but did not lose consciousness.
His whole right side was paralyzed, and, on attempting to speak, he
could not articulate a word; he barely succeeded in uttering a few
unintelligible sounds. During twelve days the paralysis continued, but
after that gradually subsided, till in the course of a few months he
was able to move about. Strange to say, however, the power of speech
did not return, and for eight months he could no more than articulate
a few words incoherently. Nothing in the case of this gentleman openly
indicated an impairment of the intellect; for he could neither read
nor write in consequence of his paralyzed condition. There was
undoubted loss of the memory of words, since his vocabulary was
limited to two or three; and there was likewise ataxic aphasia, since
his words were jumbled unmeaningly together. The recorded cases of
this disease are very numerous, many of them differing in their
individual features, but all exhibiting a greater or less degree of
both forms mentioned. The case just cited will suffice to enable the
reader to understand the interest felt by psychologists and
physiologists alike to ascertain whether, by the discovery of a
uniform and constantly-recurring lesion in a certain portion of the
brain, the seat of language in that organ might be determined. Dr.
Gall, with the view of completing his system of phrenology, referred
speech-function to that part of the brain lying on the supra-orbital
plate behind the eye. Spurzheim, Combe, and others of the
phrenological school held the same view. But this was a mere
conjecture on their part, and it was not till minute anatomy had
already localized several other important functions that a fair
promise was held out that the brain-organ of speech might be likewise
located. Experiments without number were made by Bouillaud,
Cruveilhier, Velpeau, Andral, Broca, and Dax in France; Hughlings,
Jackson, Sanders, Moxon, Ogle, Bateman, and Bastian in England; Von
Benedict and Braunwart in Germany; Flint, Wilbur, Seguin, Fisher, and
Hammond in America――all tending to confirm the localization of the
function, though not agreeing as to the exact spot. The mode of
procedure usually consisted in making a post-mortem examination of
those who during life had suffered from aphasia; and though it was an
extremely difficult matter to bring all the cases under a uniform
standard, enough was discovered to assign the function in question to
the left anterior lobe of the brain. We do not pretend to regard the
question as settled; for no less authorities than Hammond in our own
country, and Prof. Ferrier in England, seem to consider both
hemispheres of the brain as equally concerned. Still, it is
significant that out of 545 cases examined by different authorities,
514 favor the left anterior lobe of the brain, while but 31 are
opposed to such a conclusion. Assuming, then, as amply demonstrated
that some portion of the anterior convolutions of the brain is the
seat of the faculty of speech, the question arises, Can that part of
the brain which is concerned in the process of ideation continue to
perform its functions――_i.e._, originate true ideas of which the mind
is conscious――without the memory of the words which usually represent
those ideas or the power to co-ordinate them? It is evident that, no
matter how the question may be met, we possess in the discoveries to
which aphasia has led a most important contribution to the controversy
concerning the relation of language to thought; for if it can be shown
that the mental faculties are unimpaired during the existence of the
aphasic condition, the conclusion would go to favor Prof. Whitney’s
view that thought is independent of speech; whereas if it can be shown
that during the same condition the mental powers are very much
debilitated or frequently suspended, we find an unexpected support
given to Max Müller’s opinion that without language there can be no
thought. We would state in advance that the portion of the cerebral
substance which is concerned in the production of thought――or, as
neurologists have it, is the centre of ideation――entirely differs from
that which is the reputed seat of the faculty of speech; so that the
question may read: Does the centre of ideation continue to operate
while the speech-centres are in a diseased condition? Aphasic
individuals usually retain all the appearances of intelligence: their
eyes are full of expression; their manner of dealing with surrounding
objects is quite the same as if they were in possession of all their
faculties; when asked to point out material objects, they
unhesitatingly do so――in a word, to the extent that objects are their
own language their intellect remains unimpaired. But they exhibit a
remarkable deficiency in the power of co-ordination, since this is a
pure relation not symbolized by anything material. Material objects
possess in their outlines and sensible qualities enough to
discriminate and individualize them; and hence, through perception,
they reach the centres of ideation, and are as readily understood by
the aphasic as though their names were fully known. This is made
manifest in their writing when, as occurs only in a few cases, the
aphasic retain the power of using the pen. Thus we read in Trousseau
of the case of an aphasic named Henri Guénier, who could not write the
word “yes,” though capable of uttering it in an automatic way without
seeming in the least to understand its meaning. Yet he could write his
own name, though nothing else, evidently for the reason that the τὸ
ἐγώ was the object of most frequent recurrence to his mind, and that
which consequently he could most readily apprehend through its
sensible characteristics, and could thereby connect with his own name;
whereas “yes,” as the symbol of affirmation, found no counterpart in
the sensible order. The same author relates the case of a man who, so
far as he could make himself intelligible, boasted of retaining his
intellective and memorative powers unimpaired, and yet, on being put
to the test, he could not construct the shortest sentence coherently.
When a spoon was held before him, and he was asked what it was, he
gave no answer; when asked if it was a fork he made a sign of denial,
but when asked if it were a spoon he at once replied in the
affirmative. It must be remembered that in all these cases the power
of utterance, so far as it is a muscular process, remained unimpaired,
but there was true amnesic aphasia――_i.e._, the recollection of the
words was lost.

There are some cases of partial aphasia which possess an interest
quite peculiar, since its victims frequently regain the entire power
of speech, and are able to relate the results of their experience. A
celebrated professor in France spent a vacation-day reading
Lamartine’s literary conversations, when towards evening he was
attacked with partial aphasia. Fearing lest he was threatened with
paralysis, he moved his arms and walked up and down the room, in doing
which he experienced no difficulty; but when he resumed his reading,
he found it scarcely possible to understand a sentence. The individual
words were intelligible enough, but he could not follow out the
sequence of the thoughts. Of course during the attack he could not
utter a word, though able partially to comprehend what was said to
him, as he afterwards declared. Here indeed is a most instructive
instance of impaired intellect, occurring as it did in a man whose
brain was usually in a very active state, and whose mind was highly
cultivated. Does it not strongly confirm the belief that, even while
the organic instrument of thought was unimpaired, its functions were
temporarily suspended?

Another case is that of a man of good literary attainments, who
pretended that he could still understand what he read, but who could
not discover the mistake when the book was presented to him reversed.
There can be no doubt, then, that aphasia unerringly points to a most
intimate dependence between language and thought, and that, as Max
Müller says, without language there can be no thought.

But why is it that in regard to objects possessing sensible qualities
aphasic individuals exhibit no impairment of intellectual power? We
will answer, Because with regard to such objects these are their own
language, and the functions of the perceptive and ideational centres
are as active in their regard as though the faculty of speech were
intact. A tree is known by its branches and leaves to the deaf mute as
well as it is by its name to those possessing all their faculties.
Whatever circumscribes and differentiates an object of thought is its
language. For, after all, is not language conventional and arbitrary,
the outer symbol of a subjective phenomenon? The symbol may be of any
sort whatsoever, but the thought cannot be known without a symbol of
some sort. Now, the qualities of sensible objects, in so far as they
serve to circumscribe the objects and to discriminate them from all
others, become their language. This is rendered more evident when we
reflect that Locke’s theory, according to which sensible objects are
but an aggregate of sensible qualities, is generally rejected, and the
opinion admitted that under these qualities there resides a true
substance impervious to the senses and known to us only as inference
from the former. Therefore the sensible qualities are the symbol of
the substance identified with it; of course in so far these are but
the substance modified in such or such a manner. This is why aphasics
find no trouble in forming ideas of material things, though they may
forget their names. But why is aphasia ataxic――that is, incapable of
co-ordinating words? Because co-ordination expresses the relation
between the objects co-ordinated, and relation is not represented, and
cannot be represented, by anything in the sensible order. They belong
to the purely intellectual order, and the only symbol that existed by
which they were known being lost, there remains no longer any means of
circumscribing and differentiating them. Paul and Peter may be well
known to the aphasic――Paul as such, and Peter as such――because the
sensible qualities of both render them recognizable; and not only
that, but the different qualities pertaining to both enable him
clearly to distinguish the one from the other. But if he is told that
Peter is taller than Paul, he understands nothing. And why? Because
the proposition implies the relation of comparison, in which there is
nothing sensible. Indeed, he perceives Peter to be tall and Paul to be
diminutive, but he does not perform the intellectual process called
judgment, which is interpreted in the proposition, Peter is taller
than Paul. In like manner, when there is question of purely
intellectual conceptions which can be symbolized by nothing sensible
except names, the aphasic are incapable of reaching them. Virtue,
power, and malice are meaningless sounds in their ears, and equally
unintelligible is what these words represent. The reason is because
the symbols by which these ideas were conveyed to the mind are lost,
and there is nothing left by which virtue can be known or
discriminated from power and malice. Whatever circumscribes and
differentiates a thought is its language, and this can be done only by
a symbol. Now, if we consult our own consciousness, we will find
that it is impossible for us to conceive of what is purely
intellectual――_i.e._, possessing no sensible traits――if we lose sight
of the word which represents it. Affirmation and negation are of this
sort, and it is entirely impossible to disconnect the idea of either
from some word or series of words. The idea, indeed, is not the spoken
word, but is painted by it as it were on the canvas of the mind, and
hence was called by Aristotle the word of the mind. All this is
attested in the case of aphasics. The language-mechanism of the brain
is disarranged; there is forgetfulness of words, accompanied by
inability to arrange them in proper order so as to be remembered; the
ideational centre remains intact, but is inoperative with regard to
such thoughts as have their sole symbol in words.

It is true that some aphasic individuals retain for a time certain
impressions which belong to the purely intellectual order; but this
can be accounted for only by supposing that the brain centres of
ideation are endowed with certain registering powers capable of
retaining impressions for a short while after their active operation
is suspended. But when the disease is of long continuance those
impressions gradually fade, and the patient is reduced to the
condition of an untaught deaf mute. He has lost the formulæ of
thought, and therefore cannot think. Trousseau says: “A great thinker,
as well as a great mathematician, cannot devote himself to
transcendental speculations unless he uses formulæ and a thousand
material accessories which aid his mind, relieve his memory, and
impart greater strength to thought by giving it greater precision.”
But where the sole “material accessory,” as Trousseau calls it, is
absent, how can a person think? We use the word in a higher sense; for
children incapable of speech, and animals, exercise a certain amount
of thought in respect to surrounding objects; but thinking, in the
sense of reasoning, abstracting, and comparing, outlies their
capacity, just as it does that of aphasic individuals. “Without
language,” says Schelling, “it is impossible to conceive
philosophical, nay, even any human, consciousness; and hence the
foundations of language could not have been laid consciously.
Nevertheless, the more we analyze language, the more clearly we see
that it surpasses in depth the most conscious workings of the mind.”
And Hegel says: “It is in names that we think.” This exactly explains
what occurs in the case of aphasics. The principles of science, the
sequence of ideas, the links of an argument, are not understood by
them; for they are, as children and animals, capable merely of
receiving the impressions which material objects make on their sensory
organs. It is true that a few aphasics have been known to be expert
chess-players; and though this is as hard to account for as the
apparent feats of reasoning accomplished by animals of the lower
order, still we would no more rank expertness at such a game among the
higher attributes of reason than we would the sagacity of a dog or of
an elephant.

This point is well touched upon by Trousseau, who says: “I believe
that the same thing obtains in metaphysics as in geometry. In the
latter case a man may vaguely conceive space and infinity without any
precision or measure; but if he wishes to think of the properties of
space, and more particularly of the special properties of the figures
which bound space――as, say, conic sections――it is impossible that his
mind does not immediately see the curves proper to a parabola, a
hyperbola, and an ellipse. In metaphysics, on the other hand, I
believe that a man cannot think of the special properties of beauty,
justice, and truth, for instance, without immediately giving a
material form, as it were, to his thoughts, by using concrete
examples, and without associating words together――words which
represent concrete ideas, and which then stand in the same relation to
particular metaphysical ideas as figures do to determinate geometric
ideas.”

The same may be said of universal ideas. These are, subjectively
viewed, mere concepts of the mind; objectively they have a foundation
in the object. Now, that object is present to the aphasic, and he
recognizes it by its sensible properties; but when there is question
of viewing one or two properties as possessed in common by a number of
objects, he finds himself unequal to the task. In a word, he cannot
generalize, and this is one of the highest acts of reason.

We would insist upon the distinction between words representing purely
material objects and those which interpret to us supersensible
thoughts; for not a few physiologists have fallen into error by not
observing this distinction. Thus Prof. Ferrier, of the West Riding
Lunatic Asylum, says: “In aphasia, consequent as it usually is on
disease of the left hemisphere, the memory of words is not lost, nor
is the person incapable of appreciating the meaning of words uttered
in his hearing.” From this it is evident that the learned professor
neglected to note the distinction alluded to; and because an aphasic
did not fail to appreciate the meaning of certain words representing
material things, therefore he concluded in a general way that he did
not fail to appreciate the meaning of words. Indeed, we have nowhere
noted the distinction, and it is curious that, in all the cases
recorded of the clinical history of this disease, physicians have
invariably propounded to their patients as test-words such words as
fork, spoon, pen, boots, and all such as pertain to the material order
of things. Prof. Whitney certainly did not take note of these facts
when he asserted the entire independence between language and thought.
He regards man as capable of conceiving new thoughts apart from all
representative symbols, and then finding for them a vocal expression.
This, as we have seen, is in direct antagonism with the data of
aphasia. The chief flaw in Prof. Whitney’s reasoning is that he starts
from false premises when he limits language to mere spoken or
articulate sounds. He seems to ignore the question when he says: “In
all our investigations of language we find nothing which should lead
us to surmise that an intellectual apprehension could ever, by an
internal process, become transmuted into an articulated sound or
complex of sounds.” The implied premise in this sentence is erroneous,
since it is entirely possible that it be associated with some other
symbol, borrowed from a material source, which is its language, its
expression, and makes it something entirely distinct from the
intellectual apprehension. Indeed, here lies the secret of
metaphorical language, and of its extensive use among those tribes of
men whose philosophical vocabulary is limited.




  LIGHT AND SHADOW.


  In golden pomp at morn and eve
    The purple mountains rise,
  With banners bright of waving green
    Gay flaunting to the skies;
  But upward toiling, panting, slow,
  Patient the fleetest step must go.

  A winding pathway through the vale
    Entices weary feet;
  The shining waters sing of peace,
    The morning breeze is sweet;
  But nook or covert there is none
  To shelter from the noonday sun.

  The fainting trav’ller turns aside
    To seek the woodland shade――
  Beyond the thicket, stretching cool,
    Invites the mossy glade――
  But thorny is the tangled way,
  And devious paths his steps betray.

  The fleeciest cloud that graceful floats
    In summer skies of light,
  Within a veil of tender mist
    Conceals the tempest’s might;
  And winds that stir with softest breath
  Are freighted with the seeds of death.

  The loveliest blossom that unfolds
    Its beauty to the day
  Must yield its treasured fragrance up,
    Then droop and fade away;
  And greenwood birds that sweetest sing
  Are soonest gone on flitting wing.

  The undertone of earth’s delights
    In sorrow’s pensive sigh
  Is mingled with the echoing breeze
    Ere joy’s glad accents die――
  Of all the strains that saddest float
  Are requiems blent with triumph’s note.

CHICAGO, October 14.




JEAN INGELOW’S POEMS.[131]

Jean Ingelow is now over fifty years of age. For some time past she
has devoted herself chiefly to graceful prose, in which her pure and
playful imagination seems to have found sufficient vent. She can never
be removed from the company of the poets, however, notwithstanding her
apparent purpose of withdrawal, so far as we may surmise a possible
design by her neglect of versification.

That she has demonstrated her possession of genuine poetic feeling
cannot be denied. The volume before us is sufficient proof of this.
Whenever she has permitted herself to be simple, lucid, and natural,
her verses’ not only please――they charm. She is one of the minor poets
sincerely beloved――not in so great a degree as Adelaide Procter, or
Christina Rossetti, because she is not equally successful in
expressing the universal sentiments of the heart, and because she
wanders from the unambitious poetry of natural feeling into the tricky
and artificial, whither the multitude will not voluntarily follow. She
is not always in one mood, as Adelaide Procter is; and her joy, when
sincere, and not fictitious and artful, is sometimes exceedingly
attractive and――what is its truest test――becomes infectious, pervading
the reader’s mind and carrying the emotions away into its own
atmosphere.

We never smile at Adelaide Procter’s joy. Her smiles are sadder than
her tears. She smiles like a dying saint, whose pallid features
proclaim that the effort is inspired by something higher and more
mysterious than the pleasure of the world. It is as Shakspere says:
“Seldom he smiles, and smiles in such a sort, as if he mocked himself,
and scorned his spirit, that could be moved to smile at anything.”

Jean Ingelow possesses enough perception of real humor to throw, here
and there, winsome flashes of merriment over very sombre pictures,
especially in _genre_ scenes like that depicted in “The Supper at the
Mill.” Indeed, it may be safe to say that if she unloosed the flimsy
chains of artificiality in which she has bound her muse, that very
affected maid would prove frolicsome and mischievous; but her mistress
prefers a decorousness of behavior which, by this time, must have
dulled her own sense of the ludicrous, while supplying additional
keenness in that direction to her critics, and furnishing new and
irresistible models for hilarious parody, as we shall see.

It is impossible to read through a volume of her poems without coming
to this conclusion: that she has a poetic stock-in-trade. Let us make
an inventory of it. First, there are the birds; secondly, certain
flowers and grasses; thirdly, a set of stereotypes composed of
peculiar comminglings of sea, sky, ships, and stars. This poetic stock
is, as it were, all duly classified and labelled, and the whole is
arranged with scientific calculation as to drafts, at intervals, upon
the several departments. Matthew Arnold,[132] modestly defending his
own attempts toward translating Homer into English hexameter, hopes to
make it clear that he at least follows “a right method,” and that, if
he fail, it is “from weakness of execution, not from original vice of
design.” Jean Ingelow is guilty, we think, of “original vice of
design.” “Weakness of execution” is infallibly certain to follow. In
selecting her poetic stock――which is, in itself, vice of design――she
deepens the folly by being persistently fantastical. It is not enough
to choose birds, grasses, and particular flowers――these are an
integral part of all descriptive poetry; but, in order to make them
her especial poetic stock, she calls them by a curious and grotesque
nomenclature, whose terms were undoubtedly devised with an ultimate
view toward picturesque artificial composition. Her birds are not the
sweet-syllabled singers of classic song; she eschews the nightingale
and lark for jackdaws, wagtails, grouse, coot, rail, cushat, and mews.
Her grasses and flowers are less grotesque and better adapted to
sentimentalism in style: marigolds, foxglove, heather, daffodils――very
fond is she of daffodils――orchis, bluebells, golden-broom, vetches,
anemone, clover――her muse is very often in clover――ling, marybuds,
cowslips, and cuckoo-pint. The bee appears with industrious frequency;
his colors and his business are alike serviceable in a kind of
composition both picturesque and fantastic, He is as full of available
verbal suggestion as of honey. The ships are invariably bowing to each
other, to the land, or to the port. The figure is a good one, and
true, but its recurrence soon renders it tiresome and exposes the
dryness of the poet’s fancy. And after all Shakspere has been
beforehand with her. In the _Merchant of Venice_ Antonio is told that
his mind is tossing on the ocean, where his argosies with portly sail,
like signiors and rich burghers of the flood,

  “Do overpeer the petty traffickers,
  _That curt’sy to them_, do them reverence,
   As they fly by them with their woven wings.”

The sea――which has supplied all the poets, from Homer down, with noble
and beautiful images, lofty, grand, awful, terrible, or simply
lovely,――the sea to Jean Ingelow is as a sleek servant who comes in to
fill up a gap in the discourse or provide a necessary digression in
the narrative. “A Sea Song” contains nothing of the sea except “salt
sea foam” repeated. Her sea, stars, sun, and moon are all domestic.
They perform no higher functions than the pipes of parsley or “the
green ribbon” that “pranks the down.” Her sun either “stoops” or is
“level”; her moon “droops”; the sea is usually “level,” and when
disturbed, never awakens any sense of the sublime. Nothing more than
her apparent imbecility in poetic treatment of the sea is wanting to
dispose of the hope that Jean Ingelow can ever become a better poet
than she appeared to be in her first volume.

Mrs. Browning, in one of her earlier efforts, “The Seraphim,” makes
Ador and Zerah speak of “the glass sea-shore.” But we do not remember
noting a recurrence of the expression throughout her tens of thousands
of lines. Mrs. Browning seems to have been conscious that she was
unequal to an adequate depicting of marine grandeur, and she rarely
attempts it, except in an instant’s lofty sweep remindful of Homer――as
if she caught a single breath of his inspiration, and pressed it into
her verse. She had more imagination than Jean Ingelow; Jean has the
readier fancy. Mrs. Browning’s conceptions of the awe and beauty of
the sea were far above her power of description, whose efforts are
often turgid and swell into bombast; so she does not attempt, except
in modest discretion, to write of the sea at all. Miss Ingelow, on the
contrary, discovers the ocean only at her feet, or through the limited
vision of a pretty opera-glass. Thus it becomes a mere commonplace in
her stanzas; she is frivolous where Mrs. Browning would have been
turgid had she not been cautious.

The sea, indeed, has wrecked most of the poets who did not hug the
shore. Only the few greatest of the number have been able, like Jason,
to tempt its unknown breadth, and fewer still return from Colchis
without a Medea to torment them. The sea will always be the final
touchstone of poetic genius. Of recent poets, Tennyson has been most
ambitious and most successful; but his best ocean views may be seen
from along the shores of the _Æneid_. The little ’scapes which are
strictly his own are artificial and under-done; his pigment is only
the residuum of lapis-lazuli――ultramarine ashes.

Jean Ingelow’s “vice of design” is very sadly shown, too, in her
vocabulary. She wanders about in dusty, unused dictionaries, searching
out odd, obsolete, obscure, and ambiguous words. Because a term is
confessedly obsolete is no sound reason why it should not be revived;
but there is no justification for inserting it in a text where it must
play the unbecoming part of a conspicuous intruder who can make no
satisfactory excuse for his presence in uncongenial company. Where the
silenced lexicons do not afford the desired material, she is not loath
to make new combinations, and we are harassed by “bewrayed,” “amerce,”
“ancientry,” “thrid,” “scorpe,” “eygre,” “chine,” “brattling,” etc.
The best illustration of the artificiality and affectation of her
style is found in one of her most pleasing and most popular poems, and
it would be deservedly much more popular were these blemishes of
etymology and simperings of rhetoric removed. We quote stanzas enough
of “Divided” to exhibit her individuality both of thought and diction:

  “An empty sky, a world of heather,
     Purple of foxglove, yellow of broom;
   We two among them, wading together,
     Shaking out honey, treading perfume.

       *     *     *     *     *

  “Flusheth the rise with her purple favor,
     Groweth the cleft with her golden ring,
  ’Twixt the two brown butterflies waver,
     Lightly settle, and sleepily swing.

       *     *     *     *     *

  “Hey the green ribbon! We kneeled beside it,
     We parted the grasses, dewy and sheen;
   Drop over drop there filtered and slided
     A tiny bright beck that trickled between.

  “Tinkle, tinkle, sweetly it sung to us,
     Light was our talk as of faëry bells,――
   Faëry wedding bells faintly rung to us
     Down in their fortunate parallels.”

The “beck” grows into a widening stream and divides them.

  “A shady freshness, chafers whirring,
     A little piping of leaf-hid birds;
  A flutter of wings, a fitful stirring,
     A cloud to the eastward snowy as curds.

       *     *     *     *     *

  “Stately prows are rising and bowing
     (Shouts of mariners winnow the air),
  And level sands for banks endowing
     The tiny green ribbon that shows so fair.”

In the last two verses Miss Ingelow, unconsciously forgetting her
previous straining after literal effects, writes these true thoughts,
which are the most finely poetical in the entire poem:

  “And yet I know past all doubting, truly――
     A knowledge greater than grief can dim,
   I know, as he loved, he will love me duly,
    Yea better, e’en better than I loved him.

  “And as I walk by the vast, calm river,
     The awful river so dread to see.
   I say, ‘Thy breadth and thy depth for ever
     Are bridged by his thoughts that cross to me.’”

Only artificial poems can be well parodied, and the parody holds the
mirror up to the artifices, so that even the author must make
confession. The cleverest burlesques which have reached the public of
late, reproducing in an exaggerated form the faults of the modern
affected school of poetry, are those of C. S. Calverley.[133] The
merit of his rhymed farces――which is precisely what he makes of his
models――is nowhere more happily illustrated than in the following,
which needs no introduction. It is entitled “Lovers, and a Reflection”:

  “In moss-prankt dells which the sunbeams flatter
    (And heaven it knoweth what that may mean;
  Meaning, however, is no great matter),
     Where woods are a-tremble, with rifts atween;

  “Through God’s own heather we wonned together,
     I and my Willie (O love, my love!);
   I need hardly remark it was glorious weather,
     And flitterbats wavered alow, above;

  “Boats were curtsying, rising, bowing
    (Boats in that climate are so polite),
   And sands were a ribbon of green endowing,
     And O the sun-dazzle on bark and bight!

  “Through the rare red heather we danced together
    (O love, my Willie!), and smelt for flowers;
   I must mention again it was gorgeous weather――
     Rhymes are so scarce in this world of ours:――

  “By rises that flushed with their purple favors,
     Thro’ becks that brattled o’er grasses sheen,
   We walked or waded, we two young shavers,
     Thanking our stars we were both so green.

  “We journeyed in parallels, I and Willie――
     In fortunate parallels! Butterflies,
   Hid in weltering shadows of daffodilly
     Or marjoram, kept making peacock eyes;

       *     *     *     *     *

  “And Willie ’gan sing (O, his notes were fluty;
     Wafts fluttered them out to the white winged sea)――
   Something made up of rhymes that have done much duty,
     Rhymes (better to put it) of ‘ancientry’;

       *     *     *     *     *

  “Oh! if billows and pillows and hours and flowers,
     And all the brave rhymes of an elder day,
   Could be furled together this genial weather,
     And carted, or carried, on wafts away,
   Nor ever again trotted out――ay me!
   How much fewer volumes of verse there’d be!”

Miss Ingelow’s most pretentious poem, next to “Divided,” is the
“Letter L.” It has all her characteristic faults, intensified by a
curious jog-trot metre:

  “We sat on grassy slopes that meet
     With sudden dip the level strand;
   The trees hung overhead――our feet
     Were on the sand.

       *     *     *     *     *

  “And let alighting jackdaws fleet
     Adown it open-winged, and pass
   Till they could touch with outstretched feet
     The warmèd grass.”

And so on. Calverley has a little versification entitled “Changed.”
Mark how ingeniously adroit he is in getting the jog-trot:

  “I know not why my soul is racked
     Why I ne’er smile as was my wont;
   I only know that, as a fact,
             I don’t.

  “I used to roam o’er glen and glade,
     Buoyant and blithe as other folk:
   And not unfrequently I made
             A joke.

       *     *     *     *     *

  “I cannot sing the old songs now!
     It is not that I deem them low;
  ’Tis that I can’t remember how
             They go.”

Calverley’s exhilarating volume, by the way, is not all parody; many
of its numbers are original expressions of as pure fun, capitally
expressed, as mirth ever conceived or art wove into verse.

Jean Ingelow is not altogether artificial. Occasionally she writes a
terse truth:

  “One striking with a pickaxe thinks the shock
   Shall move the seat of God”;

or falls into a simple, unaffected strain:

  “Far better in its place the lowliest bird
     Should sing aright to Him the lowliest song,
   Than that a seraph strayed should take the word
     And sing His glory wrong.”

Hers is that oft-quoted couplet:

  “Is there never a chink in the world above
   Where they listen for words from below?”

“The Carpenter,” relating the touching story of his wife’s death to
“The Scholar,” says with happy directness:

  “’Tis sometimes natural to be glad;
   And no man can be always sad,
   Unless he wills to have it so.”

“The High Tide on the Coast of Lincolnshire” is widely popularized by
lyceum readers, who find its energy well fitted for semi-dramatic
recitation; and certain divisions of the “Songs of Seven,” notably
“Love” and “Giving in Marriage,” possess lyrical richness.

The thought of Jean Ingelow’s poems is always clean-of-heart; she
eschews――generally――psychological tendencies, and, although far from
lucid, her longer flights of speculation are merely curious, obscure,
and fanciful rather than vicious or misleading. Indeed, according to
her measure of grace, she is abjectly devout, worshipping with Eastern
blindness a Deity of whose attributes she conceives only one――Love;
and, in the humble resignation of a sightless child, she casts herself
into the arms of her notion of what that Love is, and rests there,
content to seek no knowledge outside herself. But even within these
sacred limits her disposition to artificiality in expression
unconsciously enters, to mar, with incongruous ornament, the limpid
thought:

  “For, O my God! thy creatures are so frail,
     Thy bountiful creation is so fair,
   That, drawn before us, like the Temple veil,
     It hides the Holy Place from thought and care,
   Giving man’s eyes instead its sweeping fold.
   Rich as with cherub wings and apples wrought of gold.

  “Purple and blue and scarlet――shimmering bells
     And rare pomegranates on its broidered rim,
   Glorious with chain and fretwork that the smell
     Of incense shakes to music dreamy and dim,
   Till on a day comes loss, that God makes gain,
   And death and darkness rend the veil in twain.”

Literal criticism of Jean Ingelow is, however, abashed and almost
silenced by the essence of her verse, which, in its chastity and
beauty, is above the touch of cavil. She is one of our few
contemporaneous poets who can look upon the face of her own work
without a blush. Apparently past the zenith of her productive talent,
she may look gratefully back upon her modest and constant rise, and
say:

  “Nothing is here for tears, nothing to wail
   Or knock the breast.”

She need not avert her gaze from any line, and plead that the public
forgets it was hers and a woman’s. Wanting the genius of poetry, her
inspiration has been only that of intense poetic feeling wrought out
by the canons of verse; but, although only one of many in this
respect, the work itself is far above the average of its class.

                      “Many fervent souls
  Strike rhyme on rhyme who would strike steel on steel,
  If steel had offered, in a restless heat
  Of doing something. Many tender souls
  Have strung their losses on a rhyming thread,
  As children cowslips――the more pains they take,
  The work more withers …
  … Alas! near all the birds
  Will sing at dawn, and yet we do not take
  The chaffering swallow for the holy lark.”

While the popular magazines and the newspapers are daily lowering the
standard of taste, and degrading and corrupting the sources of
literary enjoyment as well as of personal honor and actual virtue, the
regret is irresistible that a pleasing versifier like Jean Ingelow
should not contribute more to a total of general reading into which
what is known as “popular poetry” so largely enters.


     [131] _Jean Ingelow’s Poems._ Boston: Roberts Brothers.

     [132] _Essays in Criticism_, p. 334.

     [133] _Fly-Leaves._ By C. S. C.




NEW PUBLICATIONS.


  TERRA INCOGNITA; OR, THE CONVENTS OF THE UNITED KINGDOM. By John
    Nicholas Murphy. London: Burns & Oates. (For sale by The Catholic
    Publication Society.)

An unknown land indeed is this that Mr. Murphy traverses――unknown, it
is to be feared, not only to his “Protestant fellow-subjects of Great
Britain and Ireland, for whose information it has been written” and to
whom it is dedicated by the author, but also to too many of his
Catholic fellow subjects, as well as to Catholics generally. The book
is, in brief, a history of the growth and spread of the religious
Orders in Great Britain and Ireland, the greater portion of it being
devoted to their work and increase since a removal of the penal
statutes enabled them to return in safety to the United Kingdom. The
interest of the narrative is simply absorbing. The work accomplished
by the Orders in face of a multitude of difficulties and dangers seems
little short of the miraculous. They crept back singly or in little
groups from France and Belgium, whence the first French Revolution
drove them out. Thither they had flown for refuge when the greater
revolution of the sixteenth century banished them and their faith from
what had been a land of saints. Units gathered units, brothers
brothers, sisters sisters, Congregations other Congregations, Orders
affiliated Orders, and within less than a century we behold the
consecrated yet desecrated soil of England and Ireland dotted with
religious houses, asylums, schools, colleges, where the old faith is
taught and practised. Those who are in search of the heroic, the
sensational, the pathetic, the marvellous, should read this book.
Their appetite will be satisfied with a healthy food. It is the old
story over and over again of what can be accomplished by those who are
really inflamed with a love of God and their neighbor. No one can rise
from the story of St. Vincent de Paul or Nano Nagle without a
moistening of the eye and a better feeling in his heart.

Mr. Murphy’s book was published some years ago, and the extracts from
secular and Protestant journals in Great Britain and Ireland show how
truly he met a popular want at a time when men like Mr. Newdegate were
bent on satisfying their own morbid curiosity and insane hatred of
Catholicity by forcing themselves on the peaceful communities of
Catholic ladies. If we have any Newdegates among us, they would do
well to take up Mr. Murphy’s volume, and see for themselves how these
“dark and cloistered women” spend their lives. The present volume is a
new and improved edition. As the author tells us in the preface, “The
statistics of convents have been largely amplified and brought down to
the present day. Several chapters have been re-written, and eleven new
chapters have been introduced.”


  THE CATHOLIC’S LATIN INSTRUCTOR IN THE PRINCIPAL CHURCH OFFICES AND
    DEVOTIONS. For the use of choirs, convents, and mission schools,
    and for self-teaching. By the Rev. E. Caswall, of the Oratory.
    London: Burns & Oates. 1876. (For sale by The Catholic Publication
    Society.)

Father Caswall has done the Catholic laity a great service by this
_Instructor_. As he truly observes in his preface, “A knowledge of
Latin is not needed for Catholic worship.… Nevertheless, to those
whose education admits of it an acquaintance with those portions of
the Latin Liturgy which are in most frequent public use must ever be a
legitimate and worthy object of interest.” Accordingly, he has put
himself to the very considerable trouble of preparing a manual, which,
although an experiment, will be found, we have no doubt, all that is
needed for enabling the laity of either sex, who have an English
education, to make themselves familiar with the language of the
church’s liturgy. It deals with grammar as little as possible, he
says, yet there will be found in Part II. more grammar than his words
may lead us to suppose. Moreover, there are ample directions given, at
every turn, for the right use of the book.

The work is primarily designed, as the title-page indicates, for
choirs and mission-schools. With regard to choirs, it is superfluous
to observe how much better and more pleasing to God is an intelligent
than a non-intelligent singing of the Latin. With regard to schools,
especially those where elementary instruction in secular Latin is
given, “Catholics will enjoy,” says our author, “in the _living_
character of the language as used in the church offices, a great and
singular advantage.” And further, “What better _food for the mind_ can
we offer to our children,” he asks, “than the simple translation from
Latin into English――after a method easy alike to girls or boys――of
what they constantly hear and often join in singing in church?” Then,
as to the adult laity, there is “a large class of persons who, while
provided with missals and prayer-books abounding in Latin text and
side-by-side translations, yet, from want of a very little practical
insight, fail to derive from these manuals the advantage intended.
Others there are, devout persons of either sex, who might greatly
profit by the occasional use of Latin prayers, but are restrained (and
ladies especially) by an idea that in order to this they must first
have a complete knowledge of Latin. Such a bugbear――for it is little
else――will, let us hope, quickly yield to a steady practice of the
present exercises.”

The work consists of two Parts: “Part I. containing Benediction, the
choir portions of Mass, the Serving at Mass, and various Latin prayers
in ordinary use; Part II. comprising additional portions of the Mass,
Requiem Mass, Litany of the Saints, Vespers, Compline, and other
offices and devotions, with a short Grammar and Vocabulary.”

The only stricture we have to make regards the pronunciation of _A_.
The author says: “_A_, when fully sounded, is to be pronounced as _a_
in _far_. Examples: Pater, _Par_ter; laudamus, laud_ar_mus; ora,
or_ar_.” This is a very strange mistake. Had he heard, as we have,
“Glori_ar_ _r_in in excelsis,” “Benedict_ar_ _r_es,” “super omni_ar_
_r_est,” etc., he would never have directed that “_a_ should be
pronounced as _a_ in _far_.” We are aware that the English _r_ is
fainter than the Irish or American. Still, should not _h_ be
substituted for _r_ in the above? P_ah_ter, laud_ah_mus, or_ah_ are
the exact sounds.

With this very small exception, then, we can only speak of Father
Caswall’s manual with unqualified praise, and hope it may obtain the
wide circulation it deserves.


  ECCLESIASTICAL DISCOURSES DELIVERED ON SPECIAL OCCASIONS. By Bishop
    Ullathorne. London: Burns & Oates. 1876. (For sale by The Catholic
    Publication Society.)

“These discourses,” says their distinguished author in his preface,
“are called ecclesiastical because they were either addressed to
ecclesiastics or treat on ecclesiastical subjects. They form a volume
embracing certain points of pastoral theology――a subject on which we
have very little that is Catholic in our language, if we except the
excellent little book by Canon Oakeley.” They will therefore be
specially valuable to our clergy, while, at the same time, the bishop
“trusts there is much in them which may offer solid instruction to
thoughtful Catholic laymen.” One of the most important, and the one to
which we particularly invite the attention of our readers, both
clerical and lay, is that on mixed marriages, “delivered on occasion
of the Fourth Diocesan Synod of Birmingham.” Bishop Ullathorne is not
afraid to speak plainly on this subject. Indeed, his language is
startling but leaves no room for question of its truth. He speaks,
too, from an extensive experience of the evils resulting from mixed
marriages. Here is a passage (the italics are our own), p. 89:

“It would be as unjust as ungenerous not to admit that there _are_
Protestants who loyally keep the promises they have made in marriage
with Catholics, and who truly respect the faith and religious
exercises of their Catholic spouse, and fulfil their pledges
respecting the education of their children. _But_ prudence looks to
_what generally happens_, and not to the exceptional cases. And wisdom
never runs any serious risks in matters of the soul. _The individuals,
and even the families, that have fallen from the church through mixed
marriages, amount to numbers incredible to those who have not examined
the question thoroughly_; and the number of Catholics bound at this
moment in mixed marriages, who live in a hard and bitter conflict for
the exercise of their religion, for that of their children, and in
certain cases for the soundness of their moral life, could they, with
all the facts, be known, would deter any thoughtful Catholic from
contracting a mixed marriage.”

The bishop has extended this discourse in order to give the early
discipline of the church on the matter. He further makes his argument
impregnable by citations from popes and councils. Moreover, he
concludes the instruction “with an admirable passage from the synodal
address published by the hierarchy of Australia”; and the condition of
Catholics in Australia, as regards the ordinary excuses for mixed
marriages, bears striking resemblance, be it remembered, to their
position here.


  EVERY-DAY TOPICS: A Book of Briefs. By J. G. Holland. New York:
   Scribner, Armstrong & Co. 1876.

To one person at least, and to one only, this volume of _Topics_ is
likely to be of lasting interest. That person is the author. The
_Topics_ are short articles on a variety of subjects which have
appeared from month to month in Scribner’s magazine. They are of about
the average length of an ordinary newspaper article, and of about
equal depth. They lack the newspaper liveliness, however, and the
English is in great part of that slipshod style that is mistaken by so
many nowadays for an evidence of careless strength. “Familiarly
didactic” is the character that Dr. Holland in his preface seems to
claim for this and others of his books, and the very phrase stamps the
man. The book is tiresome, prosy, and fussy. Any one of the articles
is too long for its purpose; what, then, must a volume of them be?

Dr. Holland is apparently a Christian or nothing. He is for ever
prating about “the church” and attacking “the world.” It is to be
feared that his Christianity is of a very vague character. His zeal is
unfortunately without knowledge. He is constantly making grave
mistakes with the most solemn confidence in his own infallibility, and
thunders away on every kind of subject with a “trenchant ignorance”
that would be amusing did it not touch such grave matters. Dr. Holland
may have the best intentions in the world, but he would do well to
weigh his words a little before undertaking to champion “the church.”
What particular “church” is he for ever defending? The Christian
Church, he would doubtless reply. But which is the Christian Church?
This is a question that Dr. Holland is quite capable of undertaking to
decide in a future “Topic,” and he would do not only his own readers
but the world at large infinite service by making this matter clear
once for all.

We are quite justified in putting this question to Dr. Holland; for
everybody knows what a Catholic means when he speaks of “the church.”
But in Dr. Holland’s “church” it is doubtful whether Catholics are
allowed a place. At least, we should judge so from the manner in which
he treats of them whenever their name occurs in the _Topics_.


  LINKED LIVES. By Lady Gertrude Douglas. New York: Benziger Brothers.
    1876.

The English Catholic journals greeted this story with such an unusual
flourish of trumpets that we were led to expect something
extraordinary in the way of novel-writing. It is extraordinary in no
sense. It is not even extraordinarily bad. It is eminently dull,
altogether commonplace, and only saved from utter insipidity by here
and there an indication of real power.

Of course it relies for its main interest on the good old English
Catholic story-theme――conversion. To relieve the monotony of this
subject, probably, the author sprinkled the narrative with dashes of
what is meant for sensation. She takes us to the dens of thieves, to
the reformatory, the prison, the court of justice. Such scenes may be
rendered exciting――by a Dickens or a Victor Hugo. We are very happy to
see that Lady Gertrude Douglas is not at all at home among them. All
this portion of the book reads pretty much like an ordinary police
report, and all the desire in the world on the reader’s part cannot
invest Katie McKay or any of her companions with even a touch of the
interest that Dickens threw around Nancy Sykes. Such themes should not
be touched at all unless they can be made elevating. It takes a very
experienced, strong, yet tender hand to bare the ulcers and foul sores
of society. The process is a most delicate one. If well done, it
excites pity, remorse, sorrow, indignation, that such things can be
among Christian peoples; if ill done, it is revolting and only excites
disgust.

Great pains have been bestowed on the delineation of the character of
Mabel Forrester, and not without success. Indeed, she and her brother
Guy, who is killed off too early, are almost the only interesting
persons in the volume. By the way, what a lugubrious story it is!
Everybody is constantly down at the mouth. Poor Guy is killed at a
yacht-race, which he has just won. Katie McKay throws herself into the
sea with her babe, which has been chloroformed (!) by Katie’s sister;
and we could almost wish that Katie had been left in the sea. She is
dragged out, however, to receive two years’ imprisonment. The rascal
whom she married dies in prison. Her sister dies in her bed, but with
a strong intimation that she is likely to be consigned to the lower
regions. There are several other deaths of minor consequence; and
finally, after being induced to accompany Mabel on a voyage to
Australia, to assist at her wedding with her elderly lover, Hugh
Fortescue――who, of course, is in the last stage of consumption at the
time――the vessel takes fire and Mabel perishes. Equally of course,
Hugh, as soon as he receives the news, dies also, “aged fifty-three,”
as the tombstone erected to his memory in Australia informs us.
Surely, after all this, we may say with Macbeth that we have “supped
full of horrors,” and, like him also, we feel none the better for
them.

A great fault with the book, too, is that the fate of every one is
foreshadowed early in the story, and the recurrence of such remarks as
“But we must not anticipate,” “But of that anon,” is peculiarly
exasperating when the whole murder is out in the very sentence that
occasions such a remark. The convert-making is far too labored, and
there is too much of it.

We should not have been at the unpleasing pains to write of this book
as we have done, did we not see signs in it of a really good Catholic
story-writer, who is likely to be spoiled for any future work worthy
of the name by the injudicious praise which has been lavished on this,
which we take to be her first book. The lady can describe natural
scenery well, can touch a tender chord with true pathos, can display
strength at times. She only needs more interest of plot, and to avoid
scenes and characters of which she knows little or nothing. All the
plot in the present volume consists of the slowly-dragged-out
conversion of Mabel to Catholicity――which religion clashes with the
creed of the elderly and by no means pleasant parson to whom she is
affianced――and the consequent breaking off of the match. Finally he
also is converted, and the _dénoûment_ is as given above. To tag five
hundred and twenty-five pages of a story on a plot of such very
slender device is rather overweighting it. The French scenes are the
best in the book, and even they are needlessly marred by what the
author doubtless considers a beauty――the supposed literal translation
of the French characters’ speech into English, which is a barbarism.


  THE ILLUSTRATED CATHOLIC FAMILY ALMANAC for the United States, for
    the Year of Our Lord 1877. New York: The Catholic Publication
    Society. 1877.

The season would scarcely be itself without this admirable little
annual. It is always bright, instructive, and amusing, and the number
for the present year shows no falling off in these qualities. The
first portion of the _Almanac_ contains the usual calendars,
astronomical and ecclesiastical, with the information respecting
Catholic feasts and fasts necessary for the coming year. Among the
biographical sketches, that of Dr. Brownson claims the first place. It
is illustrated by an admirably-executed portrait. There are excellent
portraits also of Bishop Verot, Archbishop Connolly of Halifax, N. S.,
Very Rev. Dr. Moriarty, O.S.A., Rev. Francis Piquet, Pius VII.,
Vittoria Colonna, all accompanied by brief but interesting sketches.
There are, as usual, pictures of old Catholic landmarks in this
country, Ireland, and other lands, with pleasing descriptions. Among
these, that of St. Joseph’s Church, in Philadelphia, is especially
interesting. In addition to the complete and very valuable list of the
popes, which was published for the first time last year, and is wisely
retained in the present number, there is a complete catalogue of the
kings of Ireland, from the Firbholg conquest down to the landing of
Henry II. of England. To this is appended some valuable historical
remarks. Indeed, there is not a page of this _Almanac_ that can be
called dull, and its cheapness happily places it within easy reach of
every reader. We only wish that such cheapness and real excellence
could be oftener combined in Catholic books.


  THE LIFE AND LETTERS OF SIR THOMAS MORE. By Agnes M. Stewart,
    authoress of _Margaret Roper_, etc. 8vo, pp. 365. London: Burns &
    Oates. 1876.

The lot of Sir Thomas More was cast in troublous times. He lived amid
storms that wrecked many a noble life, and yet no man ever bore
throughout a serener soul or a happier and gayer disposition. His
character is a study of the most healthful sort; for it exhibits the
rare picture of a man who deemed the sacrifice of power, wealth,
place, friends, and life itself, to principle and conscience, too
ordinary a duty to excite surprise. On whatever side we view the man,
the hero comes to light. He lived in an atmosphere of his own
creation, and whoever came within its influence left it a better and
wiser mortal. He was, in the best sense of the word, a Christian
philosopher and statesman. He would jest with Erasmus in antique
phrase as though he had but returned from the portico, while a
hair-shirt nettled his skin and his soul communed in frequent
ejaculation with its Creator.

As a letter-writer he will ever hold a foremost rank because of his
sense, humor, wit, and grace of expression. Even the careless
construction of some of his letters possesses a charm; for there you
see the man disclosing himself without reserve――careful, indeed, that
the picture be a true one, but indifferent as to the setting. What
could be more delightful than his letters to his children while these
were under the care of a tutor at home and he was engrossed by the
weighty concerns of office? He flies to the pen as a refuge from
distracting thoughts, and pours out his soul to his little ones with a
sweet _abandon_; he is sportive and grave by turns and veils deep
philosophy and wise counsels beneath the garb of a fresh and mirthful
phraseology. He evidently believed with Horace:

  “Quamquam ridentem dicere verum
   Quid vetat?”

“And how can you want matter of writing to me, who am delighted to
hear either of your studies or your play, whom you may then
exceedingly please when, having nothing to write of, you write as
largely as you can of that nothing, than which nothing is more easy
for you to do, especially being women, and therefore prattlers by
nature, amongst whom a great story riseth out of nothing.” He then
advises them to be careless in nothing, but to bestow conscientious
pains on all their performances. The homelife of Sir Thomas affords us
the best glimpse of the true character of this great man, and lends a
new and sad significance to the scene which occurred between his
heart-broken daughter and himself, as he tottered, haggard and
emaciated, to the block. He loved his home as the pupil of his eye,
and sighed for it when duty called him away. With even such a shrew as
his second wife he contrived to make his a model household, where
refinement, piety, and cheerfulness ever reigned. Smart retort and
repartee, brilliant things and witty sayings, were the salt which lent
savor to many a pious reflection and devout allusion while the family
shared their daily meals. Thus did Sir Thomas, by being a devout
Catholic and a lover of learning, convert a possible home of bickering
and discontent into one which nurtured peace, contentment, happiness,
and hope.

Unless we pause to study Sir Thomas More in his home at Chelsea, we
will fail to discern the peerless knight, the virtuous man, the lover
of religion, the sententious philosopher (all which he was), amid the
grime and lustful air of Henry’s court,

  “Where the individual withers, and the world is more and more.”

Next to Sir Thomas as father, friend, and husband, the reader loves to
view him in his exalted capacity of chancellor. From him indeed, the
title has acquired its synonymous meaning with unblemished integrity
and purity immaculate; for throughout his whole political career he
never recognized friend or foe as such; he treated all alike with
unswerving impartiality. And in pursuing this course he obtained the
reward which he especially desired: the testimony of a good
conscience. He felt that, though “there are innumerable hopes to
innumerable men, he is happy who is happy day by day”; and this is
just the sort of happiness which is born of a good conscience. His
decisions bore the mark of his sterling sense and unyielding will, and
though many exceptions had been taken to his renderings by those whose
interests he countered, not a single reversal could be obtained, while
others degraded their high offices and stooped to pander to the
lustful instincts of the king. More studied to grace the chancellor’s
gown by the practice of every virtue pertaining to the dignity of his
position, and shone forth more brilliantly by contrast with the pliant
tools of Henry.

  “Velut inter ignes
   Luna minores.”

The speech which he delivered on the occasion of his investiture will
ever remain a model of dignity and modesty. While deprecating the
praise bestowed on him by the Duke of Norfolk, he failed not to
express his just appreciation of the high and important trust to which
he had been called, and this in language so fitting and graceful that
his admirers likened him to Cicero.

Miss Stewart, who but a short time ago gave to the world a charming
novelette with the title of the _Chancellor and his Daughter_,
addressed herself to the task of compiling these memoirs with laudable
enthusiasm, such, indeed, as no one acquainted with the subject could
fail to experience. Here is a hero-worship of the right sort, growing
out of the virtues and learning of her idol, and so far not to be
reckoned with Macaulay’s stupid admiration of William III. or
Carlyle’s still more fatuous veneration for Frederick of Prussia. She
has earned a new title to the esteem in which she is held in England.
The book contains an admirable autotype fac-simile of the celebrated
picture of the meeting between the chancellor and his daughter.


  THE SCIENCE OF THE SPIRITUAL LIFE. By Father Francis Neumayr, S.J.
    London: Burns & Oates. (For sale by The Catholic Publication
    Society.)

This is a poor translation of an excellent little book on ascetical
theology. Francis Neumayr was born in Munich in 1697. Early in life he
entered the Society of Jesus, and, having finished his studies, taught
theology with great success during a number of years. He was then sent
to fill the pulpit of the Cathedral of Augsburg, and during the ten
years in which he held this position acquired an extraordinary
reputation as an orator. He did not, however, confine himself to
preaching, but wrote on various subjects relating to the religious
controversies of his age. His writings were very popular in Germany,
and some of them made their way throughout Catholic Europe. _The
Science of the Spiritual Life_, which is one of his most widely-known
works, is a compendium of what has been called the “science of the
saints.” It is written with good judgment and a thorough knowledge of
the subject, in a style which is concise without being obscure. There
is nothing in it which the simplest cannot readily understand, and yet
there is everything that the most learned could desire.


  MISSALE ROMANUM ex Decreto Sacros. Concilii Tridentini restitutum,
    S. Pii V. Pontificis Maximi jussu editum, Clementis VIII. et
    Urbani VIII. auctoritate recognitum. Editio Ratisbonensis X. hujus
    forma altera missis novissimis aucta. Cum textu et cantu a
    Sacrorum Rituum Congregatione adprobato. 1876. Ratisbonæ, Neo
    Eboraci, et Cincinnatii: Sumptibus, chartis, et typis Frederici
    Pustet, S. Sedis Apost. et Sacr. Rituum Congreg. typographi.

This beautiful and finely-printed Missal fully sustains the reputation
that Mr. Pustet has already gained for his liturgical books. The paper
on which it is printed is of the finest quality, and the type by far
the best we have yet seen. Special praise is due to the printing of
the notation in the prefaces and other musical portions of the work,
which is singularly distinct and clear. The Missal is adorned with
many fine and artistic pictures, and all the introits are embellished
with finely executed initial letters. The proof-sheets have all been
read by the Sacred Congregation and approved.


  MARGARET ROPER; OR, THE CHANCELLOR AND HIS DAUGHTER. By Agnes
    Stewart, Authoress of _Florence O’Neill_, _The Foster-Sisters_,
    etc. Baltimore: Kelly, Piet & Co. 1876.

This little book will amply repay perusal. The heroine, Margaret
Roper, the favorite daughter of Sir Thomas More, was the model of a
noble Christian woman, worthy in every way of her gifted and heroic
father. Sir Thomas More was, in the truest and broadest sense of the
words, a grand character, a peerless Christian knight without fear and
without reproach, true to his honest convictions, to his friends, true
to the faith for which he died with the calm heroism of the early
martyrs. His murder――to borrow the language of one of his
biographers――was one of the blackest crimes ever perpetrated in
England under the form of law. Time has only increased the admiration
which his grand virtues extorted from his bitterest enemies, and the
most bigoted Protestants venerate his name more than that of Cranmer
or Cromwell, the unprincipled tools of the heartless tyrant, Henry
VIII., who deluged England with innocent blood. His letters to his
daughter, skilfully interwoven into the narrative, form a very
interesting feature of the volume before us. The character of the
greatest of English chancellors is sketched by the authoress with
historical fidelity, and the picture of his celebrated daughter is
drawn with equal devotion to historic truth.


  A PREPARATION FOR DEATH. Done out of French. Chicago: W. F. Squire.
    1876.

This is an excellent little book, quite cheap, and well adapted for
the sick room. It was originally “done out of French” by a writer in
Dublin and has been reprinted in this country by the present
publisher. It consists of short prayers, exhortations, and reflections
on the Passion of Our Lord. The _imprimatur_ of Bishop Foley is
attached.

Another work, though larger, which is peculiarly adapted for spiritual
reading during the month of the Holy Souls is the _Life of St.
Catherine of Genoa_, published by the Catholic Publication Society.
This is not only a beautiful and interesting life of one of those
great women who adorn the history of the Church in all ages, but
contains in addition St. Catherine’s treatise on Purgatory, which
together with her spiritual dialogues, as is said in the introduction,
“St. Francis of Sales, that great master in spiritual life, was
accustomed to read twice a year.” And “Frederick Schlegel, who was the
first to translate St. Catherine’s dialogues into German, regarded
them as seldom, if ever, equalled in beauty of style; and such has
been the effect of the example of Christian perfection in our saint,
that even the American Tract Society could not resist its attraction,
and published a short sketch of her life among its tracts, with the
title of her name by marriage, Catherine Adorno.” The words of the
saints are always golden. One can never repeat them too often or
ponder on them too long.


  SONGS IN THE NIGHT, AND OTHER POEMS. By the author of _Christian
    Schools and Scholars_. London: Burns & Oates. 1876.

Songs with a meaning are these, and full of sweet melody. The singer
evidently feels. The feelings are deep, the thought deep also, and
steeped in the purest well of religion. The versification is as varied
as it is happy; and, indeed, for both thought and expression
throughout this small volume we have nothing but praise. The title
owes its meaning to the fact that “several of the poems were
originally suggested by passages in the _Spiritual Canticles_ of St.
John of the Cross, whose use of the word _night_, in a mystic sense,
is too well known to need explanation.” The opening poem, “The
Fountain of the Night; or, the Canticle of the Soul rejoicing to know
God by Faith,” gives a good idea of the tone and excellence of the
volume:

  There is a Fount whence endless waters flow;
  There zephyrs play and fairest flowerets blow.
  Full well that crystal Fountain do I know,
                            Though of the night.

  I know the verdant hills that gird it round;
  Its source I know not, for no thought can sound
  The Spring whence all things first their being found
                                In the dark night.

  I know no earthly beauty to compare
  With that mysterious Fount, so calm and fair;
  All things in heaven and earth are pictured there,
                            Though of the night.

  The tide wells forth in many a flowing river,
  Yet is the Fountain-head exhausted never;
  Onward it flows, for ever and for ever,
                            On through the night.

  No cloud obscures, no passing shadows rest
  Upon that Fountain’s clear, unruffled breast,
  Itself the very source of light confessed,
                            Though of the night.

  Forth from this spring a sparkling Torrent flows;
  Who shall the secret of its birth disclose?
  And yet I know the source from whence it rose,
                            Though of the night.

  I see from both a mighty River run,
  Yet dare not say when first its course begun;
  For Fountain, Torrent, River――all are one,
                            Though of the night.

  I know that all are ours――all hidden lie
  In form of Bread, hid from the curious eye
  To give us life. O love! O mystery
                              Of deepest night!

  And the Life seeks all living things to fill,
  To quench our thirst with water from the rill,
  To feed, to guide us, though in darkness still,
                                As of the night.

  And ever of that Fount I long to drink,
  And ever of that living Bread I think,
  And linger by that flowing River’s brink
                          Through the long night.


  THE FIRST CHRISTMAS FOR OUR DEAR LITTLE ONES. By Miss Rosa
    Mulholland. New York and Cincinnati: Fr. Pustet.

This beautiful book will be welcomed by the little ones, for whom it
is intended, because, from the cover all the way through, it is bright
and attractive, and each picture is a pleasant surprise. All the
characters of the holy tale are made life-like and familiar, and the
children may feel themselves at home with the white-winged angels, the
eager shepherds, the stately Magi, and those nearer and dearer ones
who attended the Blessed Infant’s earliest years.

By parents this book should be welcomed, because anything that
illustrates home-lessons and makes them charming is a valuable friend
in the household, and because it provides an acceptable gift which
will bring home to children’s hearts the true meaning of the holiday
season. The verses are appropriate and not too difficult for the
little ones to enjoy.


  LECTURES ON SCHOLASTIC PHILOSOPHY. By Father John Cornoldi, S.J.
    Part I. Logic. London: Burns & Oates. 1876.

Quite a number of persons have recently undertaken the laudable but
difficult task of preparing elementary works on philosophy. Cornoldi’s
Lectures or Lessons in Philosophy are to be speedily published entire,
in an English translation, making two small volumes of from 300 to 350
pages each. A large part of the work is devoted to Rational Physics.
The Logic, just now issued, contains the simplest and most necessary
part of pure and applied logic in a _brochure_ of less than one
hundred pages. It seems to be made as simple and intelligible to
beginners as the nature of the subject permits. It is a defect,
however, in the translation, that Latin terms are sometimes used
without the least necessity, and Latin quotations are left
untranslated. We hope this defect will be supplied in a second edition.


  AN ESSAY CONTRIBUTING TO A PHILOSOPHY OF LITERATURE. By B. A. M.
    Second revised edition. Philadelphia: Claxton, Remsen &
    Haffelfinger. 1876.

The first edition of this solid and genial essay was noticed in THE
CATHOLIC WORLD. We are happy to see that its merit has received a
general recognition which must be gratifying to the author. It is a
book which grows upon one the more carefully it is perused, and we
have now an even higher esteem of its originality, sound learning,
discriminating judgment and taste than we had when we first commended
it as a work of genuine and rare excellence.


  THE VOICE OF JESUS SUFFERING, TO THE MIND AND HEART OF CHRISTIANS,
    ETC. By a Passionist Missionary Priest. New York: P. O’Shea, 37
    Barclay Street.

Another excellent book on our Lord’s Passion; but it differs from the
generality of such works in making our Lord himself relate the history
of his sufferings first, and then helping the auditor to “Practical
Reflections.” This is an admirable plan, in that it enables the reader
to bring the divine Object of his thoughts so much more really before
his imagination. This, together with the character of the “Practical
Reflections,” will be found, we are sure, to make meditation easy to
those who have hitherto given it up as requiring too great an effort.
And if the pious author shall have done no more than succeed in thus
facilitating devotion to the Passion, he will not have labored in vain.


  THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT. (To the end of the Lord’s Prayer.) By Henry
    James Coleridge, of the Society of Jesus. London: Burns & Oates.
    1876.

This is the third division of Father Coleridge’s treatise on the
Public Life of our Lord Jesus Christ. We are glad to learn that the
reception of the preceding volume on the Beatitudes has “encouraged
him to attempt a somewhat fuller treatment of the rest of the Sermon
on the Mount than he had originally thought of.” Those who have read
the volume on the Beatitudes need no insurance from us that they will
find in this new work an abundance of beautiful lessons, and
particularly some we much need at the present time. The nine chapters
on the Lord’s Prayer (chapters xv.-xxiii.) will furnish the devout
with many helps to meditation on the clauses of this summary of prayer.

  THE LIFE OF THE VERY REVEREND MOTHER MADELEINE LOUISE SOPHIE BARAT,
    FOUNDRESS OF THE SOCIETY OF THE SACRED HEART OF JESUS. By M.
    l’Abbé Baunard. Translated by Lady Georgiana Fullerton.
    Roehampton: 1876. (For sale by The Catholic Publication Society.)

The original French edition of this admirable work has already been
noticed at length in THE CATHOLIC WORLD. The English edition is
brought out in two handsome volumes, and the distinguished name of the
translator furnishes every guarantee for a faithful and excellent
rendering of the original. So great has been the demand for the work
that a large order was exhausted almost immediately on its arrival in
this country.


  THE DEVOTION OF THE HOLY ROSARY. By Michael Müller, C.S.S.R. New
    York: Benziger Brothers.

Father Müller is a tireless writer. His works are for the most part
addressed to those who are too often forgotten by Catholic
writers――the ordinary classes. He who provides the people with books
of devotion which they will _read_, and not put on the shelf, does a
great and good work. Under a modest appearance Father Müller’s books
conceal much learning and knowledge, the fruit evidently of very
extensive reading, while the whole is pervaded with a spirit of piety
and zeal. The present volume is devoted to an explanation of that most
popular of devotions――the rosary. Those who care to satisfy themselves
as to what the rosary is, what it is intended for, what it has done in
the service of the church and for the salvation of souls, will find in
this volume much to interest and instruct them, as well as to increase
their fervor. The concluding chapter treats of the “Devotion of the
Scapular.”


  SHORT SERMONS PREACHED IN THE CHAPEL OF ST. MARY’S COLLEGE, OSCOTT.
    Collected and edited by the President. London: Burns & Oates.
    1876. (For sale by The Catholic Publication Society.)

These sermons will be found very serviceable to our clergy, who are
often sorely pressed for time to prepare their discourses. One
instruction such as these is better than ten ordinary sermons of twice
or thrice its length. Lay persons also will benefit greatly by making
their spiritual reading from this volume. The subjects are wisely
selected. There are twenty-seven in all, with two funeral sermons in
an appendix.




THE CATHOLIC WORLD.

VOL. XXIV., No. 142.――JANUARY, 1877.

Copyright: Rev. I. T. HECKER. 1877.




JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.[134]


A national literature is the most perfect expression of the best
thoughts and highest sentiments of the people of which it is born, and
of whose life it is the truest record. No other Englishman may have
ever written or thought like Shakspere, but he wrote and thought from
the fulness of a mind and heart that drew their inspiration from the
life of the English people. He may be great nature’s best interpreter,
but she was revealed to him through English eyes, and spoke in English
accents. The power to take up into one’s own mind the thoughts of a
whole people; to give a voice to the impressions made upon them by
nature, religion, and society; to interpret to them their doubts,
longings, and aspirations; to awaken the chords of deep and hidden
sympathy which but await the touch of inspiration――is genius. Every
great author is the type of a generation, the interpreter of an age,
the delineator of a phase of national life. Between the character of a
people, therefore, and its literature there is an intimate relation;
and one great cause of the feebleness of American literature is
doubtless the lack of conscious nationality in the American people. We
have not yet outgrown the provincialism of our origin, nor assimilated
the heterogeneous elements which from many sources have come to swell
the current of our life. The growth of a national literature has been
hindered also, by our necessary intellectual dependence on England.
For, though it was a great privilege to possess from the start a rich
and highly-developed language, with this boon we received bonds which
no revolution could break. When the British colonies of North America
were founded, Shakspere and Bacon had written, Milton was born, and
the English language had received a form which nor power nor time
could change; and before our ancestors had leisure or opportunity to
turn from the rude labors of life in the wilderness to more
intellectual pursuits, it had taken on the polish and precision of the
age of Queen Anne. Henceforward, to know English, it was necessary to
study its classics; and in them Americans found the imprint of a
mental type which had ceased to be their own. And being themselves as
yet without strongly-marked or well-defined national features of
character, they became fatally mere imitators of works which could not
be read without admiration, or studied without exciting in those who
had thoughts to express the strong desire of imitation. Their
excellence served to intimidate those who, while admiring, could not
hope to rival their ease and elegance; and thus, in losing something
of native vigor and freshness, our best writers have generally
acquired only an artificial polish and a foreign grace.

It must be remembered, too, that more than any other people we have
been and are practical and utilitarian; and this is more specially
true of the New Englanders, whose mental activity has been greater
than that of any other Americans. We have loved knowledge as the means
of power and wealth, and not as an element of refinement and culture.
If evidence of this were needed, it would suffice to point to our
school system, which is based upon the notion that the sole aim of
education should be to fit man for the practical business of life. As
the result, knowledge has been widely diffused, but the love of
excellence has been diminished. Education, when considered as merely a
help to common and immediate ends, neither strengthens nor refines the
higher qualities of mind. If we may rely upon our own experience in
college, we should say that the prevailing sentiment with young
Americans is that it is waste of time to study anything which cannot
be put to practical use either in commercial or professional life; and
this in spite of the efforts very generally made by the professors to
inspire more exalted ideas. We have known the wretched sophism that it
is useless to read logic, because in the world men do not reason in
syllogisms, to pass current in a class of graduates. This low and
utilitarian view of education does not affect alone our notions of the
value of literature, in the stricter sense of the word, but exerts
also a hurtful influence upon the study of science. For science, like
literature, to be successfully cultivated, in its higher developments
at least, must be sought for its own sake, without thought of those
ulterior objects to which certainly it may be made to conduce. The
love of knowledge for itself, the conviction that knowledge is its own
end, is rarely found among us, and we therefore have but little
enthusiasm for literary excellence or philosophic truth. The noblest
thoughts spring from the heart, and he who seeks to know from a
calculating spirit will for ever remain a stranger to the higher and
serener realms of mind.

Another cause by which the growth of American literature has been
unfavorably affected may be found in the unlimited resources of the
country, offering to all opportunities of wealth or fame. The demand
for ability of every kind is so great that talent is not permitted to
mature. The young man who possesses readiness of wit and a sprightly
fancy, if he does not enter one of the learned professions or engage
in commerce, almost fatally drifts into a newspaper office, than which
a place more unfavorable to intellectual pursuits or to true culture
of mind cannot easily be imagined. If a book is the better the farther
the author keeps away all thought of the reader, under what
disadvantages does not he write whose duty it is made to think only of
the reader! To be forced day by day to write upon subjects of which he
knows little; to give opinions without having time to weigh arguments
or to consider facts; to interpret passing events in the interests of
party or in accordance with popular prejudice; to exaggerate the
virtues of friends and the vices of opponents; to court applause by
adapting style to the capacity and taste of the crowd; and to do all
this hurriedly and in a rush, is to be an editor. When we reflect that
it is to work of this kind that a very considerable part of the
literary ability of the country is devoted, it is manifest that the
result must be not only to withdraw useful laborers from nobler
intellectual pursuits, but to lower and pervert the standard of taste.
They who accustom their minds to dwell upon the picture of human life
as presented in a daily newspaper, in which what is atrocious, vulgar,
or startling receives greatest prominence, will hardly cultivate or
retain an appreciation of elevated thoughts or the graces of
composition.

As the public is content with crude and hasty writing, the crowd, who
are capable of such performance, rush in, eager to carry off the prize
of voluminousness, if not of excellence; and, in consequence, we
surpass all other nations in the number of worthless books which we
print. In fact, the great national defect is haste, and therefore a
want of thoroughness in our work.

But we have no thought of entering into an extended examination of the
causes to which the feebleness of American literature is to be
attributed. The very general recognition of the fact that it is
feeble, even when not marred by grosser faults, is probably the most
assuring evidence that in the future we may hope for something better.

Our weakness, however it may be accounted for, is most perceptible in
the highest realms of thought――philosophy and poetry. To the former
our contributions are valueless. No original thinker has appeared
among us; no one who has even aspired to anything higher than the
office of a commentator. This, indeed, can hardly be matter for
surprise, since we may be naturally supposed to inherit from the
English their deficiency in power of abstract thought and metaphysical
intuition. But in poetry they excel all other nations, whether ancient
or modern; and as they have transmitted to us their mental defects, we
might not unreasonably hope to be endowed with their peculiar gifts of
mind. Deprived of the philosophic brow, we might hope for some
compensation, at least, in the poet’s eye in a fine frenzy rolling.
But even in this we seem not to have been highly favored. Nothing
could well be more wretched than American verse-making during the
colonial era. We doubt whether a single line of all that was written
from the landing of the Pilgrims down to the war of Independence is
worth preserving. Pope, when he wrote his _Dunciad_, found but one
American worthy even of being damned to so unenviable an immortality.

Freneau, who was the most popular and the most gifted poet of the
Revolution, is as completely unknown to this generation as though he
had never written; and, indeed, he wrote nothing which, without great
loss to the world, may not be forgotten. And to this class, whom nor
gods nor columns permit to live, belong nearly all who in America have
courted the Muse. In our entire poetical literature there are not more
than half a dozen names which deserve even passing notice, and the
greatest of these cannot be placed higher than among the third-rate
poets of England.

Without adopting the crude theory of Macaulay that as civilization
advances poetry necessarily declines, we shall be at no loss for
reasons to account for this absence of the highest poetic gifts.
Neither the character of the early settlers in this country, nor their
religious faith, nor their social and political conditions of life,
were of the kind from which inspiration to high thinking and flights
of fancy might naturally be expected to spring. The Puritans were
hard, unsympathetic, with no appreciation of beauty. In their eyes art
of every kind was at best useless, even when not tending to give a
dangerous softness and false polish to manners. Their religious faith
intensified this feeling, and caused them to turn with aversion from
what had been so long and so intimately associated, as almost to be
identified, with Catholic worship. Their sour looks, their nasal
twang, their affected simplicity, their contempt of literature, and
their dislike of the most innocent amusements, would hardly lead the
Muse, even if invited, to smile on them. Habits of thought and feeling
not unlike theirs had, it is true, in Milton, been found to be not
incompatible with the highest gifts of imagination and expression. But
Milton had not the Puritan contempt of letters. He was, on the
contrary, a man of extensive reading and great culture; and his proud
and lofty spirit was not too high to stoop to flattery as servile and
as elegant as ever a tyrant received. His lines on ecclesiastical
architecture and music in _Il Penseroso_ prove that he had a keen
perception of the beauty and grandeur of Catholic worship. He was, in
fact, in many respects more a Cavalier than a Roundhead. He had,
besides, in the burning passions of his age, the bitter strife of
party and sect, in the scorn and contempt of the nobles for the
low-born――which in the civil wars had been trodden beneath the iron
heel of war, only to rise with the monarchy in more offensive
form――that which fired him to the adventurous song “that with no
middle flight intends to soar,” and made him deify rebellion in Satan,
who, rather than be subject, would not be at all.

In the primitive and simple social organization of the American
colonies there was nothing to fire the soul or kindle the indignation
that makes poets. And even nature presented herself to our ancestors
rather as a shrew to be conquered than as a mistress to be wooed with
harmonious numbers and sweet sounds of melody. If to this we add, what
few will deny, that the equality of conditions in our society, however
desirable from a political or philanthropic point of view, is to the
poetic eye but a flat and weary plain, without any of the inspiration
of high mountains and long-withdrawing vales, of thundering cataracts
that lose themselves in streams that peacefully glide all unconscious
of the roar and turmoil of waters of which they are born, we will find
nothing strange in the practical and unimaginative character of the
American people. We know of no better example of the tameness of the
American Muse than Whittier. He is one of our most voluminous writers
of verse, and various causes, most of which are doubtless extrinsic to
the literary merit of his compositions, have obtained for him very
general recognition. He lacks, indeed, the culture of Longfellow, his
wide acquaintance with books and the world, and his careful study of
the literatures of the European nations. He lacks also his large
sympathies and catholic thought, his elevation of sentiment and power
of finished and polished expression.

But if Whittier’s garb is plain, his features hard, and his voice
harsh, his poetry, both in subject and in style, seems native here and
to spring from the soil. He has himself not inaptly described his
verse in the lines which he has prefixed to the Centennial edition of
his complete poetical works:

     “The rigor of a frozen clime,
        The harshness of an untaught ear,
      The jarring words of one whose rhyme
      Beat often Labor’s hurried time
  Or Duty’s rugged march through storm and strife, are here.

     “Of mystic beauty, dreamy grace,
        No rounded art the lack supplies;
      Unskilled the subtle lines to trace
      Or softer shades of Nature’s face,
  I view her common forms with unanointed eyes.”

Whittier is, however, far from being a representative American or
American poet. He is a Quaker. The broad-brimmed hat, the neat and
simple dress, the sober gait, the slow and careful phrase with thee
and thou, could not more truly denote him than his verse. Now,
whatever idea we may form to ourselves of the typical American, or
whether we think such a being exists at all, no one would ever imagine
him to be a Quaker.

The American is eager; the Quaker is subdued. The American is loud,
with a tendency to boastfulness and exaggeration; the Quaker is quiet
and his language sober. He shuns the conflict and the battle, does not
over-estimate his strength; while the American would fight the world,
catch the Leviathan, swim the ocean, or do anything most impossible.
The Quaker is cautious, the American reckless. The American is
aggressive, the Quaker is timid. But it is needless to continue the
contrast. A great poet is held by no bonds. His eye glances from earth
to heaven――the infinite is his home; and that Whittier should be only
a Quaker poet is of itself sufficient evidence that he is not a great
poet. But in saying this we affirm only what is universally
recognized. He is, indeed, wholly devoid of the creative faculty to
which all true poetry owes its life; and yet this alone could have
lifted most of the subjects which he has treated out of the dulness
and weariness of the commonplace. To transform the real, to invest
that which is low or mean or trivial with honor and beauty, is the
triumph of the poet’s art, the test of his inspiration. His words,
like the light of heaven, clothe the world in a splendor not its own,
or, like the morning rays falling on the statue of Memnon, strike from
dead and sluggish matter sounds of celestial harmony.

  “To him the meanest flower that blows can give
   Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.”

Whittier certainly has no fear of trivial and commonplace subjects,
but in his treatment of them he rarely, if ever, rises above the level
of the verse-maker.

It was the opinion of Keats that a long poem is the test of invention;
and if we accept this as a canon of criticism, we shall want no other
evidence of Whittier’s poverty of imagination. All his pieces are
short, though few readers, we suppose, have ever wished them longer.
He cannot give sprightliness or variety to his verse, which like a
sluggish stream creeps languidly along. There is no freshness about
him, none of the breeziness of nature, none of its joyousness,
exuberance, and exultant strength. In his youth, even, he had all the
stiffness and slowness of age with its want of graceful motion. His
narrations are interrupted and halting, interspersed with commonplace
reflections and wearisome details; and when we have jogged along with
him to the end, we are less pleased than fatigued. He never with
strong arm bears us on over flood and fell, through hair-breadth
escapes, gently at times letting us down amidst smiling homes and
pleasant scenes, and again, with more rapid flight, hurrying us on
breathless to the goal.

Some of his descriptive pieces have been admired, but to us they seem
artificial and mechanical. They are the pictures of a view-hunter.
They lack life, warmth, and coloring――the individuality that comes of
an informing soul. He remains external to nature, and with careful
survey and deliberate purpose sketches this and that trait, till he
has his landscape with sloping hills and meadows green, with flower
and shrub and tree and everything that one could wish, except that
indefinable something which would make the scene stand out from all
the earth, familiar as the countenance of a friend or as a spot known
from childhood. He has too much the air of a man who says: Come, let
us make a description. In fact, he has taken the trouble to tell us
that he has considered the story of Mogg Megone only as a framework
for sketches of the scenery of New England and of its early
inhabitants. His own confession proves his art mechanical. He gets a
frame, stretches the canvas, and deliberately proceeds to copy. The
true poet fuses man and nature into a union so intimate that both seem
part of each. He dreams not of framework and sketches, but of the
unity and harmony of life. Where the common eye sees but parts, his
sees the living whole. He does not copy, but transforms and
re-creates. Before his enraptured gaze the immeasurable heavens break
open to their highest, and every height comes out and jutting peak.
From him not the humblest flower or blade of grass is hidden; and
whatever he beholds becomes the minister of his thought, the slave of
his will; passing through his mind receives its coloring, and rises
from his page as though some eternal law of harmony had fitted it to
this and no other purpose.

Whittier is even feebler in his attempts to portray character than in
his description of scenery. To Ruth Bonython he gives “the sunny eye
and sunset hair.” “Sunny eye” is poor enough; but who will tell us
what “sunset hair” is like? Is it purple or gold or yellow or red? She
is “tall and erect,” has a “dark-brown cheek,” “a pure white brow,” “a
neck and bosom as white as ever the foam-wreaths that rise on the
leaping river”;

  “And her eye has a glance more sternly wild
   Than even that of a forest child.”

And she talks in the following style:

  “A humbled thing of shame and guilt,
     Outcast and spurned and lone,
   Wrapt in the shadows of my crime,
     With withering heart and burning brain,
     And tears that fell like fiery rain,
  _I passed a fearful time_.”

The artifice by which Ruth quiets the suspicion of Mogg Megone, roused
by the sight of her tearful eye and heaving bosom, is as remarkable
for shrewdness as for poetic beauty:

  “Is the sachem angry――angry with Ruth
   Because she cries with an ache in her tooth
   Which would make a Sagamore jump and cry
   And look about with a woman’s eye?”

The same weak and unskilful hand is visible in the characters of Mogg
Megone, John Bonython, and Father Rasle, the Jesuit missionary. The
descriptive portions of Mogg Megone are disfigured by mere rhetoric
and what critics call “nonsense-verses.” As Mogg Megone and John
Bonython are stealing through the wood, they hear a sound:

  “Hark! is that the angry howl
     Of the wolf the hills among,
   Or the hooting of the owl
     On his leafy cradle swung?”

The only reason for hesitating between the wolfs howl and the hooting
of the owl was the poet’s want of a rhyme. But it is needless to load
our page with these nonsense-verses, since Hudibras claims them to be
a poet’s privilege:

  “But those that write in rhyme still make
   The one verse for the other’s sake;
   For one for sense, and one for rhyme,
   I think that’s sufficient at one time.”

Whittier’s Quaker faith inspired him early in life with an abhorrence
of slavery, and drew him to the abolitionists, by whom, in 1836, he
was appointed secretary of the American Anti-Slavery Society. It was
about this time that he began to publish his anti-slavery rhymes,
which he afterwards collected in a volume entitled, _Voices of
Freedom_. These verses are not remarkable for thought or expression.
They have the dull, monotonous ring of all Whittier’s rhymes, and are
hardly more poetic than a political harangue. They are partisan in
tone and manner; breathe rather hatred of the “haughty Southron” than
love of the negro; and are without polish or elegance. Read to
political meetings during the excitement of the anti-slavery
agitation, they were probably as effective as ordinary stump-speeches.
Worthless as they are as poetry, they brought Whittier to public
notice. He became the laureate of the abolitionist party, and with its
growth grew his fame. The circumstances which made _Uncle Tom’s Cabin_
the most popular novel of the day made him a popular poet. His verses
found readers who cared but little for inspired thought or expression,
but who were delighted with political rhymes that painted the Southern
slave-owner as the most heartless and brutal of men, who “in the vile
South Sodom” feasted day by day upon the sight of human suffering
inflicted by his own hand. Pieces like that which begins with the
words,

  “A Christian! Going, gone!
   Who bids for God’s own image?”

were at least good campaign documents in the times of anti-slavery
agitation.

      “A Christian up for sale;
  Wet with her blood your whips, o’ertask her frame,
  Make her life loathsome with your wrong and shame:
       Her patience shall not fail.”

This is very commonplace and vulgar, we grant, but it has the merit of
not being above the intellectual level of an ordinary political
meeting.

And then, in the metre of Scott’s “Bride of Netherby,” we have the
“Hunters of Men”:

  “Have ye heard of our hunting o’er mountain and glen,
   Through canebrake and forest, the hunting of men?
   Hark! the cheer and the halloo, the crack of the whip,
   And the yell of the hound as he fastens his grip.
   All blithe are our hunters, and noble their match――
   Though hundreds are caught, there are millions to catch.”

All we maintain is that this is not poetry, fair sample though it be
of Whittier’s _Voices of Freedom_.

Slavery undoubtedly is hateful, and to denounce it cannot but be
right. A preacher, however, need not be a poet, even though he should
declaim in rhymes; nor is hate of the slave-owner love of the slave,
much less love of liberty. We fail to catch in these _Voices_ the
swelling sound of freedom. They are rather the echoes of the fierce
words of bitter partisan strife. The lips of him who uttered them had
not been touched by the burning coal snatched from the altar of
liberty, however his heart may have rankled at the thought of Southern
cruelty.

Whittier’s rhymes of the war are the natural sequel of his
anti-slavery verses. The laureate of abolitionism could but sing,
Quaker though he was, the bloody, fratricidal strife which he had
helped to kindle. At first, indeed, he seemed to hesitate and to doubt
whether it was well to light

  “The fires of hell to weld anew the chain
   On that red anvil where each blow is pain.”

Safe on freedom’s vantage-ground, he inclined rather to be the sad and
helpless spectator of a suicide.

  “Why take we up the accursed thing again?
   Pity, forgive, but urge them back no more
   Who, drunk with passion, flaunt disunion’s rag
   With its vile reptile-blazon.”

But soon he came to recognize that God may speak “in battle’s stormy
voice, and his praise be in the wrath of man.”

Whittier’s war rhymes are not so numerous as his _Voices of Freedom_,
nor are they in any way remarkable as poetical compositions. The lines
on Barbara Frietchie derive their interest from the incident narrated,
and not from any beauty of thought or language with which it has been
clothed. They are popular because old Barbara Frietchie waving the
flag of the Union above Stonewall Jackson’s army as it passed, with
measured tread, through the streets of Frederick, is a striking and
dramatic figure. There could be no more convincing proof of the
barrenness of Whittier’s imagination than the poor use which he has
made of so poetical an episode.

  “In her attic window the staff she set
   To show that one heart was loyal yet.”

And yet of all his poems this is probably the best known and the most
popular.

The _Voices of Freedom_ and the _Songs in War Time_ both belong to the
class of occasional poetry which more than any other kind is apt to
confer a short-lived fame upon authors whose chief merit consists in
being fortunate. He who sings the conqueror’s praise will never lack
admirers.

We are sorry to perceive, in so amiable a man as Whittier is generally
supposed to be, the many evidences which this edition of his complete
poetical works affords of intense and bitter anti-Catholic prejudice.
If he were content with manifesting, even with damnable iteration, his
Quaker horror of creeds, we could excuse the simple mind that is
capable of holding that men may believe without giving to their faith
form and sensible expression; though the mental habit from which alone
such a theory could proceed is the very opposite of the poetical. The
Catholic Church, which is the groundwork and firm support of all
Christian dogmas, cannot be understood by those who fail to perceive
that without doctrinal religion the whole moral order would be
meaningless. But Whittier’s prejudice carries him far beyond mere
protest against Catholic teaching. He cannot approach any subject or
person connected with the church without being thrown into mental
convulsions. Let us take, for example, the character of Father Rasle,
the martyr, in “Mogg Megone,” one of his earliest and longest poems.
This noble and heroic missionary is represented as a heartless and
senseless zealot, who “by cross and vow” had pledged Mogg Megone

  “To lift the hatchet of his sire,
   And round his own, the church’s, foe
   To light the avenging fire.”

When Ruth Bonython, half mad with fear and grief, comes to confess to
Father Rasle that, seeing the scalp of her lover hanging to Mogg
Megone’s belt, she had killed him in his drunken sleep, the Jesuit
starts back――

  “His long, thin frame as ague shakes,
   And loathing hate is in his eye”――

not from horror of the crime, but because in the death of Megone he
recognizes the extinction of his long-cherished hopes of revenge.

           “Ah! weary priest!…
   Thoughts are thine which have no part
   With the meek and pure of heart.…
   Thoughts of strife and hate and wrong
   Sweep thy heated brain along――
   Fading hopes for whose success
   It were sin to breathe a prayer;
   Schemes which Heaven may never bless;
   Tears which darken to despair.”

His heart is as stone to the pitiful appeal of the contrite and
broken-hearted girl. “Off!” he exclaims――

  “‘Off, woman of sin! Nay, touch not me
    With those fingers of blood; begone!’
    With a gesture of horror he spurns the form
    That writhes at his feet like a trodden worm.”

And in the death-scene of the martyr, as painted by Whittier, the
coward and the villain, with forces equally matched, strive for the
mastery.

The ode “To Pius IX.” will furnish us with another example of
religious hate driving its victim to the very verge of raving madness.
“Hider at Gaeta,” he exclaims――

  “Hider at Gaeta, seize thy chance!
     Coward and cruel, come!

  “Creep now from Naple’s bloody skirt;
     Thy mummer’s part was acted well,
   While Rome, with steel and fire begirt,
     Before thy crusade fell.

       *     *     *     *     *

  “But hateful as that tyrant old,
     The mocking witness of his crime,
   In thee shall loathing eyes behold
     The Nero of our time!

  “Stand where Rome’s blood was freest shed,
     Mock Heaven with impious thanks, and call
   Its curses on the patriot dead,
     Its blessings on the Gaul;

  “Or sit upon thy throne of lies,
     A poor, mean idol, blood-besmeared,
   Whom even its worshippers despise――
     Unhonored, unrevered!”

It is some consolation to know that Whittier himself, in reading over
these ravings, has been forced to acknowledge their unworthiness by a
lame attempt at apology. “He is no enemy of Catholics,” he informs us
in a note to this effusion; “but the severity of his language finds
its ample apology in the reluctant confession of one of the most
eminent Romish priests, the eloquent and devoted Father Ventura.” What
is this but making calumny an ally of outrage?

In the “Dream of Pio Nono” he introduces St. Peter, who upbraids the
venerable Pontiff in the following style:

                “Hearest thou the angels sing
   Above this open hell? _Thou_ God’s high-priest!
   Thou the vicegerent of the Prince of Peace!
   Thou the successor of his chosen ones!
   I, Peter, fisherman of Galilee,
   In the dear Master’s name, and for the love
   Of his true church, proclaim thee Antichrist.”

In a poem on “Italy” Whittier hears the groans of nations across the
sea.

              “Their blood and bones
   Cried out in torture, crushed by thrones
   And sucked by priestly cannibals.”

“Rejoice, O Garibaldi!” he exclaims,

                  “Though thy sword
   Failed at Rome’s gates, and blood seemed vainly poured
   Where in Christ’s name the crownèd infidel
   Of France wrought murder with the arms of hell.

       *     *     *     *     *

   God’s providence is not blind, but, full of eyes,
   It searches all the refuges of lies;
   And in his time and way the accursed things
   Before whose evil feet thy battle-gage
   Has clashed defiance from hot youth to age
   Shall perish.”

We crave the reader’s indulgence for this disfigurement of our page,
and wish with all our heart it had been possible to fill it with more
worthy matter.

Longfellow, breathing the same air as Whittier, the disciple of a
faith commonly supposed to be less mild and sweetly loving than a
Quaker’s, has found the tenderest thoughts, the noblest images, and
the highest forms of character in the church which our poet cannot
even think of without raving.

But possibly we should be wrong to complain that the mystic beauty
which has in all ages appealed with irresistible power of fascination
to the highest and most richly-gifted natures should fail to impress
one all of whose thoughts are cast in a straitened and unyielding
mould. Whittier has not the far-glancing eye of the poet to which all
beauty appeals like the light itself. The partisan habit of an
inveterate abolitionist has stiffened and hardened a disposition which
was never plastic. It was so long his official duty to write
anti-slavery campaign verses that, in treating subjects which should
inspire higher thoughts, he is still held captive to the lash of the
slave-driver, hears the clanking of chains and the groans of the
fettered; and these sights and sounds drive him into mere rant and
rhetoric.

We willingly bear testimony to the moral tone and purity which pervade
Whittier’s verse. There is nothing to offend the most delicate ear;
nothing to bring a blush to a virgin’s cheek. He lacks the power to
portray passion, and was not tempted into doubtful paths. He delights
in pictures of home, with its innocent joys and quiet happiness; sings
of friendship and the endearing ties that bind the parent to the
child; or, if he attunes his harp to love, he does it in numbers so
sadly sweet that we only remember that the fickle god has wreathed his
bowers with cypress boughs and made his best interpreter a sigh.

What could be more harmless than the little scene between Maud Muller
and the judge――though Heaven only knows what the judge, and above all
the American judge, can have done that he should be condemned to play
the _rôle_ of a lover. Possibly it may have been the judicious nature
of the love that induced the poet to think such a _deus ex machinâ_
not out of place. At all events, nothing could be more inoffensive.

  “She stooped where the cool spring bubbled up
   And filled for him her small tin cup.
   ‘Thanks!’ said the judge; ‘a sweeter draught
   From a fairer hand was never quaffed.’”

And how refreshing it is to find a judge making love by talking

  “Of the grass and flowers and trees,
   Of the singing birds and humming bees”!

We are less edified, however, when, in after-years, we find him a
married man, sipping the golden wine but longing for the wayside well
and the barefoot maiden:

  “And the proud man sighed, with secret pain:
  ‘Ah! that I were free again!’”

In reading Whittier we seldom come upon a thought so perfectly
expressed that it can never after occur to us except in the words in
which he has clothed it. It is a poet’s privilege thus to marry
thoughts to words in a union so divine that no man may put them
asunder; and where this high power is wanting the _mens divinior_ is
not found. For our own part, we hardly recall a line of Whittier that
we should care to remember. Nothing that he has written has been more
frequently quoted than the couplet:

  “For of all sad words of tongue or pen.
   The saddest are these: ‘It might have been.’”

To our thinking, this is meaningless. “It might have been” is neither
sad nor joyful, except as it is made so by that with which it is
associated. He who is drowned may thus have escaped hanging――“It might
have been.” The judge might have been Maud’s husband; but she might
have thought of sadder things than that she was not his wife.

“Snow-Bound,” a winter idyl, is, in the opinion of several critics,
Whittier’s best performance. A more hackneyed theme he would probably
have found it difficult to choose; nor has he the magic charm that
makes the old seem as new. It is the unmistakable snow-storm with
which our school-readers made us familiar in childhood. The sun rises
“cheerless” over “hills of gray”; sinks from sight before it sets;
“the ocean roars on his wintry shore”; night comes on, made hoary
“with the whirl-dance of the blinding storm,” and ere bedtime

  “The white drift piled the window-frame”;

and then, of course, we have the horse and cow and cock, each in turn
contemplating the beautiful snow. Even the silly ram

  “Shook his sage head with gesture mute,
   And emphasized with stamp of foot.”

The boys, with mittened hands, and caps drawn down over ears, sally
forth to cut a pathway at their sire’s command. And when the second
night is ushered in, we are quite prepared for the blazing fire of
oaken logs, whose roaring draught makes the great throat of the
chimney laugh; while on the clean hearth the apples sputter, the mug
of cider simmers, the house-dog sleeps, and the cat meditates. The
group of faces gathered round are plain and honest, just such as good,
simple country folk are wont to wear, but feebly drawn. In the fitful
firelight their features are dim. The father talks of rides on
Memphremagog’s wooded side; of trapper’s hut and Indian camp. The
mother turns her wheel or knits her stocking, and tells how the Indian
came down at midnight on Cocheco town. The uncle, “innocent of books,”
unravels the mysteries of moons and tides. The maiden aunt, very sweet
and very unselfish, recalls her memories of

  “The huskings and the apple-bees,
   The sleigh-rides and the summer sails.”

It would be unkind to leave the village schoolmaster out in the biting
air, and he is therefore brought in to make us wonder how one small
head could contain all he knew.

In the very thought of home there is an exhaustless well-spring of
poetic feeling. The word itself is all alive with the spirit of sweet
poesy which gives charm to the humblest verse; and it would be strange
indeed if, in an idyl like “Snow-Bound,” there should not be found
passages of real beauty, touches of nature that make the whole world
kin. The subject is one that readily lends itself to the lowly mood
and unpretending style. Fine thoughts and ambitious words would but
distract us. Each one is thinking of his own dear home, and he but
asks the poet not to break the spell that has made him a child again;
not to darken the dewy dawn of memory, that throws the light of heaven
around a world that seemed as dead, but now lives.

  “O Time and Change!――with hair as gray
   As was my sire’s that winter day,
   How strange it seems, with so much gone
   Of life and love, to still live on!
   Ah! brother, only I and thou
   Are left of all that circle now――
   The dear home faces whereupon
   That fitful firelight paled and shone.
   Henceforward, listen as we will,
   The voices of that hearth are still;
   Look where we may, the wide earth o’er,
   Those lighted faces smile no more.
   We tread the paths their feet have worn;
   We sit beneath their orchard trees;
   We hear, like them, the hum of bees
   And rustle of the bladed corn;
   We turn the pages that they read,
   Their written words we linger o’er.
   But in the sun they cast no shade,
   No voice is heard, no sign is made,
   No step is on the conscious floor!
   Yet love will dream, and faith will trust
   (Since He who knows our need is just),
   That somehow, somewhere, meet we must.
   Alas! for him who never sees
   The stars shine through his cypress-trees;
   Who hopeless lays his dead away,
   Nor looks to see the breaking day
   Across the mournful marbles play;
   Who hath not learned in hours of faith
   The truth to flesh and sense unknown――
   That Life is ever Lord of Death,
   And Love can never lose its own!”

This is true poetry, sad and sweet as a mother’s voice when she lulls
her sick babe to rest, knowing that, if he sleep, he shall live.

In Whittier’s verse we often catch the unmistakable accent of genuine
feeling, and his best lyrics are so artless and simple that they
almost disarm criticism. In many ways his influence has doubtless been
good; and the critic, whose eye is naturally drawn to what is less
worthy, finds it easy to carp at faults which he has not the ability
to commit.


     [134] _The Complete Poetical Works of John Greenleaf
     Whittier._ Boston: Osgood & Co. 1876.




MONSIEUR GOMBARD’S MISTAKE.


M. Gombard was a short, stout, pompous man, with a flat nose, and
sharp gray eyes that did their very best to look fierce through a pair
of tortoise-shell spectacles. They succeeded in this attempt with very
young culprits and with the female prisoners who appeared before M.
Gombard in his official capacity of mayor of the town of Loisel; they
succeeded in a lesser degree with functionaries, such as clerks and
policemen, who were to a certain extent under the official eye of the
mayor; but with the general, independent public the attempt at
ferocity was a failure. M. Gombard passed for being a good man, a man
with high principles, an unflinching sense of duty, and a genuine
respect for law, but also a man whose heart was as dry as a last
year’s nut. He was fifty years of age, and it had never been said,
even as a joke, that M. Gombard had had a “sentiment”; it had never
entered into the imagination of anybody who knew him to suggest that
he might have a sentiment, or even that he might marry some day. He
was looked upon by his fellow-townsmen as a trusty, intelligent
machine――a machine that never got out of order, that was always ready
when wanted, that would be seriously missed if it were removed. He
settled their differences and saved them many a costly lawsuit; for M.
Gombard had studied the law, and understood its practical application
better than any lawyer in Loisel; he made marriages, and drew out
wills, and dispensed advice to young and old with the wisdom of
Solomon and the stoical impartiality of Brutus. Everybody trusted him;
they knew that if their case was a good case, he would decide it in
their favor; if it was a bad case, he would give it against them: no
man could buy him, no man could frighten him. Antoine Grimoire, the
biggest bully in all the country round――even Antoine Grimoire shook in
his shoes when one day a suit in which he was defendant was sent up
before M. Gombard. M. Gombard gave judgment against him; and this was
more than the united magistrates in Loisel would have dared do, for
Antoine would have “licked them” within an inch of their lives, if
they had tried it; but he never said _boo_ when M. Gombard pronounced
the plaintiff an injured man, and ordered the defendant to pay him one
hundred and fifty-three francs, ten sous, and three centimes damages.
Everybody in the place held their breath when this sentence went
forth. They fully expected Antoine to fly at the audacious judge, and
break every bone in his body on the spot; but Antoine coolly nodded,
and said civilly, “_C’est bon, Monsieur le Maire_,” and walked off.
People made sure he was bent on some terrible vengeance, and that he
would never pay a sou of the damages; but he deceived them by paying.
This incident added fresh lustre to the prestige of M. Gombard, whose
word henceforth was counted as good as, and better than, law, since
even Antoine Grimoire gave in to it, which was more than he had ever
been known to do to the law.

M. Gombard had some pressing business on hand just now; for he had
left Loisel before daybreak in a post-chaise, and never once pulled
up, except when the wheels came off and went spinning right and left
into the ditch on either side, and sent him bumping on over the snow
in the disabled vehicle, till at last the horses stopped and M.
Gombard got out, jumped on to the back of the leader, and rode on into
Cabicol. There he is now, his wig awry and pulled very low over his
forehead, but otherwise looking none the worse for his adventurous
ride, as he walks up and down the best room in the _Jacques Bonhomme_,
the principal inn of Cabicol.

“You said I could have a post-chaise?” said M. Gombard to the waiter,
who fussed about, on hospitable cares intent.

“I did, monsieur.”

“And it is in good condition, you say?”

“Excellent, monsieur. It would take you from Cabicol to Paris without
starting a nail.”

“Good,” observed M. Gombard, sitting down and casting a glance that
was unmistakably ferocious on the savory omelet. “I can count on a
stout pair of horses?” he continued, helping himself with the haste of
a ravenous man.

“Horses?” repeated the waiter blandly. “Monsieur said nothing about
horses.”

M. Gombard dropped his knife and fork with a clatter, and looked round
at the man.

“What use can the chaise be to me without horses?” he said. “Does it
go by steam, or do you expect me to carry it on my head?”

“Assuredly not, monsieur; that would be of the last impossibility,”
replied the waiter demurely.

“The aborigines of Cabicol are idiots, apparently,” observed M.
Gombard, still looking straight at the man, but with a broad,
speculative stare, as if he had been a curious stone or an unknown
variety of dog.

“Yes, monsieur,” said the waiter, with ready assent. If a traveller
had declared the aborigines of Cabicol to be buffaloes, he would have
assented just as readily; he did not care a dry pea for the
aborigines, whoever they might be; he did not know them even by sight,
so why should he stand up for them? Besides, every traveller
represented a tip, and he was not a man to quarrel with his bread and
butter.

“What’s to be done?” said M. Gombard. “I must have horses; where am I
to get them?”

“I doubt that there is a horse in the town to-day which can be placed
at monsieur’s disposal. This is the grand market day at Luxort, and
everybody is gone there, and to-morrow the beasts will be too tired to
start for a fresh journey; but on Friday I dare say monsieur could
find a pair, if he does not mind waiting till then.”

“There is nothing at the present moment I should mind much more,
nothing that could be more disagreeable to me,” said M. Gombard.

“We would do our best to make monsieur’s delay agreeable,” said the
waiter; “the beds of the _Jacques Bonhomme_ are celebrated; the food
is excellent and the cooking of the best; the landlord cuts himself
into little pieces for his guests.”

“Good heavens!” ejaculated M. Gombard.

“It is a figure of speech, monsieur, a figure of rhetoric,” explained
the waiter, who began to heap up blocks of wood on the hearth, as if
he were preparing a funeral pyre for his unwilling guest.

“Tell the landlord I want to speak to him,” said M. Gombard.

Before he had finished his meal the landlord knocked at the door. M.
Gombard said “Come in,” and the landlord entered. He was a solemn,
melancholy-looking man, who spoke in a sepulchral voice, and seemed
continually struggling to withhold his tears. He loved his inn, but
the weight of responsibility it laid upon him was more than he could
bear with a smiling countenance. Every traveller who slept beneath his
roof was, for the time being, an object of the tenderest interest to
him; it was no exaggeration to say, with the rhetorical waiter, that
he cut himself into little pieces for each one of them. He made out
imaginary histories of them, which he related afterwards for the
entertainment of their successors. He was guided as to the facts of
each subject by the peculiar make and fashion of their physiognomies;
but he drew his inspiration chiefly from their noses: if the traveller
wore his beard long and his nose turned up, he was set down as a
philosopher travelling in the pursuit of knowledge; if he wore his
beard cropped and his nose hooked, he was a banker whose financial
genius and fabulous wealth were a source of terror to the
money-markets of Europe; if he carried his nose flat against his face
and wore a wig and spectacles, he was a desperate criminal with a huge
price on his head, and the police scouring the country in pursuit of
him; but he was safe beneath the roof of the _Jacques Bonhomme_, for
his host would have sworn with the patriot bard: “I know not, I care
not, if guilt’s in that heart; I but know that I’ll hide thee,
whatever thou art!” All the pearls of Golconda, all the gold of
California, would not have bribed him into delivering up a man who
enjoyed his hospitality. Many and thrilling were the tales he had to
tell of these sinister guests, their hair-breadth escapes, and the
silent but, to him, distinctly manifest rage of their baffled
pursuers. This life of secret care and harrowing emotions had done its
work on the landlord; you saw at a glance that his was a heavily-laden
spirit, and that pale “melancholy had marked him for her own.” He
bowed low, and in a voice of deep feeling inquired how he could serve
M. Gombard.

“By getting me a pair of good post-horses,” replied his guest. “It is
of the utmost importance that I reach X―――― before five o’clock
to-morrow afternoon, and your people say I have no chance of finding
horses until Friday.”

The landlord stifled a sigh and replied: “That is only too true,
monsieur.”

M. Gombard pushed away his plate, rose, walked up and down the room,
and then stood at the window and looked out. It was a bleak look out;
everything was covered with snow. Snow lay deep on the ground, on the
trees, on the lamp-post, on the chimneys and the house-tops; and the
sky looked as if it were still full of snow.

Just opposite there was a strange, grand old house that arrested M.
Gombard’s attention; it was a gabled edifice with turrets at either
end, and high pointed, mullioned windows filled with diamond-paned
lattices. The roof slanted rapidly from the chimneys to the windows,
and looked as if the north wind that had howled over it for centuries
had blown it a little to one side and battered it a good deal; for you
could see by the undulations of the snow that it was full of dints and
ruts. Close under the projecting eaves in the centre of the house
there was a stone shield, on which a family coat of arms was engraved;
but the ivy, which grew thick over the wall, draped the escutcheon,
and, with the snow, made it impossible to read the story it set forth.
There was a balcony right under it, from the floor of which an old man
was now engaged sweeping the snow; on either side were set huge stone
vases, in which some hardy plants grew, defying all weathers,
apparently. When the old man had cleared away the snow, he brought out
some pots of wintry-looking flowers, and placed them on the ledge of
the balcony. M. Gombard had been watching the performance, and taking
in the scene with his eyes while his thoughts were busy about these
post-horses that were not to be had in the town of Cabicol. He turned
round suddenly, and said in his abrupt, magisterial way: “Curious old
house. Whose is it?”

“It belongs now to Mlle. Aimée Bobert,” replied the landlord; and the
question seemed to affect him painfully.

“Whom did it belong to formerly?” inquired M. Gombard.

“To the brave and illustrious family of De Valbranchart. The
Revolution ruined them, and the mansion was bought by a retired
manufacturer, the grandfather of Mlle. Aimée, who is now the sole
heiress of all his wealth.”

“Strange vicissitudes in the game of life!” muttered M. Gombard; he
turned again to survey the old house, that looked as if it had been
transplanted from some forest or lovely fell-side to this commonplace
little town. As he looked, the window on the balcony opened, and the
slight figure of a woman appeared, holding a flower-pot in her hand.
He could not see her face, which was concealed by a shawl thrown
lightly over her head; but her movements had the grace and suppleness
of youth. M. Gombard mechanically adjusted his spectacles, the better
to inspect this new object in the picture; the same moment a
gentleman, hurrying down the street, came up, and lifted his hat in a
stately salutation as he passed before the balcony. M. Gombard could
not see whether the greeting was returned, or how; for when he glanced
again towards the latticed window, it had closed on the retreating
figure of the lady. The old church clock was chiming the hour of noon.
“The ancient house has its modern romance, I perceive,” observed M.
Gombard superciliously; and as if this discovery must strip it at once
of all interest in the eyes of a sensible man, he turned his back upon
the old house, and proceeded to catechise the landlord concerning
post-horses. There was clearly no chance of his procuring any that
day, and a very doubtful chance of his procuring any the next. There
was no help for it: he must spend at least one night at the _Jacques
Bonhomme_. He was not a man to waste his energies in useless
lamentation or invective. One exclamation of impatience escaped him,
but he stifled it half way, snapped his fingers, and muttered in
almost a cheerful tone, “_Tantpis!_” The landlord stood regarding him
with a gaze of compassion mingled with a sort of cowed admiration.
There was a strange fascination about these criminals, murderers or
forgers, flying for dear life; the concentrated energy, the reckless
daring, the heroic self-control, the calm self-possession they evinced
in the face of danger and impending death, were wonderful. If these
grand faculties had been ruled by principle, and devoted to lawful
pursuits and worthy aims, what might they not have accomplished! The
landlord saw the stigma of crime distinctly branded upon the
countenance of this man, though the low, bad brow was almost entirely
concealed at one side by the wig; and yet he could not but admire,
nay, to a certain extent, sympathize, with him. M. Gombard noticed his
singular air of dejection, his immovable attitude――standing there as
if he were rooted to the spot when there was no longer any ostensible
reason for his remaining in the room. He bent a glance of inquiry upon
him, which said as plainly as words: “You have evidently something to
say; so say it.”

“Monsieur,” said the landlord in a thick undertone, “I have been
trusted with many secrets, and I have never been known to betray one.
I ask you for no confidence; but, if you can trust me so far, answer
me one question: Is it a matter of life and death that you go――that
you reach your destination by a given time?”

M. Gombard hesitated for a moment, perplexed by the tone and manner of
his host; then he replied, deliberately, as if weighing the value of
each word: “I will not say ‘life and death,’ but as urgent as if it
were life and death.”

“Ha! That is enough. I understand,” said the landlord. His voice was
husky; he shook from head to foot. “Now tell me this: will you――will
the situation be saved, if you can leave this to-morrow?”

“To-morrow?… Let me see,” said M. Gombard; and thrusting both hands
into his pockets, he bent his head upon his breast with the air of a
man making a calculation. After a prolonged silence he looked up, and
continued reflectively: “If I can leave this to-morrow at four
o’clock, with a good pair of horses, I shall be at X―――― by ten; and
starting afresh at, say, five next morning, I shall be――”

“Saved!” broke in the landlord.

“I shall be saved, as you say,” repeated M. Gombard.

“Monsieur, if the thing is possible it shall be done!” protested the
landlord. This coolness, this superhuman calm, at such a crisis, were
magnificent; this felon, whoever he was, was a glorious man.

“Very peculiar person our host seems,” was the hero’s reflection, when
the door closed behind that excited and highly sensitive individual.
M. Gombard then drew a chair towards the fire, pulled a newspaper from
his pocket, and poked his feet as far out on the hearth as he could
without putting them right into the blaze.

When he had squeezed the newspaper dry, he threw it aside, and
bethought to himself that he might as well go for a walk, and
reconnoitre this extremely unprogressive town, where a traveller might
wait two days and two nights for a pair of post-horses. He pulled on
his big furred coat and sallied forth. The snow was deep, but the
night’s sharp frost had hardened it, so that it was dry and crisp to
walk on. There was little in the aspect of Cabicol that promised
entertainment; it was called a town, but it was more like a village
with a disproportionately fine church, and some large houses that
looked out of place in the midst of the shabby ones all round though
the largest was insignificant beside the imposing old pile opposite
the inn. They looked quaint and picturesque enough, however, in their
snow dress, glistening in the beams of the pale winter sun that shone
out feebly from the milky-looking sky. The church was the first place
to which M. Gombard bent his steps, not with any pious intentions, but
because it was the only place that seemed to be open to a visitor, and
was, moreover, a stately, Gothic edifice that would have done honor to
a thriving, well-populated town. The front door was closed. M. Gombard
was turning away with some disappointment, when an old woman who was
frying chestnuts in the angle of the projecting buttress, with an
umbrella tied to the back of her chair as a protest rather than a
protection against the north wind that was blowing over the deserted
market-place, called out to him that the side door was open, and
pointed to the other side of the church. When the visitor entered it,
he was struck by the solemnity and vastness of the place. It was quite
empty. At least he thought so; for his eye, piercing the sombre
perspective, saw no living person there. In the south aisle the rich
stained glass threw delicate shadows of purple and gold and crimson on
the pavement, on the stern mediæval statues, on the slim, groined
pillars; but the other aisle was so dark that it was like night until
your eyes grew accustomed to the gloom. M. Gombard walked slowly
through the darkened aisle, peering up at the massive carving of the
capitals, and into the quaint devices of the basements, and wondering
what could have brought this majestic, cathedral-like church into so
incongruous a frame as Cabicol. Suddenly he descried coming towards
him from the farthest end of the aisle, like a dimly visible form
emerging from total darkness, the figure of a man. He supposed at
first it was a priest, and he thought he would ask him for some
information about the church; but, as the figure drew near, he saw he
had been mistaken, and presently he recognized the tall, erect bearing
and hurried step of the lover of Mlle. Bobert. There was no reason why
M. Gombard should not have accosted him just as readily as if he had
been the priest he had taken him for, but something checked him at the
first moment; and when the young man had passed, he was loath to call
him back. He had not the kind of face M. Gombard expected; there was
none of the levity or mawkishness that almost invariably characterized
the countenances of men who were in love; neither was there any trace
of coxcombry or conceit in his dress and general appearance; he had a
fine head, well shaped, and with a breadth of forehead that announced
brains; his face was thoughtful and intelligent. M. Gombard was sorry
for the poor fellow, who was evidently not otherwise a fool. The sound
of the lover’s footfall died away, and the great door closed behind
him with a boom like low thunder. M. Gombard continued his walk round
the church undisturbed. He came to the Lady Chapel behind the high
altar, and stood at the entrance, filled with a new admiration and
surprise. The chapel was as dimly lighted as the rest of the building;
but from a deep, mullioned window there came a flood of amber light
that fell full upon a kneeling figure, illuminating it with an
effulgence to which the word heavenly might fitly be applied. M.
Gombard’s first thought was that this new wonder was part of the
whole; that it was not a real, living female form he beheld, but some
beautiful creation of painter and sculptor, placed here to symbolize
faith and worship in their loveliest aspect. But this was merely the
first unreasoning impression of delight and wonder. He had not gazed
more than a second on the kneeling figure when he saw that it was
neither a statue nor an apparition, but a living, breathing woman. The
worshipper was absorbed in her devotions, and seemed unconscious of
the proximity of any spectator; so M. Gombard was free to contemplate
her at his ease. It was the first time in his life that he ever stood
deliberately to contemplate a woman, simply as a beautiful object; but
there was something in this one totally different from all the women,
beautiful or otherwise, that he had ever seen. It may have been the
circumstances, the place and hour, the obscurity of all around, except
for that yellow shaft of light that shot straight down upon the lovely
devotee, investing her with a sort of celestial glory; but whatever it
was, the spectacle stirred the fibres of his heart as they had never
been stirred before. Who was this lovely creature, and why was she
here in the deserted church, alone and at an hour when there was
neither chant nor ceremony to call her thither? M. Gombard’s habit of
mind and his semi-legal and magisterial functions led him to suspect
and discover plots and sinister motives in most human actions that
were at all out of the usual course; but it never for an instant
occurred to seek any such here. This fair girl――she looked in the full
bloom of youth――could only be engaged on some errand of duty, of
mercy, or of love. Love! Strange to say, the word, as it rose to his
lips, did not call up the scornful, or even the pitying, smile which
at best never failed to accompany the thought of this greatest of
human follies in the mayor’s mind. He repeated mentally, “Love,” as he
looked at her, and something very like a sigh rose and was not
peremptorily stifled in his breast. While he stood there gazing, a
deeper gloom fell upon the place, the yellow shaft was suddenly
withdrawn, the golden light went out, and the vision melted into brown
shadow. M. Gombard started; high up, on all sides, there was a noise
like pebbles rattling against the windows. The lady started too, and,
crossing herself, as at a signal that cut short her devotions, rose
and hurried from the chapel. She took no notice of the man standing
under the archway, but passed on, with a quick, light step, down the
north aisle. M. Gombard turned and walked after her. He had no idea of
pursuing her; he merely yielded to an impulse that anticipated thought
and will.

On emerging into the daylight of the porch he saw that the rain was
falling heavily, mixed with hail-stones as big as peas. The lady
surveyed the scene without in blank dismay, while M. Gombard
stealthily surveyed her. She struck him as more wonderful, more
vision-like, now even than when she had burst upon him with her golden
halo amidst the darkness; her soft brown eyes full of light, her
silken brown curls, her scarlet lips parted in inarticulate despair,
the small head thrown slightly back, and raised in scared
interrogation to the dull gray tank above――M. Gombard saw all these
charms distinctly now, and his dry, legal soul was strangely moved.
Should he speak to her? What could he say? Offer her his umbrella,
perhaps? That was a safe offer to make, and a legitimate opportunity;
he blessed his stars that he had brought his umbrella.

“Madame――mademoiselle――pardon me――I shall be very happy――that is, I
should esteem myself fortunate if I could――be of any service to you in
this emergency――”

“Thank you; I am much obliged to you, monsieur,” replied the young
lady; she saw he meant to be polite, but she did not see what help he
intended.

“If you would allow me to call a cab for you?” continued M. Gombard
timidly.

“Oh! thank you.” She broke into a little, childlike laugh that was
perfectly delicious. “We have no cabs at Cabicol!”

The young merriment was so contagious that M. Gombard laughed too.

“Of course not! How stupid of me to have thought there could be! But
how are you to get home in this rain, mademoiselle? Will you accept my
umbrella? It is large; it will protect you in some degree.”

“Oh! you are too good, monsieur,” replied his companion, turning the
brown eyes, darting with light, full upon him; “but I think we had
better have a little patience and wait until the rain stops. It can’t
last long like this; and if I ventured out in such a deluge, I think I
should be drowned.”

There was nothing very original, or poetical, or preternaturally wise
in this remark, but coming from those poppy lips, in that young,
silvery voice, it sounded like the inspiration of genius to M.
Gombard. He replied that she was right, that he was an idiot; in fact,
had not his age and his business-like, dry, matter-of-fact appearance
offered a guarantee for his sobriety and an excuse for his attempt at
facetiousness, M. Gombard’s jubilant manner and ecstatic air would
have led the young lady to fear he was slightly deranged or slightly
inebriated. But ugly, elderly gentlemen who wear wigs are a kind of
privileged persons to young ladies; they may say anything, almost,
under cover of these potent credentials.

“This is a fine old church,” observed M. Gombard presently.

“Yes; we are proud of it at Cabicol. Strangers always admire it,”
replied his companion.

“They are right; it is one of the best specimens of the Gothic of the
Renaissance I remember to have seen,” said M. Gombard; “this portico
reminds one of the cathedral of B――――. Have you ever seen it,
mademoiselle?”

“No; I have never travelled farther from Cabicol than Luxort.”

“Indeed! How I envy you!” exclaimed the mayor heartily. He was a new
man; he was fired with enthusiasm for beauty of every description, in
art, in nature, everywhere.

“It is you, rather, who are to be envied for having seen far places
and beautiful things!” returned the young girl naïvely. “I wish I
could see them too.”

“And why should you not?” demanded M. Gombard; he would have given
half his fortune to have been able to say there and then: “Come, and I
will show you these strange places, and beautiful things!”

“I am alone,” replied his companion in a low tone; the merry
brightness faded from her face, the sweet eyes filled with tears.

M. Gombard could have fallen at her feet, and cried, “Forgive me! I
did not mean to give you pain.” But he did not do so; he did better:
he bowed gravely and murmured, almost under his breath: “_Pauvre
enfant!_” He had never pitied any human being as he pitied this
beautiful orphan; but then he was a man, as we know, who passed for
having no heart. His young companion looked up at him through her
tears, and her eyes said, “_Merci!_” It was like the glance of a dumb
animal, so large, so pathetic, so trustful. The rain still fell in
torrents, lashing the ground like whip-cords; but the hailstones had
ceased. The two persons under the portico stood in solemn silence,
watching the steady downpour. Presently, as when, by a sudden jerk of
the string, the force of a shower-bath is slackened, it grew lighter;
the sun made a slit in the tank, and gleamed down in a silver line
through the lessening drops. The young girl went to the edge of the
steps, and looked up, reconnoitring the sky.

“It is raining heavily still,” said M. Gombard; “but if you are in a
hurry, and must go, pray take my umbrella!”

“But then you will get wet,” she replied, laughing with the childlike
freedom that had marked her manner at first.

“That is of small consequence! It will do me good,” protested M.
Gombard. “I entreat you, mademoiselle, accept my umbrella!”

It was hard to say “no,” and it was selfish to say “yes.” She
hesitated. M. Gombard opened the umbrella, capacious as a young tent,
and held it towards her. The young lady advanced and took it; but the
thick handle and the weight of the outspread canopy were too much for
her tiny hand and little round wrist. It swayed to and fro as she
grasped it. M. Gombard caught hold of it again.

“Let me hold it for you,” he said. “Which way are you going?”

“Across the market-place to that house with the veranda,” she replied;
“but perhaps that is not your way, monsieur?”

It was not his way; but if it had been ten times more out of it, M.
Gombard would have gone with delight.

“Do me the honor to take my arm, mademoiselle,” he said, without
answering her inquiry. It was done in the kindest way――just as if she
had been the daughter of an old friend. The young girl gathered her
pretty cashmere dress well in one hand, and slipped the other into the
arm of her protector. They crossed the market-place quickly, and were
soon at the door of the house she had pointed out.

“Thank you! I am so much obliged to you, monsieur!”

“Mademoiselle, I am too happy――”

She smiled at him with her laughing brown eyes, and he turned away, a
changed man, elated, bewildered, walking upon air. He walked on in the
rain, his feet sinking ankle-deep in parts where the snow was thick
and had been melted into slush by the heavy shower. He did not think
now whether there was anything to visit to pass the rest of the day;
his one idea was to find out the name of this beautiful creature, then
to see her again, offer her his hand and fortune, if her position were
not too far above his own, and be the happiest of men for the rest of
his life. He was fifty years of age; but what of that? His heart was
twenty; he had not worn it out in butterfly passions, “fancies, light
as air,” and ephemeral as summer gnats. This was his first love, and
few men half his age had that virgin gift to place in the bridal
_corbeille_. Then how respected he was by his fellow-citizens! M.
Gombard saw them already paying homage to his young wife; saw all the
magnates congratulating him, and the fine ladies calling on Madame
Gombard. When he reached the _Jacques Bonhomme_ he was in the seventh
heaven. The landlord saw him from the window of the bar, and hurried
out to meet him with a countenance blanched with terror.

“Good heavens, monsieur! you have ventured out into the town. You have
been abroad all this time! What mad imprudence!” he whispered.

“Eh! Imprudence? Not the least, my good sir,” replied the mayor,
descending with a painful jump from his celestial altitude; “my boots
are snow-proof, and behold my umbrella!” He swung it round, shut it up
with a click, and held it proudly at arm’s length, while the wet
streamed down its seams as from a spout.

“Marvellous man!” muttered the landlord, staring at him aghast. “But
hasten in now, I entreat you. You ordered dinner at three; it will be
served to you in your room.”

“Just as it pleases you,” returned M. Gombard complacently. “I don’t
mind where I get it, provided it be good.”

“Monsieur, for heaven’s sake be prudent!” said the landlord; he took
the umbrella from him, and hung it outside the door to drip.

“I wish to have a word with you presently, mine host,” M. Gombard
called out from the top of the stairs.

“I am at your orders, monsieur,” said the host. This reckless behavior
in a man flying for his life was beyond belief. “It is madness, but it
is sublime!” thought the landlord. The table was ready laid when M.
Gombard entered his room; the dinner was ready too, as was evident
from the smell of fry and cabbage that filled the place; he went to
the window and threw it open. As he did so the mysterious lover
appeared at the corner of the street――that is, of the gabled
house――and, as before, lifted his hat and bowed reverently as he
passed under the balcony. Was his lady-love there to see it? M.
Gombard glanced quickly to the latticed window; it did not open, but
he distinctly saw a female figure standing behind it, and retreating
suddenly, as if unwilling to be observed. The little pantomime, which
he had looked on so contemptuously a few hours ago, was now full of a
new interest to him. He wondered what the lady was like; whether she
looked with full kindness on this pensive, intellectual-looking
adorer, and admitted him occasionally to her presence, or whether she
starved him on these distant glimpses. What was he doing in the church
just now, with that long scroll in his hand? He had not been praying
out of it, certainly. “I must interrogate mine host,” thought M.
Gombard, stirred to unwonted curiosity about these lovers. Great was
his surprise at that very moment to behold the said host cross the
street, pass the open gateway of the gabled house, ring at the narrow,
arched door and presently disappear within it. What could the landlord
of the _Jacques Bonhomme_ have to do with the wealthy mistress of that
house?

“Monsieur is served!” said the waiter, in a tone which announced that
he had said it before.

M. Gombard started, shut the window, and sat down to his dinner. When
he had finished it, he went and opened the window again, and, lo and
behold! there was the landlord coming back from the mystifying visit.
This time M. Gombard saw most distinctly the figure of a woman looking
out from the latticed window, and drawing back instantly when he
appeared.

There was a knock at the door. “Come in!” said M. Gombard.

The landlord looked very much excited.

“I have done my best for you, monsieur,” he began in an agitated
manner; “I have left nothing undone, and all I have been able to
obtain is that you shall have a good pair of post-horses to-morrow at
one o’clock.”

“Capital! Excellent! Then I am――” He stopped short.

“_Saved!_” muttered the landlord exultingly.

“Yes, yes, my friend, saved,” repeated M. Gombard with an air of cool
indifference which was nothing short of heroic; “but I am just
thinking whether, as I have not been able to start this afternoon, I
am not losing my time in starting at all. It might be wiser to―― But,
no; I had better go. You say the horses are good?”

“The best in Cabicol.”

“And I can count upon them?”

“I have the word of a noble woman for that.”

“Ha! a woman! Who may she be?”

“The mistress of that house――Mlle. Bobert.”

The landlord pronounced these words with an emphasis that might have
been dispensed with, as far as regarded the effect of the announcement
on M. Gombard.

“Mlle. Bobert!” he repeated in amazement.

“Yes, monsieur. She is young, but she has the mind of a man and the
heart of a mother. When every other resource had been tried in vain, I
went to her; I told her――enough to excite her sympathy, her desire to
help you; she promised me you should have the horses to-morrow at one
o’clock.”

“You confound me!” said M. Gombard.

“Have no fear, monsieur; Mlle. Bobert is a woman, but――she is to be
trusted. The horses will be here at one o’clock.”

“Well, well,” said M. Gombard, “I must not be ungrateful either to you
or Mlle. Bobert; it is most kind of you to take so much trouble in my
behalf, landlord, and most kind of her to furnish me with the horses.
You say she is young; is she pretty?” (Gracious heavens! If the
citizens of Loisel had heard this stony-hearted mayor putting such
questions!)

“No, monsieur, she is not pretty,” replied the landlord; “she is
beautiful.”

“_Diable!_” exclaimed M. Gombard facetiously.

“Beautiful as an _angel_,” remarked the landlord, with an accent that
seemed to rebuke his guest’s exclamation.

“You appear to have a _spécialité_ for beautiful persons in Cabicol,”
said M. Gombard, pouncing on his opportunity; “I met one in the church
just now, taking shelter from the rain――the most remarkably beautiful
person I ever saw in my life. Who can she be? She lives in the house
to the right of the market-place.”

“Excuse me, monsieur, she does not,” said the landlord sadly.

“No? How do you know? Did you see me――did you see her in the church?”

“No, monsieur, I did not,” answered the landlord.

M. Gombard was mystified again. What a droll fellow mine host was
altogether!

“You evidently know something about her,” he resumed; “can you tell me
her name and where she lives?”

“Her name is Mlle. Bobert; she lives yonder.” He stretched out his
arm, and held a finger pointed toward the old house. The effect on M.
Gombard was electric. He started as if the landlord’s finger had
pulled the trigger of a pistol; he grew pale; he could not utter a
word. The landlord pitied him sincerely.

“When I told her who it was I wanted the horses for,” he continued,
“she asked me to describe you. I did so, and she recognized you at
once as the person to whom she had spoken in the church. She said
immediately it would be a great pleasure to her to do you this
service, you had been so very courteous to her.”

“Pray convey my best thanks to Mlle. Bobert,” said M. Gombard, making
a strong effort to control his emotions; “I am profoundly sensible of
her goodness.”

The landlord cast one deeply tragic look upon his unfortunate guest,
bowed and withdrew. As he turned away, he bethought to himself how, as
the wisest men had been fooled by lovely woman, it was not to be
wondered at that the bravest should be made cowards by her; here was a
man who could carry a bold heart and a smiling face into the very
teeth of danger, but no sooner did he find that a woman had got hold
of even a suspicion of his secret than his courage deserted him, and
he was incapable of keeping up even a semblance of bravery. Unhappy
man! But he was safe; he had nothing to fear from Mlle. Bobert.

And so it was the great heiress whom he had seen and surrendered his
impregnable heart to, without even a feint at resistance! M. Gombard
understood all now; the joyous expression of her lovely face, her
unconstrained manner to him, her presence in the deserted church――it
was all explained: her lover had been there, praying with her, and she
had lingered on praying for him. Happy, happy man! Miserable Gombard!
He spent the evening drearily over his lonely fire. How lonely it
seemed since he had lost the dream that had beautified it, filling the
future with sweet visions of fireside joys, of bright companionship by
the winter blaze! He went to bed, nevertheless, and slept soundly. The
wound was not so deep as he imagined, this middle-aged man, who had no
memories of young love, with its kindling hopes and passionate
despairs, by which to measure his present suffering. He was very
miserable, sincerely unhappy, but, all the same, he slept his seven
hours without awaking. When at last he did awake, and bethought him of
his sorrow, he took it up where he had left it the night before, and
moaned and pitied himself with all his heart. He was to start at one
o’clock, but he must make an effort to see Mlle. Bobert again before
leaving Cabicol for ever. He ordered his breakfast, ate heartily, and
then sallied forth in the direction of the church. He knew of no other
place where he was at all likely to meet her; he had not seen her
leave the house, but she might have done so while he was breakfasting.
As well try to time the coming in and out of the sunbeams as the ways
and movements of this fairy _châtelaine_. She would sit by her
latticed window immovable for an hour, then disappear, then return,
flitting to and fro like a shadow. M. Gombard watched his opportunity,
when the landlord was busy in the crowded bar, to slip out of the
house. He felt as if he were performing some guilty action in stealing
away on such a foolish errand; how men would laugh at him if they
knew, if they could see the revolution that had taken place in him
within the last four-and-twenty hours! He tried to laugh at himself,
but it was more than his philosophy could accomplish. The great doors
of the church were open to-day. They were open every morning up to
noon; the good folks of Cabicol went in and out to their devotions,
from daybreak until then, not in crowds, but in groups of twos and
threes, trickling in and out at leisure. The grand old church looked
less gloomy than yesterday; the sunlight poured in, illuminating the
nave fully, and scattering the oppressive darkness of the lofty
aisles; but to M. Gombard the sunshine brought no brightness. He stood
at the entrance of the nave, and looked up the long vista and on every
side, but no trace of the luminary he sought was visible. The few
worshippers who knelt at the various shrines disappeared one by one,
going forth to the day’s labor, its troubles and its interests, till
the church was nearly empty. M. Gombard turned into the north aisle,
and sauntered slowly on. Presently he saw a tall figure advancing, as
yesterday, with the same quick step, from out the same side chapel. It
was his hated rival! Here he was again, with the same scroll of paper
in his hand; he rolled it up carefully, and put it in his pocket as he
walked on, calm, pensive, unconcerned, as if nobody had been by,
nobody scowling fiercely upon him as he passed. It was evidently a
plan agreed upon between these lovers that they should come and say
their prayers together at a given hour every day. M. Gombard was now
certain that Mlle. Bobert was in the Lady Chapel; he quickened his
step in that direction. Great was his surprise to find it almost
filled with people. The first Mass was at six, the second at ten; the
second was just finished. People were rising to come away; soon there
were only a few, more fervent than the rest, who lingered on at their
devotions. M. Gombard looked eagerly all round. There was a group of
several persons going out together. Descrying Mlle. Bobert amongst
them, he turned and followed quickly, taking the south aisle so as to
reach the portico before her, and have a chance of saluting, perhaps
speaking to, her; for might he not, ought he not, lawfully seize this
opportunity of thanking her? He stationed himself in the open
door-way, standing so that she could not pass without seeing him. The
common herd passed out. M. Gombard turned as a light step drew close.
He bowed low. “Mademoiselle, I have many thanks to offer you,” he said
in a subdued voice, as became the solemn neighborhood. “You have done
a great kindness to a perfect stranger. I shall never see you again;
but if ever, by chance, by some unspeakable good fortune, it were――in
my power, if I could do anything to serve you, I should count it a
great hap … I should be only too happy!”

Poor man! How confused he was! He could hardly get the words out. It
was pitiable to see his emotion. Mlle. Bobert’s gentle heart was
touched.

“Don’t think of it!” she answered kindly, but with a nervous, timid
manner that he was not too absorbed to notice and to wonder at,
remembering her unrestrained frankness of yesterday. “It is I who am
glad. I wish I had known it sooner, before the market-day. I should
have done my best; but I hope it is not too late, that you will
esca――that you will get where you want in good time.”

“It is of little consequence, mademoiselle. I care not whether I get
there late or early now,” replied M. Gombard.

“Don’t say that! Pray don’t!” said the young girl with great feeling.
“I should be so sorry! Good-by, monsieur, good-by.”

She hurried away. Did his eyes deceive him, or were there tears in
hers? She was strangely agitated; her voice trembled; there was a
choking sound in it when she said that “Good-by, monsieur, good-by!”
Did she read his secret on his face, in his manner, his tone, and was
she sorry for him? It was not improbable. He hoped it was so. It was
something to have her pity, since she could give him nothing more. He
watched the slight figure drifting out of sight; the step was less
elastic than yesterday; she was depressed, unnerved. What a treasure
that odious man had conquered in this tender, loving heart!

The post-chaise was at the door punctually at one. M. Gombard was
ready waiting for it when the landlord knocked at his door. The
traveller’s air of deep dejection struck a new pang at his feeling
heart.

“Monsieur, I trust sincerely you may not be too late,” he said in the
quick undertone of strong emotion, as he closed the door of the chaise
and leaned forward confidentially.

“Late or not, I shall always remember your kindness, landlord; it
signifies little whether I am late or not,” replied the parting guest.

“Don’t say that, monsieur, don’t, I entreat you!” said the landlord,
lowering his voice to a hoarse whisper. “It would grieve me to the
very soul! I swear to you it would! Will you do me one favor?――just to
prove that you trust me and believe that I have done my best to
forward your es――your wishes: will you send me word by the postilion
if you arrive in time?”

“Really, landlord, your interest in my welfare is beyond my
comprehension,” said M. Gombard; he had had enough of this effusive
sympathy, and at the moment it irritated him.

“Don’t say so, sir! But I understand――you don’t know me; you are
afraid to trust me. Well, I will not persist; but if you consent to
send me back one word, I shall be the happier for it. And Mlle.
Bobert――think of her!”

“Mlle. Bobert! Do you suppose she cares to hear of me again? To know
what becomes of me?” asked M. Gombard breathlessly.

“Care, monsieur? She will know no peace until she hears from you; she
will reproach herself, as if it had been her fault. You little know
what a sensitive heart hers is.”

The postilion gave a preliminary flourish of his whip. Crack! crack!
it went with a noise that roused all the population of the _Jacques
Bonhomme_, the inmates of the house, of the back yard and the front;
boys, dogs, pigs, ducks, turkeys, geese――all came hurrying to the
fore, barking, grumbling, cackling, screaming, and pushing, terrified
lest they should be late for the fun.

“I will send you word,” said M. Gombard, pressing mine host’s hand
with an impulse of gratitude and joy too strong for pride. “Adieu!
_Merci!_”

Crack! crack! and away went the post-chaise amidst such a noise and
confusion of men and animals as is not to be described. As the horses
dashed down the street, M. Gombard beheld the man with the scroll turn
the corner. Curiosity was too much for dignity; he looked back: the
hat was raised, and the happy rival passed on.


TO BE CONCLUDED NEXT MONTH.




WHAT IS DR. NEVIN’S POSITION?


The leading article[135] in the _Mercersburg Review_ for October last
is from the celebrated pen of J. Williamson Nevin, D.D. Dr. Nevin is a
member of the German Reformed Church, and at one period he was
president of Marshall College, the leader of a school of theologians,
and editor of the _Mercersburg Review_, to which magazine he is now
the ablest contributor. During his editorship he wrote several
remarkable articles for its pages, especially those on St. Cyprian,
which attracted considerable attention.

Dr. Nevin’s writings are characterized by an earnest religious spirit,
a freedom from bigotry, and they always aim at conveying some
important Christian verity; which, although he scarcely can be said to
know it, finds its true home only in the bosom of the Catholic Church.
Hence Catholics can but take an interest in whatever Dr. Nevin writes,
and we intend to lay before our readers, with some remarks of our own,
the purport of his present article, entitled “The Spiritual World.”

In this article Dr. Nevin tries to show and prove that the work of
salvation includes not only the resistance to inordinate passions, but
above all a struggle against, and a conquest over, the world of evil
spirits. This is his thesis. He says:

     “Flesh and blood, self, the world, and the things of the
     world around us here in the body, are indeed part of the
     hostile force we are called to encounter in our way to
     heaven; they are not the whole of this force, however, nor
     are they the main part of it, by any means. That belongs
     always to a more inward and far deeper realm of being, where
     the powers of the spiritual world are found to go
     immeasurably beyond all the powers of nature, and to be, at
     the same time, in truth, the continual source and spring of
     all that is in these last, whether for good or for evil. The
     Christian conflict thus, even where it regards things simply
     of the present life, looks through what is thus mundane,
     constantly to things which are unseen and eternal; and in
     this way it becomes in very fact throughout a wrestling, not
     with flesh and blood, but with the universal powers of evil
     brought to bear upon us from the other world.”

This he proceeds to prove by the vows of baptism:

     “So much we are taught in the form of our Christian baptism
     itself, by which we are engaged to ‘renounce the devil with
     all his ways and works, the world with its vain pomp and
     glory, and the flesh with all its sinful desires.’ In one
     view these may be regarded as separate enemies; but we know,
     at the same time, that they form together but one and the
     same grand power of evil, no one part of which can be
     effectually withstood asunder from the diabolical life that
     animates and actuates the whole. To wrestle with the world
     or with the flesh really, is to wrestle at the same time
     really with the full power of hell. If the struggle reach
     not to this, it may issue in stoic morality or respectable
     prudence, but it can never come to true self-mastery or
     victory over the world in the Christian sense. The field for
     any such conquest lies wholly beyond the realm of mere flesh
     and blood. The conquest, if gained at all, must be won from
     the hosts of hell, and then, of course, by the aid only of
     corresponding heavenly hosts and heavenly armor; which is,
     in truth, just what our baptism means.”

He calls in philosophy to confirm his thesis, thus:

     “The conception of any such comprehension of our life here
     in the general spiritual order of the universe can be no
     better than foolishness, we know, for the reigning
     materialistic thinking of the present time. But it is, in
     truth, the only rational view of the world’s existence.
     Philosophy, no less than religion, postulates the idea that
     the entire creation of God is one thought, in the power of
     which all things are held together as a single system from
     alpha to omega, from origin to end; and all modern science
     is serving continually more and more to confirm this view by
     showing that all things everywhere look to all things, and
     that everything everywhere is and can be what it is only
     through its relations to other things universally. So it is
     in the world of nature; so it is in the spiritual world; and
     so it must be also in the union of these two worlds one with
     the other. It is to be considered a settled maxim now, a
     mere truism indeed for all true thinkers, that there is no
     such thing as insulated existence anywhere――such an
     _inconnexum_ must at once perish, sink into nonentity. It is
     no weakness of mind, therefore, to think of the spiritual
     world as a vast nexus of affection and thought (like the
     waves of the sea, endlessly various and yet multitudinously
     one), viewed either as heaven or as hell. Without doing so,
     indeed, no man can believe really in any such world at all.
     It will be for him simply an abstraction, a notion, a
     phantom. And so, again, it is no weakness of mind, in
     acknowledging the existence of the spiritual world (thus
     concretely apprehended), to think of our present human life,
     even here in the body, as holding in real contact and
     communication organic inward correlation, we may say, with
     the universal life of that world (angelic and diabolic), in
     such sort that our entire destiny for weal or woe shall be
     found to hang upon it, as it is made to do in the teaching
     of God’s Word here under consideration. It is no weakness of
     mind, we say, to think of the subject before us in this way.
     The weakness lies altogether on the other side, with those
     who refuse the thought of any such organic connection
     between the life of men here in the body and the life of
     spirits in the other world.”

These views, so strongly put forth by Dr. Nevin, we hardly need
remark, are familiar to all Catholics, agree with the doctrines of all
Catholic spiritual authors, especially the mystics, who have written
professedly on this subject, and their truth is abundantly illustrated
on almost every page of the lives of the saints. The Catholic mystical
authors, many of whom were saints, have gone over the entire ground of
our relations with the supernatural world, and, both by their learning
and personal experience, have conveyed, in their writings on this
subject, important knowledge, laid down wise regulations, and given in
detail safe, wholesome, practical directions. They seem to breathe in
the same atmosphere as that in which the Holy Scriptures were written,
and in passing from the reading of the Holy Scriptures to the lives of
the saints there is no feeling of any break. They lived in the
habitual and conscious presence, and in some cases in sight, of the
inhabitants of the supernatural world; and so familiar was their
intercourse with the angelical side, and at times so dreadful were the
combats to which they were delivered on the diabolical side, that
their lives, for this very reason, become a stumbling-block to worldly
Catholics and to Protestants generally. In the lives of her saints the
Catholic Church proves that she is not only the teacher of
Christianity, but also the inheritor and channel of its life and
spirit. How far Dr. Nevin himself would agree with this intense
realism of the church in connection with the supernatural world, as
seen in the lives of her saints, we have no special means of knowing;
but if we may judge from the spirit and drift of the article under
consideration, he goes much farther in this direction than is usual
for Protestants. Be his opinion what it may, their lives form a
concrete evidence of the truth of his thesis. It is the sense of
nearness of the spiritual world, and its bearing on the Christian
life, pervading as it does the public worship, the private devotions,
and the general tone of Catholics, that characterizes them from those
who went out from the fold of the Catholic Church in the religious
revolution of three centuries ago. This whole field has become to
Protestants, in the process of time, a _terra incognita_; and if Dr.
Nevin can bring them again to its knowledge, and in “constant, living
union” with it, he will have done a most extraordinary work.

Efforts of this kind and of a similar nature have not been wanting in
one way or another, and are not now wanting, among Protestants. There
are those who show a decided interest in the works of the spiritual
writers of the Catholic Church. Strange to say――and yet it is not
strange; for in this they follow the law of _similia similibus_――they
are particularly fond of those authors whose writings are not
altogether sound or whose doctrines are tainted with exaggerations.
Thus Dr. Upham will write the life of Madame Guyon; another will
translate _The Maxims of the Saints_, by Fénelon; and to another class
there is a peculiar charm in the history of the Jansenistic movement
of Port Royal; others, again, moved by the same instinct, will not
hesitate to acknowledge with Dr. Mahan that “such individuals as
Thomas à Kempis, Catherine Adorno [he means St. Catherine of Genoa],
and many others were not only Christians, but believers who had a
knowledge of all the mysteries of the higher life, and who, through
all coming time, will shine as stars of the first magnitude in the
firmament of the Church. In their inward experiences, holy walk, and
‘power with God and with men,’ they had few, if any, superiors in any
preceding era of church history. ‘The unction of the Spirit’ was as
manifest in them as in the apostles and primitive believers”;[136]
while many of this class in the Episcopal Church translate from
foreign languages into English the works of Catholic ascetic writers,
and books of devotion, for the use of pious members of their
persuasion. The Rev. S. Baring-Gould will give you in English, in many
volumes, the complete lives of the saints. They even go so far, both
in England and the United States, as to found religious orders of both
sexes as schools for the better attainment of Christian perfection,
and venture to take the name of a Catholic saint as their patron.

It is evident that, among a class of souls upon whom the church can be
said to exert no direct influence, there is a movement towards seeking
nearer relations with the unseen spiritual world, accompanied with a
desire for closer union with God. It finds expression among all
Protestant denominations. With the Methodists and Presbyterians it is
known by the name of “perfectionism,” or “the higher life,” or “the
baptism of the Holy Ghost.” It is also manifested by the efforts made
now and again for union among all the Protestant sects. It is the same
craving of this mystical instinct for satisfaction that lies at the
root of spiritism, which has spread so rapidly and extensively outside
of the Catholic Church, not only among sceptics and unbelievers, but
even among all classes of Protestants, and entered largely into their
pulpits.

The former movement assumes a religious aspect; but lacking the
scientific knowledge of spiritual life, and the practical discipline
necessary to its true development and perfection, it gradually dies
out or runs into every kind of vagary and exaggeration. Recently,
after having made not a little commotion among different denominations
in England and Germany, it came, in the person of its American
apostle, Mr. Pearsall Smith, to a sudden and disgraceful collapse. “If
the blind lead the blind, both fall into the ditch.” The latter
movement――spiritism――leads directly to the entire emancipation of the
flesh, resulting in free-lovism, and sometimes ending in possession
and diabolism. Spiritism is Satan’s master-stroke, in which he obtains
from his adepts the denial of his own existence. These are some of the
bitter fruits of the separation from Catholic unity: those who took
this step under the pretence of seeking a higher spiritual life are
afflicted with spiritual languor and death; and they who were led by a
boasted independence of Christ have fallen into the snares of Satan
and become his dupes and abject slaves. Behold the revenge of
neglected Catholic truth; for only in Catholic unity every truth is
held in its true relation with all other truths, shines in its full
splendor, and produces its wholesome and precious fruits!

Suppose for a moment that Dr. Nevin should succeed in the task which
he has undertaken, and by his efforts raise those around him, and the
whole Protestant world, to a sense of their relation to the
supernatural world. What then? Why, he has only brought souls to a
state which many Protestants have reached before; and when they sought
for the light, aid, and sympathy which these new conditions required,
in those around them, they found none.

By quickening their spiritual sensibilities you have opened the door
to wilder fancies, more dangerous illusions, and thereby exposed the
salvation of their souls to greater perils. For, as St. Gregory tells
us: “_Ars artium est regimen animarum_”――the art of arts is the
guidance of souls; and where is this art, this science, this
discipline, to be found? Not in Protestantism. What then? Why, either
these souls have to renounce their holiest convictions, their
newly-awakened spiritual life, and sink into their former
insensibility; or go where they can find true guidance, certain peace,
and spiritual progress――enter into the bosom of the holy Catholic
Church, where alone the cravings of that spiritual hunger can be
appeased which nowhere else upon earth found food, and the soul can at
last breathe freely.

But there is another point involved in Dr. Nevin’s article; and
however so much, as Catholics, we may sympathize with his endeavors to
awaken Protestants to their relations with the supernatural world,
this point in question will come up, and we cannot help putting it:
What is Dr. Nevin’s criterion of revealed truth? The rule of
interpretation of the written Word? Dr. Nevin has one; for neither he
nor any one else can move a single step without employing and
applying, implicitly or explicitly, a rule of faith. He criticises,
judges, condemns others, but on what ground? Does his own position, at
bottom, differ from that of those whom he condemns? He lacks neither
the ability nor the learning to make a consistent statement on this
point. Truth is consistent. God is not the author of confusion.

Where does Dr. Nevin find or put the rule of faith? If it be placed in
simple human reason, then we have as the result, in religion, pure
rationalism. If it be placed in human reason illuminated by grace,
then we have illuminism. If it be placed in both of these, with the
written Word――that is, the Bible as interpreted by each individual
with the assistance of divine grace――then we have the common rule of
faith of all Protestants, so fruitful in breeding sects and schisms,
and inevitably tending to the entire negation of Christianity.

This last appears to be Dr. Nevin’s rule of faith; for what else does
he mean when in the beginning of his article, its second sentence, he
makes the following surprising statement: “Christianity is a theory of
salvation”? Did God descend from heaven and become man upon earth,
live, suffer, and die, and for what? “A theory”! Is this the whole
issue and reality of Christianity――“a theory,” a speculation? Did
Christ rise from the dead and ascend to the Father, and, with him,
send forth upon earth the Holy Ghost, to create “a theory,” a
speculation, or an abstraction? “Christianity a theory”! We fear that
one who would deliberately make that assertion has never had the true
conception of what is meant by the reality of Christianity. What would
be said of a man who in treating of the sun should say: The sun is a
theory, or a speculation, or an exposition of the abstract principles
of light? If the sun be a theory, it would be quickly asked, what
becomes, in the meanwhile, of the reality of the sun? This way of
dealing with Christianity, while professing to explain it, allows its
reality altogether to escape. Notwithstanding Dr. Nevin’s condemnation
of “the abstract spiritualistic thinking of the age,” and of those who
would make Christianity “a fond sentiment simply of their own fancy,”
he falls, in his definition of Christianity, into the very same error
which in others he emphatically condemns.

That this is so is evident; for while he says, “Christianity is a
theory,” he adds in the same sentence, “and is made known to us by
divine revelation.” Now, the separation, even in idea, between the
church and Christianity, is the fountain, source, and origin of all
the illusions and errors uttered or written, since the beginning,
concerning the Christian religion. The attempt to get at and set up a
Christianity independently of the Christian Church is the very essence
and nature of all heresies. The church and Christianity are
distinguishable, but not separable; and in assuming their
separability, as a primary position, lies all the confusion of ideas
and misapprehensions of Christianity in the author of the article
under present consideration. This point needs further explanation, as
it is all-important, and forms, indeed, the very root of the matter.
“Christianity is a theory,” says Dr. Nevin, “and is made known to us
by divine revelation.” But what does Dr. Nevin mean by “divine
revelation”? Here are his own words in explanation:

     “When the question arises, How are we to be made in this way
     partakers of the living Christ, so that our religion shall
     be in very deed――not a name only, not a doctrinal or
     ritualistic fetich merely, nor a fond sentiment simply of
     our own fancy?” “All turns in this case on our standing in
     the divine order as it reaches us from the Father through
     the Son. That meets us in the written Word of God, which, in
     the way we have before seen, is nothing less in its interior
     life than the presence of the Lord of life and glory himself
     in the world.”

Again:

     “We cannot now follow out the subject with any sort of
     adequate discussion. We will simply say, therefore, that
     what our Lord says here of his words or commandments is just
     what the Scriptures everywhere attribute to themselves in
     the same respect and view. They claim to be spirit and life,
     to have in them supernatural and heavenly power, to be able
     to make men wise unto everlasting life, to be the Word of
     God which liveth and abideth for ever――not the memory or
     report simply of such word spoken in time past, but the
     always present energy of it reaching through the ages. The
     Scriptures――God’s law, testimonies, commandments, statutes,
     judgments, his word in form of history, ritual, psalmody,
     and prophecy――are all this through what they are as the
     ‘testimony of Jesus’; and therefore it is that they are, in
     truth, what the ark of God’s covenant represented of old,
     the conjunction of heaven and earth, and in this way a real
     place of meeting or convention between men and God. To know
     this, to own it, to acknowledge inwardly the presence of
     Christ in his Word, as the same Jehovah from whom the law
     came on Mount Sinai; and then to fear the Lord as thus
     revealed in his Word, to bow before his authority, and to
     walk in his ways; or, in shorter phrase, to ‘fear God and
     keep his commandments,’ because they _are his_ commandments,
     and not for any lower reason――this is the whole duty of man,
     and of itself the bringing of man into union with God; the
     full verification of which is reached at last only in and by
     the Word made glorious through the glorification of the Lord
     himself; as when, in the passage before us he makes the
     keeping of his commandments the one simple condition of all
     that is comprehended in the idea of the mystical union
     between himself and his people.”

According, then, to Dr. Nevin, “the divine order of our being” made
“partakers of the living Christ is in the Word of God.”

To make what is plain unmistakable, he adds:

     “What we have to do, then, especially in the war we are
     called to wage with the powers of hell, is to see that this
     conjunction with Christ be in us really and truly, through a
     proper continual use of the Word of God for this purpose.”

There is here and there throughout this article a haziness of language
which smacks of Swedenborgianism, and makes it difficult to seize its
precise meaning; but we submit that Dr. Nevin――and he will probably
accept the statement, as our only aim is to get at his real
meaning――proceeds on the supposition that Christianity is a theory,
and becomes real as each individual, illumined by divine light,
discovers and appropriates it in reading the written Word――the Bible.
This is the common ground of Protestantism; and Dr. Nevin holds no
other than the rule of faith of all Protestants. The following passage
places this beyond doubt or cavil:

     “It was the life of the risen Lord himself, shining into the
     written Word, and through this into the mind of the
     disciples, which, by inward correspondence, served to open
     their understanding to the proper knowledge of both. And as
     it was then, so it is still. We learn what the written Word
     is only by light from the incarnate Word; but then, again,
     we learn what the light of the incarnate Word is only as
     this shines into us through the written Word――a circle, it
     is true, which alone, however, brings us to the true ground
     of the Christian faith.”

We need scarcely tell our readers that this pretended rule of faith is
no rule of faith at all. It breaks down on any reasonable test which
you may apply to it. It will not stand the trial of the written Word
itself, nor of history, nor of common sense, nor of good and sound
logic. This has been too often demonstrated to require here long
argumentation. Therefore, when a man ventures to speak for
Christianity, and professes to define and explain what is
Christianity, the question rises up at once, and naturally: What does
this man know, in fact, about Christianity? Did he live in the time of
Christ? Did he ever speak to Christ, or see him? Was he a witness to
his miracles? Why, no! He can bear testimony to none of these events.
If he was not a contemporary of Christ, what, then, does he know about
him? Where has he obtained his knowledge to set up for a teacher of
Christianity? On what grounds does he presume to speak for
Christianity? Does he come commissioned by those whom Christ
authorized to teach in his name? Why, no; they repudiate him in the
character of a teacher of Christ. Does he prove by direct miraculous
power from God to speak in his name? Why, no! Then he has no
commission, indirect or direct; then he is unauthorized, a self-sent
and a self-appointed teacher!

But he fancies he has a light to speak for Christianity on the
authority of certain historical documents which contain an account of
Christ and his doctrines. But how about these documents? What
authority verified and stamped them with its approval as genuine, and
rejected others, which professed to be genuine, as spurious? Why, the
very authority which verified these documents, and on which he has to
rely for their genuineness and divine inspiration, is the very
authority which altogether denies his presumed right of teaching
Christianity! The authority which authenticated them rejects as
spurious his claim to be the interpreter of their true meaning. How
does he get over this difficulty? He does not get over it. He simply
ignores it.

But do these documents profess to give a full and complete account of
Christianity? By no means. He assumes this too. What! assumes the
vital point of his own rule, which is in dispute? He does. Strange
that those who were inspired to write these so important documents
should not have written their great object plainly on their face; and
stranger still, if they did, that this should have remained a secret
many centuries before its discovery!

Then this was not the way the primitive Christians learned
Christianity? Not at all. There were millions of Christians who spilt
their blood for Christianity, and millions more who had died in the
faith, before these documents were verified and put in the shape which
we now have them and call the Bible. This pretended rule, then,
unchristianizes the early Christians? It does; and does more――it
unchristianizes the great bulk of Christians since; for the mass of
Christians could not obtain Bibles before the invention of printing,
and could not read them if they had them. Even to-day, if this be the
rule, how about the children, the blind, and those who cannot
read――not a small number? How are they to become Christians?

But as the Bible is an inspired book, to get at its true meaning
requires the same divine Spirit which inspired it? Of course it does.
But do they that follow this rule assume that each one for himself has
this divine Spirit? Nothing else. But are they sure of this? Sure of
it?――they say so. But are they sure that each one has the divine
Spirit to interpret rightly the divinely-inspired, written Word? Each
one thinks so. Thinks so! But do they not know it? Do they not know
it? Why, let me explain: “You see we learn what the written Word is
only by light from the incarnate Word.” But how do you get the light
from the incarnate Word? Why, “we learn what the light of the
incarnate Word is only as this shines into us through the written
Word.” That is, you suppose that the Bible, read with proper
dispositions, conveys to your soul divine grace? Just so. That is, you
put the Bible in the place of the sacraments; but that is not the
question now. The question, the point, now at issue is: How do you
know that that light which shines into you through the written Word is
not “a fond sentiment simply of your own fancy,” is not a delusion,
instead of “the light of the incarnate Word”? “Oh! I see what you are
aiming at. A book divinely inspired requires for its interpreter the
divine Spirit to get at its divine meaning. Now, if those who assume
to possess this Spirit contradict each other point-blank in their
interpretation of its meaning, then this is equivalent to charging the
Holy Spirit, the Spirit of truth, with error; and such a charge is
blasphemy! But this is pushing things too far.”

Perhaps so; nevertheless, those who follow this rule of faith do
differ in their interpretation of Holy Scripture, and differ as far as
heaven is from earth. There is no end to their differences. Almost
every day breeds a new sect. They not only differ from each other, but
each one differs from himself; and why? Because none are certain that
they have the inspired Word of God, except on a basis which undermines
their position; and none are certain that the light by which they
interpret the written Word of God is the unerring Spirit of truth.
Hence all who hold this rule gradually decline into uncertitude,
doubt, scepticism, and total unbelief.

But how do the followers of this rule of faith interpret those
passages of Holy Scriptures which speak so plainly of the church?――for
instance, where Christ promises to “build his church, and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it”; “He that heareth not the church,
let him be to thee as a heathen and a publican”; “The church of the
living God, the pillar and ground of truth”; “Christ died for the
church”; “The church is ever subject to Christ”; and others of like
import. They either pass them by as of no account, or deal with them
as an artist does with a piece of clay or wax――they mould them to suit
their fancy. Truly, this rule of faith reduces the divine reality of
Christianity to the efforts of one’s own thought――“a theory.”

Dr. Nevin may struggle against the inevitable results of this rule, as
he does in several places in the present article, but he stands on the
same inclined plane as those whom he condemns, and, in spite of his
earnest counter-efforts, he is descending visibly with them into the
same abyss. For the effort to get at the reality of Christianity, and
to escape the recognition of the divine authority of the church,
through the personal interpretation of the written Word, is a vain,
absurd, and fatal expedient. “He that entereth not by the door into
the sheepfold, but climbeth up another way, the same is a thief and a
robber” (John x. 1).

As the attempt to separate the church and Christianity from each other
empties Christianity of all its contents and destroys its reality, so,
reversely, the conception of the transcendent union and inseparability
of the church and Christianity leads to the recognition of the living,
constant, divine reality of Christianity. For the Christian Church was
called into being by God, the Holy Ghost, the Creator Spirit; and as
this primary creative act still subsists in her in all its original
vigor, she is, at every moment of her life, equally real, living,
divine. Just as the created universe exists by the continuation of the
creative act which called it into existence at the beginning, so the
Catholic Church exists by the continuation of the supernatural
creative act which called her into existence on the day of Pentecost.
Once the church, always the church.

The church and the Bible are, in their divine origin, one; they
co-operate together for the same end, and are in their nature
inseparable. But the written Word is relative or subsidiary to the
church, having for its aim to enlighten, to strengthen, and to perfect
the faithful in that supernatural life of the Spirit in which they
were begotten in the layer of regeneration, in the bosom of the holy
church. The purpose of the written Word is, therefore, to effect a
more perfect realization of the church, and to accelerate her true
progress in the redemption and sanctification of the world. Hence the
written Word presupposes the existence of the church, is within and in
the keeping of the church, and depends on her divine authority for its
authentication and true interpretation. The church is primary, and not
enclosed in the written Word; but the end of the written Word is
enclosed in that of the church.

Were not a word of divine revelation written, the church would have
none the less existed in all her divine reality, and she would have
none the less accomplished her divine mission upon earth. For God, the
indwelling Holy Spirit, is her life, power, guide, and protector. God
the Son was incarnate in the man Christ Jesus; so God the Holy Spirit
was incorporate in the holy Catholic Church.

Undoubtedly the apostles were inspired by the Holy Spirit to write all
that they wrote; but their Gospels and their Epistles always
presuppose the church as existing. To appeal, therefore, from the
church to the written Word of the New Testament, if nothing else, is
to be guilty of an anachronism.

Even as to the Old Testament, before the Incarnation as well as after
the Incarnation, the reality of the church consisted in that
supernatural communion between God and man which existed at the moment
of his creation. The church, therefore, existed, at least in
potentiality, in the garden of Paradise, and was historically primary
in the order of supernatural communications.

Wherein does Dr. Nevin differ from the Ebionites, the Nicolaites, the
Gnostics, the common Protestants, down to Joe Smith, Père Hyacinthe,
and Bishop Reinkens? Perceptibly, at bottom, there is no difference.
Dr. Nevin appears to have never asked himself seriously the most
searching of all questions, to wit: What, in the last analysis, is the
basis, standard, or rule by which I judge what is and what is not
Christianity? He ventures to treat of the gravest questions and most
momentous mysteries touching the kingdom of God, on which the saints
would not have ventured a personal opinion; and on what grounds? But
it may be said in his excuse, and with truth, that this
self-sufficient attitude is due to the very position of defiance to
the divine authority of the church in which all those who have gone
out, or are born out, of her fold are necessarily involved.

To sum up: Either we must suppose that God has left the task to every
individual to direct the human race to the great end for which he
created it――and thus the individual occupies the place of Almighty
God, and turns the crank of the universe to suit his own fancy, or the
schemes and theories of the cogitations of his little brain――or
believe in “a divine order,” in being made constant partakers of the
living Christ “in a concrete form.” In this case, our first duty is to
find this real concrete body, become a member and partaker of its
divine life, and, in conquering the obstacles in the way of our
salvation, co-operate in its divine work for the whole world.

But the history of these last three centuries shows conclusively that
there is no standing-place between the Catholic Church and
Protestantism; and it has made it equally clear that Protestantism has
no standing ground of its own, and therefore no man can be a
Christian, and defend with perfect consistency his position, out of
the Catholic Church.


     [135] “The Spiritual World,” by J. W. Nevin, D.D., the
     _Mercersburg Review_, October, 1876.

     [136] _The Baptism of the Holy Ghost_, by Rev. Asa Mahan,
     D.D., p. 81.




SIX SUNNY MONTHS.

BY THE AUTHOR OF “THE HOUSE OF YORKE,” “GRAPES AND THORNS,” ETC.


