VI.

NON-ADVANCEMENT OF LOWER ORDERS. _Page_ 158.

Mr. Darwin's answer to the difficulty put by Agassiz is this;--"On our
theory the continued existence of lowly organisms offers no difficulty;
for natural selection, or the survival of the fittest, does not
necessarily include progressive development,--it only takes advantage of
such variations as arise and are beneficial to each creature under its
complex relations of life."--_Origin of Species_, sixth edition, p. 98.
This wears the aspect of a limitation of the theory, and to that extent
an acknowledgment of the force of the reasoning of Agassiz.


VII.

PROTOPLASM. _Page_ 131.

"Protoplasm, simple or nucleated, is the formal basis of all life;" thus
"all living forms are fundamentally of one character." "All the forms of
Protoplasm which have yet been examined contain the four elements,
carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, in very complex union." Thus
there is "a general uniformity in the character of the Protoplasm, or
physical basis of life, in whatever group of living beings it may be
studied."--HUXLEY'S _Lay Sermons_, p. 142.


VIII.

NUMBER OF SPECIES OF INSECTS. _Page_ 193.

Professor Huxley mentions that "Gerstsæcker in the new edition of
Broun's 'Thier-Reich' gives 200,000 as the total number of species of
_Arthropoda_." In this connection Mr. McLauchlan, when claiming that
there are 200,000 species of Insects, adds, "In one order alone
(_Coleoptera_) it is estimated that 80,000 species have been
described."--_Nature_, xv. p. 275.


IX.

FERTILIZATION OF FLOWERS BY INSECTS. _Page_ 170.

Dr. Hermann Müller's Observations are described in _Nature_, vol. xiv.
p. 175; vol. xv. pp. 317, 473; vol. xvi. pp. 265, 507.


X.

ANTS. _Page 192._

Mr. McCook's Observations are summarized in _Nature_, vol. xvii. p.
433.


XI.

LIKENESS OF THE APE'S BRAIN TO THE HUMAN BRAIN. _Page_ 225.

The close resemblance of the brain of the ape to that of man, has been
held to prove that the ape comes next to man in intelligence. But the
facts bearing on this suggestion are fitted to occasion serious
perplexity to its upholders. First stands the resemblance of bodily
structure as largely explaining similarity of brain. The results of
electric stimulation of the monkey's brain lend additional force to this
consideration. Again, facts are wanting to support the claim for
superior intelligence in behalf of the monkey and ape. The habits of the
ape in its natural state afford little evidence of an encouraging kind.
The ape gathers together a few sticks for a nest, in comparison with
which the work of very small birds presents marvels of architecture. And
nest-building seems the highest evidence gathered from the natural
habits of the animal, when we compare it with leaning the back against a
tree for rest, or staunching the blood of a wound. In the captive state
the ape gives no such evidence of superior intelligence as the
similarity of its brain to the human, would lead us to expect, if brain
structure afford the test of intellectual power. Even after allowance
has been made for sudden transition from the wild state to the captive,
the evidence of capability does not appear which the theory requires.
The highest results reached by training monkeys, do not support a claim
for intellectual superiority. These are mainly forms of mimicry,
generally inferior to the efforts of some other animals. Add to these
considerations the evidence as to the singular intelligence shown by
ants, and the theory which measures intellect by brain structure is
placed at a great disadvantage. Whether science may not ere long point
to some theory of mind connected with animal existence must be matter of
uncertainty. If, however, the easy and familiar operations of our own
intelligence are analyzed and classified; and if a statement of the
ascertained functions of the brain is laid alongside, it will appear
that nothing known to us in the action of brain, can supply a science of
the operations of the human mind.


XII.

THE LARGE SIZED OR MULTIPOLAR CELLS. _Page_ 257.

On the functions of the large sized cells, it seems desirable to add a
few words as to the direction in which evidence as to their functions
actually points. For this purpose, a further quotation is desirable,
referring to the number of fibres or processes passing off from these
large cells, distinguishing those which branch out into a fine net-work,
and those which pass directly to a nerve fibre. "One at least of the
processes of a multipolar nerve cell does not branch, but becomes
directly continuous with a nerve fibre, and has been named the
axial-cylinder process."--Professor Turner's _Human Anatomy_, i. 201.
This taken with the facts given in Lecture VII, seems to favor the
conclusions, (1) that the large cell spreads nerve energy through the
tissue of the brain, while each has at least one direct line of
communication with the system of nerve fibres; (2) that the large cell
has intimate and extended relations with the motor system.


