II.

SPONTANEOUS GENERATION. _Page_ 54.

Professor Tyndall, describing his own experiments, says, "The
experiments have already extended to 105 instances, not one of which
shows the least countenance to the doctrine of spontaneous generation."
Communicated to Royal Society of London, December 21, 1876.--_Nature_,
vol. xv. p. 303.


III.

ENERGY AND FORCE. _Page_ 96.

The term Force is by many authors used as equivalent to Energy, rather
than as a distinct term for the amount of Energy. Force is thus used by
Sir W. R. Groves. "The term Force, although used in very different
senses by different authors, in its limited sense may be defined as that
which produces or resists motion." ... "I use the term Force ... as
meaning that active principle inseparable from matter which is supposed
to induce its various changes." ... "All we know or see is the effect;
we do not see Force--we see motion or moving matter."--_The Correlation
of Physical Forces_, sixth edition, by the Hon. Sir W. R. Grove, pp. 10,
11.


IV.

ALL ORGANIZED EXISTENCE IS CONSTRUCTED ON A COMMON PLAN. _Page_ 131.

"Biologists turn to the physical organization of man. They examine his
whole structure, his bony frame, and all that clothes it. They resolve
him into the finest particles into which the microscope will enable them
to break him up. They consider the performance of his various functions
and activities, and they look at the manner in which he occurs on the
surface of the world. Then they turn to other animals, and taking the
first handy domestic animal--say a dog,--they profess to be able to
demonstrate that the analysis of the dog leads them, in gross, to
precisely the same results as the analysis of the man; that they find
almost identically the same bones, having the same relations; that they
can name the muscles of the dog by the names of the muscles of the man,
and the nerves of the dog by those of the nerves of the man, and that
such structures and organs of sense as we find in the man, such also we
find in the dog; they analyze the brain and spinal cord, and they find
that the nomenclature which fits the one answers for the other.
Moreover, they trace back the dog's and the man's development, and they
find that at a certain stage of their existence, the two creatures are
not distinguishable the one from the other; they find that the dog and
his kind have a certain distribution over the surface of the world
comparable in its way to the distribution of the human species.... Thus
biologists have arrived at the conclusion that a fundamental uniformity
of structure pervades the animal and vegetable worlds, and that plants
and animals differ from one another simply as modifications of the same
great plan. Again they tell us the same story in regard to the study of
function. They admit the large and important interval which, at the
present time, separates the manifestations of the mental faculties
observable in the higher forms of mankind, and even in the lowest forms,
such as we know them, mentally from those exhibited by other animals;
but, at the same time, they tell us that the foundations or rudiments
of almost all the faculties of man are to be met with in the lower
animals; that there is a unity of mental faculty, as well as of bodily
structure, and that here also, the difference is a difference of degree
and not of kind."--Lecture on "The Study of Biology," by Professor
Huxley, _Nature_, vol. xv. p. 219. Delivered at South Kensington Museum,
London, December 16, 1876. On the grounds here admirably summarized, it
is clear that the whole organism of our world has been constructed on a
common plan. This being true, similarities will appear in process of
development, and in the structure and functions of different orders.
This similarity, however, does not help us to explain "the large and
important interval" which appears when mental characteristics are
considered. It makes the diversity of mental power more difficult to
explain by reference to organism, in fact contributing to the strength
of evidence for mind as a form of existence distinct from organism.


V.

EMBRYOLOGY. _Page_ 131.

I have not felt warranted to include in the text any summary of results
secured by the important, but very difficult, investigations concerning
the growth of animal life in the womb. This whole department of inquiry
is in such an unfinished and uncertain state, that there is not warrant
to found upon the evidence already obtained any general argument as to
its bearing on a theory of evolution. The most competent observers
admit that they are perplexed by facts ascertained, and confess that
they can not as yet offer an explanation. To others all is as plain as
possible; embryology supplies a convincing proof of the accuracy of an
evolution theory; but these are scientific theorists who see by
imagination, and are impatient of uncertainty. There are certain general
considerations which must interpose difficulties in the way of
constructing an argument from Embryology to evolution of species. (1)
The action of environment before birth is altogether different from the
action of environment after birth. (2) The theory of the evolution of
species emphasizes this difference by insisting on the struggle for
existence. (3) This difference being admitted, an argument from the one
to the other can not hold. In the line of discovery the point of chief
interest has been the fact that in some cases embryonic life shows a
transition through lower forms analogous to lower orders of animal
existence prior to reaching the mature stage when birth occurs. But in
connection with the facts ascertained, two things are to be remarked.
(1) Evidence of transition is most striking in the history of animal
life developed external to the parental life, as in the transition from
_larvæ_ to _pupæ_ among insects, and in the changes in the life of the
tadpole. (2) If it be admitted that there is a common plan of structure
for all organism, it is implied that there must be similarities in
process of development. The question requiring answer, therefore, is
whether in the gradual development from the germ, any further
resemblance to lower orders appears than is to be anticipated on the
admission of a common plan for organic structure. There are singular
examples of transition. But there are no illustrations of uniform
progress in the case of the higher orders such as would warrant the
supposition that a history of evolution of the species can be read in
the development of the fœtus. The supposition has, however, found
currency in not a little of our scientific teaching. The incompleteness
of this evidence may appear from examples. Take the tadpole. Huxley
states the facts thus,--"The tadpole is first a fish, then a tailed
amphibian, provided with gills and lungs, before it became a frog." This
is development outside parental life, and does not belong to evidence in
Embryology. Confining attention to embryonic life, let us take Huxley's
statement, biologists "trace back the dog's and the man's development,
and they find that at a certain stage of their existence, the two
creatures are not distinguishable the one from the other." What is the
inference to be drawn? If the two are not distinguishable, our powers of
distinguishing are insufficient, for no biologist suggests that the two
are alike. The difficulty of distinguishing two germs, or two examples
of fœtus, is analogous to the difficulty which Darwin has pointed out
of distinguishing the orders of dogs when they are six-days-old puppies,
or the breed of three-days-old colt, or of nestling pigeons. At these
stages, the animals may be so similar, that it is hardly possible to
distinguish them, and yet in the full grown state they are quite
different (Darwin's _Origin of Species_, sixth edition, p. 391). Mr.
Darwin has presented the outstanding facts thus;--"The very general,
though not universal, difference in structure between the embryo and the
adult;--the various parts in the same individual embryo, which
ultimately become very unlike and serve for diverse purposes, being at
an early period of growth alike;--the common, but not invariable
resemblance between the embryos or larvæ of the most distinct species in
the same class;--the embryo often retaining whilst within the egg or
womb, structures which are of no service to it, either at that or at a
later period of life."


