CHAPTER I—INTRODUCES THE ADMIRAL


WHEN Dick Naseby was in Paris he made some odd acquaintances; for he was
one of those who have ears to hear, and can use their eyes no less than
their intelligence.  He made as many thoughts as Stuart Mill; but his
philosophy concerned flesh and blood, and was experimental as to its
method.  He was a type-hunter among mankind.  He despised small game and
insignificant personalities, whether in the shape of dukes or bagmen,
letting them go by like sea-weed; but show him a refined or powerful
face, let him hear a plangent or a penetrating voice, fish for him with a
living look in some one’s eye, a passionate gesture, a meaning and
ambiguous smile, and his mind was instantaneously awakened.  ‘There was a
man, there was a woman,’ he seemed to say, and he stood up to the task of
comprehension with the delight of an artist in his art.

And indeed, rightly considered, this interest of his was an artistic
interest.  There is no science in the personal study of human nature.
All comprehension is creation; the woman I love is somewhat of my
handiwork; and the great lover, like the great painter, is he that can so
embellish his subject as to make her more than human, whilst yet by a
cunning art he has so based his apotheosis on the nature of the case that
the woman can go on being a true woman, and give her character free play,
and show littleness, or cherish spite, or be greedy of common pleasures,
and he continue to worship without a thought of incongruity.  To love a
character is only the heroic way of understanding it.  When we love, by
some noble method of our own or some nobility of mien or nature in the
other, we apprehend the loved one by what is noblest in ourselves.  When
we are merely studying an eccentricity, the method of our study is but a
series of allowances.  To begin to understand is to begin to sympathise;
for comprehension comes only when we have stated another’s faults and
virtues in terms of our own.  Hence the proverbial toleration of artists
for their own evil creations.  Hence, too, it came about that Dick
Naseby, a high-minded creature, and as scrupulous and brave a gentleman
as you would want to meet, held in a sort of affection the various human
creeping things whom he had met and studied.

One of these was Mr. Peter Van Tromp, an English-speaking, two-legged
animal of the international genus, and by profession of general and more
than equivocal utility.  Years before he had been a painter of some
standing in a colony, and portraits signed ‘Van Tromp’ had celebrated the
greatness of colonial governors and judges.  In those days he had been
married, and driven his wife and infant daughter in a pony trap.  What
were the steps of his declension?  No one exactly knew.  Here he was at
least, and had been any time these past ten years, a sort of dismal
parasite upon the foreigner in Paris.

It would be hazardous to specify his exact industry.  Coarsely followed,
it would have merited a name grown somewhat unfamiliar to our ears.
Followed as he followed it, with a skilful reticence, in a kind of social
chiaroscuro, it was still possible for the polite to call him a
professional painter.  His lair was in the Grand Hotel and the gaudiest
cafés.  There he might be seen jotting off a sketch with an air of some
inspiration; and he was always affable, and one of the easiest of men to
fall in talk withal.  A conversation usually ripened into a peculiar sort
of intimacy, and it was extraordinary how many little services Van Tromp
contrived to render in the course of six-and-thirty hours.  He occupied a
position between a friend and a courier, which made him worse than
embarrassing to repay.  But those whom he obliged could always buy one of
his villainous little pictures, or, where the favours had been prolonged
and more than usually delicate, might order and pay for a large canvas,
with perfect certainty that they would hear no more of the transaction.

Among resident artists he enjoyed celebrity of a non-professional sort.
He had spent more money—no less than three individual fortunes, it was
whispered—than any of his associates could ever hope to gain.  Apart from
his colonial career, he had been to Greece in a brigantine with four
brass carronades; he had travelled Europe in a chaise and four, drawing
bridle at the palace-doors of German princes; queens of song and dance
had followed him like sheep and paid his tailor’s bills.  And to behold
him now, seeking small loans with plaintive condescension, sponging for
breakfast on an art-student of nineteen, a fallen Don Juan who had
neglected to die at the propitious hour, had a colour of romance for
young imaginations.  His name and his bright past, seen through the prism
of whispered gossip, had gained him the nickname of _The Admiral_.

Dick found him one day at the receipt of custom, rapidly painting a pair
of hens and a cock in a little water-colour sketching box, and now and
then glancing at the ceiling like a man who should seek inspiration from
the muse.  Dick thought it remarkable that a painter should choose to
work over an absinthe in a public café, and looked the man over.  The
aged rakishness of his appearance was set off by a youthful costume; he
had disreputable grey hair and a disreputable sore, red nose; but the
coat and the gesture, the outworks of the man, were still designed for
show.  Dick came up to his table and inquired if he might look at what
the gentleman was doing.  No one was so delighted as the Admiral.

‘A bit of a thing,’ said he.  ‘I just dash them off like that.  I—I dash
them off,’ he added with a gesture.

‘Quite so,’ said Dick, who was appalled by the feebleness of the
production.

‘Understand me,’ continued Van Tromp; ‘I am a man of the world.  And
yet—once an artist always an artist.  All of a sudden a thought takes me
in the street; I become its prey: it’s like a pretty woman; no use to
struggle; I must—dash it off.’

‘I see,’ said Dick.

‘Yes,’ pursued the painter; ‘it all comes easily, easily to me; it is not
my business; it’s a pleasure.  Life is my business—life—this great city,
Paris—Paris after dark—its lights, its gardens, its odd corners.  Aha!’
he cried, ‘to be young again!  The heart is young, but the heels are
leaden.  A poor, mean business, to grow old!  Nothing remains but the
_coup d’œil_, the contemplative man’s enjoyment, Mr. —,’ and he paused
for the name.

‘Naseby,’ returned Dick.

The other treated him at once to an exciting beverage, and expatiated on
the pleasure of meeting a compatriot in a foreign land; to hear him, you
would have thought they had encountered in Central Africa.  Dick had
never found any one take a fancy to him so readily, nor show it in an
easier or less offensive manner.  He seemed tickled with him as an
elderly fellow about town might be tickled by a pleasant and witty lad;
he indicated that he was no precision, but in his wildest times had never
been such a blade as he thought Dick.  Dick protested, but in vain.  This
manner of carrying an intimacy at the bayonet’s point was Van Tromp’s
stock-in-trade.  With an older man he insinuated himself; with youth he
imposed himself, and in the same breath imposed an ideal on his victim,
who saw that he must work up to it or lose the esteem of this old and
vicious patron.  And what young man can bear to lose a character for
vice?

At last, as it grew towards dinner-time, ‘Do you know Paris?’ asked Van
Tromp.

‘Not so well as you, I am convinced,’ said Dick.

‘And so am I,’ returned Van Tromp gaily.  ‘Paris!  My young friend—you
will allow me?—when you know Paris as I do, you will have seen Strange
Things.  I say no more; all I say is, Strange Things.  We are men of the
world, you and I, and in Paris, in the heart of civilised existence.
This is an opportunity, Mr. Naseby.  Let us dine.  Let me show you where
to dine.’

Dick consented.  On the way to dinner the Admiral showed him where to buy
gloves, and made him buy them; where to buy cigars, and made him buy a
vast store, some of which he obligingly accepted.  At the restaurant he
showed him what to order, with surprising consequences in the bill.  What
he made that night by his percentages it would be hard to estimate.  And
all the while Dick smilingly consented, understanding well that he was
being done, but taking his losses in the pursuit of character as a hunter
sacrifices his dogs.  As for the Strange Things, the reader will be
relieved to hear that they were no stranger than might have been
expected, and he may find things quite as strange without the expense of
a Van Tromp for guide.  Yet he was a guide of no mean order, who made up
for the poverty of what he had to show by a copious, imaginative
commentary.

‘And such,’ said he, with a hiccup, ‘such is Paris.’

‘Pooh!’ said Dick, who was tired of the performance.

The Admiral hung an ear, and looked up sidelong with a glimmer of
suspicion.

‘Good night,’ said Dick; ‘I’m tired.’

‘So English!’ cried Van Tromp, clutching him by the hand.  ‘So English!
So _blasé_!  Such a charming companion!  Let me see you home.’

‘Look here,’ returned Dick, ‘I have said good night, and now I’m going.
You’re an amusing old boy: I like you, in a sense; but here’s an end of
it for to-night.  Not another cigar, not another grog, not another
percentage out of me.’

‘I beg your pardon!’ cried the Admiral with dignity.

‘Tut, man!’ said Dick; ‘you’re not offended; you’re a man of the world, I
thought.  I’ve been studying you, and it’s over.  Have I not paid for the
lesson?  _Au revoir_.’

Van Tromp laughed gaily, shook hands up to the elbows, hoped cordially
they would meet again and that often, but looked after Dick as he
departed with a tremor of indignation.  After that they two not
unfrequently fell in each other’s way, and Dick would often treat the old
boy to breakfast on a moderate scale and in a restaurant of his own
selection.  Often, too, he would lend Van Tromp the matter of a pound, in
view of that gentleman’s contemplated departure for Australia; there
would be a scene of farewell almost touching in character, and a week or
a month later they would meet on the same boulevard without surprise or
embarrassment.  And in the meantime Dick learned more about his
acquaintance on all sides: heard of his yacht, his chaise and four, his
brief season of celebrity amid a more confiding population, his daughter,
of whom he loved to whimper in his cups, his sponging, parasitical,
nameless way of life; and with each new detail something that was not
merely interest nor yet altogether affection grew up in his mind towards
this disreputable stepson of the arts.  Ere he left Paris Van Tromp was
one of those whom he entertained to a farewell supper; and the old
gentleman made the speech of the evening, and then fell below the table,
weeping, smiling, paralysed.



