III

ON HORSES

I really believe that you will find more variation of individual and
interesting character in a given number of Western horses than in an
equal number of the average men one meets on the street.  Their whole
education, from the time they run loose on the range until the time
when, branded, corralled, broken, and saddled, they pick their way
under guidance over a bad piece of trail, tends to develop their
self-reliance.  They learn to think for themselves.

To begin with two misconceptions, merely by way of clearing the ground:
the Western horse is generally designated as a "bronco."  The term is
considered synonymous of horse or pony.  This is not so. A horse is
"bronco" when he is ugly or mean or vicious or unbroken.  So is a cow
"bronco" in the same condition, or a mule, or a burro.  Again, from
certain Western illustrators and from a few samples, our notion of the
cow-pony has become that of a lean, rangy, wiry, thin-necked, scrawny
beast.  Such may be found.  But the average good cow-pony is apt to be
an exceedingly handsome animal, clean-built, graceful.  This is
natural, when you stop to think of it, for he is descended direct from
Moorish and Arabian stock.

Certain characteristics he possesses beyond the capabilities of the
ordinary horse.  The most marvelous to me of these is his
sure-footedness.  Let me give you a few examples.

I once was engaged with a crew of cowboys in rounding up mustangs in
southern Arizona.  We would ride slowly in through the hills until we
caught sight of the herds.  Then it was a case of running them down and
heading them off, of turning the herd, milling it, of rushing it while
confused across country and into the big corrals.  The surface of the
ground was composed of angular volcanic rocks about the size of your
two fists, between which the bunch-grass sprouted.  An Eastern rider
would ride his horse very gingerly and at a walk, and then thank his
lucky stars if he escaped stumbles.  The cowboys turned their mounts
through at a dead run.  It was beautiful to see the ponies go, lifting
their feet well up and over, planting them surely and firmly, and
nevertheless making speed and attending to the game.  Once, when we had
pushed the herd up the slope of a butte, it made a break to get through
a little hog-back.  The only way to head it was down a series of rough
boulder ledges laid over a great sheet of volcanic rock.  The man at
the hog-back put his little gray over the ledges and boulders, down the
sheet of rock,--hop, slip, slide,--and along the side hill in time to
head off the first of the mustangs.  During the ten days of riding I
saw no horse fall.  The animal I rode, Button by name, never even
stumbled.

In the Black Hills years ago I happened to be one of the inmates of a
small mining-camp.  Each night the work-animals, after being fed, were
turned loose in the mountains.  As I possessed the only cow-pony in the
outfit, he was fed in the corral, and kept up for the purpose of
rounding up the others.  Every morning one of us used to ride him out
after the herd.  Often it was necessary to run him at full speed along
the mountain-side, over rocks, boulders, and ledges, across ravines and
gullies.  Never but once in three months did he fall.

On the trail, too, they will perform feats little short of marvelous.
Mere steepness does not bother them at all.  They sit back almost on
their haunches, bunch their feet together, and slide.  I have seen them
go down a hundred feet this way.  In rough country they place their
feet accurately and quickly, gauge exactly the proper balance.  I have
led my saddle-horse, Bullet, over country where, undoubtedly to his
intense disgust, I myself have fallen a dozen times in the course of a
morning.  Bullet had no such troubles.  Any of the mountain horses will
hop cheerfully up or down ledges anywhere.  They will even walk a log
fifteen or twenty feet above a stream.  I have seen the same trick
performed in Barnum's circus as a wonderful feat, accompanied by brass
bands and breathlessness.  We accomplished it on our trip with out any
brass bands; I cannot answer for the breathlessness. As for steadiness
of nerve, they will walk serenely on the edge of precipices a man would
hate to look over, and given a palm's breadth for the soles of their
feet, they will get through.  Over such a place I should a lot rather
trust Bullet than myself.

In an emergency the Western horse is not apt to lose his head.  When a
pack-horse falls down, he lies still without struggle until eased of
his pack and told to get up.  If he slips off an edge, he tries to
double his fore legs under him and slide.  Should he find himself in a
tight place, he waits patiently for you to help him, and then proceeds
gingerly.  A friend of mine rode a horse named Blue.  One day, the
trail being slippery with rain, he slid and fell.  My friend managed a
successful jump, but Blue tumbled about thirty feet to the bed of the
cañon.  Fortunately he was not injured.  After some difficulty my
friend managed to force his way through the chaparral to where Blue
stood.  Then it was fine to see them. My friend would go ahead a few
feet, picking a route. When he had made his decision, he called Blue.
Blue came that far, and no farther.  Several times the little horse
balanced painfully and unsteadily like a goat, all four feet on a
boulder, waiting for his signal to advance.  In this manner they
regained the trail, and proceeded as though nothing had happened.
Instances could be multiplied indefinitely.

A good animal adapts himself quickly.  He is capable of learning by
experience.  In a country entirely new to him he soon discovers the
best method of getting about, where the feed grows, where he can find
water.  He is accustomed to foraging for himself. You do not need to
show him his pasturage. If there is anything to eat anywhere in the
district he will find it.  Little tufts of bunch-grass growing
concealed under the edges of the brush, he will search out. If he
cannot get grass, he knows how to rustle for the browse of small
bushes.  Bullet would devour sage-brush, when he could get nothing
else; and I have even known him philosophically to fill up on dry
pine-needles.  There is no nutrition in dry pine-needles, but Bullet
got a satisfyingly full belly.  On the trail a well-seasoned horse will
be always on the forage, snatching here a mouthful, yonder a single
spear of grass, and all without breaking the regularity of his gait, or
delaying the pack-train behind him.  At the end of the day's travel he
is that much to the good.

By long observation thus you will construct your ideal of the mountain
horse, and in your selection of your animals for an expedition you will
search always for that ideal.  It is only too apt to be modified by
personal idiosyncrasies, and proverbially an ideal is difficult of
attainment; but you will, with care, come closer to its realization
than one accustomed only to the conventionality of an artificially
reared horse would believe possible.

The ideal mountain horse, when you come to pick him out, is of medium
size.  He should be not smaller than fourteen hands nor larger than
fifteen. He is strongly but not clumsily built, short-coupled, with
none of the snipy speedy range of the valley animal.  You will select
preferably one of wide full forehead, indicating intelligence, low in
the withers, so the saddle will not be apt to gall him.  His sureness
of foot should be beyond question, and of course he must be an expert
at foraging.  A horse that knows but one or two kinds of feed, and that
starves unless he can find just those kinds, is an abomination.  He
must not jump when you throw all kinds of rattling and terrifying
tarpaulins across him, and he must not mind if the pack-ropes fall
about his heels.  In the day's march he must follow like a dog without
the necessity of a lead-rope, nor must he stray far when turned loose
at night.

Fortunately, when removed from the reassuring environment of
civilization, horses are gregarious. They hate to be separated from the
bunch to which they are accustomed.  Occasionally one of us would stop
on the trail, for some reason or another, thus dropping behind the
pack-train.  Instantly the saddle-horse so detained would begin to grow
uneasy.  Bullet used by all means in his power to try to induce me to
proceed.  He would nibble me with his lips, paw the ground, dance in a
circle, and finally sidle up to me in the position of being mounted,
than which he could think of no stronger hint.  Then when I had finally
remounted, it was hard to hold him in.  He would whinny frantically,
scramble with enthusiasm up trails steep enough to draw a protest at
ordinary times, and rejoin his companions with every symptom of
gratification and delight.  This gregariousness and alarm at being left
alone in a strange country tends to hold them together at night.  You
are reasonably certain that in the morning, having found one, you will
come upon the rest not far away.

The personnel of our own outfit we found most interesting.  Although
collected from divergent localities they soon became acquainted.  In a
crowded corral they were always compact in their organization, sticking
close together, and resisting as a solid phalanx encroachments on their
feed by other and stranger horses.  Their internal organization was
very amusing. A certain segregation soon took place.  Some became
leaders; others by common consent were relegated to the position of
subordinates.

The order of precedence on the trail was rigidly preserved by the
pack-horses.  An attempt by Buckshot to pass Dinkey, for example, the
latter always met with a bite or a kick by way of hint.  If the gelding
still persisted, and tried to pass by a long detour, the mare would
rush out at him angrily, her ears back, her eyes flashing, her neck
extended.  And since Buckshot was by no means inclined always to give
in meekly, we had opportunities for plenty of amusement.  The two were
always skirmishing. When by a strategic short cut across the angle of a
trail Buckshot succeeded in stealing a march on Dinkey, while she was
nipping a mouthful, his triumph was beautiful to see.  He never held
the place for long, however.  Dinkey's was the leadership by force of
ambition and energetic character, and at the head of the pack-train she
normally marched.

Yet there were hours when utter indifference seemed to fall on the
militant spirits.  They trailed peacefully and amiably in the rear
while Lily or Jenny marched with pride in the coveted advance.  But the
place was theirs only by sufferance.  A bite or a kick sent them back
to their own positions when the true leaders grew tired of their
vacation.

However rigid this order of precedence, the saddle-animals were
acknowledged as privileged;--and knew it.  They could go where they
pleased.  Furthermore theirs was the duty of correcting infractions of
the trail discipline, such as grazing on the march, or attempting
unauthorized short cuts.  They appreciated this duty.  Bullet always
became vastly indignant if one of the pack-horses misbehaved.  He would
run at the offender angrily, hustle him to his place with savage nips
of his teeth, and drop back to his own position with a comical air of
virtue.  Once in a great while it would happen that on my spurring up
from the rear of the column I would be mistaken for one of the
pack-horses attempting illegally to get ahead. Immediately Dinkey or
Buckshot would snake his head out crossly to turn me to the rear.  It
was really ridiculous to see the expression of apology with which they
would take it all back, and the ostentatious, nose-elevated
indifference in Bullet's very gait as he marched haughtily by.  So
rigid did all the animals hold this convention that actually in the San
Joaquin Valley Dinkey once attempted to head off a Southern Pacific
train.  She ran at full speed diagonally toward it, her eyes striking
fire, her ears back, her teeth snapping in rage because the locomotive
would not keep its place behind her ladyship.

Let me make you acquainted with our outfit.

I rode, as you have gathered, an Arizona pony named Bullet.  He was a
handsome fellow with a chestnut brown coat, long mane and tail, and a
beautiful pair of brown eyes.  Wes always called him "Baby."  He was in
fact the youngster of the party, with all the engaging qualities of
youth.  I never saw a horse more willing.  He wanted to do what you
wanted him to; it pleased him, and gave him a warm consciousness of
virtue which the least observant could not fail to remark.  When
leading he walked industriously ahead, setting the pace; when
driving,--that is, closing up the rear,--he attended strictly to
business.  Not for the most luscious bunch of grass that ever grew
would he pause even for an instant.  Yet in his off hours, when I rode
irresponsibly somewhere in the middle, he was a great hand to forage.
Few choice morsels escaped him.  He confided absolutely in his rider in
the matter of bad country, and would tackle anything I would put him
at.  It seemed that he trusted me not to put him at anything that would
hurt him.  This was an invaluable trait when an example had to be set
to the reluctance of the other horses.  He was a great swimmer.
Probably the most winning quality of his nature was his extreme
friendliness.  He was always wandering into camp to be petted, nibbling
me over with his lips, begging to have his forehead rubbed, thrusting
his nose under an elbow, and otherwise telling how much he thought of
us.  Whoever broke him did a good job.  I never rode a better-reined
horse.  A mere indication of the bridle-hand turned him to right or
left, and a mere raising of the hand without the slightest pressure on
the bit stopped him short.  And how well he understood cow-work!  Turn
him loose after the bunch, and he would do the rest.  All I had to do
was to stick to him.  That in itself was no mean task, for he turned
like a flash, and was quick as a cat on his feet.  At night I always
let him go foot free. He would be there in the morning, and I could
always walk directly up to him with the bridle in plain sight in my
hand.  Even at a feedless camp we once made where we had shot a couple
of deer, he did not attempt to wander off in search of pasture, as
would most horses.  He nosed around unsuccessfully until pitch dark,
then came into camp, and with great philosophy stood tail to the fire
until morning.  I could always jump off anywhere for a shot, without
even the necessity of "tying him to the ground," by throwing the reins
over his head.  He would wait for me, although he was never overfond of
firearms.

Nevertheless Bullet had his own sense of dignity. He was literally as
gentle as a kitten, but he drew a line.  I shall never forget how once,
being possessed of a desire to find out whether we could swim our
outfit across a certain stretch of the Merced River, I climbed him
bareback.  He bucked me off so quickly that I never even got settled on
his back.  Then he gazed at me with sorrow, while, laughing
irrepressibly at this unusual assertion of independent ideas, I picked
myself out of a wild-rose bush.  He did not attempt to run away from
me, but stood to be saddled, and plunged boldly into the swift water
where I told him to.  Merely he thought it disrespectful in me to ride
him without his proper harness.  He was the pet of the camp.

As near as I could make out, he had but one fault. He was altogether
too sensitive about his hind quarters, and would jump like a rabbit if
anything touched him there.

Wes rode a horse we called Old Slob.  Wes, be it premised, was an
interesting companion.  He had done everything,--seal-hunting,
abalone-gathering, boar-hunting, all kinds of shooting, cow-punching in
the rough Coast Ranges, and all other queer and outlandish and
picturesque vocations by which a man can make a living.  He weighed two
hundred and twelve pounds and was the best game shot with a rifle I
ever saw.

As you may imagine, Old Slob was a stocky individual.  He was built
from the ground up.  His disposition was quiet, slow, honest.  Above
all, he gave the impression of vast, very vast experience. Never did he
hurry his mental processes, although he was quick enough in his
movements if need arose. He quite declined to worry about anything.
Consequently, in spite of the fact that he carried by far the heaviest
man in the company, he stayed always fat and in good condition.  There
was something almost pathetic in Old Slob's willingness to go on
working, even when more work seemed like an imposition. You could not
fail to fall in love with his mild inquiring gentle eyes, and his utter
trust in the goodness of human nature.  His only fault was an excess of
caution.  Old Slob was very very experienced.  He knew all about
trails, and he declined to be hurried over what he considered a bad
place.  Wes used sometimes to disagree with him as to what constituted
a bad place.  "Some day you're going to take a tumble, you old fool,"
Wes used to address him, "if you go on fiddling down steep rocks with
your little old monkey work.  Why don't you step out?" Only Old Slob
never did take a tumble.  He was willing to do anything for you, even
to the assuming of a pack.  This is considered by a saddle-animal
distinctly as a come-down.

The Tenderfoot, by the irony of fate, drew a tenderfoot horse.  Tunemah
was a big fool gray that was constitutionally rattle-brained.  He meant
well enough, but he didn't know anything.  When he came to a bad place
in the trail, he took one good look--and rushed it.  Constantly we
expected him to come to grief.  It wore on the Tenderfoot's nerves.
Tunemah was always trying to wander off the trail, trying fool routes
of his own invention.  If he were sent ahead to set the pace, he lagged
and loitered and constantly looked back, worried lest he get too far in
advance and so lose the bunch.  If put at the rear, he fretted against
the bit, trying to push on at a senseless speed.  In spite of his
extreme anxiety to stay with the train, he would once in a blue moon
get a strange idea of wandering off solitary through the mountains,
passing good feed, good water, good shelter.  We would find him, after
a greater or less period of difficult tracking, perched in a silly
fashion on some elevation. Heaven knows what his idea was: it certainly
was neither search for feed, escape, return whence he came, nor desire
for exercise.  When we came up with him, he would gaze mildly at us
from a foolish vacant eye and follow us peaceably back to camp. Like
most weak and silly people, he had occasional stubborn fits when you
could beat him to a pulp without persuading him.  He was one of the
type already mentioned that knows but two or three kinds of feed.  As
time went on he became thinner and thinner.  The other horses
prospered, but Tunemah failed.  He actually did not know enough to take
care of himself; and could not learn.  Finally, when about two months
out, we traded him at a cow-camp for a little buckskin called Monache.

So much for the saddle-horses.  The pack-animals were four.

A study of Dinkey's character and an experience of her characteristics
always left me with mingled feelings.  At times I was inclined to think
her perfection: at other times thirty cents would have been esteemed by
me as a liberal offer for her.  To enumerate her good points: she was
an excellent weight-carrier; took good care of her pack that it never
scraped nor bumped; knew all about trails, the possibilities of short
cuts, the best way of easing herself downhill; kept fat and healthy in
districts where grew next to no feed at all; was past-mistress in the
picking of routes through a trailless country.  Her endurance was
marvelous; her intelligence equally so.  In fact too great intelligence
perhaps accounted for most of her defects.  She thought too much for
herself; she made up opinions about people; she speculated on just how
far each member of the party, man or beast, would stand imposition, and
tried conclusions with each to test the accuracy of her speculations;
she obstinately insisted on her own way in going up and down hill,--a
way well enough for Dinkey, perhaps, but hazardous to the other less
skillful animals who naturally would follow her lead.  If she did
condescend to do things according to your ideas, it was with a mental
reservation.  You caught her sardonic eye fixed on you contemptuously.
You felt at once that she knew another method, a much better method,
with which yours compared most unfavorably.  "I'd like to kick you in
the stomach," Wes used to say; "you know too much for a horse!"

If one of the horses bucked under the pack, Dinkey deliberately tried
to stampede the others--and generally succeeded.  She invariably led
them off whenever she could escape her picket-rope.  In case of trouble
of any sort, instead of standing still sensibly, she pretended to be
subject to wild-eyed panics.  It was all pretense, for when you DID
yield to temptation and light into her with the toe of your boot, she
subsided into common sense.  The spirit of malevolent mischief was hers.

Her performances when she was being packed were ridiculously
histrionic.  As soon as the saddle was cinched, she spread her legs
apart, bracing them firmly as though about to receive the weight of an
iron safe.  Then as each article of the pack was thrown across her
back, she flinched and uttered the most heart-rending groans.  We used
sometimes to amuse ourselves by adding merely an empty sack, or other
article quite without weight.  The groans and tremblings of the braced
legs were quite as pitiful as though we had piled on a sack of flour.
Dinkey, I had forgotten to state, was a white horse, and belonged to
Wes.

Jenny also was white and belonged to Wes.  Her chief characteristic was
her devotion to Dinkey.  She worshiped Dinkey, and seconded her
enthusiastically. Without near the originality of Dinkey, she was yet a
very good and sure pack-horse.  The deceiving part about Jenny was her
eye.  It was baleful with the spirit of evil,--snaky and black, and
with green sideways gleams in it.  Catching the flash of it, you would
forever after avoid getting in range of her heels or teeth.  But it was
all a delusion.  Jenny's disposition was mild and harmless.

The third member of the pack-outfit we bought at an auction sale in
rather a peculiar manner.  About sixty head of Arizona horses of the C.
A. Bar outfit were being sold.  Toward the close of the afternoon they
brought out a well-built stocky buckskin of first-rate appearance
except that his left flank was ornamented with five different brands.
The auctioneer called attention to him.

"Here is a first-rate all-round horse," said he. "He is sound; will
ride, work, or pack; perfectly broken, mild, and gentle.  He would make
a first-rate family horse, for he has a kind disposition."

The official rider put a saddle on him to give him a demonstrating turn
around the track.  Then that mild, gentle, perfectly broken family
horse of kind disposition gave about as pretty an exhibition of
barbed-wire bucking as you would want to see.  Even the auctioneer had
to join in the wild shriek of delight that went up from the crowd.  He
could not get a bid, and I bought the animal in later very cheaply.

As I had suspected, the trouble turned out to be merely exuberance or
nervousness before a crowd. He bucked once with me under the saddle;
and twice subsequently under a pack,--that was all.  Buckshot was the
best pack-horse we had.  Bar an occasional saunter into the brush when
he got tired of the trail, we had no fault to find with him.  He
carried a heavy pack, was as sure-footed as Bullet, as sagacious on the
trail as Dinkey, and he always attended strictly to his own business.
Moreover he knew that business thoroughly, knew what should be expected
of him, accomplished it well and quietly.  His disposition was
dignified but lovable.  As long as you treated him well, he was as
gentle as you could ask.  But once let Buckshot get it into his head
that he was being imposed on, or once let him see that your temper had
betrayed you into striking him when he thought he did not deserve it,
and he cut loose vigorously and emphatically with his heels.  He
declined to be abused.

There remains but Lily.  I don't know just how to do justice to
Lily--the "Lily maid."  We named her that because she looked it.  Her
color was a pure white, her eye was virginal and silly, her long bang
strayed in wanton carelessness across her face and eyes, her expression
was foolish, and her legs were long and rangy.  She had the general
appearance of an overgrown school-girl too big for short dresses and
too young for long gowns;--a school-girl named Flossie, or Mamie, or
Lily.  So we named her that.

At first hers was the attitude of the timid and shrinking tenderfoot.
She stood in awe of her companions; she appreciated her lack of
experience. Humbly she took the rear; slavishly she copied the other
horses; closely she clung to camp.  Then in a few weeks, like most
tenderfeet, she came to think that her short experience had taught her
everything there was to know.  She put on airs.  She became too cocky
and conceited for words.

Everything she did was exaggerated, overdone. She assumed her pack with
an air that plainly said, "Just see what a good horse am I!"  She
started out three seconds before the others in a manner intended to
shame their procrastinating ways.  Invariably she was the last to rest,
and the first to start on again. She climbed over-vigorously, with the
manner of conscious rectitude.  "Acts like she was trying to get her
wages raised," said Wes.

In this manner she wore herself down.  If permitted she would have
climbed until winded, and then would probably have fallen off somewhere
for lack of strength.  Where the other horses watched the movements of
those ahead, in order that when a halt for rest was called they might
stop at an easy place on the trail, Lily would climb on until jammed
against the animal immediately preceding her.  Thus often she found
herself forced to cling desperately to extremely bad footing until the
others were ready to proceed.  Altogether she was a precious nuisance,
that acted busily but without thinking.

Two virtues she did possess.  She was a glutton for work; and she could
fall far and hard without injuring herself.  This was lucky, for she
was always falling.  Several times we went down to her fully expecting
to find her dead or so crippled that she would have to be shot.  The
loss of a little skin was her only injury.  She got to be quite
philosophic about it.  On losing her balance she would tumble
peaceably, and then would lie back with an air of luxury, her eyes
closed, while we worked to free her.  When we had loosened the pack,
Wes would twist her tail.  Thereupon she would open one eye inquiringly
as though to say, "Hullo!  Done already?"  Then leisurely she would
arise and shake herself.



