XIII

TROUT, BUCKSKIN, AND PROSPECTORS

As I have said, a river flows through the cañon. It is a very good
river with some riffles that can be waded down to the edges of black
pools or white chutes of water; with appropriate big trees fallen
slantwise into it to form deep holes; and with hurrying smooth
stretches of some breadth.  In all of these various places are rainbow
trout.

There is no use fishing until late afternoon.  The clear sun of the
high altitudes searches out mercilessly the bottom of the stream,
throwing its miniature boulders, mountains, and valleys as plainly into
relief as the buttes of Arizona at noon.  Then the trout quite refuse.
Here and there, if you walk far enough and climb hard enough over all
sorts of obstructions, you may discover a few spots shaded by big trees
or rocks where you can pick up a half dozen fish; but it is slow work.
When, however, the shadow of the two huge mountains feels its way
across the stream, then, as though a signal had been given, the trout
begin to rise.  For an hour and a half there is noble sport indeed.

The stream fairly swarmed with them, but of course some places were
better than others.  Near the upper reaches the water boiled like
seltzer around the base of a tremendous tree.  There the pool was at
least ten feet deep and shot with bubbles throughout the whole of its
depth, but it was full of fish.  They rose eagerly to your gyrating
fly,--and took it away with them down to subaqueous chambers and
passages among the roots of that tree.  After which you broke your
leader.  Royal Coachman was the best lure, and therefore valuable
exceedingly were Royal Coachmen. Whenever we lost one we lifted up our
voices in lament, and went away from there, calling to mind that there
were other pools, many other pools, free of obstruction and with fish
in them.  Yet such is the perversity of fishermen, we were back losing
more Royal Coachmen the very next day.  In all I managed to disengage
just three rather small trout from that pool, and in return decorated
their ancestral halls with festoons of leaders and the brilliance of
many flies.

Now this was foolishness.  All you had to do was to walk through a
grove of cottonwoods, over a brook, through another grove of pines,
down a sloping meadow to where one of the gigantic pine-trees had
obligingly spanned the current.  You crossed that, traversed another
meadow, broke through a thicket, slid down a steep grassy bank, and
there you were.  A great many years before a pine-tree had fallen
across the current.  Now its whitened skeleton lay there, opposing a
barrier for about twenty-five feet out into the stream.  Most of the
water turned aside, of course, and boiled frantically around the end as
though trying to catch up with the rest of the stream which had gone on
without it, but some of it dived down under and came up on the other
side. There, as though bewildered, it paused in an uneasy pool.  Its
constant action had excavated a very deep hole, the debris of which had
formed a bar immediately below.  You waded out on the bar and cast
along the length of the pine skeleton over the pool.

If you were methodical, you first shortened your line, and began near
the bank, gradually working out until you were casting forty-five feet
to the very edge of the fast current.  I know of nothing pleasanter for
you to do.  You see, the evening shadow was across the river, and a
beautiful grass slope at your back.  Over the way was a grove of trees
whose birds were very busy because it was near their sunset, while
towering over them were mountains, quite peaceful by way of contrast
because THEIR sunset was still far distant.  The river was in a great
hurry, and was talking to itself like a man who has been detained and
is now at last making up time to his important engagement.  And from
the deep black shadow beneath the pine skeleton, occasionally flashed
white bodies that made concentric circles where they broke the surface
of the water, and which fought you to a finish in the glory of battle.
The casting was against the current, so your flies could rest but the
briefest possible moment on the surface of the stream.  That moment was
enough.  Day after day you could catch your required number from an
apparently inexhaustible supply.

I might inform you further of the gorge downstream, where you lie flat
on your stomach ten feet above the river, and with one hand cautiously
extended over the edge cast accurately into the angle of the cliff.
Then when you get your strike, you tow him downstream, clamber
precariously to the water's level--still playing your fish--and there
land him,--if he has accommodatingly stayed hooked.  A three-pound fish
will make you a lot of tribulation at this game.

We lived on fish and venison, and had all we wanted.  The bear-trails
were plenty enough, and the signs were comparatively fresh, but at the
time of our visit the animals themselves had gone over the mountains on
some sort of a picnic.  Grouse, too, were numerous in the popple
thickets, and flushed much like our ruffed grouse of the East. They
afforded first-rate wing-shooting for Sure-Pop, the little shot-gun.

But these things occupied, after all, only a small part of every day.
We had loads of time left.  Of course we explored the valley up and
down.  That occupied two days.  After that we became lazy. One always
does in a permanent camp.  So did the horses.  Active--or rather
restless interest in life seemed to die away.  Neither we nor they had
to rustle hard for food.  They became fastidious in their choice, and
at all times of day could be seen sauntering in Indian file from one
part of the meadow to the other for the sole purpose apparently of
cropping a half dozen indifferent mouthfuls.  The rest of the time they
roosted under trees, one hind leg relaxed, their eyes half closed,
their ears wabbling, the pictures of imbecile content.  We were very
much the same.

Of course we had our outbursts of virtue.  While under their influence
we undertook vast works.  But after their influence had died out, we
found ourselves with said vast works on our hands, and so came to
cursing ourselves and our fool spasms of industry.

For instance, Wes and I decided to make buckskin from the hide of the
latest deer.  We did not need the buckskin--we already had two in the
pack.  Our ordinary procedure would have been to dry the hide for
future treatment by a Mexican, at a dollar a hide, when we should have
returned home. But, as I said, we were afflicted by sporadic activity,
and wanted to do something.

We began with great ingenuity by constructing a graining-tool out of a
table-knife.  We bound it with rawhide, and encased it with wood, and
wrapped it with cloth, and filed its edge square across, as is proper.
After this we hunted out a very smooth, barkless log, laid the hide
across it, straddled it, and began graining.

Graining is a delightful process.  You grasp the tool by either end,
hold the square edge at a certain angle, and push away from you
mightily.  A half-dozen pushes will remove a little patch of hair;
twice as many more will scrape away half as much of the seal-brown
grain, exposing the white of the hide.  Then, if you want to, you can
stop and establish in your mind a definite proportion between the
amount thus exposed, the area remaining unexposed, and the muscular
fatigue of these dozen and a half of mighty pushes.  The proportion
will be wrong.  You have left out of account the fact that you are
going to get almighty sick of the job; that your arms and upper back
are going to ache shrewdly before you are done; and that as you go on
it is going to be increasingly difficult to hold down the edges firmly
enough to offer the required resistance to your knife.  Besides--if you
get careless--you'll scrape too hard: hence little holes in the
completed buckskin. Also--if you get careless--you will probably leave
the finest, tiniest shreds of grain, and each of them means a hard
transparent spot in the product. Furthermore, once having started in on
the job, you are like the little boy who caught the trolley: you cannot
let go.  It must be finished immediately, all at one heat, before the
hide stiffens.

Be it understood, your first enthusiasm has evaporated, and you are
thinking of fifty pleasant things you might just as well be doing.

Next you revel in grease,--lard oil, if you have it; if not, then lard,
or the product of boiled brains. This you must rub into the skin.  You
rub it in until you suspect that your finger-nails have worn away, and
you glisten to the elbows like an Eskimo cutting blubber.

By the merciful arrangement of those who invented buckskin, this
entitles you to a rest.  You take it--for several days--until your
conscience seizes you by the scruff of the neck.

Then you transport gingerly that slippery, clammy, soggy, snaky, cold
bundle of greasy horror to the bank of the creek, and there for endless
hours you wash it.  The grease is more reluctant to enter the stream
than you are in the early morning.  Your hands turn purple.  The others
go by on their way to the trout-pools, but you are chained to the stake.

By and by you straighten your back with creaks, and walk home like a
stiff old man, carrying your hide rid of all superfluous oil.  Then if
you are just learning how, your instructor examines the result.

"That's all right," says he cheerfully.  "Now when it dries, it will be
buckskin."

That encourages you.  It need not.  For during the process of drying it
must be your pastime constantly to pull and stretch at every square
inch of that boundless skin in order to loosen all the fibres.
Otherwise it would dry as stiff as whalebone.  Now there is nothing on
earth that seems to dry slower than buckskin.  You wear your fingers
down to the first joints, and, wishing to preserve the remainder for
future use, you carry the hide to your instructor.

"Just beginning to dry nicely," says he.

You go back and do it some more, putting the entire strength of your
body, soul, and religious convictions into the stretching of that
buckskin.  It looks as white as paper; and feels as soft and warm as
the turf on a southern slope.  Nevertheless your tyrant declares it
will not do.

"It looks dry, and it feels dry," says he, "but it isn't dry.  Go to
it!"

But at this point your outraged soul arches its back and bucks.  You
sneak off and roll up that piece of buckskin, and thrust it into the
alforja.  You KNOW it is dry.  Then with a deep sigh of relief you come
out of prison into the clear, sane, lazy atmosphere of the camp.

"Do you mean to tell me that there is any one chump enough to do that
for a dollar a hide?" you inquire.

"Sure," say they.

"Well, the Fool Killer is certainly behind on his dates," you conclude.

About a week later one of your companions drags out of the alforja
something crumpled that resembles in general appearance and texture a
rusted five-gallon coal-oil can that has been in a wreck.  It is only
imperceptibly less stiff and angular and cast-iron than rawhide.

"What is this?" the discoverer inquires.

Then quietly you go out and sit on a high place before recognition
brings inevitable--and sickening--chaff. For you know it at a glance.
It is your buckskin.

Along about the middle of that century an old prospector with four
burros descended the Basin Trail and went into camp just below us.
Towards evening he sauntered in.

I sincerely wish I could sketch this man for you just as he came down
through the fire-lit trees.  He was about six feet tall, very leanly
built, with a weather-beaten face of mahogany on which was superimposed
a sweeping mustache and beetling eye-brows.  These had originally been
brown, but the sun had bleached them almost white in remarkable
contrast to his complexion.  Eyes keen as sunlight twinkled far down
beneath the shadows of the brows and a floppy old sombrero hat.  The
usual flannel shirt, waistcoat, mountain-boots, and six-shooter
completed the outfit.  He might have been forty, but was probably
nearer sixty years of age.

"Howdy, boys," said he, and dropped to the fireside, where he promptly
annexed a coal for his pipe.

We all greeted him, but gradually the talk fell to him and Wes.  It was
commonplace talk enough from one point of view: taken in essence it was
merely like the inquiry and answer of the civilized man as to another's
itinerary--"Did you visit Florence? Berlin? St. Petersburg?"--and then
the comparing of impressions.  Only here again that old familiar magic
of unfamiliar names threw its glamour over the terse sentences.

"Over beyond the Piute Monument," the old prospector explained, "down
through the Inyo Range, a leetle north of Death Valley--"

"Back in seventy-eight when I was up in Bay Horse Cañon over by Lost
River--"

"Was you ever over in th' Panamit Mountains?--North of th' Telescope
Range?--"

That was all there was to it, with long pauses for drawing at the
pipes.  Yet somehow in the aggregate that catalogue of names gradually
established in the minds of us two who listened an impression of long
years, of wide wilderness, of wandering far over the face of the earth.
The old man had wintered here, summered a thousand miles away, made his
strike at one end of the world, lost it somehow, and cheerfully tried
for a repetition of his luck at the other. I do not believe the
possibility of wealth, though always of course in the background, was
ever near enough his hope to be considered a motive for action.  Rather
was it a dream, remote, something to be gained to-morrow, but never
to-day, like the mediaeval Christian's idea of heaven.  His interest
was in the search.  For that one could see in him a real enthusiasm.
He had his smattering of theory, his very real empirical knowledge, and
his superstitions, like all prospectors.  So long as he could keep in
grub, own a little train of burros, and lead the life he loved, he was
happy.

Perhaps one of the chief elements of this remarkable interest in the
game rather than the prizes of it was his desire to vindicate his
guesses or his conclusions. He liked to predict to himself the outcome
of his solitary operations, and then to prove that prediction through
laborious days.  His life was a gigantic game of solitaire.  In fact,
he mentioned a dozen of his claims many years apart which he had
developed to a certain point,--"so I could see what they was,"--and
then abandoned in favor of fresher discoveries.  He cherished the
illusion that these were properties to whose completion some day he
would return.  But we knew better; he had carried them to the point
where the result was no longer in doubt and then, like one who has no
interest in playing on in an evidently prescribed order, had laid his
cards on the table to begin a new game.

This man was skilled in his profession; he had pursued it for thirty
odd years; he was frugal and industrious; undoubtedly of his long
series of discoveries a fair percentage were valuable and are
producing-properties to-day.  Yet he confessed his bank balance to be
less than five hundred dollars.  Why was this?  Simply and solely
because he did not care. At heart it was entirely immaterial to him
whether he ever owned a dollar above his expenses.  When he sold his
claims, he let them go easily, loath to bother himself with business
details, eager to get away from the fuss and nuisance.  The few hundred
dollars he received he probably sunk in unproductive mining work, or
was fleeced out of in the towns. Then joyfully he turned back to his
beloved mountains and the life of his slow deep delight and his pecking
away before the open doors of fortune.  By and by he would build
himself a little cabin down in the lower pine mountains, where he would
grow a white beard, putter with occult wilderness crafts, and smoke
long contemplative hours in the sun before his door.  For tourists he
would braid rawhide reins and quirts, or make buckskin.  The jays and
woodpeckers and Douglas squirrels would become fond of him.  So he
would be gathered to his fathers, a gentle old man whose life had been
spent harmlessly in the open.  He had had his ideal to which blindly he
reached; he had in his indirect way contributed the fruits of his labor
to mankind; his recompenses he had chosen according to his desires.
When you consider these things, you perforce have to revise your first
notion of him as a useless sort of old ruffian.  As you come to know
him better, you must love him for the kindliness, the simple honesty,
the modesty, and charity that he seems to draw from his mountain
environment.  There are hundreds of him buried in the great cañons of
the West.

Our prospector was a little uncertain as to his plans.  Along toward
autumn he intended to land at some reputed placers near Dinkey Creek.
There might be something in that district.  He thought he would take a
look.  In the mean time he was just poking up through the country--he
and his jackasses. Good way to spend the summer.  Perhaps he might run
across something 'most anywhere; up near the top of that mountain
opposite looked mineralized.  Didn't know but what he'd take a look at
her to-morrow.

He camped near us during three days.  I never saw a more modest,
self-effacing man.  He seemed genuinely, childishly, almost helplessly
interested in our fly-fishing, shooting, our bear-skins, and our
travels.  You would have thought from his demeanor--which was sincere
and not in the least ironical--that he had never seen or heard anything
quite like that before, and was struck with wonder at it.  Yet he had
cast flies before we were born, and shot even earlier than he had cast
a fly, and was a very Ishmael for travel.  Rarely could you get an
account of his own experiences, and then only in illustration of
something else.

"If you-all likes bear-hunting," said he, "you ought to get up in
eastern Oregon.  I summered there once.  The only trouble is, the brush
is thick as hair.  You 'most always have to bait them, or wait for them
to come and drink.  The brush is so small you ain't got much chance.  I
run onto a she-bear and cubs that way once.  Didn't have nothin' but my
six-shooter, and I met her within six foot."

He stopped with an air of finality.

"Well, what did you do?" we asked.

"Me?" he inquired, surprised.  "Oh, I just leaked out of th' landscape."

He prospected the mountain opposite, loafed with us a little, and then
decided that he must be going. About eight o'clock in the morning he
passed us, hazing his burros, his tall, lean figure elastic in defiance
of years.

"So long, boys," he called; "good luck!"

"So long," we responded heartily.  "Be good to yourself."

He plunged into the river without hesitation, emerged dripping on the
other side, and disappeared in the brush.  From time to time during the
rest of the morning we heard the intermittent tinkling of his
bell-animal rising higher and higher above us on the trail.

In the person of this man we gained our first connection, so to speak,
with the Golden Trout.  He had caught some of them, and could tell us
of their habits.

Few fishermen west of the Rockies have not heard of the Golden Trout,
though, equally, few have much definite information concerning it.
Such information usually runs about as follows:

It is a medium size fish of the true trout family, resembling a rainbow
except that it is of a rich golden color.  The peculiarity that makes
its capture a dream to be dreamed of is that it swims in but one little
stream of all the round globe.  If you would catch a Golden Trout, you
must climb up under the very base of the end of the High Sierras.
There is born a stream that flows down from an elevation of about ten
thousand feet to about eight thousand before it takes a long plunge
into a branch of the Kern River.  Over the twenty miles of its course
you can cast your fly for Golden Trout; but what is the nature of that
stream, that fish, or the method of its capture, few can tell you with
any pretense of accuracy.

To be sure, there are legends.  One, particularly striking, claims that
the Golden Trout occurs in one other stream--situated in Central
Asia!--and that the fish is therefore a remnant of some pre-glacial
period, like Sequoia trees, a sort of grand-daddy of all trout, as it
were.  This is but a sample of what you will hear discussed.

Of course from the very start we had had our eye on the Golden Trout,
and intended sooner or later to work our way to his habitat.  Our
prospector had just come from there.

"It's about four weeks south, the way you and me travels," said he.
"You don't want to try Harrison's Pass; it's chock full of tribulation.
Go around by way of the Giant Forest.  She's pretty good there, too,
some sizable timber.  Then over by Redwood Meadows, and Timber Gap, by
Mineral King, and over through Farewell Gap.  You turn east there, on a
new trail.  She's steeper than straight-up-an'-down, but shorter than
the other.  When you get down in the cañon of Kern River,--say, she's a
fine cañon, too,--you want to go downstream about two mile to where
there's a sort of natural overflowed lake full of stubs stickin' up.
You'll get some awful big rainbows in there.  Then your best way is to
go right up Whitney Creek Trail to a big high meadows mighty nigh to
timber-line.  That's where I camped.  They's lots of them little yaller
fish there.  Oh, they bite well enough.  You'll catch 'em.  They's a
little shy."

So in that guise--as the desire for new and distant things--did our
angel with the flaming sword finally come to us.

We caught reluctant horses reluctantly.  All the first day was to be a
climb.  We knew it; and I suspect that they knew it too.  Then we
packed and addressed ourselves to the task offered us by the Basin
Trail.



