VII

THE FOOT-HILLS

At once our spirits rose.  We straightened in our saddles, we breathed
deep, we joked.  The country was scorched and sterile; the wagon-trail,
almost paralleling the mountains themselves on a long easy slant toward
the high country, was ankle-deep in dust; the ravines were still dry of
water.  But it was not the Inferno, and that one fact sufficed.  After
a while we crossed high above a river which dashed white water against
black rocks, and so were happy.

The country went on changing.  The change was always imperceptible, as
is growth, or the stealthy advance of autumn through the woods.  From
moment to moment one could detect no alteration. Something intangible
was taken away; something impalpable added. At the end of an hour we
were in the oaks and sycamores; at the end of two we were in the pines
and low mountains of Bret Harte's Forty-Nine.

The wagon-trail felt ever farther and farther into the hills.  It had
not been used as a stage-route for years, but the freighting kept it
deep with dust, that writhed and twisted and crawled lazily knee-high
to our horses, like a living creature.  We felt the swing and sweep of
the route.  The boldness of its stretches, the freedom of its reaches
for the opposite slope, the wide curve of its horseshoes, all filled us
with the breath of an expansion which as yet the broad low country only
suggested.

Everything here was reminiscent of long ago.  The very names hinted
stories of the Argonauts.  Coarse Gold Gulch, Whiskey Creek, Grub
Gulch, Fine Gold Post-Office in turn we passed.  Occasionally, with a
fine round dash into the open, the trail drew one side to a
stage-station.  The huge stables, the wide corrals, the low
living-houses, each shut in its dooryard of blazing riotous flowers,
were all familiar. Only lacked the old-fashioned Concord coach, from
which to descend Jack Hamlin or Judge Starbottle. As for M'liss, she
was there, sunbonnet and all.

Down in the gulch bottoms were the old placer diggings.  Elaborate
little ditches for the deflection of water, long cradles for the
separation of gold, decayed rockers, and shining in the sun the tons
and tons of pay dirt which had been turned over pound by pound in the
concentrating of its treasure.  Some of the old cabins still stood.  It
was all deserted now, save for the few who kept trail for the
freighters, or who tilled the restricted bottom-lands of the flats.
Road-runners racked away down the paths; squirrels scurried over
worn-out placers; jays screamed and chattered in and out of the
abandoned cabins.  Strange and shy little creatures and birds,
reassured by the silence of many years, had ventured to take to
themselves the engines of man's industry.  And the warm California sun
embalmed it all in a peaceful forgetfulness.

Now the trees grew bigger, and the hills more impressive.  We should
call them mountains in the East. Pines covered them to the top,
straight slender pines with voices.  The little flats were planted with
great oaks.  When we rode through them, they shut out the hills, so
that we might have imagined ourselves in the level wooded country.
There insisted the effect of limitless tree-grown plains, which the
warm drowsy sun, the park-like landscape, corroborated.  And yet the
contrast of the clear atmosphere and the sharp air equally insisted on
the mountains.  It was a strange and delicious double effect, a
contradiction of natural impressions, a negation of our right to
generalize from previous experience.

Always the trail wound up and up.  Never was it steep; never did it
command an outlook.  Yet we felt that at last we were rising, were
leaving the level of the Inferno, were nearing the threshold of the
high country.

Mountain peoples came to the edges of their clearings and gazed at us,
responding solemnly to our salutations.  They dwelt in cabins and held
to agriculture and the herding of the wild mountain cattle. From them
we heard of the high country to which we were bound.  They spoke of it
as you or I would speak of interior Africa, as something inconceivably
remote, to be visited only by the adventurous, an uninhabited realm of
vast magnitude and unknown dangers.  In the same way they spoke of the
plains.  Only the narrow pine-clad strip between the two and six
thousand feet of elevation they felt to be their natural environment.
In it they found the proper conditions for their existence.  Out of it
those conditions lacked.  They were as much a localized product as are
certain plants which occur only at certain altitudes.  Also were they
densely ignorant of trails and routes outside of their own little
districts.

All this, you will understand, was in what is known as the low country.
The landscape was still brown; the streams but trickles; sage-brush
clung to the ravines; the valley quail whistled on the side hills.

But one day we came suddenly into the big pines and rocks; and that
very night we made our first camp in a meadow typical of the mountains
we had dreamed about.



VIII

THE PINES

I do not know exactly how to make you feel the charm of that first camp
in the big country.  Certainly I can never quite repeat it in my own
experience.

Remember that for two months we had grown accustomed to the brown of
the California landscape, and that for over a week we had traveled in
the Inferno.  We had forgotten the look of green grass, of abundant
water; almost had we forgotten the taste of cool air.  So invariably
had the trails been dusty, and the camping-places hard and exposed,
that we had come subconsciously to think of such as typical of the
country.  Try to put yourself in the frame of mind those conditions
would make.

Then imagine yourself climbing in an hour or so up into a high ridge
country of broad cup-like sweeps and bold outcropping ledges.  Imagine
a forest of pine-trees bigger than any pines you ever saw
before,--pines eight and ten feet through, so huge that you can hardly
look over one of their prostrate trunks even from the back of your
pony.  Imagine, further, singing little streams of ice-cold water, deep
refreshing shadows, a soft carpet of pine-needles through which the
faint furrow of the trail runs as over velvet.  And then, last of all,
in a wide opening, clear as though chopped and plowed by some
back-woodsman, a park of grass, fresh grass, green as a precious stone.

This was our first sight of the mountain meadows. From time to time we
found others, sometimes a half dozen in a day.  The rough country came
down close about them, edging to the very hair-line of the magic
circle, which seemed to assure their placid sunny peace.  An upheaval
of splintered granite often tossed and tumbled in the abandon of an
unrestrained passion that seemed irresistibly to overwhelm the sanities
of a whole region; but somewhere, in the very forefront of turmoil, was
like to slumber one of these little meadows, as unconscious of anything
but its own flawless green simplicity as a child asleep in mid-ocean.
Or, away up in the snows, warmed by the fortuity of reflected heat, its
emerald eye looked bravely out to the heavens.  Or, as here, it rested
confidingly in the very heart of the austere forest.

Always these parks are green; always are they clear and open.  Their
size varies widely.  Some are as little as a city lawn; others, like
the great Monache,[1] are miles in extent.  In them resides the
possibility of your traveling the high country; for they supply the
feed for your horses.

Being desert-weary, the Tenderfoot and I cried out with the joy of it,
and told in extravagant language how this was the best camp we had ever
made.

"It's a bum camp," growled Wes.  "If we couldn't get better camps than
this, I'd quit the game."

He expatiated on the fact that this particular meadow was somewhat
boggy; that the feed was too watery; that there'd be a cold wind down
through the pines; and other small and minor details.  But we, our
backs propped against appropriately slanted rocks, our pipes well
aglow, gazed down the twilight through the wonderful great columns of
the trees to where the white horses shone like snow against the
unaccustomed relief of green, and laughed him to scorn.  What did
we--or the horses for that matter--care for trifling discomforts of the
body?  In these intangible comforts of the eye was a great refreshment
of the spirit.

The following day we rode through the pine forests growing on the
ridges and hills and in the elevated bowl-like hollows.  These were not
the so-called "big trees,"--with those we had to do later, as you shall
see.  They were merely sugar and yellow pines, but never anywhere have
I seen finer specimens. They were planted with a grand sumptuousness of
space, and their trunks were from five to twelve feet in diameter and
upwards of two hundred feet high to the topmost spear.  Underbrush,
ground growth, even saplings of the same species lacked entirely, so
that we proceeded in the clear open aisles of a tremendous and spacious
magnificence.

This very lack of the smaller and usual growths, the generous plan of
spacing, and the size of the trees themselves necessarily deprived us
of a standard of comparison.  At first the forest seemed immense. But
after a little our eyes became accustomed to its proportions.  We
referred it back to the measures of long experience.  The trees, the
wood-aisles, the extent of vision shrunk to the normal proportions of
an Eastern pinery.  And then we would lower our gaze. The pack-train
would come into view.  It had become lilliputian, the horses small as
white mice, the men like tin soldiers, as though we had undergone an
enchantment.  But in a moment, with the rush of a mighty
transformation, the great trees would tower huge again.

In the pine woods of the mountains grows also a certain close-clipped
parasitic moss.  In color it is a brilliant yellow-green, more yellow
than green.  In shape it is crinkly and curly and tangled up with
itself like very fine shavings.  In consistency it is dry and brittle.
This moss girdles the trunks of trees with innumerable parallel
inch-wide bands a foot or so apart, in the manner of old-fashioned
striped stockings.  It covers entirely sundry twigless branches. Always
in appearance is it fantastic, decorative, almost Japanese, as though
consciously laid in with its vivid yellow-green as an intentional note
of a tone scheme.  The somberest shadows, the most neutral twilights,
the most austere recesses are lighted by it as though so many freakish
sunbeams had severed relations with the parent luminary to rest quietly
in the coolnesses of the ancient forest.

Underfoot the pine-needles were springy beneath the horse's hoof.  The
trail went softly, with the courtesy of great gentleness.  Occasionally
we caught sight of other ridges,--also with pines,--across deep sloping
valleys, pine filled.  The effect of the distant trees seen from above
was that of roughened velvet, here smooth and shining, there dark with
rich shadows.  On these slopes played the wind.  In the level countries
it sang through the forest progressively: here on the slope it struck a
thousand trees at once.  The air was ennobled with the great voice, as
a church is ennobled by the tones of a great organ. Then we would drop
back again to the inner country, for our way did not contemplate the
descents nor climbs, but held to the general level of a plateau.

Clear fresh brooks ran in every ravine.  Their water was snow-white
against the black rocks; or lay dark in bank-shadowed pools.  As our
horses splashed across we could glimpse the rainbow trout flashing to
cover.  Where the watered hollows grew lush were thickets full of
birds, outposts of the aggressively and cheerfully worldly in this
pine-land of spiritual detachment. Gorgeous bush-flowers, great of
petal as magnolias, with perfume that lay on the air like a heavy
drowsiness; long clear stretches of an ankle-high shrub of vivid
emerald, looking in the distance like sloping meadows of a peculiar
color-brilliance; patches of smaller flowers where for the trifling
space of a street's width the sun had unobstructed fall,--these from
time to time diversified the way, brought to our perceptions the
endearing trifles of earthiness, of humanity, befittingly to modify the
austerity of the great forest.  At a brookside we saw, still fresh and
moist, the print of a bear's foot.  From a patch of the little emerald
brush, a barren doe rose to her feet, eyed us a moment, and then
bounded away as though propelled by springs.  We saw her from time to
time surmounting little elevations farther and farther away.

The air was like cold water.  We had not lung capacity to satisfy our
desire for it.  There came with it a dry exhilaration that brought high
spirits, an optimistic viewpoint, and a tremendous keen appetite. It
seemed that we could never tire.  In fact we never did.  Sometimes,
after a particularly hard day, we felt like resting; but it was always
after the day's work was done, never while it was under way.  The
Tenderfoot and I one day went afoot twenty-two miles up and down a
mountain fourteen thousand feet high.  The last three thousand feet
were nearly straight up and down.  We finished at a four-mile clip an
hour before sunset, and discussed what to do next to fill in the time.
When we sat down, we found we had had about enough; but we had not
discovered it before.

All of us, even the morose and cynical Dinkey, felt the benefit of the
change from the lower country. Here we were definitely in the
Mountains.  Our plateau ran from six to eight thousand feet in
altitude.  Beyond it occasionally we could see three more ridges,
rising and falling, each higher than the last. And then, in the blue
distance, the very crest of the broad system called the
Sierras,--another wide region of sheer granite rising in peaks,
pinnacles, and minarets, rugged, wonderful, capped with the eternal
snows.


[1] Do not fail to sound the final e.



