XV

ON THE WIND AT NIGHT

The winds were indeed abroad that night.  They rattled our cabin, they
shrieked in our eaves, they puffed down our chimney, scattering the
ashes and leaving in the room a balloon of smoke as though a shell had
burst.  When we opened the door and stepped out, after our good-nights
had been said, it caught at our hats and garments as though it had been
lying in wait for us.

To our eyes, fire-dazzled, the night seemed very dark.  There would be
a moon later, but at present even the stars seemed only so many
pinpoints of dull metal, lustreless, without illumination.  We felt our
way to camp, conscious of the softness of grasses, the uncertainty of
stones.

At camp the remains of the fire crouched beneath the rating of the
storm.  Its embers glowed sullen and red, alternately glaring with a
half-formed resolution to rebel, and dying to a sulky resignation.
Once a feeble flame sprang up for an instant, but was immediately
pounced on and beaten flat as though by a vigilant antagonist.

We, stumbling, gathered again our tumbled blankets. Across the brow of
the knoll lay a huge pine trunk.  In its shelter we respread our
bedding, and there, standing, dressed for the night.  The power of the
wind tugged at our loose garments, hoping for spoil.  A towel, shaken
by accident from the interior of a sweater, departed white-winged, like
a bird, into the outer blackness.  We found it next day caught in the
bushes several hundred yards distant.  Our voices as we shouted were
snatched from our lips and hurled lavishly into space.  The very breath
of our bodies seemed driven back, so that as we faced the elements, we
breathed in gasps, with difficulty.

Then we dropped down into our blankets.

At once the prostrate tree-trunk gave us its protection.  We lay in a
little back-wash of the racing winds, still as a night in June.  Over
us roared the battle.  We felt like sharpshooters in the trenches; as
though, were we to raise our heads, at that instant we should enter a
zone of danger.  So we lay quietly on our backs and stared at the
heavens.

The first impression thence given was of stars sailing serene and
unaffected, remote from the turbulence of what until this instant had
seemed to fill the universe.  They were as always, just as we should
see them when the evening was warm and the tree-toads chirped clearly
audible at half a mile.  The importance of the tempest shrank.  Then
below them next we noticed the mountains; they too were serene and calm.

Immediately it was as though the storm were an hallucination; something
not objective; something real, but within the soul of him who looked
upon it. It claimed sudden kinship with those blackest days when
nevertheless the sun, the mere external unimportant sun, shines with
superlative brilliancy.  Emotions of a power to shake the foundations
of life seemed vaguely to stir in answer to these their hollow symbols.
For after all, we were contented at heart and tranquil in mind, and
this was but the outer gorgeous show of an intense emotional experience
we did not at the moment prove.  Our nerves responded to it
automatically.  We became excited, keyed to a high tension, and so lay
rigid on our backs, as though fighting out the battles of our souls.

It was all so unreal and yet so plain to our senses that perforce
automatically our experience had to conclude it psychical.  We were in
air absolutely still.  Yet above us the trees writhed and twisted and
turned and bent and struck back, evidently in the power of a mighty
force.  Across the calm heavens the murk of flying atmosphere--I have
always maintained that if you looked closely enough you could SEE the
wind--the dim, hardly-made-out, fine debris fleeing high in the
air;--these faintly hinted at intense movement rushing down through
space.  A roar of sound filled the hollow of the sky.  Occasionally it
intermitted, falling abruptly in volume like the mysterious rare
hushings of a rapid stream.  Then the familiar noises of a summer night
became audible for the briefest instant,--a horse sneezed, an owl
hooted, the wild call of birds came down the wind. And with a howl the
legions of good and evil took up their warring.  It was too real, and
yet it was not reconcilable with the calm of our resting-places.

For hours we lay thus in all the intensity of an inner storm and
stress, which it seemed could not fail to develop us, to mould us, to
age us, to leave on us its scars, to bequeath us its peace or remorse
or despair, as would some great mysterious dark experience direct from
the sources of life.  And then abruptly we were exhausted, as we should
have been by too great emotion.  We fell asleep.  The morning dawned
still and clear, and garnished and set in order as though such things
had never been.  Only our white towel fluttered like a flag of truce in
the direction the mighty elements had departed.



XVI

THE VALLEY

Once upon a time I happened to be staying in a hotel room which had
originally been part of a suite, but which was then cut off from the
others by only a thin door through which sounds carried clearly.  It
was about eleven o'clock in the evening. The occupants of that next
room came home.  I heard the door open and close.  Then the bed
shrieked aloud as somebody fell heavily upon it. There breathed across
the silence a deep restful sigh.

"Mary," said a man's voice, "I'm mighty sorry I didn't join that
Association for Artificial Vacations. They guarantee to get you just as
tired and just as mad in two days as you could by yourself in two
weeks."

We thought of that one morning as we descended the Glacier Point Trail
in Yosemite.

The contrast we need not have made so sharp. We might have taken the
regular wagon-road by way of Chinquapin, but we preferred to stick to
the trail, and so encountered our first sign of civilization within an
hundred yards of the brink.  It, the sign, was tourists.  They were
male and female, as the Lord had made them, but they had improved on
that idea since.  The women were freckled, hatted with alpines, in
which edelweiss--artificial, I think--flowered in abundance; they
sported severely plain flannel shirts, bloomers of an aggressive and
unnecessary cut, and enormous square boots weighing pounds.  The men
had on hats just off the sunbonnet effect, pleated Norfolk jackets,
bloomers ditto ditto to the women, stockings whose tops rolled over
innumerable times to help out the size of that which they should have
contained, and also enormous square boots.  The female children they
put in skin-tight blue overalls.  The male children they dressed in
bloomers.  Why this should be I cannot tell you.  All carried toy
hatchets with a spike on one end built to resemble the pictures of
alpenstocks.

They looked business-like, trod with an assured air of veterans and a
seeming of experience more extended than it was possible to pack into
any one human life.  We stared at them, our eyes bulging out.  They
painfully and evidently concealed a curiosity as to our pack-train.  We
wished them good-day, in order to see to what language heaven had
fitted their extraordinary ideas as regards raiment.  They inquired the
way to something or other--I think Sentinel Dome.  We had just arrived,
so we did not know, but in order to show a friendly spirit we blandly
pointed out A way.  It may have led to Sentinel Dome for all I know.
They departed uttering thanks in human speech.

Now this particular bunch of tourists was evidently staying at the
Glacier Point, and so was fresh.  But in the course of that morning we
descended straight down a drop of, is it four thousand feet?  The trail
was steep and long and without water.  During the descent we passed
first and last probably twoscore of tourists, all on foot.  A good half
of them were delicate women,--young, middle-aged, a few gray-haired and
evidently upwards of sixty.  There were also old men, and fat men, and
men otherwise out of condition.  Probably nine out of ten, counting in
the entire outfit, were utterly unaccustomed, when at home where grow
street-cars and hansoms, to even the mildest sort of exercise.  They
had come into the Valley, whose floor is over four thousand feet up,
without the slightest physical preparation for the altitude.  They had
submitted to the fatigue of a long and dusty stage journey.  And then
they had merrily whooped it up at a gait which would have appalled
seasoned old stagers like ourselves.  Those blessed lunatics seemed
positively unhappy unless they climbed up to some new point of view
every day. I have never seen such a universally tired out, frazzled,
vitally exhausted, white-faced, nervous community in my life as I did
during our four days' stay in the Valley.  Then probably they go away,
and take a month to get over it, and have queer residual impressions of
the trip.  I should like to know what those impressions really are.

Not but that Nature has done everything in her power to oblige them.
The things I am about to say are heresy, but I hold them true.

Yosemite is not as interesting nor as satisfying to me as some of the
other big box cañons, like those of the Tehipite, the Kings in its
branches, or the Kaweah.  I will admit that its waterfalls are better.
Otherwise it possesses no features which are not to be seen in its
sister valleys.  And there is this difference.  In Yosemite everything
is jumbled together, apparently for the benefit of the tourist with a
linen duster and but three days' time at his disposal.  He can turn
from the cliff-headland to the dome, from the dome to the half dome, to
the glacier formation, the granite slide and all the rest of it, with
hardly the necessity of stirring his feet.  Nature has put samples of
all her works here within reach of his cataloguing vision.  Everything
is crowded in together, like a row of houses in forty-foot lots.  The
mere things themselves are here in profusion and wonder, but the
appropriate spacing, the approach, the surrounding of subordinate
detail which should lead in artistic gradation to the supreme
feature--these things, which are a real and essential part of esthetic
effect, are lacking utterly for want of room. The place is not natural
scenery; it is a junk-shop, a storehouse, a sample-room wherein the
elements of natural scenery are to be viewed.  It is not an arrangement
of effects in accordance with the usual laws of landscape, but an
abnormality, a freak of Nature.

All these things are to be found elsewhere.  There are cliffs which to
the naked eye are as grand as El Capitan; domes, half domes, peaks as
noble as any to be seen in the Valley; sheer drops as breath-taking as
that from Glacier Point.  But in other places each of these is led up
to appropriately, and stands the central and satisfying feature to
which all other things look.  Then you journey on from your cliff, or
whatever it happens to be, until, at just the right distance, so that
it gains from the presence of its neighbor without losing from its
proximity, a dome or a pinnacle takes to itself the right of
prominence.  I concede the waterfalls; but in other respects I prefer
the sister valleys.

That is not to say that one should not visit Yosemite; nor that one
will be disappointed.  It is grand beyond any possible human belief;
and no one, even a nerve-frazzled tourist, can gaze on it without the
strongest emotion.  Only it is not so intimately satisfying as it
should be.  It is a show.  You do not take it into your heart.  "Whew!"
you cry.  "Isn't that a wonder!" then after a moment, "Looks just like
the photographs.  Up to sample.  Now let's go."

As we descended the trail, we and the tourists aroused in each other a
mutual interest.  One husband was trying to encourage his young and
handsome wife to go on.  She was beautifully dressed for the part in a
marvelous, becoming costume of whipcord--short skirt, high laced
elkskin boots and the rest of it; but in all her magnificence she had
sat down on the ground, her back to the cliff, her legs across the
trail, and was so tired out that she could hardly muster interest
enough to pull them in out of the way of our horses' hoofs.  The man
inquired anxiously of us how far it was to the top.  Now it was a long
distance to the top, but a longer to the bottom, so we lied a lie that
I am sure was immediately forgiven us, and told them it was only a
short climb.  I should have offered them the use of Bullet, but Bullet
had come far enough, and this was only one of a dozen such cases.  In
marked contrast was a jolly white-haired clergyman of the bishop type
who climbed vigorously and hailed us with a shout.

The horses were decidedly unaccustomed to any such sights, and we
sometimes had our hands full getting them by on the narrow way.  The
trail was safe enough, but it did have an edge, and that edge jumped
pretty straight off.  It was interesting to observe how the tourists
acted.  Some of them were perfect fools, and we had more trouble with
them than we did with the horses.  They could not seem to get the
notion into their heads that all we wanted them to do was to get on the
inside and stand still. About half of them were terrified to death, so
that at the crucial moment, just as a horse was passing them, they had
little fluttering panics that called the beast's attention.  Most of
the remainder tried to be bold and help.  They reached out the hand of
assistance toward the halter rope; the astonished animal promptly
snorted, tried to turn around, cannoned against the next in line.  Then
there was a mix-up. Two tall clean-cut well-bred looking girls of our
slim patrician type offered us material assistance.  They seemed to
understand horses, and got out of the way in the proper manner, did
just the right thing, and made sensible suggestions.  I offer them my
homage.

They spoke to us as though they had penetrated the disguise of long
travel, and could see we were not necessarily members of Burt Alvord's
gang. This phase too of our descent became increasingly interesting to
us, a species of gauge by which we measured the perceptions of those we
encountered. Most did not speak to us at all.  Others responded to our
greetings with a reserve in which was more than a tinge of distrust.
Still others patronized us. A very few overlooked our faded flannel
shirts, our soiled trousers, our floppy old hats with their rattlesnake
bands, the wear and tear of our equipment, to respond to us heartily.
Them in return we generally perceived to belong to our totem.

We found the floor of the Valley well sprinkled with campers.  They had
pitched all kinds of tents; built all kinds of fancy permanent
conveniences; erected all kinds of banners and signs advertising their
identity, and were generally having a nice, easy, healthful, jolly kind
of a time up there in the mountains.  Their outfits they had either
brought in with their own wagons, or had had freighted.  The store near
the bend of the Merced supplied all their needs. It was truly a
pleasant sight to see so many people enjoying themselves, for they were
mostly those in moderate circumstances to whom a trip on tourist lines
would be impossible.  We saw bakers' and grocers' and butchers' wagons
that had been pressed into service.  A man, his wife, and little baby
had come in an ordinary buggy, the one horse of which, led by the man,
carried the woman and baby to the various points of interest.

We reported to the official in charge, were allotted a camping and
grazing place, and proceeded to make ourselves at home.

During the next two days we rode comfortably here and there and looked
at things.  The things could not be spoiled, but their effect was very
materially marred by the swarms of tourists.  Sometimes they were
silly, and cracked inane and obvious jokes in ridicule of the grandest
objects they had come so far to see; sometimes they were detestable and
left their insignificant calling-cards or their unimportant names where
nobody could ever have any object in reading them; sometimes they were
pathetic and helpless and had to have assistance; sometimes they were
amusing; hardly ever did they seem entirely human.  I wonder what there
is about the traveling public that seems so to set it apart, to make of
it at least a sub-species of mankind?

Among other things, we were vastly interested in the guides.  They were
typical of this sort of thing. Each morning one of these men took a
pleasantly awe-stricken band of tourists out, led them around in the
brush awhile, and brought them back in time for lunch.  They wore broad
hats and leather bands and exotic raiment and fierce expressions, and
looked dark and mysterious and extra-competent over the most trivial of
difficulties.

Nothing could be more instructive than to see two or three of these
imitation bad men starting out in the morning to "guide" a flock, say
to Nevada Falls. The tourists, being about to mount, have outdone
themselves in weird and awesome clothes--especially the women.  Nine
out of ten wear their stirrups too short, so their knees are hunched
up.  One guide rides at the head--great deal of silver spur, clanking
chain, and the rest of it.  Another rides in the rear. The third rides
up and down the line, very gruff, very preoccupied, very careworn over
the dangers of the way.  The cavalcade moves.  It proceeds for about a
mile.  There arise sudden cries, great but subdued excitement.  The
leader stops, raising a commanding hand.  Guide number three gallops
up. There is a consultation.  The cinch-strap of the brindle shave-tail
is taken up two inches.  A catastrophe has been averted.  The noble
three look volumes of relief.  The cavalcade moves again.

Now the trail rises.  It is a nice, safe, easy trail. But to the
tourists it is made terrible.  The noble three see to that.  They pass
more dangers by the exercise of superhuman skill than you or I could
discover in a summer's close search.  The joke of the matter is that
those forty-odd saddle-animals have been over that trail so many times
that one would have difficulty in heading them off from it once they
got started.

Very much the same criticism would hold as to the popular notion of the
Yosemite stage-drivers. They drive well, and seem efficient men.  But
their wonderful reputation would have to be upheld on rougher roads
than those into the Valley.  The tourist is, of course, encouraged to
believe that he is doing the hair-breadth escape; but in reality, as
mountain travel goes, the Yosemite stage-road is very mild.

This that I have been saying is not by way of depreciation.  But it
seems to me that the Valley is wonderful enough to stand by itself in
men's appreciation without the unreality of sickly sentimentalism in
regard to imaginary dangers, or the histrionics of playing wilderness
where no wilderness exists.

As we went out, this time by the Chinquapin wagon-road, we met one
stage-load after another of tourists coming in.  They had not yet
donned the outlandish attire they believe proper to the occasion, and
so showed for what they were,--prosperous, well-bred, well-dressed
travelers.  In contrast to their smartness, the brilliancy of
new-painted stages, the dash of the horses maintained by the Yosemite
Stage Company, our own dusty travel-worn outfit of mountain ponies, our
own rough clothes patched and faded, our sheath-knives and firearms
seemed out of place and curious, as though a knight in medieval armor
were to ride down Broadway.

I do not know how many stages there were.  We turned our pack-horses
out for them all, dashing back and forth along the line, coercing the
diabolical Dinkey.  The road was too smooth.  There were no
obstructions to surmount; no dangers to avert; no difficulties to
avoid.  We could not get into trouble, but proceeded as on a county
turnpike.  Too tame, too civilized, too representative of the tourist
element, it ended by getting on our nerves.  The wilderness seemed to
have left us forever.  Never would we get back to our own again.  After
a long time Wes, leading, turned into our old trail branching off to
the high country.  Hardly had we traveled a half mile before we heard
from the advance guard a crash and a shout.

"What is it, Wes?" we yelled.

In a moment the reply came,--

"Lily's fallen down again,--thank God!"

We understood what he meant.  By this we knew that the tourist zone was
crossed, that we had left the show country, and were once more in the
open.



