V

THE COAST RANGES

At last, on the day appointed, we, with five horses, climbed the Cold
Spring Trail to the ridge; and then, instead of turning to the left, we
plunged down the zigzag lacets of the other side. That night we camped
at Mono Cañon, feeling ourselves strangely an integral part of the
relief map we had looked upon so many times that almost we had come to
consider its features as in miniature, not capacious for the
accommodation of life-sized men. Here we remained a day while we rode
the hills in search of Dinkey and Jenny, there pastured.

We found Jenny peaceful and inclined to be corralled. But Dinkey,
followed by a slavishly adoring brindle mule, declined to be rounded
up.  We chased her up hill and down; along creek-beds and through the
spiky chaparral.  Always she dodged craftily, warily, with forethought.
Always the brindled mule, wrapt in admiration at his companion's
cleverness, crashed along after.  Finally we teased her into a narrow
cañon.  Wes and the Tenderfoot closed the upper end.  I attempted to
slip by to the lower, but was discovered.  Dinkey tore a frantic mile
down the side hill.  Bullet, his nostrils wide, his ears back, raced
parallel in the boulder-strewn stream-bed, wonderful in his avoidance
of bad footing, precious in his selection of good, interested in the
game, indignant at the wayward Dinkey, profoundly contemptuous of the
besotted mule.  At a bend in the cañon interposed a steep bank.  Up
this we scrambled, dirt and stones flying.  I had just time to bend low
along the saddle when, with the ripping and tearing and scratching of
thorns, we burst blindly through a thicket.  In the open space on the
farther side Bullet stopped, panting but triumphant.  Dinkey,
surrounded at last, turned back toward camp with an air of utmost
indifference. The mule dropped his long ears and followed.

At camp we corralled Dinkey, but left her friend to shift for himself.
Then was lifted up his voice in mulish lamentations until, cursing, we
had to ride out bareback and drive him far into the hills and there
stone him into distant fear.  Even as we departed up the trail the
following day the voice of his sorrow, diminishing like the echo of
grief, appealed uselessly to Dinkey's sympathy.  For Dinkey, once
captured, seemed to have shrugged her shoulders and accepted inevitable
toil with a real though cynical philosophy.

The trail rose gradually by imperceptible gradations and occasional
climbs.  We journeyed in the great cañons.  High chaparral flanked the
trail, occasional wide gray stretches of "old man" filled the air with
its pungent odor and with the calls of its quail. The crannies of the
rocks, the stretches of wide loose shale, the crumbling bottom earth
offered to the eye the dessicated beauties of creamy yucca, of yerba
buena, of the gaudy red paint-brushes, the Spanish bayonet; and to the
nostrils the hot dry perfumes of the semi-arid lands.  The air was
tepid; the sun hot. A sing-song of bees and locusts and strange insects
lulled the mind.  The ponies plodded on cheerfully. We expanded and
basked and slung our legs over the pommels of our saddles and were glad
we had come.

At no time did we seem to be climbing mountains. Rather we wound in and
out, round and about, through a labyrinth of valleys and cañons and
ravines, farther and farther into a mysterious shut-in country that
seemed to have no end.  Once in a while, to be sure, we zigzagged up a
trifling ascent; but it was nothing.  And then at a certain point the
Tenderfoot happened to look back.

"Well!" he gasped; "will you look at that!"

We turned.  Through a long straight aisle which chance had placed just
there, we saw far in the distance a sheer slate-colored wall; and
beyond, still farther in the distance, overtopping the slate-colored
wall by a narrow strip, another wall of light azure blue.

"It's our mountains," said Wes, "and that blue ridge is the channel
islands.  We've got up higher than our range."

We looked about us, and tried to realize that we were actually more
than halfway up the formidable ridge we had so often speculated on from
the Cold Spring Trail.  But it was impossible.  In a few moments,
however, our broad easy cañon narrowed. Huge crags and sheer masses of
rock hemmed us in.  The chaparral and yucca and yerba buena gave place
to pine-trees and mountain oaks, with little close clumps of
cottonwoods in the stream bottom. The brook narrowed and leaped, and
the white of alkali faded from its banks.  We began to climb in good
earnest, pausing often for breath.  The view opened.  We looked back on
whence we had come, and saw again, from the reverse, the forty miles of
ranges and valleys we had viewed from the Ridge Trail.

At this point we stopped to shoot a rattlesnake. Dinkey and Jenny took
the opportunity to push ahead.  From time to time we would catch sight
of them traveling earnestly on, following the trail accurately,
stopping at stated intervals to rest, doing their work, conducting
themselves as decorously as though drivers had stood over them with
blacksnake whips.  We tried a little to catch up.

"Never mind," said Wes, "they've been over this trail before.  They'll
stop when they get to where we're going to camp."

We halted a moment on the ridge to look back over the lesser mountains
and the distant ridge, beyond which the islands now showed plainly.
Then we dropped down behind the divide into a cup valley containing a
little meadow with running water on two sides of it and big pines
above.  The meadow was brown, to be sure, as all typical California is
at this time of year.  But the brown of California and the brown of the
East are two different things.  Here is no snow or rain to mat down the
grass, to suck out of it the vital principles.  It grows ripe and sweet
and soft, rich with the life that has not drained away, covering the
hills and valleys with the effect of beaver fur, so that it seems the
great round-backed hills must have in a strange manner the yielding
flesh-elasticity of living creatures.  The brown of California is the
brown of ripeness; not of decay.

Our little meadow was beautifully named Madulce,[1] and was just below
the highest point of this section of the Coast Range.  The air drank
fresh with the cool of elevation.  We went out to shoot supper; and so
found ourselves on a little knoll fronting the brown-hazed east.  As we
stood there, enjoying the breeze after our climb, a great wave of hot
air swept by us, filling our lungs with heat, scorching our faces as
the breath of a furnace.  Thus was brought to our minds what, in the
excitement of a new country, we had forgotten,--that we were at last on
the eastern slope, and that before us waited the Inferno of the desert.

That evening we lay in the sweet ripe grasses of Madulce, and talked of
it.  Wes had been across it once before and did not possess much
optimism with which to comfort us.

"It's hot, just plain hot," said he, "and that's all there is about it.
And there's mighty little water, and what there is is sickish and a
long ways apart. And the sun is strong enough to roast potatoes in."

"Why not travel at night?" we asked.

"No place to sleep under daytimes," explained Wes.  "It's better to
keep traveling and then get a chance for a little sleep in the cool of
the night."

We saw the reasonableness of that.

"Of course we'll start early, and take a long nooning, and travel late.
We won't get such a lot of sleep."

"How long is it going to take us?"

Wes calculated.

"About eight days," he said soberly.

The next morning we descended from Madulce abruptly by a dirt trail,
almost perpendicular until we slid into a cañon of sage-brush and
quail, of mescale cactus and the fierce dry heat of sun-baked shale.

"Is it any hotter than this on the desert?" we inquired.

Wes looked on us with pity.

"This is plumb arctic," said he.

Near noon we came to a little cattle ranch situated in a flat
surrounded by red dikes and buttes after the manner of Arizona.  Here
we unpacked, early as it was, for through the dry countries one has to
apportion his day's journeys by the water to be had.  If we went
farther to-day, then to-morrow night would find us in a dry camp.

The horses scampered down the flat to search out alfilaria.  We roosted
under a slanting shed,--where were stock saddles, silver-mounted bits
and spurs, rawhide riatas, branding-irons, and all the lumber of the
cattle business,--and hung out our tongues and gasped for breath and
earnestly desired the sun to go down or a breeze to come up.  The
breeze shortly did so.  It was a hot breeze, and availed merely to
cover us with dust, to swirl the stable-yard into our faces.  Great
swarms of flies buzzed and lit and stung. Wes, disgusted, went over to
where a solitary cowpuncher was engaged in shoeing a horse.  Shortly we
saw Wes pressed into service to hold the horse's hoof.  He raised a
pathetic face to us, the big round drops chasing each other down it as
fast as rain.  We grinned and felt better.

The fierce perpendicular rays of the sun beat down. The air under the
shed grew stuffier and more oppressive, but it was the only patch of
shade in all that pink and red furnace of a little valley.  The
Tenderfoot discovered a pair of horse-clippers, and, becoming slightly
foolish with the heat, insisted on our barbering his head.  We told him
it was cooler with hair than without; and that the flies and sun would
be offered thus a beautiful opportunity, but without avail.  So we
clipped him,--leaving, however, a beautiful long scalp-lock in the
middle of his crown.  He looked like High-low-kickapoo-waterpot, chief
of the Wam-wams.  After a while he discovered it, and was unhappy.

Shortly the riders began to come in, jingling up to the shed, with a
rattle of spurs and bit-chains.  There they unsaddled their horses,
after which, with great unanimity, they soused their heads in the
horse-trough. The chief, a six-footer, wearing beautifully decorated
gauntlets and a pair of white buckskin chaps, went so far as to say it
was a little warm for the time of year.  In the freshness of evening,
when frazzled nerves had regained their steadiness, he returned to
smoke and yarn with us and tell us of the peculiarities of the cattle
business in the Cuyamas.  At present he and his men were riding the
great mountains, driving the cattle to the lowlands in anticipation of
a rodeo the following week.  A rodeo under that sun!

We slept in the ranch vehicles, so the air could get under us.  While
the stars still shone, we crawled out, tired and unrefreshed.  The
Tenderfoot and I went down the valley after the horses.  While we
looked, the dull pallid gray of dawn filtered into the darkness, and so
we saw our animals, out of proportion, monstrous in the half light of
that earliest morning. Before the range riders were even astir we had
taken up our journey, filching thus a few hours from the inimical sun.

Until ten o'clock we traveled in the valley of the Cuyamas.  The river
was merely a broad sand and stone bed, although undoubtedly there was
water below the surface.  California rivers are said to flow bottom up.
To the northward were mountains typical of the arid countries,--boldly
defined, clear in the edges of their folds, with sharp shadows and
hard, uncompromising surfaces.  They looked brittle and hollow, as
though made of papier mache and set down in the landscape.  A long four
hours' noon we spent beneath a live-oak near a tiny spring.  I tried to
hunt, but had to give it up.  After that I lay on my back and shot
doves as they came to drink at the spring. It was better than walking
about, and quite as effective as regards supper.  A band of cattle
filed stolidly in, drank, and filed as stolidly away.  Some half-wild
horses came to the edge of the hill, stamped, snorted, essayed a
tentative advance.  Them we drove away, lest they decoy our own
animals.  The flies would not let us sleep.  Dozens of valley and
mountain quail called with maddening cheerfulness and energy. By a
mighty exercise of will we got under way again. In an hour we rode out
into what seemed to be a grassy foot-hill country, supplied with a most
refreshing breeze.

The little round hills of a few hundred feet rolled gently away to the
artificial horizon made by their closing in.  The trail meandered white
and distinct through the clear fur-like brown of their grasses. Cattle
grazed.  Here and there grew live-oaks, planted singly as in a park.
Beyond we could imagine the great plain, grading insensibly into these
little hills.

And then all at once we surmounted a slight elevation, and found that
we had been traveling on a plateau, and that these apparent little
hills were in reality the peaks of high mountains.

We stood on the brink of a wide smooth velvet-creased range that dipped
down and down to miniature cañons far below.  Not a single little
boulder broke the rounded uniformity of the wild grasses. Out from
beneath us crept the plain, sluggish and inert with heat.

Threads of trails, dull white patches of alkali, vague brown areas of
brush, showed indeterminate for a little distance.  But only for a
little distance.  Almost at once they grew dim, faded in the thickness
of atmosphere, lost themselves in the mantle of heat that lay palpable
and brown like a shimmering changing veil, hiding the distance in
mystery and in dread.  It was a land apart; a land to be looked on
curiously from the vantage-ground of safety,--as we were looking on it
from the shoulder of the mountain,--and then to be turned away from, to
be left waiting behind its brown veil for what might come.  To abandon
the high country, deliberately to cut loose from the known,
deliberately to seek the presence that lay in wait,--all at once it
seemed the height of grotesque perversity.  We wanted to turn on our
heels. We wanted to get back to our hills and fresh breezes and clear
water, to our beloved cheerful quail, to our trails and the sweet upper
air.

For perhaps a quarter of an hour we sat our horses, gazing down.  Some
unknown disturbance lazily rifted the brown veil by ever so little.  We
saw, lying inert and languid, obscured by its own rank steam, a great
round lake.  We knew the water to be bitter, poisonous.  The veil drew
together again.  Wes shook himself and sighed, "There she is,--damn
her!" said he.


[1] In all Spanish names the final e should be pronounced.



