VI

THE INFERNO

For eight days we did penance, checking off the hours, meeting doggedly
one after another the disagreeable things.  We were bathed in heat; we
inhaled it; it soaked into us until we seemed to radiate it like so
many furnaces.  A condition of thirst became the normal condition, to
be only slightly mitigated by a few mouthfuls from zinc canteens of
tepid water.  Food had no attractions: even smoking did not taste good.
Always the flat country stretched out before us.  We could see far
ahead a landmark which we would reach only by a morning's travel.
Nothing intervened between us and it.  After we had looked at it a
while, we became possessed of an almost insane necessity to make a run
for it.  The slow maddening three miles an hour of the pack-train drove
us frantic.  There were times when it seemed that unless we shifted our
gait, unless we stepped outside the slow strain of patience to which
the Inferno held us relentlessly, we should lose our minds and run
round and round in circles--as people often do, in the desert.

And when the last and most formidable hundred yards had slunk sullenly
behind us to insignificance, and we had dared let our minds relax from
the insistent need of self-control--then, beyond the cotton-woods, or
creek-bed, or group of buildings, whichever it might be, we made out
another, remote as paradise, to which we must gain by sunset.  So again
the wagon-trail, with its white choking dust, its staggering sun, its
miles made up of monotonous inches, each clutching for a man's sanity.

We sang everything we knew; we told stories; we rode cross-saddle,
sidewise, erect, slouching; we walked and led our horses; we shook the
powder of years from old worn jokes, conundrums, and puzzles,--and at
the end, in spite of our best efforts, we fell to morose silence and
the red-eyed vindictive contemplation of the objective point that would
not seem to come nearer.

For now we lost accurate sense of time.  At first it had been merely a
question of going in at one side of eight days, pressing through them,
and coming out on the other side.  Then the eight days would be behind
us.  But once we had entered that enchanted period, we found ourselves
more deeply involved. The seemingly limited area spread with startling
swiftness to the very horizon.  Abruptly it was borne in on us that
this was never going to end; just as now for the first time we realized
that it had begun infinite ages ago.  We were caught in the
entanglement of days.  The Coast Ranges were the experiences of a past
incarnation: the Mountains were a myth.

Nothing was real but this; and this would endure forever.  We plodded
on because somehow it was part of the great plan that we should do so.
Not that it did any good:--we had long since given up such ideas.  The
illusion was very real; perhaps it was the anodyne mercifully
administered to those who pass through the Inferno.

Most of the time we got on well enough.  One day, only, the Desert
showed her power.  That day, at five of the afternoon, it was one
hundred and twenty degrees in the shade.  And we, through necessity of
reaching the next water, journeyed over the alkali at noon.  Then the
Desert came close on us and looked us fair in the eyes, concealing
nothing.  She killed poor Deuce, the beautiful setter who had traveled
the wild countries so long; she struck Wes and the Tenderfoot from
their horses when finally they had reached a long-legged water tank;
she even staggered the horses themselves.  And I, lying under a bush
where I had stayed after the others in the hope of succoring Deuce,
began idly shooting at ghostly jack-rabbits that looked real, but
through which the revolver bullets passed without resistance.

After this day the Tenderfoot went water-crazy. Watering the horses
became almost a mania with him.  He could not bear to pass even a
mud-hole without offering the astonished Tunemah a chance to fill up,
even though that animal had drunk freely not twenty rods back.  As for
himself, he embraced every opportunity; and journeyed draped in many
canteens.

After that it was not so bad.  The thermometer stood from a hundred to
a hundred and five or six, to be sure, but we were getting used to it.
Discomfort, ordinary physical discomfort, we came to accept as the
normal environment of man.  It is astonishing how soon uniformly
uncomfortable conditions, by very lack of contrast, do lose their power
to color the habit of mind.  I imagine merely physical unhappiness is a
matter more of contrasts than of actual circumstances.  We swallowed
dust; we humped our shoulders philosophically under the beating of the
sun, we breathed the debris of high winds; we cooked anyhow, ate
anything, spent long idle fly-infested hours waiting for the noon to
pass; we slept in horse-corrals, in the trail, in the dust, behind
stables, in hay, anywhere.  There was little water, less wood for the
cooking.

It is now all confused, an impression of events with out sequence, a
mass of little prominent purposeless things like rock conglomerate.  I
remember leaning my elbows on a low window-ledge and watching a poker
game going on in the room of a dive.  The light came from a sickly
suspended lamp.  It fell on five players,--two miners in their
shirt-sleeves, a Mexican, a tough youth with side-tilted derby hat, and
a fat gorgeously dressed Chinaman.  The men held their cards close to
their bodies, and wagered in silence.  Slowly and regularly the great
drops of sweat gathered on their faces.  As regularly they raised the
backs of their hands to wipe them away.  Only the Chinaman,
broad-faced, calm, impassive as Buddha, save for a little crafty smile
in one corner of his eye, seemed utterly unaffected by the heat, cool
as autumn. His loose sleeve fell back from his forearm when he moved
his hand forward, laying his bets.  A jade bracelet slipped back and
forth as smoothly as on yellow ivory.

Or again, one night when the plain was like a sea of liquid black, and
the sky blazed with stars, we rode by a sheep-herder's camp.  The
flicker of a fire threw a glow out into the dark.  A tall wagon, a
group of silhouetted men, three or four squatting dogs, were squarely
within the circle of illumination. And outside, in the penumbra of
shifting half light, now showing clearly, now fading into darkness,
were the sheep, indeterminate in bulk, melting away by mysterious
thousands into the mass of night.  We passed them.  They looked up,
squinting their eyes against the dazzle of their fire.  The night
closed about us again.

Or still another: in the glare of broad noon, after a hot and trying
day, a little inn kept by a French couple.  And there, in the very
middle of the Inferno, was served to us on clean scrubbed tables, a
meal such as one gets in rural France, all complete, with the potage,
the fish fried in oil, the wonderful ragout, the chicken and salad, the
cheese and the black coffee, even the vin ordinaire.  I have forgotten
the name of the place, its location on the map, the name of its
people,--one has little to do with detail in the Inferno,--but that
dinner never will I forget, any more than the Tenderfoot will forget
his first sight of water the day when the Desert "held us up."

Once the brown veil lifted to the eastward.  We, souls struggling, saw
great mountains and the whiteness of eternal snow.  That noon we
crossed a river, hurrying down through the flat plain, and in its
current came the body of a drowned bear-cub, an alien from the high
country.

These things should have been as signs to our jaded spirits that we
were nearly at the end of our penance, but discipline had seared over
our souls, and we rode on unknowing.

Then we came on a real indication.  It did not amount to much.  Merely
a dry river-bed; but the farther bank, instead of being flat, cut into
a low swell of land.  We skirted it.  Another swell of land, like the
sullen after-heave of a storm, lay in our way. Then we crossed a
ravine.  It was not much of a ravine; in fact it was more like a slight
gouge in the flatness of the country.  After that we began to see
oak-trees, scattered at rare intervals.  So interested were we in them
that we did not notice rocks beginning to outcrop through the soil
until they had become numerous enough to be a feature of the landscape.
The hills, gently, quietly, without abrupt transition, almost as though
they feared to awaken our alarm by too abrupt movement of growth,
glided from little swells to bigger swells.  The oaks gathered closer
together.  The ravine's brother could almost be called a cañon.  The
character of the country had entirely changed.

And yet, so gradually had this change come about that we did not awaken
to a full realization of our escape.  To us it was still the plain, a
trifle modified by local peculiarity, but presently to resume its
wonted aspect.  We plodded on dully, anodyned with the desert patience.

But at a little before noon, as we rounded the cheek of a slope, we
encountered an errant current of air. It came up to us curiously,
touched us each in turn, and went on.  The warm furnace heat drew in on
us again.  But it had been a cool little current of air, with something
of the sweetness of pines and water and snow-banks in it.  The
Tenderfoot suddenly reined in his horse and looked about him.

"Boys!" he cried, a new ring of joy in his voice, "we're in the
foot-hills!"

Wes calculated rapidly.  "It's the eighth day to-day:  I guessed right
on the time."

We stretched our arms and looked about us.  They were dry brown hills
enough; but they were hills, and they had trees on them, and cañons in
them, so to our eyes, wearied with flatness, they seemed wonderful.



