XIV

ON CAMP COOKERY

One morning I awoke a little before the others, and lay on my back
staring up through the trees.  It was not my day to cook.  We were
camped at the time only about sixty-five hundred feet high, and the
weather was warm.  Every sort of green thing grew very lush all about
us, but our own little space was held dry and clear for us by the
needles of two enormous red cedars some four feet in diameter.  A
variety of thoughts sifted through my mind as it followed lazily the
shimmering filaments of loose spider-web streaming through space.  The
last thought stuck. It was that that day was a holiday.  Therefore I
unlimbered my six-shooter, and turned her loose, each shot being
accompanied by a meritorious yell.

The outfit boiled out of its blankets.  I explained the situation, and
after they had had some breakfast they agreed with me that a
celebration was in order. Unanimously we decided to make it gastronomic.

"We will ride till we get to good feed," we concluded, "and then we'll
cook all the afternoon. And nobody must eat anything until the whole
business is prepared and served."

It was agreed.  We rode until we were very hungry, which was eleven
o'clock.  Then we rode some more.  By and by we came to a log cabin in
a wide fair lawn below a high mountain with a ducal coronet on its top,
and around that cabin was a fence, and inside the fence a man chopping
wood.  Him we hailed.  He came to the fence and grinned at us from the
elevation of high-heeled boots.  By this token we knew him for a
cow-puncher.

"How are you?" said we.

"Howdy, boys," he roared.  Roared is the accurate expression.  He was
not a large man, and his hair was sandy, and his eye mild blue.  But
undoubtedly his kinsmen were dumb and he had as birthright the voice
for the entire family.  It had been subsequently developed in the
shouting after the wild cattle of the hills.  Now his ordinary
conversational tone was that of the announcer at a circus.  But his
heart was good.

"Can we camp here?" we inquired.

"Sure thing," he bellowed.  "Turn your horses into the meadow.  Camp
right here."

But with the vision of a rounded wooded knoll a few hundred yards
distant we said we'd just get out of his way a little.  We crossed a
creek, mounted an easy slope to the top of the knoll, and were
delighted to observe just below its summit the peculiar fresh green
hump which indicates a spring.  The Tenderfoot, however, knew nothing
of springs, for shortly he trudged a weary way back to the creek, and
so returned bearing kettles of water.  This performance hugely
astonished the cowboy, who subsequently wanted to know if a "critter
had died in the spring."

Wes departed to borrow a big Dutch oven of the man and to invite him to
come across when we raised the long yell.  Then we began operations.

Now camp cooks are of two sorts.  Anybody can with a little practice
fry bacon, steak, or flapjacks, and boil coffee.  The reduction of the
raw material to its most obvious cooked result is within the reach of
all but the most hopeless tenderfoot who never knows the salt-sack from
the sugar-sack.  But your true artist at the business is he who can
from six ingredients, by permutation, combination, and the genius that
is in him turn out a full score of dishes.  For simple example:  GIVEN,
rice, oatmeal, and raisins.  Your expert accomplishes the following:

ITEM--Boiled rice.

ITEM--Boiled oatmeal.

ITEM--Rice boiled until soft, then stiffened by the addition of quarter
as much oatmeal.

ITEM--Oatmeal in which is boiled almost to the dissolving point a third
as much rice.

These latter two dishes taste entirely unlike each other or their
separate ingredients.  They are moreover great in nutrition.

ITEM--Boiled rice and raisins.

ITEM--Dish number three with raisins.

ITEM--Rice boiled with raisins, sugar sprinkled on top, and then baked.

ITEM--Ditto with dish number three.

All these are good--and different.

Some people like to cook and have a natural knack for it.  Others hate
it.  If you are one of the former, select a propitious moment to
suggest that you will cook, if the rest will wash the dishes and supply
the wood and water.  Thus you will get first crack at the fire in the
chill of morning; and at night you can squat on your heels doing light
labor while the others rustle.

In a mountain trip small stout bags for the provisions are necessary.
They should be big enough to contain, say, five pounds of corn-meal,
and should tie firmly at the top.  It will be absolutely labor lost for
you to mark them on the outside, as the outside soon will become
uniform in color with your marking. Tags might do, if occasionally
renewed.  But if you have the instinct, you will soon come to recognize
the appearance of the different bags as you recognize the features of
your family.  They should contain small quantities for immediate use of
the provisions the main stock of which is carried on another
pack-animal. One tin plate apiece and "one to grow on"; the same of tin
cups; half a dozen spoons; four knives and forks; a big spoon; two
frying-pans; a broiler; a coffee-pot; a Dutch oven; and three light
sheet-iron pails to nest in one another was what we carried on this
trip.  You see, we had horses.  Of course in the woods that outfit
would be materially reduced.

For the same reason, since we had our carrying done for us, we took
along two flat iron bars about twenty-four inches in length.  These,
laid across two stones between which the fire had been built, we used
to support our cooking-utensils stove-wise.  I should never carry a
stove.  This arrangement is quite as effective, and possesses the added
advantage that wood does not have to be cut for it of any definite
length.  Again, in the woods these iron bars would be a senseless
burden.  But early you will learn that while it is foolish to carry a
single ounce more than will pay in comfort or convenience for its own
transportation, it is equally foolish to refuse the comforts or
conveniences that modified circumstance will permit you.  To carry only
a forest equipment with pack-animals would be as silly as to carry only
a pack-animal outfit on a Pullman car.  Only look out that you do not
reverse it.

Even if you do not intend to wash dishes, bring along some "Gold Dust."
It is much simpler in getting at odd corners of obstinate kettles than
any soap.  All you have to do is to boil some of it in that kettle, and
the utensil is tamed at once.

That's about all you, as expert cook, are going to need in the way of
equipment.  Now as to your fire.

There are a number of ways of building a cooking fire, but they share
one first requisite: it should be small.  A blaze will burn everything,
including your hands and your temper.  Two logs laid side by side and
slanted towards each other so that small things can go on the narrow
end and big things on the wide end; flat rocks arranged in the same
manner; a narrow trench in which the fire is built; and the flat irons
just described--these are the best-known methods.  Use dry wood.
Arrange to do your boiling first--in the flame; and your frying and
broiling last--after the flames have died to coals.

So much in general.  You must remember that open-air cooking is in many
things quite different from indoor cooking.  You have different
utensils, are exposed to varying temperatures, are limited in
resources, and pursued by a necessity of haste. Preconceived notions
must go by the board.  You are after results; and if you get them, do
not mind the feminines of your household lifting the hands of horror
over the unorthodox means.  Mighty few women I have ever seen were good
camp-fire cooks; not because camp-fire cookery is especially difficult,
but because they are temperamentally incapable of ridding themselves of
the notion that certain things should be done in a certain way, and
because if an ingredient lacks, they cannot bring themselves to
substitute an approximation.  They would rather abandon the dish than
do violence to the sacred art.

Most camp-cookery advice is quite useless for the same reason.  I have
seen many a recipe begin with the words:  "Take the yolks of four eggs,
half a cup of butter, and a cup of fresh milk--"  As if any one really
camping in the wilderness ever had eggs, butter, and milk!

Now here is something I cooked for this particular celebration.  Every
woman to whom I have ever described it has informed me vehemently that
it is not cake, and must be "horrid."  Perhaps it is not cake, but it
looks yellow and light, and tastes like cake.

First I took two cups of flour, and a half cup of corn-meal to make it
look yellow.  In this I mixed a lot of baking-powder,--about twice what
one should use for bread,--and topped off with a cup of sugar.  The
whole I mixed with water into a light dough.  Into the dough went
raisins that had previously been boiled to swell them up.  Thus was the
cake mixed.  Now I poured half the dough into the Dutch oven, sprinkled
it with a good layer of sugar, cinnamon, and unboiled raisins; poured
in the rest of the dough; repeated the layer of sugar, cinnamon, and
raisins; and baked in the Dutch oven.  It was gorgeous, and we ate it
at one fell swoop.

While we are about it, we may as well work backwards on this particular
orgy by describing the rest of our dessert.  In addition to the cake
and some stewed apricots, I, as cook of the day, constructed also a
pudding.

The basis was flour--two cups of it.  Into this I dumped a handful of
raisins, a tablespoonful of baking-powder, two of sugar, and about a
pound of fat salt pork cut into little cubes.  This I mixed up into a
mess by means of a cup or so of water and a quantity of
larrupy-dope.[1]  Then I dipped a flour-sack in hot water, wrung it
out, sprinkled it with dry flour, and half filled it with my pudding
mixture.  The whole outfit I boiled for two hours in a kettle.  It,
too, was good to the palate, and was even better sliced and fried the
following morning.

This brings us to the suspension of kettles.  There are two ways.  If
you are in a hurry, cut a springy pole, sharpen one end, and stick it
perpendicular in the ground.  Bend it down towards your fire.  Hang
your kettle on the end of it.  If you have jabbed it far enough into
the ground in the first place, it will balance nicely by its own spring
and the elasticity of the turf.  The other method is to plant two
forked sticks on either side your fire over which a strong cross-piece
is laid.  The kettles are hung on hooks cut from forked branches.  The
forked branches are attached to the cross-piece by means of thongs or
withes.

On this occasion we had deer, grouse, and ducks in the larder.  The
best way to treat them is as follows.  You may be sure we adopted the
best way.

When your deer is fresh, you will enjoy greatly a dish of liver and
bacon.  Only the liver you will discover to be a great deal tenderer
and more delicate than any calf's liver you ever ate.  There is this
difference: a deer's liver should be parboiled in order to get rid of a
green bitter scum that will rise to the surface and which you must skim
off.

Next in order is the "back strap" and tenderloin, which is always
tender, even when fresh.  The hams should be kept at least five days.
Deer-steak, to my notion, is best broiled, though occasionally it is
pleasant by way of variety to fry it.  In that case a brown gravy is
made by thoroughly heating flour in the grease, and then stirring in
water.  Deer-steak threaded on switches and "barbecued" over the coals
is delicious. The outside will be a little blackened, but all the
juices will be retained.  To enjoy this to the utmost you should take
it in your fingers and GNAW. The only permissible implement is your
hunting-knife. Do not forget to peel and char slightly the switches on
which you thread the meat, otherwise they will impart their fresh-wood
taste.

By this time the ribs are in condition.  Cut little slits between them,
and through the slits thread in and out long strips of bacon.  Cut
other little gashes, and fill these gashes with onions chopped very
fine. Suspend the ribs across two stones between which you have allowed
a fire to die down to coals.

There remain now the hams, shoulders, and heart. The two former furnish
steaks.  The latter you will make into a "bouillon."  Here inserts
itself quite naturally the philosophy of boiling meat.  It may be
stated in a paragraph.

If you want boiled meat, put it in hot water.  That sets the juices.
If you want soup, put it in cold water and bring to a boil.  That sets
free the juices. Remember this.

Now you start your bouillon cold.  Into a kettle of water put your deer
hearts, or your fish, a chunk of pork, and some salt.  Bring to a boil.
Next drop in quartered potatoes, several small whole onions, a half
cupful of rice, a can of tomatoes--if you have any.  Boil slowly for an
hour or so--until things pierce easily under the fork.  Add several
chunks of bread and a little flour for thickening.  Boil down to about
a chowder consistency, and serve hot.  It is all you will need for that
meal; and you will eat of it until there is no more.

I am supposing throughout that you know enough to use salt and pepper
when needed.

So much for your deer.  The grouse you can split and fry, in which case
the brown gravy described for the fried deer-steak is just the thing.
Or you can boil him.  If you do that, put him into hot water, boil
slowly, skim frequently, and add dumplings mixed of flour,
baking-powder, and a little lard.  Or you can roast him in your Dutch
oven with your ducks.

Perhaps it might be well here to explain the Dutch oven.  It is a heavy
iron kettle with little legs and an iron cover.  The theory of it is
that coals go among the little legs and on top of the iron cover.  This
heats the inside, and so cooking results.  That, you will observe, is
the theory.

In practice you will have to remember a good many things.  In the first
place, while other affairs are preparing, lay the cover on the fire to
heat it through; but not on too hot a place nor too long, lest it warp
and so fit loosely.  Also the oven itself is to be heated through, and
well greased.  Your first baking will undoubtedly be burned on the
bottom.  It is almost impossible without many trials to understand just
how little heat suffices underneath.  Sometimes it seems that the
warmed earth where the fire has been is enough.  And on top you do not
want a bonfire.  A nice even heat, and patience, are the proper
ingredients. Nor drop into the error of letting your bread chill, and
so fall to unpalatable heaviness.  Probably for some time you will
alternate between the extremes of heavy crusts with doughy insides, and
white weighty boiler-plate with no distinguishable crusts at all.
Above all, do not lift the lid too often for the sake of taking a look.
Have faith.

There are other ways of baking bread.  In the North Country forests,
where you carry everything on your back, you will do it in the
frying-pan.  The mixture should be a rather thick batter or a rather
thin dough. It is turned into the frying-pan and baked first on one
side, then on the other, the pan being propped on edge facing the fire.
The whole secret of success is first to set your pan horizontal and
about three feet from the fire in order that the mixture may be
thoroughly warmed--not heated--before the pan is propped on edge.
Still another way of baking is in a reflector oven of tin.  This is
highly satisfactory, provided the oven is built on the scientific
angles to throw the heat evenly on all parts of the bread-pan and
equally on top and bottom.  It is not so easy as you might imagine to
get a good one made.  These reflectors are all right for a permanent
camp, but too fragile for transportation on pack-animals.

As for bread, try it unleavened once in a while by way of change.  It
is really very good,--just salt, water, flour, and a very little sugar.
For those who like their bread "all crust," it is especially toothsome.
The usual camp bread that I have found the most successful has been in
the proportion of two cups of flour to a teaspoonful of salt, one of
sugar, and three of baking-powder.  Sugar or cinnamon sprinkled on top
is sometimes pleasant.  Test by thrusting a splinter into the loaf.  If
dough adheres to the wood, the bread is not done.  Biscuits are made by
using twice as much baking-powder and about two tablespoonfuls of lard
for shortening.  They bake much more quickly than the bread.
Johnny-cake you mix of corn-meal three cups, flour one cup, sugar four
spoonfuls, salt one spoonful, baking-powder four spoonfuls, and lard
twice as much as for biscuits.  It also is good, very good.

The flapjack is first cousin to bread, very palatable, and extremely
indigestible when made of flour, as is ordinarily done.  However, the
self-raising buckwheat flour makes an excellent flapjack, which is
likewise good for your insides.  The batter is rather thin, is poured
into the piping hot greased pan, "flipped" when brown on one side, and
eaten with larrupy-dope or brown gravy.

When you come to consider potatoes and beans and onions and such
matters, remember one thing: that in the higher altitudes water boils
at a low temperature, and that therefore you must not expect your
boiled food to cook very rapidly.  In fact, you'd better leave beans at
home.  We did.  Potatoes you can sometimes tease along by quartering
them.

Rolled oats are better than oatmeal.  Put them in plenty of water and
boil down to the desired consistency. In lack of cream you will
probably want it rather soft.

Put your coffee into cold water, bring to a boil, let boil for about
two minutes, and immediately set off. Settle by letting a half cup of
cold water flow slowly into the pot from the height of a foot or so.
If your utensils are clean, you will surely have good coffee by this
simple method.  Of course you will never boil your tea.

The sun was nearly down when we raised our long yell.  The cow-puncher
promptly responded.  We ate. Then we smoked.  Then we basely left all
our dishes until the morrow, and followed our cow-puncher to his log
cabin, where we were to spend the evening.

By now it was dark, and a bitter cold swooped down from the mountains.
We built a fire in a huge stone fireplace and sat around in the
flickering light telling ghost-stories to one another.  The place was
rudely furnished, with only a hard earthen floor, and chairs hewn by
the axe.  Rifles, spurs, bits, revolvers, branding-irons in turn caught
the light and vanished in the shadow.  The skin of a bear looked at us
from hollow eye-sockets in which there were no eyes.  We talked of the
Long Trail.  Outside the wind, rising, howled through the shakes of the
roof.


[1] Camp-lingo for any kind of syrup.



