X

ON SEEING DEER

Once I happened to be sitting out a dance with a tactful young girl of
tender disposition who thought she should adapt her conversation to the
one with whom she happened to be talking.  Therefore she asked
questions concerning out-of-doors.  She knew nothing whatever about it,
but she gave a very good imitation of one interested.  For some occult
reason people never seem to expect me to own evening clothes, or to
know how to dance, or to be able to talk about anything civilized; in
fact, most of them appear disappointed that I do not pull off a war-jig
in the middle of the drawing-room.

This young girl selected deer as her topic.  She mentioned liquid eyes,
beautiful form, slender ears; she said "cute," and "darlings," and
"perfect dears." Then she shuddered prettily.

"And I don't see how you can ever BEAR to shoot them, Mr. White," she
concluded.

"You quarter the onions and slice them very thin," said I dreamily.
"Then you take a little bacon fat you had left over from the flap-jacks
and put it in the frying-pan.  The frying-pan should be very hot. While
the onions are frying, you must keep turning them over with a fork.
It's rather difficult to get them all browned without burning some.  I
should broil the meat.  A broiler is handy, but two willows, peeled and
charred a little so the willow taste won't penetrate the meat, will do.
Have the steak fairly thick.  Pepper and salt it thoroughly.  Sear it
well at first in order to keep the juices in; then cook rather slowly.
When it is done, put it on a hot plate and pour the browned onions,
bacon fat and all, over it."

"What ARE you talking about?" she interrupted.

"I'm telling you why I can bear to shoot deer," said I.

"But I don't see--" said she.

"Don't you?" said I.  "Well; suppose you've been climbing a mountain
late in the afternoon when the sun is on the other side of it.  It is a
mountain of big boulders, loose little stones, thorny bushes.  The
slightest misstep would send pebbles rattling, brush rustling; but you
have gone all the way without making that misstep.  This is quite a
feat.  It means that you've known all about every footstep you've
taken.  That would be business enough for most people, wouldn't it?
But in addition you've managed to see EVERYTHING on that side of the
mountain--especially patches of brown.  You've seen lots of patches of
brown, and you've examined each one of them.  Besides that, you've
heard lots of little rustlings, and you've identified each one of them.
To do all these things well keys your nerves to a high tension, doesn't
it?  And then near the top you look up from your last noiseless step to
see in the brush a very dim patch of brown.  If you hadn't been looking
so hard, you surely wouldn't have made it out. Perhaps, if you're not
humble-minded, you may reflect that most people wouldn't have seen it
at all. You whistle once sharply.  The patch of brown defines itself.
Your heart gives one big jump.  You know that you have but the briefest
moment, the tiniest fraction of time, to hold the white bead of your
rifle motionless and to press the trigger.  It has to be done VERY
steadily, at that distance,--and you out of breath, with your nerves
keyed high in the tension of such caution."

"NOW what are you talking about?" she broke in helplessly.

"Oh, didn't I mention it?" I asked, surprised. "I was telling you why I
could bear to shoot deer."

"Yes, but--" she began.

"Of course not," I reassured her.  "After all, it's very simple.  The
reason I can bear to kill deer is because, to kill deer, you must
accomplish a skillful elimination of the obvious."

My young lady was evidently afraid of being considered stupid; and also
convinced of her inability to understand what I was driving at.  So she
temporized in the manner of society.

"I see," she said, with an air of complete enlightenment.

Now of course she did not see.  Nobody could see the force of that last
remark without the grace of further explanation, and yet in the
elimination of the obvious rests the whole secret of seeing deer in the
woods.

In traveling the trail you will notice two things: that a tenderfoot
will habitually contemplate the horn of his saddle or the trail a few
yards ahead of his horse's nose, with occasionally a look about at the
landscape; and the old-timer will be constantly searching the prospect
with keen understanding eyes. Now in the occasional glances the
tenderfoot takes, his perceptions have room for just so many
impressions. When the number is filled out he sees nothing more.
Naturally the obvious features of the landscape supply the basis for
these impressions.  He sees the configuration of the mountains, the
nature of their covering, the course of their ravines, first of all.
Then if he looks more closely, there catches his eye an odd-shaped
rock, a burned black stub, a flowering bush, or some such matter.
Anything less striking in its appeal to the attention actually has not
room for its recognition.  In other words, supposing that a man has the
natural ability to receive x visual impressions, the tenderfoot fills
out his full capacity with the striking features of his surroundings.
To be able to see anything more obscure in form or color, he must
naturally put aside from his attention some one or another of these
obvious features.  He can, for example, look for a particular kind of
flower on a side hill only by refusing to see other kinds.

If this is plain, then, go one step further in the logic of that
reasoning.  Put yourself in the mental attitude of a man looking for
deer.  His eye sweeps rapidly over a side hill; so rapidly that you
cannot understand how he can have gathered the main features of that
hill, let alone concentrate and refine his attention to the seeing of
an animal under a bush. As a matter of fact he pays no attention to the
main features.  He has trained his eye, not so much to see things, as
to leave things out.  The odd-shaped rock, the charred stub, the bright
flowering bush do not exist for him.  His eye passes over them as
unseeing as yours over the patch of brown or gray that represents his
quarry.  His attention stops on the unusual, just as does yours; only
in his case the unusual is not the obvious.  He has succeeded by long
training in eliminating that.  Therefore he sees deer where you do not.
As soon as you can forget the naturally obvious and construct an
artificially obvious, then you too will see deer.

These animals are strangely invisible to the untrained eye even when
they are standing "in plain sight."  You can look straight at them, and
not see them at all.  Then some old woodsman lets you sight over his
finger exactly to the spot.  At once the figure of the deer fairly
leaps into vision.  I know of no more perfect example of the
instantaneous than this. You are filled with astonishment that you
could for a moment have avoided seeing it.  And yet next time you will
in all probability repeat just this "puzzle picture" experience.

The Tenderfoot tried for six weeks before he caught sight of one.  He
wanted to very much. Time and again one or the other of us would hiss
back, "See the deer! over there by the yellow bush!" but before he
could bring the deliberation of his scrutiny to the point of
identification, the deer would be gone.  Once a fawn jumped fairly
within ten feet of the pack-horses and went bounding away through the
bushes, and that fawn he could not help seeing. We tried
conscientiously enough to get him a shot; but the Tenderfoot was unable
to move through the brush less majestically than a Pullman car, so we
had ended by becoming apathetic on the subject.

Finally, while descending a very abrupt mountain-side I made out a buck
lying down perhaps three hundred feet directly below us.  The buck was
not looking our way, so I had time to call the Tenderfoot. He came.
With difficulty and by using my rifle-barrel as a pointer I managed to
show him the animal.  Immediately he began to pant as though at the
finish of a mile race, and his rifle, when he leveled it, covered a
good half acre of ground.  This would never do.

"Hold on!" I interrupted sharply.

He lowered his weapon to stare at me wild-eyed.

"What is it?" he gasped.

"Stop a minute!" I commanded.  "Now take three deep breaths."

He did so.

"Now shoot," I advised, "and aim at his knees."

The deer was now on his feet and facing us, so the Tenderfoot had the
entire length of the animal to allow for lineal variation.  He fired.
The deer dropped.  The Tenderfoot thrust his hat over one eye, rested
hand on hip in a manner cocky to behold.

"Simply slaughter!" he proffered with lofty scorn.

We descended.  The bullet had broken the deer's back--about six inches
from the tail.  The Tenderfoot had overshot by at least three feet.

You will see many deer thus from the trail,--in fact, we kept up our
meat supply from the saddle, as one might say,--but to enjoy the finer
savor of seeing deer, you should start out definitely with that object
in view.  Thus you have opportunity for the display of a certain finer
woodcraft.  You must know where the objects of your search are likely
to be found, and that depends on the time of year, the time of days
their age, their sex, a hundred little things.  When the bucks carry
antlers in the velvet, they frequent the inaccessibilities of the
highest rocky peaks, so their tender horns may not be torn in the
brush, but nevertheless so that the advantage of a lofty viewpoint may
compensate for the loss of cover.  Later you will find them in the open
slopes of a lower altitude, fully exposed to the sun, that there the
heat may harden the antlers.  Later still, the heads in fine condition
and tough to withstand scratches, they plunge into the dense thickets.
But in the mean time the fertile does have sought a lower country with
patches of small brush interspersed with open passages.  There they can
feed with their fawns, completely concealed, but able, by merely
raising the head, to survey the entire landscape for the threatening of
danger.  The barren does, on the other hand, you will find through the
timber and brush, for they are careless of all responsibilities either
to offspring or headgear.  These are but a few of the considerations
you will take into account, a very few of the many which lend the deer
countries strange thrills of delight over new knowledge gained, over
crafty expedients invented or well utilized, over the satisfactory
matching of your reason, your instinct, your subtlety and skill against
the reason, instinct, subtlety, and skill of one of the wariest of
large wild animals.

Perversely enough the times when you did NOT see deer are more apt to
remain vivid in your memory than the times when you did.  I can still
see distinctly sundry wide jump-marks where the animal I was tracking
had evidently caught sight of me and lit out before I came up to him.
Equally, sundry little thin disappearing clouds of dust; cracklings of
brush, growing ever more distant; the tops of bushes waving to the
steady passage of something remaining persistently concealed,--these
are the chief ingredients often repeated which make up deer-stalking
memory.  When I think of seeing deer, these things automatically rise.

A few of the deer actually seen do, however, stand out clearly from the
many.  When I was a very small boy possessed of a 32-20 rifle and large
ambitions, I followed the advantage my father's footsteps made me in
the deep snow of an unused logging-road. His attention was focused on
some very interesting fresh tracks.  I, being a small boy, cared not at
all for tracks, and so saw a big doe emerge from the bushes not ten
yards away, lope leisurely across the road, and disappear, wagging
earnestly her tail. When I had recovered my breath I vehemently
demanded the sense of fooling with tracks when there were real live
deer to be had.  My father examined me.

"Well, why didn't you shoot her?" he inquired dryly.

I hadn't thought of that.

In the spring of 1900 I was at the head of the Piant River waiting for
the log-drive to start.  One morning, happening to walk over a slashing
of many years before in which had grown a strong thicket of white
popples, I jumped a band of nine deer.  I shall never forget the
bewildering impression made by the glancing, dodging, bouncing white of
those nine snowy tails and rumps.

But most wonderful of all was a great buck, of I should be afraid to
say how many points, that stood silhouetted on the extreme end of a
ridge high above our camp.  The time was just after twilight, and as we
watched, the sky lightened behind him in prophecy of the moon.




ON TENDERFEET



