XVIII

THE GIANT FOREST

Every one is familiar, at least by reputation and photograph, with the
Big Trees of California. All have seen pictures of stage-coaches
driving in passageways cut through the bodies of the trunks; of troops
of cavalry ridden on the prostrate trees.  No one but has heard of the
dancing-floor or the dinner-table cut from a single cross-section; and
probably few but have seen some of the fibrous bark of unbelievable
thickness.  The Mariposa, Calaveras, and Santa Cruz groves have become
household names.

The public at large, I imagine, meaning by that you and me and our
neighbors, harbor an idea that the Big Tree occurs only as a remnant,
in scattered little groves carefully fenced and piously visited by the
tourist.  What would we have said to the information that in the very
heart of the Sierras there grows a thriving forest of these great
trees; that it takes over a day to ride throughout that forest; and
that it comprises probably over five thousand specimens?

Yet such is the case.  On the ridges and high plateaus north of the
Kaweah River is the forest I describe; and of that forest the trees
grow from fifteen to twenty-six feet in diameter.  Do you know what
that means?  Get up from your chair and pace off the room you are in.
If it is a very big room, its longest dimension would just about
contain one of the bigger trunks.  Try to imagine a tree like that.

It must be a columnar tree straight and true as the supports of a Greek
facade.  The least deviation from the perpendicular of such a mass
would cause it to fall.  The limbs are sturdy like the arms of
Hercules, and grow out from the main trunk direct instead of dividing
and leading that main trunk to themselves, as is the case with other
trees.  The column rises with a true taper to its full height; then is
finished with the conical effect of the top of a monument. Strangely
enough the frond is exceedingly fine, and the cones small.

When first you catch sight of a Sequoia, it does not impress you
particularly except as a very fine tree.  Its proportions are so
perfect that its effect is rather to belittle its neighbors than to
show in its true magnitude.  Then, gradually, as your experience takes
cognizance of surroundings,--the size of a sugar-pine, of a boulder, of
a stream flowing near,--the giant swells and swells before your very
vision until he seems at the last even greater than the mere statistics
of his inches had led you to believe.  And after that first surprise
over finding the Sequoia something not monstrous but beautiful in
proportion has given place to the full realization of what you are
beholding, you will always wonder why no one who has seen has ever
given any one who has not seen an adequate idea of these magnificent
old trees.

Perhaps the most insistent note, besides that of mere size and dignity,
is of absolute stillness.  These trees do not sway to the wind, their
trunks are constructed to stand solid.  Their branches do not bend and
murmur, for they too are rigid in fiber.  Their fine thread-like
needles may catch the breeze's whisper, may draw together and apart for
the exchange of confidences as do the leaves of other trees, but if so,
you and I are too far below to distinguish it. All about, the other
forest growths may be rustling and bowing and singing with the voices
of the air; the Sequoia stands in the hush of an absolute calm. It is
as though he dreamed, too wrapt in still great thoughts of his youth,
when the earth itself was young, to share the worldlier joys of his
neighbor, to be aware of them, even himself to breathe deeply. You feel
in the presence of these trees as you would feel in the presence of a
kindly and benignant sage, too occupied with larger things to enter
fully into your little affairs, but well disposed in the wisdom of
clear spiritual insight.

This combination of dignity, immobility, and a certain serene
detachment has on me very much the same effect as does a mountain
against the sky.  It is quite unlike the impression made by any other
tree, however large, and is lovable.

We entered the Giant Forest by a trail that climbed.  Always we entered
desirable places by trails that climbed or dropped.  Our access to
paradise was never easy.  About halfway up we met five pack-mules and
two men coming down.  For some reason, unknown, I suspect, even to the
god of chance, our animals behaved themselves and walked straight ahead
in a beautiful dignity, while those weak-minded mules scattered and
bucked and scraped under trees and dragged back on their halters when
caught.  The two men cast on us malevolent glances as often as they
were able, but spent most of their time swearing and running about.  We
helped them once or twice by heading off, but were too thankfully
engaged in treading lightly over our own phenomenal peace to pay much
attention.  Long after we had gone on, we caught bursts of rumpus
ascending from below.  Shortly we came to a comparatively level
country, and a little meadow, and a rough sign which read

"Feed 20C a night."


Just beyond this extortion was the Giant Forest.

We entered it toward the close of the afternoon, and rode on after our
wonted time looking for feed at less than twenty cents a night.  The
great trunks, fluted like marble columns, blackened against the western
sky.  As they grew huger, we seemed to shrink, until we moved fearful
as prehistoric man must have moved among the forces over which he had
no control.  We discovered our feed in a narrow "stringer" a few miles
on.  That night, we, pigmies, slept in the setting before which should
have stridden the colossi of another age.  Perhaps eventually, in spite
of its magnificence and wonder, we were a little glad to leave the
Giant Forest.  It held us too rigidly to a spiritual standard of which
our normal lives were incapable; it insisted on a loftiness of soul, a
dignity, an aloofness from the ordinary affairs of life, the ordinary
occupations of thought hardly compatible with the powers of any
creature less noble, less aged, less wise in the passing of centuries
than itself.



