XI

ON TENDERFEET

The tenderfoot is a queer beast.  He makes more trouble than ants at a
picnic, more work than a trespassing goat; he never sees anything,
knows where anything is, remembers accurately your instructions,
follows them if remembered, or is able to handle without awkwardness
his large and pathetic hands and feet; he is always lost, always
falling off or into things, always in difficulties; his articles of
necessity are constantly being burned up or washed away or mislaid; he
looks at you beamingly through great innocent eyes in the most
chuckle-headed of manners; he exasperates you to within an inch of
explosion,--and yet you love him.

I am referring now to the real tenderfoot, the fellow who cannot learn,
who is incapable ever of adjusting himself to the demands of the wild
life.  Sometimes a man is merely green, inexperienced.  But give him a
chance and he soon picks up the game.  That is your greenhorn, not your
tenderfoot.  Down near Monache meadows we came across an individual
leading an old pack-mare up the trail.  The first thing, he asked us to
tell him where he was.  We did so.  Then we noticed that he carried his
gun muzzle-up in his hip-pocket, which seemed to be a nice way to shoot
a hole in your hand, but a poor way to make your weapon accessible.  He
unpacked near us, and promptly turned the mare into a bog-hole because
it looked green.  Then he stood around the rest of the evening and
talked deprecating talk of a garrulous nature.

"Which way did you come?" asked Wes.

The stranger gave us a hazy account of misnamed cañons, by which we
gathered that he had come directly over the rough divide below us.

"But if you wanted to get to Monache, why didn't you go around to the
eastward through that pass, there, and save yourself all the climb?  It
must have been pretty rough through there."

"Yes, perhaps so," he hesitated.  "Still--I got lots of time--I can
take all summer, if I want to--and I'd rather stick to a straight
line--then you know where you ARE--if you get off the straight line,
you're likely to get lost, you know."

We knew well enough what ailed him, of course. He was a tenderfoot, of
the sort that always, to its dying day, unhobbles its horses before
putting their halters on.  Yet that man for thirty-two years had lived
almost constantly in the wild countries.  He had traveled more miles
with a pack-train than we shall ever dream of traveling, and hardly
could we mention a famous camp of the last quarter century that he had
not blundered into.  Moreover he proved by the indirections of his
misinformation that he had really been there and was not making ghost
stories in order to impress us.  Yet if the Lord spares him thirty-two
years more, at the end of that time he will probably still be carrying
his gun upside down, turning his horse into a bog-hole, and blundering
through the country by main strength and awkwardness.  He was a
beautiful type of the tenderfoot.

The redeeming point of the tenderfoot is his humbleness of spirit and
his extreme good nature. He exasperates you with his fool performances
to the point of dancing cursing wild crying rage, and then accepts
your--well, reproofs--so meekly that you come off the boil as though
some one had removed you from the fire, and you feel like a low-browed
thug.

Suppose your particular tenderfoot to be named Algernon.  Suppose him
to have packed his horse loosely--they always do--so that the pack has
slipped, the horse has bucked over three square miles of assorted
mountains, and the rest of the train is scattered over identically that
area.  You have run your saddle-horse to a lather heading the outfit.
You have sworn and dodged and scrambled and yelled, even fired your
six-shooter, to turn them and bunch them.  In the mean time Algernon
has either sat his horse like a park policeman in his leisure hours, or
has ambled directly into your path of pursuit on an average of five
times a minute.  Then the trouble dies from the landscape and the baby
bewilderment from his eyes.  You slip from your winded horse and
address Algernon with elaborate courtesy.

"My dear fellow," you remark, "did you not see that the thing for you
to do was to head them down by the bottom of that little gulch there?
Don't you really think ANYBODY would have seen it?  What in hades do
you think I wanted to run my horse all through those boulders for?  Do
you think I want to get him lame 'way up here in the hills?  I don't
mind telling a man a thing once, but to tell it to him fifty-eight
times and then have it do no good--  Have you the faintest recollection
of my instructing you to turn the bight OVER instead of UNDER when you
throw that pack-hitch?  If you'd remember that, we shouldn't have had
all this trouble."

"You didn't tell me to head them by the little gulch," babbles Algernon.

This is just the utterly fool reply that upsets your artificial and
elaborate courtesy.  You probably foam at the mouth, and dance on your
hat, and shriek wild imploring imprecations to the astonished hills.
This is not because you have an unfortunate disposition, but because
Algernon has been doing precisely the same thing for two months.

"Listen to him!" you howl.  "Didn't tell him! Why you gangle-legged
bug-eyed soft-handed pop-eared tenderfoot, you! there are some things
you never THINK of telling a man.  I never told you to open your mouth
to spit, either.  If you had a hired man at five dollars a year who was
so all-around hopelessly thick-headed and incompetent as you are, you'd
fire him to-morrow morning."

Then Algernon looks truly sorry, and doesn't answer back as he ought to
in order to give occasion for the relief of a really soul-satisfying
scrap, and utters the soft answer humbly.  So your wrath is turned and
there remain only the dregs which taste like some of Algernon's cooking.

It is rather good fun to relieve the bitterness of the heart.  Let me
tell you a few more tales of the tenderfoot, premising always that I
love him, and when at home seek him out to smoke pipes at his fireside,
to yarn over the trail, to wonder how much rancor he cherishes against
the maniacs who declaimed against him, and by way of compensation to
build up in the mind of his sweetheart, his wife, or his mother a
fearful and wonderful reputation for him as the Terror of the Trail.
These tales are selected from many, mere samples of a varied
experience.  They occurred here, there, and everywhere, and at various
times.  Let no one try to lay them at the door of our Tenderfoot merely
because such is his title in this narrative.  We called him that by way
of distinction.

Once upon a time some of us were engaged in climbing a mountain rising
some five thousand feet above our starting-place.  As we toiled along,
one of the pack-horses became impatient and pushed ahead. We did not
mind that, especially, as long as she stayed in sight, but in a little
while the trail was closed in by brush and timber.

"Algernon," said we, "just push on and get ahead of that mare, will
you?"

Algernon disappeared.  We continued to climb.  The trail was steep and
rather bad.  The labor was strenuous, and we checked off each thousand
feet with thankfulness.  As we saw nothing further of Algernon, we
naturally concluded he had headed the mare and was continuing on the
trail.  Then through a little opening we saw him riding cheerfully
along without a care to occupy his mind.  Just for luck we hailed him.

"Hi there, Algernon!  Did you find her?"

"Haven't seen her yet."

"Well, you'd better push on a little faster.  She may leave the trail
at the summit."

Then one of us, endowed by heaven with a keen intuitive instinct for
tenderfeet,--no one could have a knowledge of them, they are too
unexpected,--had an inspiration.

"I suppose there are tracks on the trail ahead of you?" he called.

We stared at each other, then at the trail.  Only one horse had
preceded us,--that of the tenderfoot. But of course Algernon was
nevertheless due for his chuckle-headed reply.

"I haven't looked," said he.

That raised the storm conventional to such an occasion.

"What in the name of seventeen little dicky-birds did you think you
were up to!" we howled.  "Were you going to ride ahead until dark in
the childlike faith that that mare might show up somewhere?  Here's a
nice state of affairs.  The trail is all tracked up now with our
horses, and heaven knows whether she's left tracks where she turned
off.  It may be rocky there."

We tied the animals savagely, and started back on foot.  It would be
criminal to ask our saddle-horses to repeat that climb.  Algernon we
ordered to stay with them.

"And don't stir from them no matter what happens, or you'll get lost,"
we commanded out of the wisdom of long experience.

We climbed down the four thousand odd feet, and then back again,
leading the mare.  She had turned off not forty rods from where
Algernon had taken up her pursuit.

Your Algernon never does get down to little details like tracks--his
scheme of life is much too magnificent.  To be sure he would not know
fresh tracks from old if he should see them; so it is probably quite as
well.  In the morning he goes out after the horses.  The bunch he finds
easily enough, but one is missing.  What would you do about it?  You
would naturally walk in a circle around the bunch until you crossed the
track of the truant leading away from it, wouldn't you?  If you made a
wide enough circle you would inevitably cross that track, wouldn't you?
provided the horse started out with the bunch in the first place.  Then
you would follow the track, catch the horse, and bring him back.  Is
this Algernon's procedure?  Not any.  "Ha!" says he, "old Brownie is
missing.  I will hunt him up." Then he maunders off into the scenery,
trusting to high heaven that he is going to blunder against Brownie as
a prominent feature of the landscape. After a couple of hours you
probably saddle up Brownie and go out to find the tenderfoot.

He has a horrifying facility in losing himself. Nothing is more
cheering than to arise from a hard-earned couch of ease for the purpose
of trailing an Algernon or so through the gathering dusk to the spot
where he has managed to find something--a very real despair of ever
getting back to food and warmth. Nothing is more irritating then than
his gratitude.

I traveled once in the Black Hills with such a tenderfoot.  We were off
from the base of supplies for a ten days' trip with only a saddle-horse
apiece. This was near first principles, as our total provisions
consisted of two pounds of oatmeal, some tea, and sugar.  Among other
things we climbed Mt. Harney. The trail, after we left the horses, was
as plain as a strip of Brussels carpet, but somehow or another that
tenderfoot managed to get off it.  I hunted him up.  We gained the top,
watched the sunset, and started down.  The tenderfoot, I thought, was
fairly at my coat-tails, but when I turned to speak to him he had gone;
he must have turned off at one of the numerous little openings in the
brush.  I sat down to wait.  By and by, away down the west slope of the
mountain, I heard a shot, and a faint, a very faint, despairing yell.
I, also, shot and yelled.  After various signals of the sort, it became
evident that the tenderfoot was approaching.  In a moment he tore by at
full speed, his hat off, his eye wild, his six-shooter popping at every
jump.  He passed within six feet of me, and never saw me.  Subsequently
I left him on the prairie, with accurate and simple instructions.

"There's the mountain range.  You simply keep that to your left and
ride eight hours.  Then you'll see Rapid City.  You simply CAN'T get
lost.  Those hills stick out like a sore thumb."

Two days later he drifted into Rapid City, having wandered off
somewhere to the east.  How he had done it I can never guess.  That is
his secret.

The tenderfoot is always in hard luck.  Apparently, too, by all tests
of analysis it is nothing but luck, pure chance, misfortune.  And yet
the very persistence of it in his case, where another escapes, perhaps
indicates that much of what we call good luck is in reality unconscious
skill in the arrangement of those elements which go to make up events.
A persistently unlucky man is perhaps sometimes to be pitied, but more
often to be booted.  That philosophy will be cryingly unjust about once
in ten.

But lucky or unlucky, the tenderfoot is human. Ordinarily that doesn't
occur to you.  He is a malevolent engine of destruction--quite as
impersonal as heat or cold or lack of water.  He is an unfortunate
article of personal belonging requiring much looking after to keep in
order.  He is a credulous and convenient response to practical jokes,
huge tales, misinformation.  He is a laudable object of attrition for
the development of your character.  But somehow, in the woods, he is
not as other men, and so you do not come to feel yourself in close
human relations to him.

But Algernon is real, nevertheless.  He has feelings, even if you do
not respect them.  He has his little enjoyments, even though he does
rarely contemplate anything but the horn of his saddle.

"Algernon," you cry, "for heaven's sake stick that saddle of yours in a
glass case and glut yourself with the sight of its ravishing beauties
next WINTER. For the present do gaze on the mountains.  That's what you
came for."

No use.

He has, doubtless, a full range of all the appreciative emotions,
though from his actions you'd never suspect it.  Most human of all, he
possesses his little vanities.

Algernon always overdoes the equipment question. If it is
bird-shooting, he accumulates leggings and canvas caps and belts and
dog-whistles and things until he looks like a picture from a
department-store catalogue.  In the cow country he wears Stetson hats,
snake bands, red handkerchiefs, six-shooters, chaps, and huge spurs
that do not match his face.  If it is yachting, he has a chronometer
with a gong in the cabin of a five-ton sailboat, possesses a
nickle-plated machine to register the heel of his craft, sports a
brass-bound yachting-cap and all the regalia.  This is merely amusing.
But I never could understand his insane desire to get sunburned.  A man
will get sunburned fast enough; he could not help it if he would.
Algernon usually starts out from town without a hat.  Then he dares not
take off his sweater for a week lest it carry away his entire face.  I
have seen men with deep sores on their shoulders caused by nothing but
excessive burning in the sun.  This, too, is merely amusing.  It means
quite simply that Algernon realizes his inner deficiencies and wants to
make up for them by the outward seeming.  Be kind to him, for he has
been raised a pet.

The tenderfoot is lovable--mysterious in how he does it--and awfully
unexpected.



