part i. p. 40, part iv. p. 101, 102.

This conversion of a national into an appellative name appears to have
arisen in the eighth century, in the oriental France, where the princes
and bishops were rich in Sclavonian captives, not of the Bohemian
(exclaims Jordan) but of Sorabian race. From thence the word was
extended to general use, to the modern languages, and even to the style
of the last Byzantines. (See the Greek and Latin Glossaries of Ducange;
also Gibbon’s Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. iv. p. 38.)

The Moors, with whom the early Christians in the south of Europe had so
many and frequent contentions, at this day differ from all the other
African races, in their physical and mental development;—in person,
black, with the straight hair of the Arab, whom they exceed in stature
and intellect.

The Arabs are admitted to be an amalgamation of the descendants of Shem,
of Canaan, and Misrain. Into the particulars of their admixture, it will
be as useless to inquire as it would be into the paternity of the goats
on their mountains.

The Moors, according to King Hiempsal’s History of Africa, as related by
Sallust, are descended from an admixture of Medes, Persians, and
Armenians with the Libyans and Gætulians, the original occupants of the
country. His statement is, that Hercules led a large army of the people
to conquer new and unknown countries; that after his death in Spain, it
became a heterogeneous mass, made up of a great number of nations, among
whom were many ambitious chiefs, each one aspiring to rule; that a
portion of this mass, mostly of Japhanese descent, passed over to Africa
and seized on the shores of the Mediterranean; that their ships, being
hauled ashore, were used for shelter; that the Persians among them
passed on to the interior, and mingled with the Gætulians, and in after
times were known as Numidians,—whereas those who remained upon the coast
intermarried with Libyans, and in course of time, by a corruption of
their language, Medi, in the barbarous dialect of Libya, became
_Mauri_—now Moor.

To the foregoing, digested from Hiempsal, as given by Sallust, we may
add:—To this amalgamation was also adjoined, from time to time, large
parties of adventurers from the Hebrews, Greeks, Romans, and from almost
every part of Europe, which were all absorbed by the native masses; and
between the years 850 and 860, large masses of the Scandinavian hordes
were also absorbed into this general amalgam of the races of man.

The instances of slavery, and the laws and customs of the church
regulating it, as presented in this study, with few exceptions, have
pointed to the case where the white races have been enslaved or have
enslaved one another; where no strongly marked physical impediment has
branded amalgamation with deterioration and moral disgust; nor is it
thought necessary to present an argument to prove that, under such a
state of facts, the condition of Europe at the present moment is in
strict conformity with the result produced by the unchangeable laws of
God touching the subject.

God always smiles upon the strong desire of moral and physical
improvement. Had Europe remained under deteriorating influences which
determined her moral and physical condition two thousand years ago, her
condition as to slavery could not have changed. Nor is it seen that she
is yet in so highly favoured a condition as to call upon her the
providence of God, charging her with the pupilage of the backslidden
nations of the earth.


                           ------------------

                             LESSON XXIII.

It has been heretofore remarked that the great mass of the African
tribes are slaves in their own country,—that slavery there subjects them
to death at the will of the master, to sacrifice in the worship of their
gods, and to all the evils of cannibalism; and yet it has been seen that
even such slavery is a more protected state than would be a state of
freedom with their religion, and other moral and physical qualities.
History points not to the time when their present condition did not
exist, nor to the time when their removal, in a state of slavery, to the
pagan nations of Asia commenced. Upon the adoption of Mohammedanism
there, we find the black tribes of Africa succeeding to them in a state
of slavery; and we also find, and history will support the assertion,
that in some proportion as the slavery of these tribes was adopted by
Christian nations, it was diminished among the Mohammedans; and also,
that as the slave-trade with Africa was abolished by the Christians, it
was increased there; and also, that in the proportion it has been
extended among both or either of these creeds of religion abroad, it has
been invariably ameliorated at home. The causes of this state of facts
seem to have been these:—The African slave-owner found his bargain with
the Christian trader more profitable than with the Mohammedan. He
received more value, and in materials more desired by him: the labour of
the slave was of more value in America than Asia; and the transportation
to the place of destination was attended with less cruelty and hardship
by sea than by land. The slave of the African owner was increased in
value beyond any native use to which he could be applied, by reason of
both or either trade: hence the slave in his native land became of
greater interest and concern. The native owner ceased to kill for food
the slave whose exportation would produce him a much greater quantity.
His passions were curbed by the loss their indulgence occasioned. The
sacrifice was stayed by a less expensive, but, in his estimation, a more
valuable offering.

The object of our present inquiry is, whether the slavery of the African
tribes to the followers of Mohammed is at all recognised or alluded to
by the inspired writers. The fact exists, nor can it be contested,
although the condition of the African slave is far more degraded among
the Asiatics and Arabians than among the Christians, but that even there
it is far more elevated than in his native land. “Blessed be the Lord
God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant.” _Gen._ ix. 26. The
prophet Daniel was a captive the greater portion of his life, in the
very region of country, and among the ancestors of the Mohammedans of
the present day, and, of all the prophets, the most to have been
expected to have been endowed with prophetic gifts in relation to that
country and its future condition. It is proper also to remark that
although there is in many instances among the Mohammedans of the present
day a mixture of Japhanese descent, yet their main stock is well known
to be Shemitic. It should also be noticed that the Shemites have at all
times more frequently amalgamated with the descendants of Ham than those
of Japhet, consequently more liable to moral and physical deterioration;
and here, indeed, we find a reason why it was announced that Japhet
should possess the tents of Shem.

_Dan._ viii. 9: “And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which
waxed exceeding great towards the south, and towards the east, and
towards the pleasant land. 10. And it waxed great, even to the host of
heaven, and it cast down some of the host of the stars to the ground,
and stamped upon them. 11. Yea, he magnified himself even to the prince
of the host, and by him the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the
place of his sanctuary was cast down. 12. And an host was given him
against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, and it cast down
the truth to the ground, and it practised and prospered. 23. And in the
latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors are come to the
full, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences,
shall stand up. 24. And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own
power: and he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and
practise, and shall destroy the mighty and holy people. 25. And through
his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand, and he
shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many: he
shall also stand up against the Prince of princes; but he shall be
broken without hand.”

_Dan._ xi. 40: “And at the time of the end shall the king of the south
push at him, and the king of the north shall come against him like a
whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships, and he
shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass over. 41. He
shall enter also into the glorious land, and many countries shall be
overthrown; but these shall escape out of his hand, even Edom and Moab,
and the chief of the children of Ammon. 42. He shall stretch forth his
hand also upon the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not escape.
43. But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver,
and over all the precious things of Egypt, and the Libyans and the
Ethiopians shall be at his steps.”

Of the language used by this prophet, it is proper to remark that there
are many variations from the more ancient Hebrew, both as to form of
expression and the particular words used, among which Arabicisms and
Aramacisms are quite common. Faber supposes that this remarkable vision
relates to the history of Mohammedanism: no previous theory has been
satisfactory to the Christian world, and it is now generally believed
that he has suggested a correct interpretation. We may therefore be
allowed to follow him in considering it as descriptive of the rise and
progress of that religion.

Mohammed was born at Mecca. His education was contracted, and his
younger days devoted to commercial and warlike pursuits. By his marriage
with the widow of an opulent merchant, he rose to distinction in his
native city. For several years he frequently retired into the cave of
Hera and cherished his enthusiastic sentiments, till, at the age of
forty, he stated that he had held communication with the angel Gabriel,
and was appointed a prophet and apostle of God. In 612, he publicly
announced to his relations and friends that he had ascended through
seven heavens to the very throne of Deity, under the guidance of
Gabriel, and had received the salutations of patriarchs, prophets, and
angels. This monstrous statement, however, did not succeed, except with
a very few; and on the death of his uncle Abn Taleb, who had been his
powerful protector, he was compelled, in 622, to seek security by flight
to Medina. This henceforth became the epoch of Mohammedan chronology;
his power was more consolidated, and his influence extended by a large
accession of deluded, but determined followers. He very soon professed
to have received instructions from the angel Gabriel to propagate his
religion by the sword; and power made him a persecutor. In seven years
he became the sovereign of Mecca, and this led to the subjugation of all
Arabia, which was followed by that of Syria. In less than a century from
the period of its rise in the barren wilds of Arabia, the Mohammedan
religion extended over the greater part of Asia and Africa, and
threatened to seat itself in the heart of Europe.

The unity of God was the leading article of Mohammed’s creed. When
addressing the Jews, he professed highly to honour Abraham, Moses, and
the prophets, and admitted, for the sake of conciliating Christians,
that Jesus was the Messiah of the Jews, and will be the judge of all.
This compromising policy is seen in the Koran.

Mohammedan morals enforce many principles of justice and benevolence,
and inculcate a degree of self-denial, but, at the same time, permit the
indulgence of some of the strongest passions of our nature. The
representations given of paradise are adapted to gratify the sensuality
of men,—and of hell, to awaken their fears of disobeying the Koran or
the prophet. “Eastern Christendom,” says Mr. Foster, “at once the parent
and the prey of hydra-headed heresy, demanded and deserved precisely the
inflictions which the rod of a conquering heresiarch could bestow. The
king of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sentences, well
expresses the character of Mohammed and his religion.” “Mohammed,” says
Gibbon, “with the sword in one hand, and the Koran in the other, erected
his throne on the ruins of Christianity and of Rome. The genius of the
Arabian prophet, the manners of his nation, and the spirit of his
religion involve the causes of the decline and fall of the Eastern
empire, and our eyes are curiously intent on one of the most memorable
revolutions which impressed a new and lasting character on the nations
of the globe.”

His first efforts were directed against the Jews, who refused to receive
Mohammed’s effusions as the revelations of heaven, and, in consequence,
suffered the loss of their possessions and lives.

“When Christian churches,” says Scott, “were converted into mosques, the
‘daily sacrifice’ might be said to be taken away,” (viii. 11, 12,) and
the numbers of nominal Christians who were thus led to apostatize, and
of real Christians and ministers who perished by the sword of this
warlike, persecuting power, fulfilled the prediction that he cast down
some of the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped on them. It
is said that “a host was given him against the daily sacrifice,” (or
worship of the Christian church, corresponding with the Jewish
sanctuary,) “by reason of transgression.” A rival priesthood subverted
the priesthood of a degenerate church. The imams of Mohammed assumed the
place of the apostate teachers of Christianity. The event here predicted
was to occur in the latter part of the Grecian empire, (ver. 23,) “when
the transgressors are come to the full.”

History relates that the remains of the Eastern empire and the power of
the Greek church were overthrown by Mohammedans. Their chief endeavoured
to diffuse his doctrine, but found that it could not prevail by “its own
power,” or the inherent moral strength of the system: it was requisite
to support his pretensions by “craft” and “policy.” Mohammed sanctioned
as much of the inspired Scriptures as he thought might tend to obviate
the prejudices of the Jews, and incorporated as much of his own system
with the errors of the Eastern church as might tend to conciliate Greek
Christians.

“Although Mohammedism did not first spring up in the Macedonian empire,
yet it now spread from Arabia to Syria, and occupied locally, as well as
authoritatively, the ancient dominion of the he-goat.” (_Scott._) It has
been remarked, however, by Mr. Foster, (Mohammedism Unveiled,) that the
part of Arabia which included the native country of Mohammed, composed
an integral province both of the empire of Alexander and of the
Ptolemean kingdom of Egypt. Ptolemy had Egypt, Syria, Arabia,
Cælo-syria, and Palestine. The sovereignties of Egypt and Syria, before
called the king of the south and the king of the north, disappeared when
they were absorbed in the Roman empire, and the new power, or the
Saracen and Turkish empires, that succeeded, are now brought to view.
But let it be observed, that the Saracens became masters of Egypt, the
original territory of the king of the south, and the Turks possessed
Syria, or the kingdom of the north, and still retain it. “The king of
the south shall push at him.” The power of Rome was overthrown in the
east by the Saracens. This was the first wo of the revelation, which was
to pass away after three hundred years. The Turks then came, a whirlwind
of northern barbarians, and achieved a lasting conquest, in a day, of
the Asiatic provinces of the Roman empire. The line of march was along
the north of Palestine, and the Turkish monarch entered only to pass
through and overflow: “he entered into the glorious land;” for, as
Gibbon has stated it, the most interesting conquest of the Seljukian
Turks was that of Jerusalem, which soon became the theatre of nations.
“But Edom and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon escaped out
of his hand.” Even when all the regions round owned the Turkish sway,
these retained their detached and separate character, and even received
tribute from the pilgrims as they passed to the shrines of Mecca and
Medina. Thus they have escaped and maintained their independence of the
Porte. A race of monarchs arose to stretch out their hand upon the
countries. Othman, Amurath, Bajazet, and Mohammed conquered nation after
nation, and finally fixed the seat of their empire at Constantinople.
The land of Egypt “did not escape;” it was indeed the last to yield;
but, though its forces had vanquished both Christians and Turks, it was
at length subdued by Selim I. in 1517, and came into possession of the
Ottomans. (_Cox, on Daniel._) And it may be here remarked, as a fact of
well-known history, that the countries known as Libya and Ethiopia have,
at all ages of the world, supplied this country with slaves, whoever may
have borne rule, and still continue to do the same. Thousands from the
interior of Africa are yearly transplanted from the slavery of their
native land into those countries now under Mohammedan rule. And it may
be well here for the Christian philanthropist to notice, that so far as
the slave-trade with Africa has ceased with Christian nations, to the
same extent it has substantially increased with Mohammedan countries.

“And the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps,”—a form of
speech as clearly indicating the condition of slavery as though ever so
broadly asserted. The Hebrew word here translated “at his steps,”
בְּמִצְעָדָיו _in his footsteps_, &c., i. e. attached or subjected to
his interests as slaves, is cognate with the Arabic word مِصعادٌ
_metsuad_, and means the chains by which the feet of captive slaves are
bound, and in Hebrew form this word is used in _Isa._ iii. 20, צְעָדוֹת֙
_tseadoth_. The whole passage is strictly an Arabicism, and is to be
construed, with reference to that language, _chain for the legs_. Of
this passage, Adam Clark says, “_Unconquered Arabs_ all sought their
friendship, and many of them are tributary to the present time.” Some
commentators seem to understand this passage to mean only that Libyans
and Ethiopians would be in courteous attendance, &c. If so, the Hebrew
would have read, as in _Judg._ iv. 10, רֶגּל _regel_. “And he went up
with ten thousand men _at his feet_.” This passage, foretelling the
slavery of the Ethiopians to the Mohammedans, may well be compared with
_Isa._ xlv. 14, announcing the slavery of the same people to those of
the true religion. “Thus saith the Lord, the labour of Egypt and the
merchandise of Ethiopia and of the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come
over unto thee, and they shall be thine; they shall come after thee, in
chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down unto thee; they
shall make supplication unto thee, saying, Surely God is in thee, and
there is none else, there is no God” _beside_.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XXIV.

In reflection upon the leading ideas that present themselves in the
review of the subjects of this study, we may notice that slavery has
been introduced to the world as a mercy in favour of life. That, in its
operation, its general tendency is to place the weak, deteriorated, and
degraded under the control and government of a wisdom superior to their
own; from whence the intellectual, moral, and physical improvement of
the enslaved, to some extent, is a consequence as certain as that cause
produces its effect.

The world never has, nor will it ever witness a case where the moral,
intellectual, and physical superior has been in slavery, as a fixed
state, to an inferior race or grade of human life. The law giving
superior rule and government to the moral, intellectual, and physical
superior is as unchangeable as the law of gravitation. No seeming
exception can be imagined which does not lend proof of the existence of
such law. The human intellect can make no distinction between the
establisher of such law and the author and establisher of all other laws
which we perceive to be established and in operation, and which we
attribute to God. No one has ever yet denied that obedience to the laws
of God effects and produces mental and physical benefits to the
obedient, or that their disregard and contempt are necessarily followed
by a deterioration of the condition of the disobedient; nor can any one
deny that the neglect of obedience to the laws of God, which, in its
product, yields to the disobedient mental and physical deterioration, or
any one of them, is sin,—and in proportion to its magnitude, so will be
its consequent degradation. To be degraded is sin, because the law is
improve. No one will pretend that the relation of master and slave is
not often attended with sin on the part of the master, on the account of
his disobedience to the law of God in his government of his slave; or on
the part of the slave, on the account of his disobedience to the same
law in his conduct towards his master. Therefore, such master is not as
much benefited, not the slave as much improved by the relation, as would
otherwise be the case. It is therefore incumbent on the master to search
out and exclude all such abuses from the intercourse and reciprocal
duties between him and his slave. Placed upon him is the responsible
charge of governing both himself and his slave. The responsibility of
the master in this respect is of the same order as that of a guardian
and that of a parent.

The want of a less affectionate regard in the master towards the slave
is supplied and secured to the safety of the slave by the increased
watchfulness of the master over the slave from the consideration that
the slave is his property. For where affection cannot be supposed
sufficiently strong to stimulate a calm and wise action, interest steps
in to produce the effect.

That every mind will see and comprehend these truths, where prejudice
and education are in contradiction, is not to be expected. The
influences of a false philosophy on the mind, like stains of crime on
the character, are often of difficult removal. Some forbearance towards
those who honestly entertain opposing ideas on this subject, can never
disgrace the Christian character,—and we think it particularly the duty
of the men of the South, towards the men, women, and children of the
Northern States, especially of the unlearned classes. For even among
ourselves of the South, we sometimes hear the announcement of doctrines
that declare all the most rabid fanatic at the North need claim, on the
subject of immediate abolition. We refer to and quote from Walker’s
Reports of Cases adjudged in the Supreme Court of Mississippi, at the
June term, 1818, page 42: “Slavery is condemned by reason and the laws
of nature.” This false and suicidal assertion, most unnecessarily and
irrelevantly introduced, still stands on the records of the Supreme
Court of that State, and is an epitaph of the incapacity and stupidity
of him who wrote it and engraved it on this monument of Southern
heedlessness. We were at first surprised at the silence of the reporter,
but, at that day, any criticism by that officer would have been
contempt. Yet we may infer that the ingenious and talented gentleman
contrived to express his most expunging reprobation, by wholly omitting
all allusion to the point in his syllabus of the case.

If in the course of these Studies we shall not have shown that slavery
as it exists in the world is commanded by “reason” and the laws of
“nature,” we shall have laboured in vain; and even now an array of
battle is formed, and our enemy has chosen human “reason” for the “bolt
of Jove,” as wrought from strands of Northern colds, Southern heats, and
Eastern winds; in their centre, bound by cloudy fears and avenging
fires; for their ægis, “_the laws of nature_” supply Minerva’s shield,
upon which fanaticism has already inscribed its government over thirty
States, far exceeding in purity, they think, that of the God of Israel.
And we have come up to the war!—armed neither with the rod of Hermes nor
the arrows of Latona’s son; but with a word from him of Bethlehem:
“Sanctify them through thy truth; thy word is truth.”




                  ------------------------------------

                                Study V.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON I.

The inquirer after truth has two sources by which he can arrive at some
knowledge of the will of God:—1st. By faith and revelation; 2d. By the
observance of the facts uniformly developed in the material and moral
world. The accuracy of his knowledge will be coincident with the
accuracy of the mental perceptions and the extent of the research of the
inquirer.

In the Bible he will find the declarations of God himself: some of them
are express, and some of them implied.

In the second place, he may discover the will of God from the
arrangement of his works as manifested in the visible world. Some call
this the light of nature; others the laws of nature. But what do they
mean other than the light and laws of God? Are not the laws of
gravitation as much the laws of God as they would be if set down in the
decalogue, although not as important to man in his primary lessons of
moral duty?

Let us view the forest as planted by the hand of God: we see some trees
made to push their tall boughs far above the rest; while others, of
inferior stem and height, seem to require the partial shade and
protection of their more lofty neighbours; others, of still inferior and
dwarfish growth, receive and require the full and fostering influence of
the whole grove, that their existence may be protected and their organs
fully developed for use.

Let us view the tribes of ocean, earth, and air: we behold a regular
gradation of power and rule, from man down to the atom.

           Whether with reason or with instinct blest,
           All enjoy that power that suits them best:
           Order is Heaven’s first law; and this confess’d,
           Some are, and must be, greater than the rest—
           More rich, more wise; but who infers from hence
           That such are happier, shocks all common sense.
           Heaven to mankind impartial we confess,
           If all are equal in their happiness;
           But mutual wants this happiness increase.
           All nature’s difference, keeps all nature’s peace:
           Condition, circumstance, is not the thing;
           Bliss is the same, in subject, or in king!
                                              POPE’S _Essay_.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON II.

They who study even only such portion of the works of God as can,
seemingly, to some extent be examined by the human mind, never fail to
discover a singular affinity between all things, the creation of his
hand. This, to us, would be proof, independent of inspiration, that one
Creator made the whole world and all things therein.

So great is the affinity between the vegetable and animal kingdoms, that
it is to this day a doubt where the one terminates or where the other
begins. Naturalists all agree that they both spring from “slightly
developed forms, perhaps varied, yet closely connected;” true, “starting
away in different directions of life,” but ever preserving, it may be an
obscure, yet a strict analogy to each other.

These analogies are sufficiently obvious to prove that one power, one
and the same general law, has brought them both into existence. Thus the
devout worshipper of God may, in some sense, view the vegetable
inhabitants of the earth as his brethren.

The animal kingdom may be considered as divisible into five groups. The
vertebreta, annulosa, (the articulata of Cuvier,) the radiata, the
acrita, (in part the radiata of Cuvier,) and the molusca.

Each one of these groups will be found divisible into five classes. Let
us take, for example, the vertebreta, and it is readily divided into the
mammalia, reptilia, pisces, amphibia, and aves.

So each one of these classes is divisible into five orders. Let us take,
for example, the mammalia; and it is readily divided into the
cheirotheria, (animals with more or less perfect hands,) feræ, cetacea,
glires, and ungulata.

So each one of these orders is divisible into five genera. Let us take,
for example, the cheirotheria, and it is readily divided into the bimana
or homo, the quadrumana or simiadæ, the natatorials or vespertilionidæ,
the suctorials or lemuridæ, the rasorials or cebidæ.

So each one of these genera is divided in five species. Let us take, for
example, the bimana or homo, and it is readily divided into the
Caucasian or Indo-European, the Mongolian, the Malayan, the Indian or
aboriginal American, and the Negro or African.

Thus we behold man in his relation to the animal world: true, far in
advance as to his physical and mental development; yet the natural
philosopher finds traces of all his mental powers among the inferior
animals, as does the comparative anatomist those of his physical
structure.

Does he feel degraded by the fact that God has been pleased to order
this relation of brotherhood with the lower orders of creation? Or will
he for ever suffer his pride to hedge up the way of progress by the
impassable darkness of his own ignorance.

The uniformity of these penta-legal ramifications, which reach down from
man through all the orders and groups of the animal world, gives
evidence of a preconceived design—of an arrangement by Almighty power—of
a God whose thought is law!—while the analogy of animal formation, the
traces of affinity in the mental qualities found in all, in proportion
as those qualities are more or less developed, and the apparent
adaptation of each one to the condition in which it is found,
demonstrate the unity of the law which governs their physical being.

These analogies, found to exist between all the individuals of the
animal world, and particularly striking and more and more obvious as we
proceed from a particular group to its genera and species, have led some
philosophers to suppose that the more perfectly developed species have
been progressively produced by some instance of an improved development,
as an offshoot from the genera, and so on back to its original form of
animal life, in obedience to the laws of the great First Cause. But we
wish to disturb no man’s philosophy. We deem it of little importance to
us what method God pursued in the creation of our species; whether we
were spoken instantly into life, as was the light, or whether ages were
spent in reproducing improved developments from the earlier forms of
animal life.

In either case we see nothing contradictory to the inspired writings of
Moses. Man is as much the creation of God through one means as another.
The wisdom and power required are the same; for his existence alone
demonstrates him to be the work of a God. The fact of the existence of
these analogies is alone what we propose to notice. And we offer them
merely as indications of a course of study that may lead to some
important results in elucidation of the mental and physical relations
between the different varieties of man.

In further illustration, let us for a moment look at the bovine species,
from the genus ruminantia, from the order ungulata, and we find the ox,
the bison, the buffalo, the elk, and the goat.

Like the five species of homo, we find the bovine species divided into a
great number of families or varieties, of which we need take no further
notice. Does any one fail to perceive the analogy between these species
of the bos? Are they more obscure, more aberrant than are the relations
between the species of man? Examine the high physical development of the
most intellectual Caucasian; trace down the line to the diminutive and
ill-formed cannibal savage of Africa, the habits and mental development
of whom would seem rather allied to the lower orders of animals than to
the Caucasian! How will it comport with the general laws manifested by
the condition of the animal world and of the obvious inferiority and
influence of one over another, in proportion to their apparent
superiority in physical and mental development, to place the lowest
grade of the African in equal power or in control of the Caucasian
brother? Is there any manifestation of the Creator of an arrangement
like this, even through the eternity of his own work?

On the contrary, through the whole animal race, we find power and
control lodged everywhere in proportion as we find an advance towards
perfection in the development bestowed.

In conformity to this law, God gave Adam “dominion” over every living
thing that moved upon earth.

It is known to most men, that, under certain circumstances, the race of
any animal will improve: so also, under adverse, they degenerate. We see
these facts daily in the breeds of domestic animals. We see these
changes even in the families of all the species of man. Nor is it a
matter of the least importance to our inquiry, whether these species of
the race have been produced by an upward movement from the lowest, or a
downward degenerating movement from the most elevated. It is sufficient
that they exist from some cause; for an individual having been, say an
equal, but now degenerate, falls under the influence and control of his
superior. And in conformity to this law, it was announced to Eve, the
helpmate of Adam, that “he shall rule over thee.”

But if these particles of inspiration had never been proclaimed, man
would have discovered this law from its constant operation, not only on
the family of man, but on every branch of the animal world.

We can spend but little time with such infidel principles as lead some
men to say, “Down with your Bible that teaches slavery.” “If the
religion of Jesus Christ allows slavery, the New Testament is the
greatest curse that could be inflicted on man.” “Down with your God who
upholds slavery; he shall be no God of mine.” “Jesus Christ was himself
a negro!” Our hearts bleed when we see such evidence of a destroyed
intellect. The maniac in his ravings excites our extreme sorrow. We feel
no harshness. He has sunk far below resentment. Can we administer to
such mental deformity any relief? Will it be absurd to ask him to deduce
from nature, as it is found to operate, that the various grades of
subjection spread through the animal world exist in conformity to the
natural law?

But, says the querist, “Your remarks have a tendency towards the
conclusion,—upon the supposition that Adam was created with a perfect,
or rather with a very high order of physical organization and mental
development,—that the facts of the greater or less degeneration of the
people of the world, since his fall, now exhibited by the different
species of man upon the earth, had their origin in his transgression.
Now, by parity of argument, we may conclude, if such high physical
elevation was the original condition of Adam, that each genus of the
brute creation also was originally created on a proportional scale. If
so, their degeneration is quite as visible as that of man. Yet we have
no account that they committed sin and ‘fell.’”

We do not say that such was the original condition of the first man. We
say, the creation of the animal world was upon principles compatible
with progressive improvement; and that as far as these principles are
not obeyed, but changed or reversed by the practice of the animal world,
that the effect is to remain stationary, or to retrograde and
deteriorate.

It is a matter of no importance to our argument what was the first
condition of Adam. But allow it to be as querist has stated: We answer,
the Bible was given to man for his moral government; not to teach him
geology, chemistry, or other sciences. Such matters were left for him to
attain by progressive improvement. A minute history of the brute
creation, or any portion of it, from the earliest dawn of animal life up
to the time of revelation, other than the announcement of their creation
and subjection to him, was irrelevant. But man was the very head and
governor of the whole animal race. Now, who is to say that the
degeneration of the ruler will not produce a change of conduct in the
ruled? Who is to say that the poisoned moral feeling of him in command,
breaking forth in acts of violence on all around, will not produce a
corresponding effect on the animate objects under him? Witness the
effect, we need not say on children, but on domestic animals, of the
rash, cruel, and crazy treatment of a wicked and inconsistent man?

The idea that the brute creation were injured in condition by the fall
of man is put forth by St. Paul, in _Rom._ viii. 9–22, where the word
“creature” is translated from the Greek term that implies the whole
animal or the whole created world. But no answer to querist is
necessary. The fact is sufficient that animals, under habits ill-adapted
to their organization, do degenerate.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON III.

However insensible individuals themselves may be of the fact, some men,
and those of quite different character, find it unpleasant to submit
themselves to the great Author of animal life. For they, in substance,
make a continual inquiry, How is it to be reconciled that a Being so
perfectly good should have admitted into the midst of his works, as a
constant attendant of all his sentient creations, so large an admixture
of what we call evil?

We might continue the inquiry by adding, Why, in a mere drop of water,
do we find the animalculæ manifesting all the agonies and repeating the
outrages upon one another strikingly visible among the larger animal
developments of the great ocean and of the land? Why such an admixture
of pain and misery among men? Why the male of all animals making
destructive war on their kind? Why exterminating wars among men? And why
the numberless, nameless evils everywhere spread through the world?

And do we forget that the great Creator of animal life brought forth his
works and sustains each thing by the unchangeable exercise of his laws?
Laws which are found to have a direct tendency to progressive
improvement? Will rational beings expect God to change their actions to
suit their disregard of them? Will fire cease to burn because we may
choose to thrust in the hand? And what if, even in all this, we shall
discover his wisdom and goodness by making what we may call punishment
for the breach of the law, a pulling back from deeper misery, a powerful
stimulus for a change of direction from a downward to an upward movement
in the path of progressive improvement? Do we find no satisfaction in
this view of the constitution of nature, of the wisdom of God?

These men seem desirous that the works of God should have been on a
different footing, or that every thing should have been at once perfect
to the extent of his power. Would they then desire to be his equal too?
But, at least as to man, the mind incapable of error, the body of
suffering! It is possible that under such a dispensation, our mental
enjoyments would have been on a par with a mathematical axiom, and our
bodies have about as much sympathy for the things around them as has a
lump of gold. And how do they know that the rocks, minerals, and trees,
yea, the starry inhabitants of the firmament, are not the exact
manifestations of what would have been creations of that order? We will
not stop here to inquire how far the complaints of these men operate to
their own mental and physical injury.

It is a great popular error to suppose all of our own species to be born
equals. It involves the proposition that each one also possesses the
same faculties and powers, and to the same extent. Even every
well-informed nursery-maid is furnished with a good refutation. The
grades of physical development are proofs of grades of mind.

Through the whole animal world, as with man, mental action takes place,
providing for the sustenance and security of life; and the amount of
mental power each one possesses is ever in proportion to the development
of the nervous system and animal structure. Upon this earth, the highest
grade of such development is found among the Caucasian species of man.
Physiologists assert that the African exhibits, in maturity, the
imperfect brain &c. of a Caucasian fœtus some considerable time before
its birth: so the Malay and Indian, the same at a period nearer birth;
while the Mongolian, that of the infant lately born. See _Lloyd’s
Popular Physiology_. The _beard_, among men the attribute of a full
maturity, largest in the Caucasian, is scarcely found among the lower
grades of the African.

Colour is also found darkest where the development is the least perfect,
and the most distant from the Caucasian; and hence a philosopher of
great learning makes the question pertinent, “May not colour then depend
on development also? Development being arrested at so immature a stage
in the case of the negro, the skin may take on the colour as an
unavoidable consequence of its imperfect organization.” The different
species and all the varieties of man are nothing but a short history of
their different grades of organization and development. One fraction, by
a long and more or less strict observance of the laws of nature,
becomes, after many generations, quite improved in its organization.
From an opposite course, another fraction has degenerated and sunk into
degradation. It is now a well-known fact that Caucasian parents too
nearly related exhibit offspring of the Mongolian type. So, a particular
tribe of Arabs, now on the banks of the Jordan, from an _in-and-in_
propagation have become scarcely to be distinguished from Negroes. This
is only an instance, but is important when we notice the deteriorating
influence such intercourse has among domestic animals. In short, every
breach of the laws tending to the path of progressive improvement must
have a deteriorating effect on the offspring. There was truth in the
ancient adage, “The fathers have eaten sour grapes and the children’s
teeth are set on edge.”

Every private habit and circumstance in life that enervates or deranges
the physical system, or disturbs the balance of the mind, stamps its
impress on the descendant. The moral and physical condition of the
progeny, with slight exceptions the result of an elevating and upward
movement, or a downward and deteriorating one, (as the case may be,) is
the necessary result of the moral and physical condition of the
parentage: and this influence is doubtless felt back for many
generations.

But does God make man wicked? does he predestine to evil? These queries
may seem pertinent to some, because we are in the habit of considering
each individual by itself; whereas each individual is only a link in the
chain of phenomena, which owe their existence to laws productive of
good, and even of progressive improvement, but of necessity, in their
breach, admit these evils, because such breach is sin. Our moral
faculties are permitted to range in a wide field; but evil is the result
of a disruption of the rules of action. It is the flaming sword elevated
to guard our good, showing us the awful truth, the mere bad habit in the
parent may become a constitutional inherent quality in the off spring.

We do not suppose these influences always very perceptibly immediate.
Many generations are doubtless often required in the full development of
an upward movement to a higher order of moral perception; and so in the
opposite. Yet we cannot forbear to notice how often the immediate
descendant is quite apt to prove its parentage.

Will the theologian object—“You contradict the Scripture. You make five
species of man. Whereas they are all the descendants of Noah.” Have we
not shown ample ground and time for their formation from his stock?
Besides, we expect hereafter to prove by Scripture that Ham took a wife
from the degenerate race of Cain; which, if so, would alone place his
descendants in the attitude of inferiority and subjection.

No! but we advertise the theologian that we shall take the Scripture for
our platform. We believe it, and hope to even hold him close to it.

But we now ask for the reflection of all, does not the degenerate man,
degraded in constitution below the possibility of his emerging from the
depth to which he has sunk, by any self-renovating power, still
lingering about his reduced condition, require the aid of one of
superior nature, of superior organization and mental development, to act
as his adviser, protector, and master? Would not such a provision be a
merciful one?

And may we not also inquire, whether the superior endowments here
required do not also require to be exercised in bearing rule over the
wayward energies of those more degenerate, as a necessary element in the
school to a higher advance? And shall we not perceive that such a
relation must produce a vast amount of improvement and happiness to
both?

Children and inferior persons often show themselves, upon the slightest
temptation, false and cruel,—often the inheritance of parental
imperfection. Absolute command, sustained by physical force, has alone
been found sufficient to eradicate these old, and to found new habits of
truthfulness and humanity.

True, the Scripture asserts that all men are equal in the sight of God,
just as a father feels an equal parental regard for all his children.
The philosophic mind cannot well conceive otherwise than that God feels
an equal regard for all parts of his creation; for “The glory of the
Lord shall endure for ever: the Lord shall rejoice in his work.” But
this view reaches not the physical fact; for the father hesitates not to
place a guardian over his wayward child, or disinherit the utterly
worthless. So God “turneth man to destruction; and sayeth, Return, ye
children of men.” And how gladly would the parent provide the fatted
calf for the worthless son upon his return to honour and virtue! So
there is more joy in heaven over the return of one sinner than over
ninety-nine who have not gone astray.

The mercy of God shines upon the world in floods of celestial light; for
Christianity, in its passports to heaven, judges all men by their own
acts. Therefore, the most degraded nature, upon a sight of its
deformity, may feel an unchangeable regret, and inherit its portion.

Here Christianity itself points the way to progressive improvement, and
commands children to obey their parents, wives their husbands, and
servants their masters.

The grace of God is as openly manifested in the welfare of the child or
slave, when produced through the interposition of the parent or master,
as if the interposition had been more immediate.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON IV.

Intellect is not found to exist only in connection with a corresponding
physical organization. In the family of man, if that which may appear a
good organization is accompanied by an inferior intellect, we may
suspect our nice accuracy of discernment, rather than a discrepancy in
the operation of the general law; so also where we may seem to perceive
a good intellect, but which produces inferior or unworthy results. We do
not always notice the small steps of degeneration. Often the first
notice we take is of the fact of a changed condition, as proved by the
results: “By their fruits ye shall know them.”

The idea that intellect and mental development can be independent of
physical organization is an absurdity. A suppressed or incomplete
organization must arrest a further enlargement of the mental faculties.
These faculties may be improved, brought into action, or even their
action to some extent suppressed, by government and culture. Such indeed
are the guides to progressive improvement. EXPLANATION:—_Man has no
organization by which he could build a honey-comb like a bee._ Will any
culture applied to him teach him? _Man has no organization by which he
can closely examine spiritual existences_: his ideas about them are
therefore variant and confused. Who will arrange their study into a
science? _Man has no organization by which he can fully comprehend God._
Will he ever do so in his present state?

Are, then, the actions of the child, and of those persons whose mental
development has been arrested at a very early stage, (as has been
supposed the case with the lower orders of animals, and of those animals
themselves,) the result of some faculty or mental power different from
mind? The result of instinct? And what is instinct but mind in the early
dawn of its development? Are not such actions as the chick breaking its
shell, the young-born infant receiving its natural food, the necessary
consequents of the state of their infantile organization, which the
earliest development of mind could prompt and enable them to put forth;
and will it be deemed beyond the reach of reason, to prove that with the
difference of maturity in organization and development, the same general
connection of mind and organization is found, through the entire of life
as well as infancy?

Philosophers have, with indefatigable labour, endeavoured to enlighten
the world on the subject of instinct. Can we be pardoned if we suggest
that their theories on this subject signally prove they were but men?
Des Cartes says—“Brutes are machines without sensation or ideas; that
their actions are the result of external force, as the sound of an organ
is the result of the air being forced through the pipes.” This is his
“instinct.” If this be true, then it follows that every action in the
material world is instinct. Then the thunder utters its voice, the earth
quakes, and the telegraph works by “instinct.” Yet, his theory has found
an advocate in that very classical Latin poem, “Anti Lucretius,” by
Cardinal Polignac.

Dr. Reid sustains the mechanical nature of brutes, but classifies their
actions into those of habit and those of instinct.

Dr. Darwin says that instinct is mental, and that the actions of brutes
result from faculties, the same in nature as those of man, but extremely
limited. Smellie takes the same view. Yet Darwin asserts that instinct
is the reason; and Smellie, that reason is the result of instinct.
Cudworth says that instinct is an intermediate power, taking rank
between mind and matter, yet often vibrating from one to the other.
Buffon contends that brutes possess an _intellectual principle_, by
which they distinguish between pleasure and pain, and desire the one and
repel the other. This is his _instinct_.

Reimar divides _instinct_ into three classes: _mechanical_, such as the
pulsation of the heart; _representative_, such as result from an
imperfect kind of memory, and, so far as it is memory, in common with
mankind; and _spontaneous_, the same as Buffon’s. Cuvier says that
instinct consists of ideas that do not result from _sensation_, but flow
directly from the brain! Dupont says that there is no such distinct
faculty as instinct. His views are analogous to Darwin and Smellie.

Pope, Stahl, and others say, “It is the divinity that stirs within us.”

              “And reason raise o’er instinct as you can,
              In this ’tis God directs, in that ’tis man.”

Cullen, Hoffman, and others say that _instinct_ is the “vis medicatrix
naturæ.” Dr. John Mason Good says that “_instinct is the law of the
living principle_,” that “_instinctive actions are the actions of the
living principle_.” If so, instinct is as applicable to vegetables as to
animals.

Dr. Hancock, in his work on the Physical and Moral Relations of
Instinct, has evidently enlarged on the doctrine of Pope and Stahl. He
says instinct is the “_impulse_,” “_the inspiration of the Holy
Spirit_;” and, in his own words, “_which we can only regard as an
emanation of Divine wisdom_.”

He asserts that the lower we descend in the scale of animal organization
and mental development, the more active and all-pervading over the
conduct of the animal is instinct! But, nevertheless, holds that
“_instinct_ is in such animals an _unconscious intelligence_.” We much
admire why he did not think proper to cast off from the ancients the
charge of a _puerile idolatry_, on the account of their worship of
_bulls_, _calves_, _alligators_, _snakes_, _beetles_, and _bugs_, for
they must have entertained a somewhat similar notion. But the doctor
goes further, and says, that as the lower grades of the animal world
have this _quality_, in which “the Divine energy seems to act with most
unimpeded power,” so the holiest of men has it also, but consciously and
willingly, and it then becomes his ruling principle, “Divine counsellor,
his never-failing help, a light to his feet, and a lantern to his path.”
(Page 513.) It is quite evident that the doctor’s instinct is the same
with the “unerring conscience,” “the innate principle of light,” “the
moral sense,” “the spiritual power,” “the Divine reason,” “the internal
teaching,” “the perfect light of nature,” and “the Divine afflatus” of
the theologico-abolition speakers and writers of the present day, which,
they say, is the gift of God to every man. This strange error of some of
these writers we have already had occasion to notice. But it is to be
regretted, for the good credit of _religious profession_, that they did
not acknowledge from whom they borrowed the idea; or, will they at this
late day, excuse themselves, and frankly acknowledge they took it, not
from Dr. Hancock, or any other modern, but as a deduction from the
practices of ancient idolatry?

Since we have ventured an opinion on the subject of instinct, we trust
forgiveness for the introduction of that of others.

Our desire is to present such considerations as lead to the conclusion
that men are born into the world with different physical and mental
aptitudes: in short, that their corporeal and intellectual organizations
are not of equal power; or, if some prefer the term, that their
_instincts_ are not of equal extent and activity.

For substantially, upon a contrary hypothesis, are founded all those
beautiful arguments in favour of the entire equality of man. Some whole
systems of political justice are founded upon the proposition that there
is no innate principle; and one class of philosophers argue that, as
there is no innate principle, therefore all men are ushered into the
world under the circumstance of perfect equality; consequently, all the
inequality afterwards found is the result of usurpation and injustice.

Do they forget that organization itself is innate, and that different
organizations must direct the way through different paths? But these
philosophers still persist that there is no such disparity among the
human race whereby the inferiority of one man shall necessarily place
him in subjection to another. This doctrine is perhaps confuted by
practice better than by argument. Counsellor Quibble saw his client
Stultus in the stocks, on which he cries out, “It is contrary to law.
The court has no such power. They cannot do it.” Nevertheless, Stultus
is still in the stocks! But what would it avail, even if all men were
born equals? Could they all stand in the same footsteps, do the same
things, think the same thoughts, and be resolved into a unit? Who does
not perceive the contrary?—but that from their birth they must stand in
different footsteps, walk in different paths, think different things,
and, in the journey of life, arrive at different degrees of wealth,
honour, knowledge, and power?

Men organized into some form of government cannot be equal; because the
very thing, government, proves the contrary: among perfect equals,
government is an impossibility. If laws were prescribed, they could
never be executed until some of these equals shall have greater power
than those who infringe them. Man is never found so holy as to punish
himself for his own impulses. Thus the idea of government among equals
is a silly fiction.

Men without government cannot be equal, because the _strong_ will have
power over the _weak_.

The inequality of men is the progenitor of all civil compact. One man is
strong, another weak; one wise, another foolish: one virtuous, another
vicious: each one yielding himself to a place in the compact, all
acquire additional protection, especially so long as all shall adhere to
the terms of the compact. But the compact itself is the result of the
proposition that the majority shall have more power than the minority,
because they are supposed to have more animal force, and that they hold
the evidence of a more lofty mental development. Here has sprung forth
the doctrine that _the good of the greater part is the good of the
whole_: hence, under this system, an opposing fraction is often
sacrificed to the ruling power. We must here remark that this doctrine
was changed at an early day into, “The good of the ruling power is the
good of the whole.”

Although not a part of our study, we may turn aside here to remark that,
from this _monad_ in the composition of the doctrines of government, did
emanate the idea of all those strange sacrifices that now deform the
pages of ancient idolatry. In its aid the idol divinity vouched its
influence, and the daughter of Ham yielded her new-born to the flaming
embraces of her god. Even now the ancient sources of the Ganges still
pour down their holy waters, are still drinking in an excessive
population from the arms of the Hindoo mother. Nor is this idea only an
ancient thought; it is not half a century since it was broached in one
of the European parliaments to so hedge around the institution of
marriage with thorny impediments, that none excessively poor could
legally propagate. But to our minds these things strangely show forth
the facts that prove “men are not equal.”

But even the lowest grades yield their obedience, and are protected from
greater evils. Even though they may have been so low as to have not been
able to take any part in the formation of the compact, yet they are as
certainly benefited as the most elevated.

Such has been the condition of the race through all time, while
falsehood has often mingled in her ingredients, adding misery to the
degradation of man;—for it is truly observable that falsehood has for
ever led to deeper degradation, to an increased departure from the laws
of civil rule. So far as human intellect has threaded its way along the
path of truth and through the mazes of human depravity, so far has man
improved his condition by increasing his knowledge and power,—while a
reversed condition has ever attended a retrograde movement. May not the
conclusion then be had, such is the ordinance of God! But equality among
men is a chimera, not possible to be reduced to practice, nor desirable
if it could be. They never were so, nor was it intended they ever should
be. Cain and Abel were not equal: God told Cain that if he behaved well,
he should have rule over Abel; but if he did not, he should suffer the
consequences of sin. “Who art thou that repliest against God? Shall the
thing formed say unto him that formed it, Why hast thou made me thus?
Hath not the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one
vessel to honour and another to dishonour?” _Rom._ ix. 20, 21. “Who hath
made thee to differ one from another?” 1 _Cor._ iv. 7. “And the Lord
said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb; and two manner of people
shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger
than the other people, and the older shall _serve_ (יַֽעֲבֹ֥ד _ya avod_,
_be a slave to_) the younger.” _Gen._ xxv. 23. See also _Rom._ ix. 12.
Can the inequality of man be more strongly inculcated? And St. Paul
seems to suggest that such inequality will exist hereafter. “There is
one glory of the sun, another glory of the moon, and another glory of
the stars; for as one star differeth from another star in glory, so also
is the resurrection of the dead.” 1 _Cor._ xv. 41, 42.

The idea that the souls of men are unequal in a future state of
existence seems to be consonant with the faith of most of the Christian
churches. “And his lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful
servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee
ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord. For unto
every one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but
from him that hath not, shall be taken away even that he hath; and cast
ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth.” _Matt._ xxv. 21, 29, 30.

Some politicians say, government is founded on opinion. Be it so; yet
opinion is predicated upon the very incidents of men’s conduct, which,
when analyzed, are found to prove their inequality. So also, when, by
the aid of the compact formed, one individual holds a part of the
community in subjection, such extended rule is dependent on the same
principles as the elementary case. The truth is, human society never
recedes far from elementary influences, notwithstanding all the
artificials in government that ever have or ever can be brought into
use. The conditions to govern and to be in subjection necessarily imply
superiority and inferiority: change these relative qualities, and the
condition of the parties is changed also. But, upon the organization of
society, in all countries and at all times, we find inequality in the
conditions of men, growing out of their social state; distinctions
between them, affecting their personal considerations, and often
disposing of them for life. Thus, in one country a man is born a
monarch, in another a priest of the Lord, a prince, a peer, a noble, a
commoner, a freeman, a serf, a slave. This arrangement of the conditions
of social and civil life, from long habit, may well be said to become
constitutional, and necessary to the happiness of that society, although
thereby one may seem forced to be a tinker and another a tailor. Hence
we infer, inequality among men is the necessary result of the rules of
civil life.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON V.

Justice, as a general term, means all moral duty. One of its rules is,
that we should “love our neighbours as ourselves.” Some men have
construed this to include each individual of the human family. Such
construction we deem to be error. The word “neighbour,” as here used,
includes those virtues which render one good man acceptable to another
and to God. “And who is my neighbour?” “And Jesus answered and said, A
certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves,
which stripped him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance
there came down a certain priest that way, and when he saw him, he
passed by on the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the
place, came and looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a
certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw
him, he had compassion on him, and went to him and bound up his wounds,
pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him
to an inn, and took care of him. And on the morrow, when he departed, he
took out two pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take
care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again I will
repay thee.” _Luke_ x. 30–36.

Who has given a better definition of the word neighbour? And how shall
we esteem him, who, instead of loving such an one as himself, shall
treat him with ingratitude, fraud, and cruelty? “God is angry with the
wicked every day.” _Ps._ vii. 2. If to “love our neighbour as ourselves”
implies that we should love all men equally alike, it also necessarily
will imply a subversion of order, and consequently lead to acts of
injustice, because all men are not equal. “For if any provide not for
his own, and especially for those of his own house, he hath denied the
faith, and is worse than an infidel.” 1 _Tim._ v. 8.

It would be ungrateful and unjust to not save a parent from death in
preference to a stranger—the life of him on whom the life and happiness
of thousands depended, in preference to an obscure individual.

One man may be of more value to me, and to the public, than another,
because he is further removed from being a mere animal. He has more
knowledge, more power, and does dispense more happiness to his
fellow-man.

A very evil man and a good one may be in the vicinity or elsewhere; but
to regard them equally alike is a contradiction of Christian duty. When
we love our neighbour as ourselves, we love the man, his acts, his
character; but when we are taught to love our enemies, the mind reaches
him as a creature of God, our erring fellow-mortal, our brother steeped
in sin—and we look upon him with pity, forgiveness; and yet hate his
qualities and conduct. The cases are quite dissimilar. “Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him.” 1 _John_ ii. 15.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON VI.

Virtue is always an appellant to justice. It is manifested by the acts
of an intelligent being of correct and benevolent motives, contributing
to the general good. Consequently an act, however benevolent may have
been the motive of the actor, cannot be a virtuous act if it have an
evil tendency. Ignorance can never be virtue: so, no man can be virtuous
who acts from a wicked motive, however beneficial may be the result. The
motive must be pure, and the effect good, before the act or the actor is
virtuous. A man, may be virtuous, but in so low a degree as to not merit
the appellation: we must compare what he does, with what he has the
power of doing. The widow’s mite may be an example.

We submit the inquiry—Is not the deduction clear, that men are not
equal—neither physically, religiously, mentally, or morally? Can they
then be so politically? Will not the proposition be correct, that
political equality can never exist with an inequality in these previous
terms?

Raynal has said, we think correctly, “that equality will always be an
unintelligible fiction, so long as the capacities of men are unequal,
and their claims have neither guarantee nor sanction by which they can
be enforced.” “On a dit que nous avions tous les mêmes droits. J'ignore
ce que c'est que les mêmes droits, où il y a inégalitè de talens ou de
force, et nulle garantie, nulle sanction.” _Raynal, Revolution
d'Amerique_, p. 34.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON VII.

The rules of Christianity are always coadjuvant to those of justice. The
least deviation from justice begins to mark the unchristian character.
“Just balances, just weights, a just _epha_ and a just _hin_ shall ye
have.” _Lev._ xix. 36. “But thou shalt have a perfect and just weight, a
perfect and just measure shalt thou have; that thy days may be
lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.” _Deut._ xxv.
15. “Ye shall have a just balance and a just epha, and a just bath.”
_Ezek._ xlv. 10.

“Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne; mercy and truth
shall go before thy face.” _Ps._ lxxxix. 14.

“As I hear I judge, and my judgment is just.”

“Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if
there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on those things.”
_Phil._ iv. 8.

But justice, as an act emanating from the rules of right, is wholly
dependent on the law: with the abolition of all law, justice or its
opposite would cease to exist.

We are aware there are a class who say that Christians have nothing to
do with the law of God; that they believe in Christ, and are excused
from obedience to the law; that they are not under the law, but the
gospel; that the law to them is of none effect; that the laws of God as
revealed to Moses have been repealed;—or rather they seem to have but a
confused idea of what they do believe touching the matter, while they
fashion a theory of Divine providence to suit their own fancies, and
substantially, by their own hands, fashion Jehovah into an idol,
although not of wood or stone, yet as much in conformity to their own
notions; perhaps but little thinking that their notions may have arisen
from pride or ignorance. We cannot promise any benefit by addressing
such. He who dares take the character of Jehovah into keeping, selecting
from among the manifestations of his providence, and decide this law to
be repealed, or this only in force, would seem to be as far beyond the
reach of human reason as his position is beyond the bounds of moral
sense.

But let us, who claim not so high prerogative, who are able only to
notice some faint emanations of the Divine mind, as He has seen fit to
reveal himself to our feeble perceptions,—who have been taught by the
exercise of faith to perceive them in the holy books of his record of
what is past, and the present display of his power and rule in the
government of the world,—take counsel together, and examine and compare
the teachings they may give of the unchangeableness of, and our relation
with, the laws of God.

The Creator of things may be deemed able to impose such relations
between the things created as he may judge suitable to effect the object
had in their creation. Such relations we call law; because, as we notice
things, they are the rules by which they act or are acted upon. So far
as human reason has been able to examine, such laws are as unchangeable
as the Deity who imposed them. To such certainty and unchangeableness we
give the name of truth, and hence we say God is truth, having reference
to the unchangeableness of his nature and of his laws.

With the idea of the changeability of his laws, of necessity must be
associated the idea of the changeability of God himself. The wickedness
of such argument is announced in its tendency to the dethronement of
Jehovah. It was the very argument used by the serpent in Eden.

The conclusion is, it is inconsistent with the Deity that his laws
should be repealed; the same circumstance, under which his law has been
noticed to manifest itself, reappearing, and it is again developed. They
are the laws of eternity. They are the voice of God. The doctrine of the
gospel is bold and plain upon this subject.

“Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment holy and just and good.”
_Rom._ vii. 12.

“Now we know that what things soever the law saith, it saith to them who
are under the law, that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world
may become guilty before God. Therefore by the deeds of the law, there
shall no flesh be justified in his sight, for the law is the knowledge
of sin.” “Do we then make void the law through faith? God forbid; yea,
we establish the law.” _Rom._ iii. 19, 20, 31.

“Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law, for sin is the
transgression of the law.” 1 _John_ iii. 4.

“Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets; I am not
come to destroy, but to fulfil. Whosoever therefore shall break one of
these least commandments, and shall teach so to do, he shall be called
the least in the kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach
them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven.” _Matt._
v. 17, 19.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON VIII.

Another of the rules of Christian justice which will be found applicable
to our subject, is, “Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men
should do unto you, do ye even so unto them: for this is the law and the
prophets.” _Matt._ vii. 12.

The remarks made upon the first rule are in some measure applicable to
this.

The desire of something to be done must be founded on good reason and
conformable to justice. Folly ever marks an unreasonable desire; and
that desire is always unjust which merely reaches to the taking from
another without the corresponding desire to reciprocate. Such desires
are changed instantly into the action of the mind called “_coveting_,”
and are most strictly forbidden, for this good reason, that very action
of the mind is a mental theft; and the moral wickedness in the
individual “coveting” is the same as though he were practically a thief.
But, further, the desire must be predicated upon a presumable condition:
for, by the rule, it would be unjust to desire that which it would not
be possible to have done to us; so it would be to desire any other
impossibility. Suppose A. should desire that you would make him rich,
does it follow that he must make you rich when he has no ability to do
so? The case is not founded upon a presumable condition, nor, on good
reason, upon a desire to reciprocate, consequently unjust.

But suppose A. feels anxious for your warm regard for his prosperity in
his lawful understandings, here the desire reaches to nothing unjust, to
no disorder in society, or beyond your power, and clearly within his
power to reciprocate; he is then bound by the rule to feel a warm desire
for your prosperity in all your lawful undertakings. And who does not
perceive that if one desires your good wishes, he must of necessity feel
good wishes for you. Whether the desire imply merely a mental or
physical action, similar examples will illustrate. The rule is truly a
golden one, and, so far as acted upon, binds society together in peace
and good-will.

It is quite analogous to the twenty-fourth maxim of Confucius, which
reads thus: “Do unto another as thou would be dealt with thyself; thou
only needest this law alone: it is the foundation and principle of all
the rest.” And is in spirit with the fifty-third maxim of the same
philosopher: “Acknowledge the benefits by the return of other benefits;
but never revenge injuries.” We trust the rule is none the less sacred
because it was revealed to man at an early period.

Let us illustrate the correctness of these views by the inconsistency of
those opposite. Others say that if we were in slavery we should wish to
be made free, therefore we are bound by this rule to set free all who
are in slavery now.

If this be true, in order that the whole circle of action may be
consistent, there must be another link added to the chain; hence we find
that the advocates of this interpretation say, also, “that same inward
principle which teaches a man what he is bound to do for others, teaches
equally, and at the same instant, what others are bound to do to him.”
_Channing_, vol. ii. p. 33. This proposition inevitably follows the
preceding; for who is he that can say among men that that is a good rule
which is not reciprocal.

This imaginary rule would perhaps be less obnoxious in case of universal
equality. For, in that case, we may suppose an universal equality of
desire, without which one wishes one thing and another its opposite. But
so long as God rules, universal equality can only happen in case of
universal perfection, in which case neither sin nor slavery can exist,
and in which case the argument will not be wanted. But the rule as left
by Jesus Christ was made for man in his fallen state.

But again, if the interpretation of our opponents be true, then the
proposition may be resolved into this state:—A. is as much bound by the
desire of B. as by his own, and the whole world is fully bound by both.
But the whole world individually desire adversely to each other, yet
each desire is to be harmoniously gratified. Let each one make out the
examples; we think they will find them extremely ridiculous in the
result. The doctrine involves plainly the most gross contradictions, and
is therefore a naked nullity.

Again, if it be the law of God, that because we desire a thing,
therefore we are bound to give that thing to another, it implies that
the desire was the manifestation of God’s will; in short, that the
desire was a portion of his revealed law; consequently, whatever any man
desires is a portion of inspiration. Hence Channing says, (page as
above,) “his conscience, in revealing the moral law, does not reveal a
law for himself only, but speaks as a universal legislator.” Now it
follows, that, as each man desires an opposite, therefore there are as
many opposite systems of the laws of God as there are individuals who
desire them; in other words, it would be making God’s law just what each
one desired it to be. Thus making the law of God a perfect nullity.

But again, if the interpretation of the golden rule, as employed by them
who use it to inculcate immediate emancipation, be true, then it
contradicts the spirit of the command, “Thou shalt not covet thy
neighbour’s house. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s wife; nor his
_man-servant_, (וְעַבְדּ֤וֹ _ve abeddo_, _male slave_,) nor his
_maid-servant_, (וַֽאֲמָתוֹ֙ _va amatho_, _female slave_,) nor his ox,
nor his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbour’s.” _Exod._ xx. 17.
Here the word “covet” is used to mean a strong desire without the wish
or ability to reciprocate; therefore without good reason—consequently
unjust. It is the same exercise of the mind that leads a man to acts of
theft that is here forbidden: an exercise of the mind that leads to many
disorders in society, and hence this command. The command does not
extend to him who desires his neighbour’s house, man-servant,
maid-servant, ox, or ass, upon the condition that the desire is founded
upon good reason. The neighbour having the will and power to part with,
and he who desires the power and will to reciprocate, these
qualifications bring the desire within the purview of the golden rule,
and remove all tendency to disorders in society. To buy and sell with
the view to reciprocate gain, has a very strong tendency to bind society
together in peace and good-will.

In the lesson of the golden rule, the Saviour gave a check to impetuous
and improper desires,—to the wicked and improper hankering after the
substance or condition of others,—by bringing to view the propriety of
performing themselves such acts as they demanded of others: that they
should prove themselves worthy of the solicited favour by a reciprocity
of feeling and action.

This we think evident from what precedes: “If then ye, being evil, know
how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your
Father that is in heaven give good things unto them that ask him.”

The doctrine of the golden rule seems to be often misunderstood. We
quote from the great Selden: “Guided by justice and mercy, do unto all
men as you would have them do to you, were your circumstances and theirs
reversed. If the prisoner should ask the judge whether he would be
content to be hanged were he in his case, he would answer, No! Then says
the prisoner, Do as you would be done to. Neither of them must do as
private men; but the judge must do by him as they have publicly agreed:
that is, both judge and prisoner have consented to the law, that if
either of them steal, he shall be hanged.” _Selden._

“If the wickedest wretches among yourselves, the most peevish, weak, and
ill-natured of you all, will readily give good gifts to their children
when they cry for them, how much rather will the great God, infinite in
goodness, bestow blessings on his children who endeavour to resemble him
in his perfections, and for that ask his grace and other spiritual and
heavenly blessings;” but God grants these blessings alone upon this
condition, that, “animated by his goodness, you study to express your
gratitude for it by your integrity and kindness to your
fellow-creatures, treating them in every instance as you would think it
reasonable to be treated by them, if you were in their circumstances,
and they in yours; for this is, in effect, a summary and abstract of all
the human and social virtues recommended in the moral precepts of the
_law_ and the _prophets_, and it was one of the greatest ends of both to
bring men to this equitable and amiable temper.” _Doddridge._

Such are the comments of these men upon this subject.

But permit us to remark that the word _man-servant_, in the command just
quoted, is translated from the Hebrew עֶבֶד _ebed_, and means what we
mean by the word _slave_. And let it be remembered that, in the
decalogue, in one of the original laws of God the Father, delivered to
Moses from Sinai, the slave is classed with the ox, the ass, in short,
with all other property, as an article of possession; and that we are
commanded not to have a desire to change the possession unjustly. And
that, by a fair interpretation of the golden rule issued by the living
lips of Jesus Christ, if we reasonably and justly desire to change the
possession, we must honestly reciprocate the full value thereof.

Let the candid world, the truth-searching philosopher, and the humble
Christian examine, and say whether these conclusions are not founded on
reason, justice, and the laws of God.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON IX.

We suppose all Christians will agree that God is a Spirit eternal and
infinite, unchangeable and unaccountable, omnipotent, omnipresent, and
omniscient, most wise, most true, most holy, and most good, without
beginning or without end. Such from eternity were his qualities, and
such to eternity they will remain.

In contemplation of these characteristics of Jehovah, we are led to
deduce that God must originally and essentially within himself be
eternally happy. “My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure.” _Isa._ xlvi. 10. If it is proper to say that God has desires,
then it must be his desire that his “counsel shall stand,” because it is
inconsistent with happiness to be unable to gratify desire or fail in
counsel; besides, it would prove some deficiency of power. Before God
created some other being or thing, he existed alone. Can it be said he
had wants? For what purpose then did he create other things? What object
had he in view? The object must have been worthy of calling forth his
action. What other object could have been worthy of his action than
himself? Because his work must in all its parts reflect his power, his
every quality, we must therefore conclude God is the sole and ultimate
end of every thing he does. If all the labours of Deity were not solely
for himself, then of the greatness and rectitude of many of his
providences and acts, perhaps none could ever be comprehended or even
perceived by mortals. For God legislates not merely for a city, a tribe
or nation, but for the universe: not for an hour, a day or a thousand
years, but for eternity. “I know that whatsoever God doeth it shall be
for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it; and God
doeth it, that men shall fear before him.” _Eccl._ iii. 14.

If God himself is the ultimate end of all things, then that moral
philosopher, a poor, ignorant man, a worm of but momentary existence,
mistakes, who teaches in substance that true religion, that is, worship
of God, consists in an advantageous, successful, and well-directed
selfishness in favour of himself; for, upon that principle the vilest
enemy may take shelter under the cloak of his adversary,—but will he be
the more worthy? If God is the supreme object of creation, then this
righteous selfishness must be in extreme opposition to God. There are
important deductions emanating from these reflections, which we are
unwilling to deprive others the pleasure of drawing out for themselves.
The use God makes of his creations proves the end for which he made
them. We might rest here; but we have heard some say that God’s object
in creation was the happiness of all his sentient creatures. If so, then
they all would be happy; which is not the fact. Human misery is the
first object we behold everywhere. True, man can never have a very
competent idea of God. His powers of thought are too low; his
associations too trivial. But if the object God had in creation was the
development of his own glory, then there can be no greater conformity
unto God than there is knowledge of his character. Hence, where we see,
hear, and learn the most of God, we become the most pure and holy.
Holiness depends on a knowledge of God. The reason is obvious: a holy
man is a more perfect exhibition of the Divine character. If so, then
the happiness of man depends upon his perception of God. Therefore man
can never be happy only in proportion as he is holy. But if the glory of
God is the ultimate end of creation, and if the happiness of his
rational creatures depends upon their perception of him, then the
ultimate end secures in the highest possible degree their happiness.

The great cause of human misery will be found to proceed from the
unquenchable desire in the unregenerate man to rebel against God—to set
up a government of his own, more wise than he conceives the government
of God to be; in fact, he does not perceive his government, for he has
no perception of him.

We might deduce an argument in proof that a perception of God is
happiness to man, from the formation of his mental powers. To whom does
it not give deep distress to behold what we call talent and virtue hid
in obscurity and bowed down beneath oppression and want? To whom does it
not give great delight to perceive a lucid manifestation of these
qualities? The great object in the individual creation of man is his
improvement; his advance towards an approximation of being able to see
God as he is. The business of angels and saints in heaven is to
intensely seek after a more full knowledge of God.

If the happiness of man is thus dependent upon his perception of the
greatness and power of God, then we may conclude that a continued
manifestation of it is essential to him in producing before his mind an
increasing brilliancy of view of the great Jehovah.

The order and gradation in the power bestowed on the different objects
his hand has made, displaying his foresight in the work of creation,
from the seraph down to the veriest mite, would seem an arrangement that
might furnish the mind of man or an angel with never-ending study, with
a never-ending employment to find out God.

If the wide and permanent diversity of character and condition in the
present world, and in that which is to come,—if the relations we find
between man and man,—if the great sacrifice for sin and the redemption
wrought therefrom,—if the eternal wrath of Jehovah against the
incorrigible sinner, all in combination manifest the greatest display of
the power and perfections of God;—in short, if the providences of God
collectively, as we see them manifested in the world, are the true
developments of his character, then it will follow that they all, in
combination, terminate in the greatest good, and, in their external
consequences, subserve to the greatest extent of happiness to which the
human mind, in the pursuit of its only legitimate employment, is now or
ever will be susceptible.

The first deduction is that sin must always be accompanied with misery,
but that holiness is as surely accompanied with happiness, no matter
what may be the physical condition. It may not be improper here to
advert to one of the characteristics of our intellectual constitution,
which is this: whatever is presented to the mind calling on its energy
and our physical action can never be approached by us with any tolerable
degree of perfectedness unless by constant and long-continued
repetitions; whence we say, “practice makes perfect.” Whereas, whatever
is presented wherein we are wholly passive, repetition and familiarity
are in constant action to diminish, weaken, and wash out the impressions
first made. Examples in proof of the first position are found in the
necessary and long-continued exertions before we become adepts in the
arts and practices of civilized life. In the African savage, often, many
generations of constant exertion in the same direction are required
before that race is found to have attained such a state of
perfectibility in these things as is required to sustain a position in
civilized life; and it is to this they owe their state of pupilage among
the civilized races.

Examples of the second position are found in the ready and quick
adaptation of ourselves to the condition in which we are placed: even
our senses, from constant repetition and familiarity, often cease to
loathe that which was obnoxious. The mind to which the starry firmament
is first unfolded will be filled with astonishment and wonder; but the
familiarity of a constant gaze does not even excite an emotion.

This characteristic of the human intellect gives strong proof of the
power and wisdom of God. For through its means, all in civilized and
Christian life and practice, from the king upon the throne down to the
slave, are rendered equally happy and contented with their condition.
Therefore he is not a correct philosopher who measures the happiness of
a lower grade in life by his own feelings.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON X.

From consideration of our previous lesson, we should make the deduction
that Christianity is incompatible with savage life. The Christian can no
longer be a savage, notwithstanding the habits of civilization may be
yet too weakly established to guaranty against lapses to former habits.
The habits of the savage must be changed so as to approximate civilized
life before Christianity can be successfully taught him. Hence one error
into which the missionary and the teacher of the Negro sometimes fall.
They confine their labours to instructions concerning the more abstruse
doctrines of Christianity; but the savage has no capability to
comprehend them: his mind has never been prepared for their reception.

The child can never comprehend the laws of astronomy till he has first
learned mathematics. The savage must first be made to comprehend the
necessity that individual wants must be supplied by individual labour,
and all the consequent attendants of such a state of things, before the
possibility can exist that he will comprehend the higher moral duties.
Because, without that, he remains passive under such teachings; and in
such case, the more familiar such lessons are made to him the less they
affect him. Instances are not wanting where such a state of facts exists
in circles of society where it would seem they should be the least
expected! and from whence the great truth is deducible, that mental and
physical idleness is a most deadly poison to good morals and
intellectual improvement, and the conduct of such men is always found
searching the way back to a deteriorated condition.

The animal propensities require to be forced into habits contributive to
the relations and duties of civilized and Christian life. The mind must
be made to comprehend what our relative duties are, both experimentally
and habitually, and also the impossibility of their being dispensed
with, before it will be able to perceive the laws which bind our action
to their performance. And it may be here remarked, that a perception of
these laws sufficiently strong to influence the conduct of a man will at
least place him in the position of Agrippa before Paul. The history of
man does not point to an instance where an individual has regenerated
himself from the depth of human degradation, except under the pupilage
and control of a superior wisdom.

Upon this state of facts was founded the necessity of a Saviour for the
children of men.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON XI.

The lowness of individual condition, in relation to our fellow men, or
to human society generally, is not incompatible with the humility of the
Christian in the performance of our duty to man or God, because the
Christian is not required to display intellectual powers which he does
not possess, nor possessions not his own. If he has but one talent, its
occupation alone is required,—the desire to bestow one mite marks his
character. It is therefore a very great error which some of the
abolitionists seem to suppose, that, because a man is a slave, he is
thereby prevented from being a Christian or hindered from the worship of
God. On the contrary, so essential is humility to the Christian
character, that Jesus Christ, in a lesson to his disciples, says,
“Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant,” δοῦλος,
_doulos_, _slave_; a figure, a sentence, which the Divine Being could
never have pronounced, if slavery was inconsistent with his doctrine,
either as to the condition of the slave or that of the master. With
great similarity of figure and sameness of the humility in the
worshipper of God, David addresses Jehovah: “O Lord, truly I am thy
servant,” (עַ֫בְדֶךָ _abedeka, thy slave_,) “I am thy servant (עַ֫בְדָךָ
_abedeka, thy slave_) and the son of thy _hand-maid_,” בֶּן־אֲתֶ֑ךָ
_amatheka, thy female slave_,) “thou hast loosed my bonds.” Compare with
_John_ viii. 36, also 1 _Cor._ vii. 22.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XII.

The institutions of slavery and Christianity can never be antagonistic.
Slavery enforces obedience in the inferior to a superior power, for the
reciprocal benefit of both. Any deviation from the law of God pertinent
to the case, to some extent lessens the benefit and diminishes what
should have been the quotient of the general good. Slavery is therefore,
however rude in its obedience or commands, an attempt at civilized life;
and we may therefore judge of the amount of its abuses by its greater or
less success in the cultivation of those virtues incident to that
condition. True, this result is scarcely perceptible where the most
elevated are still deeply degraded, as is for ever the case in all those
regions where the light of Christianity has never been diffused. And it
is from these facts we find the providence of God to be that slavery, in
such regions, is always seeking abroad for a more enlightened master.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XIII.

The path of the Christian is described as strait and narrow; in it there
are no broad provisions for licentiousness, immorality, crime, or sin of
any kind, nor, at suitable distances, are there private apartments
prepared, wherein cunning expediency may change her apparel; nor will
the poor traveller be perplexed with ambiguous directions, whereby any
thing is to be performed contrary to the plain understanding of the law.
But each step therein must be in conformity to the directions of him who
made, knows, and governs all.

How feeble then shall prove the man, swelled with the pride of his own
supposed holiness, who shall attempt to straighten, alter, and make
better this highway to heaven! “For who hath known the mind of the Lord?
or who hath been his counsellor? or who hath first given to him, and it
shall be recompensed unto him again? For of him, and through him, and to
him are all things!” _Rom._ xi. 34–36. On every step of this footway to
heaven, made for poor sinners to walk in, for the slave as well as for
the crowned head, are engraven, in letters of the light of God himself,
directions for the poor traveller, so that “the wayfaring men, though
fools, shall not err therein.” _Isa._ xxxv. 8. And let us now read some
of these records, and see how they comport with the doctrine of
universal equality as involved in the labours before us:

“Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers; for there is no power
but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God.

“Whosoever therefore resisteth the power resisteth the ordinance of God;
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

“For rulers are not a terror to good works but to the evil. Wilt thou
then not be afraid of the power, do that which is good, and thou shalt
have praise of the same.

“But if thou do that which is evil, be afraid; for he beareth not the
sword in vain; for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute
wrath upon him that doeth evil.

“Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake.

“For, for this cause pay ye tribute also; for they are God’s ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

“Render therefore to all their dues: tribute to whom tribute is due;
custom to whom custom; fear to whom fear; honour to whom honour.” _Rom._
xiii. 1–8.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XIV.

Before we close our present Study, let us survey for a moment the
position of the truly Christian character. Let us see and examine a
position, whether filled by _lord_, _subject_, or _slave_, that seems so
surrounded with hope, so particularly the focus of all the irradiations
of heaven, that the distinctions and miseries of human life, even wrongs
done us, are blotted out by the brilliancy of their illumination.

But let us view it in connection with man in an unchristianized state,
under the control of the appetites, passions, and influences of an
unredeemed world; and it may be we shall behold with wonder the
operation of that redemption by which his felicity is made steadfast.

The uncertainty and vanity of human pursuits have for ever been a
subject of remark.

And, if we examine the motives of human conduct and see the fallacious
objects of human hope, we always perceive the constant attendance of
pain, misery, and woe.

As the visions of early life are relinquished, we transfer to the future
that confidence which has been for ever betrayed by the past, and as
these illusions are successively dispelled, new objects continue to fill
the imagination, till the very moment when all our prospects are
involved in the darkness of the tomb. Nor think ye that the miseries
that flow from ambition, avarice, voluptuousness, and open crime, are
the only ones that attend us. Each refinement of life is accompanied
with its own peculiar symptom. Besides, there are sufferings that no
foresight can foresee, which no excellence can elude.

The imperfection of a master, or of him placed in power, may bring to
his slave or other dependant unutterable wo!

The lassitude of sickness, the agony of its pain, the distresses, the
imperfections of our friends, their alienation from us, and our final
separation from the objects of our tenderest regard, would transform
paradise itself into a wilderness of wo, did not the light of God keep
it for ever illumined.

Even could we escape from all the external causes of wo, yet the waters
of bitterness would continue to flow from the never-ceasing sources of
sorrow that lie deep in our own bosoms buried.

We are therefore constrained, forced to conclude, that the balance of
our moral constitution has been destroyed; and by the derangement of a
system once harmoniously attuned, our principles of action, no longer in
unison, are thrown into perpetual collision: maintaining no longer their
original or their relative strength, they lead us into perpetual error,
and by their conflicts produce a moral discord incompatible with the
happiness of man. “For the creature was made subject to vanity, not
willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope.”
“Because the creature itself shall be delivered from the bondage
(δουλειαςδουλειας, _slavery_) of corruption into the glorious liberty of
the children of God.” _Rom._ viii. 20.

Had we been made acquainted merely with the fall of man and its effect
upon his moral constitution, we should have still been bewildered in the
perplexities of our condition. A consciousness of guilt would have
filled our minds with apprehension, and the fear of the Divine
displeasure would have mingled its bitterness with every gratification,
would have seized upon every hope. Like Cain, we should have cried out,
“Our punishment is greater than we can bear,” and solicited the black
mark of slavery as an antidote to threatened and instant death.

But the mercy of God, which always tempers even the natural events to
the delicate sensibilities of our physical perceptions, concealed from
our view the desolation of our condition, till, in the maturity of his
counsels, he saw fit to blend with the discovery the bright visions “of
the glory about to be revealed.” _Rom._ viii. 18.

The heathen nations, although painfully alive to the brevity of human
life, and deeply impressed with the vanity of our hopes, were equally
ignorant of our fallen nature, and of the holiness of that God before
whom we are to be adjudged. Their conception of an existence after death
was cheerless and indistinct, although, even at this late day, among the
most lofty intellects of their time, we can now perceive a longing
desire after something to them unknown, a hankering for the proof of a
spiritual immortality. Thus, while there was but little in their
anticipations of a future state to excite their apprehension or alarm,
there was but little to stimulate their hope.

The vulgar were sometimes alarmed by the majestic terrors of the
Thunderer, and the philosopher was sometimes penetrated by those
perfections which he was led to ascribe to the mighty Mind.

Yet the wisest sages of antiquity do not seem to have perceived in human
guilt an internal malignity, which no penitence can expiate, nor blood
of dying victims wash away.

If some glimpses of the miseries and dangers in which sin had involved
us were disclosed to the favoured few, yet visions of prophecy dispelled
the gloom; for, “where there is no vision the people perish.” _Prov._
xxix. 18.

It was not till our Saviour had sealed the charter of our hope, that our
condition, with a full view of its desolation, was proclaimed to a
fallen world. A knowledge of the disease and the remedy has in mercy
kept pace with each other. If we learn that the “creature was made
subject to vanity,” we also learn that he was made so in hope.

Now, when we behold our condition, although we see evidences of our
fallen state, of the degradation of our intellectual and moral
faculties, yet we see also a provision of mercy by which the creature
may be delivered from “the bondage (δουλειας, _slavery_) of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the children of God.”

Viewed in connection with this sublime truth, the value of human
interests, the pain of human sufferings, and the grief of human wrongs
disappear; yea, vanish from the eye of the true believer. The grandeur
of his future prospects dignifies his present state, however humble. His
present evils, which might overwhelm him if attached to his ultimate
condition, lose all their bitterness when converted by redeeming love
into mere lessons of moral discipline. The pain is softened by the
endearment of paternal tenderness, and he feels and knows that they will
only accompany the mere infancy of his being.

The poor, humble, but Christian slave, hears constantly the lessons of
Titus, and is happy in his obedience to his own master, that he may
please him well in all things, watchful to not contradict, nor purloin
from any one, and careful to show all good fidelity, that he may adorn
the doctrine of God. He feels that no one has a deeper interest in that
grace; for it hath equally appeared to all men.

He remembers his fellow-slaves of Colosse, and while with singleness of
eye he heartily serves his earthly master, he feels that the act is
ennobled, and is transferred to be an act of devotion and obedience to
the great Jehovah.

Sympathy carries him back to his Corinthian brethren, in common with
whom he feels no anxious care to change the condition in which he was
called, for while he is content to abide where God has placed him, he
knows that he has been purchased by the blood of Christ, and promoted to
the rank of a freeman of the Lord.

With his fellow-slaves of Ephesus, he may tremble with fear lest his
obedience to his master shall not be performed with good-will and
singleness of heart, as unto Christ himself, for he knows that God has
not required of him merely eye-service; yet he also knows that
Christians, whether bond or free in this world, will hereafter be
remembered of God for whatever good they do. Yea, he yields himself to
the exhortations of Timothy, and accounts his own master worthy of all
honour and obedience, that the name of God and his doctrine should not
be blasphemed; nor does he feel the less reverence for his believing
master, but rather does his service with alacrity as to a brother, and
with heart-felt joy, because he is a faithful and beloved partaker of
the benefits of his labour.

And when he hears men, whose ignorance of God has caused them to be
puffed up with the idea of their own importance and purity, evidently
filled with pride, as though they could teach God a more holy
government, attempting to exhort and teach them a different doctrine, he
feels, he knows that such are not only evil and bad men, but ignorant
ones, such as dote about questions, and strifes of words, which have no
other tendency than to fill the mind with envy, strife, railing, and
evil surmises, such as are among men of corrupt minds, among men who are
destitute of the truth, and among men who suppose that gain is
godliness. He will view such men, however thoughtless they may be of
their true position or sincere in their belief, as standing in the
position of the serpent in Eden. Their lessons to him are disobedience
to God. From such he will withdraw himself; yea, he will fly from them
as from a deadly poison, because disobedience to God for ever ends in
ruin and death. But from Timothy he learns contentment, for, as he
brought nothing into the world with him, and as he can most certainly
carry nothing out, so, having food and raiment, he will be content, and
especially so as contentment and godliness are great gain.

And finally he hears as it were a trumpet sounding from the very gates
of heaven, and looking, he beholds Peter standing there; he hears a
still small voice, the voice of Jesus Christ, saying, “Thou art Peter,
and on this rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it, and I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven.” _Matt._ xvi. 18, 19. And then Peter, raising his arm in the
direction of the Gentile nations, says to the slaves: “Be subject to
your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to
the froward: for this is thank-worthy, if a man for conscience towards
God endure grief, suffering wrongfully. For what glory is it, if, when
ye be buffeted for your faults, ye take it patiently? But if, when ye do
well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable to
God. For even hereunto were ye called; because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an example, that ye should follow his steps, who did no
sin, neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judgeth righteously; who his own self bare our sins
in his own body on the tree, that we, being dead to sins, should live
unto righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed. For ye were as
sheep gone astray, but are now returned unto the Shepherd and Bishop of
your souls.”


                           ------------------

                               LESSON XV.

From the immense disproportion between our finite minds and the infinite
objects of future hope, our conceptions of the disimbodied spirit must
necessarily be feeble. But while we anticipate the promised freedom of
the celestial world, the disenthralment of our intellectual faculties,
and the deliverance of our moral powers from all corruption, the mind
becomes more and more habituated to the scenes thus disclosed, and even
reaches to prospects of resplendent beauty; to visions of unclouded
truth; to the solution of the little difficulties of our own earthly
trials; to the evolutions of the Divine character in connection with our
little planet, and even to that infinitude that mocks the bounds of time
and space.

Thus the pious Christian, who meditates upon God and the heavens, the
work of his hand, feels a divine influence spread over his soul, while
the active and the retired, the ardent and the timid, the philosopher
whose mind is illumined by the varied lights of science, and the pious
_slave_, whose researches are confined to the sayings of some unlettered
expositor, will each cherish anticipations congenial to his peculiar
state of mind. Yet all will grow in grace; all will rise above the level
of temporal delights; and all will embrace in their expanding
conceptions the mighty import of that glorious promise, that “eye hath
not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it entered into the heart of man,
the things that God hath prepared for them that love him,” 1 _Cor._ ii.
9, till elevated so far above earthly associations, that each can say,
“I shall be satisfied when I awake in thy likeness.” _Ps._ xvii. 15.

What degree of moral likeness will gradually be produced by a near
contemplation of unveiled perfection is reserved for eternity to
disclose. But the time will at length come when to every sincere
Christian and true disciple, dazzled by the refulgence that will break
upon his astonished sight, Jesus Christ will address the language of
affection, as he did to Martha: “Said I not unto thee that if thou
wouldst believe thou shouldst see the glory of God?” _John_ xi. 40.

“Then we all, with open face, beholding, as in a glass, the glory of
God, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory.” 2 _Cor._
iii. 18.

Such, then, is the picture and such the prospect of the Christian
character; and well may Christians, even the slave, “Reckon that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed.” _Rom._ viii. 18.

From the monarch down, viewed from the distance of eternity, man
occupies but a point. All earthly distinctions become so small that
nothing short of the eye of omnipotence can see them. The same language
describes, and the same God will prepare their rest.

The Christian slave feels exalted even while on earth, for he is well
persuaded “that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
nor power, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor
depth, nor any creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of
God.” _Rom._ viii. 38.

If for a few days the afflicted Christian and _slave_ “wander in the
wilderness in a solitary way;” if “hungry and thirsty, their souls faint
in them,” he is yet “hastening to a city of habitations.” _Ps._ cvii. 4,
5, 7.

If even the sun of his earthly hopes be set, yet he is hastening to a
country where “thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon
withdraw itself; for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and the
days of thy mourning shall be ended.” _Isa._ lx. 20.

With such views the heart is elevated above the pains and miseries of
this transitory world to the contemplation of hope celestial.

The mere philosopher, who views the mutilated structure of the moral
world, sees no renovating principle to reorganize its scattered
fragments. He mourns with unavailing sorrow over the ruins of his race,
and chills with horror at the prospect of his own decay. But the
Christian sees a fairer earth and a more radiant heaven. And should the
poor slave, forgetful of this high destiny of his Christian character,
and of his ultimate home, feeling, like Hagar, the slave of Sarah, the
hand of his mistress dealing hardly by him, and, like her, attempt a
remedy by flight; like her, he will hear the voice of God, saying,
“Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hand.” _Gen._ xvi.
9.

Like her, in humble submission, he obeys the command, and prays, “O
Lord, correct me,” for “I know that the way of man is not in himself it
is not in man that walketh to direct his steps.” _Jer._ x. 23.

In the miseries and vanities with which he is surrounded, the Christian
only sees proofs of a fallen, not of a hopeless state. He, like old
Æneas, is seeking and looking for a home in a foreign land, and, like
him, constantly requires the interposition of some friendly providence
to warn him that he is still distant from the destined shores.

         Mutandæ sedes; non hæc tibi littora suasit,
         Delius, aut Cretæ jussit considere Apollo.—_2d Ænead._

Like the Israelites, he has pitched his tent in a wilderness of sin, and
feels grateful for those afflictions that reiterate the admonition:
“Arise and depart, for this is not your rest.” _Micah_ ii. 10.

He knows that “this corruptible will put on incorruption, that this
mortal will put on immortality, and that as he has borne the image of
the earthly, he shall also bear the image of the heavenly.” See 1 _Cor._
xv. 49, 53.

Why then should our hearts sink in sadness, because, as we have seen,
sin has destroyed the balance of moral power among men,—even the
foundation on which their universal equality could exist, whence some
races of men have gone deep down in the pit of human degradation, until
the man and the brute are found in the same animal tenement.

Such is the poisonous nature of sin, that the heart that deviseth wicked
imaginations always finds “feet running swiftly to ruin.” See _Prov._
vi. 18.

But God hath promised that the remnant of Israel shall not speak lies:
“Neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth, for they
shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.” _Zeph._ iii.
12, 13.

But the ways of God are not as the ways of man; he makes his enemies
build his throne.

Therefore, be ye not deceived, for “there shall be false teachers among
you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord
that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction.” 2 _Pet._
ii. 1.

Study and pray to improve the powers that God hath given, while you
compare the things that be with the causes and designs of Providence;
and while you note that “the evil bow before the good, and the wicked at
the gates of the righteous,” note also that “the way of the ungodly
shall perish.” They shall be “like the chaff which the wind driveth
away.” For “the hand of the diligent shall bear rule; but the slothful
shall be under tribute.” “He that hath not sells himself to him that
hath.” Therefore, “the borrower is _servant_ to the lender,” and
wherefore, “_wisdom_ is better than rubies;” for “by me princes rule,
and nobles, even all the judges of the earth. I love them that love me,
and those that seek me early shall find me. Riches and honour are with
me: yea, durable riches and righteousness.”

But God hath promised that “the whole earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.” _Isa._ xi. 9.
Therefore, so long as the tares and the wheat shall grow together, “Wait
ye upon me, saith the Lord, until the day that I will rise up to the
prey: for my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble
the kingdoms to pour out upon them mine indignation, even all my fierce
anger; for all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.
For then will I turn to the people a pure language that they may all
call on the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. From beyond
the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, even the daughter of my
_dispersed_, (בַּת־פוּצַ֔י _Bath Putsi, the daughter of Phut, the most
degraded of the African tribes_,) shall bring mine offering.” _Zeph._
iii. 8–10.

The slavery of the African tribes to those of the true faith is here
clearly announced, and the great benefit of their conversion to the
worship of the true God proclaimed as an abundant reason.

Thus Isaiah, speaking of the house of Israel, the prototype of the
church of God, says—“Thus saith the Lord, The labour of Egypt, and the
merchandise of Ethiopia and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over
unto thee, and they shall be thine; they shall come after thee; in
chains they shall come over, they shall fall down unto thee; they shall
make supplication unto thee, saying, Verily, God is in thee, and there
is no God” _beside_. _Isa._ xlv. 14.

And these people, in a state of pupilage, are thus referred to by
_Zephaniah_: “I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and
poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord.”

God ever requires of the powerful the protection of the weak, of the
more learned the instruction of the ignorant, and of the more wise the
government of those who cannot govern themselves.

“For so hath the Lord commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a
light to the Gentiles, that thou shouldest be for salvation unto the
ends of the earth.” _Acts_ xiii. 47.




                  ------------------------------------

                                Study VI


                           ------------------

                               LESSON I.

Sin is any want of a conformity to the law of God. Man was created free
from sin. He was placed under the government of laws adapted to his
condition. But a want of conformity to any item of such law necessarily
disorganized and deranged some portion of his original condition. Let us
cast a hasty view at the operation of these laws. It is contrary to the
law of God that a man should put his hand in the fire; when he does so,
his condition is somewhat physically changed, and he is in trouble.

It is contrary to the law of God that a man should bear false testimony;
he having done so, his condition is changed mentally, and his troubles
increase.

It is contrary to the law of God that a man should remain ignorant; he
doing so, is not in the condition of him who has multiplied and
replenished his mental and physical capabilities: he is less capable, he
has less power.

The law of God is all powerful, and will be executed. The punishment of
its breach is certain. It is effect following cause. The whole of God’s
creation is planned by this principle.

A want of conformity to the law operates as a poison, that spreads
through the moral and physical man, sinking, forcing him down to
trouble, pain, misery, ruin, and death.

The boy, intending to appropriate to himself, takes a pin. If there is
naught that checks him, petty thefts push him on to deeper crimes, that
end in death. The young gentleman drinks the social glass, nor thinks
harm to himself; he feels strong, he fears nothing: but habit becomes
excess; his physical appearance becomes sickly; his mind obtuse, his
pleasures gross; his condition is changed; he is evidently tending
downwards to the grave. And such are the course and progress of every
other sin; for, whatever has a tendency to injure the character, health,
mind, and body, is sin.

Speculators upon the holy writ may say what they will; yet it is
certain, that act, called the eating the apple, was an act, whatever it
may have been, that necessarily injured the character, health, mind, and
body of man. It is certain, because it did so. It was the very birth of
death itself. The wages of sin are death—the Lord God Almighty hath
spoken it!! Another law of God, till then unknown to man, was brought
instantly into operation. His wants were changed; the earth no longer
produced spontaneously to them. In the emphatic language of that day, it
was cursed, that he might have less leisure time and opportunity to
continue in the downward course of sin to sudden destruction and death.
He was in great mercy condemned to labour for the supply of his daily
wants; he was made the slave to the necessities of animal life. Is it
necessary to quote Scripture to show that it abounds with the doctrine
that idleness is a wonderful promoter of sin? God in great mercy
contrived that his hungry body and naked back should in some measure
keep him from it.

“Therefore, the Lord sent him forth from the garden of Eden _to till_
the ground from which he was taken.” _Gen._ iii. 23, “To till” is
translated from לַֽעֲבֹד֙ _la avod, to slave_. It is the very word that
means a slave; but is here used as a verb, and literally means _to slave
the ground_. In this early instance of its use in holy writ, in relation
to man, it is used as a verb, to show us, not that he had become the
property of any other person, but a slave to his own necessities, and
that the labour required was the labour of a slave.

Until man had become poisoned by sin there was no want of a law, of an
institution to interpose between him and his sudden destruction and
death.

This is the first degree of slavery among poor, fallen men, and upon
which now depend their health, happiness, and continuance of life.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON II.

“But Cain was a tiller of the ground.” The word _tiller_ is translated
from the same word used as a noun, _a slave of the ground_, having
reference to its cultivation for his support and sustenance. And here we
see the peculiar propriety of the language of the Psalmist: “He causeth
the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the _service_ of man,
that he may bring forth food out of the earth.” _Ps._ civ. 14. In this
instance, “service” means slavery, and is translated from the same word,
לַֽעֲבֹדַ֣ת _la avodath_. “He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle,
and herb for the slavery of man, that he may bring forth food out of the
earth.”

But we are directly informed that the Lord had no respect for the
offering of Cain; that Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell;
and the Lord reasoned with him and said, “If thou doest well, shalt thou
not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door;”
also promising him, if he would do well, he should have rule over his
younger brother! All this shows that Cain’s progress in sin had become
very considerable, notwithstanding the mild yet unavoidable slavery
already imposed. But, like many other sinners, he ran his race rapidly,
until his hands were dyed in his brother’s blood.

“When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto thee
her strength: a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the earth.”
_Gen._ iv. 12. Here _tillest_ is also translated from the same word, and
means “when _thou slavest the ground_,” showing most clearly that the
slavery imposed on Adam was attached to Cain, with the additions, that
the earth should not yield unto him her strength,—that he should be a
fugitive and a vagabond,—and a mark was placed upon him. The expression
that the ground should not yield unto him its strength, may be
understood to mean that it should not be as productive, or, that some
other person should enjoy a portion of the benefit of his labour, or in
fact both: his labours were to be in some measure fruitless. And let us
notice how this portion of his sentence compares with other
announcements of Jehovah:

“Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but righteousness delivereth
from death.”

“The Lord will not suffer the soul of the righteous to famish, but he
casteth away the substance of the wicked.”

“The hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but the slothful shall be
under tribute.”

“Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuses instruction, but he that
regardeth reproof shall be honoured.”

“A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children’s children, but the
wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.”

“The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul, but the belly of
the wicked shall want.” _Proverbs._

“He should be a fugitive and a vagabond.”

“The wicked flee when no man pursueth; but the righteous are bold as a
lion.” _Prov._ xxviii. 1.

“Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.
But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and his law doth he meditate
day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of
water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall
not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper. The ungodly are not
so, but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away. Therefore the
ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation
of the righteous. For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous; but the
way of the ungodly shall perish.” _Ps._ i.

And again: “Set thou a wicked man over him; and let Satan stand at his
right hand. When he shall be judged, let him be condemned; and let his
prayer become sin. Let his days be few, and let another take his office.
Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow. Let his children
be continually vagabonds and beg; let them seek their bread also out of
their desolate places. Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and
let the strangers spoil his labour. Let there be none to extend mercy
unto him: neither let there be any to favour his fatherless children.
Let his posterity be cut off; and in the generation following let their
name be blotted out. Let the iniquities of his fathers be remembered
with the Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.” _Ps._
cix. 6–14.

Such is the prospect of the desperately wicked: “The curse of the Lord
is in the house of the wicked: but he blesseth the habitation of the
just.” _Prov._ iii. 33.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON III.

But Cain had a mark set upon him. The word translated _mark_ is א֔וֹת
_oth_: it means a mark of a miraculous nature, whereby some future thing
is of a certainty known, and may be something done or only said.
Whatever it may have been, the object was to prevent him from being
slain by any one meeting him, by its proclamation of the burden of the
curses under which he laboured. It was, therefore, absolutely the mark
of sin, sealing upon him and his race this secondary degree of slavery.
The mark distinguished them as low and servile as well as wicked, and
hence its protective influence.

But what was the mark of sin? What is it now? and what has it ever been?
If one is accused of some vile offence, a little presumptive evidence
will make us say, It is a very dark crime; it makes him look very black.
This figure, if it be one, now so often applied, is so strongly used in
Scripture, and in fact by all in every age, that the idea seems well
warranted that the downward, humiliating course of sin has a direct
tendency, by the Divine law, to even physically degrade, perhaps blacken
and disbeautify, the animal man.

A similar doctrine was well known to the Greeks. Demosthenes says to the
Athenians, “It is impossible for him who commits low, dishonourable, and
wicked acts, not to possess a low, dirty intellect; for, as the person
of a man receives, as it were, a colouring from his conduct, so does the
mind take upon itself a clothing from the same acts.” See Second
Olynthiac. So the Arabians: “God invited unto the dwelling of peace, and
directed whom he pleaseth into the right way. They who do right shall
receive a most excellent reward, and a superabundant addition; neither
blackness nor shame shall cover their faces.” _Koran_, chap. x.

“On the day of the resurrection, thou shalt see the faces of those who
have uttered lies concerning God, become black.” _Koran_, chap. xxxix.

So, the Mohammedan belief is that a man who has some good qualities may
die; but, on the account of his wickedness, he will be sent to hell, and
there tormented until his skin is black; but that if he shall ever be
taken thence, by the mercy of God, he will be immersed in the river of
life, and his skin become whiter than pearls; see _Pocock, notis in
part. Moris_, p. 289 and 292; but that the faces of the wicked will ever
remain black. See _Yalkut Shemuni_, part ii. fol. 86; also _Sale,
Prelim. Disc._ p. 104, 105.

So the Mohammedan tradition, that the bad spirits, Monker and Nakir,
who, upon the death of a man, come to examine him, are awful and black.
See _Prelim. Disc._ p. 90. And hence the belief is that the wicked, even
before judgment, will stand looking up to God with their faces obscured
by blackness and disfigured by all the marks of sorrow and deformity.
_Idem_, p. 99.

So also the fable, that a precious stone of paradise fell down to the
earth to Adam, whiter than milk, but turned black by the touch of a
wicked woman, or, as others say, by wickedness of mankind generally; but
the story is that its blackness is only skin-deep, and hence the
Arabians carefully preserved it in the Caaba at Mecca. _Idem_, p. 125.
Also, _Al Zamakh_, &c. _in Koran_; and _Ahmed Ebĕn Yusef_; and _Pocock,
Spec._ p. 117.

Similar traditions and quotations may be gathered from all quarters of
the world, and from all portions of time; but let us turn to the book
that never lies nor misleads. “Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord
of hosts; and I will discover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will show
the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.” _Nahum_, iii. 5.

The word here translated skirts, is שׁוּלַיִךְ _shulaik_. We believe
that all scholars agree the Hebrew root of this word is borrowed from
the Arabic شَيلࣨ, of which the meaning is _postremum cujusque rei_; and,
hence the idea _skirt_, the extreme of something hanging down, tending
downward.

And from the same source we have the Hebrew word שׁוֹלָל _sholal_, a
captive, a thing captured, &c., because the captive is in an extreme
condition; and thus שוּל _shūl_ is made to mean a hem or skirt, from its
cognate and Arabic root, the extreme of something tending downwards.
Thus شَلَل _shaal_, _to be loose_, _to hang down_. From these
considerations, the word was often used to mean a prisoner, a captive.
Thus, _Job_ xii. 19: “He leadeth princes away spoiled,” שׁוֹלָ֑ל
_sholal_, _captive_, _reduced to the lowest extremity_, &c.

Therefore, although perhaps not as literal, the idea of the prophet
would have been more exactly conveyed had it been translated, “_And I
will discover the low extremity of your condition upon your face_;” and
in this same sense the word is used in _Jer._ xiii. 22: “If thou say in
thine heart, Wherefore come these things upon me? For the greatness of
thine iniquity are thy skirts (שׁוּלַ֖יִךְ _shulaik_) discovered, and
thy heels made bare.” Evidently proclaiming the doctrine, that a course
of sin, through the Divine providence, will leave its mark.

“She is empty, and void, and waste, and the heart melteth, and the knees
smite together, and much pain is in all loins, and the faces of them all
gather blackness. Behold, I am against thee, saith the Lord.” _Nah._ ii.
10, 13.

“At Tehaphnehes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break there
the yokes of Egypt; and the pomp of her strength shall cease in her: as
for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into
captivity. Thus will I execute judgments in Egypt: and they shall know
that I am the Lord.” _Ezek._ xxx. 18, 19.

“Our necks are under persecution: we labour and have no rest. We have
given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied
with bread. Our fathers have sinned, and are not; and we have borne
their iniquities. _Servants_ (עֲבָדִים֙ _abadim_, _slaves_) have ruled
over us: there is none that doth deliver us out of their hand. We get
our bread with the peril of our lives, because of the sword of the
wilderness. Our skin is black like an oven, because of the terrible
famine.” _Lam._ v. 5–10.

“For the hurt of the daughter of my people I am hurt; I am black;
astonishment hath taken hold on me.” _Jer._ viii. 21.

“Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish; they are black unto the
ground; and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up.” _Jer._ xiv. 2.

“Her Nazarites were purer than snow; they were whiter than milk; they
were more ruddy in body than rubies; their polishing was of sapphire.
Their visage is blacker than a coal; they are not known in the streets.”
_Lam._ iv. 7, 8.

“For ye are not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that
burned with fire; nor unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest.” _Heb._
xii. 18.

“Raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars,
to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.” _Jude_ 13.

“For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet
thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord God.” _Jer._ ii. 22.

“The show of their countenance doth witness against them.” _Isa._ iii.
9.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON IV.

But experience proved that even this second degree of slavery was not a
sufficient preventive of sin to preserve man upon the earth. “That the
sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair; and they took
them wives of all which they chose. And the Lord said, My spirit shall
not always strive with man.” _Gen._ vi. 2, 3. The word translated
“fair,” and applied to the daughters of men, is טֹבֹ֖ת _to voth_; it is
in the feminine plural, and comes from טָב _tav_, and cognate with the
Syriac word ܛܒܳܗܳ _tov_ or _tob_; it merely means _good_, _excellent_,
as the quality may exist in the mind of the person taking cognisance.

It implies no quality of virtue or complexion, but in its use is
reflective back to the nominative. It is one of those words which we
find in all languages, of which rather a loose use is made. We find it
in _Dan._ ii. 32, (the 31st of the English text,) “_excellent_;” also
_Ezra_ v. 17, “_good_.” When it is said of Sarah, in _Gen._ xii. 11,
that she was “fair,” meaning that she was of a light complexion, the
word יְפַה _yĕphath_, is used, and is the same with our Japheth, the son
of Noah, and comes from יָפַה _yapha_, and means to _shine_, _to give
light_, and, as an adjective, well means lightness of complexion,
fairness, and brilliancy of beauty. So in _Esth._ ii. 7, “and the maid
was fair and beautiful,” יָפַה _yephath_. 1 _Sam._ xvi. 12, “Now he was
ruddy and of a fair countenance,” יְפַה _yepha_. 1 _Kings_ i. 4, “and
the damsel was fair,” יָפָ֣ה _yaphah_.

It is true that in _Solomon’s Song_, i. 16, “Behold, thou art fair, my
beloved,”—ii. 10, “My beloved spake and said unto me, Rise up my love,
my fair one, and come away,”—iv. 1, “Behold, thou art fair, my love;
behold, thou art fair; thou hast doves’ eyes,”—iv. 7, “Thou art fair, my
love; there is no spot in thee,” and also v. 9, “O thou fairest among
women,” the word יָפַה _yapha_, in grammatical form, is used in the
original, and that the term is applied to a black woman. But this whole
song is written in hyperbole. In the description of Solomon’s person, it
says, v. 11, “His head is as the most fine gold;” in the original, “His
head is the most fine gold.” 14: “His hands are as gold rings set with
the beryl: his belly as bright ivory overlaid with sapphires. 15: His
legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of gold: his countenance
is as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.”

Asiatic poetry always abounded in hyperbole. Thus an Arabian poet,
speaking of his mistress, says—

    “I behold in thine eyes, angels looking at me.
    Deformity in another, in thee is excellent beauty;
    The garments of the shepherd, upon thee, are the finest tissue,
    And brass ornaments become fine gold.
    Thy excellence, so great among men, the god beholds,
    And is astonished at thy beauty.”

It is not from such productions that we are to look for the simple,
original, and radical meaning of terms; and probably even in the case of
Canticles, the word יָפַה _yapha_ would not have been allowed by the
rules of composition, had it not been first announced in a calm,
initiatory manner, that she was a black woman, in order that no
misconception might arise from such hyperbole.

Let us suppose ourselves in Arabia, and some poet announces that, for
our evening entertainment and diversion, he will deliver a panegyric
upon some black woman, and, among other things, says—

       Thy neck is as a tower of ivory.
       Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep.
       Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet.
       Thy nose like the tower of Lebanon,
       That looketh towards Damascus;
       And the smell of thy nose like apples;
       And the smell of the roof of thy mouth like the best wine
       Thy stature is like the palm-tree.
       Thy skin is fairer than snow,
       And thy breasts like two clusters of grapes.
       Thy head is as Mount Carmel,
       And the hair of thy head like purple,
       And the curls of thy hair like a flock of goats.
       Behold, thou art fair, my love; thou hast doves’ eyes.

True, amid such hyperbole, we might have mistaken her colour, if he had
not previously informed us on that subject. But, as it stands, there is
no falsehood asserted; there is no liability to mistake. The poet merely
means that, at least in his conception, she is as lovely, beautiful, and
desirable as all those hyperboles would make her. And we think we have
reason to contend, that the hyperbolic use of the word יָפַה _yapha_, in
Canticles, does not alter in any sense its real meaning, or, in any
ordinary use of language, make it a term applicable to people of colour,
or in any sense whatever a synonyme of the טָב _tav_, or טֹבֹת _to
voth_, as used in Genesis.

This explanation is thought necessary, since it is seen that we shall
hereafter contend that the descendants of Cain were black.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON V.

If we take the passage, _Gen._ vi. 2, 3, as it stands in connection, it
seems to us an obvious deduction that the commingling of the races of
Seth and Cain was obnoxious to the Lord.

It is placed in position as the cause why his Spirit should not always
strive. He saw that such amalgamation would, did deteriorate and destroy
the more holy race of Seth; and therefore determined, with grief in his
heart, to destroy man from the earth. All were swept away, except Noah,
his three sons, and their four wives. Yet sin found a residence among
the sons of Noah, and Canaan was doomed to perpetual bondage, as it now
exists upon the earth. “And he said, Cursed be Canaan: a servant of
servants shall he be unto his brethren. And he said, Blessed be the Lord
God of Shem, and Canaan shall be his servant. God shall enlarge Japheth,
and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his
servant.” _Gen._ ix. 25–27.

The expression “_servant of servants_” is translated from the words
עֶ֥בֶד עֲבָדִ֖ים _ebed abadim, slave of slaves_. The expression is
idiomatic, and means the most abject slave.

In the passage quoted, the word servant, in all cases, is translated
from _ebed_, and means slave. There was no master placed over Adam,—it
is not certain there was over Cain,—but here the master is named and
blessed; and the slave is named, and his slavery pronounced to be of the
most abject kind. If we mistake not, it is an article of the Christian
creed of most churches, that Adam was the federal head and
representative of his race; that the covenant was made, not only with
Adam, but also with his posterity; that the guilt of his sin was imputed
to them; that each and every one of his posterity are depraved through
his sin; that this, their original sin, is properly sin, and deserves
God’s wrath and curse. If so, can we say less in the case of Cain? or
that a new relation did intervene in the case of Ham?


                           ------------------

                               LESSON VI.

Having traced the institution of slavery down to its third and final
degree, and finding it firmly lodged in the family of Ham, let us now
inquire what proof there may be that his descendants are also the
descendants and race of Cain. This evidence is to be found in the fact,
1st. That the descendants of Ham were black, inheriting the mark of
Cain. 2d. That the traditions and memorials of the family of Ham are
also traditions and memorials of the family of Cain. 3d. That Naamah, of
the family of Cain, is found to be kept in memory by the earlier
descendants of Ham. 4th. That the characteristics of these families are
the same, and that no facts are found to exist discordant to the
proposition of their being one and the same race; but on the contrary,
every vestige of them is in unison with such proposition.

In presenting the evidence touching the several facts of the inquiry, we
cannot claim the most lucid or logical arrangement, nor that our remarks
will be classed in the best methodical order for the subjects of
consideration. But we present the proposition that aboriginal names are
always significant terms: thus, Abram, the high father; Abraham, the
father of a multitude; Jacob, holding by the heel, supplanting; Israel,
one who wrestles with God; and Cain, one that has been purchased or
bought: “And she bare Cain, and said, I have _gotten_ a man from the
Lord.” _Gen._ iv. 1. The word Cain is from קָנָח _Cana_, and means to
buy, to purchase, and, as a noun, a thing bought; and the word “gotten,”
קַנִ֥יתִי _canithi_, terminating with its verbal formation, means, _I
have bought_ or _purchased_—his name signified _one purchased_.

There is an allusion to Cain in the Koran; and, although we do not
present it as or for authority, yet it may not be out of place to notice
what the ancient Arabians have said on the subject: “Verily, I (the
prophet) am no other than a denouncer of threats, and a messenger of
good tidings unto the people who believed. It is he who hath created you
from one person and out of him produced his wife, that he might dwell
with her; and when he had known her, she carried a light burden for a
time, wherefore she walked easily therewith: but when it became more
heavy, they called upon God their Lord, saying, If thou give us a child
rightly shaped, we will surely be thankful. Yet when he had given them a
child rightly shaped, they attributed companions unto him, for that
which he had given them. But far be that from God, which they associated
with him! Will they associate with him false gods, which create nothing,
but are themselves created, and can neither give them assistance nor
help themselves?” _Koran_, chap. vii.

The Arabian commentators, in explanation of this passage, relate a
tradition among them. They say, when Eve was big with her first child,
the devil came to frighten and fill her mind with apprehension. But he
pretended to her that by his prayers to God he could persuade him to
cause her to have a well-shaped child, a son, the likeness of Adam, and
that she should be safely delivered of it, upon the condition that she
should dedicate or name the child _abed al hareth, the slave of the
devil_, instead of the name that Adam would give it, _abed Allah, the
slave of God_; that Eve accepted the terms, and the child was born, &c.
The legend is varied by the commentators, some saying the child died as
soon as born, or that the devil applied to Adam instead of Eve, &c.; but
they all agree that _al hareth_ was the name the devil went by among the
angels.

It is a little remarkable that the passage in _Gen._ iv. 2, “But Cain
was a tiller of the ground,” Heb. _obed adamah, the slave of the
ground_, would be, in Arabic, this phrase, _abed al hareth_, the cognate
of the Hebrew word ארצ _erets_, the earth. And therefore the Arabic,
_abed al hareth_, will be a translation of the Hebrew in Genesis. This
legend will be found in _Al Beidawi, Jallado' ddin, Zamakhshari, et al._
See _Sale’s Koran_, vol. i. p. 360.

The discovery of the western continent by Columbus was the great and
absorbing event of the age in which it happened. It was an event which,
in consideration of the characteristics of men, would be held in
commemoration: in all parts of the world it would be a matter of such
record as literature made convenient, or the relative influence of the
event rendered constant to the mind. And hence we find it referred to
not only in books, but in the continent discovered; it is commemorated
by the application of the name of the discoverer to its seas, lakes,
rivers, mountains, districts of country, cities, towns, &c. Now, if at
the time of the event, the world had not advanced to the achievement of
literary records, it is evident that the latter mode of commemoration
could have been the only one practicable; and history shows us that this
mode of commemoration was adopted at the earliest ages, nor laid aside
even at this day. This disposition to commemorate is one of the
characteristics of the whole human family. Thus Eve commemorated some
event, described as the purchase of her first-born of the Lord, by
giving said first-born the name of “_one purchased_.”

“And the sons of Noah that went forth of the ark were Shem, and Ham, and
Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan.” “And Ham, the father of
Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren
without.” “And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his younger son
had done unto him. And he said, Cursed be Canaan.” _Gen._ ix. 18, 22,
24, 25. The things here recorded took place in quick succession from the
removal of Noah’s family from the ark. Ham ultimately had four sons, the
youngest of whom he named Canaan. Is there any evidence, at the time of
these records, that any of the children of Ham were born, and especially
his youngest?

It does appear to us that the word Canaan, as here used, does not mean
any particular son of Ham. It is evidently used at a time before he had
any sons. From the manner of the relation it seems probable the planting
of the vineyard was among the first things Noah did after the flood. Two
or three years was all the time required for the consummation of this
event. In case Ham had married a female of the race of Cain, he had also
identified himself with that race, and might well be called by his
father, especially at a moment of displeasure, by a term emphatically
showing, yea announcing prophetically, his degradation through all
future time,—the degradation to which that connection had reduced him.

The ill-manners of Ham towards his father were not the great cause of
the curse. The cause must have previously existed. The ill-manners only
influence the time of its announcement. Even had it never been
announced, the consequences would have been the same. The sentence of
the law is only declaratory of the relation in which one has placed
himself. The cause of the curse or degradation here pronounced must have
been something adequate, to have produced it. The ill-manners could have
no so great effect. And let us inquire, where are we to find an adequate
cause for the immediate degradation of an unborn race, unless we find it
in intermarriage. His intermarriage, then, could have been with no other
than the race of Cain? When Noah spoke to Ham, and said, “Cursed be
Canaan,” he had no reference to any particular descendant of Ham, but
included them all, as the race of Cain, and, in reproof and
disparagement to his son, reproaching the connection. Suppose, even at
this day, a descendant of Japheth should choose to amalgamate with the
Negro, could not his father readily foretell the future destiny of the
offspring,—their standing among the rest of his family? The term
_Canaan_, thus spoken and applied to Ham, was significant of the
character his conduct had created, by identifying himself with the race
of Cain. It was a new name, deeply and degradingly distinguishing him
from the rest of his father’s family. Jacob was called Israel, after
having wrestled with God; but an honourable cognomen would be made known
and used, whereas one of reverse character might or might not.

It cannot be expected, at this late day, to account for the anomalies of
the ancient Hebrew. Terms applied as proper names, whether significant
or not, are in all languages, and in all ages, subject sometimes to
strange and even oblique alterations. Thus, in the family of Benjamin,
“_Ard_,” of Genesis and Numbers, is changed into _Addar_ in Chronicles;
and thus _Colon_ of Genoa was converted into _Columbus_ in the western
continent.

Thus, _Muppim_ and _Huppim_, in Genesis, are changed into _Shupham_ and
_Hupham_ in Numbers, and into _Shephupham_ and _Huram_ in Chronicles.
See _Gen._ xlvi. 21, _Num._ xxvi. 39, and 1 _Chron._ viii. 5. The
Kenites, Kennizites, and Canaanites of _Gen._ xv. 19; the Kenaz, xxxvi.
11 and 42; the Kenite and Kenites of _Num._ xxiv. 21; the _Kenites_ of 1
_Sam._ xxvii. 10, xv. 5, 6; _Judges_ iv. 11–17; and the city called
“_Cain_,” הַקּ֭יִן _ha Kain_, _Josh._ xv. 57, also _Kinah_, קִינָ֥ה
_idem_ 22,—are all legitimately derived and descended from the name
given to the first-born of mankind. Doubtless a critical search would
find many more; but in all these instances the derivative is used for
and by the descendants of Ham. But no instance is found where any such
derivative is in use by the unmixed posterity of Shem or Japheth. We
surely need not point in the direction of the cause of these facts.

In _Judges_ iv. 11, we have, “Now, Heber the Kenite, הַקֵּינִי֨ _ha
Keni_,) which was of the children of Hobab, (the Jethro of Genesis,) the
father-in-law of Moses.” We shall hereafter have occasion to show that
the father-in-law of Moses was a descendant of Misraim, the second son
of Ham; that he dwelt in the mountains of Midian, and, when spoken of in
regard to his country, was called a Midianite; but his daughter, when
spoken of in regard to her colour, was called an Ethiopian; but now,
when he is spoken of in regard to his race, he is called a Cainite,
_Kenite_.

In _Josh._ xv. 17, we have a derivative in common origin of the
foregoing, in “Kenaz,” the brother of Caleb; but upon examining 1
_Chron._ ii., we shall find a sufficient reason in the blood of that
family; and in all instances where such derivative is found, we shall
find the same cause to warrant its use.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON VII.

Such evidence as there may be that Ham did take to wife some particular
female of the race of Cain, will also be the most positive evidence that
their descendants are one and the same.

Let it be noticed that, immediately preceding the account of the flood,
and the causes which led to that judgment upon the earth, we are
presented with the genealogical tables of the families of Cain and Seth,
down to that period; and that these tables terminate with Ham, in that
of Seth, and in the female Naamah, the daughter of Lamech, in the
genealogy of Cain. Ham and Naamah are thus placed upon a parallel, so
far as it regards these tables.

It surely is not difficult to perceive the cause why, in the table of
Seth, the genealogical line ending in the family of Noah was selected;
but, if the entire race of Cain were to be destroyed by the flood, why
was the particular line ending in Naamah chosen? Why was any such table
of his race required? Beside Eve, the two wives of Lamech and this
Naamah are the only females whose names are given before the flood? If
the entire race of Cain was destroyed, how was the name of Naamah of
more importance for us to know than that of thousands of the same race?
Why has God sent these facts down to us? Has he ever revealed to us any
thing unnecessary for us to know? Is it consistent with his character to
do so? There have been, through all time since the deluge, traditions
and legends among the Arabians, and many other Asiatic tribes, that this
Naamah and her posterity continued upon the earth subsequent to that
period. We give in substance a tale of traditionary lore among the
Eastern nations, found in the Book Zohar, and referred to by Sale, page
87. They believe that at an extremely ancient time, there was an
inferior race of beings, whom they call “jin,” (query, a cognate of ינה
_yana_ or _jana_, to cast down, destroyed, used in a bad sense, to cast
away;) that this race was created from, by, or someway connected with
fire, heat, &c., either in their original state or in an acquired
condition; that they eat, drink, propagate, and die, and are subjects of
salvation or reprobation, like men; that they inhabited the world for
ages before Adam was created; that they fell at length into general
corruption; that, therefore, Eblis (one of the names of the devil) drove
them into a remote part of the earth, and confined them there; but,
however, some of their race remained; and that Tahmunah, (the Noah of
the Hebrew Scriptures,) one of the ancient kings of Persia, drove them
into the mountains of _Kâf_.

Another version of the same legend is, that this race of beings was
begotten by Aza with Naamah, the daughter of Lamech. (Let us here note,
אזא _aza_ is a Chaldaic word, meaning _heat, to grow hot_, &c., and as
such is used in _Dan._ iii. 22,—therefore a synonyme with Ham, as
applied to the son of Noah.) But some have it that the race is the joint
offspring, or from the double paternity, of Aza and Azael. (Let us also
notice, that this monstrosity of paternity is reduced to a single
personage by the fact, that the Hebrew suffix _el_ merely gives quality,
even by repetition, as thus,—Aza the mighty Aza.) But this version of
the legend denominates the race “_Shedim_,” the plural of _shed_, a word
sometimes used to express idols, but more often used to mean desolation,
destruction, &c.; and because the nursing breast is often exhausted, or
from the notion that such exhaustion is akin to a thing destroyed, this
word is applied to the female breast; and hence a posterity strongly
marked by natural peculiarities would very readily take some name
expressive of such fact. Even at this day, in reference to such
peculiarities, we say, they took it from the “breast.”

We deem it unnecessary to enter into a critical history of the word
_shed_ or _shedim_, as used by the Arabians, the “_sed_” of the Hebrews;
but we may be permitted to remark that, from its conveying the idea of
destruction, desolation, so strongly, the Hebrews applied it also to
mean a “field,” or country, in a destroyed or desolate or uncultivated
condition; and it is thus used in many places. See _Genesis_ iii. 1.;
and is thus the word we call _Sodom_. It always carries with it the idea
opposite to improvement; and, governed by the same leading idea, writers
have applied it, perhaps rather figuratively, to any living existence
found wandering over waste and solitary districts. We might pursue the
subject of this tradition, and from the analogy of language, as well as
from ancient associations, at least find some evidence that _Zahmurah_
was no other than Noah; that the affix “_el_” with _Aza_ arose from the
acknowledged superiority of the race of Seth to that of Cain, in
consequence of which they were sometimes described as “the sons of God,”
_Gen._ vi. 4; and that the tradition points to the race of Ham, and
their humble condition in the world.

Traces of this legend will not only be found as above, but also in
Gemara, in Hagiga, and Igrat Baale Hayyin, c. 15.

If it be a fact that the Negro race are the descendants of Ham and
Naamah, the daughter of Lamech, of the race of Cain, it might be thought
there would still be existing some traditions of such an extraordinary
fact. As such we present the legend: not that we attach to it any undue
importance, and especially not to be received as evidence at all, in
contradiction of one word found in the holy books. But if a legend of
ancient time shall be found, when sifted from the ignorance of fable or
the fraud of design, to coincide with facts as related in the holy
books, we may be permitted to consider the same as a circumstance not
altogether unworthy of consideration.

But, we repeat, unless Naamah was to survive the destruction of the
deluge, why was her name, why was her genealogy recorded and sent down
to future time?

We think it certain that if she did survive the flood, she must have
done so as the wife of one of Noah’s sons. Now, as it is evident that
the intermixture of the two races was regarded by Jehovah as a sin, it
is not probable that either Shem or Japheth took her to wife, since they
were both most honourably distinguished by a public blessing immediately
after the flood.

But again: Noah had been preaching the then impending ruin near a
hundred years. Lamech might well have had some glimpses of the
subdiluvian world, and certainly saw the consequential ruin to young
Ham, of the holy family of Noah, from such a connection with his
daughter, Naamah. It could not otherwise than operate as a moral death
to all the high hopes of him and his posterity. In case such connection
was formed, and Lamech was forward in aiding or influencing it, then
well might his troubled soul exclaim to his two wives as related.

But in case Ham did take to wife this daughter of Lamech, we might
expect her name also to be held in remembrance by her posterity, as we
have seen to some extent was that of Cain; and if we find such fact to
exist in regard to her, it will be to our mind strong additional proof,
that the descendants of Ham were in common the descendants of Cain. We
notice here the fact, which we may hereafter deem necessary to prove,
that, of the children of Ham, Cush originally settled in Arabia and the
southwestern parts of Asia generally, Misraim in Egypt, Phut in the
northern parts of Africa and southward indefinitely, and Canaan in
Palestine.

When this latter country came to be conquered by Joshua, he found a city
by the name of “Naamah,” situated in that portion which was given to the
tribe of Judah. See _Josh._ xv. 41. But we shall directly see that there
must have also been another city by the name of “Naamah,” situated
probably in the region originally occupied by Cush. The book of Job is
supposed to have been written as early as the days of Abraham. One of
the men named in it is Zophar the “Naamathite.” See _Job_ ii. 11; also
xi. 1.; also xlii. 9. He was an inhabitant of “Naamah,” at a much more
ancient period than the time of Joshua. Job is represented as of the
land of “Uz,” far distant from the land of Canaan, in the eastern parts
of Arabia. His intimate friends and acquaintances cannot be expected to
have been of so distant a country as was the land of Judea. The evidence
is then that there must have been a city in the land of Cush by the same
name. But in _Gen._ x. 7, one of the sons of Cush is called _Raamah_: we
think those who will examine the subject will find this term a mere
alteration or adulteration of _Naamah_, as there are many others, a
tedious explanation of which might not be excused at our hand. Suffice
it then to say that among the Cushites at a very early period one whole
tribe were called “_Naamathites_,” distinct from the _Naamathites_ that
lived in the city of _Naamah_ conquered by Joshua. Another variation of
this word will be found in the word “_Hamathites_,” _Gen._ xvi. 18. This
word is used, differently varied, in _Num._ xiii. 21, xxvi. 40; _Judges_
iii. 3; 1 _Kings_ x. 65, xiv. 21–31; 2 _Kings_ v. 1–27; 2 _Sam._ viii.
9; 1 _Chron._ viii. 4, 7; 2 _Chron._ viii. 3, xii. 13; _Isa._ x. 9, also
xi. 11, also xvii. 10; _Ezek._ xlvii. 16, 20, also xlviii. 1, and
perhaps many other places; and in all cases in reference to individuals,
the people and country of the Canaanites, and no doubt in memory of
their great female progenitor, Naamah, the daughter of Lamech, of the
race of Cain.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON VIII.

Before we close this branch of our inquiry, let us examine into the
significancy and composition of the name “Naamah,” as applied to the
daughter of Lamech: and we take occasion here to say how deeply we are
indebted to the labours of the Rev. Dr. Lee, the regius professor of
Hebrew in the University of Cambridge, England, and whom we have no
question in believing to be among the most penetrating oriental scholars
of the age. By an intimate knowledge of the Asiatic languages, he
discovered that in many instances where, in a cognate case, the Heemanti
would be used in Hebrew, in them the word was supplied with a particle,
changing or influencing the sense. Upon full research, he determined
that the Heemanti, in Hebrew, were the fragments of ancient or obsolete
particles, still influencing the significance as would have done the
particles themselves. Let us take an example in our own language: _able_
implies fulness of power; add to it the prefix _un_, and you reverse the
sense wholly. Yet we do not perceive, without reflection, that the
prefix really is a contraction of something similar to “_I am not_,” &c.

With this door open to a constitutional knowledge of the language, let
us take the word צם _am_. The terminating aspirate of the word Naamah
will be readily formed from this by the usual feminine, as a fragment of
the בּוּת later בַּת _bath_. And for the prefix _nun_, we beg leave to
quote from Lee’s Lectures, pages 123 and 124:

“We come now to propose a conjecture on the prefix _nun_, and on the
modification of sense which primitive words undergo in consequence of
its influence. If then we take this (נ) as the defective form of some
primitive word, appearing sometimes in the form of הנ, at other times as
נ only, we may suppose it to have been derived from the (Arabic) root,
which, had it been preserved in Hebrew, might have been written הָנָֽה
_hanah_, אָנָה _anah_, or אָנָא _ana_. The senses attributed to it by
Castell (in his Arabic Lexicon) are, among others, ‘ad extremum
perfectionis terminum pervenit—assecutus fuit, seu percepit—retinuit,
detinuit, coercuit,—lenitate, modestia et patientia usus fuit,’ &c.
Supposing this word, or some defective form of it, to be construed with
any other, the sense of both taken together would, in general, give the
force of the forms thus compounded. And as this form of compound is
often in the leading word of one of the conjugations, it becomes the
more important to ascertain its properties. Primitive words receiving
this particle will have a sort of passive sense, or will exhibit
subjection to the action implied by the primitive accidentally, but not
habitually. Words receiving this augment, subjecting them to the action
implied by the primitive word, may, when the context requires it, also
be construed as having a reciprocal sense, or as implying possibility,”
&c.

Now then, let us present examples of the influence of this particular
Heemanti: —שָׂכּוּר _sakur_, _a hireling_, one whose habit is to be
hired, one whose occupation is that of being hired by others. Add נ
_nun_, and we have נִשְׂכָּ֔רוּ _niskkaru_, as in 1 _Sam._ ii. 5, and
translated thus: “They that were full have hired out themselves for
bread.” The idea in Hebrew is: They who were habitually full, from the
force of the circumstances influencing the case, have been compelled to
hire themselves to others for bread. The _sakur_ is a hireling from
habit, from constitution, from custom, &c., and which idea enters into
the meaning of the word. But the prefix of the proposed Heemanti at once
destroys all idea of habit, fitness, constitution, or custom; but yet
the individual is a “hireling,” but only as the force of circumstances
influencing the case compelled him to be so. Thus this Heemanti gives a
reflective quality, reflecting back upon the agent or actor, as thus:
שָׁמַר _shamar_, _he guards_, נִשְׁמַר _nishmar_, _he guards himself_;
that is, under the force of circumstances affecting the case, he was
compelled to guard himself. Thus כּמר _chemar_ is sometimes used to
express the idea _black_, as a constant, habitual quality. In _Lam._ v.
10, we find it with this Heemanti, thus, נִכְמָ֔רוּ _nichemaru_, “our
skin was black;” not that their skin was naturally and habitually black,
but made so by the facts of the case: and this same word, with this
Heemanti, is used in _Gen._ xliii. 30, and translated, by attempting to
express a Hebrew cognate idea, into “_yearn_.” The idea is, his bowels
did not habitually “yearn,” but the action was forced upon him by the
facts of the case; and the same again in 1 _Kings_ iii. 26. In _Hosea_
xi. 8, we find it again translated “my repentings are kindled:” because
his people were bent on backsliding, which would cause the Assyrian to
be their king, and war to be in their cities continually, and their bad
counsels themselves to be destroyed, his repentings were forced to be
“kindled.” See the passage.

This particle then prefixed to the word עם _am_, with its feminine
termination, makes the word נעמה _Naamah_, with the meaning, under the
condition of things, she was to become a people distinct to herself; not
that she would be a people absolutely, by the habitual action of
constituent ability, but she would be a people distinct to herself, only
as the peculiar influencing causes made her so,—showing also that these
causes gave distinction and character to her posterity. Thus her very
name shadowed forth the condition of her race. A Frenchman goes to
England, or _vice versa_: a generation passes and nationality is lost.
Not so with the Ethiopian. For “though thou wash thee with nitre and
take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the
Lord God.” _Jer._ ii. 22.

A form of the word “Naamah” is used in character of a masculine plural,
in _Isa._ xvii. 10, and translated “pleasant,” as if from נעם _nam_.
Forced to differ from this translation, we beg leave to place the whole
passage before the scholars of the day:

                          כִּ֤י שָׁכַ֙חַתְּ֙ אֱלֹהֵ֣י יִשְׁעֵ֔ךְ וְצ֖וּר מָֽעֻזֵּ֭ךְ לֹ֣א זָכָ֑רְתְּ עַל־כֵּׄן תִּטְּעִי֨
                                            נִטְעֵ֣י נַֽעֲמנִים וּזְמ֥רַׄת זָ֖ד תִּזרָעֶֽנּוּ׃

It is translated thus: “Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy
salvation, and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength,
therefore shalt thou plant pleasant plants and shalt set it with strange
slips.”

We beg to inquire whether there is not a material defect in the latter
clause of this translation? The verb “to plant,” in Hebrew, governs two
accusatives, to wit, the plantation and the thing planted. In English,
we are compelled to render one of the names as governed by a
preposition. Thus, he planted a field with corn, or he planted corn in a
field. The word זְמֹרַה _zemorath_, is often translated a song, as “The
Lord Jehovah is my strength and song.” See _Ps._ cxviii. 14 and _Isa._
xii. 2. But the idea is more comprehensive than is our idea expressed by
the term “song.” It includes the result of a course of conduct. Thus the
result of a devout worship of God is that Jehovah becomes the
“_Zemorath_” of the worshipper; and we doubt not our term _result_,
although imperfect, will give a better view of the prophet’s idea in
this place than the _song_. In this sense this word is used in _Gen._
xliii. 11, and translated “fruits:” thus, “take of the best fruits of
the land,” that is, the best results of our cultivation. The prophet
informs his people that they intermix and amalgamate with the
Naamathites because they have forgot God, and that the result is the two
last words in the passage, to wit, the “_zar_” and “_tizera-ennu_” that
is, a “stranger.” See _Exod._ xxx. 33; _Levit._ xxii. 10, 12, 13, where
“_zar_” is translated “stranger;” also, _Job_ xix. 15, 17; also, _Prov._
v. 10, 17, and 20; and many other places, surely enough to determine its
meaning here. The original sense of the last word in the passage was to
_sow seed_, hence to _scatter_ and _destroy_. The result of such
amalgamation then is, their posterity will be a deteriorated race, and
the pure Hebrew stock sown to the winds, scattered, wasted away and
destroyed.

In these highly excited and poetic effusions of the prophet, we are to
notice the chain of thought and mode of expression by which he reaches
the object in view. This chapter commences with the information that
Damascus shall cease to be a city; that Aroer shall be forsaken, and
Ephraim be without a fortress to protect her; and finally that Jacob
shall be made thin, like a few scattering grapes found by the gleaner,
or a few berries of the olive left in the top of the bough, and the
house of Jacob become desolate. In the passage under consideration the
causes of this condition of Jacob are announced. If our view of the word
“Naamah” be correct, in the masculine plural, as here used, it will be
quite analogous to Ethiopians. But we have no one word of its meaning;
perhaps the idea will be more correctly expressed by Naamathites.
Evidently the idea intended to be conveyed by the prophet by the word
נַ֥עֲמָנִ֔ים _Naamanim_, is, a people whose cultivation would be
abortive as to them and injurious to the cultivator; that is, a people
with whom intermarriage will produce nothing but injury and destruction
to the house of Jacob.

By the use of some such paraphrasis the idea of the prophet will be
brought to mind: “Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation,
and hast not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt
thou (or therefore dost thou) plant _Naamathites_,” (that is, amalgamate
with the descendants of Ham and Naamah,) “and the fruits of the land
shall be a stranger” (that is, their adulterated posterity will be
heathen) “scattering thee away;” that is, wasting away not only the
purity of the Hebrew blood, but their worship also.

Repeat: “Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast
not been mindful of the rock of thy strength.” Therefore dost thou
cohabit with the heathen, and thy posterity, O Jacob, shall be an enemy,
and thou scattered away and destroyed! Such is the announcement of the
prophet.

One of the most bitter specimens of irony contained in the Scriptures is
the answer of Job to the Naamathite: “No doubt but ye are the people,
and wisdom shall die with you.” The passage needs no comment.

The view we take of the word “_Naamanim_,” as used by Isaiah, we think
warranted by the succeeding sentence, which we ask the scholar to
notice.

“For a day thou shalt make thy plant to grow, for a morning thou shalt
make thy seed to flourish, but the harvest shall be a heap” (a burden
unbearable) “in the days of grief and desperate sorrow.” And such has
ever been the lot of the white parent who has amalgamated with the
negro; as to posterity, it is ruin.

The prophet borrowed his figure from agriculture. His intention was to
present to the mind the abortiveness of such a course of sin, by
presenting a bold and distinct view of the mental and moral character of
the descendants of Naamah; and is on a par with—“Are ye not as the
children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel? saith the
Lord.” _Amos_ ix. 7.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON IX.

By referring to the instances where we allege are to be found variations
of the names _Cain_ and _Naamah_, it will be at once noticed that some
of them are quite remarkable. Shall we be excused for a few remarks in
explanation, by way of example, of other lingual changes? Queen
Elizabeth lived but yesterday; and her history has not advanced through
a very great variety of languages, yet we find, in commemoration of her,
one place named Elizabeth, Elizabeth City, Elizabethtown,
Elizabethville, Elizabethburg, and another, even Betsey’s Wash-tub, and
because she was never married, one is called Virgin Queen, and another
Virginia.

Now, we all know that at a very ancient period, the worship of the sun
and of fire was introduced into the British Isles. Is there nothing left
at this day in commemoration of that fact? The sun became an object of
great and absorbing consideration. The ancient Celtic word _grian_ meant
the sun; from the application of this word and its variations, we have a
proof, not only of how words are made to change, but also of the fact
that the people of that country were once addicted to the worship of the
sun or fire. Hence Apollo, who was the sun personified, was called
Grynæus. At once we find a singular change in the name of the Druidical
idol _Crom-Cruach_, often called _Cean Groith_, the head of the sun.
This was the image or idol god to whom the ancient inhabitants of
Ireland offered infants and young children a sacrifice. It was in fact
the same as the Moloch of the ancient Hamitic occupants of Palestine,
and was so firmly established in the superstitions of the world, that
whatever race had the ascendency in Ireland, it continued to be thus
worshipped, giving the name of the “Plains of slaughter” to the place of
its location, until St. Patrick had the success to destroy the image and
its worship; and hence also the names _Knoc-greine_ and _Tuam-greine_,
hills where the sun was worshipped, and other places in Ireland, even
now keep in memory that worship: _Cairn-Grainey_, the sun’s heap,
Granniss’ bed, corrupted from _Grian-Beacht_, the sun’s circle. A point
of land near Wexford is called _Grenor_, the sun’s fire, and the town of
_Granaid_, because the sun was worshipped there. And we may notice a
still greater variation in _Carig-Croith_, the rock of the sun—and even
our present word _grange_, from the almost obsolete idea, a place
enclosed, separate and distinct, but open to the sun, now used as a
synonyme of _farm_.

Let us take our word _fire_, and we shall perceive remarkable changes
through all the languages from the Chaldaic down. _Gen._ xi. 28, “_Ur_”
is translated from אוּר which means fire. Abraham was a native of
Chaldea, and from a place where they worshipped fire, or the sun. It was
used to mean the sun, _Job_ xxxviii. 12; also, in the plural, _Isa._
xxiv. 15: “Wherefore glorify ye the Lord in the fires?” It is here ארֻים
_urim_. Because fire emitted light, it became used to mean light. The
words _urim_ and _thummim_ meant lights or fires, and truth: among the
fire-worshippers the same term meant _fire_ and _sun_. The Copts called
their kings _suns_. Hence from this term they took the word _ouro_, to
mean the idea of royalty; their article _pi_, made _piouro_, the sun or
the _king_, which being carried back to the Hebrews, they made it
_Pharaoh_; but the sun was regarded as a god, and hence the Egyptian
kings came to be called gods; but the Chaldaic and Hebrew אוּר, when
applied to fire or the sun by the Copts, as an object of worship, was
distinguished from the idea of royalty by the term _ra_ and _re_, with
the particle _pira_ and _pire_, generally written _phra_ and _phre_.
Hence the Greek πυρ, _pur_, to mean fire, and hence pyrites, which means
a fire-stone, a stone well burned, or a stone containing fire, &c.

And hence also the Hebrew word ראי _rai_, a mirror, vision, the god of
vision, and by figure a conspicuous or illustrious person. But according
to Butman, the Sanscrit root _Raja_ is the original of the obsolete
Greek word, Ῥα, Ῥαια, Ῥαων, and if so, possibly of the Chaldaic word
under view. But however that may be, it is evident that the Greek
_radios_ is at least derived through the channel indicated; and we now
use the term _ray_ to mean an emanation from great power. Our word
_regent_ is also from the same source, through the Latin _rex_, and may
be found, slightly modified, through all the European dialects. And it
may be remarked that, cognate therewith, we have the Arabic word
_raiheh_, or _raygeh_, to mean fragrancy; the poetic minds of the
Arabians uniformly applying this image to legitimate rule and
government.

And if we take a view of the filiations of languages, even as they are
now found, such changes cannot be deemed unusual, especially if we take
into consideration the inevitable variation words are found to undergo
in their progress through different countries and ages of time; and more
especially, if we notice the precise manner in which lingual variations
are found to operate.

Changes of language sometimes take place upon a single word apparently
by caprice, among different tribes of people,—sometimes by the
transposition of the consonant or vowel sound; by the insertion of a
letter or letters for the sake of euphony; by the contraction or
abbreviation of letters for the sake of despatch; by the reduplication
of a letter or syllable on the account of some real or fancied
importance or emphasis attached to it; and by the deletion or addition
of a letter or syllable at the commencement or end of a word, for a real
or supposed more felicitous enunciation of certain sounds in succession;
and hence alterations, slight at first, are liable to become quite
remarkable.

Thus μορφη in Greek, becomes _formæ_ in Latin; _regnum_ becomes _reign_;
_cœlum, ciel_; _ultra jectum, Utrecht_; and עבד _ebed, eved_, as
variously pronounced, meaning a _slave_, becomes _obediens_,
_obedienter_, _obedio_, _obedientia_, in Latin, and _obey_, _obedient_,
&c., in English. The Celtic _ros_ becomes _horse_, and the English
_grass_ becomes _garse_. Consonants of the same order are interchanged;
p becomes _b_, and b _v_, d _t_, g _k_ and sometimes _n_,—φ becomes _ph_
or _f_, d or t becomes _th_, and g or c _gh_. It is therefore impossible
that such changes should not have taken place, and therefore they give
proof of the genuineness of the history they may develop.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON X.

WE have heretofore remarked that such names as are derived from _Cain_
or _Naamah_ are never found in the holy books, except among and applied
to the descendants of Ham. But there are some few instances of the
application of these terms in the family of the Benjamites. It is
therefore our design now to prove, so far as may be, that such
instances, in the family of Benjamin, are wholly confined to those cases
where the Benjamite was a mixed-blooded person, and a descendant of Ham,
as well as of the youngest son of Jacob. The holy books do give evidence
that individuals of the race of Shem did sometimes commingle with the
descendants of Ham.

From the proximity of the Israelite tribes to those of Ham; from their
co-habitation of Palestine itself, it was natural to expect among the
low and vulgar, as well as among those whose morals hung loosely about
them, that such intermixture should take place. “Now Sheshan had no
sons, but daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, (עֶבֶד _ebed_, a
_slave_,) an Egyptian, (מִצְרִ֖י _Mitsri_, a _Misraimite_, a descendant
of the second son of Ham,) whose name was Jarha. And Sheshan gave his
daughter to Jarha his servant, (עֶבֶד _ebed, slave_) to wife.” 1
_Chron._ ii. 34, 35. Proving the wisdom and truth of the saying of
Solomon, “He that delicately bringeth up his servant (עֶבֶד _ebed,
slave_) from a child, shall have him become his son at length.” _Prov._
xxix. 21.

“Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign; and he reigned
seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord did choose out of
all the tribes of Israel to put his name there: and his mother’s name
was Naamah, an Ammonitess. And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the city of David. And his mother’s name was
_Naamah_, an _Ammonitess_.” 1 _Kings_ xiv. 21, 31.

“For Rehoboam was one-and-forty years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which the Lord had chosen
out of all the tribes of Israel, to put his name there, and his mother’s
name was _Naamah_, an _Ammonitess_.” 2 _Chron._ xii. 13.

“But King Solomon loved many strange women, together with the daughter
of Pharaoh; women of the Moabites, _Ammonites_, Edomites, Zidonians, and
Hittites; of the nations concerning which the Lord said unto the
children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come
in unto you.” 1 _Kings_ xi. 1, 2.

By thus personally amalgamating with the various nations over whom he
ruled, Solomon, no doubt, expected more firmly to establish his throne.
This led to the selection of the son of this woman for his successor.

A vast majority of the tribes over whom his reign extended were the
descendants of Ham.

But this very act, which he thought to be political wisdom, although
contrary to the laws of God, brought ruin to the permanency of his
dynasty. The great majority of his Jewish subjects, hunting up, as was
natural, plausible excuses, rejected with scorn the contamination of the
royal house.

And we see such manifestation of Divine providence even at the present
day: even among ourselves, men whose talents and patriotism might
authorize them to look to any station, are forced back by public
sentiment, degraded by a notorious amalgamation with the descendants of
Ham.

We shall hereafter see some proof that this “_Naamah_,” the mother of
Rehoboam, was the individual whose praises are celebrated in the book of
Canticles: at any rate, she was an Ammonitess, a descendant of Ham, and
the prophet Hanani includes the Ammonites among those whom he calls
Ethiopians. See 2 _Chron._ xvi. 8.

If then it be true that Naamah, the daughter of Lamech, was the great
female progenitor of the race of Ham, we should expect to find some
testimony of her remembrance even among her mingled offspring. And since
the unmixed race of Ham have generally, at all times of the world, been
too degraded to even leave behind them any written memorials, it is to
the mixed race, and their connection with the races of Shem and Japheth,
that we are principally to look for any particular fact concerning them;
and it is reasonable to conclude, as we find this kind of memorial among
the mixed race, that the same kind of memorial existed much more
frequently among the unmixed races of Ham.

“And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and
_Naaman_, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.” _Gen._ xlvi. 21.

“The sons of Benjamin after their families of Bela, the family of the
Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family
of the Ahiramites; of Shupham, the family of the Shuphamites; of Hupham,
the family of the Huphamites. And the sons of Bela were Ard and Naaman;
of Ard, the family of Ardites, and of Naaman, the family of Naamanites.”
_Num._ xxvi. 38–40.

“Now Benjamin begat Bela his first-born, Ashbel the second, and Ahirah
the third, Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth. And the sons of Bela
were Addar, and Gera, and Abihud, and Abishua, and _Naaman_, and Ahoah,
and Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram. And these are the sons of Ehud:
these are the heads of the fathers of the inhabitants of Geba, and they
removed them to Manahath. And _Naaman_, and Ahiah, and Gera, he removed
them, and begat Uzra and Abihud. And _Shaharaim_ begat children in the
country of Moab, after he had sent them away.” 1 _Chron._ viii. 1–8.

The hurried reader might well apprehend these three different accounts
of the same matter to be somewhat contradictory. We think otherwise. We
had, in fact, prepared several sheets, elucidating these genealogies of
Benjamin, but upon a review we found much irrelevant to the subject of
our present inquiry: we deem only a few remarks necessary.

Our object is to show that these genealogies prove that some portion of
the family named were coloured people, descended from Ham, and that
_Naaman_ is distinguished most clearly to be of that class.

It will be readily perceived that _Muppim_ מִפֻּיִ֥ם, in Genesis, is
formed from מֹף _Moph_, and thus used in _Hos._ ix. 6: “_Memphis_ (מַֹף
_Moph_) shall bury them.” Our word is a Hebraism of the Coptic word נֹף
_Noph_, the _Nod_ of Genesis, the _No_ of the prophets Ezekiel and
Nahum, and finally confounded with _Memphis_.

It is here used after the form of a Hebrew masculine plural, and as a
caput, to aid in the classification of the descendants of Benjamin; and
clearly designates, whatever may have been their blood, that one class
were _Memphites_.

So the word _huppim_ הֻפִּים is formed from the quite ancient word הַף
_haph_, which means innocence, purity; whence also the word הָפָה
_haphah_, covered, shielded, protected; and hence, הֻפָּה _hupah_,
_bride-chamber_, _the marriage-bed_, and _marriage_ itself. In this
sense the word is used in _Joel_ ii. 16, and in several other places,
where the translator has so paraphrased the idea as to make it
imperceptible to the English reader.

Nor is it an unworthy consideration in the etymology of this word, that
from the idea _purity_, the Arabians borrowed from it their word جار
_hhar_, to mean _white_, which was quickly introduced into Hebrew in the
word הוּר _hur_, and הוֹר _hor_, to mean _white_ also. Hence, Mount הָור
_Hor_, “the white mountain;” and from which branch of the derivation the
corresponding words in Numbers and Chronicles have taken their origin.
Here, then, we have another word used in the same manner, to designate
another class of the descendants of Benjamin, as of the _pure stock_,
_legitimate_ and _white_.

The word וָאָֽרְּדְּ _va ard_ or _ared_ in Genesis, and אַ֣רְדְּ _ard_
or _ared_ in Numbers, is changed by _dagesh_ and transposition into
אַדָּר _addar_ in Chronicles. It is unnecessary to go into an
explanation of Hebrew peculiarities. It is probable that we never have
had the true pronunciation of any of these words. But however that may
be, the analogy of language seems to show that this word is a cognate of
the Arabic غَرَض _gharadh_, and the Syrian ܕܓܳܪܳܕ _dharadh_, and from
whence עֲרָד _harad_ or _arad_; yet there is nothing more common than
for _aleph_ and _ghain_ to interchange in one and the same word. They
are ever regarded as cognates. But again, the word is not of Hebrew
origin, and with the latter spelling, we find it in _Num._ xxi. 1,
xxxiii. 40, _Josh._ xii. 14, and _Judges_ i. 16, as the name of a
Canaanitish city. The Arabic is more guttural than Hebrew, and it has
two _ghains_, one more guttural than the other, distinguished by רְבִיעַ
_rĕviă_, a _resting upon_; thus, in translating Arabic into Hebrew, the
one will take the Hebrew _ghain_, but the Arabic _ghain_ with which this
word is spelled is at once converted into the Hebrew _aleph_; so that
while we thus find the very word, we find it with the evidence of a
Canaanitish admixture.

Its application in Hebrew seems to be mostly confined to the _wild ass_,
(see _Dan._ v. 21;) but the Syriac gives it _effrænatus_, _effrænis
fuit_, and the Arabic, _durus fuit_, _fugit_. Such, then, being its
signification in these languages, we may well perceive its adaptedness
to the _wild ass_. We all know that the wild Arabs are the descendants
of Ishmael; now a true synonyme in Hebrew of this word was applied to
him: “He shall be a _wild man_;” he was illegitimate, mixed-blooded. The
term can apply to no other than such a race as that of Ishmael,—_wild_,
_illegitimate_, and of _impure blood_.

In Numbers we find _Shupham_, and in Chronicles _Shephuphan_,
substituted for the _Muppim_ in Genesis; both being the same word in
different forms. The root is שֶׁפִי _shephi_, a high situation; hence
שָפַט _shaphat_, a judge, and its derivatives are applied to the person
or thing adjudged. Hence שִׁפְחָה _shiphehhahh_, a _female slave_; (See
_Gen._ xvi. 16; i. 2, 3; also xx. 14; also xxxii. 22;) and hence, also
the Syrian ܫܳܦܦܰ _shafefa_, a _serpent_, because the serpent had been
adjudged, condemned. Whence the Hebrew _shephiphim_, poetically used to
mean a serpent, as, “Dan shall judge his people; Dan shall be a serpent
by the way.” _Gen._ xlix. 16. In this passage in Hebrew, there is a
beautiful _paronomasia_ in the word _Dan_, which also means a judge,
_judge_ and the _serpent_. But the serpent is called שְׁפִיפ֖ןֹ
_shephiphon_, only as it had been adjudged; and it is to be noticed, as
here used, it has the same points and accents as in Chronicles, and is
substantially the same word,—not, as here, borrowed from the Syriac, to
mean a serpent, but used to mean the adjudged, condemned to some
condition or degradation. “And they removed them to _Manahath_.”
_Manahath_ was a district of country near the Dead Sea, near the ancient
city Zoar; and it is a little remarkable that Zoar was by the Canaanites
called _Bela_, the very name of the son of Benjamin. The whole country
was called by the general term Moab. The fact that it was a custom to
send persons of a certain description there, seems to be alluded to by
the prophet: “Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, O Moab!” _Isa._ xvi. 4.

But, who were sent there? “_Naaman_, _Ahia_, and _Gera_, he removed
them. * * * And _Shaharaim_ begat children in the land of Moab after he
had sent them away.” This explains the whole matter. _Shaharaim_ is a
plural formation of _Shihor_, and means _black_. “_And these blacks
begat children in the land of Moab after he had sent them away_,”—that
is, _Naaman_, _Ahia_, and _Gera_; further establishing the fact that the
word _Naamah_ is kept in remembrance only by the descendants of Ham. One
class of the race of Benjamin is described in Genesis as _Memphites_; in
fact, that whole genealogy substantially divides them into those who
were white, and of pure descent, and into those who were not white, and
of impure descent. Numbers and Chronicles confirm and warrant the same
distinction.

The seventh Psalm commences thus:—“Shiggaion of David, which he sang
unto the Lord, concerning the words of Cush, the Benjamite.” It would
have been more readily understood, and more decidedly a translation
thus: _A song of lamentation of David, which he sang unto the Lord,
concerning the words of an Ethiopian, a Benjamite_.

The word “Cush,” as often elsewhere, is here used to designate a
descendant of Ham by his colour. But it clearly proves an amalgamation,
to some extent, of the race of Ham, in the family of Benjamin.

Indeed, the race of Benjamin had become deeply intermixed with the
descendants of Ham; and this fact well accounts why they did, upon an
occasion, behave like as the Sodomites to Lot; and why the other tribes
of Israel so readily joined in league to utterly destroy and annihilate
this tribe, and did put to death fifty thousand warriors in one day, and
every man, woman, and child of the whole tribe, except a few hundred
men, who hid in the rock Rimmon. See _Judges_ xix. xx.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON XI.

It remains now to examine what proof there exists that the descendants
of Ham were black. We wish to impress upon the mind the fact, that among
all aboriginal nations, and in all primitive languages, proper names are
always significant terms. Such is the fact among the Indian tongues of
America at this day. The holy books give ample proof that such was
eminently the case among the ancient Hebrews. Every name that Adam
bestowed was the consequence of some cause that operated on his mind.
And if we examine minutely into the influences operating even among
ourselves, in such cases, we shall be unable to deny that such is the
universal law. There is a cause for every thing.

“And the sons of Ham (_were_) Cush and Misraim, and Phut and Canaan.”
_Gen._ x. 6.

It will not be denied that the word Ethiopian, as used in Scripture,
means a black man. “Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard
his spots.” _Jer._ xiii. 23. The word “Ethiopian,” in this passage from
Jeremiah, is translated from כּוּשִׁי֨ _Cushi_, the very name of the
oldest son of Ham. And we shall find in every instance where in the Old
Testament the word Ethiopia or Ethiopian is used, that it is translated
from the same word, varied in termination according to the position in
which it is used, and as applied to country or people. “Are ye not as
the children of the Ethiopians (כֻשִׁיִּ֙ים _Cushiim_) unto me?” _Amos_
ix. 7. It became and was used as a general term, by which all
descendants of Ham were designated by their colour, in the same manner
as we now use the Latin word _negro_ to designate the same thing. “And
Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses because of the Ethiopian woman whom
he had married: for he had married an _Ethiopian_ woman.” _Num._ xii. 1.
And we deem these facts alone sufficient to establish the truth of the
proposition that that branch of Ham’s family were black.

In the examination of what evidence may now be found that the family of
Misraim were black, we beg to notice a fact which we suppose no scholar
will dispute—that he settled in Egypt, and, in fact, gave his name to
that country. As Cush gave his name to all Ethiopia and its inhabitants,
as Canaan gave his name to the land of Canaan, and Canaanites to its
inhabitants, so Misraim gave his name to Egypt and its inhabitants.
Whenever we find the word Egypt or Egyptian in our English version, we
never fail to find מִצְרָים _Mitsraim_ in the Hebrew text. His
descendants took upon them the particular appellation _Misraimites_, as
in _Gen._ xvi. 1: “And she had a handmaid, (שִׁפְחָ֥ה _shiphehhah, a
female slave_,) an Egyptian, (מִצְרִ֖ית _Mitsrith_ a descendant of
Misraim,) whose name was Hagar.” She was a _Misraim_, a descendant from
the second son of Ham. The word is translated “Egyptian.” A family feud
growing up upon the occasion of her having a son by her master Abraham,
she and her son were sent away to the wilderness of Paran; where, when
the son was grown, she took him a wife of her own race, from the land of
Egypt. See _Gen._ xxi. 21. The descendants of Ishmael, therefore, were
three-fourths of Misraimitish blood, and are known and distinguished as
of his _race_, by the particular name of Ishmaelites.

Midian was a district of country lying near to and including Mount
Sinai. The people, in reference to the country, were called Midianites,
but without any reference to their descent or race. From the position of
the district of country called Midian, it would be reasonable to suppose
the inhabitants in after times to be descended from Ishmael; and in
fact, whenever we find any allusion made to the whole country of the
Ishmaelites, we shall find it to include Midian. But it may be proper to
remark, that from a notable mountain called _Gilead_, situated in this
region, the whole country was sometimes called by that name, and one of
the cities in it also called Gilead.

We are all acquainted with that most beautiful and pathetic history of
Joseph; but let us read a passage—and we pray you to notice with
distinctness the language:

“And they lifted up their eyes and looked, and behold a company of
Ishmaelites came from Gilead, with their camels bearing spicery and balm
and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt. * * * And Judah said, * * *
Come, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon
him. * * * And his brethren were content. Then there passed by
Midianites, merchantmen, and they drew and lifted up Joseph out of the
pit, and sold Joseph to the _Ishmaelites_; and the Midianites sold him
into Egypt unto Potiphar. And Joseph was brought down to Egypt, and
Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian,
bought him of the hands of the Ishmaelites which had brought him down
thither.” _Gen._ xxxvii. 25–36, and xxxix. 1. Is it not positive and
clear that the Ishmaelites and the Midianites were one and the same
people?

But again, there was, during the days of the judges, a destructive war
between the Israelites and the Midianites. “And the Midianites and the
Amalekites, and all the children of the east, lay along in the valley,
like grasshoppers for multitude. * * * And when Gideon was come, behold,
there was a man that told a dream. * * * And when Zeba and Zalmunna
fled, he pursued after them, and took the two kings of Midian, Zeba and
Zalmunna, and discomfited all the host.

“And Gideon the son of Joash returned from the battle before the sun was
up. * * * Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us,
both thou and thy son, and thy son’s son also, for thou hast delivered
us from the hand of Midian. And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a
request of you, that you would give me every man the ear-rings of his
prey. (For they had golden ear-rings, because they were Ishmaelites.)”
See _Judg._ vii. 12–14, also viii. 12–24.

Here then is another instance where the Midianites and the Ishmaelites
are announced to be the same people. “At the mouth of two witnesses
shall the matter be established.” See _Deut._ xix. 15; also 2 _Cor._
xiii. 1. “Now Moses kept the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the
priest of Midian.” _Exod._ iii. 1.

“When Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses’ father-in-law, heard of all
that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, and that the
Lord had brought Israel out of Egypt, then Jethro, Moses’ father-in-law,
took Zipporah, Moses’ wife, (after he had sent her back,) and her two
sons.” _Exod._ xviii. 1, 2, 3.

“And Miriam and Aaron spake against Moses, because of the Ethiopian
woman whom he had married, for he had married an Ethiopian woman.”
_Num._ xii. 1.

Even in the poetic strain of the prophet, there is a vestige that goes
to prove the sameness between the _Midianites_ and the _Ethiopians_. “I
saw the tents of _Cushan_ (כוּשָׁ֑ן _Ethiopians_) in affliction, and the
curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.” _Hab._ iii. 7.

Are these facts no proof that the descendants of Misraim were black?

                  *       *       *       *       *

Let us then proceed to the same inquiry concerning the descendants of
Phut.

In the Antiquities of Josephus, book i. 6, we find the following: “The
children of Ham possessed the land from Syria and Amanus and the
mountains of Lybanus; seizing upon all that was upon the seacoasts and
as far as the ocean, and keeping it as their own. Some, indeed, of its
names are utterly vanished away; others of them being changed, and
another sound given, hardly to be discovered; yet a few there are, which
kept their denominations entire. For of the four sons of Ham, time has
not at all hurt the name of _Chus_; for the Ethiopians, over whom he
reigned, are even at this day, both by themselves and by all men of
Asia, called _Chusites_.” “The memory also of the Mesraites is preserved
in their name, for we who inhabit this country (Judea) call Egypt
_Mestra_, and the Egyptians _Mestreans_. Phut also was the founder of
Lybia, and called the inhabitants Phutites, from himself. There is also
a river in the country of the Moors which bears that name, whence it is
that we may see the greatest part of the Grecian historiographers
mention that river, and the adjoining country, by the appellation of
Phut. But the name it has now has been by change given it from one of
the sons of Mestraim, who was called Lybios.” His name, in the English
version of Genesis, is _Ludim_. From him the Lybian desert has taken its
name, and the country now called Lybia. Thus we discover from Josephus
that the memorials of the nephew had obliterated those of Phut, his
uncle. As Phut was the founder of Lybia, which was at one time called by
his name, it may be well to inquire as to the extent of that region,
that we may know where the descendants of Phut have resided from the
time of their progenitor till now.

In order to form a tolerably correct idea of what was the country once
called Phut, we have to examine how far the son of Misraim extended his
name in superseding him. We quote from the Melpomene of Herodotus, where
he compares the extent of Lybia, Asia, and Europe. Concerning Lybia, he
says—

“Except in that particular part which is contiguous to Asia, the whole
of Lybia is surrounded by the sea. The first person who has proved this
was, as far as we are able to judge, Necho, king of Egypt: when he had
desisted from his attempt to join, by a canal, the Nile with the Arabian
Gulf, he despatched some vessels, under the conduct of Phœnicians, with
directions to pass the columns of Hercules, and, after penetrating the
Northern Ocean, to return to Egypt.

“These Phœnicians, taking their course from the Red Sea, entered into
the Southern Ocean. On the approach of autumn they landed in Lybia, and
planted some corn in the place where they happened to find themselves.
When this was ripe, and they had cut it down, they again departed.

“Having thus consumed two years, they in the third doubled the columns
of Hercules and returned to Egypt. Their relation may obtain attention
from others, but to me it seems incredible; for they affirm that, having
sailed round Lybia, they had the sun on their right hand. Thus was Lybia
for the first time known.”

Hanno, a Carthaginian, was sent, about 600 years before our era, with
30,000 of his countrymen, to found colonies on what is now the western
coast of Africa. His account commences—“The voyage of Hanno, commander
of the Carthaginians, round the parts of _Lybia_, which lie beyond the
pillars of Hercules.”

In the body of the work he says—“When we had passed the pillars on our
voyage, and sailed beyond them two days, we founded the first city,
which we named Thurmiaterium. Below it lay an extensive plain.
Proceeding thence towards the west, we came to Solous, a promontory of
Lybia.”

Having proceeded on with his voyage, he says—“We came to the great
_Lixus_, which flows from Lybia; on its banks the Lixitæ, a shepherd
tribe, were feeding their flocks, among whom we continued several days,
on friendly terms. Beyond the Lixitæ dwell the inhospitable
_Ethiopians_.”

Herodotus, immediately preceding our quotation of him, says—“Lybia
commences where Egypt ends; about Egypt the country is narrow; one
hundred thousand orgiæ, or one thousand stadia, comprehend the space
between this and the _Red Sea_. Here the country expands and takes the
name of Lybia.”

Africa, to an indefinite extent, was the country of Phut.

The result of the inquiry thus far is, that the tribes of Phut
amalgamated with the descendants of Misraim, until all family memorials
of them became extinct. But let us examine what memorials of Phut are to
be found in the holy books. “Ethiopia and Egypt were thy strength, _Put_
and _Lubim_ were thy helpers.” _Nahum_ iii. 9.

_Put_ is the same Phut; in the text the _letter_ is _dagheshed_, which
takes away the aspirate sound. We here notice that _Put_ and _Lubim_ are
associated together.

“They of Persia, and of Lud, and of Phut, were in thine army, thy men of
war.” _Ezek._ xxvii. 10.

“Persia, Ethiopia, and Lybia with them: all of them with shield and
helmet.” _Ezek._ xxxviii. 5.

In this instance the word _Lybia_ is translated from _Phut_. We take
this as proof that the country of the son of Misraim and Phut was the
same, and the two families amalgamated.

“Come up, ye horses, and rage, ye chariots: and let the mighty men come
forth, the Ethiopians and the Lybians that handle the shield.” _Jer._
xlvi. 9. _Lybians_ is also here translated from _Phut_.

“Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host?” _2 Chron._ xvi. 8.
There Phut is lost in that of Lubim, as accounted for by Josephus. The
families were wholly amalgamated, the nephew carrying off the trophy of
remembrance.

The proof that the family of Phut were black is rather inferential than
positive; but can the mind fail to determine that it is certain?

But again, Phut, as an appellative, signifies _scattered_. Thus Num. x.
30. “Let thine enemies be scattered,” (פֻּצּוּ _phutsu_.) In Genesis x.
18, it is used with the same Heemanti, and with the same effect, which
we have noticed in the word _Naamah_, thus: “And afterwards were the
families of the Canaanites _spread abroad_,” נָפֹ֔צוּ _naphotsu_. The
idea is, by the influence of the circumstances attending them, _they
were scattered_. The condition is involuntary, the action implied is
reflective. A similar use of the word occurs in 2 Samuel xviii. 8: “The
battle was scattered,” נָפִֹצֶו֯ת _naphotseth_; that is, it was
scattered only as it was forced to be by the circumstances attending it.
The distinctive appellation thus of the family of Phut, means a
scattered people. The phonetic synonyme of Phut means scattered, in all
the Shemitic tongues.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Thus in Arabic, فَاَطس _phats_, and its variations, put down, _abiit_,
_peregrinatus fuit_ in terra, &c. In Coptic, Ⲫⲏⲧ fet _phet_ has the same
meaning; but in the hieroglyphical writings of the Copts, found in
Egypt, the idea _scattered_ is represented by an arrow. But an arrow is
called _phet_, because it is shot away, scattered. And the country or
people of the _Phutites_ is represented by a _bow_, _segment_ of a
_globe_, _nine arrows_, and an _undulating surface_. Those who have made
researches in such matters say, the phonetic power of this is
_nephaiat_. It will be perceived to be quite analogous to the _Heemanti_
prefixed to the root. _The people who have been compelled to be
exceedingly scattered._

When Jonathan wished in an emphatic manner to signify to his friend
David that he should depart, go off from his family, &c., he shot an
arrow beyond him. Was not the arrow emblematical of what was supposed
his only safe condition?

These explanations as to the significance of the word Phut will enable
us better to understand _Zephaniah_ iii. 10. “From beyond the rivers of
Ethiopia, my suppliants, _even the daughter of my dispersed_,
(בַּת־פּוּצַ֔י _bath Putsa_, the descendants of Phut,) shall bring mine
offering.” Unknown and scattered as they are over the trackless wastes
of Africa, yet even to them shall come the knowledge of the true God.
They shall, at one day, come to the knowledge of the truth.

The hieroglyphical record relating to the Phutites is considered, by
those versed in such matters, to point to a period of at least 2000
years anterior to our era. The inference, to our mind, is clear, that
the family of Phut at an exceedingly ancient period was wholly absorbed
and lost sight of among the other families of Ham, especially in that of
Ludim, the oldest son of Mitsraim: that they were of the same colour and
other family distinctions, unless it may be they differed in a deeper
degradation: that for numberless ages the mass of the descent are alone
to be found in the most barbarous portions of Africa.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XII.

In the inquiry, What evidence have we that the Canaanites were black? we
may find it necessary to refer to various facts which have come down to
us, connecting their history with that of the Israelitish people.

Perhaps no fact could be better established than that Abraham lived on
the most friendly terms with the Canaanites. He was a confederate with
their kings. When they lost a battle, he retrieved it. They treated him
with the utmost regard, and he them with a generous liberality. Could he
not have wedded his son among them, to whom he chose?

“And Abraham said unto the eldest servant of his house, that ruled over
all that he had, Put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: and I will
make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven, and the God of the
earth, that thou shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of
the Canaanites among whom I dwell.” _Gen._ xxiv. 2, 3.

Under the circumstances of the case, what could have influenced such a
determination?

“And Rebecca said unto Isaac, I am weary of my life, because of the
daughters of Heth: if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such
as those which are the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do
me? And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, Thou shalt
not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.” _Gen._ xxvii. 46, xxviii.
1.

On what rational ground are we to account for this extraordinary
repugnance?

The conduct of the sons of Jacob does not determine them to have been
very sincerely religious. The soul of Shechem, a prince of the country,
clave unto Dinah their sister; he was rich, and offered ever so much
dowry for an honourable marriage with her; and to show his sincerity,
even abandoned his old, and adopted their religion. There must have been
some other deep and unalterable cause for their unchangeable aversion to
that proposed marriage of their sister.

“When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou goest
to possess it, and hath cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites,
and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the
Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, seven nations greater
and mightier than thou;

“And when the Lord thy God shall deliver them before thee, thou shalt
smite them and utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no covenant with
them, nor show mercy unto them:

“Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt
not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.”
_Deut._ vii. 1, 2, 3.

The laws of God are always predicated upon some sufficient cause: in
such cases we may ever notice a tendency towards the prevention of
deterioration.

“Whosoever lieth with a beast shall surely be put to death.” _Ex._ xxii.
19.

The terms Japhet, Laban, Hor, and their derivatives in significancy ever
include the idea white, of a light colour. These terms are applied among
the descendants of Japheth and Shem, as the appellatives of their races
and individual names, and as adjectives in description of their personal
appearance, too frequently to permit a doubt of these families belonging
to the white race.

There is but a single case in all the holy books, where any of these
terms is applied to a person of colour, and which we trust we have
explained; and if our view be correct, how came the poet to require its
use there, unless to elevate the character he celebrates! Do we use any
term to signify that a person is white in a country where there are none
but white people? Whatever evidence then there may be that the families
of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were white people, is also just as positive
testimony that the Canaanites were black. See _Gen._ xxvi. 34, 35.

But in Judges i. 16, we find that the family of the race of Ishmael out
of which Moses took his wife are denominated Kenites. We think that we
have abundantly proved that they were black. From this connection of
Moses, the Israelites seem to have felt some regard for that race. Now
it appears that some of that descent were afterwards residing in the
cities of Amalek; for we find in 1 Samuel xv. 6, that “Saul said unto
the Kenites, Go, depart, get ye down from among the Amalekites, lest I
destroy you with them, for ye showed kindness to all the children of
Israel when they came out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed.” How should
it be a fact, since they were black, that he could not distinguish them
from the Amalekites, unless the Amalekites were black also?

The Amalekites were Canaanites, notwithstanding they claimed Esau in
their ancestry. “Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan. Adah
the daughter of Ebon the Hittite; * * * and Adah bore to Esau, Eliphaz;
* * * and Timna was concubine to Eliphaz, Esau’s son; and she bore to
Eliphaz, Amalek.” _Gen._ xxxvi. 2, 4, 12.

The Amalekites were one of those tribes, that the Israelites were
particularly commanded to destroy from off the earth; and in them, he
who amalgamates with the daughters of Ham may see his own prospect as to
posterity.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XIII.

There are circumstances in evidence that the descendants of Ham were
black, more properly referable to the whole family than to either
particular branch.

Among this class of circumstances, we might mention the tradition so
universal through the world, that we know no age of time or portion of
the globe that can be named in exception, that the descendants of Ham
were black; and that the fact announced by that tradition is made
exceedingly more probable by the corresponding tradition, that the
descendants of Japheth and Shem were white.

The holy books provide proof that Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca,
Jacob, Leah, and Rachel, were white. Their descendants sojourned in
Egypt in a state of bondage about four hundred years, in the course of
which time there was a law that all the male Hebrew children should be
put to death at their birth. When the mother of Moses put him in the ark
of bulrushes, she would have disguised his birth as much as possible,
for the safety of his life. Yet no sooner had the daughter of Pharaoh
beheld the infant than she proclaimed it to be a Hebrew child. If there
was no difference of colour, from whence this quick decision as to the
nationality of an infant three months old?

But during the residence of the Israelites in Egypt, it is to be
apprehended there was more or less commixture between the two races;
and, if the two races were of different colour, that there would have
been left us some allusion to such offspring; and so we find the fact.

“And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six
hundred thousand on foot, that were men, besides children. And a mixed
multitude went up also with them.” _Exod._ xii. 37, 38. The word
“_mixed_” is translated from עָרָב _ereb, arab_. The word means of
_mixed-blood_, that is, the mixture of the white man with the black; and
in consequence thereof is often used to mean black itself, and is
universally applied as the appellative, and has become the established
name of the mixed-blooded people of Arabia, the _Arabs_; and because it
became a common term to express the idea black, a dark colour, &c., it
was applied to the raven; and even at this day, who can tell whether
Elijah was fed by the _ravens_ or the _Arabs_, because the one word was
used to mean both or either. _And a multitude of persons of colour, of
Hebrew and black parentage, went up also with them._

This word is used to express the idea of a mulatto race, in _Num._ xi.
4, and the “_mixed multitude_;” also _Neh._ xiii. 3, “They separated
from Israel all the _mixed multitude_;” also _Jer._ xxv. 20, 24, thus:
“And all the mingled people,” _mixed-blooded_, “and all the kings of
Arabia, and all the kings of the _mingled people_,” _mixed-blooded
people_. By the expression _mixed multitude_, it is clear Moses included
the offspring of the Hebrew with the race of Ham. But would there have
been such distinction if there was no difference of colour? It will be
recollected that the children of Ishmael were three-fourths of
Misraimitish blood, consequently quite dark. It will also be recollected
that when Esau perceived how extremely offensive to his father and
mother was his connection with the Canaanitish women, that he took wives
of the house of Ishmael. It should also be recollected that Ishmael
named one of his sons _Kedar_. As we shall hereafter refer to this word,
we propose to examine its meaning and formation. It is of Arabic
derivation, _Arab._ درࣨ, Hebrew דַּר _dar_, and in this form is used
_Esth._ i. 6, and translated _black marble_. With the prefix of the
Hebrew koph it becomes קֵדָר _Kedar_, and is equivalent to “_the
black_.” It is used in Hebrew to mean black, in 1 _Kings_ xviii. 45;
_Job_ vi. 16, 30, 28; _Isa_ lx. 3; _Jer._ iv. 28; _Ezek._ xxxii. 7, 8,
and many other places. The very name of the son of Ishmael was
tantamount to “_the black_.”

In the poem called Solomon’s Song, the female whose praises are therein
celebrated, says, “I am _black_, but comely, O ye daughters of
Jerusalem, as the tents of _Kedar_, as the curtains of Solomon. Look not
upon me because I am _black_; because the sun hath looked upon me: my
mother’s children were angry with me, they made me the keeper of the
vineyards, but mine own vineyards have I not kept.” _Cant._ i. 5, 6.

The word _black_, which twice occurred in the text, is translated from
שָחַר _shahar_, with many variations. The words mean abstractly the idea
_black_. Examples of its use will be found in _Lev._ xiii. 31, 37, thus:
“And there is no _black_ hair in it.” “And there is _black_ hair grown
up therein.” _Job_ xxx. 30: “My skin is _black_ upon me.” _Zech._ vi. 2,
6: “And in the second chariots _black_ horses. The _black_ horses that
are therein.” _Lam._ iv. 8: “Their visage is _blacker_ than a coal.”
_Cant._ v. 11: “His locks are bushy and _black_ as a raven.” There is no
mistake about the meaning of this word; she was surely _black_, and she
says that she is as _black_ as the tents of _Kedar_.

The inquiry, then, now is, who was she? When we take into consideration
the Asiatic mode of expression, from the term “because the sun hath
looked upon me,” we are forced to understand that she was from a more
southern region. That she was not a native of Palestine, or especially
of Jerusalem. Figures of somewhat analogous import are occasionally
found among the Roman poets. But we suppose, no one will undertake the
argument that she was black, merely because she had been exposed to the
sun!

In vii. 1 of the Hebrew text, she is called _Shulamite_. Some suppose
this is a formation of the Gentile term שׁוּנֵם _Shunem_, because they
say the _lamda_ was sometimes introduced. In that case it would be the
synonyme of _Shunamite_, and would locate her in the tribe of Issacar.
But we see no necessity of a forced construction, when a very easy and
natural one is more obvious. We omit the _dagesh_. שׁוּלַמִית
_Shulammith_ is readily formed as the feminine of שְׁלֹמֹה _Shelomoh,
Solomon_, after the Arabic form شُليْمَنࣨ _Suleiman_, and, so used,
would be quite analogous to what is now quite common—to apply the
husband’s name as an appellative of the wife. Upon the occasion of her
consecration into Solomon’s household, she well might, even at that age,
be called by a term that would imply such consecration, especially in
the poem celebrating her nuptials. And we may remark that the use of
this word is in strict conformity to the usage of the Hebrew and Arabic
poets, because it creates an implied _paronomasia_, derived from שׁוּל,
signifying that she was a captive by her love to Solomon, and if she
stood in any such relation to him politically, the beauty of the figure
would at that age have been considered very greatly increased. The
poets, at that age of time, in compositions of the character of this
poem, appear to have been ever on the search for an occasion to
introduce figures of this class; and the more fanciful and extreme, the
more highly relished. We fail therefore to derive any knowledge of her
origin from this term. We have dwelt upon this particular thus long,
merely because commentators have been so desirous to find out a clue to
the history of the poem. Some commentators of elevated character,
suppose this subject of their epithalamium to have been the daughter of
Pharaoh, simply because she was _black_, and is addressed: “O prince’s
daughter!” Undoubtedly she was the daughter of some prince or king. But
the question now, is of what one? There is no probability that the kings
of Egypt, nor even the nobility of that kingdom, had been of the race of
Ham for many ages. Egypt had been conquered by the Shemites as early as
the days of Abraham, and there is no proof that the descendants of Ham
ever again ascended the throne; although, perhaps, their religion had
been adopted by their successors from motives of policy, the great mass
of the population being of the old stock.

In fact, the mixed-blooded races, and indeed the Shemites of pure blood,
have, from time immemorial, shown a disposition to settle in Egypt. The
Persians and the Greeks have also, for a very long time, aided in the
amalgamation of the Egypt of the middle ages of the world.

But she is made to say that she is “the rose of Sharon;” as much as to
say, _the most excellent of her country_. This district of country will
be found to embrace the Ammonites, and perhaps some other of the ancient
tribes of the family of Ham, at that time under the government of
Solomon. And, iv. 8, we find Sharon called by its Ammonitish name, amid
a cluster of figures having relation to the locality and productions of
that country.

In short, the whole body of this extraordinary poem points to the region
of the Ammonites for her native place of abode. Now, since Solomon had
an Ammonitess by the name of Naamah for a wife, and since he selected
her son to succeed him on the throne, it seems at least quite probable
she was the person it commemorates; and that fact will make quite
intelligible the allusion to her having been elevated from a servile
condition. But, nevertheless, if it shall be thought not sufficiently
proved that she was the mother of Rehoboam, yet she surely was of some
one of the Canaanitish or Hamitic tribes, and was as surely black; and
so far is in direct proof that the descendants of Ham generally were
black also.

There are incidents of this poem which it would seem cannot be explained
on other ground than that this marriage was one of state policy on the
part of Solomon; and the queen upon this occasion selected was from some
one of the heathen nations of the descendants of Ham, whom he had
subjected to his government. It will be recollected that these nations,
whom the Israelites had failed to destroy, had omitted no occasion to
make war on the Hebrews, from the time of Joshua down to that of David;
and that they occasionally had them in subjection.

Solomon had no guarantee how long his rule over them would prove quiet,
or how far they would yield obedience to his successor. What could
induce him to marry an Ammonite princess, and place her son upon his
throne, if not to effect this purpose? Even at the time of the nuptials
a reference to this political union might well find a place in the songs
to which it gave birth. We introduce one of the incidents to which we
allude: we select the close of the sixth strain. This poem is written in
the form of a dialogue, mostly between the bride and groom.

_Solomon._ Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may look
upon thee.

_Naamah._ What will ye see in the Shulamite?

_Solomon._ As it were the company of two armies.

This surely needs no comment. The poem had already recited every mental
and personal quality; was it then unnatural delicately to allude to her
political importance? The art of the poet, however, to cover the
allusion, recommences a view of her personal charms, changes his order,
and commences with her feet.

Much learning has come to many untenable conclusions concerning this
poem, among which, that of the Targum may be placed in the lead.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XIV.

We have heretofore noticed how, in 2 _Chron._ xvi. 8, the name Phut is
lost in that of Lubim, as accounted for by Josephus. But it should be
recollected that the prophet Hanani most distinctly refers to one of the
wars between the black tribes and the Jewish people, of which there had
been a long series from the exodus down.

We propose to adduce an argument from the language used in the
description of these wars.

In the time of King Asa, the invading army is described thus: “And there
came out against them Zerah, the Ethiopian, with a host of a thousand
thousand and three hundred chariots. And Asa cried unto the Lord his
God; so the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah, and
the Ethiopians fled: and Asa, and the people that were with him, pursued
them unto Gerar, and the Ethiopians were overthrown.” These people the
prophet calls Ethiopians and Lubims. This term proves that many of them
were from Lybia. Now is it to be presumed that so vast an army, one
million of men and three hundred chariots, was not composed of all the
tribes between the remotest location of any named and the place of
attack?

But this battle was commenced in the valley of Zephathah, in Philistia,
and pursued to Gerar, a city of the same country. “And they smote all
the cities round about Gerar. For the fear of the Lord came upon them,
and they spoiled all the cities, for there was exceeding much spoil in
them. They smote all the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and
camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem.” See 2 _Chron._ xiv. 14,
15.

These facts could not have existed had not the Philistines composed a
part of the army.

Yet they are all Ethiopians. Is this no evidence that the tribes of Ham
generally were black?

But again, with the view to arrive at a greater certainty as to what
races did compose these armies, we propose to examine that which invaded
Jerusalem during the reign of Rehoboam.

“And it came to pass when Rehoboam had established the kingdom, and
had strengthened himself, he forsook the law of the Lord, and all
Israel with him; and it came to pass in the fifth year of King
Rehoboam, Shishak, king of Egypt, came up against Jerusalem, because
they had transgressed against the Lord, with twelve hundred chariots
and threescore thousand horsemen; and the people were without number
that came with him out of Egypt, the Lubims, the Sukkims, and the
Ethiopians; and he took the fenced cities, which pertain to Judah,
and came to Jerusalem.” 2 _Chron._ xii. 1–10. “And the people were
without number that came with him out of Egypt, _the Lubims_, _the
Sukkims_, _and the Ethiopians_.” The Hebrew construction of the
latter clause of this is thus: מִמִּצְרַיִם לוּבִ֥ים סֻכִּיִּ֖ים
וְכוּשִַׁים׃ _Mim-mits-raim, Lubim, Sukkiyyim ve Cushim_. We suggest
a slight error in the translation of these words. The prefix מ _mem_
preceding _Mitsraim_, we read a preposition, _out of_, _from_, &c.,
influencing and governing the two following words also; as, _from
Egypt_, _from Lybia_, _from Succoth_. It will be noticed that
_Cushim_ is preceded by the prefix ו _vav_. Grammarians have written
much upon this particle: we cannot enter into an argument on Hebrew
grammar, but, with all the learning that has been expended on this
particle, the Hebrew scholar must find the fact to be, that it is
sometimes used to designate a _result_; and we take occasion here to
say that, in our opinion, Professor Gibbs has given a more definite
and philosophical description of the Hebrew use of this particle,
than any lexicographer of modern research.

Suppose an ancient Hebrew physician wished to teach that certain
diseases were incurable, that they ended in death, might he not have
said, מִשַׁחֶפֶת קַדַּחַת אָנוּשׁ וְמוּה׃ _mish shahhepheth kaddahhath
anish vemuth_,—_from consumption, burning fever, the mortal sickness,
termination is death?_ Or, allow our Hebrew not to be so classical,
could he not have expressed the idea after this form? “The army was
without number, from Egypt, from Lybia, from the Nomads, all
Ethiopians.” And we here suggest the query, whether this is not the true
reading? We do not propose that this prefixed וְ _vav_ has the power of
an adjective or a verb, although it might require the one or the other
to give the idea in English. What we say is, that it is the sign of the
thing which is the result of the preceding nouns. If it had been used
here as a connective particle, then the two preceding nouns would also
have had it for a prefix. Such was the Hebrew idiom. It would then have
read, “And the people were,” &c., from Egypt, and from Lybia, and from
the Nomads, and from Ethiopia, as the translator seems to have supposed.
But, as it is, it determines them all to have been Ethiopians. This will
be in strict conformity with the description of the army at the time of
Asa. The invading army, at that time, was denominated Ethiopian,
although it is evident that many of the Hamitic tribes composed it.

The real cause of all these wars was the contest whether Palestine
should be held by the Hamitic race, or by the Shemitic, who were bearing
rule. Keeping this in mind, let us note how perfectly natural is this
description of those who composed the army under Shishak. The troops
first collected would be from among his own immediate people, the
Egyptians. The next, those who lived beyond him from the point of
attack, to wit, the Lubims, who lived to the west of Egypt. These being
collected together, they would commence their march, and the Nomads be
added to the list of the army after they joined it; but none other than
those governed by the same impulses would attach themselves to it.
Suffer us to illustrate this description of Shishak’s army by supposing
a somewhat analogous case, in much more modern times:—That during the
reign of Elizabeth, King Philip of Spain had made war on England, upon
the issue of whether the Protestant or Catholic faith should prevail in
that country. Philip would have first collected troops in Spain. He may
be supposed to collect large numbers in Portugal. These Spanish and
Portuguese troops may be supposed to march through France, and his army
vastly increased there; and, when upon the coast of England, some
Froissart would have said, that the people who came with Philip were
without number, Spaniards, Portuguese, French, all Catholics. The manner
of such description would be in exact similitude with this description
of Shishak’s army. Any one who is acquainted with the history of the
Crusades will readily see how a similar description would have in truth
fitted the army of the Cross. We think it proof conclusive that the
descendants of Ham were black. But we might add some proof from sketches
of profane history. In the 22d section of Euterpe, Herodotus says that
the natives on the Nile are universally black. In the 32d section,
giving an account of a party of Neesamonians, who in Africa were out
upon an excursion, he says—“While they were thus employed, seven men, of
dwarfish stature, came where they were, seized their persons, and
carried them away. They were mutually ignorant of each others’ language.
But the Neesamonians were conducted over marshy grounds to a city, in
which all the inhabitants were of diminutive appearance and of a black
colour.”

In the 57th section, he gives an account of an Egyptian priestess who
was brought among the Threspoti. He says that “the circumstance of her
being black explains to us her Egyptian origin.”

In the 104th section, he says—“The Cholchians certainly appear to be of
Egyptian origin, which indeed, before I had conversed with any one on
the subject, I had always believed. But as I was desirous of being
satisfied, I interrogated the people of both countries. The result was,
that the Cholchians seemed to have a better remembrance of the
Egyptians, than the Egyptians of the Cholchians. The Egyptians were of
the opinion that the Cholchians were descended of a part of the troops
of Sesostris: to this I myself was also inclined, because they are
black, and have their hair short and curling.”

Cambyses fought the black tribes of Egypt and Africa under Amasis, in
the western parts of Arabia. Herodotus says, (Thalia, section 12th,)
“The bones of those who fell in the engagement were soon afterwards
collected, and separated into two distinct heaps. It was observed of the
Persians, that their heads were so extremely soft as to yield to the
slight impression even of a pebble. Those of the Egyptians, on the
contrary, were so firm that the blow of a large stone could hardly break
them. * * * I saw the very same fact at Papremis, after examining the
bones of those who, under the conduct of Achæmenes, son of Darius, were
defeated by Inaius the African.”

Herodotus notices the distinction between the Arabs and the Negroes, but
calls them all Ethiopians. In the 70th section of Polymnia, he
says—“Those Ethiopians who came from the most eastern part of their
country, served with the Indians. These differed from the former in
nothing but their language and their hair. The Oriental Ethiopians have
their hair straight: those of Africa have their hair more crisp and
curling than other men.”

Herodotus lived and wrote about five hundred years before our era. We
have quoted him through a translation, but not without examining the
original.

We shall close our evidence on this point with a single quotation from
_Judg._ iii. 8 and 10. The children of Israel intermarried with the
Canaanites: the writer says, “Therefore the anger of the Lord was hot
against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of _Chusan rishathaim_,”
_the wicked Ethiopians_. Whereas it is as well known as any other fact
of biblical history, that these “_wicked Ethiopians_” were none other
than the Philistines and other aboriginal tribes of the land of Canaan.

Upon the conquest of Palestine by the Israelites, portions of the
Canaanites overspread the approachable parts of Africa, where numerous
hordes of their race were already in possession. For ages, there is said
to have stood near Tangier, a monument with inscriptions signifying that
it was built in commemoration of the people who fled from the face of
_Joshua_ the robber. From the presumption of this being a fact, and from
a collection of other facts connected with early commerce, Moore, in the
first volume of his History of Ireland, has strongly suggested that the
ancient Irish are partially indebted to the ancient Canaanites for their
origin; whereas we think we have sufficiently proved that they were
black. We hope the impulsive sons of the Emerald Isle will repel the
insult. But, if what Moore says be true, it only proves another portion
of our theory; for, as sin sinks to all moral and physical degradation
and slavery, so virtue and holiness elevate to freedom and all animal
and mental perfections; and since _Iern_ was for ages regarded as an
island of saints, Moore may have the benefit of the argument, if he
chooses, whereby to account for the high-toned feeling and personal
perfections of the modern Irish.

In conclusion, from the history of the family of man, we may all know
that the descendants of Japheth and Shem, when free from amalgamation
with the black tribes, are white people. Unless then the descendants of
Ham were black, how are we to account for the phenomena of the existence
of that colour among men? Philosophy has been in search, and history has
been on the watch; facts upon facts have been recorded touching every
matter; but have you ever heard of the uncontaminated descendants of
Japheth, living in the extreme, or in the central zone, exhibiting the
woolly crown of the sons of Ham?


                           ------------------

                               LESSON XV.

We suggest some origin, some complexion of thought, from whence may have
emanated the word “Ham,” and its derivatives, as found to have existed
in the days of the prophets; and we may here state that the Shemitic
languages seem to exist all in a cluster, like so many grapes; nor are
we able to say which stands nearest the vine. Doubts may be raised as to
the priority of any one named; yet we might adduce some proof that the
Coptic is younger, as we could that the Greek is younger still.

The Arabic word مَا _ma_ corresponds with the Syriac ܡܳܐ _ma_, and the
Hebrew מָה _mah_, and has been translated into the Latin _quid_, as an
interrogatory, used in all languages very elliptically. Thus, _Gen._ iv.
10: מֶ֣ה עָשִׂ֑יתָ “_What have you done?_” If the עָשִׂ֑יתָ had been
omitted, the מֶ֣ה would have expressed the whole idea.

It was an interrogatory expression of exclamation and astonishment, to
one who had committed a heinous offence. So when Laban pursued, Jacob
said, מָה _mah, What is my trespass?_ &c., as if in derision,—_What is
my horrid crime?_ Ever since the days of Cain some have manifested
wicked acts, as though they were operated on by some strong desire, some
coveting overwhelming to reason,—as if the action was in total disregard
of the consequences that must follow it. This state of mind seems to
have been expressed, in some measure, by the particular use of this
particle. Let us conceive that such a state of mind must be a heated, a
disturbed state of mind, as was that of Cain, and as must have been that
of Jacob, had he stolen the goods of Laban. The word thus incidentally
expressive of such an idea, by being preceded or influenced by a
particle implying particularity, giving it definiteness and boundary,
must necessarily be converted into an action or actor, implying some
portion of the primitive idea; and hence we find הֵֽמָּה and همُّ and
هَمَي _ham_ and _hami_ in Arabic, ܚܳܡ _ham_ in Syriac, to mean a cognate
idea, i. e. _to grow hot_, &c., _to boil_, _rage_, &c., sometimes
_tumult_, &c., &c. And we now ask, these being facts, is it difficult to
point in the direction of the origin of the word Ham? Nor is it a matter
of any importance, if the relationship exists, whether the noun and verb
have descended from such exclamatory particle, or the reverse; yet we
can easily imagine, in the early condition of things, that the mind,
taking cognisance of some horrid act, would impel some such exclamation,
and that it would become the progenitor of the name of the act or actor.

However this may be, each Hebrew scholar will inform us that the word
הָם is an irregular Hebrew word. Grammarians have usually arranged words
of this peculiar class among the Heemanti and augmented words, and they
have accurately noticed that the punctuatists have always preceded the ם
_mem_ by a (ָ) _Kamets_, or a (וֹ) _Kholem_. This circumstance has
induced Hiller to suppose that the ם _mem_, as a _Heemanti_, was a
particle, while the adjunct was either הֵם or אוֹם; but all agree that
the form of these nouns shows that they are intensive in their
signification.

If then הָם _ham_ is a particle of הָמָה _hamah_, which carries with it
the ideas before named, it may be less difficult to conceive how the
particle, when added to other nouns, will make them intensive also,
while the particle itself would be used alone to express some intensity
in an emphatic manner, more particularly of its root.

But we find the word חָ֞ם _ham_, as applied to the son of Noah, from the
root הָמָה _hammah_, or חֵמַה and used in Hebrew thus: In _Josh._ ix.
12, “This our bread we took hot חָ֞ם for our provision,” &c. _Job_
xxxvii. 17, and vi. 17: “How thy garments _warm_ (חַמִּ֑ים _hammin,
hot_) when he quieteth the earth by the south wind.” “What time they wax
warm, they vanish when it is _hot_,” בְּ֝חֻמּ֗וֹ _behummo, in the heat_.
So _Gen._ viii. 22: “While the earth remaineth, seed-time and harvest,
cold and heat וָחֹ֜ם, and summer and winter, and day and night, shall
not cease.” _Gen._ xviii. 1: “And he sat in the tent door in the heat
בְּחֹ֥ם of the day.” 1 _Sam._ xi. 9–11: “To-morrow, by the time the sun
is hot, (בְּחֹ֣ם _be hom, in heat_.) And slew the Ammonites until the
heat of the day,” עַדחֹם _ad hom, until the hot_. xxi. 7 (the 6th of the
English text): “To put _hot_, חֹ֔ם _hot_ in the day,” &c. 2 _Sam._ iv.
5: “And came about the _heat_ of the day,” כְּחֹ֣ם _ke hom, at the_
_hot_. _Isa._ xxiii. 4: “Like a clear _heat_ כְּחֹם upon herbs, and like
a cloud of dew in the heat בְּחֹ֥ם of harvest.” _Hag._ i. 6: “Ye clothe
you, but there is none warm,” לְחֹ֥ם _be hom, not hot_. _Jer._ li. 39:
“In their heats,” בְּחֻמָּם _be hummon, in their heats_, &c.

But in Hebrew, as in some other languages, the phonetic power expressing
the idea _hot_, _heat_, &c. was cognate with rage, stubbornness, anger,
wickedness, &c. &c., and hence we say _hell is hot_, and hence, in
_Dan._ iii. 13, 19: “Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage,” חֱמָֹא _hama_,
_heat_, _hot_. “Therefore shall he go forth with great fury,”
בְּחִמָּ֣א֥ _be hama_, _heat_, _rage_, _fury_, &c.

Should it be said, the words in their declination, or rather the affixed
and suffixed particles, differ, and are marked with different vowel
points, we answer by quoting _Lee’s Heb. Lex._ p. 205: “This variety in
the vowels may be ascribed either to the punctuatists or the copyists,
and is of no moment. But as the word חָם _ham_ was thus applied in
Hebrew to the original idea of active caloric, as emanating from the
sun, so it will agree with its homophone in Arabic and Syriac; for let
it be noticed, that the Arabic word حَمٌّ _ham_ or _haman_, means to be
_hot_, as of the sun. So the Syriac ܗܡܳܐ _hama_ means _œstus_, _calor_,
&c. But in _Deut._ xxxii. 24, 33, it is translated _poison_; thus,
poison of serpents, and ‘the poison of dragons,’ from the notion that
great heat, rage, anger, &c. are cognate with poison.”

This word occurs in _Zeph._ ii. 12. The received version is, “Ye
Ethiopians also, ye shall _be_ slain by my sword.” The original is,
גַּם־אַתֶּ֣ם כּוּשִׁ֔ים חַלְלֵ֥י חַרְבִּ֖י הֵֽמָּה, and has been subject
to much investigation. Gesenius considers the word הֵֽמָה a pronoun in
the second person, and Lee seems to side with him, but says, “the truth
is, the place is inverted and abrupt, and should read thus: גַּם־אַתֶּ֣ם
חַלְלֵ֥י חַרְבִּ֖י כּוּשִׁ֔ים הֵֽמָּה,” and which he translates
thus—“_Even ye (are) (the) wounded of my sword_,—they are _Cushites_.”
We do not perceive how he has made the passage more plain. Let us, for a
moment, examine how the Hebrews used this form חֵמָה or חֵם, that we may
the better comprehend its sense in the present instance. _Jer._ v. 22:
“Though they _roar_,” וְהָמ֥וּ _ve hamu_, _rage_, &c., “yet can they not
pass over it!” vi. 23: “Their voice roareth like the sea,” יֶֽהֱמֶה
_rageth_, &c. xxxi. 35; “Which divideth the sea, when the waves thereof
_roar_,” וַיֶֽהֱמ֖וּ _say ye_, _hemen_, _rage_, &c. li. 15: “When her
waves do roar (וְהָמ֤וּ _ve hamu se_, _rage_, &c.) like great waters.”
_Isa._ li. 13: “But I am the Lord thy God that divided the sea, whose
waves roared,” _raged_. li. 13: “Because of the _fury_ (חֲמַ֣ת _rage_,
&c.) of the oppressor,” “and where is the fury (חֲמַ֥ת _hamath_, _rage_,
&c.) of the oppressor?” li. 15: “whose waves _roared_,” וַיֶֽהֱמ֖וּ
_raged_, &c. _Ps._ xlvi. 4 (the 3d of the English text): “_Though_ the
waters thereof _roar_ (יֶֽהֱמ֣וּ _rage_, &c.) and be troubled,”
יֶחְמְ֣רוּ _great agitation_, _rage_, &c.

But let us take a more particular view of this word, as used in the
passage from _Zephaniah_. The Septuagint has translated this passage in
Καὶ ὑμεῖς Αἰθίοπες τραυματίαι ῥομφαίας μοῦ ἐστέ, which is very much like
our received version.

But it should be noticed that it has translated the Hebrew word חַלְלִ֥י
into τραυματίαι; τραῦμα would imply the injury, wounds, carnage, or
slaughter of a whole nation, army, or body of people; but τραυματίαι
implies individuality, and reaches no farther than the person or persons
named. The prophet had been uttering denunciations against many nations,
but in this passage emphatically selects the Ethiopians as individuals;
and the Greek translator evidently discovered there was in this
denunciation something peculiarly personal as applied to the Ethiopians.

The Hebrew conveys the idea of reducing, subjecting, or bringing low, as
by force, to cause to sink in character as in _Ps._ lxxxix. 40 (39th of
the English text): “Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant:
thou hast חִלַּֽלְתָּ _wounded_, _subjected_, or _reduced_ his crown to
the earth.” _Ezek._ xxii. 26: “Her priests have violated my law, and
have חַלְּל֣וּ (_wounded_, _subjected_, _lowered the character of_) my
holy things.”

But the word חַלְּלֵי is here used in the construct state, showing that
the idea imposed by this word was brought about by the following term,
חַדְבִי֖, which the Septuagint translates rhomphaias, which properly
means the Thracian spear; but חַרְבּי means any weapon, a goad harpoon
as well as a sword. The fact is, neither of these words were the usual
Hebrew or Greek term to mean a sword. The Greeks would have called a
sword μάχαιρα, and the Hebrews חֲנִית or דֹחַמ or כִּדוֹן, or perhaps
שׂכה; and Dr. Lee has given Ἅρπη as the Greek translation of חַרְבִ֖י,
which means a sickle, a goad for driving elephants, &c. It was a thing
to inflict wounds by which to enforce subjection, and the idea is that
the Ethiopians are covered by wounds by their being reduced by it, or
that they shall be. When Jeremiah announced captivity and slavery to the
Egyptians and the adjacent tribes, he used this word as the instrument
of its execution. Thus _Jer._ xlvi. 14: “Declare ye in Egypt, and
publish in Migdol, and publish in Noph, and in Taphanhes; say ye, Stand
fast, and prepare thee, for the _sword_ חֶ֖רֶב shall devour round about
thee.” 16: “Arise and let us go again to our own people, and to the land
of our nativity, from the oppressing _sword_,” חֶ֖רֶב. Many such
instances might be cited, showing the fact that, in poetic strain, this
was the instrument usually named, as in the hand of him subjecting
others to bondage; and much in the same manner, even at this day, we use
the term “whip,” in the hand of the master, in reference to the
enforcement of his authority over his slave.

In a further view of the word חֵמָּה, as used in this passage, we deem
it proper to state that Gibbs considers it a pronoun of the third person
plural, masculine, _they_, and adds, “sometimes” (probably an
incorrectness drawn from the language of common life) “used in reference
to women,” and quotes _Zech._ v. 10; _Cant._ vi. 8; _Ruth_ i. 22. And he
further adds, “It is used for the substantive verb in the third person
plural, 1 _Kings_ viii. 40, ix. 20; _Gen._ xxv. 16; also for the
substantive verb in the second person, _Zeph._ ii. 12: ‘Also, ye
Cushites חַלְלֵ֥י חַרְבִּ֖י הֵֽמָּה _shall be slain by my sword_.’”
_Gibbs’s Lex._ p. 175. In Stuart’s Grammar, p. 193, he says, “_Personal
pronouns of the third person sometimes stand simply in the place of the
verb of existence_;” e. g. he cites _Gen._ ix. 3, _Zech._ i. 9, and
says, “Plainer still is the principle in such cases, as follows: _Zeph._
ii. 12, ‘Ye Cushites, victims of my sword אַתֶּ֣ם הֵֽמָּה are ye.’”

The fact is, the verb of existence, called the verb “to be,” and the
verb substantive, in Hebrew, as in all other languages, is often not
expressed, but understood. This circumstance is well explained in
Gessenius’ Hebrew Grammar, revised by Rodiger, and translated by Conant,
p. 225, thus, “When a personal pronoun is the subject of a sentence,
like a noun in the same position, it does not require for its union with
the predicate a distinct word for the copula, when this consists simply
in the verb ‘to be,’ אָֽנֹכִ֣י הָֽרֹאֶ֔ה ‘_I (am) the seer_,’ _1 Sam._
ix. 19.” And again: “The pronoun of the third person frequently serves
to convert the subject and predicate, and is then a sort of substitute
for the copula of the verb _to be_, e. g. _Gen._ xli. 26: ‘_The seven
good cows_, שֶׁ֤בַע שָׁנִים֙ הֵ֔נָּה _seven years_ (are) _they_.’” To
say in English, “The seven good cows, seven years they,” would be
thought too elliptical; but we do not perceive how the expression
converts “_they_” into the verb “to be.”

But again, the same author says, p. 261: “The union of the
substantive or pronoun, which forms the subject of the sentence,
with another substantive or adjective, as its predicate, is most
commonly expressed by simply writing them together without any
copula. 1 _Kings_ xxiii. 21: יְהוָ֤ה הָֽאֱלֹהִים֙ ‘_Jehovah_ (is)
_the true God_.’” The idiom of the language then does not
necessarily convert הֵמָּה in the passage before us into the verb
“to be.” And here let us repeat the sentence, גַּם־אַתֶּ֣ם
כּוּשִׁ֔ים חַֽלְלֵ֥י חַרְבִּ֖י הֵֽמָּה _Zeph._ ii. 12. It will be
perceived that גַּם־אַתֶּ֣ם are connected _by Makkaph_. Hebrew
scholars do not agree as to how far this character is effective as
an accent. But the rules for its use are—“Makkaph is inserted in the
following cases: 1. Particles, which, from their nature, can never
have any _distinctive_ accent, are mostly connected with other words
by the mark _Makkaph_: גַּם־לְאִישַׁהּ _even to her husband_;
בְּתָם־לְבָבִ֛י _in the integrity of my heart_. _Gen._ xx. 5, &c. 2.
When words are to be construed together, &c., as זַרְעוֹ־ב֖וֹ _its
seed_ (is) within itself. _Gen._ i. 11,” &c.—_Lee’s Lectures_, p.
61.

But Stuart, seeing no way to translate the sentence without making
הִ֖מָּה the verb “_to be_,” 3d person plural, “_are_,” takes אַתֶּ֣ם the
personal pronoun, 2d person plural, equivalent to _ye_ or _you_, away
from גַּם, to which it is attached by _Makkaph_, and carries it down to
precede הֵמָּה in the sentence, and thus reads “_are ye_,” while he
supplies another אַתֶּם֣ as understood to precede כּוּשִים, and reads,
“ye Cushites, victims of my sword are ye.” We consider this as quite as
objectionable as Dr. Lee’s—“_Even ye_ (are) (the) _wounded of my
sword,—they are Cushites_.”

But permit us now to inquire into the probability of הֵמָּה being even a
pronoun. אָנכִי _a-no-khi_ is not believed to be a Hebrew word. It is a
homophone of the Coptic word Ⲁⲛⲟⲕ, and used by the Egyptians, who spoke
Coptic, as the personal pronoun _I_. This word is believed to have been
borrowed by the Hebrews at the time they were in bondage in Egypt, and
the habit of it so strongly established during their four hundred years
of servitude, that neither the literature of the age of Moses nor the
genius of the people could ever eradicate it. Their original personal
pronoun was probably totally lost; nothing analogous to this Coptic term
can be found in any other of the Shemitic tongues. But Lee says that
Gessenius has found it in Punic, and quotes Lehrege-baude, note, p. 200.
In Chaldaic, _the personal pronoun, first person singular_, is אֲנָה
_a-nah_, and its phonetic cognates are found in all the other sister
dialects. We may then well suggest that _the lost_ Hebrew term was אֲנָא
_a-na_, or quite analogous thereto.

Such then being the facts, let us inquire into the origin, composition,
and signification of this Coptic pronoun. It will be agreed that some
language must have had precedence in the world, and it is usually
yielded to the Hebrew. That such precedence was the property of some one
of the Asiatic dialects all agree; and the nearer the subsequent
language exists to its precedent, the more plainly will its descent be
manifest. If the Hebrew was such precedent, or any other of its
immediate sisters, the Coptic, existing in their immediate
neighbourhood, must have been originally very analogous to them.

It is immaterial whether our suggestion be right or wrong as to what
particularly was the lost Hebrew pronoun; let us take the Chaldaic,
which, of all these dialects, was the most nearly like the Hebrew—the
personal pronoun אֲנָה _I_, _I am_, and the word כִּי _ki_, which means
a _mark as a stigma_, indelibly fixed, as burned in, a mark intended
pointedly to indicate something; and hence it became a particle attached
to a word often by Makkaph, whence the attention was to be particularly
called, as, _mark me_, _mark ye_, are _just_, &c. &c. _Isa._ iii. 24: pm
tr1 he 'כִּי תַחַת יוׄפִי' 'kî taḥat ywpî' _a burned mark of stigma_,
instead of beauty. Some have doubted the accuracy of the Hebrew in this
instance, and the fact is, no doubt, that it is rather an Arabicism; but
that in no way affects our deduction; it matters not whether the Coptic
borrowed from Chaldean, Hebrew, or Arabic. These two words are beyond
question the origin, the compound of the Coptic pronoun, meaning and
including the individuality of the first person singular, and originally
expressing also the fact, that such person was _marked_ as a stigma
indelibly, _as burned in_, &c. _Anoki, I, a marked one_; _I, one
deformed as if_ _branded_, &c.; _I, one that carry the mark of_, &c.
&c., was the original idea expressed by this Coptic term of
individuality. Thus it expressed the fact that the person was a
successor in the curses of Ham and Cain, and in no other manner can the
extraordinary appearance of הֵם and sometimes הֵמָּה in the third person
of the pronoun be accounted for. It is evidently from a new and other
source, the same or cognate with the term applied to the son of Noah.

These adjective associations of the pronoun, through the lapse of ages,
would naturally be forgotten by the Copts themselves, and were probably
unknown to the Hebrews; just as we ourselves have forgotten that our
word _obedient_ still expresses some of the qualities of the Hebrew word
עֶבֶד _ebed_ and _abed_, from which it has been derived through the Latin.

This pronoun אָנׄכִ֖י _I_, &c. was often contracted by the Hebrews into
אֲנִ֖י _ani_, and in its declination stood thus:


                 _1st person singular, common gender_:
          אָנכִי sometimes  אֲנִי                  _I_.
                               _Plural_:
          אֲנַֽחְנוּ                                _We_.
                    _2d person singular masculine_:
          אַתָּ֖ה                                  _Thou_.
                               _Plural_:
          אַתֶּ֖ם                                  _You_.
                          _Singular feminine_:
          אַתְּ                                   _Thou, fem._
                               _Plural_:
          אֲתֶּן                                  _You, fem._
                    _3d person singular, masculine_:
          הֽוּא                                  _He_.
                               _Plural_:
          הֵ֥ם _hem_—occasionally  הֵ֖מָה           _They_.

Here we find the word in question, if a pronoun. The feminine of the
third person is הִי֖א, and plural נָה, and yet הֵֽפָּה is used in
_Canticles_ in a condition evidently feminine; and yet in _Zeph._ ii.
12, it is said it must be in the _second person plural_. But can any one
believe that these words, thus arranged in the declination of this
pronoun, could ever have had a common origin? The fact is, no original
language was ever formed from rules; the rules are merely its
description after it is formed. Language, in the infancy of its
formation, resents restraint and all laws, except such as apply to its
incipient state. Suppose a soldier for life should persist in calling
his infant son _soldier_, either playfully or mournfully; the child
would associate the term “soldier” with his individuality, and say
_soldier am sleepy_, &c. In case the soldier’s family was isolated from
the rest of the world, in the land of Nod, or elsewhere, then the family
of languages would be quite apt to have a new term as a personal
pronoun.

More pertinent examples would explain our idea perhaps more fully. There
never was a language upon this earth, of which any thing is known, that
does not show an extraordinary irregularity in the formation of its
personal pronouns,—often giving proof that the different cases and
persons have been formed from different roots. Webster says—“_I_, the
pronoun of the first person, the word which expresses one’s self, or
that by which a speaker or writer denotes himself.” “In _the plural_, we
use _we_ and _us_, which appear to be words radically distinct from
_I_.” Under _we_, he says, “From plural of _I_, or rather a different
word, denoting,” &c. Does any one imagine that _I_, you, me, and _us_
are from the same root? Webster noticed the discrepancy; we could have
hoped that he would have given the world a history of the personal
pronoun of all languages: we know of no intellect more capable. Such a
history would develop many curious things in the history of man, but
would be attended with great labour; and human life has too few days for
such a man.

Thus we may, hypothetically at least, point out the class of operating
causes whereby the Copts introduced הֵם or occasionally הֵמָּה as a
person of the pronoun, with the signification that the person to whom it
was applied was a descendant of the son of Noah; and the pronoun so
introduced derived from the noun חָם _Ham_. For, can we suppose the
_first person singular_ אָנֹכִ֖ה _a-no-ki_, and its third person plural
הֵ֖ם _hem_, occasionally הֵֽמָּה _hemmah_, have the same root, or are of
the same origin? This הֵם and the word חָם _the son of Noah_, are
identical, except the son of Noah is generally written with a _heth_,
instead of a _he_; but all know, who have studied the matter, these
characters very often interchange, and that copyists have often
inadvertently placed the one for the other. That which would seem the
pronoun is used in _Gen._ xiv. 5, and the Septuagint has translated it
as a _pronoun_; but our received version has no doubt restored the true
reading. The passage בְּהָ֑ם is translated “in _Ham_,” _i. e._ the land
occupied by the descendants of Ham, the son of Noah. The change of
_Kamets_ into _Tsere_, is really of no moment. These characters were
never invented until after the language ceased to be spoken, and was
long since dead. The points, in reality, are no part of the language.
The word in Genesis is indisputably a noun, preceded and governed by the
_preposition_ בְּ.

Perhaps no one has ever yet succeeded to satisfy himself and others in
the translation of this passage of Zephaniah; all, or others for them,
find it full of difficulty: but let us consider הֵמָּה a noun of the
same order as the הָם of xiv. 5 of _Genesis_,—in some respect in
apposition to כּוּשִים, but more emphatic, as the affix of ה would seem
to indicate, by its increase of the intensity, as well as its accounting
for the _dagesh_ of the מ _mem_, or its duplication. Let us consider it
to mean the descendants of Ham,—to express the idea, with great
intensity, that the _Cushites_ were _Hamites_. True, it is not in the
usual form of a patronymic. But we know not who will account, by
grammatical rules, for all the anomalies found in Hebrew, a language so
full of ellipses that some have thought it a mere skeleton language.
With this view of the subject it will read elliptically, thus: _So ye
Ethiopians wounded of the sword, Hamites_—with the meaning, that the
Ethiopians were subject to bondage, and at the same time putting them in
mind that the curse of slavery, as to the posterity of Ham, was
unalterable.

The meaning of the prophet is—So ye Ethiopians, reduced to a condition
of bondage, remember ye are the inheritors of the curse of Ham!

The arrangement of the language to us clearly indicates that sense.
Besides, we must take into consideration the peculiar meaning of the
words חַלְלֵי and חַרְבִּ֖י— that the prophet is writing in a highly
figurative and poetic strain; and we would also compare what this
prophet says to the Ethiopians with what the other prophets have said of
the same people. כּוּשִׁים is here applicable to all the tribes of Ham,
as in _Amos_ ix. 7: “Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me? O
children of Israel, saith the Lord.” It may be well here to notice also
that the word “Ethiopian” is of Greek origin, and associates with the
idea blackness, like that of Ham. Thus, Αιθιοπς, _Aithiops_,_
sun-burnt_, _swarthy as Ethiopians_; αιθος, _warmth_, _heat_, _fire_,
_ardent_, _blazing like fire_, _blackened by fire_, _black_, _dark_;
αιθοπς, _burning_ _fiery_, _blazing_, _burned_, _darkened by fire_,
_dark-coloured_, _consuming_, _destroying_. _Donnegan_ p. 34. But Isaiah
speaks of the descendants of Ham perhaps in a more figurative language,
and in a more elevated and poetical strain:

 1. Wo to the land shadowing with wings,
   Which _is_ beyond the rivers of Ethiopia:

 2. That sendeth ambassadors by the sea,
   Even in vessels of bulrushes upon the waters,
   _Saying_, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation scattered and peeled;
   To a people terrible from the beginning hitherto;
   A nation meted out and trodden down,

 3. Whose land the rivers have spoiled!
   All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on the earth,
   See ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains,
   And when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye!

 4. For so the Lord said unto me, I will take my rest,
   And I will consider in my dwelling-place,
   Like a clear heat upon herbs,
   And like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.

 5. For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect,
   And the sour grape is ripening in the flower,
   He shall both cut off the sprigs with pruning-hooks,
   And take away and cut down the branches.

 6. They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains,
   And to the beasts of the earth;
   And the fowls shall summer upon them,
   And the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.

 7. In that time shall a present be brought unto the Lord of hosts,
   Of a people scattered and peeled,
   And from a people terrible from the beginning hitherto;
   A nation meted out and trodden under foot,
   Whose land the rivers have spoiled,
   To the place of the name of the Lord of hosts, the Mount Zion.
                                                             _Isa._ 18.

The denouncements of Jehovah against the children of Ham are more
plainly expressed in the promises of God to these of the true worship,
his peculiar people:

               Thus saith the Lord,
       The labour of Egypt, and merchandise of Ethiopia,
       And of the Sabeans, men of stature,
       Shall come over unto thee, and they shall be thine:
       They shall come after thee;
       In chains they shall come over;
       And they shall fall down unto thee.
       They shall make supplication unto thee,
       _Saying_, Surely God _is_ in thee;
       And there is none else,
       There is no God (_beside_),—(_or, there is no other God._)
                                                  _Isa._ xlv. 14.

So _Jeremiah_: “Declare ye in Egypt, and publish it in Migdol, and
publish in Noph and in Taphanhes; say ye, Stand fast, and prepare thee;
for the sword shall devour round about thee.

“O thou daughter dwelling in Egypt, furnish thyself to go into
captivity: for Noph shall be waste and desolate, without an inhabitant.

“The daughter of Egypt shall be confounded; she shall be delivered into
the hands of the people of the north.” _Jer._ xlvi. 1, 19, 24.

“And the sword shall come upon Egypt, and great pain shall be in
Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away
her multitudes, and her foundations shall be broken down.

“Ethiopia, and Lybia, and Lydia, and all the mingled (_mixed-blooded_)
people, _Chub_ and the men of the land that is in league, shall fall
with them by the sword.

“In that day shall messengers go forth from me in ships to make the
careless Ethiopians afraid, and great pain shall come upon them, as in
the day of Egypt: for, lo, it cometh.

“The young men of Aven and of Pibeseth shall fall by the sword: and
these cities shall go into captivity.

“At Taphanhes also the day shall be darkened, when I shall break there
the yokes of Egypt: and the pomp of her strength shall cease in her: as
for her, a cloud shall cover her; and her daughters shall go into
captivity.

“And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations and disperse them
among the countries, and they shall know that I am the Lord.” _Ezek._
xxx. 4, 5, 9, 17, 18, 26.

“And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hands of the
children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people
afar off: for the Lord hath spoken it.” _Joel_ iii. 8.

It may be we have occupied too much time, in remarks too obscure and
indistinct for biblical criticism, upon this passage of _Zephaniah_; and
it may be that, in the judgment of some, we have thus made ourselves
obnoxious to the satire of the reverend and witty commentator upon the
words:

                “Strange such difference there should be
                'Twist tweedle-dum and tweedle-dee.”

But we were sure the passage had been greatly misunderstood, and were,
perhaps, too much emboldened by the hope, that the providence of the
All-wise might yet again issue forth the truth from the tongue of the
feeble.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XVI.

From the root המּה has also been derived the Arabic word حَمَّانٌ
_haman_, and the Syriac ܚܳܡܳܢ' _haman_, and adopted by the Hebrews in
the word חַמָן _haman_, which Castell translates “_images_,” dedicated
to the worship of the sun, the worship of fire, heat, &c.

The Hebrew use of this word will be found in a plural form in _Lev._
xxvi. 30, thus: “And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your
_images_,” _hammanekem_. 2 _Chron._ xiv. 3 (the fourth of the Hebrew
text:) “And brake down the _images_,” חַמָנִ֑ים _hammanim_; also xxxiv.
4, 7: “And the _images_, (חַמָּנִים _hammanim_) that were on high above
them, he cut down,” “and had beaten the graven images (חַמָנִ֖ים
_hammanim_) into powder.” _Isa._ xvii. 8: “Either the groves or the
_images_,” חַמָנִֽים _hammanim_; also xxvii. 9: “The groves and images
(חַמָנִֽים hammanim) shall not stand up.” _Ezek._ vi. 4, 6: “Your altars
shall be desolate, and your _images_ (חַמָּ֣נֵיכֶ֔ם _hammanekem_) shall
be broken,” “and your _images_ (חַמָּ֣נֵיכֶ֔ם _hammanekem_) may be cut
down.” We have no possible word to express literally this term, but the
_hammanekens_, or little HAMS, or fire-houses, the objects of religious
adoration, were conical towers, from fifty to one hundred feet high, and
fifteen to twenty feet in diameter at the base, and gradually decreasing
upward, with a small door or opening fifteen or twenty feet above the
base, and four smaller ones near the apex, looking towards the cardinal
points.

The moderns have no certain knowledge of their particular use, yet all
believe that in them was attempted to be kept the perpetual or holy
fire, and perhaps into them was thrust the infant sacrificed to the god.
May we not suppose that Daniel and his brethren would have informed us,
had it been necessary for us to know more? Spencer, Heb. Laws, lib. ii.
cap. 25, § 3, says of these edifices: “_They were of a conical form and
of a black colour_.” It seems to us this identifies these edifices with
the round towers of Persia and elsewhere, remains of many of which were
anciently found in Ireland. The curious about this matter are referred
to Gesenius’s Thesaurus, p. 489; also Lee’s Lex. p. 297, where he quotes
Henrici Arentii Hamaker Miscellanea Phœnicia, pp. 49, 54; also Diatribe
Philologico-Critica aliquot monumentorum Punicorum; Selden, de Diis
Syris, ii. cap. 8, and the authors severally cited by them. Upon a full
consideration of the subject, Dr. Lee says—“Upon the whole, I am
disposed to believe that the term הָם (_haman_) is rather derived from
הָם _Ham_, the father of Canaan, of Mitsraim, &c., _Gen._ x. 6–20; and
hence by the latter worshipped as presiding angel of the sun, under the
title of Ἄμουν, _Greek_ Ἄμμων (_Ammon_), which is probably our very
word.” If so, then his very name became significant of the worship of
fire, and even expressive of the fire-temples themselves.

By some fanciful relation, not relevant to our subject, between the fire
or sun worshippers and astronomy, when the sun was in aries (the ram),
the god Ham, _Ammon_, _Hammon_, or _Jupiter Hammon_, was represented
with a ram’s head for his crest; with this crest became associated the
idea of the god, and hence chonchologists, even to this day, call
certain shells, that are fancied to resemble the ram’s horn,
_Ammonites_, giving further evidence, even now, of how deeply seated was
the association between the earlier descendants of Ham and the fire
worship of their day.

The long and fanciful story of _Io_, changed by Jupiter into a white
cow; of her flight from the fifty sons of Egyptus; of her becoming the
progenitor of the _Ionians_; the Egyptians claiming her under the name
of _Isis_; of her marriage with _Osiris_, who became at length _Apis_
and _Serapis_, worshipped in the image of a black bull with a white spot
in his forehead, and many such tales, are all legitimately descended
from his family peculiarities, their relative condition in the world,
and the fact that Ham became the imaginary _deity_ of his descendants.

Much evidence may be had proving that Ham became inseparably associated
with, and in fact the very father of, idolatry, and of all those
enormities growing out of it; enormities with which idolatry has ever
been attended, and which time and the history of man for ever give proof
to be a total preventive of all physical and moral elevation and
improvement; and which, like other breaches against the laws of God,
have, at all times, among all men, for ever been accompanied by both
physical and moral degradation. But the descendants of Ham gave his name
to their country. Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ _Chemi_ was the Coptic name for Egypt, which the
Septuagint translates into Χαμ _Cham_. Plutarch styles Egypt Χημία
_Chemia_, from the Coptic Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ _Chemi_, and, as if he wished to give
some account of its origin, adds, θερμή γὰρ ἐστὶν καὶ ὕγρα, “for it is
_hot and humid_;” showing that the Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ _Chemi_ of the Copts signified
the same as the Ham of the Hebrews. But the Coptic word Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ _Chemi_,
Χημι and Χημε of Plutarch, also signified the adjective _black_. See
Gibbs’s Hebrew Lexicon, under the word חָם _Ham_; and with this
signification the word _Ham_ is used in _Ps._ lxxviii. 51: “The chief of
their strength in the tabernacles of _Ham_:” Septuagint, Χαμ, _Cham_,
from the Coptic Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ _chemi_, black. cv. 23: “And Jacob sojourned in the
land of _Ham_,” חָם _Ham_: Septuagint, Χαμ, _Cham_, from the Coptic Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ
_chemi_, black. 27: “And wonders in the land of Ham:” Septuagint, Χαμ
_Cham_, from the Coptic Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ _chemi_, black. cvi. 22: “Wondrous works in
the land of _Ham_:” Septuagint, Χαμ _Cham_, from the Coptic Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ
_chemi_, black. The idea is, the land of the black people.

In this sense also the word is used in _Gen._ xiv. 5: “And smote the
Rephaims in Ashteroth Karnaim, and the Zuzims in _Ham_.” The Septuagint
translates this passage into Καὶ ἔθνη ἰσχυρά ἅμα αὐτοῖς, as though the
בְּהָ֑ם _be Ham_ was a pronoun, and which seems to have been the view of
several ancient translators. But such certainly was not the view of the
translators of the received version; nor of Martindale, and others from
whom he compiled. He says of this passage—“2. _Ham_, crafty, or heat;
the country of the Zuzims, the situation of which is not known:” p. 326.
We certainly agree with the Septuagint that זוּזִים _Zuzim_ was a
significant term, and perhaps well enough explained by ἔθνη ἰσχυρὰ, for
which a suitable translation would seem to be _wicked_, _perverse_,
_strong_, _numerous_, or _stubborn heathen_. They were probably the
זַמְזֻמֲים Zamzummims of _Deut._ ii. 20.

The word בְּהָ֑ם _be Ham_, unless a pronoun as above, against which much
can be said, is evidently used as in the _Psalms_ quoted. In all these
cases _Ham_ is used somewhat as a synonyme of כּוּשׁ _Cush_; and when
applied to a country generally, meant whatever country was occupied by
the descendants of _Ham_. The sense of the sentence, _and Zuzims in
Ham_, will then be, _and the stubborn heathen in Ethiopia_, or, _the
perverse tribes of Cush_, or _the wicked nations of Ham_; all meaning
the black tribes, descendants of Ham, or some one of them, when
particularity is intended, as probably in this case; and let it be
noticed, that Martindale, p. 241, gives “blackness” as his first
definition of _Cush_. The descendants of Ham applying his name to
themselves and country, they being black, it necessarily became
significant of that colour. We have Germans, Swedes, English; but if we
say “Negroes,” or if we say Africans, we mean black men, because those
words, as now used, mean men of colour; and in a sense analogous, the
word _Ham_ seems to have been used in the passages quoted.

This view of the word _Ham_ we think elucidates the history of Esther
and that of Haman הָמָ֥ן the son of Hamadatha—_Agagite_, _ha Agagi_. The
word is a patronymic of אַגָג _Agag_,—hence he was an Amalekite: “Agag,
the king of Amalek”—“Agag, the king of the Amalekites.” 1 _Sam._ xv. 20,
32. “Now there was one Haman, the son of Amadatha, by birth an
Amalekite.” _Josephus_, book ii. cap. vi. 5. This shows the cause of the
extraordinary hatred that existed between her people and his. His very
name shows that he was a descendant of _Ham_, and we think also proves
that the Amalekites were black; and which fact is confirmed by 1 _Sam._
xv. 6: “And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart; get ye down from
among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them,”—evincing the fact
that by mere inspection he could not distinguish the one from the other.
We have before shown that the Kenites were black. The argument follows,
that the Amalekites were also.

The word _Ham_ is also used in 1 _Chron._iv. 40, in the same manner as
it is in _Psalms_ and _Genesis_, thus: “For they of _Ham_ חָ֔ם had dwelt
there of old.” This is said of Gedar, “_even unto the east_ side of the
valley.” Now Gedar was in the mountains of Judea, (see _Josh._ xv.
48–60,) or in the valley, (see _Josh._ xv. 36;) and as that account of
the country of Judea closes (see _idem_, 63) by informing us whom the
inhabitants of Judah could not drive out, and as the inhabitants of
Gedar are not included in such list, it is to be presumed that the
inhabitants of Gedar were so driven out at the time of Joshua; and
leaves us nothing else to conclude than that, whoever they were, they
who are spoken of in this passage, as having dwelt there of old, were
the people driven out by him. But _Josh._ xii. 7, 8 informs us who the
people were on the west side of Jordan, both in the mountains and
valleys, and names them as Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites,
and Hivites, and Jebusites; and from the 9th to the 24th gives us an
account of their kings, among whom is named the king of Gedar, who was
smitten and driven out. It is immaterial which of the tribes they were.
They were inhabitants of Palestine, (see 2 _Chron._ xxviii. 18 and 1
_Chron._ xxvii. 28,) of the land of Canaan, not of south, east, nor of
northern Arabia, nor of Egypt or any part of Africa; yet they are
emphatically spoken of as of _Ham_, clearly having reference to their
descent and colour. Here we have an additional key whereby to unlock the
meaning of this word as used in _Psalms_ and _Genesis_. There can be no
doubt these primitive inhabitants of Gedar were the descendants of
Canaan. Yet they are described by the same term which in other places is
used to describe the descendants of Cush and Mitsraim; a term which most
unquestionably determines them to have been black.

But the Coptic word _chemi_, which we have seen had the same
significancy as חָם _ham_ in Hebrew, opens to the view the real meaning
of a few Hebrio-Coptic words that grew into common use among the Hebrews
subsequent to their bondage in Egypt. We allude solely to the
derivatives of Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ _Chemi_. כֹּמֶר _Chemar_ is thus derived, and
occasionally used by the holy writers to signify black; thus, _Lam._ v.
10: “Our skin was _black_” נִכְמָ֔רוּ _ni chemaru_. True, some have
disputed the accuracy of this translation. They take a cognate meaning,
and say _our skin was hot_, &c. We hope to be excused for adopting the
received version. But either meaning proves the origin of the word from
the Coptic Ⲭⲏⲙⲓ _chemi_, the same as the _ham_ of the Hebrews. The fact
is, the cognate meaning, sometimes, necessarily forces itself into an
English translation, as in _Gen._ xliii. 30: “For his bowels did yearn,”
נִכְמְרוּ _grew hot_, _warmed_, became agitated, &c. 1 _Kings_ iii. 26:
“Her bowels _yearned_,” נִכְמְרוּ _grew hot_, _troubled_, &c.; and also
_Hosea_ xi. 8: “My repentings are kindled,” נְכְמְרוּ _became hot_, &c.

But in all these instances the figure of speech is more particularly
Asiatic, and more obscure than is well suited to our modern dialect, as
we think will be seen by comparing them with _Job_ iii. 5, “Let the
blackness of the day terrify it.”

From this Coptic name of HAM has _also_ been derived the appellative
term of the Moabitish and Ammonitish god כְּמֹוּשׁ _Chemosh_. The
Syrians applied this term to the fancied being who oppresses mankind
during the dark hours of their sleeping, and hence _distressing dreams_,
_incubus_, &c. _Chemosh_ is ranked with the god of destruction among the
Hindoos, _Muha Dēvā_. The worshippers of this god are in Scripture
called עַם־כְּמוֹשׁ _am Chemosh_, the people of Chemosh, particularly
the Moabites and Ammonites. The image of this god was a _black stone_.

The term applied to the priesthood in this worship among the black
tribes is also derivative from the same Coptic word to which we have
often added in translation the word “idolatrous.” Thus, 2 _Kings_ xxiii.
5, “and he put down the _idolatrous_ priests הַכְּמָרִים _ha chemarim_.”
_Hosea_ x. 5, “And the _priests_ thereof” כְּמָרָיו. _Zeph._ i. 4, “And
the name of the _Chemarims_,” הַכְּמָרִים _ha Chemarim_, i. e. the
_priests_ of the Hamitic fire-worshippers, &c. Some commentators, not
connecting these words with the Coptic, and the _priest_, as the term
applies, with the black families of Ham, have conceived that the idea
_blackness_, as associated with these idolatrous priests, had reference
to their apparel. Hence they conceive that these priests always wore
black apparel; whereas the fact is they were _black men_, and, as such,
are described by a term indicating that fact, as well as that of their
idolatry and descent; and here we find the foundation of that modern and
common prejudice, that the appropriate dress of the clergy is _black_.

But we find another derivative from the word _Ham_, _Gen._ xxxviii. 13:
“And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold thy _father-in-law_ חָמִיךְ goeth
up.” 25: “She sent to her _father-in-law_,” heḥāmîhā So also 1 _Sam._
iv. 19: “And that her _father-in-law was dead_.” 21. “And because of her
father-in-law,” חָמִֽיהָ. This word is used in the feminine in _Micah_,
vii. 6, thus: “Against her _mother-in-law_,” בַּֽחֲמֲֹתָ֑הּ _la hamtha_.
We notice the word is preceded by the word כַּלָּה, which word, in
_Gen._ xxxviii. 11, is applied to _Tamar_, and in _Jer._ ii. 32,
evidently to a “bride” taken from the heathen, which was forbid; and is
also used in _Cant._ iv. 8, for the “spouse,” who is made to declare
herself a _black woman_, giving evidence that the word in _Micah_ is
used in character.

This word is also used in the feminine in _Ruth_ i. 14: “And Orpah
kissed her _mother-in-law_,” לַּֽחֲמוֹתָ֔הּ _la hamotha_. ii. 11: “All
that thou hast done unto thy _mother-in-law_,” חֲמוֹתֵךְ _hamothek_. 18:
“And her _mother-in-law_ saw what she had done,” _hamotha_. 19: “And her
_mother in-law_ (_hamotha_) said unto her;” “and she showed her
_mother-in-law_,” _la hamotha_. 23: “And dwelt with her
_mother-in-law_,” _hamotha_. iii. 1: “Then Naomi her _mother-in-law_,”
_hamotha_. 6: “All her _mother-in-law_ bade her,” _hamotha_. 16: “And
when she came to her _mother-in-law_,” _hamotha_. This is certainly not
the most usual word in Hebrew to express the idea of _parent-in-law_.

But these instances of its use are too frequent, its declination too
varied, and in both genders, to admit the idea that they are the result
of error or casualty, although some lexicographers seem to reject it. It
may be noticed that the individual holding the junior position was a
female—that in each case the _parent-in-law_ was most unquestionably of
pure Shemitic race.

But suspicion may at least be allowed to such purity in these young
females. Tamar’s husbands were half of Canaanitish blood. It would be
expected that she was of that race, but if not, her intermarriage with
those sons of Judah placed her in that rank. The sons of Eli were
notoriously wicked and licentious, and although the widow of Phinehas
appears to have been of a devout cast, yet God had determined to destroy
the house of Eli on their account, and to wrest the priesthood from the
family. The suspicion as to her race grows out of these facts and the
character of her husband. Ruth was declaredly a Moabitess, and Orpah was
of that country.

Much might be said in favour of the position that in these cases the
parents-in-law on the husband’s side were of pure Shemitic blood, and
the reverse as to the daughters-in-law. Now as this peculiar term is
nowhere else used in the holy books, are we not to suppose that this
peculiar state of facts is nowhere else thus described? In _Gen._
xviii., when the _father-in-law_ of Moses is named, this term is not
used, but the more usual one; and the reason is because the position of
the parties is changed. Had the father or mother of Moses been spoken of
as the _parent-in-law_ of Zippora, then we may presume this peculiar
term would have been used and expressed the fact as to the distinction
of races; that he would have been called חֲמִ֖יהָ, and she her חֲמוֹתָה.
And we now present the inquiry, how came the name of Ham to be thus
compounded and used to express this particular position of relationship
and distinction of race, unless from the fact that he had placed his
parents in a similar position, liable to have been called by these
peculiar terms?


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XVII.

Having thus, at some length, passed these subjects in review, we present
our reflections to the impartial mind.

But there are grown up upon this earth some men who would seem to be so
holy and pure that even the providences of God are defective in their
sight, and by their conduct seem to evince their opinion to be that
Jehovah could not well manage the government of the world without their
especial counsel and aid. And do such really mean to condemn God, unless
his government shall comport with their views? In kindness of heart, and
for the benefit of such poor fallen ones, we propose to close this our
present Study by reading to them the thirty-third chapter of
Ecclesiasticus, omitting the five verses irrelevant to the subject.

“There shall no evil happen unto him that feareth the Lord, but in
temptation even again he will deliver him. A wise man hateth not the
law; but he that is a hypocrite therein is as a ship in the storm. A man
of understanding trusteth in the law; and the law is faithful unto him
as an oracle. Prepare what to say, and so thou shalt be heard; and bind
up instruction, and then make answer.” “Why doth one day excel another,
where as all the light of every day in the year is of the sun? By the
knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished: and he altered seasons
and feasts. Some of them hath he made high days, and hallowed them, and
some of them hath he made ordinary days. And all men are from the
ground, and Adam was created of earth. In much knowledge the Lord hath
divided them, and made their ways diverse. Some of them hath he blessed
and exalted, and some of them hath he sanctified, and set near himself:
but some of them hath he cursed and brought low, and turned them out of
their places. As the clay is in the potter’s hand, to fashion it at his
pleasure, so is man in the hand of him that made him, to render to them
as liketh him best. Good is set against evil, and life against death: so
is the godly against the sinner, and the sinner against the godly. So
look upon all the works of the Most High; and there are two and two, one
against another. I awaked up last of all, as one that gathereth after
the grape-gatherers; by the blessing of God I profited, and filled my
wine-press, like a gatherer of grapes. Consider that I laboured not for
myself only, but for all them that seek learning. Hear me, O ye great
men of the people, and hearken with your ears, ye rulers of the
congregation.” “In all thy works keep to thyself the pre-eminence; leave
not a stain on thy honour. At the time when thou shalt end thy days, and
finish thy life, distribute thine inheritance. Fodder, a wand and
burdens, are for the ass; and bread, correction, and work, for a
servant. If thou set thy servant to labour, thou shalt find rest, but if
thou let him go idle, he shall seek liberty. A yoke and a collar to bow
the neck, so are tortures and torments for an evil servant. Send him to
labour, that he be not idle; for idleness teacheth much evil. Set him to
work, as is fit for him; if he be not obedient, put on more fetters. But
be not excessive toward any, and without discretion do nothing. If thou
have a servant, let him be unto thee as thyself, because thou hast
bought him with a price. If thou have a servant, entreat him as a
brother: for thou hast need of him as thine own soul: if thou entreat
him evil, and he run from thee, which way wilt thou go to seek him.”

The doctrine is, that man is not exempt from the general law, that
governs the animal world; that among all the animated races upon this
earth, certain causes produce deterioration; and that it may take a
longer course of time for the restoration of a degenerate race, under
the controlling influences of opposite causes, than even that occupied
in a downward direction. “Quickly is the descent made to hell; but to
recover from the fall, and regain our former standing, is a labour, a
task indeed.” _Virgil._ In short, that sin has a tendency forcing
downward to moral and physical ruin; to deteriorate the mental powers,
to rot, to blast, as with a mildew, all animal perfections; to fill life
with disease and pain, and its hours with misery and wo, and that it
never willingly ceases its iron hold until it can shake hands with
death. That God, in mercy, by the wisdom of his providence, has
contrived as it were a shield, sheltering poor fallen man from the
action of such portion of this deadly poison as would have destroyed
every hope of intercession, and for ever excluded from our view,
perhaps, even the advent of a _Saviour_. When the patient is dead, the
physician is not called. The law which produced the deluge and
destruction of the antediluvian world was a law established from all
eternity, meet for just such a case as the moral and physical condition
of man then was. For the sake of ten, Sodom would not have been
destroyed; but it was less than ten for whom the Ark was provided; and
we are to remember that quick upon the promise that all flesh were not
again to be cast off, the lowest grade of slavery was promulgated, and
its subjects ordered into the protection of the master; and may we not
hence infer that slavery is intended, to some extent, as a preventive,
as a shield against sin? And do we not notice that this shield is more
or less weighty, more or less heavy to be borne, as the safety of the
individual bearing it may require; and that it is so cunningly
contrived, that its weight and burden are diminished in proportion as
the danger abates?

“He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in the
wilderness where there is no way; yet setteth he the poor on high from
affliction, and maketh him families like a flock. The righteous shall
see it and rejoice, and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. Whoso is
wise, and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
loving-kindness of the Lord.” _Ps._ cvii. 40–43.

In close, we may everywhere notice that some among the family of man
have become so poisoned with sin, so destroyed, that they are no longer
safe guardians to themselves, even under the general interdict, that
animal wants enslave us all. That for such God provides, as the general
safety may seem to require. That, in the history of man, some races have
become so deteriorated by a continued action in opposition to the laws
of God, that he has seen fit to care for them, by placing them under the
control of others; or by placing them, in mercy, under the guidance of a
less deteriorated race, whom, no doubt, he holds responsible for the
good he intends them. And may we be permitted of the humble Christian to
inquire, if this position presents any thing contrary to the general law
of benevolence of the Deity,—contrary to the welfare of man on earth, or
his hopes of heaven? Will you reject the doctrine, saying the biblical
proofs are too scattered, too deeply buried under the dust of time? or,
because a prophet has not appeared, or one arisen from the dead? The
geologist, from a few fragments of bone, now dug from the deep bowels of
the earth, is able to set up the osseous frame, to clothe with muscle
and sinew, and give character to the animals of ancient time. And shall
it not be recollected by you, who are striving to make your descendants
the very princes of intellect and talent, that similar researches may be
made in the moral history of man?

We submit the foregoing, confident, although there may be obscurity and
darkness yet surrounding the subject, which we have not the ability to
dispel, that the time will come, when it will be made plain to the
understanding of all. We therefore resign the subject, touching the
colour of the descendants of Ham, of their relationship with the family
of Cain, and the ordinances of God influencing their condition in the
world, to those more learned, more critical, and of more mental power,
and into the hands of those whose lips have been touched by a more
living coal from the altar of the prophet.




                  ------------------------------------

                               Study VII.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON I.

In the inquiry into the scriptural views of slavery, by ALBERT BARNES,
Philadelphia, 1846, page 322, we find the following assertion: “No man
has a right to assume that when the word δοῦλος, _doulos_, occurs in the
New Testament, it means a slave, or that he to whom it was applied was a
slave.”

Our object in our present study is to prove that this assertion is not
true; and our object further is to prove that when the word δοῦλος,
_doulos_, occurs in the New Testament, it means a slave, and that he to
whom it was applied, as an appropriate distinctive quality, was a slave.

Suppose some infidel, a monomaniac in the study of infidelity, should
put forth the proposition that when the words Jesus Christ occur in the
New Testament, no one had the right to assume that they meant the
Messiah, the Son of God, the Saviour of the world. We should feel it a
needless labour to refute it; a foolish, false assertion often does not
merit or require refutation, but the falsity of propositions may not be
equally obvious to all, as in the present case.

The premises include the observance of the constitution, idioms, and use
of the Greek language.

To him whose mind can flash upon the volume of Greek literature, like
the well-read schoolboy upon the pages of Dilworth,—our present study
and argument will be unnecessary and useless; but, as unsavoury as it
may seem, from the evidence that reaches us, we doubt whether the great
mass of those called learned, do not remember and practise their Greek
only as the old veterans in sin do the evening and morning prayers of
their childhood.

But, however that may be, a great proportion of us know no language but
our own, and take on trust what any Magnus Apollo may choose to assume
concerning others. The assertions of one man, unaccompanied by evidence,
may excite little or no attention; but we have seen the substance of
this assertion put forth by the abolition clergy in various small
publications, no doubt having great weight in their immediate vicinage.

We fear those who sit under such teaching may grope in deep darkness;
and may we humbly pray, that, like the stroke of Jove, the light of the
Almighty may reach them from afar.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON II.

When the untruthfulness of the lesson taught involves a misconception of
the character and laws of God, its direct tendency is to create in the
mind an idea of, we may say, an image of God and his laws, as decidedly
different from him and his law as is the lesson taught from the truth;
and here, perhaps, through all time, has been the commencement of
idolatry.

Is it not as much idolatry to worship a false image of the mind, as it
would be an image of wood or stone?

You teach that δοῦλος, _doulos_, does not mean _slave_ in the word of
God; you consequently teach that God disapproves of it, and that his
laws forbid it. We say the exact contrary. It is therefore evident that
the idea, the image we form in the mind of our God, is quite different
from the idea you form in your mind of your God. But God cannot possess
a contradiction in quality; therefore the God we worship must be a
different God from the God you worship. But there can be but one God;
therefore your God is a false God, or our God is a false God. You are an
idolater, or we are one.

And shall it be said that our language is too strong?—unnecessarily
extreme in its denunciation?—unwarranted by the views, by the language
held by the advocates of abolition and the friends of the anti-slavery
movements now in action in the Northern sections of our country? Hear
the proclamation of Mr. Wright, an eloquent speaker, before the
Anti-Slavery Society, as reported in the Boston papers, May 30th, 1850:

“Down with your Bible!—down with your political parties!—down with your
God that sanctions slavery! The God of Moses Stuart, the Andover God,
the God of William H. Rogers, which is worshipped in the Winter-street
Church, is a monster, composed of oppression, fraud, injustice,
pollution, and every crime, in the shape of slavery. To such a God I am
an atheist.”

Thus the enemies of Jehovah give rapid proof of their idolatry.

It may be well here to remark, that the doctrine thus strange and astray
from truth, may be expected to engraft itself upon such intellects as
are led to the conclusion that man possesses within himself an unerring
guide between right and wrong,—a doctrine which to us appears deeply
fraught with ruin to the individual, and degradation to public morals.

We therefore condemn, most decidedly, the doctrine that man possesses a
mental power called “moral sense,” “conscience,” or the “light within
us,” which enables him unerringly to decide on right and wrong. You may
as well say it will always enable him to discern the truth. Nor do we
comprehend how the mind can entertain such a notion, unless the
intellect is thus impressible that the mind can believe in the existence
of what would be a sister faculty, clairvoyance, or a thousand other
such fantasies.

Man possesses no power by which he can know God, only as he has revealed
himself by inspiration and by the daily manifestations of his law. We
prefer to worship the God of Abraham and Moses, who gave them directions
how slaves should be governed, and of whom they should be purchased:—the
God of the Bible, in which he has plainly revealed the reason why they
are slaves. The history of the human intellect gives proof that among
its strong characteristics is a desire, a fondness to search into
mystery. While this quality stimulates to inquiry after truth, in well
organized minds, it is an important means of man’s improvement and
progression. But in the absence of all guides which can direct the path
to successful inquiry, or by the substitution of false lights, man has
ever gone astray. Here idolatry commences her reign.

The condition of man, from the most exalted instance of mental power,
down to the most abject degradation of the African savage, is for ever
marked and located by the fact, whether the guides to truth in their
influence on him and his race have been universal, or only occasional;
whether their influence has been obeyed only at distant periods, or at
all times rejected. It is the law of God, man shall not progress to
greatness only under the guidance of truth; under the guidance of
falsehood, man degenerates to insignificance, crime, slavery, or to
inglorious death.

We do not propose that any man or any race has, without exception, been
under the constant influence of those axioms that guide the mind along
the thread of truth; but that some men and some races have deviated far
more than others, and that the effect of such difference is quite
perceptible. Some races have become highly improved, while others only
give evidence that they belong to the animal race of men.

Distinctions from this source arose between Cain and Abel; between the
sons of Noah, Abraham, and the fire-worshippers of his day; between
Jacob and Esau; and between the Israelites and the idolaters of the
surrounding Hamitic tribes. This love of searching into mystery without
using the aids to find truth, has at all times of the world, when
supreme power was the object of contemplation, led men to idolatry,
sometimes of the grossest kind; to the belief in mysterious influences,
supernatural agencies, of spirits and demons, magic, witchcraft, &c.

To the same order of causes we are to attribute the sentiment
entertained by some, that certain portions of Scripture and certain
words sometimes contain unknown, hidden, secret, or mysterious meanings
or instructions. Such views involve the proposition that such words,
when used in the Scripture, have a different meaning than when otherwise
used by men, and are to be translated into another language by
substituting different ideas than those expressed by such words when
used by man in his own oral or written language.

Do they forget that the language of man is the language of God? That
revelation is always adapted to the understanding of men? They forget to
know this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation. It happens that men take their own circumscribed view of
the providence of God, as God’s ordinance touching a matter, and if
Scripture is in contradiction, then they search for mysterious or
unusual meaning, and give it such interpretation as they imagine suits
the case.

Hence theologians who deny that slavery is of Divine authority, are led
to the necessity of also denying that the Greek word δοῦλος, _doulos_,
means slave; or that, in its verbal formation, it expresses a cognate
action.

The frequency of the use of this word in the copies of the ancient Greek
Testament, as left us in the evangelical writings of the apostles; the
varied manner in which they have applied the term, in figurative
illustration, in comparison, in the most simple explanations, as well as
in the expression of the primitive idea which they intended to convey by
it, would seem to be sufficient proof that whatever such primitive idea
may have been, yet that it surely was in exact conformity to the common
and received opinion of its signification among those who wrote in and
used the Greek language. This is very clear, since it is often used and
addressed to the Greeks themselves, insomuch that no temerity has ever
yet asserted that this word is of different import when found in the
writings of the apostles than when found in the Greek authors generally.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON III.

The Greek noun δοῦλος, _doulos_, which we say means a slave
unconditionally, so far as we have been able to examine, took its
origin, both phonetically and literally, among the Greeks. Let us take
δοῶ, as theme for διδώμι, and λοὐω, or from the radical λοῶ, lŏō: both
phonetically and significantly the word is complete. At the most ancient
period of the Greeks, it is said they had no slaves, and it is a little
remarkable that the word “_doulos_” is very seldom found in the most
ancient of the Greek writers: but other nations more advanced had
slaves. The idea, slave, was then expressed by them by the term δμώς,
_dmos_, evidently of foreign origin. This latter term was nearly or
quite obsolete as early as the days of Alexander, when the word _doulos_
is found to have taken its place.

The ancient and Eastern nations were particular in their custom of
bathing their bodies and washing their feet, &c. One of the first and
most important uses to which the early Greeks seem to have applied
slaves, was in these personal purifications; and hence the peculiar name
δοῦλος originated; δου-λούω, one whose office it was to bathe and wash
them, a bondman for that particular use.

There is no instance in which Homer has used the word incompatible with
such an association. The most affecting, we may say afflicting,
circumstance in which he has introduced the word is the parting of
Hector and Andromache; when Hector, anticipating his own death, and the
probability of her being made a slave to the Greeks, emphatically
laments her being compelled to carry water for her master, as if that
was a particular employment in which the _doulos_ was engaged.

But it does not affect the force of our argument, even if it shall be
thought that the origin we give the word is doubtful. All we at the
present moment propose is, that it is an original Greek term, all of
which terms, either remotely or immediately, spring from particles
having a significant and phonetic relation with the derivative. Such has
been the doctrine of all who have written upon the philology and origin
of the Greek language. Valckenaerus (the edition of Venice, published by
Coletos) says, p. 8—

“Verba simplicia apud Græcos sunt vel ‘primitiva,’ vel a primitivis per
varios flexus ‘derivata.’

“Primitiva verba admodum sunt ‘pauca:’ ‘derivatorum’ numerus est
infinitus.

“‘Binæ’ literarum syllabæ verbum primitivum constituunt.

“Verba primitiva, secundum observationem tertiam, dissyllaba sunt vel
‘bilittera,’ vel trilittera, vel quadrilittera.

“Primitiva ‘bilittera,’ per rei naturam, dari possunt in universum (si
vel totam linguam perscrutemur) tantum quinque, nempe ἄω,ἔω, ὅω,ἴω, ὔω
Primitiva ‘trilittera’ sunt, quæ a ‘vocali,’ ‘quadrilittera’ (pleraque
saltem) quæ a ‘consonante,’ incipiunt. Hoc certum est: sed de eo
etiamnum addubito, an nonnulla verba ‘quinque’ litteris constantia pro
‘primitivis’ debeant haberi?” &c.

And Lennepius, de Anologia Linguæ Græcæ, (eadem editio,) p. 38:

“Cognita literarum potestate, earumque antiquitate, ad primas linguæ
Græcæ origines indagandas progrediendum est. Videndum itaque primo loco,
quænam voces pro ‘simplicissimis originibus’ haberi possint, quænam
minus? Hoc autem ut rite peragatur, quædam de ‘partibus orationis’ ante
sunt monenda.

“Ex viii. partibus quas vulgo statuunt grammatici, ‘Verbum et Nomen’
principem obtinent locum: quum reliquæ omnes facillime ad harum partium
alterutram referi possint. Quapropter etiam ‘Aristoteles,’ aliique de
veteribus, revera ‘duas’ tantum esse ‘partes orationis’ voluerunt.

“Addunt quidem alii tertiam partem, utriusque, nempe et ‘verbi et
nominis, ligamentum,’ sive particulas, quod, nempe, particulæ orationem
in unum corpus veluti connectant et devinciant. Sed, qui attentius
‘particularum’ naturam inspexerit, facile animadvertat, omnia fere, quæ
‘particularum’ nomine insigniuntur, si ‘exteriorem formam’ eorumque
naturam grammaticam inspiciamus, referenda esse vel ad ‘nomen’ vel ad
‘verbum.’

“Ita verbi gr.: particula ᾽ȣ͂ν, Lat. igitur, revera participium est,
contracta pro ἐὸν, quod neutrum a masculo ἐὼν est, quo modo participium
verbi ἐὼ, vel εἰμὶ, pronuntiarunt Iones, quum Attici ἐὸν contraxerint in
᾽ȣ͂ν. Apparet itaque, Græcum ᾽ȣ͂ν revera pertinere ad nomina
participialia. Eadem ratio cernitur quoque in particulis ποὶ, πῆ, πȣ͂,
quæ ‘adverbia loci’ dicuntur, quorum duo priora proprie ‘dativa antiqua’
sunt, postremum vero genitivus est; quemadmodum similis ratio cernitur
in adverbiis quæ dicuntur ‘Loci’ apud Latinos, _quò_, _quà_, et
similibus.

“Ad ‘verba’ porro referenda sunt ἄγε, φέρε, ἰδȣ͂, ἲθι, ἔια vel ἔα, et
plura alia similia, id quod in aliis clarius, in aliis minus manifesto,
apparet. Horum tamen omnium rationem eandem fuisse in prima linguæ Græcæ
infantia, non est quod dubitemus.

“Hæc igitur quum revera sic sese habeant, jam porro inquirendum est,
utrum verba, an vero nomina, ‘primas’ linguæ Græcæ stirpes nobis
subministrent.

“Docet autem ipsa rei natura, si de ‘simplicissimis’ verbis sermo fiat,
‘nomina’ a ‘verbis,’ non verba a nominibus, primum esse formata.

“Quum enim omnes res vocabulis, tanquam nominibus, signatæ, ab usu qui
singulis adest, vel quacumque etiam actione, nomina, sua acceperint:
clare apparet, sicut ipsam actionem unde res denominata sit, ita etiam
verbum, quo actio designetur, præcedere nomini, quod ab actione aliqua
rei sit inditum. Atque hoc adeo certum est, non solum in lingua Græca,
sed etiam omnibus omnino linguis, ut extra omnem controversiam positum
esse videatur: nisi quis delabatur illuc, ut linguas integras, qua late
patent, nullo artificio humano accedente, uno temporis articulo
hominibus divinitus datas esse, eosque statim caluisse tot myriadas quot
in singulis linguis sunt vocabulorum; tametsi res ipsas vocabulis istis
designandas plerosque primos homines ignorasse certum est.

“Hoc autem quam sit rationi contrarium, atque ipsi experientiæ, facile
apparet, si modo consideremus, ea ratione multa vocabula existere jam
debuisse priusquam eorum utilitas inter homines ulla esset, quæque
proinde, non nisi vani et inutiles soni, facile et sine ulla jactura
dediscenda fuissent.

“Quin imo experientia abunde docet, primum res ipsas inveniri hominum
industria, deinde autem inventis nomina imponi, sive ab utilitate sive
alia qualitate ducta. Ex quo porro apparet, quo plures res ab aliquo
populo inveniantur, eo ditiorem et uberiorem eorum linguam fieri, ut
adeo mirandum non sit tantam esse linguæ Græcæ copiam et ubertatem, quum
exculta ea fuerit a populo ingeniosissimo, cui omnes artes et disciplinæ
non tantum primordia sua, sed etiam omnem fere splendorem, debent.
Linguas itaque diligenter consideranti, idem quod in artibus, in iis
quoque usu venire apparebit: eas nimirum a paucis simplicissimisque
initiis profectas, non nisi sensim et progressu temporis ad eam qua
postea patuerunt amplitudinem pervenisse. Quum autem hominum natura ita
sit comparata, ut primum eas res circumspiciat, quæ necessario ad vitam
sustentandam, et cum aliis quibuscum homo societatis vinculo conjunctus
est secure agendam, requirantur, dein vero ea excogitat quæ vitam
jucundiorem possint reddere, valde verisimile fit vocabula ea in linguis
antiquissima esse quibus res designantur ad vitam degendam necessariæ,
si recesseris ab iis vocabulis, quæ in antiquissimorum vocabulorum locum
deinceps substitute sunt, ut revera hujus generis multæ vocabulorum
formæ inveniantur, quæ verborum obsoletorum locum occupaverunt.

“Porro non alienum erit hic observasse non tantum ejusmodi vocabula
antiquissima existimari debere, sed etiam ‘ipsas’ significationes verbis
subjectas tanto antiquioris usus esse, tantoque magis proprias esse
habendas, quanto sunt propiores iis rebus quas corporis sensibus
percipimus. Ab iis enim semper servata quadam similitudine ad reliquas
quascumque verborum significationes progrediendum est: ut adeo appareat,
paucissimas revera esse proprias verborum ‘significationes,’ nec alias
esse nisi corporeas, sive eas quibus res sensibus externis expositæ
designantur.

“E contrario autem, translatarum significationum copiam immensam, quæ ex
propria notione, tanquam ex trunco arboris rami, quaquaversum pateant;
manente similitudine inter eas omnes et propriam seu primam stirpis
significationem, similiter atque rami, utcumque dispersi, et communem et
communis trunci naturam retinent.

“Ex his præterea intelligitur ea verba, quæ ὄνοματα πεποιήμενα a Græcis
vocantur, sic dicta quia a ‘nomine’ vel ‘sono’ formentur, ‘propriam’ eam
significationem quæ soni, unde facta sunt, naturam referat. Quorum
verborum numerus ingens revera in linguis est, et longe major quam vulgo
credi solet. Sed, ut ad propositum redeamus, ex iis quæ supra dicta
sunt, clare apparet, simplicissimas origines non posse repeti nisi ab
ejusmodi verbis, quibus actiones ipsæ significentur; adeoque a verbis
sic proprie dictis.

“Quumque actiones infinitæ, sive nulli certæ personæ adsignatæ, per rei
naturam antecedere debeant iis quæ certæ personæ attribuuntur, verba
‘infinitiva’ simplicissima proprie primas linguæ Græcæ origines
continere certum est.

“Harum autem plurimæ, quum jam a longissimis temporibus, una cum
plerisque notionibus propriis, ex usu ceciderint, ac difficillimaæ sæpe
indagatu sint, quo certiores progredi possimus, id semper tenendum est,
ne quidquam admittamus quod constanti analogiæ linguæ repugnet; dein
etiam, ut ex ipsis linguæ reliquiis, rite inter se comparatis,
inquiramus a quo verbo originali vocabulum quodque oriatur: etiam tum,
quum minus ipsum verbum originale superstes sit.

“Ubi enim in sequentibus agetur de ‘simplicissimis’ verbis ‘primitivis,’
id non ita accipiendum est quasi ea omnia, sicut etiam multa derivata
simpliciora, florente lingua Græcæ, in sermone Graæcorum adhuc
exstitisse vellem; sed tantum, in primo linguæ Græcæ ortu, aut
exstitisse revera aut saltem existere potuisse. Neque enim, in hoc
linguæ Græcæ defectu, æque certo sciri potest, an tanta copia, quantam
fingere verborum per linguæ naturam constanti analogiæ ductu liceat,
prima linguæ Græcæ ætate reipsa viguerit.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

Our object is here to present the Greek scholar, who may not have
reflected on the subject, such suggestions as will lead him to perceive
that δοῦλος, _doulos_, is an original Greek word, not borrowed; and
although he may not agree with us in the derivation of the term, yet
that he may readily satisfy himself what is the true derivation. It is
true, Scheidius, in his “Animadversiones ad analogiam linguæ Græcæ,” has
criticized the views of Lennepius, and has devoted near thirty pages to
that which is our quotation from him; and we did fancy, upon its
examination, that he had rather established than weakened the argument
of Lennepius: in fact we did propose to quote him as authority; but to
the most of us long quotations, in a language to us unknown, are quite
objectionable. We therefore refer to his work, pp. 246 to 275, apud
Paddenburg et filium, 1790, “Traiecti ad Rhenum.” It has been said by
some of those who contend that δοῦλος, when found in the Greek
Testament, does not mean slave, that the Greek, like all other languages
of modern date, is a compilation from the more ancient ones; and since
the Greeks at an early day had no slaves, it is evident, it is good
proof that the more ancient tribes, from whom they and their language
descended, had none; and in all such early periods of the world men
never had words in their language to express things which did not exist
among them, of which they could have no idea.

Therefore δοῦλος could not have meant slave,—“an idea of which they had
no notion.” Even if this statement were true, we do not perceive how it
proves their proposition. To show the futility of such argument, we
consent, for the moment, that δοῦλος is not an original Greek word, but
was borrowed from some other language, in which it meant something
distinct from the idea of slave: say, a freeman, if you choose.
Language, and all its parts, has ever been found to conform itself to
the habits and wants of those who use it. Wherefore we often find a
term, which some centuries ago expressed a certain distinct idea, now to
express quite a different one. We therefore cannot say, with any
propriety, that, because the word δοῦλος meant a “freeman,” at the age
of Noah, that it also meant the same thing at the age of Alexander. If
it meant a “freeman” at the age of Noah, we are to determine that fact
by its use at that period; if otherwise, we should be able to prove that
our word _slave_ does not mean a slave now, but a proud and lofty
distinction.

It is a term borrowed from the Schlavonic, where its significance was
_fame_, _renown_, &c.; but the Schlavonians going into bondage to other
nations, upon their inroads on Europe, the term implying _fame_ in their
ancient national distinctions came to signify in succeeding ages the
condition of bondage. But although, as we have seen, a language is
modified by the habits of those who apply it, yet this liability to
change ceases when the language ceases to be the common vehicle of
thought. Such substantially has been the case with the ancient Hebrew,
since the era of the prophets; and such has, emphatically, been the case
with the ancient Greek since the breaking down of the Roman Empire.

And even at the age of the apostles, the Greek had already arrived at
the very highest point of its cultivation. No history, no writer gives
proof of any subsequent improvement. If, then, we desire with
seriousness and truth to determine the significance of any term then in
use, the same is alone to be found by an investigation of the Greek
literature of that age.

There are two modes by which an idea expressed in one language is
explained in another. Where both languages contain words of synonymous
meaning, then the expressing the idea through the medium of the words in
another language, is properly what we mean by “translation.” But in many
instances, the second language contains no word or words which are
synonymes of the term by which the idea is expressed in the language
which we wish to translate. In that case we can accomplish the object
only by transferring the term expressing the idea from the one language
to the other. Example:—When the French exhibited to the natives here a
padlock, the natives associated the thing with their idea of the
tortoise, from the fancied mechanical resemblance, and with them the
name of the one became the name of the other also. But when we exhibited
to them a steamboat, they found their language destitute of any word to
express their idea of the thing exhibited; consequently, they
transferred into their own language the word steamboat, to express the
new idea.

With a view to be enabled to come to a truthful decision as to the
definiteness of the idea intended to be conveyed by the word _doulos_,
when used in the writings of the apostles, let us make a suitable
inquiry among the Greek authors read and studied at their time,
regardless of what may be the result as to the establishment of any
peculiar theory or favourite notion. Let a development of the truth be
the sole object of the research, careless of what else may stand or fall
thereby. And since all have not chosen to burden themselves with the
toilsome lesson necessary in a preparation for such examination, we
consent that such may pass it by with the same indifference with which
they regard the study.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON IV.

We commence our quotations from the Greek authors with the Cebetis
Tabula, from the Gronovius edition, Glasgow, 1747:

P. 17.——διὸ καὶ ὅταν ἀναλώσῃ πανθ’ ὅσα ἔλαβε παρά τῆς τύχης, ἀναγκάζεται
ταύταις ταῖς γυναιξὶ _δουλεύειν_, καὶ πάνθ’ ὑπομένειν, καὶ ἀσχημονεῖν,
καὶ ποιεῖν ἕνεκεν τούτων ὅσα ἐστὶ βλαβερά.

P. 34. Τοὺς μεγίστους, ἔφη, καὶ τὰ μέγιστα θηρία, ἅ πρότερον αὐτὸν
κατήσθιε, καὶ ἐκόλαζε, καὶ ἐποίει _δοῦλον_. Ταῦτα πάντα νενίκηκη, καὶ
ἀπέῤῥιψεν ἀφ’ ἑαυτου, καὶ κεκράτηκεν ἑαυτοῦ, ὥστε ἐκεῖνα νῦν τούτῳ
_δουλεύουσι_, καθαπερ οὕτος ἐκείνοις πρότερον.

Æschylus, Prometheus Chained. Line 463:

                    κἄζευξα πρῶτος ἐν ζυγοῖς κνώδαλα
                    ζεύγλαισι _δουλεύοντα_.

In his Chœphoroi line 75:

                            ἒκ γαρ οἲκων
                  πατρῴων _δούλιον_ ἐσᾶγον αἶσαν,
                  δίκαια καὶ μὴ δίκαια,
                  πρέποντ’ ἀρχαῖς βίου,
                  βίᾳ φερομένων αἰνέσαι πικρόν φρενῶν
                  στύγος κρατούσῃ.

Burney translates this passage thus:

Etenim e domo paterna servilem induxeram sortem, _stat_ juste et
injuste, convenienter origini meæ, eorum qui vi agunt laudare acerbum
mentis odium coërcenti.

Line 133. κἄγω μὲν _ἀντίδουλος_—which the same author translates, Et ego
quidem pro serva habeor.

Anacreon, _Sur l'Amour Esclave_:

                        Καὶ νῦν ἡ Κυθέρεια
                        Ζητεῖ, λύτρα φέρουσα,
                        Λύσασθαι τόν Ἔρωτα.
                        Κἄν λύσῃ δέ τις αὐτόν,
                        Οὐκ ἔξεισι, μενεῖ δέ·
                        _Δουλεύειν_ δεδίδακται.

Lucian, Dialogues of the Gods—Jove, Æsculapius, and Hercules:

          ἐγὼ δε, εἰ καὶ μηδέν ἄλλο, οὔτε ἐδούλευσα ὥσπερ σύ.

Translation: Ego vero, si nihil aliud, neque servivi quemadmodum tu, &c.

Mercury and Maia:

                  ——ὥσπερ οἱ ἐν γῇ κακῶς δουλεύοντες,

Ut in terris solent, qui malam servitutem serviunt.

Charon sive Contemplantes. Mercury:

Οὐ γαρ οἶοθα, ὅσοι πόλεμοι διὰ τοῦτο, καὶ ἐπίβουλαι, καὶ λῃστήρια, καὶ
ἐπιορκιαι, καὶ φόνοι, καὶ δεσμὰ, καὶ πλοῦς μακρὸς, καὶ ἐμπορίαι, καὶ
_δουλεῖαι_·

Nescis enim quot propterea bella existant, et insidiæ, latrocinia,
perjuria, cædes, vincula, navigatio longinqua, mercaturæ, servitutes
denique?

Cataplus sive Tyrannus:

Clotho — Ἄκουε μᾶλλον γὰρ ἀνιάσῃ μαθών. Τὴν μὲν γυναῖκά σοι Μίδας ὁ
_δοῦλος_ ἕξει, καὶ πάλαι δέ αὐτὴν ἐμοίκευεν.

Audi, magis enim iis auditis lugebis: uxorem tuam Midas habebit, servus
qui olim adulterio illi cognitus est.

Megapenthes.—Κἄν ἰδιώτην με ποίησον, ὦ Μοῖρα, τῶν πενήτων ἕνα, κᾄν
_δοῦλον_, ἀντί τοῦ πάλαι βασιλέως.

Vel privatum me facito, Parca, pauperum unum, vel servum, pro eo, qui
rex nuper fui.

Necyomantia, Menippus:

* * * ἐκολάζοντο τε ἅμα πάντες, βασιλεῖς, _δοῦλοι_, σατράπαι, πένητες,
πλούσιοι καὶ μετέμελε πᾶσι τῶν τετολμημένων. ἐνιους δὲ αὐτων καὶ
ἐγνωρισαμεν ιδοντες, ὁποσοι ἦσαν τῶν ἐναγχος τετελευτηκότων. οἱ δε
ἐνεκαλύπτοντο καὶ ἀπεστρέφουτο· εἰ δὲ καὶ προσβλέποιεν, μάλα
_δουλοπρέπες_ τι, καὶ κολακεύτικον· καὶ ταῦτα, πῶς οιει, βαρεῖς ὄντες
καὶ ὑπερόπται παρὰ τὸν βίον;

Unà autem omnes puniebantur, reges, servi, satrapæ, pauperes, divites,
mendici; cunctosque pœnitebat patratorum; nonnullos agnovimus etiam
conspicati, eorum de numero scilicet qui nuper vitam finierant; illi
vero præ pudore vultus tegebant seseque avertebant; quod si forte
respicerent, valde quidem _servilem_ in modum, atque adulatorie, illi
ipsi, qui fuerant quàm putas graves et superbi aliorum contemtores in
hac vita.

Deorum Comitia:

Momus: * * * τοιγαρουν οἱ Σκυφαι καὶ οἱ Γεται ταυτα ὁρῶντες αὐτῶν, μακρά
ἡμῖν χαίρειν εἰπόντες, αὐτοὶ ἀπαθανατίζουσι, καὶ θεοὺς χειροτονοῦσιν,
οὕς ἄν ἐθελὴσωσι, τὸν αὐτὸν τρόπον ὅνπερ καὶ Ζάμολξις, _δουλος_ ὤν,
παρενεγράφη, οὐκ οἶδ’ ὁπως διαλαθών.

Proinde Scythæ ac Getæe hæc illorum videntes, longum nobis valere
jussis, immortalitati se donant, et deos quoscunque voluerint feris
suffragiis consalutant, eodem modo quo Zamolxis etiam, servus cum esset,
in album nescio quomodo delitescens, irrepsit.

Demosthenes. Leipsic Ed. 1829, in 4 vols. Vol. i.

Olynthiac 2d. * * * ἤ ὡς οἱ παρά τὴν αὑτῶν ἀξίαν _δεδουλωμένοι_ Θετταλοὶ
υῦν οὐκ ἄν ἐλεύθεροι γένοιντο ἀσμενοι—which Leland translates thus: * *
* “or that the Thessalians, who have been so basely, so undeservedly
_enslaved_, would not gladly embrace their freedom.”

P. 70.——ὅτι Λακεδαιμονίοις _καταδουλουμένοις_, &c.

Philippic 4th, p. 142.——μήτε δουλεύειν ἄλλῳ.

P. 148.——εἰς δούλειαν, &c.

Idem.——τήν δε τῶν _δούλων_ ἀπέχεσθαι δήπου μη γένεσθαι δεῖ.

Idem, p. 149.——δούλῳ δὲ, πληγαὶ, καὶ ὁ τοῦ σώματος αἴκυσμος· &c.

Idem, p. 158. * * * ὑπόλοιπον _δουλεύειν_.

Idem.——οἶδε γὰρ ἀκριβῶς ὅτι _δουλεύειν_ μεν ὑμεῖς οὔτ’ ἐθελησετε.

Idem, p. 159.——ὑπηγάγετο εἰς τὴν νῦν παροῦσαν _δουλεὶαν_.

On the Treaty with Alexander, p. 227. * * * ἤ πείσθεντας γε _δουλεύειν_
ἀντὶ τῶν ἀργυρωνήτων.

Idem, p. 229.——τόν δ’ εἰς _δουλείαν_ ἄγοντά με, &c.

De Corona, p. 208.——πότερ’ ὡς ὁ πατήρ σου, Τρόμης, _ἐδούλευε_ παρ’ Ἐλπίᾳ
τῷ πρός τῷ Θησείῳ διδάσκοντι γράμματα, &c.

Idem.——ἀλλ’ ὡς ὁ τριηραύλης Φορμίων, ὁ Δίωνος τοῦ φρεαῤῥίου _δοῦλος_,
&c.

Idem, p. 289.——ὥστ’ ἐλεύθερος ἐκ _δούλου_, καὶ, &c.

Idem, p. 309.——τοὺς Ἑλλήνας _καταδουλουμένους_.

Idem, p. 315.——προσθεμένην ἀσφαλῶς _δουλεύειν_.

Idem, p. 316.——δι’ ὅτου _δουλεύσουσιν_ εὐτυχῶς.

Idem.——ὁ δὲ καὶ τῇ πατρίδι ὑπέρ τοῦ μὴ ταύτην ἐπιδεῖν _δουλεύουσαν_
ἀποθνήσκειν ἐθελήσει, καὶ φοβερωτέρας ἡγήσεται τάς ὕβρεις καὶ τας
αἰτίμιας, ἅς ἐν _δουλευούσῃ_ τῇ πόλει φέρειν ἀνάγκη τοῦ θανάτου.

Idem, p. 343, (_in the Epitaph._)——ὡς μὴ ζυγὸν αὐχένι θέντες
_δουλοσύνης_, &c.

Idem, p. 345.——ἕως _δούλους_ ἐποίησαν.

Oratio de Falsa Legatione, vol. ii. p. 37.——ἀλλὰ _δουλεύειν_, καὶ
τεθνᾶναι τῷ φόβω, καὶ τοὺς Θηβαίους, καὶ τοὺς Φιλίππου ξένους, [ὁὕς]
ἀναγκάζονται τρέφειν, διωκισμένοι κατὰ κώμας, καὶ παρῃρημένοι τὰ ὅπλα.

Idem, p. 54.——καὶ γὰρ τοι, πρῶτον μὲν Αμφίπολιν, πόλιν ὑμετέραν,
_δούλην_ κατέστησεν, ἣν τότε σύμμαχον αὐτοῦ καὶ φίλην ἒγραψεν.

Idem, p. 60.——ὥστ’ ἐκεῖνος ὁ _δουλεύσων_ ἔμελλεν ἔσεσθαι τοῖς ἀπὸ τῆς
εἰρήνης λυσιτελοῦσιν, οὐχ ὑμεις.

Idem, p. 78.——ὅτι ταῦτα μὲν αὐτῷ συνῄδει πεπραγμένα, καὶ _δοῦλος_ ἦν τῶν
ῥημάτων τούτων.

Idem, p. 95. Ἐλεγεῖα Σολωνος.

              Εἰς δὲ κακήν ταχέως ἤλυθε _δουλοσύνην_,
            Ἥ στάσιν ἔμφυλον, πόλεμόν θ’ εὕδοντ’ ἐπεγείρει,
              Ὅς πολλῶν ἐρατὴν ὤλεσεν ἡλικίην.

Idem, p. 97.——οἱ γὰρ ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι γνωριμώτατοι, καὶ προεστάναι τῶν
κοινῶν ἀξιούμενοι, τὴν ἁυτῶν προδιδόντες ἐλευθερίαν, οἱ δυστυχεῖς,
αὐθαίρετον αὑτοις ἐπάγονται _δουλείαν_, Φιλίππου φιλίαν, καὶ ξενίαν, καὶ
ἑταιρίαν, καὶ τὰ τοιαῦθ’ ὑποκοριζόμενοι.

Oratio adversus Leptinem, p. 174.——πῶς γὰρ οὐχὶ καὶ κατὰ τοῦτο δεινότατ’
ἄν πεπονθὼς ὁ Χαβρίας φανείη εἰ μὴ μόνον εξαρκέσειε τοῖς τα τοιαῦτα
πολιτευομένοις τὸν ἐκείνου _δοῦλον_ Λυχίδαν πρόξενον ὑμετερον
πεποιηκέναι, ἀλλ’ εἰ καὶ δια τοῦτον πάλιν τῶν ἐκεὶνῳ τι δοθὲντων
ἀφελοιντο, χαὶ ταῦτ’ αἰτίαν λέγοντες ψευδῆ;

Oratio contra Midiam, p. 207.——καὶ τοσαύτῃ γ’ ἐχρήσατο ὑπερβολῇ, ὥστε,
κᾄν εἰς _δοῦλον_ ὑβρίζῃ τις, ὁμοίως ἒδωκεν ὑπὲρ τούτου γραφήν. * * *
ἐπειδή δὲ εὕρεν οὐχ ἐπιτήδειον. μητε πρὸς _δοῦλον_, μηθ’ ὅλως ἐξεῖναι
πραττεῖν ἐπέταξεν.

P. 208. _Νομος_.—Ἐὰν τις ὑβρίσῃ εἴς τινα, ἤ παῖδα, ἤ γύναῦκα, ἤ ἄνδρα,
τῶν ἐλευθέρων, ἤ τῶν _δοῦλων_, ἤ παράνομον τι ποιήσῃ εἴς τούτων τινὰ,
γραφέσθω πρός τούς θεσμοθέτας ὁ βουλόμενος Ἀθηναῖων, οἷς ἔξεστιν. * * *
ἀκούετε, ὤ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, τοῦ νόμου τῆς φιλανθρωπίας, ὅς οὐδὲ τούς
_δούλους_ ὑβρίζεσθαι ἀξιοῖ.

P. 209.——ὅμως οὐδ’ ὅσων ἄν τιμὴν καταθέντες _δούλους_ κτήσωνται.

P. 210.——Ἀπόλλωνι ἀποτροπαίῳ βοῦν θῦσαι, καὶ στεφανηφορεῖν ἐλευθέρους
καὶ _δούλους_, καὶ ἐλινύειν μίαν ἡμέραν.

Idem, p. 253.——τύπτειν, ἀλλὰ τὴν ἐπὶ τῆς πομπῆς καὶ τοῦ μεθύειν πρὸφασιν
λαβὼν, ἀδικεῖν, ὡς _δούλοις_ χρῶμενος τοῖς ἐλευθέροις.

Oratio adversus Androtionem, p. 293.——ὑπέρ τοῦ μή τό σῶμα ἁλούς εἰς τό
δεσμωτήριον ἕλκεσθαι, ἤ ἄλλα ἀσχημονοίη, ἃ _δουλων_, οὐκ ἐλευθέρων,
ἐστὶν ἔργα, &c.

Idem.——καὶ μὴν, εἰ θέλοιτε σκέψασθαι, τί _δοῦλον_, ἤ ἐλεύθερον εἶναι,
διαφὲρει, τοῦτο μέγιστον ἄν ἕυροιτε, ὅτι τοῖς μὲν _δούλοις_ τὸ σῶμα τῶν
ἁδικημάτων ἁπάντων ὑπεύθυνόν ἐστι.

Idem, p. 295.——πότερ’ οὖν οἴεσθε τούτων ἕκαστον μισεῖν, καὶ πολεμεῖν
αὐτῷ, διὰ τὴν εἰσφοραν τύυτην, ἤ τὸν μὲν αὐτῶν, ὅτι, πάντων ἀκουόντων
ὑμῶν, ἐν τῷ δήμῳ _δοῦλον_ ἔφη, καὶ ἐκ _δούλων_ εἴναι, καὶ προσήκειν αὐτῷ
τὸ ἕκτον μέρος ἐισφέρειν μετὰ τῶν μετοίκων.

Idem, p. 298.——εἰ γὰρ _ἀνδραπόδων_ πόλις, ἀλλὰ μὴ τῶν ἄρχειν ἑτέρων
ἀξιούντων, ὡμολογεῖτε εἶναι, ὀυκ ἄν, ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, τὰς ὕβρεις
ἠνέσχεσθε τὰς τούτου, ἅς κατὰ τὴν ἀγοραν ὕβριζεν, ὁμοῦ μετοίκους,
Ἀθηναίους, δέων, ἀπάγων, βοῶν ἐν ταῖς ἐκκλησίαις, ἐπὶ τοῦ βήματος,
_δούλους_ καὶ ἐκ _δούλων_ καλῶν, ἑαυτοῦ βελτίους, καὶ ἐκ βελτίονων,
ἐρωτῶν.

Idem, p. 299.——νῦν δ’ ἐπὶ ταῖς εἰσφοραῖς, ὅ δίκαιον ἔσθ’ ὁρίσας, μὴ σοὶ
πιστεύειν, ἀλλὰ τοῖς αὑτῆς _δούλοις_, τὴν πόλιν, ὁπότ’ ἄλλο τι πράττων,
&c.

Oratio adversus Timocratem, vol. iii. p. 128.——καὶ γὰρ ἐκείνων, ὦ ἀνδρες
δικασταὶ, ὅσοι ἄν ἐλεῦθεροι γένωνται, οὐ τῆς ἐλευθερίας χάριν ἔχουσι
τοῖς δεσπόταις, ἀλλὰ μισοῦσι μάλιστα ἀνθρώπων ἁπάντων, ὅτι συνίσασιν
αὐτοῖς _δουλούσασιν_.

Idem, p. 133.——εἰ οὖν μὴ τιμωρήσησθε τούτους, οὐκ ἄν φθάνοι το πλῆθος
τούτοις τοῖς θηρίοις _δουλεῦον_. Idem, p. 141.——καὶ μὴν εἰ θέλοιτε
σκέψασθαι παρ’ ὑμῖν αὐτοῖς, ὦ ἄνδρες δικαταὶ, τι _δοῦλον_, ἤ ἐλεύθερον
εἶναι διαφέρει, τοῦτο μεγίστον ἄν ἕυροιτε, ὅτι τοῖς μὲν _δούλοις_ τὸ
σῶμα τῶν ἀδικημάτων ἁπάντων ὑπεύθυνον ἐστι, τοῖς δ’ _ἐλευθέροις_ ὒστατον
τοῦτο προσήκει κολάζειν.

Oratio III. adversus Aphobum, p. 242.——καίτοι ἒιγ’ ἦν _δοῦλος_ ἄνθρωπος,
καὶ μὴ προωμολόγητο πρὸς τῦυδ’ ἐλεύθερος εἶναι, &c.

Idem, p. 243.——ἀλλά καὶ _δοῦλον_ εἶναι τὸν ἄνθρωπον τῷ ὄντι.

Idem, p. 247.——διόπερ τοὺς ὁμολογουμένως _δούλους_ παραβὰς, τὸν
ἐλεύθερον ἠξίον βασανίζειν, ὅν οὐδ’ ὅσιον παραδοῦναι, &c.

Oratio I. adversus Onetorem, p. 266.——οὐ χρῆσθε ταῖς τῶν ἐλευθέρων
μαρτυρίαις, ἀλλὰ τοῦς _δούλους_ βασανίζοντες οὕτω ζητεῖτε τὴν ἀλήθειαν
εὑρεῖν τῶν πεπραγμένων. * * * _δούλων_ δὲ βασανισθέντων, οὐδένες πώποτ’
ἐξηλέγχθησαν, ὡς οὐκ ἀληθῆ τὰ ἐκ τῆς βασάνου εἶπον.

Oratio in Phormionem, vol. iv. p. 13.——νῦν δ’ οὐκ ἐμοὶ, * * * ἀλλ’ ἐν
Βοσπόρῳ, καὶ τῆς συγγραφῆς σοι κειμένης Ἀθηνηοι καὶ πρὸς ἐμὲᾧ, καὶ, ᾧ τὸ
χρυσίον ἀπεδίδους, ὄντος θνητοῦ, καὶ πέλαγος τοσοῦτον μέλλοντος πλεῖν,
μάρτυρα οὐδέν’ ἐποιήσω, οὔτε _δοῦλον_, οὔτ’ ἐλεύθερον.

Oratorio in Pantanænetum, p. 80.——τίς γὰρ πωποτε τῷ δεσπότῃ λαχών, τοῦ
_δούλου_ τὰ πράγματα, ὥσπερ κυρίου, κατηγόρωρησεν;

Oratio in Macartatum, p.173.——ἐπαγγέλλειν δὲ, περὶ μὲν τῶν _δοῶλων_ τῷ
δεσπότῃ περὶ δὲ τῶν ἐλευθέρων τοις τα χρήματ’ ἔχουσιν.

Oratio in Stephanum, I. p. 217.——φανήσεται γὰρ οὐ πατρὸς, ὑπὲρ ὑιέων
γράφοντος, ἐοικυῖα διαθήκη, ἀλλὰ _δούλου_ λελυμασμένον τὰ τῶν δεσποτῶν,
ὅπως μή δώσει δίκην σκοποῦντος.

Idem, p. 231.——καὶ εἰ μέν πένης οὗτος ἦν, ἡμεῖς δ’ εὐυποροῦντες
ἐτυγχάνομεν, καὶ συνέβη τι παθεῖν, οἷα πολλὰ, ἐμοὶ, οἰ παῖδες ἄν οἰ
τούτου τῶν ἐμῶν θυγατέρων ἐδικάζοντο, οἰ τοῦ _δούλου_ τῶν του δεσπότου·
* * * οὗτος δ’ αὖ τοὐναντίον τόν δεσπότην ὁ _δοῦλος_ ἐξετάζει, ὡς δῆτα
πονηρὸν καὶ ἄσωτον ἐκ τούτων ἐπιδείξων.

Idem, p.234.——ὄντων γὰρ ἡμῶν τοιωυτων, ὁποίυς τινὰς ἄν καὶ σὺ
κατασκευάσῃς τῷ λόγω, σὺ _δοῦλος_ ἦσθα.

Idem, p. 235.——καὶ δέομαι καὶ ἀντιβολῶ καὶ ἱκετεύω, μὴ ὑπεριδητέ με καὶ
τὰς θυγατέρας, δι’ ἔνδειαν τοῖς ἐμαυτοῦ _δούλοις_, καὶ τοῖς τούτου
κόλαξιν ἐπιχάρτους γενομένους. * * * _δοῦλοι_ μεν ἐκεῖνοι, _δοῦλος_ δ’
ὗυτος ἦν, δεσπόται δ' ὑμεῖς, δεσπότης δ’ ἦν ἐγώ.

Oratio in Timotheum, p. 312.——ὁ δέ οὔτε μαρτυρίαν παρέσχετο, οὔθ' ὡς
_δοῦλον_ τοῦ Αἰσχρίωνα παραδοὺς, ἐκ τοῦ σώματος τὸν ἔλεγχον ἠξίου
γενέσθαι, φοβούμενος, ἄν μὲν μαρτυρίαν παράσχηται, ὡς ἐλευθέρου ὄντος,
&c.

Sophocles, Electra, line 814:

                          ἤδη δεῖ με _δουλεύειν_ πάλιν
                  ἐν τοῖσιν ἐχθίστοισιν ἀνθρώπων ἐμοί,
                  φονεῦσι πατρός.

This Francklin translates thus: “Left at last, a slave to those whom
most on earth I hate.”

Antigone, line 202.——τοὺς δὲ _δουλώσας_ ἄγειν.

Francklin thus—“And made you slaves.”

Idem, line 478.

                                  οὐ γαρ ἐκπέλει
              φρονεῖν μέ γ’ ὅστις _δοῦλός_ ἐστι τῶν πέλας.

Thus—“’Tis not for slaves to be so haughty.”

Idem, line 517.——οὐ γάρ τι _δοῦλος_, ἀλλ’ ἀδελφὸς ὤλετο.

Thus—“He was a brother, not a slave.”

Idem, line 756.——γυναικὸς ὥν _δούλευμα_, μὴ κώτιλλέ με.

Thus—“Think not to make me thus thy scorn and laughter, thou woman’s
slave.”

Ajax, line 489.——νῦν δ’ εἰμι _δούλη_.

Thus—“Though now a wretched slave.”

499.——ξύν παιδὶ τῷ σῷ _δουλὶαν_ ἕξειν τροφήν.

Thus—“And thy loved son shall eat the bread of slavery.”

1020.——_δοῦλος_ λόγοισιν ἀντ’ ἐλευθέρου φανείς.

Francklin thus——“And to slavery doomed.”

1235.——ταῦτ’ οὐκ ἀκούειν μεγάλα πρὸς _δούλων_ κακά;

Thus——“Shall we be thus insulted by our slaves?”

1289.——ὁ _δοῦλος_, ὁ ἐκ τῆς βαρβάρου μητρὸς γεγώς.

Thus——“I am a slave, born of a barbarian mother.”

Oedipus Tyrannus, line 1062——

                      σύ μέν γάρ, οὐδ’ ἄν ἐκ τρίτης ἐγὼ
                υντρός φανῶ _τρίδουλος_, ἐκφανεῖ κακή.

Thus——“Were I descended from a race of slaves, ’twould not dishonour
thee.”

1123.——ἦ _δοῦλος_, οὐκ ὠνητός, ἀλλ’ οἴκοι τραφείς.

Thus——“Although I am a slave, yet I was not purchased, but born and
reared up in his house.”

1168.——ἦν _δοῦλος_, ἤ κείνου τις ἐγγενὴς γεγώς;

Thus—“Was he the son of a slave; if not, of whom?”

Oedipus Coloneus, line 917—

                καὶ μοι πόλιν κένανδρον ἤ _δούλην_ τινὰ
                ἔδοξας εἶναι.

Francklin thus—“Or didst thou think I valued a desert land, or that my
people were a race of slaves?”

Trachiniæ, line 53.——δούλαις, _female slaves_.

Line 63—

                                        ἥδε γὰρ γυνή
                _δούλη_ μέν, ἑιρηκεν δ’ ἐλεύθερον λόγον.

Francklin thus—“This woman, though a slave, hath spoken what would have
well become the mouth of freedom’s self to utter.”

257.——ξύν παισὶ καὶ γυναικὶ _δουλώσειν_ ἔτι.

Thus—“And bind in slavery his wife and all his race.”

267.——φωνεῖ δέ, _δοῦλος_ ἀνδρὸς ὡς ἐλεύθερου ῥαίοιτο.

Francklin thus—“And said a slave like him should bend beneath a
freeman’s power.”

283.——πόλις δέ _δούλη_.

302.——τανῦν δε _δοῦλον_ ἴοχουσιν βίον.

367.——οὐδ’ ὥς τε _δούλην_.

467.——ἔπερσε _κᾳδουλωσεν_.

Philoctetes, line 995——

               οἴ μοι τάλας. ἡμᾶς μὲν ὡς _δούλους_ σαφῶς
               πατὴρ ἄρ’ ἐξέφυσεν, οὐδ’ ἐλευθέρους.

Aristophanes, Ranæ (Batrachoi), line 191——

                                   _δοῦλον_ οὐκ ἄγω,
                 εἰ μὴ νεναυμάχηκε τὴν περὶ τῶν κρεῶν.

531.——ὡς _δοῦλος_ ὤν καὶ θνητός.

541.——εἰ Ξανθίας μὲν _δοῦλος_ ὤν.

584.——_δοῦλος_ ἅμα καὶ θνὸτος ὤν;

632.——ἀθάνατος εἰναί φημι Διόνυσος Διὸς, τοῦτον δὲ _δοῦλον_.

694.——κᾀντὶ _δούλων_ δεσπότας.

742.——ὅτι, _δοῦλος_ ὤν, ἔφασκες εἶναι δεσπότης.

743.——

                         τοῦτο μέντοι δουλικὸν
                         εὐθυς πεποίηκας.

949.——ἀλλ’ ἔλεγεν ἡ γυνή τ’ ἐμοὶ χῷ _δοῦλος_ οὐδὲν ἧττον.

Aves (Ornithes), line 69.——ὄσνις ἔγωγε _δοῦλος_.

Line 763—

                           τοῦ Φιλήμονος γένους
                     εἰ δέ _δοῦλος_ ἐστι Κὰρ, etc.

911.——ἔὣπειτα δῆτα _δοῦλος_ ὣν κόμην ἔχεις.

Equites (Hyppes), line 44—

                            οὗτος τῇ προτέρᾳ νουμυηνίᾳ
                  ἐπρίατο _δοῦλον_.

Lysistrate, line 330.——_δούλῃσιν_ ὠστιζομένη.

Acharnenses, 401—

ὅθ’ ὁ _δοῦλος_ οὑτωσὶ σαφῶς ἀπεκρίνατο.

Vespæ (Sphekes), 517—

                  ἀλλά _δουλεύων_ λέληθας.
                                παῦε _δουλείαν_ λέγων,
                  ὅστις ἄρχω τῶν ἁπάντων.

Line 602—

ἥν _δουλείαν_ οὖσαν ἔφασκες χὐπηρεσίαν ἀποδείξειν.

Line 681—

ἀλλ’ αὐτην μοι τὴν _δουλείαν_ οὐκ ἀποφαίνων ἀποκναίεις. οὐ γὰρ μεγάλη
_δουλεία_ στὶν, τούτους μὲν ἅπαντας ἐν ἀρχαῖς.

Thesmophoriazusæ, line 537—

                    αὐταί γε καὶ τα _δουλάρια_, &c.

564.———οὐδ’ ὡς σὺ, τῆς _δοὺλης_ τεκούσης ἄῤῥρεν’.

Ecclesiazusæ, line 651.——οἱ _δοῦλοι_.

Line 721—

               καὶ τάς γε _δούλας_ οὐχὶ δεῖ κοσμουμένας
               τὴν τῶν ἐλευθέρων ὑφαρπάζειν Κύπριν,
               ἀλλὰ παρὰ τοῖς _δοὺλοισι_ κοιμᾶσθαι μόνον,
               κατωνάκῃ τὸν χοῖρον ἀποτετιλμένας.

Homer, Iliad iii. 407—

             Μηδ’ ἔτι σοῖσι πόδεσσιν ὑποστρέψειας Ὄλυμπον,
             Αλλ’ αἰεὶ περὶ κεῖνον ὀΐζυε, καὶ ἑ φύλασσε,
             Εἰσόκε σ’ ἢ ἄλοχον ποιήσεται, ἢ ὅγε _δοὺλην_.

Which Pope has paraphrased thus—

          “A handmaid goddess at his side to wait,
          Renounce the glories of thy heavenly state,
          Be fix’d for ever to the Trojan shore,
          His spouse, or slave, and mount the skies no more.”

Iliad vi. 460—

            Ἕξτορος ἥδε γυνή, ὅς ἀριστεύεσκε μάχεσθαι
            Τρώων ἱπποδάμων, ὅτε Ἴλιον ἀμφεμάχοντο.
            Ὥς ποτέ τις ἐρέει· σοὶ δ’ αὖ νέον ἔσσεται ἄλγος
            Χήτεϊ τοιοῦδ’ ἀνδρός, ἀμύνειν _δούλιον_ ἧμαρ.

We should be happy to see the exquisite tenderness of the original
transferred into English. We offer:—“This is the wife of Hector, the
bravest of the horse-taming Trojans, when our people fought about Ilion.
Thus perchance some one will say: and this will be to thee a fresh
sorrow, to feel the want of thy husband to ward off the day of slavery.”

Odyssey xiv. 339—

             Ἀλλ’ ὅτε γαίης πολλὸν ἀπέπλω ποντοπόρος νηῦς,
             Αὐτικα _δούλιον_ ἧμαρ ἐμοὶ περιμηχανόωντο.

Pope thus—

            “Soon as remote from shore they plough the wave,
            With ready hands they rush to seize the slave.”

Odyssey xxii. 421—

             Πεντηκοντά τοί εἰσιν ἐνι μεγάροισι γυναῖκες
             Δμωαί, τὰς μεν τ’ ἔργα διδάξαμεν ἐργάζεσθαι,
             Εἰρια τε ξαίνειν, καὶ _δουλοσύνης_ ἀνεχέσθαι.

Pope thus—

             “Then she: In these thy kingly walls remain
             (My son) full fifty of the handmaid train;
             Taught by my care to cull the fleece or weave,
             And servitude with pleasing tasks deceive.”

Euripides, Iphigenia in Tauris, line 130—

                  πόδα παρθένιον
                  ὅσιον ὁσίας
                  κλῃδούχου _δούλα_ (_a slave_) πέμπω.

Line 451.——_δουλείας_ ἐμέθεν δειλαίας παυσίπονος.

Potter thus—“And bid the toils of slavery cease.”

Troades (Trojan Dames), line 140—

                   _δούλα_ δ’ ἄγομαι γραῦς ἐξ οἴκων.

“I, an old woman, am led from my home a slave.”

Idem, 159. _δουλείαν_ αἰάζουσιν.

“Bemoan their slavery.”

186.——τῷ πρόσκειμαι _δούλα_ τλάμων.

“Assigned a slave,” &c.

197.——_δουλεύσω_ γραῦς.

“An old woman enslaved.”

214.——ἔνθ’ ἀντάσω Μενέλα _δούλα_.

“Exposed me a slave to Menelaus.”

Idem, 235—

                                 _δοῦλαί_ γαρ δὴ
                       Δωρίδος ἐσμέν χθονὸς ἤδη.

“We are slaves of the Dorian land, even now.”

284.——φωτὶ _δουλεύειν_.

“I am enslaved,” &c.

599.——ζυγά δ’ ἤνυσε _δούλια_ Τροία.

“Troy yields to the yoke of slavery.”

615.——εἰς _δοῦλον_ ἥκει.

“Is sunk in slavery.”

661.——_δουλεύσω_ δ’, &c.

Idem, 678—

                             ναυσθλοῦμαι δ’ ἐγὼ
               πρός Ἑλλάδ’ αἰχμάλωτος εἰς _δοῦλον_ ζυγόν.

“I go by sea to Greece, a prisoner of war, to a yoke of _slavery_.”

957.——κείνης δέ _δοῦλός_ ἐστι.

“But is her slave.”

971.——πικρῶς _ἐδούλευς_’.

“Harshly _enslaved_.”

1341.——ἴτ’ ἐπὶ τάλαιναν
      _δούλειον_ ἁμέραν βίου.

Bacchæ, 366.——γὰρ τῷ Διὸς _δουλευτέον_.

803.——τί δρῶντα; _δουλεύοντα δουλείαις_ ἐμαῖς;

Potter thus—“What should I do? be to my slaves a slave?”

1028.——ὥς σε στενάζω, _δοῦλος_ ὤν μὲν, ἀλλ’ ὅμως χρηστοῖσι _δούλοις_
        συμφορὰ τὰ δεσποτῶν.

Potter thus—

            “How I lament thee, though a slave; yet slaves,
            If faithful, mourn the ruin of their lords.”

Cyclops, 76—

                       ἐγὼ δ’, ὁ σος πρόσπολος,
                       θητεύω Κύκλωπι
                       τῷ μονοδέρκτᾳ,
                       _δοῦλος_ ἀλαινων σὺν τᾷδε
                       τράγου χλαίνᾳ μελέᾳ
                       σᾶς χωρὶς φιλίας.

Helena, 283—

                                 καὶ φίλων τητωμένη,
               _δούλη_ καθέστηκ’, οὖς’ ἐλευθέρων ἄπο.
               τὰ βαρβάρων γὰρ _δοῦλα_ πάντα, πλὴν ἑνός.

Potter thus—

                                    “Of friends deprived,
              I, from the free who draw my generous blood,
              Am made a _slave_; for ’mong barbarians all
              Are slaves, save one.”

299.——ἀσχήμονες μὲν ἀγχόναι μετάρσιοι,
      κᾀν τοῖσι _δούλοις_ δυσπρεπὲς νομίζεται.

Potter thus—

                                        “The pendent cord
            Disgraces; even in _slaves_ it is deemed base.”

Line 728—

             ἐγω μὲν εἴην, κεἰ πέφυχ’ ὅμως λάτρις,
             ἐν τοῖσι γενναίοισιν ἠριθμημένος
             _δούλοισι_, τοὔνομ’ οὐκ ἔχων ἐλεύθερον,
             τόν νοῦν δε· κρεῖσσον γὰρ τόδ’ ἤ δυοῖν κακοῖν
             ἕν ὄντα χρῆσθαι, τὰς φρένας τ’ ἔχειν κακὰς,
             ἄλλων τ’ ἀκούειν _δοῦλον_ ὄντα τῶν πέλας.

Potter thus—

                                       “It is my wish,
             Though born a slave, among the generous slaves
             To be accounted, bearing a free mind,
             If not the name; for better this I deem,
             Than two bad things, to harbour a base mind,
             And hear from those around the name of slave.”

We deem this translation defective, because it makes no distinction
between the ideas conveyed by the words λάτρις and δουλος. True, at this
late day, the passage is somewhat obscure. But the speaker was not a
slave: he says he was born a λάτρις—a character far less elevated than
the δοῦλος, yet a freeman, but possessing a greater servility of mind
than even the _doulos_, and his condition often far more abject. The
slave possessed the protection of his master; but the _latris_, with all
the destitution and degradation incident to the lowest conditions of the
freeman, often coveted the happier condition of the _doulos_. The idea
conveyed by this messenger is literally this: “Although born a _latris_,
I had rather be considered among the home-born slaves, not having the
name of freedom, than to have merely the name; for I consider this a
good choice between the two evils—the being supposed to have the base
mind of the _latris_, and the being truly called a slave by those near
us.” The substance is, he had rather be a _doulos_ than a _latris_.

That he was not a slave is evident from what follows in the 797th line,
where Menelaus calls him emphatically his _prospolon_, merely an
attendant.

1630.——ἀλλὰ δεσποτῶν κρατήσεις, _δοῦλος_ ὤν;

Potter—“Slave as thou art, wilt thou control thy lord?”

Idem, 1640.

                                      πρὸ δεσποτῶν
            τοῖσι γενναίοισι _δούλοις_ εὐκλεέστατον θανεῖν.

“To home-born slaves, it is glory to die for their masters.”

Ion, line 132.——θεοῖσι _δούλαν_ χέρ’ ἔχειν.

“To be a slave to the gods.”

182.——Φοίβῷ _δουλεύσω_, &c.

327.——τοῖς τοῦ θεοῦ κοσμούμεθ’, ᾧ _δουλεύομεν_.

556.——ἐκπεφεύγαμεν τὸ _δοῦλον_.

761.——_δούλευμα_ πιστόν, &c.

837.——εκ _δούλης_ τινός, &c.

854.——ἕν γάρ τι τοῖς _δούλοισιν_, &c.

855.——τοὒνομα· τὰ δ’ ἀλλα πάντα τῶν ἐλευθέρων οὐδεὶς κακίων _δοῦλος_,
ὅστις ἐσθλὸς ᾖ.

Potter—

            “It is the name; in all else than the free
            The slave is nothing worse, if he be virtuous.”

983.——ἐπίσημον ὁ φόνος, καὶ τὸ _δοῦλον_ ἀσθενές.

Potter—“An open murder, and with coward _slaves_.”

1109.——τί δ' ἔστιν, ὦ _ξύνδουλε_;

“What is the matter, my fellow-slave?”

Hercules, 190.——ἀνὴρ ὁπλίτης _δοῦλος_ ἐστι τῶν ὅπλων.

Potter—

                            “——the man array’d in arms
                  Is to his arms a _slave_.”

Electra, 110.——_δούλης_ γυναικός, _female slave_.

633.——_δούλων_ γὰρ ἴδιον τοῦτο, σοὶ δὲ σύμφορον.

Potter—“Such the slave’s nature, but this favours thee.”

Line 898—

                               σὸς γάρ ἐστι νῦν
                         _δοῦλος_.

“He is thy _slave_ now.”

Medea, line 54—

                χρηστοῖσι _δούλοις_ ξυμφορὰ τὰ δεσποτῶν
                κακῶς πίτνοντα καὶ φρενῶν ἀνθάπτεται.

“Slaves who are faithful, suffer in the afflictions of their masters.”

Line 65.——μή, πρὸς γενείου, κρύπτε _σύνδουλον_ σέθεν.

“Now by this beard, deceive not by secrecy thy fellow-slave.”

Hecuba, line 234—

               εἰ δ’ ἔστι τοῖς _δούλοισι_ τοὺς ἐλευθέρους
               μὴ λυπρὰ μηδὲ καρδίας δηκτήρια
               ἐξιστορῆσαι, σοὶ μὲν εἰρῆσθαι χρεών,
               ἡμᾶς δ’ ἀκοῦσαι τοὺς ἐρωτῶντας τάδε.

Potter thus—

               “But may _slaves_ be permitted of the free
               To ask—I mean no rudeness, no reproach—
               But may we ask? And wilt thou answer us?”

247.——τί δῆτ’ ἔλεξας, δούλος ὤν ἐμὸς τότε;

Potter—“What didst thou say, when thou wast then my _slave_?”

Idem, 291—

                νόμος δ’ εν ὑμῖν τοῖς τ’ ἐλευθέροις ἴσος
                καὶ τοῖσι _δούλοις_ αἵματος κεῖται πέρι.

Potter thus—

                                 “The laws of blood
             Are equal to us _slaves_, and you our lords.”

331.——αἰαῖ· τὸ _δοῦλον_ ὡς κακὸν πεφυκέναι.

“Ah well, how great the evil to have become a _slave_!”

356.——νῦν δ’ εἰμὶ _δούλη_.

“But I am now a slave.”

Idem, 365—

                   λέχη δε τἀμα _δοῦλος_ ὠνητός πόθεν
                   χρανεῖ.

“And then, a female stewardess, a slave purchased somewhere, shall
defile my bed.”

Idem, 444—

                     αὔρα, ποντιὰς αὔρα,
                     ἅτε ποντοπόρους κομίζεις
                     θοὰς ἀκάτους ἐπ’ οἶδμα λίμνας,
                     ποῖ με τὰν μελέαν πορεύσεις;
                     τῷ _δουλόσυνος_ πρὸς οἶκον
                     κτηθεῖσ’ ἀφίξομαι;
                     ἤ Δωρίδος ὅρμον αἴας,
                     ἤ Φθιάδος.

Potter—

          “Tell me, ye gales, ye rising gales,
            That lightly sweep along the azure plain,
          Whose soft breath fills the swelling sails,
            And wafts the vessel dancing o'er the main;
          Whither, ah! whither will ye bear
          This sickening daughter of despair?
          What proud lord’s rigour shall the _slave_ deplore,
          On Doric or on Phthian shore?”

495.——αὕτη δὲ _δούλη_, γραῦς, ἄπαις, ἐπὶ χθονι κεῖται, κόνει φύρουσα
δύστηνον κάρα.

Potter—

“Herself a _slave_, old, childless, on the ground She lies, and soils
her hoar head in the dust.”

741.——

               ἀλλ’ ἔι με _δούλην_ πολεμίαν θ’ ἡγούμενος
               γονάτων ἀπώσαιτ’, ἄλγος αὖ προσθείμεθ’ ἄν

Potter—

             “But should he treat me as a _slave_, a foe,
             And spurn me, I should add to my afflictions.”

757.——

                  οὐ δῆτα· τοὺς κακοὺς δὲ τιμωρουμένη,
                  αἰῶνα τὸν ξύμπαντα _δουλεῦσαι_ θέλω.

Potter—

            “Not freedom, but revenge; revenge on baseness:
            Grant me revenge, and let me die a _slave_.”

798.——ἡμεῖς μὲν οὖν _δοῦλοί_ τε κἀσθενεῖς ἴσως.

Potter—“But we are _slaves_, but we perchance are weak

809.——τύραννος ἦν ποτ’, ἀλλὰ νῦν _δούλη_ σέθεν.

Potter—“Erewhile I was a queen, but now a slave.”

Idem, 864—

                οὐκ ἕστι θνητῶν ὅστις ἔστ’ ἐλεύθερος·
                ἢ χρημάτων γὰρ _δοῦλος_ ἐστιν ἢ τύχης,
                ἢ πλῆθος αὐτὸν πόλεος ἢ νόμων γραφαὶ
                εἴργουσι χρῆσθαι μὴ κατὰ γνώμην τρόποις

Potter—

              “Vain is the boast of liberty in man:
              A slave to fortune or a slave to wealth,
              Or by the people or the laws restrained,
              He dares not act the dictates of his will.”

1252.——

                oimoi, gynaikos, hôs eoich', hêssômenos
                _doulês_, hyphexô tois kakiosin dikên.

Potter—

            “What! from these wretches shall I suffer thus,
            Defeated by a woman and a _slave_?”

Phœnissæ, line 94.——ὡς _δούλω_, _as a slave_.

189.——_δουλείαν_ περιβαλών.

“To lead in _slavery_.”

192.——_δουλοσύναν_ τλαίην.

“To suffer slavery.”

205.——Φοίβω _δούλα_. “Slave to Phœbus.”

1606.——ἀλλὰ _δουλεῦσαι_ τέ με—Πολύβον, &c.

“Slave to Polybus,” &c.

Orestes, line 221.——ἰδοὺ τὸ _δούλευμ’_ ἡδύ, κοὐκ ἀναίνομαι.

Idem, 715—

                         ——νῦν δ’ ἀναγκαίως ἔχει
               _δούλοισιν_ εἶναι τοῖς σοφοῖσι τῆς τύχης.

937.——ἤ γυναιξὶ _δουλεύειν_ χρεών.

Potter—“Vile _slaves_ to your wives.”

1115.——οὐδὲν τὸ _δοῦλον_ πρὸς τὸ μὴ _δοῦλον_ γένος.

Such was the reply of Pylades to his friend Orestes, in reference to the
Phrygian slave; and we shall close our quotations from this remarkable
tragic poet, with an interview between Orestes and one of these Phrygian
slaves.

Line 1522—

_Orestes._ _Δοῦλος_ ὤν φοβεῖ τὸν Ἁΐδην, ὅς σ’ ἀπαλλάξει κακῶν; ΐ
_Slave._ Πᾶς ἀνὴρ, κἂν _δοῦλος_ ᾖ τις, ἥδεται τὸ φῶς ὁρῶν.

Potter—

_Orestes._ “Fears a _slave_ death, the end of all his ills?

_Slave._ “To slave or free, sweet is the light of heaven.”

Alcestes, line 638—

                               _δουλίου_ δ’ ἀφ’ αἵματος
                 μαστῷ γυναικὸς σῆς ὑπεβλήθην λάθρα.

Potter—“But, the base offspring of some _slave_, thy wife stole me, and
put me to her breast.”

We find the following in a short notice of the life of Isocrates, by
Dionysius of Halicarnassus.

Page 23.——διδάσκει δ’ ὡς οὐ Μεσσηνίοις τοῖς οὐκετ’ οὖσιν, ἀλλὰ _δούλοις_
καὶ _εἵλωσιν_ ὁρμητηριον καὶ καταφυγὴν παρέξουσι τὴν πόλιν.

Also, page 26.——_δουλευει_ γὰρ ἡ διάνοια πόλλακις τῷ ῥυθμῷ τε λέξεως,
καὶ τῶν κομψοῦ λείπεται τὸ ἀληθινὸν.

Idem, 35.——ἡμεῖς δε _καταδούλευμενοι_, καὶ τᾀναντια τοῖς τότε
πράττοντες.

Idem, 36.——καὶ τότε μὲν εἰ τριήρεις πληροῖεν, τοὺς μὲν ξένους καὶ τούς
_δούλους_ ναύτας εἰσεβίβαζον, τούς δε πολίτας μεθ’ ὅπλων ἐξέπεμπον.

Isocrates, (Cantabrigigiæ, 1686,) Orat. ad Demonicum, page 52— ἐν δὲ
τοῖς τερπνοῖς, ἄν αἰσχρὸν ὑπολάβῃς, τῶν μὲν οἰκετῶν ἄρχειν, ταῖς δι’
ἡδοναῖς _δουλεύειν_.

Ad Nicoclem, p. 74.——καὶ τοῦτο ἡγοῦ βασιλικώτατον ἐάν μηδεμίᾳ _δουλεύης_
τῶν ἡδονων, ἀλλὰ κρατῇς τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν μᾶλλον ἤ τῶν πολιτῶν.

Panegyricus, p. 121.——τῶν δὲ βαρβάρων οἵ βουλομένοι _καταδουλώσασθαι_
τοὺς Ἑλλήνας, ἐφ’ ἡμᾶς πρώτους ἰόντες.

Idem, 133.——ἧροῦντο δὲ τῶν _εἱλώτων_ ἐνίοις _δουλεύειν_, ὥστε εἰς τὰς
ἑαυτῶν πατρίδας ὑβρίζειν.

Idem, 137.——νῦν δὲ εἰς τοσαύτην _δουλείαν_ καθεστώτων.

Idem.——μέγιστον δε τῶν κακῶν, ὅταν ὑπὲρ αὐτης τε _δουλείας_ ἀναγκάζωνται
συστρατεύεσθαι.

Idem.——κατορθώσαντες δὲ μᾶλλον εἰς τὸν ἐπίλοιπον χρόνον _δουλεύσουσιν_.

Idem, 144.——πρός μὲν τὸν πόλεμον ἐκλελύμενος, πρὸς δὲ τὴν _δουλείαν_
ἄμεινον τῶν παρ’ ἡμῖν οἰκετῶν πεπαιδευμένος.

Idem.——ἅπαντα δὲ τὸν χρόνον διάγουσιν, ὡς μέν τοὺς ὑβρίζοντες, τοῖς δὲ
_δουλεύοντες_.

Idem, 150.——Σικελία δὲ _καταδεδούλωται_.

Idem, 151.——ὡς ὑπὲρ τούτων _δουλεύειν_ ἠναγκασμέναι.

Idem, 153.——δημοσία δε τοσούτους τῶν συμμάχων περιορᾷν αὐτοις
_δουλεύοντας_.

Orat. ad Philippum, p. 161.——ζητεῖν δὲ ἐκείνους τοὺς τόπους τοὺς πόῤῥω
μὲν κειμένους τῶν ἄρχειν δυναμένων, ἐγγὺς δὲ τῶν _δουλεύειν_ εἰθισμένων.

Archidamus, p. 235.——νῦν καὶ τὴν τῶν _δούλων_ παῤῥησίαν ὑπομένοντας
φαίνεσθαι.

De Pace, sive Socialis, page 281.——καὶ τοτε μὲν εἔ τριήρεις πληροῖεν,
τοὺς μὲν ξένους καὶ τοὺς _δούλους_ ναύτας εἰσεβίβαζον.

Idem, p. 280.——ὑμεῖς δέ _καταδουλούμενοι_.

Idem, p. 306.——μὴ _δουλείας_ ἀλλά σωτηρίας αὐτοῖς αἰτίαν γενέσθαι.

Evagoras, p. 310.——οὐ μὲν _δουλεύτεον_.

Idem, p. 320.——τοὺς μὲν φίλους ταῖς εὐεργεσίαις ὑπ’ αὐτῷ ποιούμενος τοὺς
δέ ἄλλους τῇ μεγαλοψυχία _καταδουλούμενος_.

Idem, p. 326.——οἱ δέ Ἕλληνες ἀντί _δουλείας_ αὐτονομίαν ἔσχον Ἀθηναῖοι
δὲ τοσαῦτον ἐπέδοσαν.

Panathenaicus, p. 396.——οὕς μὲν ἐλευθερώσειν ὡμολόγησαν _κατεδουλώσαντο_
μᾶλλον ἥ τοὺς εἵλωτας.

Idem, p. 400.——καὶ τὸ μη δικαίως τῶν ἄλλων ἄρχειν μᾶλλον ἤ φεύγοντας τὴν
αἰτίαν ταύτην, ἀδίκως Λακεδαιμονίοις _δουλεύειν_.

Idem, p. 412.——τοὺς δὲ ἄλλους Ἑλλήνας _καταδουλώσασθαι_ πρὸς μὲν
τοιοῦτον κρατίσασαι ῥαδίως ἄν αὐτου.

Idem, p. 418.——_καταδουλωσαμένους_.

Plataicus, p. 459.——οἵ μὲν οὐδὲν ἧττον τῶν ἀργυρωνήτων _δουλεύουσιν_.

Idem.——τε δὲ τῶν ἄλλων _δουλείας_ αὐτους κυρίους καθιστᾶσι.

Idem, p. 463.——_δουλεὐειν_.

Idem, p. 465.——_δουλευουσῶν_.

Idem, p. 466.——ἀλλὰ πολλοὺς μὲν μικρῶν ἕνεκα συμβουλαίων _δουλεύοντας_,
ἄλλους δὲ ἐπὶ θητείαν ἴοντας.

Orat. de Permutatione, p. 493.——τὴν δε τῷ γένει τῆς σωτηρίας αἰτίαν
οὖσαν, _δουλεύειν_ αὐτοις ἀξιοῦν.

Idem, p. 494.——τῶν δέ βαρβάρων οἱ βουλόμενοι _καταδουλοῦσθαι_ τοὺς
Ἑλλήνας.

Idem, p. 502.——τοῖς δ’ ἄλλοις τὴν _δουλείαν_ αἱρουμένοις.

Idem.——οὕτω καὶ τῶν πόλεων ταις ὑπερεχούσαις λυσιτελεῖν λεῖν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων
ἀφανισθῆναι μᾶλλον ἤ _δούλας_ ὀφθῆναι γενομένας.

Idem.——ὥστε μὴ τοῖς Ἕλλησιν αἴτιον γενήσθαι τί _δουλείας_.

Idem, p. 510.——ἡμεῖς δέ _καταδουλούμενοι_.

Idem, p. 511.——τοὺς μὲν ξένους καὶ τοὺς _δούλους_.

De Bigis, p. 530.——τοὺς πολίτας ἰδεῖν _δουλεύοντας_.

Epistolæ: to Philip, p. 611.——ἅ Ξέρξη τε τῷ _καταδουλώσασθαι_ τοὺς
Ἕλληνας βουληθέντι.

To Jason, a freedman, p. 629.——καὶ τὰς τιμὰς ἡδίους νομίζω τὰς παρὰ τῶν
μέγα φρονούντων, ἤ τὰς παρὰ τῶν _δουλευόντων_.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON V.

But if it shall be objected, that by these writers the word δουλος,
_doulos_, and its derivatives are used in a figurative sense, since
these writers all exhibit minds deeply excited, or used all language
with poetic license; we think such objection unfounded, so far as it
alleges that they have used this word in an unusual manner, or have
attributed to it any other sense than was attributed to it by all the
Greeks.

Nevertheless, we propose now to present this word as it was used by
Thucydides, Herodotus, and Xenophon, against whose use no cavil can be
made; and we now fear not to assert that their use of this word will be
in the most strict accordance with the authors already examined.

Plutarch, who was somewhat disposed to criticize other authors, speaking
of Thucydides, expresses the idea that he wrote in such a manner that
the reader saw the picture of what he represented. (See his _De Gloria
Atheniensium_.) Plutarch was then clearly of opinion that the language
of Thucydides was most appropriately accurate.

We here premise, that we shall not presume to offer our own translation
to the extract we propose to make from Thucydides. From the many that
have been made, we have selected that of the Rev. Dr. William Smith, of
the cathedral of Chester, England, and concerning whom it may be proper
to say a word. He translated Longinus with great accuracy and beauty.
The Weekly Miscellany of Dec. 8th, 1739, says of this translation, “It
justly deserves the notice and thanks of the public.” Father Phillips
says, 1756, “A late English translation of the Greek critic, by Mr.
Smith, is a credit to the author, and reflects lustre on Longinus
himself.” Laudits of this work will fill a volume. In 1753 he translated
Thucydides, and was directly created a doctor of divinity,—and we find
in his epitaph now in the cathedral of Chester, “as a scholar his
reputation is perpetuated by his valuable publications, particularly his
correct and eloquent translations of Longinus, Thucydides, and
Xenophon.” We have been thus minute that it may be known with what
spirit we prepare this work.

THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, _by Thucydides_.

Book i. chap. 8. Οἵ τε ἥσσους ὑπέμενον τὴν τῶν κρεισσόνων _δουλείαν_.

“And the great, who had all needful supplies at hand, reduced less
powerful cities into their own _subjection_.”

At that age of the world, when one city was conquered by another, all
were reduced to slavery, unless by the especial favour of the conqueror.
In this instance it would have been more literal to our present idiom to
have used the term _slavery_, instead of _subjection_; because now there
has grown up a wide distinction between the mere subjugating and
enslaving.

Chap. 16. Κῦρος καὶ ἡ Περσικὴ βασιλεια, Κροῖσον καθελοῦσα, καὶ ὅσα ἐντὸς
Ἅλυος ποταμοῦ πρὸς θάλασσαν, ἐπεστράτευσε, καὶ τὰς ἐν τῇ ἠπείρω πόλεις
ἐδούλωσε.

“For Cyrus, after he had completed the conquest of Crœsus, and all the
country which lieth between the river Halys and the sea, invaded them,
and enslaved their towns upon the continent.”

Chap. 18. Δεκάτω δὲ ἔτει μετ’ αὐτην αὖθις ὁ βάρβαρος τῷ μεγάλω στόλῳ ἐπὶ
τὴν Ἑλλάδα _δουλωσόμενος_ ἦλθε.

“And in the tenth year after that, the barbarian, with a vast armament,
invaded Greece in order to _enslave_ it.”

Chap. 34. Οὐ γὰρ ἐπὶ τῷ _δοῦλοι_, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ τῷ ὅμοιοι τοῖς λειπομένοις
εἶναι, ἐκπέμπονται.

“They are not sent out to be the _slaves_, but to be the equals of those
who remain behind.”

Chap. 55. Καὶ τῶν Κερκυραίων ὀκτακοσίους μὲν, οἵ ἦσαν _δοῦλοι_,
ἀπέδοντο.

“Eight hundred of their Corcyrean prisoners, who were _slaves_, they
sold at public sale.”

Chap. 68. Νῦν δὲ τί δεῖ μακρηγορεῖν, ὧν τοὺς μὲν _δεδουλωμένους_ ὁπᾶτε.

“But now, what need can there be of multiplying words, when some you
already see _enslaved_.”

Chap. 69. Ἐς τόδε τε ἀεὶ ἀποστεροῦντες οὐ μόνον τοὺς ὑπ’ ἐκείνων
δεδουλωμένους ἐλευθερίας, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ὑμετέρους ἤδη ξυμμάχους. οὐ γὰρ
ὁ _δουλωσάμενος_ ἀλλ’ ὁ δυνάμενος μὲν παῦσαι, περιορῶν δὲ, ἀληθέστερον
αὐτὸ δρᾷ.

“Ever since you have connived at liberty overthrown, not only in
whatever communities they have proceeded to enslave, but now where even
your own confederates are concerned. For not to the men who rivet on the
chains of _slavery_, but to such as, though able, yet neglect to prevent
it, ought the sad event with truth to be imputed.”

Chap. 74. Τῶν ἄλλων ἤδη μέχρι ἡμῶν _δουλευόντων_, &c.

“And every state already _enslaved_,” &c.

Chap. 81. Οὕτως εἰκὸς, Ἀθηναίους φρονήματι, μήτε τῇ γῇ _δουλεῦσαι_, μήτε
ὥσπερ ἀπείρους καταπλαγῆναι τῷ πολέμῳ.

“It is by no means consistent with the spirit of Athenians to be
_slaves_ to their soil, or, like unpractised soldiers, to shudder at
war.”

Chap. 98. Πρώτη τε αὕτη πόλις ξυμμαχὶς παρὰ τὸ καθεστηκὸς _ἐδουλώθη_.

“This was the first confederate state which was _enslaved_ to gratify
their aspiring ambition.”

Chap. 101. Πλεῖστοι δὲ τῶν Εἱλώτων ἐγένοντο οἱ τῶν παλαιῶν Μεσσηνίων
τότε _δουλωθέντων_ ἀπόγονοι· ᾗ καὶ Μεσσήνιοι ἐκλήθησαν οἱ πάντες.

“Most Of the Helots were descendants of the ancient Messenians, then
reduced to _slavery_, and on this account all of them in general were
called Messenians.”

Chap. 103. Ἤν δέ τις ἁλίσκηται, τοῦ λαβόντος εἶναι _δοῦλον_.

“What if any one of them be ever found there, he should be made the
_slave_ of whoever apprehended him.”

Chap. 121. Εἰ οἱ μὲν εκείνων ξύμμαχοι ἐπί _δουλεία_ τῇ αὐτῶν φέροντες
οὐκ ἀπεροῦσιν.

“Which rivet _slavery_ on themselves,” &c.

Chap. 122. Καὶ τὴν ἧσσαν, εἰ καὶ δεινόν τῷ ἀκοῦσαι, ἴστω οὐκ ἄλλο τι
φέρουσαν ἣ ἄντικρυς _δουλείαν_.

“Such a triumph, how grating soever the bare mention of it may be to any
of your ears, yet be it known, can and is nothing else but plain and
open _slavery_.”

Chap. 124. Καὶ τοὺς νῦν _δεδουλωμένους_ Ἕλληνας, ἐλευθερώσωμεν.

“And shall immediately recover liberty for those Grecians who are
already _enslaved_.”

Chap. 138. Καὶ τοῦ Ἑλληνικοῦ ἐλπίδα, ἣν ὑπετίθει αὐτῷ _δουλώσειν_.

“As the hope be suggested to him of _enslaving_ Greece.”

Chap. 141. Τὴν γὰρ αὐτὴν δύναται _δούλωσιν_.

“The very same tendency to make them _slaves_.”

Book ii. chap. 61. _Δουλοῖ_ γὰρ φρόνημα τὸ αἰφνίδιον καὶ ἀπροσδοκητον,
καὶ τὸ πλείστω παραλόγῳ ξυμβαῖνον.

“Accidents sudden and unforeseen, and so opposite to that event you
might reasonably have expected, _enslave_ the mind.”

Chap. 63. Μηδὲ νομίσαι περὶ ἑνὸς μόνου, _δουλειας_ ἀντ’ ἐλευθερίας.

“Think not you have only one point at stake, the alternative of
_slavery_ instead of freedom.”

Idem. Οὐδὲ ἐν ἀρχούσῃ πόλει ξυμφέρει, ἀλλ’ ἐν ὑπηκόῳ ἀσφαλῶς
_δουλεύειν_.

“Slavery is never to be endured by a state that once hath governed. Such
a situation can be tolerable only to that which has ever been
dependent.”

Chap. 71. Στρατεῦσαί τε μηδένα ποτὲ ἀδίκως επ’ αὐτοὺς, μηδ’ ἐπὶ
_δουλείᾳ_.

“That no one should unjustly make war on them, or endeavour to _enslave_
them.”

Idem. Ἐπὶ _δουλείᾳ_ τῇ ἡμετέρα ἥκετε.

“Are come hither to _enslave_ us,” &c.

Chap. 78. Καὶ ἄλλος οὐδεὶς ἦν τῷ τείχει, οὔτε _δοῦλος_, οὔτε ἐλεύθερος.

“Nor was there any other portion within the wall, either _slave_ or
free.”

Book iii. chap. 10. Ξύμμαχοι μέντοι ἐγενόμεθα οὐκ ἐπὶ _καταδουλώσει_ τῶν
Ἑλλήνων Ἀθηναίοις.

“We made an alliance with the Athenians—not to _enslave_ the rest of
Greece to the Athenians.”

Idem. Ἐπειδὴ δὲ ἑωρῶμεν αὐτοὺς τὴν μὲν τοῦ Μήδου ἔχθραν ἀνιέντας, τὴν δὲ
τῶν ξυμμάχων _δούλωσιν_ ἐπαγομένους, οὐκ ἀδεεῖς ἕτι ἦμεν. ἀδύνατοι δὲ
ὄντες καθ’ ἕν γενόμενοι, διά πολυψηφίαν ἀμύνασθαι, οἱ ξύμμαχοι
_ἐδουλώθησαν_, πλὴν ἡμῶν καὶ Χίων.

“But when we perceived that they relaxed in their zeal against the Mede,
and were grown earnest in riveting _slavery_ upon allies, we then began
to be alarmed. It was impossible, where so many parties were to be
consulted, to unite together in one body of defence; and thus all the
allies fell into _slavery_ except ourselves and the Chians.”

Chap. 38. _Δοῦλοι_ ὄντες τῶν ἀεὶ ἀτόπων, ὑπερόπται δὲ τῶν εἰωθότων.

“Slaves as you are to whatever trifles happen always to be in vogue, and
looking down with contempt on tried and experienced methods.”

Chap. 56. Ἐν ἐκείνω δὲ τῷ καιρῷ, ὅτε πᾶσι _δουλείαν_ ἐπέφερεν ὁ
βἁρβαρος, οἵδε μετ’ αὐτου ἦσαν.

“But at that season, when the barbarians struck at _enslaving_ us all,
these Thebans were then the barbarians’ coadjutors.”

Chap. 58. Πρὸς δὲ, καὶ γῆν, ἐν ᾗ ἠλευθερώθησαν οἱ Ἕλληνες, δουλώσετε;

“Will you further _enslave_ the spot on which the Grecians earned their
liberty?”

Chap. 63. Τοὺς μὲν, _καταδουλουμένους_ τὴν Ἑλλάδα, τοὺς δὲ,
ἐλευθεροῦντας.

“The Athenians truly have _enslaved_ your country; and the others would
regain its freedom.”

Chap. 64. Ἀπελείπετε γὰρ αὐτὴν, καὶ παραβὰντες, _ξυγκατεδουλοῦσθε_
μᾶλλον Αἰγινήτας, καὶ ἄλλους τινὰς τῶν ξυνομοσάντων, ἤ διεκωλύετε.

“You renounced, you violated first the oaths, which rather concurred to
_enslave_ the Æginetæ and some other people of the same association,
than endeavoured to prevent it.”

Chap. 70. Ὑπάγουσιν αὐτον οὗτοι οἱ ἄνδρες εἰς δίκην, λέγοντες Ἀθηναίοις
τὴν Κέρκυραν _καταδουλοῦν_.

“And therefore against him the accomplices prefer an accusation, as
plotting how to subject Corcyra to Athenian _slavery_.”

Chap. 71. Δράσαντες δὲ τοῦτο, καὶ ξυγκαλέσαντες Κερκυραίους, εἶπον ὅτι
ταῦτα καὶ βέλτιστα εἴη, καὶ ἥκιστ’ ἄν _δουλωθεῖεν_ ὑπ’ Ἀθηναίων.

“After this bold assassination, they summoned the Corcyreans to assemble
immediately, where they justified their proceedings as most highly for
the public good, and the only expedient of preventing Athenian
_slavery_.”

Chap. 73. Τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ἠκροβολίσαντό τε ὀλίγα, καὶ ἐς τοὺς ἀγροὺς
περιέπεμπον ἀμφότεροι, τοὺς _δούλους_ παρακαλοῦντες τε, καὶ ἐλευθερίαν
ὑπισχνούμενοι. καὶ τῷ μὲν δήμῳ τῶν οἰκετῶν τὸ πλῆθος παρεγένετο
ξύμμαχον, τοῖς δ’ ἐτέροις ἐκ τῆς ἠπείρου ἐπίκουροι ὀκτακόσιοι.

“The day following they skirmished a little with their missive weapons,
and both parties sent out detachments into the field to invite
concurrence of the slaves, upon a promise of their freedom. A majority
of the slaves came in to the assistance of the people, and the other
party got eight hundred auxiliaries from the continent.”

It will be noticed that οἰκετῶν in this passage is also translated
_slave_; but the οἰκετος was a slave whose condition was above the mere
δοῦλος. In English the word will imply a _house-slave_. The οἰκετος
enjoyed a greater portion of his master’s confidence, and consequently
was under a less rigorous government. The truth of what Thucydides
states is evident to those acquainted with the character: the higher
class of slaves ever take sides with their masters in such cases. It is
this word St. Paul uses, by which he describes the character of Onesimus
in his letter to Philemon. He had acted as Paul’s house-slave at Rome.

Book iv. chap. 86. Ἀλλὰ τοὐναντίον, ὑμῖν _δεδουλωμένοις_ ὑπὸ Ἀθηνανίων
ξυμμαχήσοντες.

“But, on the contrary, are to act in support of you, who are oppressed
with Athenian _bondage_.”

Idem. Ὀυδὲ ἀσαφῆ, τὴν ἐλευθερίαν νομίζω ἐπιφέρειν, εἰ, τὸ πάτριον
παρεὶς, τὸ πλέον τοῖς ὀλίγοις, ἤ τὸ ἔλασσον τοῖς πᾶσι _δουλώσαιμι_.

“I am convinced that liberty can never be re-established by me, if,
disregarding ancient constitutions, I _enslave_ the multitude to the
few, or the few to the crowd.”

Chap. 87. Οἱ δὲ Ἕλληνες ἵνα μὴ κωλύωνται ὑφ’ ὑμῶν _δουλείας_
ἀπαλλαγῆναι.

“For the sake of the Grecians, that they may not be obstructed by you in
their deliverance from _bondage_.”

Chap. 92. Καὶ πρὸς τούτοις γε δὴ, οὅ καὶ μὴ τοὺς ἐγγὺς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς
ἄπωθεν πειρῶνται _δουλοῦσθαι_, πῶς οὐ χρὴ καὶ ἐτὶ τὸ ἔσχατον ἀγῶνος
ἐλθεῖν;

“Let me add further, that when men are bent on _enslaving_, not
neighbours only, but such people as are more remote, how can it be
judged improper to encounter such, so long as we can find ground whereon
to stand?”

Idem. Οἷς δὲ γενναῖον, τήν τε αὑτῶν αἰεὶ ἐλευθεροῦν μάχῃ, καὶ τὴν ἄλλων
μὴ _δουλοῦσθαι_ ἀδίκως, ἀναγώνιστοι ἀπ’ αὐτων οὐκ ἀπίασι.

“But from men who were born to vindicate their own country for ever by
the _dint_ of arms, and never unjustly to _enslave_ another, that from
such men they shall not get away without that struggle which honour
enjoins.”

Chap. 114. Οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐπὶ _δουλείᾳ_.

“They had no _enslaving_ views.”

Chap. 118. Μήτε ἐλεύθερον, μήτε _δοῦλον_.

“Whether they be free men or _slaves_.”

Book v. chap. 9. Καὶ τῇδε ὑμῖν τῇ ἡμέρα, ἢ ἀγαθοῖς γενομένοις ἐλευθερίαν
τε ὑπαρχειν, καὶ Λαχεδαιμονίων ξυμμάχοις κεκλῆσθαι, ἢ Ἀθηναίων τε
_δούλοις_, ἢ τὰ ἄριστα ἄνευ _ἀνδραποδισμοῦ_ ἢ θανατώσεως πράξητε, καὶ
_δουλείαν_ χαλεπωτέραν, ἢ πρὶν εἴχετε.

“That this very day, if you behave with valour, you are henceforth free,
and will gain the honourable title of Lacedæmonian allies; otherwise you
must continue to be the _slaves_ of Athenians, where the best that can
befall you, if neither sold for _slaves_ nor put to death as rebels,
will be a heavier yoke of tyranny than you ever yet have felt, while the
liberty of Greece must by you for ever be obstructed.”

Chap. 23. Ἤν δὲ ἡ _δουλεία_ ἐπανίστηται, ἐπικουρεῖν Ἀθηναίους
Λακεδαιμονίοις παντὶ σθένει, κατὰ τὸ δυνατόν.

“That if there happen any insurrection among the _Helots_, the Athenians
march to the succour of the Lacedæmonians with their whole strength, to
the full extent of their power.”

In this instance the translator has substituted “_Helots_” for _slaves_,
because the Helots were the slaves at Sparta, and the usual term by
which slaves were designated in Lacedæmonia, _Helot_ and δουλος, were
synonymous terms there.

Chap. 27. Ὡς χρὴ, ἐπειδὴ Λακεδαιμόνιοι οὐκ ἐπ’ ἀγαθῷ, ἀλλ’ ἐπὶ
_καταδουλώσει_ τῆς Πελοποννήσου.

“That since the Lacedæmonians, not in order to serve, but to _enslave_
Peloponnesus,” &c.

Chap. 29. Μὴ μετὰ Ἀθηναίων σφᾶς βούλωνται Λακεδαιμόνιοι _δουλώσασθαι_.

“That the Lacedæmonians might strike up a bargain with the Athenians to
_enslave_ other states.”

Chap. 69. Καὶ ὑπὲρ ἀρχῆς ἅμα καὶ _δουλείας_.

“Either such on _slavery_.”

Chap. 86. Περιγιγνομένοις μὲν τῷ δικαίῳ, καὶ δι’ αὐτο μὴ ἐνδοῦσι,
πόλεμον ἡμῖν φέρουσαν, πεισθεῖσι δὲ, _δουλείαν_.

“Since if, superior in debate, we for that reason refuse submission, our
portion must be war and if we allow your plea, from that moment we
become your _slaves_.”

Chap. 92. Καὶ πῶς χρήσιμον ἂν ξυμβαίη ἡμίν _δουλεῦσαι_, ὥσπερ καὶ ὑμῖν
ἄρξαι;

“And how can it turn as beneficial for us to become your _slaves_ as it
will be for you to be our masters?”

Chap. 100. Ἤπου ἄρα, εἰ τοσαύτην γε ὑμεῖς τε, μὴ παυσθῆναι ἀρχῆς, καὶ οἱ
_δουλεύοντες_ ἤδη, ἀπαλλαγῆναι, τὴν παρακινδύνευσιν ποιοῦνται, ἡμῖν γε,
τοῖς ἔτι ἐλευθέροις, πολλὴ κακότης καὶ δειλία, μὴ πᾶν πρὸ τοῦ δουλεῦσαι
ἐπεξελθεῖν.

“If this be, and if you, ye Athenians, can readily embark in so many
perils to prevent the desolation of your empire; if states, by you
_enslaved_, can do as much to throw off your yoke, must it not be
wretchedly base and cowardly in us, who yet are free, to leave any
method, even to the last extremity, untried of averting _slavery_.”

Book vi. chap. 20. Ἐπὶ δὲ τῷ παρόντι ἃ γιγνώσκω σημανῶ. ἐπὶ γὰρ πόλεις,
ὡς ἐγὼ ἀκοη αἰσθάνομαι, μέλλομεν ἰέναι μεγάλας, καὶ οὔθ’ ὑπηκόους
ἀλλήλων, οὔτε δεομένας μεταβολῆς, ᾗ ἂν ἐκ βιαίου τὶς _δουλείας_ ἄσμενος
ἐς ῥᾴω μετάστασιν χωροίη.

“According to the last information I have been able to procure, we are
now going to invade a number of powerful cities; cities independent of
one another, nor standing in need of public revolutions; which people,
who cringe under the yoke of _slavery_, might easily embrace, in order
to render their condition more supportable.”

Chap. 27. Μηνύειν ἀδεῶς τὸν βουλόμενον καὶ ἀστῶν καὶ ξένων καὶ _δούλων_.

“He should boldly inform the public of it, whether he were a citizen, or
a foreigner, or a _slave_.”

Chap. 76. _Δουλωσαμένους_ ἔχειν.

“They hold fast riveted the yoke of _slavery_.”

Idem. _Καταδουλώσεως_. “By _enslaving_,” &c.

Chap. 77. Ὡς _ἐδουλώθησαν_. “Who will be _slaves_,” &c.

Chap. 80. _Δουλείαν_ “_Slave_,” &c.

Chap. 82. Οὕς ξυγγενεῖς φασὶν ὄντας ἡμᾶς Συρακούσιοι _δεδουλῶσθαι_.

“Whom the Syracusans say we thought proper to _enslave_, though
connected with us by ties of blood.”

Idem. _Δουλείαν_ δὲ αὐτοί τε ἐβούλοντο ὑμῖν τὸ αὐτὸ ἐπενεγκεῖν.

“They made _slavery_ their choice, and in the same miserable fate would
have been glad to envelop us.”

Chap. 83. Καὶ οὐ _δουλωσόμενοι_, μὴ παθεῖν δὲ μᾶλλον τοῦτο κωλύσοντες.

“So far from the view of _enslaving_ them to ourselves, that we are
solely intent on preserving them from being enslaved by others.”

Chap. 84. Ὅν ἀλόγως ἡμᾶς φησὶ _δουλωσαμένους_.

“Whom, after unjustly _enslaving_,” &c.

Chap. 88. Πλὴν καθόσον εἰ τὴν Σικελίαν ᾤοντο αὐτους _δουλώσεσθαι_.

“Save only the ambition they showed of _enslaving_ Sicily.”

Book vii. chap. 75. Μέγιστον γὰρ δὴ το διάφορον τοῦτο τῷ Ἑλληνικῷ
στρατεύματι ἐγένετο, οἷς ἀντι μὲν τοῦ ἄλλους _δουλωσομένους_ ἥκειν.

“For a most cruel turn of fortune this really proved to a Grecian army;
who, coming hither to _enslave_ others, were departing now with the sad
alternative of fearing to be made slaves themselves.”

Book viii. chap. 15. Τάς τε τῶν Χίων ἑπτὰ ναῦς, αἳ αὐτοῖς ξυνεπολιόρκουν
τὰς ἐν τῷ Πειραιῷ, ἀπαγαγόντες, τοὺς μὲν _δούλους_ ἐξ αὐτῶν ἠλευθέρωσαν,
τοὺς δ’ ἐλευθέρους κατέδησαν.

“Having, moreover, fetched off the seven vessels belonging to the
Chians, which assisted in forming the blockade at Piræus, they set at
liberty the _slaves_ who were on board them, and threw all the freemen
into prison.”

Chap. 43. Ἐνῆν γὰρ καὶ νήσους ἁπάσας πάλιν _δουλεύειν_.

“For thus he might be enabled once more to _enslave_ all the islands.”

Chap. 48. _Δουλεύειν_ μᾶλλον, &c.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON VI.

XENOPHON, _Memorabilia, &c._

Book i. chap. 3, § 11. Ὦ τλῆμον, ἔφη ὁ Σωχράτης, καὶ τί ἂν οἴει παθεῖν,
καλὸν φιλήσας; αρ’ οὐκ ἂν αὐτίκα μάλα _δοῦλος_ μὲν εἶναι ἀντ’ ἐλευθέρου;

“Miserum te, ait Socrates, quid eventurum tibi existimas, si formosum
osculeris? annon subitò pro libero _servus_ esses?” _Leunclavius._

Chap. 5. § 2. _Δούλω_ δ’ ἀκρατεῖ ἐπιτρέψαιμεν ἂν ἢ βοσκήματα ἢ ταμιεῖα ἢ
ἔργων επιστασίαν;

“Et servo intemperanti num vel pecora, vel penum, vel ut operi præesset,
committeremus?” _Leunc._

§ 3. Ἀλλὰ μὴν εἴ γὲ μηδὲ _δοῦλον_ ἀκρατῆ δεξαίμεθ’ ἂν, πῶς οὐκ ἄξιον
αὑτόν γε φυλάξασθαι τοιοῦτον γενέσθαι;

“Enimvero si ne _servum_ quidem intemperantem accepturi simus, quî non
operæ pretium sit cavere ne quis ipse talis fiat?” _Leunc._

§ 5. Ἢ τίς οὐκ ἂν, ταῖς ἡδοναῖς _δουλεύων_, αἰσχρῶς διατεθείη καὶ τὸ
σῶμα καὶ τὴν ψυχήν;

“Quis voluptatibus _serviens_ non turpiter tum corpore tum animo
affectus sit?” _Leunc._

Ibid. Ἐμοὶ μὲν δοκεῖ, νὴ τὴν Ἥραν, ἐλευθέρω μὲν ἀνδρὶ εὐκτέον εἶναι, μὴ
τυχεῖν _δούλου_ τοιότου, _δουλεύοντα_ δὲ ταῖς τοαύταις ἡδοναῖς,
ἱκετεύειν τοὺς θεοὺς, δεσποτῶν ἀγαθῶν τυχεῖν.

“Equidem ita profectò statuo, homini libero optandum esse, ut hujusmodi
_servum_ non consequatur, atque illi qui voluptatibus ejusmodi servit
deos esse obsecrandos ut dominos bonos nanciscatur.” _Leunc._

Book ii. chap. 1. § 11. Ἀλλ’ ἐγώ τοι, ἔφη ὁ Ἀρίστιππος, οὐδὲ εἰς τὴν
_δουλείαν_ αὖ ἐμαυτὸν τάττω· ἀλλ’ εἶναι τις μοὶ δοκεῖ μέοη τούτων ὁδὸς,
ἣν πειρῶμαι βαδίζειν, οὔτε δι’ ἀρχῆς, οὔτε διὰ _δουλείας_, ἀλλὰ δι’
ἐλευθερίας, ἥπερ μάλιστα πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν ἄγει. (12) Ἀλλ’, εἰ μέντοι,
ἔφη ὁ Σωκράτης, ὥπερ οὔτε δι’ ἀρχῆς οὔτε διὰ _δουλείας_ ἡ ὁδὸς αὕτη
φέρει, οὕτω μηδὲ δι’ ἀνθρώπων, ἴσως ἂν τι λέγοις.

“I surely, says Aristippus, do not place myself in slavery; but my
doctrine is, that the condition equally free from the objections of
those who govern and of those who are in _slavery_, is true liberty.
But, says Socrates, the condition of which you speak, beyond the
influences affecting those who bear rule or those in _slavery_, can
never exist among men; for,” &c. § 12. ὡς _δούλοις_ χρῆσθαι—“for safety
they desire _slavery_.”

§ 13. Ἕως ἂν πείσωσιν ἑλέσθαι _δουλεύειν_ ἀντὶ τοῦ πολεμεῖν τοῖς
χρείττοσι;

“Donec persuaserint eis _servire_ potiùs quàm bellum cum potioribus
gerere?”

§ 15. Ἦ διότι καὶ _δοῦλος_ ἂν οἴει τοιοῦτος εἶναι, ἷιος μηδενὶ δεσπότῃ
λυσιτελεῖν;

“An quòd talem te _servum_ esse putas, qui nulli domino prosit?”

Chap. 6. § 9. Χαλεπὸν δὲ καὶ δήσαντα κατέχειν, ὥσπερ _δοῦλον_.

“Neque minùs difficile vinctum retinere tanquam _servum_.” _Leunc._

Chap. 7. § 3 and 4. Ὅτι νὴ Δί’, ἕφη, ὁ μὲν _δούλους_ τρέφει, ἐγὼ δὲ
ἐλευθέρους. (4) Καὶ πότερον, ἒφη, τοὺς παρὰ σοὶ ἐλευθέρους οἴει βελτίους
εἶναι ἢ τοὺς παρὰ Κεράμωνι _δούλους_;

“By Jupiter, (says Aristarchus,) _the reason is obvious_. He (Ceramon)
rears up _slaves_, while I only employ freemen. Well, then, truly, says
(Socrates), which do you esteem the most valuable, your freemen or
Ceramon’s _slaves_?”

Chap. 8. § 4. Χαλεπῶς ἂν, ἔφη, ἐγὼ, ὦ Σώκρατες, _δουλείαν_ ὑπομείναιμι.
Καὶ μὴν οἵ λε ἐν ταῖς πόλεσι προστατεύοντες, καὶ τῶν δημοσίων
ἐπιμελόμενοι οὐ _δουλοπρεπέστεροι_ ἕνεκα τούτου, ἀλλ’ ἐλευθεριώτεροι
νομίζονται.

“But it is difficult, O Socrates, for me to submit to _slavery_. But
(says Socrates) high political officers, and all those who have charge
of public affairs, are not esteemed to be in a _slavish_ employment, but
in that which is the most appropriate to the most elevated of freemen.”

Book iii. chap. 12. § 2. Πολλοὶ δὲ δι’ αὐτὸ τοῦτο ζῶντες ἁλίσκονται, καὶ
ἁλόντες ἤτοι _δουλεύουσι_ τὸν λοιπὸν βίον, ἐὰν οὕτω τύχωσι, τὴν
χαλεπωτάτην _δουλείαν_.

“Many endure the most burdensome _slavery_, produced by their having
been taken captives in war, and as captives, _slaves_ themselves through
the remainder of life.”

Book iv. chap. 2. § 33. Τί δέ; τὸν Δαίδαλον, ἔφη, οὐκ ἀκήκοας, ὅτι
ληφθεὶς ὑπὸ Μίνω διὰ τὴν σοφίαν, ἠναγκάζετο ἐκείνῳ _δουλεύειν_, καὶ τῆς
τε πατρίδος ἅμα καὶ τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἐστερήθη, καὶ ἐπιχειρῶν ἀποδιδράσκειν
μετὰ τοῦ υἱου τόν τε παῖδα ἀπώλεσε καὶ αὐτος οὐκ ἠδυνήθη σωθῆναι, ἀλλ’
ἀπενεχθεὶς εἰς τοὺς βαρβάρους πάλιν ἐκεῖ _ἐδούλευε_;

“Is it truly so? You have not heard (says Socrates) that Dædalus,
captured, deprived of his liberty, and torn from his country and forced
into _slavery_, on account of his knowledge and wisdom was detained by
Minos; and, when afterwards attempting to make his escape with his son,
who was slain in the attempt, was not able to save himself, but was
seized by the barbarians and again forced into _slavery_.”

Ibid. Ἄλλους δὲ πόσους οἴει διὰ σοφίαν ἀναρπάστους πρὸς βασιλέα
γεγονέναι, καὶ ἐκεῖ _δουλεύειν_;

“How many others are born and remain creeping, fawning about the king
(of Persia); and because he deems them his, he there _enslaves_ them.”

Chap 5. § 5. _Δουλείαν_ δὲ ποίαν κακίστην νομίζεις εἶναι; Ἐγὼ μὲν, ἔφη,
τὴν παρὰ τοῖς κακίστοις δεσπόταις. Τὴν κακίστην ἄρα _δουλείαν_ οἱ
ἀκρατεῖς δουλεύουσιν;

Of which Leunclavius gives the following: “Pessimam _servitutem_. Et
quam esse arbitraris? Eam ait, quæ apud pessimos dominos _serviatur_.
Ergone intemperantes _servitutem_ pessimam _serviunt_?”

For the benefit of the mere English scholar, we give it thus: “Now,
where do you esteem the most degraded slavery? Why, to be sure, says he,
when the master is most degraded. It follows then, (says Socrates,) that
the slaves of intemperance are the most degraded of _slaves_.”

In the 30th section of the defence of Socrates before his judges, by
Xenophon, we find thus:—

Ὥστε φημὶ, αὐτὸν ἐπὶ τῇ _δουλοπρεπεῖ_ διατριβῇ, ἣν ὁ πατὴρ αὐτῷ
παρεσκεύακεν, οὐ διαμενεῖν.

By Leunclavius: “Itaque aio, non permansurum in illo _servili_ vitæ
genere, quod pater ei præscripsit.”

We offer: “So that, I said, it is not becoming that his son should
remain in an occupation only proper for a _slave_, in which alone his
father educated him.”


                           ------------------

                              LESSON VII.

At the close of the 23d chapter of the first book of Xenophon’s
Cyropædia, we find:

Πολλοὶ δὲ, οἷς ἐξῆν φίλοις χρῆσθαι, καὶ ἢν ποιεῖν καὶ ἢν πάσχειν,
τούτοις _δούλοις_ μᾶλλον βουληθέντες η φιλοις χρῆσθαι, ὑπ’ αὐτῶν τούτων
δίκην ἔδοσαν.

“There are instances of many, who, when they might have used others as
their friends in a mutual intercourse of good offices, and who, choosing
to hold them rather as _slaves_ than as friends, have met with revenge
and punishment at their hands.” _Ashley._

Book iii. § 2. Καὶ γαρ ἔστιν, ἔφη ὁ Κῦρος, καλὸν μάχεσθαι, ὅπως μὴ ποτέ
τις _δοῦλος_ μέλλοι γενήσεσθαι· ἢν δὲ δὴ ἢ πολέμω κρατηθεὶς, ἢ καὶ ἄλλον
τινὰ τρόπον _δουλωθεὶς_, ἐπιχειρῶν τις φαίνηται τοὺς δεσπότας αποστερεῖν
ἑαυτοῦ, τοῦτον σὺ, πρῶτος εἰπὲ, πότερον ὡς ἀγαθὸν ἄνδρα καὶ καλὰ
πράττοντα τιμᾷς, ἢ ὡς ἀδικοῦντα, ἢν λάβῃς, κολάζεις; κολάζω, ἔφη, &c.

“It is indeed noble, said Cyrus, to fight, in order not to be made a
slave! But if a man be conquered in war, or by other means be reduced to
_slavery_, and be found attempting to throw off his masters, do you
yourself first pronounce whether you reward and honour such a one as an
honest man, and as one that does noble things, or, if you take him, do
you punish him as one that acts unjustly? I punish him, said he.”
_Ashley._

Ibid. Ἢν ᾗ, νὴ Δί’, ἑαυτῷ σύνοιδεν ἐλευθερίας μὲν ἐπιθυμήσας, _δοῦλος_
δ’ ὡς οὐδεπώποτε γενόμενος.

“Why, by Jupiter, being conscious of himself that, affecting his
liberty, he has become by far much more of a slave than ever.”

Ibid. Οἴει οὖν τι, ἔφη ὁ Τιγράνης, μᾶλλον _καταδουλοῦσθαι_ ἀνθρωώους τοῦ
ἰσχυροῦ φόβου;

“Can you, said Tigranes, imagine what brings men into yielding to
_slavery_ more effectually than very great fear?”

Ibid. καὶ δεσμὸν φοβούμενοι, οὗτοι μὲν οὔτε σίτου οὔθ’ ὑπνου δύνανται
τυγχάνειν διὰ τὸν φόβον οἱ δὲ ἤδη μὲν φυγάδες, ἤδη δ’ ἡττημένοι, ἤδη δὲ
_δουλεύοντες_, ἔστιν ὅτε δύνανται καὶ μᾶλλον τῶν εὐδαιμόνων ἐσθίειν τε
καὶ καθεύδειν.

“They that are at sea, and dread shipwreck, and they that fear servitude
and chains, are neither able to eat nor sleep for fear: but they who are
already under banishment, who are already conquered, and already
_slaves_, are often in a condition to eat and sleep better than the
fortunate themselves.” _Ashley._

Ibid. Τὸν δ’ ἐμὸν πατέρα, ἔφη, νῦν πῶς δοκεῖς διακεῖσθαι τὴν ψυζὴὃν, ὃς
οὐ μόνον περὶ ἑαυτοῦ, ἀλλὰ καὶ περὶ ἐμοῦ, καὶ περὶ γυναικὸς, καὶ περὶ
πάντων τῶν τέκνων _δουλείας_ φοβεῖται;

“In what state of mind then, said he, do you take my father to be, he
who fears not only for his own life, but that his wife, myself, and all
his children will be plunged into _slavery_?”

Ibid. Ἀλλὰ μὰ Δι’, ἔφη, οὐκ ἐκεῖνον ἐθεώμην. Ἀλλὰ τίνα μὴν; ἔφη ὁ
Τιγράνης. Τὸν εἰπόντα, νὴ Δία, ὡς τῆς αὑτοῦ ψυχῆς ἂν πρίαιτο ὥστε μή με
_δουλεύειν_.

“Truly, said she, I did not look at him. At whom then did you look? said
Tigranes. At him who said, that to save me from _servitude_ he would
ransom me at the expense of his own life.” _Ashley._

Ibid. Ὡς ὀλιγα δυνάμενοι προορᾷν ἄνθρωποι περὶ τοῦ μέλλοντος, πολλὰ
ἐπιχειροῦμεν πράττειν. Νῦν γὰρ δὴ καὶ ἐγὼ, ἐλευθερίαν μὲν μηχανᾶσθαι
ἐπιχειρήσας, _δοῦλος_ ὡς οὐδεπώποτε ἐγενόμην· ἐπεὶ δ’ ἑάλωμεν, σαφῶς
ἀπολωλέναι νομίσαντες, νῦν ἀναφαινόμεθα σεσωσμένοι ὡς οὐδεπώποτε.

“How few things in futurity are we men able to foresee! and how many
projects do we undertake! I have endeavoured upon this occasion to
obtain liberty, and I have become more a _slave_ than ever: and, after
having been made a captive, and thinking our destruction certain, we now
again appear to be in a condition of greater safety and security than
ever.” _Ashley._

Book iv. chap. 8. Αὐτίκα μάλα ὄψεσθε, ὥσπερ _δούλων_ ἀπο διδρασκοντων
καὶ εὑρημενων, τοὺς μὲν ἱκετεύοντας αὐτῶν, τοὺς δὲ φεύγοντας, τοὺς δ’
οὐδὲ ταῦτα φρονεῖν δυναμένους.

“You will see them, like _slaves_ that have run away and are discovered,
some supplicating for mercy, some flying, and some without presence of
mind enough to do either.” _Ashley._

Chap. 18. Ἐαν δέ τις ὐμων, καὶ ἰὼν ὡς ἡμᾶς εὐνοϊκῶς καὶ πράττων τι καὶ
διδάσκων φαίνηται, τοῦτον ἡμεῖς ὡς εὐεργέτην καὶ φίλον, οὐχ ὡς _δοῦλον_,
περιέψομεν.

“But, then, if you shall come to us, and shall appear to do any action,
or give any information, in friendship and good-will to us, him will we
treat as a benefactor and a friend, not as a _slave_.”

Chap. 23. Αὐτος δὲ ὁ Κῦρος ἀνειπεῖν ἐκέλευσεν, εἴ τις εἴη ἐν τῷ Ἀσσυρίων
ἢ Σύρων ἢ Ἀραβίων στρατεύματι ἀνὴρ _δοῦλος_, ἢ Μήδων, ἢ Περσῶν, ἢ
Βακτριανῶν, ἢ Καρῶν, ἢ Κιλίκων, ἢ Ἑλλήνων, ἢ ἀλλοθέν ποθεν Βεβιασμένος,
ἐκφαίνεσθαι.

“Cyrus himself ordered them to make proclamation, that whatever _slave_
there might be, either in the Assyrian, Syrian, or Arabian armies,
whether he were Mede, Persian, Bactrian, Carian, Cilician, or Greek, or
of any other country, forced to serve, that he should appear.” _Ashley._

Chap. 24. Ἔχθιστος ὢν ἐμοὶ, ἥκω πρὸς σὲ, καὶ ἱκέτης προσπίπτω, καὶ
δίδωμί σοι ἐμαυτὸν _δοῦλον_ καὶ σύμμαχον, σὲ δέ τιμωρὸν αἰτοῦμαι ἐμοὶ
γενέσθαι.

“I bow myself at your feet, a suppliant, and give myself a _slave_ to
you, and a confederate in the war.”

Book v. chap. 1. Καὶ τοίνυν ὁμοίαν ταῖς _δούλαις_ εἶχε τὴν ἐσθῆτα.

“And was clothed in the same manner as were her _female slaves_.”

Ibid. Ἀλλ’ ἐγὼ, ἔφη, ἑώρακα καὶ κλαίοντας ὑπὸ λύπης δι’ ἔρωτα, καὶ
_δουλεύοντάς_ γε τοῖς ἐρωμένοις· καὶ μάλα κακὸν νομίζοντας, πρίν γε
ἐρᾷν, τὸ _δουλεύειν_.

“But I have seen, says he, people in grief and tears when in love,
_slaves_ to those with whom they were in love, yet they deemed _slavery_
a very great evil when not in love.”

Chap. 32. Οὐ γὰρ ἀγνοῶ τοῦτ’, ἔφη, ὅτι οὐ σύ μου μόνον μείζων εἶ, ἀλλὰ
καὶ οἱ ἐμοὶ _δοῦλοι_ ισχυροτεροι ἐμου ὑπαντιάζουσί μοι, καὶ, &c.

“I am not ignorant, says he, that you are above me, but that my own
_slaves_ are above me in power,” &c.

Book vi. chap. 26. Καὶ Κύρῳ δὲ δοκῶ μεγάλην τινὰ ἡμᾶς χάριν ὀφείλειν,
ὅτι με, αἰχμάλωτον γενομένην καὶ ἐξαιρεθεῖσαν ἑαυτῷ, οὔτε με ὡς _δούλην_
ἠξίωσε κεκτῆσθαι, οὔτε ὡς ἐλευθέραν ἐν ἀτίμῳ ὀνόματι· διεφύλαξε δέ σοι
ὥσπερ ἀδελφοῦ γυναῖκα λαβών.

“Then I think we are both under great obligation to Cyrus, who, when I
was captured, and chosen and selected particularly for him, thought
proper not to receive me as a _slave_, nor even as a free woman of low
standing, but detained me under such restraint as if I had been his
brother’s wife.”

Book vii. chap. 20. Καὶ πάντας δὲ τοὺς ἀόπλους τῶν ὑποχειρίων γενομένων
σφενδονᾷν ἠνάγκαζε μελετᾷν, νομίζων τοῦτο τὸ ὅπλον _δουλικώτερον_ εἶναι.

“All those whom he conquered, he compelled to practise with the sling,
which he deemed more suitable for _slaves_.”

Chap. 30. Νόμος γαρ ἐν πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις ἀιδιός ἐστιν, ὅταν πολεμούντων
πόλις ἁλῷ, τῶν ἑλόντων εἶναι καὶ τὰ σώματα τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει καὶ τὰ
χρήματα.

“For it is a perpetual law among all men, that when a city is taken from
an enemy, both the persons and treasures of the inhabitants belong to
the captors.” _Ashley._

Ibid. Θάλπους μὲν οὖν καὶ ψύχους, καὶ σίτων καὶ ποτῶν, καὶ πόνων καὶ
ὕπνου ἀνάγκη καὶ τοῖς _δούλοις_ μεταδιδόναι.

“In heat, and in cold, in meat and drink, in work and rest, we
necessarily allow our _slaves_ a portion.”

Ibid. Ὅτι, ἐπεὶ κεκτήμεθα _δούλους_, τούτους κολάσομεν, ἢν πονηροὶ ὦσι;
καὶ τί προσήκει αὐτὸν ὄντα πονηρὸν πονηρίας ἕνεκα ηἢ βλακείας ἄλλους
κολάζειν;

“When we acquire _slaves_, we punish them if they are slothful and
vicious. But does it become him who is slothful and vicious himself, to
punish others for vice and sloth?”

Book viii. chap. 1. Τοσοῦτον δὲ διαφέρειν ἡμᾶς δεῖ τῶν _δούλων_, ὅσον οἱ
μὲν _δοῦλοι_, ἄκοντες τοῖς δεσπόταις ὑπηρετοῦσιν· ἡμᾶς δὲ, εἴπερ
ἀξιοῦμεν ἐλεύθεροι εἶναι, ἑκόντας δεῖ ποιεῖν, ὅ τι πλείστου ἄξιον
φαίνεται εἶναι.

“We ought to distinguish ourselves so far from _slaves_, as that
_slaves_ do service to their masters against their wills; and if we
desire to be free, we ought willingly to perform what appears to be most
excellent and worthy.” _Ashley._

Chap. 14. Οὓς δ' αὖ κατεσκεύαζεν εἰς τὸ _δουλεύειν_, τούτους οὔτε
μελετᾷν τῶν ἐλευθερίων πόνων οὐδένα παρώρμα, οὔτε ὅπλα κεκτῆσθαι
ἐπέτρεπεν.

“But in the management of _slaves_,” &c.

Chap. 41. Βουλοίμην δ’ ἂν ὑμᾶς καὶ τοῦτο κατανοῆσαι, ὅτι τούτων, ὧν νῦν
ὑμῖν παρακελεύομαι, οὐδὲν τοῖς _δούλοις_ προστάττω.

“And I desire likewise that you should observe, that of all these orders
that I now give you, I give none to those that are of _servile_
condition.”

Chap. 47. Καὶ τοὺς μὲν φίλους ἐπεῖδον δι’ ἐμοῦ εὐδαίμονας γενομένους,
τοὺς δὲ πολεμίους ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ _δουλωθέντας_.

“By my means my friends have been made happy, and my enemies
_enslaved_.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

In Xenophon’s Expedition of Cyrus, usually termed the _Anabasis_, book
i. chap. 9, we find—

Ὥστε φαίνεσθαι τοὺς μὲν ἀγαθοὺς, εὐδαιμονεστάτος, τοὺς δὲ κακοὺς
_δούλους_ τούτων ἀξιοῦν εἶναι.

“So that brave men were looked upon as most fortunate, and cowards as
deserving to be their _slaves_.” _Spelman._

Ibid. Παρὰ μὲν Κύρου, _δούλου_ ὄντος, οὐδεὶς ἀπῄει πρὸς βασιλέα.

“No one, not even a _slave_, ever deserted Cyrus to go to the king.”

Book ii. chap. 3. _Δοῦλοι_ δὲ πολλοὶ εἵποντο.

“They were attended by a great many _slaves_.”

Chap. 5. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα τῶν βαρβάρων τινὲς ἱππέων, διὰ τοῦ πεδίου
ἐλαύνοντες, ᾧτινι ἐντυγχάνοιεν Ἕλληνι ἢ _δούλω_ ἢ ἐλευθέρῳ, πάντας
ἔκτεινον. ׳ “After this, some of the barbarian horse, scouring the
plains, killed all the Greeks they met with, both freemen and _slaves_.”
_Spelman._

Ibid. Ἑαυτοῦ γὰρ εἶναι φησὶν, ἐπείπερ Κύρου ἦσαν τοῦ ἐκείνου _δούλου_.

“For, he says, they are his, having belonged to his _slave_ Cyrus.”

Book iii. chap. 1. Ἡμᾶς δὲ, οἷς κηδεμὼν μὲν οὐδεὶς πάρεστιν,
ἐστρατεύσαμεν δ’ ἐπ’ αὐτον ὡς _δοῦλον_ ἀντὶ βασιλέως ποιήσοντες καὶ
ἀποκτενοῦντες, εἰ δυναίμεθα, τί ἄν οἰόμεθα παθεῖν;

“How then will he treat us, who have no support, and who have made war
on him, with the design to reduce him from the condition of a king to
that of a _slave_, and, if in our power, to put him to death?”

Book vii. chap. 4. Ὁ δ’ εἶπεν· Ἀλλ’ ἔγωγε ἱκανὴν νομίζω νῦν δίκην ἔχειν,
εἰ οὗτοι _δοῦλοι_ ἔσονται ἀντ’ ἐλευθέρων.

“And then he said, but I think myself sufficiently revenged, if these
people, instead of _freemen_, are to be made _slaves_.”

Chap. 7. Σοῦ μὲν γὰρ κρατοῦντος, _δουλεία_ ὑπάρχει αὐτοῖς· κρατουμένου
δὲ σοῦ, ἐλευθερία.

“For if you conquer, they are _slaves_,—but if you are conquered, they
are free.”


                           ------------------

                              LESSON VIII.

HERODOTUS _of Halicarnassus_.

WE often find the word δοῦλος, and its various derivatives, in the
plain, the simple narrative of this author. His use of the term is as
follows:

Book i. chap. 7. Παρὰ τούτων δὲ Ἡρακλεῖδαι ἐπιτραφθέντες ἔσχον τὴν ἀρχὴν
ἐκ θεοπροπίου, ἐκ _δούλης_ τε τῆς Ἰαρδάνου γεγονότες καὶ Ἡρακλέος.

“The Heraclidæ are descended from Hercules and a _female slave_ of
Jardanus.”

Chap. 27. Λαβεῖν ἀρώμενοι Λυδοὺς ἐν θαλάσση, ἵνα ὑπερ τῶν ἐν τῇ ἠπείρω
οικημένων Ἑλλήνων τίσωνταί σε, τοὺς σὺ _δουλώσας_ ἔχεις;

“Can they wish for a better opportunity than to meet the Lydians on the
Ocean, to revenge those of the Greeks reduced by you to _slavery_ on the
continent?”

Chap. 94. Λυδοὶ μὲν δὴ ὑπὸ Πέρσῃσι _δεδούλωντο_.

“Thus the Lydians were _enslaved_ by the Persians.”

Chap. 95. Καὶ ἀπωσάμενοι τὴν _δουλοσύνην_ ἠλευθερώθησαν.

“And rejecting _slavery_, they became _free_.”

Chap. 114. Ὦ βασιλεῦ, ὑπὸ τοῦ σοῦ _δούλου_.

“O king! by your _slave_.”

Chap. 126. Οὐδένα πόνον _δουλοπροπέα_ ἔχουσι.

“_Slavish_ employment,” &c.

Chap. 129. Καὶ ἄλλὰ λέγων ἐς αὐτὸν θυμαλγέα ἔπεα, καὶ δὴ καὶ εἴρετό μιν
πρὸς τὸ ἑωυτοῦ δεῖπνον, τό μιν ἐκεῖνος σαρξὶ τοῦ παιδὸς ἐθοίνισε, ὅ τι
εἴη ἡ ἐκείνου _δουλοσύνη_ ἀντὶ τῆς βασιληΐης.

“Among other things, he asked him what was his opinion of that supper,
in which he had compelled a father to feed on the flesh of his child; a
supper which had reduced him from a monarch to a _slave_.” _Beloe._

Ibid. Ἀδικώτατον δὲ, ὅτι τοῦ δείπνου εἵνεκεν Μήδους _κατεδούλωσε_.

“(He said that he was) most wicked, on the account of the supper, to
_enslave_ the Medes.”

Ibid. Νῦν δὲ Μήδους μὲν ἀναιτίους τούτου ἐόντας _δουλους_ ἀντὶ δεσποτέων
γεγονέναι, Πέρσας δὲ _δούλους_ ἐόντας τὸ πρὶν Μήδων νῦν γεγονέναι
δεσπότας.

“The Medes, who were certainly not accessary to the provocation given,
had exchanged situations with their _slaves_. The Persians, who were
formerly the _slaves_, were now the masters.”

Chap. 170. Καὶ οὕτω ἀπαλλαχθέντας σφέας _δουλοσύνης_ εὐδαιμονήσειν.

“And thus, freed from _slavery_, deem themselves happy.”

Chap. 173. Καὶ ἢν μὲν γε γυνὴ ἀστὴ _δούλω_ συνοικήσῃ, γενναῖα τὰ τέκνα
νενόμισται.

“If any free woman marries a _slave_, the children of such marriage are
reputed free.” _Beloe._

Chap. 174. Οἱ μέν νῦν Κᾶρες οὐδὲν λαμπρὸν ἔργον ἀποδεξάμενοι
_ἐδουλώθησαν_.

“The Carians made little or no exertion, and were easily _enslaved_.”

Chap. 210. Ὃς ἀντὶ μὲν _δούλων_ ἐποίησας ἐλευθέρους Πέρσας εἶναι.

“You have raised the Persians from _slavery_ to freedom.” _Beloe._

Book ii. chap. 1. Ὡς _δούλους_ πατρωΐους ἐόντας ἐνόμιζε.

“He considered them as _slaves_ by right of inheritance.”

Chap. 56. Ἔπειτα _δουλεύουσα_ αὐτόθι ἱδρύσασθαι ὑπὸ φηγῷ πεφυχυίῃ Διὸς
ἱρὸν.

“Although in a state of _slavery_, she there constructed, under a green
spreading beech, a natural little temple to her god.”

Book iii. chap. 125. Ὅσοι δὲ ῇσαν ξεῖνοί τε καὶ _δοῦλοι_ τῶν ἑπομένων,
ἐν _ἀνδραπόδων_ λόγῳ ποιεύμενος εἶχε.

“All the strangers, and their _slaves_ accompanying them, were detained
in _bondage_.” See 1 _Tim._ i. 10.

Chap. 138. Καί σφεας _δουλεύοντας_ ἐνθαῦτα Γίλλος.

“And they being _enslaved_, Gillus immediately _ransomed them_,” &c.

Chap. 140. Ἐμοὶ μήτε χρυσὸν, ὦ βασιλεῦ, μήτε ἄργυρον δίδου, ἀλλ’
ἀνασωσάμενος μοι δὸς τὴν πατρίδα Σάμον, τὴν νῦν ἀδελφεοῦ τοῦ ἐμοῦ
Πολυχράτεος ἀποθανόντος ὑπὸ Ὀροίτεω ἔχει _δοῦλος_ ἡμέτερος, ταύτην μοι
δὸς ἄνευ τε φόνου καὶ _ἐξανδραποδίσιος_.

“I would have neither gold nor silver; give me Samos, my country, and
deliver it from _servitude_. Since the death of Polycrates, my brother,
whom Orœtes slew, it hath been in the hands of one of our _slaves_. Give
me this, without any effusion of blood, or reducing my countrymen to
servitude.” (_Beloe._) See 1 _Tim._ i. 10.

Chap. 153. Ἀπείπας τοῖσι _δούλοισι_ μηδενὶ φράζειν τὸ γεγονὸς
ἐβουλεύετο.

“He counselled _with himself about that_ which was foretold, that
_Babylon_ should not be reduced to _slavery_ until this _prodigy_ should
be brought forth.”

Book iv. chap. 1. Αἱ γὰρ τῶν Σκυθέων γυναῖκες, ὥς σφι οἱ ἄνδρες ἀπῆσαν
χρόνον πολλὸν, ἐφοίτεον παρὰ τοὺς _δούλους_.

“For the women, deprived so long of their husbands, had associated with
their _slaves_.” _Beloe._

Chap. 2. Τοὺς δὲ _δούλους_ οἱ Σκύθαι πάντας τυφλοῦσι τοῦ γάλακτος
εἵνεκεν τοῦ πίνουσι ποιεῦντες ῷδε.

“It is a custom with the Scythians, to deprive all the _slaves_ of
sight, on the account of the milk, which is their customary drink.”
_Beloe._

Chap. 3. Ἐκ τούτων δὴ ὦν σφι τῶν _δούλων_ καὶ τῶν γυναικῶν ἐπετράφη
νεότης.

“From the union of these _slaves_ with the Scythian women, a numerous
progeny was born.” _Beloe._

Ibid. _Δούλοισι_ τοῖσι ἑμετέροισι μαχόμενοι αὐτοί τε ἐλάσσονες
κτεινόμενοι γινόμεθα.

“In this contest with our _slaves_, every action diminishes our number.”
_Beloe._

Ibid. Μαθόντες ὥς εἰσι ἡμέτεροι _δοῦλοι_.

“They will be impressed with a sense of their _servile_ condition.”
_Beloe._

Book v. chap. 35. Ὁ δὲ τῶν _δούλων_ τὸν πιστότατον ἀποξυρήσας τὴν
κεφαλὴν ἔστιξε καὶ ἀνέμεινε ἀναφῦναι τὰς τρίχας.

“He therefore took one of the most faithful of his _slaves_, and
inscribed what we have mentioned on his skull, being first shaved.”
_Beloe._

Chap. 49. Ἰώνων παῖδας _δούλους_ εἶναι ἀντ’ ἐλέυθερων ὄνειδος καὶ ἄλγος
μέγιστον μὲν αὐτοῖσι ἡμῖν, ἔτι δὲ τῶν λοιπῶν ὑμῖν, ὅσῳ προέστατε τῆς
Ἑλλάδος· νῦν ὦν πρὸς θεῶν τῶν Ἑλλενίων ῥύσασθε Ἴωνας ἐκ _δουλοσύνης_,
ἄνδρας ὁμαίμονας.

“The Ionians, who ought to be free, are in a state of _servitude_; which
is not only disgraceful, but also a source of the extremest sorrow to
us, as it must be to you, who are so pre-eminent in Greece. I entreat
you therefore, by the gods of Greece, to _relieve_ the Ionians from
_slavery_, who are connected with you by the ties of consanguinity.”
_Beloe._

Book vi. chap. 83. Ἄργος δὲ ἀνδρῶν ἐχηρώθε οὕτω ὥστε οἱ _δοῦλοι_ αὐτῶν
ἔσχον πάντα τὰ πρήγματα ἄρχοντές τε καὶ διέποντες, ἐς ὃ ἐπήβησαν οἱ τῶν
ἀπολομένων παῖδες, ἔπειτα σφεας οὗτοι ἀνακτώμενοι ὀπίσω ἐς ἑωυτοὺς τὸ
Ἄργος ἐζέβαλον· ἐζωθεύμενοι δὲ οἱ _δοῦλοι_ μάχη ἔσχον Τίρυνθα. τέως μὲν
δή σφι ἦν ἄρθμια ἐς ἀλλήλους, ἔπειτα δὲ ἐς τοὺς _δούλους_ ἦλθε ἀνὴρ
μάντις Κλέανδρος, γένος ἐὼν Φιγαλεὺς ἀπ’ Ἀρκαδίης· οὗτος τοὺς _δούλους_
ἀνέγνωσε ἐπιθέσθαι τοῖσι δεσπότῃσι.

“Argos, however, was deprived of so many of its citizens, that the
_slaves_ usurped the management of affairs, and executed the offices of
government; but when the sons of those who had been slain grew up, they
obtained possession of the city, and after some contest expelled the
_slaves_, who retired to Tyrinthe, which they seized. They for a time
forebore to molest each other, till Cleander, a soothsayer, and an
Arcadian of the district of Phigalis, came among the _slaves_, when he
persuaded the slaves to attack their masters.”

Book ix. chap. 48. Ἐν Ἀθηναίοισί τε τὴν πρόπειραν ποιευμένους αὐτούς τε
ἀντια _δούλων_ τῶν ἡμετέρων τασσομένους.

“We see you delegating to the Athenians the more dangerous attempt of
opposing us, and placing yourselves against our _slaves_.” _Beloe._

In the “Libellus de Vitâ Homeri,” attributed to Herodotus, in the 23d
section we find the word συνδούλῳ, used to mean a _fellow-slave_.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON IX.

We now propose to notice the scriptural use of the word δουλος,
_doulos_, and its derivatives, not only that its use may be compared
with the Greek writers, but that it may be seen, as we believe is true,
that its use in these carries with it abundant proof, even in the
absence of all other, that “it means a slave,” and “that he to whom it
was applied was a slave.”

Whenever a thing is made any part of discourse, it is necessarily placed
in a position of commendation, reprehension, or of perfect indifference.
One of these conditions must unavoidably attend its mention. A little
reflection will enable us to perceive these distinctive positions. For
instance, in the sentence, “Lay up treasures in heaven, where moth and
rust doth not corrupt, nor thieves break through nor steal,” who does
not feel the commendable position of the things, treasure and heaven,
and the reverse of moth, rust, and thieves? Let us apply this view to
the word _servant_, selecting only those instances in the Christian
Scriptures, where the word is translated from the Greek word δουλος,
_doulos_, and means nothing except what we mean by the word _slave_.

St. Paul commences his epistle to the Romans, to the Philippians, and to
Titus, with the appellation of servant. In the two first cases he calls
himself the servant and apostle of Christ. In the last instance, he
terms himself the servant of God and apostle of Jesus Christ. Peter, in
his second epistle, styles himself a _servant_ and apostle: Jude, the
servant of Christ. In all these instances the word means _slave_, and is
used commendatively, but figuratively, to signify their entire
devotedness to the cause in which they are engaged,—devoted to the cause
wholly, as a good slave is to his master. And it may be here remarked,
that the professing Christian is indebted to the institution for the
lesson of humility and devotedness here plainly taught him, and without
which, perhaps, he never could have been taught his duty in these
particulars so pertinently and clearly. The humility and devotedness of
the Christian are illustrated by this ordinance in _John_ xv. 20:
“Remember the words that I said unto you, the servant is not greater
than his Lord.”

In the parable of the vineyard, _Luke_ 20 and _Matt._ 21, the _servant_
(δοῦλος, _doulos_, slave) is presented in a position evincing, the
trustworthiness, devotion, and obedience implied in that character,
clearly indicating the idea that these qualities inspire the mind of the
proprietor with a confidence surpassed only by that in his son and heir.
And it may be well remarked, that the position of the slave is one of
great facility for the generating of such confidence in the mind of the
master. Between the good slave and the good master there can be no
dissimilarity of interest, but not so with the _hired man_, see _Matt._
20; for the very moment those hired in the morning for a penny a day
perceived that those who had not laboured the whole day received the
same amount of wages, they commenced a quarrel with the proprietor.

This distinctive use of language we think also perceptible in the
parable of the prodigal son, _Luke_ xv. 17: “_How many hired servants_
(πόσοι μίσθιοι, _posoi misthioi_) of my father have bread enough and to
spare,” περισσεύουσιν ἄρτων, _perisseuousin arton, an overflowing of
bread_.

He is not made to say that his father’s slaves had bread enough, but
that even his hired men had enough. “Make me as one of thy _hired
servants_,” μισθίων, _misthion_. He does not ask to be received as a
son, not even to be accounted as a slave,—he feels unworthy of either.
“But the father said to his servants,” δούλους, _doulous_, slaves,
“Bring forth the best robe.” Having slaves, it would have been quite out
of place to have called one of his μίσθους, _misthous_, hired men. But
the elder son “called one of the servants;” nor would it have been
natural for him to have called a _hired-man_, nor yet one of the _common
slaves_, but a confidential servant, whose position in the family would
enable him to possess the information required, and so we find the fact
by the expression τῶν παίδων αὐτοῦ, _ton paidon autou_, his young
confidential, favourite slave.

But the elder brother said to his father, “Lo, these many years do I
serve thee;” the verb used is δουλεύω, _douleuo_, and expresses the
faithful and devoted service of a good slave, not of a _hired man_, who
would feel no real interest beyond his own personal benefit. And this
word is put in the mouth of the angered son, whereby to show more
forcibly his sense of his own merits.

While we cast reflection back upon the incidents of this parable, let us
suppose the owner of slaves also to employ hired labourers: if from
famine or other cause he finds himself unable to supply them all with
bread, which would he turn away, his slaves, or hired men? or, if they
refused to go, which would he feel disposed to put on small allowance?

Jesus Christ seems to have understood that if there was to be any
deficiency of bread, the hired-men might be expected first to feel it.
Our Lord and Saviour, in pronouncing this parable, has given us the most
explicit assurance that he intimately understood the domestic relations
of the _slave_, and has taught us the lesson by placing him side by side
with the _hired servant_.

From the fact that the good slave was wholly devoted and faithful to his
master, the idea was not only applied to Paul, Peter, and Jude, but also
to Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, and David, and others, to
express these qualities in them towards Jehovah; and we find it so used
in the Christian Scriptures: “He hath holpen his servant Israel,” Ἰσραὴλ
παιδὸς αὐτοῦ, _Israel paidos autou_, _Luke_ i. 54. It is noticed that
with the word “_Israel_” is associated the same term to mean _slave_
which was applied to the slave called by the elder brother; and the
reason seems to be because the name _Israel_ is supposed to be in higher
regard than the word Jacob,—the word in apposition should also be
expressive of such elevated regard. Therefore, if the word Jacob had
been used, the word δοῦλος would have followed it. This word παῖς,
_pais_, when applied to a _slave_, was a word of endearment, and hence
was used in the case of the centurion’s servant. And we may here well
remark that the case of the centurion is one in point, presenting an
instance where slave-holding was brought to the immediate and particular
notice of the Saviour, and the record shows his conduct and language
upon the occasion.

“For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me, and I say to
this man, Go, and he goeth; and to another Come, and he cometh; and to
my servant, (δούλῳ, _doulo_, _slave_,) Do this, and he doeth it.

“When Jesus heard it, he marvelled, and said to them that followed,
Verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no, not in
Israel.” _Matt._ viii. 9, 10.

“And as he was now going down, his servants (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, _slaves_)
met him, and told him, saying, Thy son liveth.” _John_ iv. 51.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON X.

The Christian Scriptures use the institution of slavery figuratively, in
illustration of the Christian character and duty, and also in happy
illustration of the providences of God to man.

“Who is that faithful and wise servant, (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_,)
whom his lord hath made ruler over his household, to give them meat in
due season? Blessed is that servant (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_,) whom
his lord, when he cometh, shall find so doing. But if that evil
_servant_ (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) shall say in his heart, My lord
delayeth his coming; and shall begin to smite his fellow-servants,
(συνδούλους, _sundoulous_, _fellow-slaves_,) and to eat and drink with
the drunken, the lord of that servant (δούλου, _doulou_, _slave_) shall
come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not
aware of.” “For the kingdom of heaven is as a man travelling into a far
country, who called his own servants, (δούλους, _doulous_, _slaves_,)
and delivered unto them his goods.” “His Lord said unto him, Well done,
thou good and faithful _servant_, (δοῦλε, _doule_, _slave_,) thou hast
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things: enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” “His lord answered and
said unto him, Thou wicked and slothful servant, (δοῦλε, _doule_,
_slave_,) thou knewest that I reap where I sowed not, and gather where I
have not strewed,” &c. “And cast ye the unprofitable servant (δοῦλον,
_doulon_, _slave_) into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.” _Matt._ xxiv. 45–50 xxv. 14, 30.

“And he called his servants (δούλους, _doulous_, _slaves_), and
delivered them ten pounds, and said unto them, Occupy till I come. And
it came to pass, that when he was returned, having received the kingdom,
then he commanded these servants (δούλους, _doulous_, _slaves_) to be
called unto him, to whom he had given money, that he might know how much
every man had gained by trading.” “And he said unto him, Well, thou good
servant (δοῦλε, _doule_, _slave_), because thou hast been faithful in a
very little, have thou authority over ten cities.” “And he saith unto
him, Out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant,
(δοῦλε, _doule, slave_.) Thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking
up that I laid not down, and reaping that I did not sow.” _Luke_ xix.
13–28.

“Blessed is that servant, (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) whom his lord,
when he cometh, shall find so doing. But if that servant (δοῦλους,
_doulos_, _slave_) say in his heart, My lord delayeth his coming; and
shall begin to beat the men-servants (τοὺς παῖδας, _male-slaves_) and
maidens, (τὰς παιδίσκας, _female slaves_,) and to eat and drink and be
drunken; the lord of that servant (δούλον, _doulou_, _slave_,) will come
in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour when he is not
aware, and will cut him in sunder.” “And that servant (δοῦλος, _slave_)
which knew his lord’s will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes.” _Luke_ xii.
43–48.

Here is an instance when the most favourite slave, called by the term
expressing such favouritism, when supposed to be disobedient, is
immediately designated by the term δοῦλος, _doulos_.

“Blessed are those servants (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, _slaves_) whom the lord
when he cometh shall find watching; and if he shall come in the second
watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those
servants,” (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, _slaves_.) _Luke_ xii. 37, 38.

“And sent his servant (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) at supper-time,” &c. *
* * “So that servant (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) came and showed his
lord these things. Then the master of the house being angry, said to his
servant,” (δούλῳ, _doulo_, _slave_.) “And the servant (δοῦλος, _doulos_,
_slave_) said, Lord, it is done. And the lord said unto the servant,
(δοῦλον, _doulon_, _slave_,) Go out into the highway,” &c. _Luke_ xiv.
17–23.

“And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free,
(ἐλευθερώσει, _eleutherosei_, _free_.) They answered him, We be
Abraham’s seed, we were never in bondage (δεδουλεύκαμεν,
_dedouleukamen_, _slavery_) to any man: how sayest thou, Ye shall be
made free? Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
whosoever committeth sin, is the _servant_ of sin, (δοῦλος, _doulos_,
_slave_.) And the _servant_ (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) abideth not in
the house for ever. If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall
be free indeed.” _John_ viii. 32–35.

“But which of you, having a servant (δοῦλον, _doulon_, _slave_)
ploughing or feeding cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is
come from the field, Go and sit down to meat? And will not rather say
unto him, Make ready wherewith I may sup, and gird thyself, and serve
me, till I have eaten and drunken; and afterward thou shall eat and
drink? Doth he thank that servant (δούλῳ, _slave_) because he did the
things that were commanded him? I trow not. So likewise ye, when ye
shall have done all those things which are commanded you, say, We are
unprofitable servants (δοῦλοι, _slaves_): we have done that which was
our duty to do.” _Luke_ xvii. 7–10.

In all these instances slavery is made a lesson of instruction, and
always in the position commendable.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON XI.

The Christian Scriptures recognise the force and application of the
command, “Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour’s man-servant, nor his
maid-servant,” as applicable to slaves at the time of the apostles; and
that the act of “coveting,” extended into action, becomes “stealing,”
the property named in the command. “Now the end of the command is
charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned: from which some having swerved, have turned aside unto vain
jangling; desiring to be teachers of the law; understanding neither what
they say, nor whereof they affirm. But we know that the law is good, if
a man use it lawfully, knowing this, that the law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and disobedient, the ungodly, and for
sinners, for unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers, and murderers
of mothers, for manslayers, for whoremongers, for them that defile
themselves with mankind, for _men-stealers_, (ἀνδραποδισταῖς
_andrapodistais_, _slave-stealers_,) for liars, for perjured persons,
and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine,
according to the glorious gospel of the blessed God, which was committed
to my trust.” 1 _Tim._ i. 5–11.

It may be well remembered that the preceding third verse of this chapter
beseeches Timothy to still abide at Ephesus, that he may charge some
that they teach no other doctrine, &c.

The word _andrapodistais_, of the original Greek text, here translated
_men-stealers_, means the stealing, or enticing away from the possession
and ownership of their masters, their slaves. St. Paul speaks of it as a
part of the law,—speaks of the offence as one well known, and as too
well known to be a part of the law to require any explanation. When we
come to know that that act of the mind called _coveting_, indulged to
action, becomes stealing,—that the crime in action includes the crime in
mind,—we may readily perceive what particular law is referred to. Is it
difficult to decide that property, which the law forbids us to covet, it
also forbids us to steal, even if “thou shalt not steal” had not
preceded?

The idea stealing was expressed by the Greeks by the word κλέπτο,
_klepto_, but the idea _stealing slaves_ was expressed by the word in
the text. The formation is ἀνὴρ, _a man_, ποῦς, _a foot_, and signifies
the condition of slavery, as a man bound by the foot. A whole class of
words of this formation, all including the idea of slavery, were in use
by the Greeks, and found in their authors. When used to express the
substantive, the idea of slavery is associated with the idea of some
change of position or ownership; hence its use in this instance. The
thing stolen involves the idea of a change of position, possession, &c.
Yet in many instances it may be difficult to perceive this distinction,
it rather appearing to have been often used as a synonyme of _doulos_,
both as a verb and substantive.

In the 8th section of the 4th book of the Cyropædia, Xenophon uses this
word to mean a slave, the quality growing out of the imputed change in
the condition of the soldier, thus: Ὡς ὁ τοῦτο ποιῶν οὐκέτι ἀνήρ ἐστιν,
ἀλλὰ σκευοφόρος, καὶ ἔξεστι τῷ βουλομένω ἤδε χρῆσθαι τούτῳ ὡς ἀνδραπόδῳ.
Which Ashley translates, “And as he that does this can no longer be
reckoned a man, but a mere bearer of baggage, so any one that will is
free to use him as a slave.” The Romans so understood this word. In the
translation of Xenophon into Latin by Amelburnus, we find this passage:
“Nam qui hoc facit non miles et vir est, sed sarcinarius calo; quem uti
mancipium tractare cuivis licet;” nor can it be said that this learned
man misunderstood his Greek, for we have before us the critical
translations of Oxford and Cambridge, in which the sentence reads, “Nam
qui hoc facit, non amplius vir est et miles, sed sarcinarius calo, atque
hoc adeò uti mancipium licet.” They have made no change as to this word,
nor as to the sense of the sentence.

Xenophon uses this word also in the 14th section of the 8th book, to
mean slaves, and in the same passage with δοῦλος, the adjective sense
existing in the presumed unwillingness in the slaves to seek freedom, on
the account of their happiness being probably better secured in a state
of _slavery_ to Cyrus than it would be in a state of freedom. We give it
entire:

Ὃυς δ’ αὖ κατεσκεύαζεν εἰς τὸ _δουλεύειν_, τούτους οὔτε μελετᾷν τῶν
ἐλευθερίων πόνων οὐδένα παρώρμα, οὔτε ὅπλα κεκτῆσθαι ἐπέτρεπεν·
ἐπεμελεῖτο δ’ ὅπως μήποτε ἄσιτοι μήτε ἄποτοι ποτὲ ἔσοιντο, ἐλευθερίων
ἕνεκα μελετημάτων. Καὶ γὰρ ὁπόταν ἐλαύνοιεν τὰ θηρία τοῖς ἱππεῦσιν εἰς
τὰ πεδία, φέρεσθαι σίτον εἰς θήραν τούτοις ἐπέτρεπε, τῶν δὲ ἐλευθέρων
οὐδενί. Καὶ ὁπότε πορεία εἴη, ἤγεν αὐτους πρὸς τὰ ὑδατα ὕσπερ τὰ
ὑποζύγια. Καὶ ὁπότε δὲ ὥρα εἴη ἀρίστου, ἀνέμενεν αὐτοὺς ἔστ’ ἂν φάγοιέν
τι, ὡς μὴ βουλιμιῷεν· ὥστε καὶ οὗτοι αὐτὸν ὥσπερ οἱ ἄριστοι, πατέρα
ἐκαλουν, ὅτι ἐπεμέλετο αὐτῶν ὅπως ἀναυφιλόγως ἀεὶ _ἀνδράποδα_
διατελοῖεν.

Which may be translated thus: “But in rearing up his _slaves_, he never
permitted them to practise the employment of the free, nor allowed them
the possession of arms, but took care that they would never be without
their meat and drink for the sake of the practices of the free; for when
with their horses they drove out the wild beasts into the plains, he
allowed meat and drink to be carried for the use of these people during
the hunt, but not for the free; and when he was upon a march, he led
them to water, as he did the beasts of burden; and when the time for
dinner came, he waited till they had eaten something, that they might
not be distressed with hunger; so that these people, as likewise the
more elevated, called him their father; so he was careful, beyond a
doubt, that they would always remain his _slaves_,” _ἀνδράποδα_,
_slaves_, _i. e._ they would have no desire to change their situation.

Amelburnus translates it thus: “Quos autem ad serviendum instruebat, eos
nec ad labores ullos liberales excitabat, nec habere arma sinebat:
studiosèque dabat operam, ne unquam liberalium exercitationum causa vel
cibo vel potu carerent. Permittebat enim _servis_, quoties equitibus
feras in campos adigerent, ut cibum ad venationem secum sumerent;
ingenuorum verò nemini. Quando item faciundum erat iter, ad aquas eos,
perinde ac jumenta, ducebat. Quum prandii tempus erat, expectabat eos
donec aliquid comedissent, ne furcilla sive fames acrior eos affligeret.
Quo fiebat ut, non aliter ac optimates, etiam hi Cyrum _patrem_
appellarent, qui curam ipsorum gereret ut semper sine dubio _mancipia_
manerent.”

The Oxford translation, which was published in 1737, has perhaps made
the Latin more classical, but has strictly adhered to the same meaning
of the words δουλεύειν and ἀνδράποδα. We give their version also, that
the curious may compare, and have no doubt about this matter. It reads
thus:

“Quos autem ad serviendum instruebat, eos nec ad se in laboribus ullis
liberalibus exercendos excitabat, nec habere arma sinebat. Studiosèque
dabat operam, ne unquam liberalium exercitationum causa vel cibo vel
potu carerent. Etenim his permittebat, ut cibum ad venationem secum
sumerent, ingenuorum verò nemini: quando item faciendum erat iter, ad
aquas eos, perinde ac jumenta, ducebat. Et cùm prandii tempus erat,
expectabat eos donec aliquid comedissent ne fames ingens eos invaderet;
quo fiebat ut etiam hi, non aliter ac optimates, Cyrum patrem
appellarent, qui curam ipsorum gereret ut semper sine dubio _mancipia_
manerent.”

We deem it proper to add a word concerning the use of this term,
especially as some, who claim to be learned divines, also claim that
Paul by its use totally forbid slavery. See _Barnes, on Slavery_, p.
355. He says? “‘The law is made for _manstealers_,’ ἀνδραποδισταῖς, 1
_Tim._ i. 9, 10. The meaning of this word has been before considered. It
needs only to be remarked here, that the _essential_ idea of the term is
_that of converting a freeman into a slave_. Thus Passon defines the
word ἀνδραπόδισμος, _andrapodismos_: Verwandlung eines freyen Mannes in
einen Sklaven, besonders durch Varkauf, Unterjochung, U.S.W.: a changing
of a freeman into a slave, especially by traffic, subjection, &c. Now,
somehow this ‘conversion of a freeman into a slave,’ the sin forbidden
in the passage before us, occurs essentially in the case of every one
who ever becomes a slave.”

We know not why Mr. Barnes chose to go to a Dutch dictionary for his
quotation, since he might have found the true signification in that of
any schoolboy.

But we think it a singular argument that, because _andrapodismos_ means
the making or selling a slave, _andrapodistais_ means the exact same
thing. The truth is, the essential idea conveyed by this word is
_slave_, _slavery_, &c. If I wish to say “stealing a slave,” I use one
form of it; if “selling a slave,” another, and so on; but the stealing a
_freeman_ with the view to make _him a slave_ was not expressed by this
word, or any form of it. The Greeks used the term _anthropokleptais_,
but the legal reduction of a man to slavery was quite a different
matter. St. Paul’s animadversion comprehended the idea of slavery and
stealing,—what? a freeman, or a slave? Had it been a freeman that
occupied the objective case, it is presumable that his language would
have had some analogy to that used in the Septuagint, _Deut._ xxiv. 7.

This word, or some form of it, is of most frequent occurrence in the
Greek authors. We need quote but a few passages to show their use of the
term, whether it included the idea of a freeman, or only that of a
slave. Thucydides, Leipsic edition, 1829:

Οἱ δ’ Αθηναῖοι οὔτε τἄλλα ὑπηκουον, οὔτε τὸ ψήφισμα καθῄρουν,
ἐπικαλοῦντες ἐπ’ ἐργασίαν Μεγαρεῦσι τῆς γῆς τῆς ἱερᾶς, καὶ τῆς ἀορίστου,
καὶ _ἀνδραπόδων_ ὑποδοχὴν τῶν ἀφισταμένων.

“But the Athenians listened to none of these demands, nor would revoke
the decree, but reproached the Megarians for tilling land that was
sacred, land not marked out for culture, and for giving shelter to
runaway slaves.”

Vol. ii. p. 138. Αἱ δέ νῆες περίεπλευταν, τα ἀνδράποδα ἀγοῦσαι.

“But the vessels came back along the coast, on board of which were the
_slaves_.”

Idem. Καὶ τὰ ἀνδράποδα ἀπεδόσαν.

“And here they offered the _slaves_ for sale.”

P. 118. Ἀνδράποδα Ὑκκαρικὰ—“Hyccarian _slaves_.”

P. 201. Καὶ ἀνδράποδων πλέον ἢ δύο μυριαδες ηὐτομοληκέσαν.

“And more than twenty thousand slaves had deserted.”

P. 314. Καὶ σκεύη μὲν καὶ ἀνδράποδα ἀρπαγὴν ποιησάμενος, τοὺς δὲ
ἐλευθέρους πάλιν κατοικίσας, ἐπ’ Ἄβυδον ἦλθε.

“He gave up all the effects and slaves to pillage, and after
establishing such as were free people in their old habitations, he went
against Abydos.”

The instances of the use of this word are so frequent that we know not
whether more of them should not be given; but may we not presume that
those who read the language have some knowledge of the matter? and we
therefore ask them to relieve us from that burden. We think it no hazard
to maintain the fact that ἀνδραποδίζω, its _cognates_ and _derivatives_,
both _nouns_ and _adjectives_, are never used in the Greek language
unassociated with the idea of slavery. If so, then it follows that the
idea _stealing_, as it existed in the mind of St. Paul, was not
associated with the idea “_man_,” but “_slave_,” and that he used the
term ἀνδραποδισταῖς, _andrapodistais_, to express the idea
“slave-stealers.”


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XII.

But as the verb ἀνδραποδίζω, _andrapodizo_, and its conjugates, are
sometimes used to express the action of subjecting to slavery, it is
asked, how are we to know whether Paul did not mean such subjugation? It
was surely in the compass of the Greek language for Paul so to have used
the proper mood and tense of this verb, with other suitable words, and
effectually forbid the subjecting of others to slavery. But is it
probable he could have consistently done so? Such forbidding would have
been forbidding what the law prescribed. It would have been a rebellious
teaching against the laws of the land, as well as against the laws
delivered to Moses for the civil government of the Israelites. “When
thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, thou shalt proclaim
peace unto it; and it shall be, if it make answer of peace, and open
unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people that are found therein
shall be tributaries unto thee, and they shall serve thee,”
(וַעֲבָֽדוּךָ _va abaduka, be slaves to thee—and they shall be slaves to
thee_.) “But if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war
against thee, then thou shalt besiege it: and when the Lord thy God hath
delivered it into thy hands, thou shalt smite every male thereof with
the edge of the sword. But the women, and the little ones, and the
cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil thereof, shalt
thou take to thyself.” _Deut._ xx. 10–14.

Such, substantially, was the law of all nations at the very time Paul
wrote to Timothy. The verb proposed the making of a _slave_ in a legal
manner, reducing to the condition alluded to by the prophet. “Shall the
prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captive restored?” _Isa._
xlix. 24. The verb _andrapodizo_ expressed a lawful act. If individuals,
without law, had seized upon the others with the view to make them
slaves, such act would have been called by a different name. It would
not have been a name formed from ἀνὴρ and ποῦς, (_aner_ and _pous_,)
unaccompanied by explanations. We have an example before us in _Deut._
xxiv. 7: “If any man be found stealing any of his brethren of the
children of Israel, and maketh merchandise of him, or selleth him, then
that thief shall die.” Here the individual stolen was not a slave,
either by the laws of God or man: and hence we find that the Septuagint
uses no word to signify slave. The passage reads thus:

Ἐαν δὲ ἁλῷ ἄνθρωπος κλέπτων ψυχὴν ἐκ τῶν ἀδελφῶν αὐτοῦ τῶν ὑιῶν Ἰσραήλ,
καὶ καταδυναστεύσας ἀυτὸν αποδῶται, ἀποθανεῖται ὁ κλέπτης ἐκεῖνος.

And had St. Paul merely in his mind the idea _man-stealing_, unconnected
with slavery, he would have used analogous language. In the passage in
Timothy, he might well have used the term ἀνθρώποκλεπταις,
_anthropokleptais_, which would have expressed the same thing,—an
unlawful act, an act forbidden in the passage just quoted,—the act of
stealing a freeman, with an intention of making him a slave, contrary to
law; and Paul would have probably added this offence, if the Ephesians
had been guilty of the crime. But Paul did not use a word even
conjugated from ἀνδραποδίζω, _andrapodizo_, but a cognate substantive,
used almost technically to mean those who stole slaves, not _freemen_.

The word used by Paul is translated into Latin, in the Vulgate, by the
word _plagiariis_, which also means those who stole slaves. It is formed
from _plagiger_, _one born to be whipped_, (the Romans were cruel to
their slaves,) and _areo_, _to be parched up_, _to be thirsty_, and
hence _plagiarius_, from the notion that he who stole slaves _coveted_
the slave with such intensity that he thirsted for the slave, and
appropriated _him_ to himself as a thirsty man does water. It originally
was a mere cant word. But it expressed the contempt the Romans
entertained for the act of slave-stealing. Hence has come our word
_plagiary_; only used now to mean the act of appropriating the literary
property of another, but still retaining, to some extent, the expression
of contempt. The learned men who translated the New Testament into Latin
well knew that Paul told Timothy that the law was made against those who
stole slaves: and so we find it, _Thou shalt not steal_. Thou shalt not
even _covet_ thy neighbour’s _slave_. (See _Exod._ xx. 15, 17; also
_Deut._ v. 19, 20.) Had Paul used the word _andrapodizo_, or some form
of it, and had he really intended to have told Timothy that he or others
should no longer, under any circumstances, subject others to slavery, or
under the Christian dispensation he should not; that Christianity forbid
it; yet he could not have been so shallow as to have added the sentiment
that it was against the law, for such addition, such part of his
instruction, Timothy would have at once known to be not true; and we
trust but few will entertain a position so full of gross consequences.
This discourse to Timothy was founded upon the fact that “some had
swerved” from the end of the law, and turned to vain jangling, desiring
to be teachers of the law, understanding neither what they say nor
whereof they affirm,—probably teaching doctrines that led essentially to
the crimes here exposed. Paul’s object, in part, was to expose their
ignorance and wickedness, to sustain the supremacy of the law, and by
his counsel to warn him against a shipwreck of faith, as in the case of
Hymeneus and Alexander.

Can it be supposed that under such circumstances he would have
undertaken to have repealed a law, or to have asserted that the law
prohibited what it sustained? In such case, he would have done the very
act himself for which he condemned Hymeneus and Alexander, and have
proved himself one of the lawless and disobedient, for whom the law was
made.

There is another consideration, which to our mind is of moment in the
review of this subject. The religion of Jesus Christ never undertook to
meddle with the civil institutions of the law. Its object was to make
its devotees happy under and resigned to its adjudications, whatever
they may have been, by reason of the greater considerations of a
hereafter; nor do we recollect an instance where either Christ or his
apostles even suggested any repeal. His kingdom was not of this world,
and therefore his followers could not act in reference to the things of
this world. Peter in his zeal smote off the ear of the slave of the
high-priest, but Christ immediately rebuked the act and restored the
injury done. Had Paul intended to have suggested that the subjecting to
slavery, as that subject then existed and ever had from the time of
Moses, was no longer to be countenanced, then, it seems to us, he would
have travelled beyond the mission of an apostle, the precepts of his
Master, and out of his kingdom into the problematical questions of civil
government.

Paul, in the passage before us, enumerates a class of the breaches of
the law which came within the view of Timothy, which breaches of the law
he pronounces to be “contrary to sound doctrine,” and “to the glorious
gospel of the blessed God, which was committed to my trust,” having
previously notified him “that the law was good if a man use it
lawfully.” Now, one of the plain and well-known laws on the subject of
slavery was, “Both thy bond-men and thy bond-maids which thou shalt
have, shall be of the heathen that are around about you; of them shall
you buy bond-men and bond-maids. Moreover, of the children of the
strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy, and their
families that are with you, which they beget in your land, and they
shall be your possession. And ye shall take them as an inheritance for
your children after you, to inherit them for a possession. They shall be
your bond-men for ever.”

Under such a state of facts can any thing be conceived more
inconsistent, than that Paul should, under such circumstances, design to
slip in a word repealing in fact this law, and directly producing all
the other ill effects which he so pointedly complained of in others.
Whoever can believe such a thing, surely, whatever he may pretend, can
have no respect for the character of Paul, nor for his religion.

But the character of Paul remains consistent, his religion unblemished
and spotless, and the preaching of Jesus Christ in relation to the
matter vindicated and supported, by giving to the word _andrapodistais_,
as here used by Paul, its plain, legitimate, and usual meaning,
_slave-stealers_, persons who steal, or entice away from the possession
of their masters, individuals who according to the law are slaves.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XIII.

The inquiry naturally occurs, how happened it that St. Paul found it
necessary to instruct and inform Timothy that the law forbid the
stealing or enticing away other men’s slaves. By an examination of his
writings and letters to the Gentile churches, the fact is plainly proven
that there had grown up among them some new doctrines, which his office
as apostle made it his duty to reprehend. What these doctrines were we
are enabled in some measure to discover, by examining the 7th of the
_1st Corinthians_, which commences thus: “Now concerning the things
whereof ye wrote unto me,” disclosing the fact that the Corinthians had
written to him for advice and counsel, whom he now answers with
instructions against the abolition of marriage, and against the
abolition of slavery, &c.

Some of the Gentile churches advocated the doctrine that if a man or a
woman of the faith were married to one not of the faith, that such
marriage should be abolished; so also, that a slave of the faith should
be set free, and especially from his believing master; so also, the
believing child should be discharged from the authority of the
unbelieving parents. The promulgation of these doctrines filled society
with disorder there, and the church with confusion.

In his lesson to _Timothy_, he complains of the doctrines taught by
Hymeneus and Alexander, as _blasphemous_. Now, in this same lesson, he
applies this epithet to these new abolition doctrines, leaving us
plainly to infer that these doctrines were also taught by them, and for
which he “delivered” them “unto Satan.” And here we have a connecting
link between this lesson to Timothy and his whole instruction to the
Gentile churches on this subject. But these doctrines, as taught by
Hymeneus and Alexander, or others analogous, have found advocates ever
since; for folly has never been so foolish nor wickedness so wicked as
not to find followers. These new doctrines Paul reprehended in many
other places, and touching the subject of our present inquiry, let us
examine how he treated the matter during the time of his apostleship.

“Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. Art thou
called being a servant, (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_,) care not for it;
but if thou mayest be _made free_, use it rather. For he that is called
in the Lord, being a servant, (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_,) is the Lord’s
_freeman_; likewise, also, he that is called, being free, is Christ’s
_servant_, (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_.) Ye are bought with a price; be
ye not the servant (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) of men. Brethren, let
every man, wherein he is called, therein abide with God.” 1 _Cor._ vii.
20–24. And this is consistent with his introduction to the subject in
the 17th verse: “But as God hath distributed to every man, as the Lord
hath called every one, so let him walk, and so ordain I in all
churches.” Compare this with his instruction to _Titus_: “Exhort
servants (δούλος, _doulous_, _slaves_,) to be obedient unto their own
masters, and to please them well in all things. Not answering again, not
purloining, but showing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the
doctrine of God our Saviour in all things. For the grace of God that
bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ; who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. These
things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority. Let no man
despise thee.” _Titus_ ii. 9–15.

And to the _Colossians_: “Servants, (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, _slaves_,) obey
in all things your masters according to the flesh; not with eye-service,
as men-pleasers; but in singleness of heart, fearing God: and whatsoever
ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; knowing that of
the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye serve
(δουλεύετε, _douleuete_, _ye slave yourselves to_) the Lord Christ. But
he that doeth wrong shall receive for the wrong which he hath done: and
there is no respect of persons. Masters, give unto your servants
(δούλοις, _doulois_, _slaves_) that which is just and equal; knowing
that ye also have a Master in heaven.” _Col._ iii. 22, 25; iv. 1.

And to the Ephesians: “Servants, (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, _slaves_,) be
obedient to them that are your masters according to the flesh, with fear
and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as unto Christ; not with
eye-_service_ (ὀφθαλμοδουλείαν, _ophthalmodouleian_, _slavery to the
eye_) as men-pleasers; but as the servants (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, _slaves_)
of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart; with good-will doing
service (ουλεύοντες, _douleuontes_, _slaving yourselves_) as to the
Lord, and not to men; knowing that whatsoever good thing any man doeth,
the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be _bond_ (δοῦλος,
_doulos_, _slave_) or _free_ (ἐλεύθερος, _eleutheros_, _a freeman_). And
ye masters, do the same things unto them, forbearing threatening:
knowing that your Master is also in heaven, neither is there respect of
persons with him.” _Eph._ vi. 5–9.

And, finally, to Timothy: “Let as many servants (δοῦλοι, _douloi_,
_slaves_) as are under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all
honour, that the name of God and his doctrine be not _blasphemed_. And
they that have believing masters, let them not despise them because they
are brethren; but rather do them service, (δουλευέτωσαν, _do them
slave-labour_,) because they are faithful and beloved, partakers of the
benefit. These things teach and exhort. If any man teach otherwise, and
consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, he is proud,
knowing nothing, but doting about questions and strifes of words,
whereof cometh envy, strife, railings, evil surmisings, perverse
disputings of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth,
supposing that gain is godliness: from such withdraw thyself. But
godliness with contentment is great gain. For we brought nothing into
this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. And having food
and raiment, let us be therewith content. But they that will be rich
fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of
money is the root of all evil: which while some coveted after, they have
erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
But thou, O man of God, flee these things; and follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness. Fight the
good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art also
called, and hast professed a good profession before many witnesses. I
give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickeneth all things, and
before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good
confession, that thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukable,
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.” 1 _Tim._ vi. 1–14.

From the arguments here presented to Timothy in support of the doctrine
which Paul invariably taught in relation to slavery, we may well suppose
he felt a deep interest, even anxiety, to prevent these new doctrines
from affecting Timothy’s mind in their favour; and we cannot but notice,
that while, with the dignified authority of an apostolic teacher, his
instructions are full, distinct, and certain, yet they are accompanied
with a courteousness of explanation consolatory even to the slave, the
subject of them, and with a solemnity of attestation that fathoms the
very foundation of the Christian faith.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XIV.

Jesus Christ announced to the Jews that whosoever committeth sin is the
servant (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) of sin; that the servant (δοῦλος,
_doulos_, _slave_) abideth not in the house for ever, but the son
abideth ever, &c.; therefore, if the son make them free, they shall be
free indeed, &c. Of the doctrine here inculcated by the Saviour himself,
it seems to us St. Paul has given a full and happy illustration; and, by
his using the institution of slavery as a principal medium of his
illustration, and by referring to facts well-known in the history of the
institution of slavery, has not only recognised its existence, but also
that it existed in conformity with the ordinances of God: and we deem
his illustration not the less valuable, because it explains what is
meant by, and how we are to understand, the Christian equality of all in
that church. In addition to what we have already read from his writings,
we may also notice, “Is the law then against the promises of God? God
forbid; for if there had been a law given which could have given life,
verily righteousness should have come by the law. But the scripture hath
concluded all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might
be given to them that believe. But before faith came, we were kept under
the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed.
Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no
longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith
in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ,
have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither
bond (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) nor free, there is neither male nor
female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ’s, then
are ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.” _Gal._ iii.
21–29.

“Now I say, that the heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing
from a servant, (δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_) though he be lord of all;
but is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the
father. Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage
(δεδουλωμένοι, _dedoulomenoi_, _a state of slavery_) under the elements
of the world. But when the fulness of the _time_ was come, God sent
forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And
because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant,
(δοῦλος, _doulos_, _slave_,) but a son; and if a son, then an heir of
God through Christ. Howbeit then, when ye knew not God, ye did service
(ἐδουλεύσατε, _edouleusate_, _did slave yourselves_) unto them which by
nature are no gods. But now, after that ye have known God, or rather are
known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly elements,
whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?” (δουλεύειν, _douleuein_,
_to be in slavery_.) Gal. iv. 1–9.

“Tell me, ye that desire to be under the law, do ye not hear the law?
For it is written, that Abraham had two sons; the one by a bond-maid,
(παιδίσκης, _paidiskes_, _a favourite female slave_,) and the other by a
free-woman. But he who was of the bond-woman (παιδίσκης, _paidiskes_, _a
favourite female slave_) was born after the flesh, but he of the
free-woman was by promise. Which things are an allegory: for these are
the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai in Arabia, which
gendereth to bondage, (δουλείαν, _douleian_, _slavery_,) which is Agar.
For this Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which
now is, and is in bondage (δουλεύει, _douleuei_, _slavery_) with her
children. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of
us all.” _Gal._ iv. 21–26.

“Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise. But as
then he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after
the Spirit, even so it is now. Nevertheless, what saith the scripture?
Cast out the bond-woman (παιδίσκην, _paidisken_, _favourite female
slave_) and her son: for the son of the bond-woman (παιδίσκης,
_paidiskes_, _favourite female slave_) shall not be heir with the son of
the free-woman. So then, brethren, we are not children of the
bond-woman, (παιδίσκης, _paidiskes_, _favourite female slave_,) but of
the free. Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made
us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage,”
(δουλείας, _douleias_, _slavery_.) _Gal._ iv. 29–31, v. 1.

In these lessons of Paul we not only find the Greek use of the word
“doulos,” but we find also the doctrine that slavery is the quotient of
sin. It is true he often uses the word figuratively to illustrate the
devotion and obedience of the humble followers of Jesus Christ; but in
him who spurns obedience to the laws of God, and rejects the faith of
the gospel, the character is fixed and permanent, as is the course of
conduct that gives it.

While in this portion of our present Study, we desire to bring to mind
the word _doulos_ and its cognates, as used in the ancient Greek
Scriptures, with the design that it may be easily compared with its use
by the classical authors in that language. We shall be happy if
successful in the attempt to present it in such form that the mind may
acknowledge the doctrine inculcated to be consistent with the justice of
Divine providence and the mercy of a redeeming love; that the deduction
shall be evident; that slavery is a creation of Divine justice upon the
model of mercy, every way adapted to benefit the most degenerate and
wicked races of mankind; and that its whole action manifests the
principle, that he whom the Father loveth, him he chasteneth;—and such,
indeed, is the object of our entire study.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON XV.

From the writings of St. Paul, we deem the deduction clear, that he
considered slavery to be a consequent of sin, and plainly set it forth
in his address to the Romans. “Wherefore as by one man sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned. For until (ἄχρι, _achri_, _as far as_—see Iliad, xvii.
599) the law, sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed where there
is no law. Nevertheless, death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over
them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam’s transgression,
who is the figure of him that was to come.” _Rom._ v. 12–24.

“Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants (δούλους,
_doulous_, slaves) to obey, his servants (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, slaves) ye
are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness? But God be thanked, that ye were the servants (δοῦλοι,
_douloi_, slaves) of sin, but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of
doctrine which was delivered you. Being then made free from sin, ye
became the servants (ἐδουλώθητε _edoulothete_, ye enslaved yourselves)
to righteousness unto holiness. For when ye were the servants (δοῦλοιes)
of sin, ye were free from righteousness. What fruit had ye then, in
those things whereof ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is
death. But now, being free from sin, and become servants (δουλωθέντες,
_doulothentes_, slaving yourselves) to God, ye have fruit unto holiness,
and in the end everlasting life. For the wages of sin is death: but the
gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.” _Rom._ vi.
16–23.

“For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God.
For ye have not received the spirit of bondage (δουλείας, _douleias_,
slavery) again to fear, but ye have received the spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our
spirit, that we are the children of God; and if children, then heirs:
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with
him, that we may be also glorified together. For I reckon, that the
sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory which shall be revealed in us. For the earnest expectation of the
creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God. For the
creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him
who hath subjected the same in hope. Because the creature itself also
shall be delivered from the bondage (δουλείας, _douleias_, slavery) of
corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God. For we
know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together
until now: and not only they, but ourselves also, which have the
firstfruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves,
waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body.” _Rom._
viii. 14–23. “So then, with the mind I myself serve (δουλεύω, _douleuo_,
slave myself to) the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.”
_Rom._ vii. 25. “For they that are such serve (δουλεύουσιν,
_douleuousin_, slave themselves to) not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their
own belly.” _Rom._ xvi. 18.

The word “doulos” is used by Peter in a similar manner: “For so is the
will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men: as free, not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God,” (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, slaves.)
Idem: “While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the
servants, (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, slaves) of corruption: for of whom a man is
overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage,” (δεδούλωται,
_dedoulotai_, is he enslaved.)

Further instances of the use of the word “doulos” in the original Greek
Scriptures will be found as follows:—“But I keep under my body and bring
it into subjection, (δουλαγωγῶ, _doulagogo_, and guide it as in
slavery,) lest that by any means when I have preached to others, I
myself should be a castaway.” 1 _Cor._ ix. 27. “For by one Spirit we are
all baptized into one body, whether we are Jews or Gentiles, whether we
are bond (δοῦλοι, _douloi_, slaves) or free, and have been all made to
drink into one spirit.” 1 _Cor._ xii. 13. “Where there is neither Greek
nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bond
(δοῦλος, _doulos_, slave) nor free.” _Col._ iii. 11. “As ye also learned
of Epaphras, our dear fellow-servant” (συνδούλου _sundoulou_,
fellow-slave.) _Col._ i. 7. “But if the unbelieving depart, let him
depart; a brother or a sister is not under bondage (δεδούλωται,
_dedoulotai_, is enslaved) in such cases.” 1 _Cor._ vii. 15. “For ye
suffer if a man bring you into bondage,” (καταδουλοῖ, _katadouloi_,
reduce you to slavery,) &c. 2 _Cor._ xi. 20. “For he that in these
things serveth (douleύsei, _douleusei_, shall slave himself to) Christ
is acceptable to God and approved of men.” _Rom._ xiv. 18. “It was said
unto her, the elder shall serve (δουλεύσει, shall _slave_ himself to)
the younger; for it is written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I
hated.” _Rom._ ix. 12, 13. “And behold, one of them which were with
Jesus, stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck a servant
(δοῦλον, _doulon_, slave) of the high-priest, and smote off his ear.”
_Matt._ xxvi. 51. “And one of them that stood by drew his sword, and
smote a servant (δοῦλον, _doulon_, slave,) of the high-priest, and cut
off his ear.” _Mark_ xiv. 47. “And one of them smote a servant (δοῦλον,
_doulon_, slave) of the high-priest, and cut off his right ear.” _Luke_
xxii. 50. “Then Simon Peter, having a sword, drew it, and smote the
high-priest’s servant (δοῦλον, _doulon_, slave,) and cut off his right
ear. The servant’s (δούλῳ, _doulo_, slave) name was Malchus.” “One of
the servants (δούλων, _doulon_, slaves) of the high-priest (being his
kinsman whose ear Peter cut off) saith, Did not I see thee in the garden
with him?” _John_ xviii. 10, 26. “And the servants (δοῦλοι, _douloi_,
slaves) and officers stood there, who had made a fire of coals, (for it
was cold,) and they warmed themselves: and Peter stood with them and
warmed himself.” _John_ xviii. 18.

There are several instances where the word is used figuratively, as a
submissive epithet, as an example of which we cite _Acts_ iv. 29: “And
now, Lord, behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants
(δούλοις, _doulois_, _slaves_) that with all boldness they may speak thy
word.” “And God spake on this wise, That his seed should sojourn in a
strange land; and that they should bring them into bondage,
(δουλώσουσιν, _doulosousin_, should enslave them,) and entreat them evil
four hundred years. And the nation to whom they shall be in bondage
(δουλεύσωσι, _douleusosi_, to whom they shall be enslaved) will I judge,
said God.” _Acts_ vii. 6, 7. “Not now as a servant (δοῦλον, _doulon_,
slave,) but above a servant, (δοῦλον, _doulon_, slave,) a brother
beloved,” &c. _Philem._ 16. “Lord, now lettest thou thy servant (δοῦλον,
_doulon_, slave) depart in peace.” _Luke_ ii. 29.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XVI.

The English words _servant_, _to serve_, _service_, _servile_,
_servilely_, _serving_, &c. have descended into the language from the
Latin word _servus_, a slave, and these words, when first introduced
into the language, as distinctly carried with them the idea of slavery
as does now our present term, and will continue to do so wherever the
English language and slavery prevail. In no slave-holding country will
the word servant be applied to a freeman as a legitimate term of
description, but in non-slaveholding communities these words are
sometimes used in a somewhat different sense, yet erroneously, because
they are then used without adherence to their derivation and analogy.
These words, when found in the received translation of the Christian
Scriptures, are in the most of instances translated from some Greek word
that signified or included the idea slavery. But notwithstanding the
obvious error in giving the word _servant_, &c. as the translation of a
word that did not carry with it the idea which was in unison with the
original of these words, yet we find some few instances of such error.
We give a few examples.

“Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of
this world, then would my _servants_ fight.” _John_ xviii. 36.

Here servants is translated from ὑπηρέται, _huperetai_, and signifies a
subordinate. In English it sometimes requires attendants, assistants,
inferior officers, &c., but never associates with the idea of slavery.

“Peter followed him afar off unto the high-priest’s palace, and he sat
with the _servants_, (ὑπηρετῶν, _attendants_, &c.,) and warmed himself
at the fire.” _Mark_ xiv. 54. “And the servants (δοῦλοι, _douloi_,
_slaves_) and officers (ὑπηρέται, _huperetai_, _attendants_, _inferior
officers_, &c.) stood there, who had made a fire of coals, (for it was
cold,) and they warmed themselves.” _John_ xviii. 18.

That the word here used never conjugates with the idea slavery, we quote
it as used in _Luke_ iv. 20, in proof: “And he closed the book, and he
gave it again to the minister,” (ὑπηρέτῃ, _huperete_, _attendant_,
_inferior officer_, &c.) Also, _Acts_ xxvi. 16: “But rise and stand upon
thy feet: for I have appeared unto thee for this purpose, to make thee a
_minister_ (ὑπηρέτην, _hupereten_, _attendant_, _assistant_, _minister_,
&c.) and a _witness_ both of those things which thou hast seen and of
those things in the which I will appear unto thee.”

Here the requisites of the character required are totally incompatible
with the character of the _doulos_, proving with the greatest certainty
that these two words have no analogy whatever. For we may well here
remark, that human learning has never arrived at a more nicely distinct
and definite perfection in the use of language than is even now manifest
in the sayings of Him “who spoke as never man spake.”

Besides, in the case of _John_ xviii. 18, servants, _douloi_, and
officers ὑπηρέται, _huperetai_, being used consecutively and coupled
together by a conjunction, is a strong proof that the idea appropriated
here severally to these terms could not be expressed by either term
alternately by substitution, and that these terms were by no analogy
synonymous.

The word _servant_ has also in error been rendered from other terms: see
Hebrews iii. 5: “And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a
_servant_,” (θεράπων, _therapon_.) We have not in English any single
term that fully expresses the idea conveyed by this. It means an
associate or companion who is voluntarily under the direction of one
whom he takes and acknowledges to be his superior. The old Roman
_umbra_, when applied to an attendant, conveyed the idea more exactly
than any one term of ours. Thus, the warrior was called the _therapon_
of Mars, and of the muses and kings of the gods generally. Thus,
Menelaus is called the _therapon_ of his chief, &c. &c. (See _Iliad_,
viii. 113, xviii. 244, xix. 143.)

A similar error is occasionally found in the use of the terms _to
serve_, _served_, _service_, &c., as if they were legitimately derived
from some form of _doulos_. Thus, Luke ii. 37: “But _served_ God with
fasting and prayers night and day,”—“served,” λατρεύουσα, _latreuousa_,
from _latreuo_. The more appropriate term is “to worship,” &c.

The term was used by the Greeks, “to worship” the gods by sacrifices and
offerings. (See _Euripides_, _Electra_, 131; _Iphagenia in Tauris_,
1115.) So in _Acts_ vii. 7: “And after that shall they come forth and
_serve_ me in this place,”—“serve,” λατρεύσουσι, _latreusousi_. It
should have been, “and worship me in this place.” _Rom._ ix. 4: “And the
_service_ of God, and the promises,” λατρεία, _latreia_, worship, &c. So
also _Heb._ ix. 1: “Then verily the first covenant had also ordinances
of divine service,” λατρείας, _latreias_, worship. So also _Heb._ xiii.
10: “We have an altar whereof they have no right to eat which _serve_
the tabernacle,”—“serve,” λατρεύοντες, _latreuontes_, who are
worshipping in the, &c. &c.

Διάκονος, _diakonos_, is also sometimes erroneously translated
_servant_, _service_, _to serve_, &c. An instance occurs, _John_ ii. 5:
“And his mother saith unto the _servants_,” διακόνοις, _diakonois_, from
_diakonos_: as a verb, it means to minister unto, to wait upon, to
manage affairs, to perform some function to another; and hence, in
English, we may occasionally require some other term of cognate meaning.
From this term our word “deacon” has been legitimately derived. The word
is of less elevated import in Greek than _therapon_ (see Aristophanes,
_Ornithes_, line 1322, ὡς βλαχιχῶς διαχονεῖς,) but never consorts in the
least degree with the idea slavery. “Saith unto” them who ministered,
who waited upon the guests, &c. So also _John_ ii. 9: “But the
_servants_ which drew the water knew,”—servants, διάκονοι, _diakonoi_,
“they who ministered unto.” See also _Rom._ xvi. 1: “I commend unto you
Phebe our sister, which is a _servant_ of the church,” &c., διάκονον,
_diakonon_, _one who ministers unto_, &c. So also _John_ xii. 26: “If
any man _serve_,” διακονῇ, _diakone_, wait upon, minister unto me. “And
where I am there shall my _servant_ be,” διάκονος, _diakonos_, one who
waits upon, who ministers unto; “him will my Father honour.” It is not
always in English easy to select a phrase distinctly the best adapted to
express the precise difference between the words _diakonos_ and
_huperetes_, but it may be remarked that the _huperetes_ was of an
employment more of public character: hence those who in the ships held
certain banks of oars were called by that name; also those of a
particular rank in the army, or in civil government; but the word
_diakonos_ was used as a term more applicable to domestic, personal, or
private life. Keeping this distinction in mind, the same word may often,
in English, give the sense of either; yet _huperetes_ will often appear
in Greek where _diakonos_ would be ill used. A more correct use of this
word than the preceding will be found in _Matt._ iv. 11: “Then the devil
leaveth him, and behold, angels came and _ministered_ unto him,”
διηκόνουν, _diekonoun_, ministered unto, attended to.

_Matt._ xx. 26: “But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your
_minister_,” διάκονος, _diakonos_, minister, &c. And here is shown the
distinction between this word and _doulos_, a slave; for he proceeds,
“And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your _servant_,”
δοῦλος, _doulos_, slave. Also, _Luke_ viii. 3: “And Joanna the wife of
Chuza, Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many others which ministered
unto him of their substance,” διηκόνουν, _diekonoun_, ministered, &c. We
have deemed it proper to notice these inaccuracies in our translation,
to prevent the word _servant_, &c., when used to mean _slave_, &c.,
being confounded with its use when given in translation as above; and it
may be proper also to notice that the _hired_ labourer, a freeman
_hired_ into the employ of another, is never described by any term
implying _slavery_, or even having any analogy with it, as examples will
show:

“For the kingdom of heaven is like a man that is a householder, which
went out early in the morning to _hire labourers_ (μισθώσασθαι ἐργάτας,
_misthosasthai ergatas_, to hire labourers) into his vineyard.” “They
say unto him, Because no man hath hired us,” (ἐμισθώσατο, _emisthosato_,
hath hired.) “So when the evening was come, the Lord of the vineyard
saith unto his steward, call the labourers and give them _their hire_,”
μισθὸν, _misthon_, wages, &c. “And when they had received it, they
murmured against the good man of the house.” _Matt._ xx. 1, 7, 8, 11.
“And when he came to himself, he said, How many _hired servants_
(μίσθιοι, _misthioi_, hired persons) of my father’s have bread,” &c.
_Luke_ xv. 17. “But he that is a hireling, (μισθωτὸς, _misthotos_, a
person hired,) and not the shepherd, whose own the sheep are not, seeth
the wolf, &c. and the wolf catcheth them and scattereth the sheep. The
_hireling_ (μισθωτὸς, _misthotos_, a person hired) fleeth because he is
a _hireling_ (μισθωτὸς, _misthotos_, a person hired,) and careth not for
the sheep.” _John_ x. 12, 13. “For the labourer is worthy of his
_hire_,” τοῦ μισθοῦ hire, wages, payment, &c. _Luke_ x. 7. “Behold, the
hire (ὁ μισθὸς, payment for being hired) of the labourers (τῶν ἐργατῶν,
_ton ergaton_, the labourers, not slaves) who have reaped down your
fields.” _James_ v. 4.

He who is seeking to obtain a correct view of the truth will perceive
the propriety of keeping in mind the distinction between the different
characters thus in our version called by the same name, “_servants_,”
and not suffer his mind to be governed, or even influenced, by any bias
which has been produced by an incomplete examination of the whole gospel
of God.




                  ------------------------------------

                              Study VIII.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON I.

The Hebrew letters ע ain, ב beth, and ד daleth compose the word by which
the Hebrews meant what we mean by the word slave. There is some
variation among men of letters, even among the Jews themselves, as to
the pronunciation of this word, some following the Asiatic, some the
Portuguese, and some the Polish method.

Out of respect and in deference to King James’s translators of the Old
Testament, of the learned and critical Dr. Blany, and of that
indefatigable biblical scholar, Dr. Bagster, we have adopted their
pronunciation of this word, and call it _ebed_.

This word, as left untranslated by them, will be found in _Jer._
xxxviii. 7–12; also xxxix. 16, 17, thus:—“Now, when Ebed-melech the
Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which was in the king’s house.”
“Ebed-melech went forth out the king’s house.” “When the king commanded
Ebed-melech the Ethiopian.” “So Ebed-melech took the men with him.” “And
Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said to Jeremiah.” “Go, speak to Ebed-melech
the Ethiopian.” The words Ebed-melech are here left untranslated,
because we have not, in English, words to express the idea conveyed by
them, except by paraphrasis, as, for instance, they would have had to
have said, his majesty’s private, or principal, and confidential
body-servant: and this is the exact meaning implied by the words
Ebed-melech, as here used: the word servant, meaning a slave. In
_Judges_ ix. 26, 28, 30, 31, 35, the word Ebed is also left
untranslated. Also in _Ezra_ viii. 6: “Ebed, the son of Jonathan.” And
in some other places.

We trust that our authority for the pronunciation of the word עֶבֶד
_ebed_, will be deemed sufficient: yet, we admit that, in Hebrew
pronunciation, it will be varied by suffix, affix, and points, as has
been found by the learned rabbis long since to best agree with their
rules of cantation and the idiomatic construction of the language.

This word _ebed_ is used as a _noun_, _verb_, _adjective_, participle,
and adverb; but we make the proposition, that, however used, and in
whatever form, it is never used disconnected from the idea of slavery.
Philological history will develop to us, at least, one human
weakness:—pride to be thought learned, has more or less, among the
European nations and languages, had its effect in the compilation of
dictionaries.

In some instances, men of learning have undertaken their compilation
without using their ability to fathom the depths of language, or to
discover the sources of its streams, or describe the qualities of their
combinations. And the world is full of servile imitations of former and
old errors; and each one seems to think that the authority of a book
warrants their perpetuation.

But there will occasionally arise, in the walks of knowledge, some
Moses, some Confucius, some Homer, some Euclid, some Socrates, some
Bacon, some Newton, some Franklin, some Champollion, before the fire of
whose genius and mental power, all imitations of error wither away.

Touching the subject of the Asiatic languages generally, and the
darkness that has for ages overspread them, may we not fondly hope that
such a luminary is now culminating in the region of the universities of
England. Permit us, at least, to have some hope for the Regius Professor
of Cambridge.

But to our subject:—We sometimes find the philologist yield his sceptre
and borrow his definitions from a bad translation. And we often find the
translator sacrificing his original upon the altar of his own
imperfections. Now, it is not uncommon that a word in one language may
be in such peculiar use, that, consistently with the constitution of
some other language, it cannot be translated therein by any one single
term and even if so, not always by the same word. Should all the
different terms and words that might thus be legitimately used in
translation, be collected together, and put down as the descriptive
meaning of some foreign or ancient term, our lexicons would, of
necessity, contain some portions of error. For example, suppose we take
the Arabic word عَبْدࣨ _abed_, which means absolutely a slave in that
language: we all know that an Arabian, speaking or writing to one far
his superior, would someway call himself by this term. He uses it to
express great devotedness, honesty, and integrity of intentions to the
one addressed. If we were composing an Arabic lexicon, what would the
scholar have good reason to say, if we should put as the definition of
this word,—honesty, integrity of intention, &c.? This Arabic word is the
same as in Hebrew, and the word is used in both languages with great
similarity: also in Chaldee, Syriac, and other Shemitic dialects.

While we premise that the Koran is taken as the standard of Arabic
literature, we present this word, as used in that language, as a sample
of its use in the other Shemitic dialects.

This word, as above, in Arabic, is composed of the letters _gain_, or
_ain_, under point _jesm_, which is equivalent to the Hebrew _quiescent
sheoa_, but really having the shortest possible trace of the sound of
our short _ĕ_, and terminated by the letter _dhal_, or _dal_, under the
diacritical sign of nunnation.

Mr. Sale, who had great experience in Arabic literature, has left this
word frequently untranslated in his notes, quoting BEIDAWI and
Iolalo'ddin, to his version of the Koran, and in Roman letters expressed
it thus, _abda_, and, without annunation thus, _abd_. We confine
ourselves to this particular _form_ of the word. If, by long experience
we supply the shortest possible trace of our vowel _ĕ_ between the _b_
and _d_, and in _annunation_ cause the terminating vowel to coalesce in
some trace of our consonant _n_, we should perhaps arrive at as correct
a pronunciation as could be attained by mere rules and it will be seen
that the _ebĕd_ of Jerusalem became _abĕd_ at Mecca.

We copy from Sale’s translation, without burthening our page with a
repetition of the original; our object is to show the precise idea for
the expression of which the Arabians appropriated this word.

“God causeth some of you to excel in worldly possessions: yet, they who
are caused to excel do not give their wealth unto the _slaves_ whom
their right hands possess, that they may become equal sharers therein.”
_Koran_, chap. 16.

Al Beidawi, an Arabian commentator on the Koran, upon this passage says—

“A reproof to the idolatrous Meccans, who could admit created beings to
a share of the divine honour, though they suffered not their slaves to
share with themselves in what God had bestowed on them.”

The expression of a thing done, held, or “possessed by the right hand,”
in Arabic, is a full concession that the doing, holding, or possessing,
is just, rightful, and righteous.

“God propoundeth, as a parable, a _possessed slave_, who hath power over
nothing, and him on whom we have bestowed a good provision from us, and
who giveth alms thereout, both secretly and openly; shall these two be
esteemed equal? God forbid.” _Koran_, chap. 16.

Of this, the above commentator says, “The idols, we have likened to a
_slave_, who is so far from having any thing of his own, that he is
himself in the possession of another.” _Idem._

“And this is the favour which thou hast bestowed on me, that thou hast
enslaved the children of Israel.” _Koran_, chap. 26.

“O prophet, we have allowed thee thy wives, unto whom thou hast given
their dower, and also the _slaves_ which thy right hand possesseth, of
the booty which God hath granted to thee.” _Koran_, chap. 33.

Yet, so it is, we find in our Hebrew lexicons, among the significations
of this word עבד _ebed_, not only its true signification,—slave,
slavery, &c.,—but also, _to labour_, _cultivate_, _labour generally_,
_worship_, _to make_, _to do, or deal with any one_, _to take place or
happen_, _work_, _business_, _tillage_, _cultivation of land_,
_agriculture_, _implements_, _utensils_, _appurtenances_, _a worship of
God_ or _of idols_, _wearied_, _to be wearied with labour_, _complied
with_, _assented to_, _performed_, _religious service_, _a submissive
epithet_, _a minister_, _to minister unto_, _any one employed in the
service of a king_, _any one who worships, adores God_, _one who is
commissioned by him for any purpose, benefit, employment of any kind_.

But we will desist from increasing this catalogue of definitions, for
fear of being charged with slander on the Hebrew lexicons. Must not that
be a very strange language in which one little word of only three
letters has so many varied and adverse meanings? Yet, in all sobriety,
we might double the number. If each and every Hebrew word were like
this, thus loaded with lexicographical learning, we beg to know who
would undertake and what would be the use of its study; for surely, from
the same page, there might be a very great number of adverse and
contradictory translations, all equally correct. But, if such catalogue
is not legitimate, to what cause are we to look for its existence? to
some abiding influence, secret but persevering, in the minds of the
lexicographers for the last thousand years? Or shall we rather confine
our views to the casualities of hurried translations and bad readings,
to the facility of the copyist in book-making, instead of the laborious
study of the investigator?

This circumstance, from whatever cause it may have sprung, will impose
on us some labour to show the correctness of our proposition, to wit,
the word עֶבֶד _ebed_, however used, and in whatever form, is never used
in Hebrew disconnected from the idea of slavery.

We first propose to show that the Hebrew is abundantly supplied with
words to express all these other meanings, _disconnected_ with the idea
of slavery.

Aware that such examination may be extremely uninteresting to the most
of us, yet, deeming it of great importance to our subject, we humbly ask
indulgence, while we examine a few of the most leading _terms_ as
examples, whose significations have been appropriated to the word עֶבֶד
_ebed_.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON II.

But, before we enter into such examination, it may be proper to remark
that the Hebrew, in common with all the Shemitic languages, makes
abundant use of what we call rhetorical figures. The word בֵּן _ben_
means a son; but by _prosopopœia_ it is made to mean an _arrow_. Thus,
_Lam._ iii. 13, “He hath caused the _arrows of his quiver_,” בְּנֵי֖
אַשְׁפָת֥וֹ _beney_, _ashpatho_—literally, the _sons of his quiver_,
from the notion that the arrow is the produce, issue, adjunct, &c. of
the quiver. We might quote a great number of instances where the word
בֵּן _ben_, by the same figure, is used to express some other idea than
_son_, yet never unassociated with the primitive idea but, what would be
the value of the lexicographical assertion that this word in Hebrew
meant an arrow? The following fifteen verses are wholly of the same
character: “He hath filled me with bitterness, he hath made me drunk
with wormwood.”

The Arabians have a common way of expressing “_one of great
affliction_,” by saying that he is a “_wormwood beater_.” Yet the Arabic
word that means _affliction_, by no means is synonymous of _wormwood_.

The figure of Lamentations is also used in _Ps._ cxxvii. 4, 5: “As
awards are in the hand of a mighty man, so are children of the youth.
Happy _is_ the _man_ that hath his quiver full of them.” Yet, the word
אֶת־אַשְׁפָּתֹוֹ is in no sense a synonyme of whatever word for which it
is here figuratively used. A singular instance of this figure is found
in _Lam._ ii. 13: “Let not _the apple of thine eye_ cease;”
בַּת־עֵינֵֽךְ _bath eynek_, the _daughter of the eye_. The translators
have understood this to mean the “_pupil_,” otherwise called the apple
of the eye; but, the word _bath_, _daughter_, shows that the thing meant
is a _produce_ of the eye; hence, it cannot mean the _apple_ or _pupil_
of the eye, but _tears_. But how stupid the page that shall put down as
a signification of the word בַּת _bath_, an apple, or the apple of the
eye, or the pupil, or yet, what it here means, a tear?

These two words _ben_, a _son_, and _bath_, a _daughter_, sometimes
_beth_, are associated in so many different forms of figure and in
connection or compound with other Hebrew words, to express some
complex idea, that, if each different idea thus conveyed was to be
considered a legitimate signification of these words, their
description would be quite lengthy, and contradictory; for instance,
_Gen._ xxiv. 16, בְּתוּלָ֕ה is used to mean a _virgin_. But, 1 _Sam._
i. 16, בַת־בְּלִיַּעַל is used to mean quite a different character, as
if of different origin. In _Eccl._ xii. 4, בְּנוֹ֥ת הַשִּׂ֥יר is
generally understood to mean the voice of an old man. But in _Dan._
xi. 17, בַ֤ת הַנׇּשִׁים֨ is understood to mean a princess. We might
multiply examples without number; yet, in all instances, the leading
idea, a daughter, is ever present: other primitive words, whose
signification was an idea of great and leading interest, will be found
in similar use. And it may be remarked, that, at one age of the world,
when a large proportion of the children of men were slaves, that the
word signifying that condition would be naturally and exceedingly
often used in a figurative manner. Even among us, our word _servant_,
which, from use, has become merely a milder term to express the same
idea, is in the mouth of every devout man, while _slave_ is in
constant use among the moral and political agitators of the day.

One among the causes of our finding in the lexicons so many and
adverse significations of the word _ebed_, is the fact, that the
Hebrew often expressed an adjective quality, by placing the
substantive expressing the quality as if in apposition with the
substantive qualified, thus, עֲבָדֶיךָ מְרַגְּלִים _they_, slaves
(not) spies; עֲבָדֶ֨יךָ אַחִ֧ים _they slaves_, brethren, _Gen._ xlii.
11–13, לְעַבְדְּךָ לְאָבִינוּ _thy slave our father_, _Gen._ xliii. 28.

In an analogous sense the word א֤יִשׁ is used in 2 _Kings_ i. 9, 10, 11,
12, 13. Also iv. 25 and 27, preceding הָֽאֱלֹהִ֤ים _a man of God_,
meaning one so wholly devoted to God as to partake of the divine nature.
But such use in no manner changes the meaning of the word אִישׁ or
אֱלהים. This mode of expressing quality, by placing one of the
substantives in the genitive, is quite common even in the modern
languages. Grammarians will also inform us that substantives are often
used adverbially, designating the time, place, and quality of the action
of the verb.

But again, the Hebrew adjectives are in disproportional scarcity to the
substantives, which the language remedies by a kind of circumlocution;
this, אִ֨ישׁ דְּבָרִ֜ים _a man_ (of) _words_, _i.e._ an eloquent man, as
in _Ex._ iv. 10; _the son of strength_ בֶּן־חַיִל _valiant_ or _worthy
man_, 1 _Kings_ i. 52; בְּנֵי־קֶדֶם the sons of the East, _i.e._ the
orientals, _Gen._ xxix. 1; בֶּן מָוֶת the son of death, _i.e._ doomed to
death, 1 _Sam._ xx. 31; בַּת־בְּלִיַּעַל the daughter of baseness,
_i.e._ a base woman, 1 _Sam._ i. 16.

This use of language is common to our word, _ebed_, _slave_: עֲבֵד
אֱלָהָא slaves of God, _i.e._ a man devoted to God, as a slave to a
master, _i.e._ a man who most devotedly worships God, _Dan._ iii. 26;
עֲבֵד אֱלָהָא _slave of God_, _i.e._ devoted worshipper of God, &c.,
_Dan._ vi. 21, the 20th of the English text; and to express this
adjective quality, is thus compounded in _Ezra_ v. 11, עַבְדוֹהִ֩י
slaves of God, _i.e._, devoted to God as slaves are to their masters.
&c., to express the adjective qualities of devotion and obedience. This
word is used and compounded with many other words in a great variety of
instances.

But, doubtless, another cause which has led the lexicographers into the
alleged error, is the peculiar disposition of the Hebrew, (common to all
the Shemitic tongues) to express the idea intended, by expressing
another to which it has a real or supposed analogy, either in primitive
relation or in ultimate result. For example, let us take the word _ben_,
a son, thus: _Isa._ v. 1, _keren_, here used to mean the top of a
mountain, because they fancied an analogy between the top of a mountain
and a _horn_. _Ben_, a son, _shamen_, fat, son of fatness, is here used
to mean a fruitful mountain. But, do these words acquire new
significations from this figurative use of them? The sons of the quiver,
_i.e._ arrows. _Lem._ iii. 13. Shall we say that _ben_, means an arrow?
_Ben kasheth_, the son of the bow, (_cannot make him flee_,) _i.e._ the
arrow, _Job_ xli. 20, (the 28th of the English text.) Shall we indeed
then say that _ben_ means an arrow? _Ben shahor_, the son of
_blackness_, here used to express night,—_son of the night_,—used to
convey our idea, the _morning star_. Shall we say that _ben_ means a
star? or, that _blackness_ means the morning? _Isa._ xiv., 12 בֶּן
יוֹנָה _ben yonah_, the _son of a dove_, _i.e._ a young dove, a squab?
_Lev._ xii. 6. Shall we say that בֶּן _ben_ means a squab? _Lev._ xii.
8, _beni yonah_, sons of a dove, _i.e._ two young doves or squabs. Shall
we then, surely say that _beni_ means two squabs? But, in _Lev._ xiv.
22, we have the same words used in the same sense: must we say that this
word means squabs? בֶּנֵי עֹ֝רֵב _bene oreb, the sons of the raven_,
_i.e._ young ravens, _Ps._ cxlvii. 9: does _beni_ then mean young ravens
also? בֶּן בָּקָר _ben baker_, xxix. 1. What, does _ben_ mean a calf?
_Num._ xxix. 2–8, _son_ of an _ox_, also; _ben_ the son of an ox—meaning
a calf, does _ben_ most surely mean a calf? _Job_ xxxix. 16, speaking of
ostrich-eggs, calls them, בָּנֶיהָ, the plural: what! does this word
also mean ostrich-eggs? But, _Eccl._ ii. 7, _canithi_, I purchased,
_ebadim_, male slaves, _shepaphath_, and female slaves, and _sons,
bayith_, of my house, _haya_, there were, _li_, to me:—here בְנֵי _bené_
is used to express the idea “_home-born slaves_.” But, shall we say that
this word means such young slaves? Would such a catalogue of
significations placed to the word _ben_, a son, be legitimate or
truthful?

But, in _Jer._ ii. 14, we again find this word _bayith_, preceded by
_yelid, born of the house_, meaning a house-born slave. The same words
are used to mean the same thing in _Gen._ xiv. 14, meaning _house-born
slaves_; and again, _Gen._ xvii. 12, meaning a _house-born slave_; also,
_idem._ 13, meaning a slave born in thy house—thy _house-born slave_.

God did not speak to Abraham in an unintelligible language: every one
knew what the idea was, even down to this day. Yet, are either of these
words a synonyme of _ebed_, a slave?

But we will close this portion of our remarks by stating that the
lexicographers might, in the manner here pointed out, (which they have
pursued to great extent,) have still increased their catalogue of
significations to the word _ebed_.

Let us show an instance. It is well known that the ancient eastern
nations punished great offenders by _cutting them in pieces_. The
term expressing and threatening this punishment was used somewhat
technically, as is now the term _to guillotine_, meaning _to cut off
a man’s head_. The term used by the ancients to express this
_cutting in pieces_, as introduced in Hebrew, was, עֲבַד הַדָּמִין
_abad haddamin_, which literally was “_to enslave in pieces_.” The
term is expressed thus in _Dan._ ii. 5: הַדָּמִין תִּתְעַבְדוּן _in
pieces ye shall be enslaved_, _i.e._ “Ye shall be cut in pieces.”

The lexicographers might have continued their catalogue with the same
truthfulness with which they have extended it to such length, and have
said that עבד _ebed_ also meant to hew, to cut, &c., and have cited this
instance in proof.

But in _Dan._ iii. 29, the term is used again thus הַדָּמִ֣ין יִתְעֲבֵד
_in pieces shall be enslaved_, _i.e._ “shall be cut in pieces.” Surely,
they should have added, that _ebed_ means _to cut_. It is true that the
literal meaning of this term cannot always be given in English so as to
be in pleasant accordance with our use of language.

But the same is true as to many other phrases and terms, and perhaps
applicable to every other language. This form and use of this word as
here used by Daniel, is rather a Persian adulteration than pure Hebrew,
of which several instances may be found in some of the later books. The
Babylonian and Persian kings considered even _all their_ subjects as
slaves to them, and this word was evidently used with greater latitude
among them than it appears to have been among the Hebrews at the time of
Moses.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON III.

The lexicons seem tenacious that a very usual signification of the word
עבד _ebed_ is labour, both as a _noun_ and _verb_; and inasmuch as to
many there may seem some relation between the ideas _slavery_ and
_labour_, we wish to be particular in examining the Hebrew use of the
terms expressive of these ideas. It appears to us that the Hebrew word
יָגַע _yaga_, it simply our idea of labour, more closely than any other
word. Yet this word is never disconnected with the idea _fatigue_ and
_weariness_, and perhaps something of the same character will be
perceived to be attached to our word _labour_. In _Gen._ xxxi. 42, it is
used and translated, “the יְגִיֽעַ _labour_ of my hands.” xxv. 18, “and
when thou wast faint and וְיָגִ֑עַ weary.” 3: “And make not all the
people to תְּיַגַ֥ע _labour_ thither.” xxiv. 13: “And I gave you a land
for which you did not יָגַ֣עְתָּ _labour_.” 2 _Sam._ xvii. 2: “And I
will come upon him while he is יָגֵעַ weary.” _Neh._ v. 13: “So shall
God shake out every man from his house and from his וּמִ֣יגִיע֔וֹ
labour.” _Job_ iii. 17: “And the יְגִ֣יעֵי weary be at rest.” ix. 29:
“If I be wicked, why then אִיגָע֖ labour I in vain.” x. 13: * *
“despised the יְגִ֣יעַ work of thy hands * *.” xxviii. 18: “That which
he יָגָע laboured for shall he restore.” xxxix. 11: * * “Wilt thou leave
thy יְגִיעֶֽךָ֖ labour to him.” 16: * * * “ her יְגִיעָ֣הּ labour is in
vain without fear?” _Ps._ lxix. 4: “They that _hate_ me without a
cause;” the idea is, they that labour to injure, &c. “And their
וִ֜יגִעָם labour unto the locust.” cix. 11: “let the stranger spoil his
יְגִיע֥וֹ labour.” cxxviii. 2: “For thou shalt eat the יְגִ֣יעַ labour
of thy hands.” _Prov._ xxiii. 4: “תִּיגַע֥ _labour_ not to be rich.”
_Eccl._ xii. 12: “Much study is יְגִעַ֥ת weariness to the flesh.” _Isa._
xliii. 22, 23, 24: “But thou hast been יָגַ֥עְתָּ הֽוֹגַעְתִֽיךָ wearied
thee with incense.” “Thou hast הֽוֹגַעְתַּ֖נִי wearied me with thine
iniquities.” xlv. 14: “The יְגִ֨יעַ labour of Egypt.” xlvii. 15: “with
whom thou hast יָגָ֑עַתְּ _laboured_.” lv. 2: “And your וִיגִיֽעֲכֶם֖
_labour_ for that which satisfieth not.” lxv. 23: “They shall not
יִֽגְעוּ֨ labour in vain.” _Jer._ iii. 24: “For shame hath devoured the
יְגִי֥עַ labour.” xx. 5: “And all the יְגִיעָ֖הּ labours thereof.” xlv.
3: “I יָגַעְתִּי _fainted_ in my sighing.” The idea is, my sighing was a
labour of great weariness, &c. _Ezek._ xxiii. 29: “And shall take away
all thy יְגִיעֵךְ _labour_.” _Hag._ i. 11: “And upon all the יְגִי֥עַ
labour of thy hands.” _Mal._ ii. 17: “Ye have הֽוֹגַעְתֶּם֤ wearied the
Lord with your words, yet ye say, Wherein have we הוֹגָ֑עְנוּ wearied
him?” _Eccl._ i. 8: “All things are full of יְגֵעִ֔ים labour.” x. 15:
“The (עָמָל _amal_) _labour_ of the foolish (תִּיגָעֶנּוּ) every one of
them.” The word _labour_ in this sentence is translated from _amal_,
another Hebrew word, which signifies _labour_, but in its signification
is implied the association of the idea _grief_, _sorrow_, &c. The
adjective quality of this word is mental—in _yaga_, it is physical. This
word _amal_ seems to be derived from the Arabic عَملمنࣨ _amelan_, and
from thence the Syriac ܥܰܠܢܵܐ, having nearly the same signification. In
Arabic the signification is put down by Castell, _operator_,
_mercenarius_; and in Syriac, _labore defessus_. It is used in Hebrew as
follows: _Gen._ xli. 51: “And Joseph called the name of his first-born
Manessa; for God, said he, hath made me forget all my עֲמָלִי toil,”
(_labour_, _sorrow_.) The word _manessa_ means to forget, to cause to
forget, &c. _Num._ xxiii. 21: “He hath not beheld עָמָ֖ל _iniquity_ in
Jacob,” _i.e._ labour designed to give trouble, perplexity, or sorrow.
_Deut._ xxvi. 7: “The Lord heard our voice and looked upon our
affliction, and our עֲמָלֵנ֭וּ labour and our oppression.” _Judg._ v.
26: “And her right hand to the workman’s (עֲמֵלִי֑ם _labourer’s_)
hammer.” _Job_ iii. 10: “Nor hid עָ֜מָׄל sorrow from mine eyes.” 20:
“Wherefore is light given unto him that is in לְעָמֵ֣ל _misery_.” iv. 8:
“They that plough iniquity and sow עָמָ֣ל _wickedness_ shall reap the
same.” v. 7: “Yet man is born to לְעָמָ֣לtrouble.” vii. 3: “So I am made
to possess months of vanity, and עָ֝מָל wearisome nights are appointed
to me.” xv. 35: “They conceive עָ֭מָל mischief and bring forth vanity.”
xvi. 2: עָמָ֣ל “Miserable comforters are ye all.” xx. 22: “In the
fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in עָמֵ֣ל _straits_.” But it
should be remembered that the Hebrew copy of Job is itself a
translation. _Ps._ vii. 15: “He made a pit and digged it, and has fallen
into the עָ֜מָׄל _ditch_ (sorrow bringing labour) which he made.” 16:
“His עֲמָ֣לוֹ _mischiefs_ shall return upon his own head.” x. 7: “Under
his tongue is עָמָל mischief and vanity.” 14: “Thou beholdest עָ֘מָ֤ל
_mischief_ and spite.” xxv. 18: “Look upon mine affliction and my
וַֽעֲמָלִ֑י pain, and forgive my sin.” “Yet is their strength עָמָ֣ל
_labour_ and _sorrow_.” cv. 44: “And they inherit the וַֽעֲמַ֖ל _labour_
of the people.” cxxvii. 1: “Except the Lord build the house, they
_labour_ in vain.” _Prov._ xvi. 26: “He that עָֽמְל֣וּ _laboureth_
עָ֣מְׄלָה עָ֭מֵל _Isa._ liii. 11: “He shall see of the מֵעֲמַל _travail_
of his soul,” (labour producing sorrow, &c.) “And that write עָמָל
grievousness which they have prescribed,” (a labour producing sorrow,
&c.) _Jonah_ iv. 10: “Thou hast had pity on the gourd for which thou
hast not עָמַ֥לְתָּ _laboured_.” _Eccl._ i. 3: “What profit hath a man
of all his עֲמָלוֹ _labour_ which he taketh under the sun?” ii. 10: “For
my heart rejoiced in all my עֲמָלִי _labour_.” 11: “And then I looked on
all the work that my hands had wrought, and on all the וּבֶֽעָמָ֖ל
_labour_ that I had שֶֽׁעָמַ֣לְתִי _laboured_.” I hated all my עֲמָלִי
_labour_ which I had עָמֵ֖ל _taken_ (laboured) under the sun.” 19: “Yet
shall he have rule over all my עֲמָלִ֔י _labour_ wherein I have
שֶֽׁעֽמַ֥לְתִּי _laboured_.” 20: “Therefore I went about to cause my
heart to despair of all the הֶ֣עָמָל _labour_ which I שֶׁ֥עָמַ֖לְתִּי
took (laboured) under the sun.” 21: “For there is a man whose
שֶֽׁעֲ֗מָל֛וֹ _labour_ is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity—yet
to a man that hath not עָ֥מַל _laboured_ herein shall he leave it for
his portion.” 22: “For what hath man of all his עֲמָל֔וֹ _labour_ and of
the vexation of his heart, wherein he hath עָמֵ֖ל _laboured_ under the
sun?” iv. 4: “Again I considered all עָמָל _travail_,” (labour and
sorrow.) 8: “Yet there is no end to all his עֲמָל֔וֹ _labour_, neither
saith he, For whom do I עָמֵ֗ל _labour_.” iii. 9: “What profit hath he
that worketh in that wherein he עָמֵ֥ל _laboureth_?” v. 18: “And to
enjoy the good of all his בַּֽעֲמָל֑וֹ _labour_.” vi. 7: “All the עֲמַ֥ל
_labour_ of a man is for his mouth.” ix. 9: “For that is thy portion in
this life and in thy וּבַעֲמָ֣לְךָ֔ _labour_.” x. 15: “The עֲמַ֥ל
_labour_ (_amal_) of the foolish תְּיַגְּעֶ֑נּוּ _wearieth_ every one of them.”

מְלָאכָה֜ _melahkah_ is also quite analogous in its signification to our
word _labour_, insomuch that our word _labour_ may be often used in
translation without impairing the sense. _Gen._ ii. 2: “On the seventh
day God ended his work,” מְלַאכְתּ֖וֹ _labour_. xxxix. 11: “Joseph went
into the house to do his _business_,” (labour.) _Exod._ xx. 9: “And do
all thy _work_,” מְלַאכְתֶּֽךָ 10: “In it thou shalt not do any _work_,”
(labour, מְלָאכָ֜ה.) xxxi. 3: “All manner of _workmanship_,” מְלָאכָֽה.
14: “For whosoever doeth any _work_,” מְלָאכָ֔ה. 15: “Six days may
_work_ מְלָאכָה֒ be done.” _Lev._ xiii. 48: “Of any thing _made_
מְלֶ֥אכֶת of skin,” (done, laboured, manufactured.) _Ezra_ iii. 8: “To
set forward the _work_ of the house.” 9: “To set forward the workman,”
הַמְּלָאכָ֖ה. _Esther_ iii. 9: “And those that have charge of the king’s
_business_,” הַמְּלָאכָ֔ה. ix. 3: “And officers הַמְּלָאכָה֙ of the
king. Without multiplying examples, it may suffice to say, that this
word, as expressive of _labour_, is ever associated with the idea of
particularity, or class of _labour_, _business_, _employment_ or _job_,
without reference to any other adjective quality; and hence it came to
mean a message, or one charged with a message, and is therefore
sometimes used to mean an angel, because they were supposed to be
messengers, charged to do a particular labour; hence, also, applied to a
prophet; and hence, also, the prophet Malachi’s name.

עָשָׂה _Asa_ properly means work or labour, as the result of _making_,
_procreating_, _producing_, _doing_, _acting_, or _performing_, without
any regard to the condition of the agent or actor. _Gen._ i. 7: “God
_made_ וַיַּעַשׂ the firmament.” 16: “God _made_ וַיַּעַשׂ two great
lights.” ii. 2: “God ended his _work_ מְלַאכְתּוֹ which he had _made_,”
עָשָׂ֥ה. This word is also used to express the _result_ of labour in
acquiring slaves and other property generally, as in _Gen._ xii. 5: “All
their substance that they had gathered, and the souls they had gotten in
Haran,” _i. e._ all the property and slaves that they had _laboured_
for, &c. עָשׂ֣וּ. _Exod._ xxxi. 4: “To work in gold and silver.” 5: It
is used with _malabkah_, thus: “to _work_ לַֽעֲשׂ֖וֹת in all manner of
workmanship,” (מְלָאכָֽה malakah.) These two words occur together again
in _Neh._ iv. 15, the iv. 21 of the English text: “So _we laboured_
עֹשִׂ֣ים _in the work_,” בַּמְּלָאכָ֑ה. _Ezek._ xxix. 20: “I have given
him the land of Egypt for his _labour_,” עָ֣שׂוּ. _Exod._ xxx. 25: “And
thou shalt make it (וְעָשִׂ֣יתָ labour it) an oil of holy ointment, an
ointment composed after the art of the apothecary.” Art is here
translated from מַ֥עֲשֵׂ֣ה _maase_, which is another word of very
similar import, and is derived from עָשָה, and expresses the idea of
labour, as of a _thing done_, or _wrought_, a _work_, _deed_, _action_,
_concern_, _business_, _i. e._ a labour emanating from a habit, or an
occupation of business. _Gen._ xliv. 15: “_What deed_ הַמַּעֲשֶׂ֥ה is
this that ye have done?” xlvii. 3: “What is your _occupation_?”
מַּֽעֲשֵׂיכֶ֑ם. _Exod._ xxiii. 16: “And the feast of the harvest, the
firstfruits of thy _labours_ מַֽעֲשֶׂיךָ, which thou hast sown in the
field, and the first of the ingathering, which is the end of the year,
when thou hast gathered in thy _labours_,” מַעֲשֶׂ֖יךָ. _Hag._ ii. 17:
“And I smote you with blasting and with hail in all the _labours_
מַֽעֲשֵׂ֣ה of your hands.” _Hab._ iii. 17: “Although the fig-tree shall
not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vine, the _labour_ מַֽעֲשֵׂה
of the olive shall fail.”

סֵבֶל _sebel_ is sometimes translated _labour_, but it more often means
something consequent to labour, as the burthen of _labour_ is consequent
to the labour: it is sometimes used to mean the produce of labour, and
hence the Syrian Ephraimitish word סִבֹּלֶה _siboleth_, which is said to
mean an ear of corn, because an ear of corn was the produce of labour.
Hence, it is sometimes used to mean prolific and fruitful, because the
produce of labour is _prolific and fruitful_; and because to sustain a
burthen, as of labour, carries with it the idea of physical ability and
strength, it is used in the sense of bearing up, to elevate, to deliver
from, &c. A few instances of its use will suffice. _Exod._ i. 11: “To
afflict them with their _burthens_,” בְּסִבְלֹתָ֑ם. _Ps._ lxxxi. 7: “I
delivered מִסֶּ֣בֶל thee.” cxliv. 14: “That our oxen may be strong to
_labour_,” מְֽסֻבָּ֫לִים. The Hebrews had thus several ways by which
they could express the idea _labour_ accompanied with different
adjective qualities. So the word עֶבֶד _ebed_ may express the idea
_labour_; but when so, it is always _slave-labour_, the labour peculiar
to, or performed by a slave as in _Isa._ xix. 9: “They that _work_
עֹֽבְדֵ֥י in fine flax.” The meaning is, they that _labour_ or slave
themselves in fine flax. The working in fine flax was _slave-labour_. If
it were good English for us to say, _they that slave in fine flax_, it
would be exactly what the prophet did say in this passage. So in _Exod._
xx. 9: “Six days shalt thou _labour_ and _do all thy work_.” Here labour
is translated from _ebed_ תַּ֥עֲבֹ֔ד֮, as a verb “_do_” is from
וְעָשִ֣֭יתָ and “_work_” from מְלַאבְתְ֥ךָ. The literal meaning of this
is—Six days shalt thou slave and labour all thy work;—or, more
plainly—Six days shalt thou slave thyself (_i.e._ do slave labour) and
וְעָשִ֣֭יתָ _labour_, or make all thy מְלַאבְתְ֥ךָ particular,
accustomed, professional or usual work or labour. This command is
addressed to all mankind, and the propriety of it, as here explained,
will be seen in the succeeding verse. “But the seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shalt not do תַֽעֲשֶׂ֣ה _any
work_ כָל־מְלָאכָ֜ה֡ thou nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy
man-servant, (עַבְדְּךָ, _ebeddeka_, _slave_.)” So, then, if this
particular word had not been used, we could not have said that the
command applied to slaves.

But the Hebrews had a way of expressing the idea of labour alone,
associated with the idea of industry as its adjective quality: Should I
say; By your hands you shall be sustained, the idea would be that you
shall be sustained by your labour; that is, your personal industry. So
the Hebrews used the words עַל־יָד _el yod_, which means “_by hand_,”
and is used to mean labour. Thus, _Prov._ xiii. 11: “He that gathereth
by vanity shall be diminished, but he that gathereth by _labour_
(עַל־יָ֣ד _by hand_, _i. e._ by his own industry) shall increase.” Is it
not clear, then, that the Hebrews stood in no need of the word _ebed_ to
mean labour generally. They did use it to mean slave-labour, and
slave-labour alone, as we shall more fully see hereafter.

This language enabled its writers to express the distinctive shades of
meaning—those adjective qualities associated with the idea _labour_.
These facts may appear to the mere English scholar as matters of no
importance—not worth investigation. But, touching the Hebrew use of this
word עבד _ebed_ and its compounds, as it affects and expresses the
institution of slavery, amid the eras of Divine inspiration, we hope to
be sustained in the consideration of its very great importance.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON IV.

Some of the lexicons say that this root עֶבֶד _ebed_ means also
_worship_, to _worship_ God, or idols, &c., without any connection
with the idea of slavery. In _Gen._ xxii. 5: “And I and the lad will
go yonder and _worship_;” here, worship is from וְנִ֥שְׁתַּֽחֲוֶ֖ה,
from the root שׁחה _shahah_, which means to bow down. xxiii. 12:
“_And_ Abraham _bowed down himself_ before the people of the Lord,”
_bowed down himself_ וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ֙. xlvii. 31: “_And_ Israel bowed
himself upon the bed’s head,” וַיִּשְׁתַּ֥חוּ. _Exod._ iv. 31: “Then
they bowed their heads and worshipped,” וַיִּ֥שְׁתַּ֥חֲוֽוּ. This
root, like all others, takes upon itself a change of shape,
according to the condition in which it is used. We will present a
few instances of its application in Hebrew. _Exod._ xi. 8: “And bow
down themselves unto me,” וְהִשְׁתַּ֥חֲווּ. xx. 5: “_Thou shalt not
bow down thyself_ תִּשְׁתַּ֥חֲוֶ֥֣ה _unto them_.” xxxiii. 10: “And
the people rose up and _worshipped_,” וְהִ֥שְׁתַּֽחֲו֔וּ. _Deut._
xxvi. 10: “And _worship_ וְיִִּֽשְׁתַּֽחֲוִ֔יתָ before the Lord thy
God.” _Josh._ v. 14: “And Joshua fell on his face to the earth and
did _worship_,” וַיִּשְׁתָּ֔ח֗וּ. 1 _Sam._ xv. 30: “That I may
_worship_ וִהִשְׁתַּ֥חֲוֵ֖יתִי the Lord thy God.” 31: “And Saul
worshipped וַיִּשְׁתַּ֥חוּ the Lord.” 2 _Sam._ i. 2: “That he fell
to the earth and did _obeisance_,” וַיִּשְׁתָּ֥חוּ. xiv. 33: “And
_bowed himself_ וַיִּשְׁתַּחוּ on his face to the ground before the
king.” 1 _Kings_ i. 23: “He _bowed himself_ וַיִּשְׁתַּ֥חוּ before
the king with his face to the ground.” 2 _Kings_ v. 18: “When my
_master_ goeth into the house of Rimmon to _worship_
לְהִשְׁתַּֽחֲ֙וֹת there, * * * and I bow myself וְהִֽשְׁתַּ֥חֲוֵיתִי
in the house of Rimmon, * * * _when I bow myself down_
בְּהִשְׁתַּֽחֲוָיָתִי in the house of Rimmon.” xviii. 22: “Ye shall
worship תִּשְׁתַּ֥חֲו֖וּ before the altar of Jerusalem.” xix. 37:
“And it came to pass as he was _worshipping_ מִשְׁתַּ֥חֲוֶה in the
house of Nishrosh, his God.” _Job_ i. 20: “Then Job arose and fell
down upon the ground and _worshipped_,” וַיִּשְׁהָֽחוּ. _Ezek._
viii. 16: “And they _worshipped_ מִשְׁהֲוִיהֶ֥ם the sun towards the east.”

Before we close our examples, let us notice how the Hebrews applied this
word in poetry. _Ps._ xlv. 12 (11 of the English text): “Worship
וְהִשְׁתַּ֥חֲוִי thou him,” xcix. 5: “Exalt ye the Lord our God, and
_worship_ וְ֭הִשְׁתַּ֥חֲווּ at his footstool.” cvi. 19: “They made a
calf in Horeb and worshipped הִ֥שְׁתַּ֖חֲווּ the molten image.” xcvii.
7: “Confounded be all they that _serve_ (עֹבְדֵי slave themselves to)
graven images; that boast themselves of idols: _worship_ הִֽשְׁתַּֽחֲווּ
him, all ye gods.” In this instance, the word _serve_ associates with
the idea of slavery, as does the original; but the _worship_ with that
of reverence. Both words occurring in the same sentence, will give us
some idea of their different uses; yet some think this word in such
instances synonymous with the word worship, notwithstanding the Hebrew
writers thought differently; yet true it is, this word is sometimes used
(as it were by figure) to express humility, subserviency, and
devotedness of the true _worshipper_. In the same manner, St. Paul
expresses the idea, when he says, that he is the _doulos_ (δοῦλος,
slave) of Jesus Christ. In an analogous sense, the Arabic words هَلَّ
_hel_ and هَلّلَ _hallel_, Hebrew הַלֵּל _hallal_, are used to mean
worship, &c. _Ps._ cl.: “Praise ye the Lord, praise God in his
sanctuary,” &c., where this word is in frequent use, and from which our
word _hallelujah_ has arisen. Also the Arabic word هَوْدٌ _hōd_, Hebrew
הוֹד _hōd_, is in somewhat similar use: _Ps._ cxxxvi. 1, 2, 3, all
commencing, “O give thanks to the Lord,” meaning glory, majesty, or
dignity to the Lord, as the worship of the Almighty. We trust no one has
ever found the word _ebed_ used in such a sense.

But it is said that עֲבֹדָת _avoda_ means implements, utensils,
appurtenances, (see _Gessenius_,) and _Num._ iii. 26, 31, and 36, is
quoted in proof: “And the hangings of the court and the curtains for the
door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round
about, and the cords of it, for all the _service_ thereof.” _Service_ is
translated from עֲבֹֽדָתוֹ _avodatho_. The word, as here used, means
_slave-labour_, and might well have been translated, “For all the
slave-labour thereof,” _i. e._ of the tabernacle. We cannot perceive
that it means the hanging of the court, or the curtains, or cords. The
other instances quoted are of the same character, and we dismiss their
consideration, asking the passages to be read.

But it is said, to _minister_, to _minister unto_, is sometimes
translated to the word _ebed_. 1 _Kings_ xix. 21: “Then he arose and
went unto Elijah, and _ministered_ וַֽיְשָׁרְתֵֽהוּ unto him.” The
word is from the root שֵׁרֵת _shereth_, and means to wait upon, to
attend to, &c., distinct from the idea of slavery. In _Matt._ iv. 11:
“Then the devil leaveth him, and, behold, angels came and _ministered_
(διηκονουν, _diekonoun_) unto him.” This Greek word, we deem, would be
a good translation of this word from Hebrew into Greek. This word is
used in _Num._ iii. 6: “That they may _minister_ unto him.” 31:
“Wherewith they may _minister_ וְשֵֽׁרְת֖וּ unto it.” iv. 12: “And
they shall take all the instruments of ministry וְשֵֽׁרְתוּ wherewith
they _minister_.” 14: “Wherewith they _minister_ about it.” xviii. 2:
“That they may be joined unto thee and _minister_ וִֽישָֽׁרְת֑וּךָ֩
unto thee.” 1 _Kings_ i. 4: “And the damsel was very fair, and
cherished the king and _ministered_ וַתְּשָׁ֣רְתֵ֔הוּ to him.” 15:
“The Shunammite _ministered_ מְשָׁרַ֖ת unto the king.” If the word
_ebed_ had been used, it would have shown that she was a _slave_. The
same word is continued to be used to mean _minister_. In 1 _Sam._ ii.
11: “And the child did _minister_ unto the Lord before Eli.” 18: “But
Samuel _ministered_ מְשָׁרֵת before the Lord, being a child.” iii. 1:
“And the child Samuel _ministered_ מְשָׁ֣רֵ֥ת unto the Lord before
Eli.” 2 _Sam._ xiii. 17: “Then he called his servant (נַֽעֲרוֹ _his
young man_) that _ministered_ מְשָׁ֣רְת֔וֹ unto him.” Now, had the
_ebed_ been here used instead of this word, as a verb, in the required
mood and tense, &c., it would have been proof that the young man was a
slave. But, in case the word _ebed_, as a noun, had been used, instead
of נער _nar_, then this word might have been used as it is, without
affecting the slave character of the servant. 1 _Kings_ x. 5: “And the
sitting of his servants, (עֲבָדָיו֩ _slaves_,) and the attendance of
his ministers,” מְשָׁרְתָי֜ו.

This passage shows with great distinctness the different use and meaning
of the words _ebed_ and _shereth_, between those who _ministered_ unto
him, and those who did slave-labour, between the minister and the slave
and so we ever find the distinct uses and meanings of these words. See
_Exod._ xxviii. 43: “Or when they come near unto the altar to _minister_
לְשָׁרֵ֣ת in the holy place.” _Deut._ x. 8: “To stand before the Lord to
_minister_ לְשָֽׁרְתוֹ֙ unto him.” xviii. 5: “For the Lord thy God hath
chosen him out of all thy tribes to stand to _minister_ לְשָׁרֵת in the
name of the Lord, him and his sons for ever.” 1 _Kings_ viii. 11: “So
that the priests could not stand to _minister_ לְשָׁרֵ֖ת because of the
cloud.” 2 _Kings_ xxv. 14: “And all the vessels of brass wherewith they
_ministered_, יְשָֽׁרְתוּ, took they away.” 2 _Chron._ xxiv. 14: “ Even
vessels to _minister_,” שָׁרֵת. _Neh._ x. 36 (the 27th of the Hebrew
text): “Unto the priests that _minister_ in the house of God.” 39 (the
40th of the Hebrew text): “And the priests that _minister_,”
הַ֥מְשָׁ֣רְתִ֔ים. _Isa._ lx. 7: “The rams of Nebaioth shall _minister_
יְשָֽׁרְת֑וּנֶךְ unto thee.” Let it be noticed that the word _strangers_
is translated from the word נֵכָר _nechar_. The word is of Arabic
derivation from _eker_, and has a privative sense, as _nescivit_,
_abrogavit_, _improbavit_. Hence, the Hebrews used it to mean _strange_,
_foreign_, and sometimes _false_, as in _Deut._ xxxii. 12: “No strange
(_false_) God with him.” _Mal._ ii. 11: “The daughter of a _strange_
(_false_) God.” And this word was used to mean the _strangers_,
idolaters, and rejected people, out of whom the Hebrews were allowed to
make slaves, and therefore it was used in _Gen._ xvii. 12: “Or bought
with thy money of any stranger (נֵכָ֔ר _neker_) which is not of thy
seed.” And therefore the propriety of the use of this word in the
description of those who should be their drudges and slates, is
beautifully expressed by the idea of building up their walls, as here
expressed by the prophet. But the idea of the kings _ministering_, is as
before, from the root, _shereth_. Many more examples of the use of this
word might be quoted; but we trust the foregoing are sufficient to
establish its meaning to be altogether different and distinct from any
use of the word _ebed_. Yet, there are in the received translation of
the holy books, a few instances where this word is translated
erroneously, as though it were a synonyme of the word _ebed_.

In _Num._ xi. 28, “And Joshua the son of Nun, the _servant_ of Moses,”
the word servant is translated from מְשָׁרֵ֥ת, and should have been the
_minister_ of Moses. In _Exod._ xxiv. 13: “Moses rose up and Joshua his
_minister_” מְשָֽׁרְת֑וֹ. In this last quotation, _minister_ is
correctly translated from the word as above, proving the error in
Numbers. A similar error occurs also in _Ezek._ xx. 32; it reads thus:
“And that which cometh into your mind shall not be at all that ye say,
We will be as the heathen, as the families of the country to _serve_
לְשָׁרֵ֖ת wood and stone.” Serve is translated from as above, and should
have been _to minister unto wood and stone_. A like error occurs in
_Exod._ xxxiii. 11: “But his _servant_ וּמְשָֽׁרְתוֹ Joshua,” should
have been rendered, “his _minister_ Joshua.” So, also, in _Num._ iv. 47,
the word _ebed_ is translated as a synonyme of _sherath_. The passage
reads thus: “_From thirty years old and upward, even unto fifty years
old_, every one that comes to do the service of the ministry, and the
service of the burden in the tabernacle of the congregation.” In this
passage, the word _ebed_, with affixes, is used four times
consecutively, and immediately followed by the word _massa_, which we
have before seen means _labour_, with the idea of the burden of labour
altogether predominating.

In the translation, it is plain to see that one of these words is
totally left out, which, we suppose, no one will pretend is not an
error. The translation made of these five words at the Theological
College at Andover, is far more correct than the received version. It is
thus: “_to perform the business of the service and the business of the
burden_,” &c. Yet this is not the language of the original, which reads
thus: לַֽעֲבֹ֨ד עֲבֹדַ֧ת עֲבֹדָ֛ה וַֽעֲבֹדַ֥ת מַשָּׂ֖א.

If our proposition is correct, that the word _ebed_ is never used in
Hebrew expression unassociated with the idea of slavery, then this
passage from Numbers should read: “From thirty years old and upwards,
even to fifty years old, every one that comes to slave in the slavery of
the slave labour, and in the _slavery_ of the burdens of the tabernacle
of the congregation.” We agree that the passage is somewhat difficult to
render into English but because we may find some difficulty in making
good English, we are not to translate from other words of different
meaning from the ones used. The holy penmen said what they meant, and
surely meant what they said: there was no double dealing in the spirit
of Jehovah, who dictated to them. But that translators should have, in
some few instances, mistaken or confounded the use of one word, is not
to be thought strange. Taking into view the volume of the holy books, it
is truly wonderful that greater errors were not committed. And we take
occasion here to remark, that, of all the ideas, qualities, and actions,
given in definition of the word _ebed_, unassociated with the idea of
slavery, upon examination of the language, we shall find graphic symbols
representing their phonetic signs, distinct from the idea of _slavery_,
as we have these already examined.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON V.

To show more clearly that the word עֶבֶד _ebed_ is never used in Hebrew
expression unassociated with the idea of slavery, we now propose to
examine that word as used by the Hebrew writers in the holy books. Our
words SERVANT, servitude, service, &c. are all derived from the Roman
word SERVUS, which meant a SLAVE; and our word _servant_, when first
introduced into our language, as absolutely meant a slave as now does
that term itself, and even now fully retains that meaning, where the
English language and slavery coexist. The oriental scholar (and let him
be invited to examine) will perceive that the word עֶבֶד _ebed_ was
common to all the Shemitic tribes, and almost with the same phonetic
particulars; but as their figures representing the same phonetic power
were quite dissimilar, we think it a proof, almost demonstration, that
the word עֶבֶד _ebed_ was used as a phonetic symbol by them long before
any of those languages were written. This circumstance shows the extreme
antiquity of the word; and if we succeed to establish the fact, that
this word meant nothing but what is now meant by the word _slave_, we
shall also have established the extreme antiquity of the thing itself. A
_word_ means nothing, until it is by some means agreed what it shall
represent, what idea, or association of ideas it shall excite in the
mind. Hence, it not unfrequently occurs that a thing may be better
described by paraphrasis than by the expression of a single term. In
_Gen._ xii. 5: “And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother’s
son, and their substance that they had gathered, and the _souls that
they had gotten in Haran_.” The latter clause of this sentence is from
this Hebrew expression, וְאֶת־הַנֶּ֖פֶשׁ אֲשֶׁר־עָשׂ֣וּ בְֹחָרָ֑ן, which
is correctly translated in the Andover lexicon, “The souls they had
acquired in Haran.” Every one knows that the things here meant are
_slaves_. But, when the scholar comes to examine the power of the
language of this Hebrew paraphrasis, he will discover three incident
attendants. הַנֶּפֶשׁ _hannephesh_, translated souls, also carries with
it the idea a living soul, to have life, the life itself, the living
principle, and is so translated in many places. A slave, therefore, must
have life: when dead, the condition ceases. In the same way, the
sentence expresses the idea of acquiring property by purchase, or any
other way in which property may be acquired so as to be property. The
three incidents then are life, a capacity of being acquired, and, when
so acquired, property. All this could not have been expressed by the
single term עֶבֶד _ebed_, only as it is made the representative of this
complex idea: and God has no doubt caused this passage to be on record
at this early period, that these incidents should finally come to the
knowledge of all men. A somewhat similar expression is used in _Rev._
xviii. 13. Every one knows that Babylon had been a great slave-market.
St. John, after naming the various articles of her merchandise, adds και
των σωματων, και την ψυχην, _kai ton sōmatōn, kai tēn psuchēn_, which is
translated, “_slaves and souls of men_:” σωματων does not mean slaves,
but a dead body, and is so used by Homer, Xenophon, and by the New
Testament itself; but, when united with και την ψυχην, means slaves
alone. The phrase “souls of men,” therefore, in the translation, is
surplusage. But the xii. 16 of _Genesis_ is more particular in giving
the different kinds of property and their appropriate names. “And he had
sheep and oxen, and he-asses, and men-servants (עֲבָדִים _abadim_), and
maid-servants, and she-asses, and camels.” The word _men-servants_ is
translated from the plural of עֶבֶד _ebed_. Here we find the
conventional term expressing the complex idea, previously expressed by
the phrase “ souls gotten,” persons in life, subject to be purchased,
and when purchased, property, as were sheep and oxen, and he-asses and
she-asses, and camels. In _Gen._ xvii. 9–13, we begin to find the law
influencing the conduct of Abraham in the management of this property:
“And God said unto Abram, thou shalt,” &c. 12: “And he that is eight
days old shall be circumcised,” &c.: “He that is born in thy house, or
_bought with money_ of any stranger which is not of thy seed.” 13: “He
that is born in thy house, and he that is _bought with thy money_, must
needs be circumcised.” And let it here be remembered that God recognises
the possession of this property, by giving directions with his own voice
concerning its government. And in _Gen._ xx. 14, we have some account of
the origin of Abraham’s title to some portion of this property: “And
Abimelech took sheep and oxen and _men-servants_ (עבדים _ebedim_, the
plural of _ebed_), and gave them to Abraham.” xxiv. 35: “And the Lord
hath blessed my master greatly, and he is become great; and he hath
given him flocks and herds, and silver and gold, and _men-servants_ and
maid-servants, and camels and asses.” Here the plural of _ebed_ is also
used. _Such_ is the title by which he possessed this property, described
as given to him by the Lord. But God had promised that he would bless
Abraham, _Gen._ xvii. 1: “The Lord appeared unto Abraham, and said unto
him, _I am the Almighty God_.” 2: “And I will make my covenant between
me and thee.” 7: “And I will establish my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their generations, for an everlasting
covenant.” 10: “This is my covenant.” (This covenant extends from the
beginning of the 10th to the end of the 14th verse.) One part of this
covenant was, that these _ebeds_, translated _men-servants_, whether
born in his house or bought with his money of any stranger, should be
circumcised. Wherefore, the possession of these _ebeds_ as property
became agreeable to the terms of the covenant, a part of the covenant
itself—a covenant first proposed and promulgated by the great Jehovah;
as he styles himself in the covenant, the Almighty God! _Gen._ xxvi. 2:
“And the Lord appeared unto him (Isaac), and said, Go not down into
Egypt: dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of: sojourn in this
land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee.” 4: “And I will make
thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and I will give unto thy
seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed.” 13: “And the man (Isaac) waxed great, and went
forward and grew until he became very great.” 14: “For he had possession
of flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of _servants_
(עֲבֻדָּֽה _abuddah_, _slaves_, a plural formation of _ebed_), and the
Philistines envied him.”!!!


                           ------------------

                               LESSON VI.

_Gen._ xxvii. 29: “Let people serve thee (יַֽעַבְדּ֣וּךָ _be slaves to
thee_), be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother’s sons bow down to
thee; cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that
blesseth thee.” Let us notice the conformity of this passage with _Gen._
xxv. 23: “And the Lord said unto her, two nations are in thy womb, and
two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one
people shall be stronger than the other people, and the elder shall
serve (יַֽעֲבֹ֥ד _be a slave to_) the younger.” _Gen._ xxx. 43: “And the
man (Jacob) increased exceedingly, and had much cattle, and
maid-servants, and _men-servants_ (וַֽעֲבָדִ֔ים the plural of _ebed_),
and camels and asses.” _Exod._ xx. 1, 2, 9, 10, 17: “And God spake all
these words, saying,” 2: “I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee
out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage” (עֲבָדִֽי֑ם out
of _slavery_): 5: “Thou shalt not _bow down_ (תִשְׁתַּ֥חֲוֶה֣ _worship
them_) thyself to them, nor _serve_ (תָֽעָבְדֵ֑ם _be a slave to them_)
them.” 9: “Six days shalt thou _labour_ (תּֽ֥עֲבֹ֔ד֘ _slave thyself_, or
do SLAVE-LABOUR) and do (_oso_, _labour or do work_) all thy work,”
(וְעָשִׂי֣תָ all thy accustomed labours.) This command embraces all
classes, the slave as well as the most elevated. All men, by the fall of
Adam, had become subject to slave-labour. 10: “But the seventh day is
the sabbath of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt not do any work, thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy _man-servant_ (עַבְדְּךָ thy
_slave_), this commandment we are directed not to covet any thing that
is our neighbour’s, including his man-servant and maid-servant. Here the
same word עַבְד֤וֹ is also used. _Exod._ xxi. 1: “Now these are the
judgments which thou shalt set before them.” 2: “If thou buy a Hebrew
_servant_ (עֶ֣בֶד _ebed_), (יַֽעֲבֹ֑ד _shall slave himself_),” 5: “And
if the _servant_ (הָעֶבֶד _ha ebed_, _slave_) shall plainly say, I
love,” &c. _Exod._ xxi. 7: “She shall not go out as the _men-servants_
do.” (הָֽעֲבָדִֽים the plural is here used.) 20: “If a man smite his
_servant_ עַבְדּוֹ or his maid with a rod, and he die under his hand, he
shall be surely punished: for he is his money.” 26: “If a man smite the
eye of his _servant_,” עַבְדּ֛וֹ. 27: “ If he smite out his
_man-servant’s_ tooth,” עַבְדּ֛וֹ. 32 “If the ox shall push the
_man-servant_ עֶבֶד or _maid-servant_, he shall give unto their master
thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.”

_Lev._ xxv. 44: “Both thy _bond-men_ וְעַבְדְךָ and thy bond-maids which
thou shalt have, shall be of the heathen that are round about you, of
them shall ye buy _bond-men_,” (עֶ֥בֶד _ebed_.) 45: “Moreover, of the
children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye
buy, and of their families that are with you, which they beget in your
land, and they shall be your possession.” 46: “And ye shall take them as
an inheritance for your children after you, to inherit them for a
possession they shall be your _bond-men_ תַּ֖עֲבֹ֑דוּ for ever.”

_Deut._ v. 14: “But the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord thy God;
in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
nor thy _man-servant_ וְעַבְדְּךָ, nor thy maid-servant, that thy
_man-servant_ and thy maid-servant may rest as well as thou.” 15: “And
remember that thou wast a _servant_ (עֶ֣בֶ֥ד _ebed_) in the land of
Egypt.” 21 (18th of Hebrew text): “Neither shalt thou covet thy
neighbour’s house, his field, or his _man-servant_ וְעַבְדֵֹו, or his
maid-servant.” _Deut._ xii. 12: “And ye shall rejoice before the Lord
your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your _men-servants_
(וְעַבְדֵיכֶם a plural form of _ebed_), thy son, and thy daughter, and
_thy man-servant_,” וְעַבְדְּךָ. _Deut._ xv. 12: “If thy brother, a
Hebrew man, or a Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and _serve_
וַעֲבָֽדְךָ֖ thee six years.” 15: “And thou shalt remember that thou
wast a _bond-man_ (עֶ֣בֶד _ebed_) in the land of Egypt.” 17: “And he
shall be thy servant (עֶבֶד _ebed_) for ever.” _Deut._ xvi. 11: “And
thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy
daughter, and thy _man-servant_ וְעַבְדְּךָ, and thy maid-servant, and
the Levite that is within thy gates, and the stranger, and the
fatherless, and the widow, that are among you.” 12: “And thou shalt
remember that thou wast a _bond-man_ (עֶבֶד _ebed_) in Egypt.” 14: “And
thou shalt rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter,
and thy _man-servant_ וְעַבְדְּךָ֣, and thy _maid-servant_, and the
Levite, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow.” _Deut._ xx.
10: “When thou comest nigh unto a city to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it.” 11: “And it shall be if it make thee an answer
of peace and open unto thee, then it shall be, that all the people found
therein shall be _tributaries_ (לָמַ֖ס _lamas_, afflicted, cast down, to
pay tribute, &c.), and they shall _serve_ (וַֽעֲבָדֽוּךָ _be thy
slaves_) thee.” _Deut._ xxiii. 9–17 contains certain laws to be observed
in time of war with their enemies, &c., one of which is, that a slave
escaped to them from the enemy should not be restored, &c. _Deut._
xxiii. 16 (15th of the English text): “Thou shalt not deliver unto his
master the _servant_,” (עֶבֶד _ebed_, _slave_.) xxiv. 18: “But thou
shalt remember that thou wast a _bond-man_,” (עֶבֶד _ebed_, _slave_.)
wast a bond-man,” עֶבֶד _Gen._ ix. 25: “And he said, Cursed be Canaan, a
_servant_ of _servants_ (_ebed-ebedim_) shall he be unto his brethren.”
26: “And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem, and Canaan shall be
his _servant_,” (עֶבֶד _ebed_.) Many more instances of a similar use of
this word might be selected from the holy books; some of which we hope
to notice in the progress of our study. Such, then, was the Hebrew use
of the word, to mean slave, a person purchased or otherwise acquired,
and the unquestionable _property_ of the master. Such then being the
condition of the _ebed_, slave, it is evident that he could not be
contented and happy, in case he had ambition to gratify, with hopes and
prospects before him adverse from those of his master; his whole earthly
felicities are bound up in his master’s welfare and prosperity; like an
individual of an army, he feels that the elevation, the brilliancy of
the commander is reflected upon him; and with a Christian spirit, he
obeys his master in all things, “not with eye-service, but with
singleness of heart, fearing God.” See _Col._ iii. 22. In such a state
of mind, the slave finds no unhappiness in his condition, but joy and
gladness; and with the slave of Abraham, he implores Jehovah: “_O Lord
God of my master Abraham! I pray thee send me good speed this day, and
show kindness unto my master Abraham_: Blessed be the Lord God of my
master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my master of his mercy and
truth.” _Gen._ xxiv. 12 and 27. Expressive of a character of perfect
devotedness, humility, and obedience. The term _ebed_ might well be
borrowed to express the earnest devotion of a worshipper of Jehovah, and
is so often used in connection with the patriarchs, Moses, David, and
the prophets. The term thus used expresses the quality of their
devotedness and obedience, and not necessarily the quality of the
individual. In this sense, the apostles style themselves the (δουλοι,
_douloi_) slaves of Jesus Christ; not that they were personally
_douloi_, but in their devotion and obedience to him, they were what the
_doulos_ was or should be to his master. It is probable that, in some
sense, all men feel that in the hand of God they are as clay in the
hands of the potter; that the great Jehovah overrules and governs all
things; that, as existences, they are from and dependent on him: under
such a sense, we sometimes find the term _ebed_ applied, as in the name
_Obadiah_, _Obadyahu_, the slave of God, and used as a proper noun. But
such compound words are dependent for their meaning upon the complex
ideas of what their primitives signified; and, in a somewhat analogous
sense, the term _ebed_ is applied to Nebuchadnezzar, lie being in the
hands of the Almighty, as clay in the hands of the potter, the mere
instrument, the fabrication of his hand. There is, however, in the books
of Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel, a use of this word peculiar to them; but
we should recollect that they were educated in the Persian capital and
employed in high stations by the Persian monarch. We may therefore well
expect some variation in their dialect.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON VII.

And we may well bring to mind the fact that there are two distinctly
marked eras in the Hebrew language. The first ends at the Babylonish
captivity. The Pentateuch and older prophets, Ruth, Samuel, Kings,
Psalms, and Proverbs, come within this era. The second commences with
the return of the Israelites from that captivity, and extends to the
introduction of Greek into Palestine, subsequent to the conquests of
Alexander. The first period may be emphatically called ancient Hebrew;
and the latter, more modern. The Hebrew of this period is strongly
marked by an approximation to the Chaldee and Persian. To this period of
the language belong the books of Nehemiah, Ezra, Daniel, Esther, Jonah,
Haggai, Malachi, Ecclesiastes, and a part of the Psalms; and these works
will ever be regarded by the oriental scholar as inferior in classical
literature to those of earlier date, notwithstanding their other merits
of high excellence. But some of the peculiarities of the writings of the
second period are not to be regarded as recent alterations, but as the
phonetic, unwritten Hebrew of the more remote districts of Palestine
itself. The variations of this more modern from the ancient Hebrew are
extremely numerous, both as to the substitution of one word for another,
but also as to a change of meaning of the same word; as, for instance,
the more ancient would have used the word מָלַךְ _malak_ to signify a
king, to rule, &c.; but the more modern have used a word, which, from
its strong phonetic relation, has evidently been derived from it, שָלַט
_shalat_, to mean _to rule_, &c., and so used _Ps._ cxix. 133, _Eccl._
ii. 19, _Esther_ ix. 1, _Neh._ v. 15, _Dan._ ii. 39, and in many other
places. So also the ancient would use the word אָמַר _amar_, to signify
_to speak_, _to say_; but the more modern uses the same word to signify
_to command_. What we say is, that we cannot always learn the original
meaning of a word from the more modern use of it. We will now notice the
use of the ancient word _ebed_ in this more modern dialect of the
Hebrews. In _Ezra_ iv. 19, we find, “And that rebellion and sedition
_have been made_ therein” is translated from מִהְעֲבֶד _mithabed_. Let
us examine the circumstances under which this sentence was written.
Rehum had written to the monarch Artaxerxes in opposition to the
building of the walls of Jerusalem, informing him that it had ever been
a rebellious city, hurtful to kings, &c.; in answer to which, the king
writes, “that the records have been examined, and it is found that this
city of old time hath made insurrection against kings, and that
rebellion and sedition _hath been made therein_.” The Persian monarchs
were all absolute; they regarded those whom they conquered as slaves;
and when they rebelled, they used this word to signify that it was
slaves who rebelled. Our word _servile_ is somewhat analogous, and might
very properly be substituted for it in the foregoing text, thus: “And it
is found, this city of old time hath made insurrection against kings,
and that there hath been servile rebellion and sedition therein.” When
we speak of insurrection, sedition, rebellion, or war with slaves, we
call it _servile_, as Artaxerxes did in this case, to show the fact that
the war was with slaves. _Ezra_ iv. 24, this word עֲבִידַ֣ת is
translated _work_. So in v. 8, עֲבִ֥ידְתָּא _work_, vi. 7, עֲבוׄדַ֭ת
_work_, to show that the labour was done by _slaves_, or, figuratively,
that the _labour_ was intense, devoted, and obedient, as of slaves. vi.
8: תַעַׄבדֹוּן “_Ye shall do._” 12: יִתְעֲבֵ֖ד “Let it be done with
speed.” 13: עֲבַֽדוּ “_So they did speedily._”

      vii. 18: תַֽעַבְדוּן }   “_That do_ after the will of your God.”

            and לְמֶעְבַּ֑ד }   “_To do_ with the rest of the silver and
                          gold.”

21: יִתְעֲבֵ֖ד “It be done speedily.” 23: יִתְעֲבֵד “Let it be
diligently _done_.” 26: עָבֵד “Will not _do_.” מִתְעֲבֵ֖ד “Let judgment
_be executed_ speedily.” These instances of the use of monarch of Persia
is speaking, who regarded not only the Jews, but all his subjects, as
slaves. It was the court manner of the eastern monarchs in such decrees
to throw in occasionally an exclamation of the nature of an imperative
interjection, such as, _Slave, attend!_ _Pay attention, slaves!_
_Listen, slaves!_ &c., all in substance meaning that those to whom the
decree is issued should perform it quickly and without further notice.
And we find the same custom existing among them even at this day, and
such is the true sense in which the term is here used. Let us exemplify
it. _Ezra_ vi. 12: “I, Darius, have made a decree;” then follows the
Persian adverb אָסְפַּ֖רְנָא _asepporna_, which means quickly, speedily,
diligently, &c.; then the word in question, as before noticed:
“_quickly, slaves_,” is therefore the literal meaning, _i. e._ what he
had decreed they should instantly perform. We do not pretend to say that
translating it _to do_, &c. gives a substantially wrong sense; but it
seems it may have led lexicographers to an erroneous conception of the
meaning of the word. _Jer._ x. 11: “The gods that have not made the
heavens and the earth:” _made_ is translated from עֲבַ֑֗דוּ. If this
word is the correct reading, the idea of the prophet had regard to the
_power_, not to the _act_ of a creator,—the gods that have not
_subjected_, have not placed in _subjection_, as if in slavery to, whose
laws do not govern the heavens and the earth. The gods who could not do
these things are _not_ gods, and they shall perish. This was the idea of
the prophet. But this word is marked in all the best copies with a keri,
showing that this reading was suspected by the Jewish scholars to be
bad; and they supply in the margin the words פתח כאתנח, which is at
least some proof that they thought its use in this instance unusual; and
Kennecott and De Rossi found these words used instead of עבדוֹ in some
copies.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON VIII.

But we have a sure method by which we may discover what meaning Ezra did
affix to this word—by examining his use of it in those cases where its
meaning cannot be doubtful. See _Ezra_ iv. 11: “Thy servants,”
עַבְדָּ֛י֯ךְיך. v. 11: “We are the servants,” עַבְדוֹהִי, having
relevance to their devotedness to God. vi. 16 commences with the word
יַֽעֲבַ֣דוּ, which is omitted in our translation. The sentence should
commence thus: “_And the slaves_, the children of Israel, the priests,”
&c. ix. 9: “For we were _bondmen_ עֲבָדִ֣ים, yet our God hath not
forsaken _us in our bondage_,” וּבְעַבְדֻתֵ֔נוּ. These instances clearly
show how Ezra understood this word: notwithstanding his writings were
touched with the Persian and Chaldee idioms. A similar result will be
found upon the examination of Nehemiah and Daniel. _Neh._ ii. 10 and 19:
“And Tobiah the _servant_ הָּעֶ֣בֶד, the Ammonite heard of it”—“And
Tobiah the _servant_ הָעֶ֣בֶד, the Ammonite.” v. 5: “Yet now our flesh
is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as their children: and lo,
we bring into _bondage_ (כֹֽ֠בְשִׁים _kovshim_) sons and our daughters
to be _servants_ (לַֽעֲבָדִֹם _slaves_), and some of our daughters are
brought into _bondage_ (נִכְבָּשׁוֹת _subjections_, not necessarily
slavery) already,” (כָּבַש _kovash_.) The root from which these two
words are formed in no sense means slavery, but to reduce, to subdue, to
humble; and in this sense is used in _Esther_ vii. 8, and translated
“_force_.” But this word aids very much in showing what idea was affixed
to the word _ebed_; and we ask to compare this passage of Nehemiah with
_Jer._ xxxiv. 8–16: “This is the word that came unto Jeremiah from the
Lord, after that king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people
which were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty unto them; * * * that every
man should let his _man-servant_, (עַבְדּ֔וֹ _male slave_,) and every
man his maid-servant שִׁפְחָת֛וֹ, being a Hebrew or Hebrewess, go free;
that none should _serve_ (עֲבָד־ _slave_) himself of them, to wit, of a
Jew his brother. Now, when all the princes, and all the people which had
entered into the covenant, heard that every one should let his
_man-servant_ (עַבְדּ֔וֹ _male slave_), and every one his maid-servant,
go free, that none _serve themselves_ (עֲבָד־ _slave themselves_), of
them any more, then they obeyed and let them go. But afterwards they
turned and caused the _servants_ (הָ֥עֲבָדִים _ha abadim_, _slaves_),
and the _hand-maids_, whom they had let go free, to return. Therefore
the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah, from the Lord, saying, Thus saith
the Lord, the God of Israel, I made a covenant with your fathers in the
day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house
of bond-men (עֲבָדִ֖ים _ebedim_, _slaves_), saying, At the end of seven
years, let go every man his brother a Hebrew, which hath been sold unto
thee; and when he hath _served_ thee (וַֽעֳבָ֖דְךָ _slaved for thee_)
six years, thou shalt let him go free from thee; but your fathers
hearkened not unto me, neither inclined their ear. And ye were now
turned, and had done right in my sight, in proclaiming liberty every man
to his neighbour; and ye had made a covenant before me in the house
which is called by my name. But ye turned and polluted my name, and
caused every man his _servant_, (עַבְדּוֹ _ebeddo_, _slave_,) and every
man his _hand-maid_, whom he had set at liberty at their pleasure, to
return, and brought them into _subjection_ (וַתִּכְבְּשׁ֣וּ) to be unto
you for _servants_ (לַֽעֲבָדִ֖ים _for slaves_), and for _hand-maids_.”
The comparison of these passages proves the fact that Nehemiah and
Jeremiah used the word _ebed_ to mean a slave, without any variation of
meaning. Nor will we hold Nehemiah responsible for his word כָּבַשׁ
_kavash_, _subjection_, being translated _bondage_. _Neh._ vii. 66, 67,
gives an account of the captive Israelites that returned from Susa and
Babylon to Jerusalem. “And the whole congregation together was forty and
two thousand three hundred and threescore. Besides their _man-servants_
(עַבְדֵיהֶ֤ם _male slaves_), and their maid-servants, of whom there were
seven thousand three hundred and thirty score.” We trust that so varied,
particular, and descriptive are the records left in the holy books
through which we may search out what the Hebrews meant by their use of
the word _ebed_ (עבד), that its certainty and definiteness must place
the inquiry beyond doubt. But as in this instance the word כָּבַשׁ
_kavash_ has been translated _bondage_, it may be well to give a few
examples of its use in the holy books, that all may see and know that
its meaning is totally distinct from that of slavery. _Gen._ i. 28:
“Multiply and replenish the earth and subdue it,” וְכִבְשֻׁהָ. _Num._
xxxii. 22: “And the land _be subdued_ וְנִכְבְשָׁ֥ה before the Lord.”
29: “And the land _shall be subdued_ וְנִכְבְּשָׁה before you.” _Josh._
xviii. 1: “And the land _was subdued_ נִכְבְּשָׁ֖ה before them.” 2
_Sam._ viii. 1: “Which he _subdued_,” כִּבֵשׁ. ‎2 _Chron._ ix. 18: “With
a footstool,” וְכֶבֶשׁ because a footstool was in the place of
subjection. _Zech._ ix. 15: “And _subdue_ וְכָ֥בְשׁוּ with
sling-stones.” _Micah_ vii. 19: “He will _subdue_ יִכְ֖בּוֹשׁ our
iniquities.” The foregoing examples, we trust, are sufficient to
disabuse the mind of the idea of any synonyme of meaning of these two
words.


                           ------------------

                               LESSON IX.

WE propose to examine the Hebrew use of the word _ebed_ in the 5th and
15th of the second chapter of Genesis: “In that day the Lord God made
the earth, and the heavens, and every plant of the field before it grew;
for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was
not a man _to till_ לַֽעֲבֹ֖ד the ground.” _To till_ is here translated
from this word _ebed_, with the affix of the preposition ל. This is the
first instance in which the word is used in the holy book; and it may
seem extremely strange that the writers of these books found its use
necessary in their description of events even before the creation of
man. It is not our business to draw out theological doctrine unconnected
with the subject of our present inquiry; but we suppose it will not be
disputed that the great Jehovah as well knew, before he created the
heavens and the earth, and man upon the earth, all and every particular
of what would happen, as at any subsequent time: with him, a day is as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. _We_ may behold the
birth, maturity, and death of some animalcula, in a day or in an hour.
But, with him the succession of generations, of the animal life of a
thousand years, pass in instantaneous and present view. _Time_
appertains alone to mortals. _He_ saw the most ultimate condition of
man; and the earth and the herb were made to suit it. But from the
manner of the expression of the text, may we not conclude that the herb,
although made, would not grow until man was created, and in the
condition _to till_ (לַ֥עֲבֹ֖ד _to slave_) the ground? The support of
the animal world, independent of man, is spontaneously presented before
them: not so with man in his fallen state. “He sendeth the springs into
the valley, which run among the hills. They give drink to every beast of
the field: the wild asses quench their thirst. By them shall the fowls
of heaven have their habitation, which sing among the branches. He
watereth the hills from his chambers; the earth is satisfied with the
fruit of thy works. He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and
herb _for the service_ (לַֽעֲבֹדַ֣ת _for the slavery_) of man: that he
may bring forth food out of the earth,” _Ps._ civ. 10–14. The second
instance in which this word is used is in _Gen._ ii. 15: “And the Lord
God took the man and put him into the garden of _Eden to dress it_, and
to keep it.” _To dress it_ is translated from this word לְעָבְדָ֖הּ.
There is certainly much obscurity in the use of the word in this
instance. Professor Stuart, of Andover, supposes that it inculcates the
doctrine that _labour_ was imposed on man in the paradisiacal state;
consequently, that labour was no part of the curse which followed the
apostacy. (See his Chreestomathy, page 105.) This view excludes the idea
that the word, as here used, is associated with the idea of slavery, and
that, if, in the interchange of language, although the idea of labour
may predominate, nevertheless, it must be _slave_ labour. Our mind does
not yield its assent to his position. We had associated with our idea of
this paradise the most perfect heaven, the dwelling-place of Jehovah!!
and that the generations of man, when guided and governed by Divine
mercy in such a manner that we could be happy therein, that it would yet
become our ultimate home,—(“He that hath an ear, let him hear what the
Spirit saith unto the churches; To him that overcometh will I give to
eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God,”
_Rev._ ii. 7,)—and that the humble worshipper of Jehovah while in a
state of progressive preparedness, would therefore cry out with the
Psalmist, “Unto thee I lift mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the
heavens! Behold, as the eyes of _servants_ (עֲבָדִ֠ים _male slaves_)
look unto the hand of their master; and as the eyes of a _maiden_
(שִׁפְחָה֮ _shiphhah_, _female slave_) unto the hand of her mistress, so
our eyes wait upon the Lord our God until he have mercy upon us.” _Ps._
cxxiii. 1, 2. If then the paradise of old was the type of the paradise
eternal, it would seem that the labour of the _ebed_ was excluded
therefrom: “Because the creature itself also shall be delivered from the
_bondage_ (δουλείας, _slavery_) of corruption into the glorious liberty
of the children of God.” _Rom._ viii. 21. And for this very good reason,
that slavery, the consequent of sin, could never find entrance there:
regeneration is therefore indispensable.

“It strikes me that the use of the verb (עָבַד _abad_, presents no
difficulty that calls for explanation. The language of inspiration is
man’s language, though employed by God. The events, facts, things, acts,
that preceded man’s creation, must still be described by language and
terms that _had come into use after man’s creation_. Man must first
exist before there could be _words_ to be used in conveying knowledge to
man. A word implying _slavery_ might therefore most reasonably be found
in a _description_ of things _prior_ to the existence of man, or of
slavery, which description was written long afterwards by Moses, and in
language which was in use amongst the men for whom he wrote. When Moses
wrote, when God inspired him, עֶבֶד _ebed_ was a familiar word.”
_Extract from manuscript letter of the Rev. J.B. Stratton to the
author._

But in the pursuance of the chain of thought that first was impressed on
our mind, we have to remark that the word _Eden_ meant pleasure,
happiness. It seems to have been derived from or cognate with the Arabic
word عَدْنٌ _aden_, and means softness, gentleness, mildness,
tenderness, and daintiness, in that language. The Hebrews had also
another word from this same root, עֲדִי _adi_, to mean ornaments, &c.,
and עֲדָיִן _adain_, to mean luxuriousness and delicate. The word, as
used in the text before, is applied to a district of country, and
confers the adjective qualities to said district, _i. e._ a district of
country of great pleasure and delight. The general boundaries are given
and described by the naming of its rivers. It was of considerable
extent, embracing, perhaps, more than the whole of the ancient Armenia.

“And a garden was planted eastward in Eden.” Garden is translated from
גַן _gan_. The word is derived from גַנּן _ganan_. The word means, to
protect, protection, a thing protected. The idea expressed by it is
not confined to a single walled area; but the two words are often used
together, as if it was intended to convey the idea of the fact that
the protection extended to the whole of Eden. And it may be well
conceived that _innocency_ was its protection. Here cunning art never
wove its web for the entanglement of its victim. Here no crocodile
tears enticed sympathy within the reach of harm. Here no vile wretch
ever betrayed a brother’s confidence. Here the lion and the lamb might
have couched together, and the infant have played with the tiger’s
paw. We are aware that some modern scholars consider the description
of the garden of Eden by Moses a mere picture of the mind. Rosenmaeler
says that it is on a par with Virgil’s description of the Elysian
fields. This class of philosophers consider the whole as a fiction:
but man had his commencement somewhere, and it is a fact that four
large rivers, answering to the outlines of the general description of
Moses, do flow from fountain-heads not more than thirty or forty miles
apart, in the central and most elevated region of Armenia. These
streams meander through the same countries described by him, and
exhibit the same mineral productions: nor would it be any thing
remarkable, if investigation should yet prove that they were all
indebted to one and the same source. Let us consider then, whether it
was not a fact that the garden of Eden was not confined to a little
plat of ground, but included a whole district of country, embracing
the visible sources of the rivers named: a district of country, from
the mildness of its climate, fruitfulness, and other causes of
pleasure and delight, exceedingly well adapted to the early residence
of man. We have therefore no well founded reason to believe that the
account given by Moses of the garden of Eden was a fiction,
independent of Divine authority. But his account must be understood so
as to be consistent with itself, and with the facts now existing of
which it speaks. We are not under the necessity of supposing that the
felicity of our first parents was confined to the locality named: a
paradise was to them anywhere. It was their innocence, not the
location, that made it so; and thus they were driven out of paradise,
perhaps, without a change of location. The use of the word _ebed_ עבד,
in ii. 15 of _Genesis_, might then well be of the same foreshadowing
import as in the first instance of its use, even before the creation
of man. For, who must not conclude, when man was first placed in
paradise, that God did not as clearly see his apostasy then, as now?
By his wisdom, power, and mercy, all nature was ready-prepared for the
change, and poor fallen man, without change of habitation, found that
habitation no longer heaven, and commenced his first act of slavery by
the vain attempt to hide himself from God and his own contempt. And
here, let us remark, _we find the true commencement of slavery_. “And
Jesus answered them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whosoever
committeth sin is the _servant_ (δουλος, _slave_) of sin.” _John_
viii. 34. _Force_, _disease_, _ruin_, and _death_ were now introduced
to man. For, “A. _servant_ (עָ֑בֶד _slave_) will not be corrected by
words.” _Prov._ xxix. 19. God had mercifully contrived that he should
be forced to action. “He that _tilleth_ (עֹבֵ֣ד _slaveth_) of bread;
but he that followeth after vain persons shall have poverty enough.”
_Prov._ xxviii. 19. When God made “every plant of the field before it
was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew,”
foreseeing the apostasy of man—its poisonous effect upon his moral and
physical condition—its direct influence to produce immediate ruin and
death, he also provided, ordained, and decreed a relation, a law
between man and his mental and physical wants, which must cleave unto
him, upon his apostasy, and be of the utmost value and efficacy in
alleviating, removing, and preventing the final evils incident to his
poisoned condition. This relation, law, institution, was the
_ebeduth_, the _institution of slavery_, as expressed in _Ezra_ ix. 8,
9: “And give us a little reviving _in our bondage_ (עֲבדתנוּ
_ebeduthenu_, _slavery_). For we were _bond-men_ (עֲבָדִ֣ים _abedim_,
_slaves_), and yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage,”
עבדתנוּ. So in 2 _Chron._ xii. 8: “Nevertheless, ye shall be his
_servants_ (לעבדים _le-obedim_, his _slaves_), that they may know my
_service_ (עֲב֣וֹדָתִ֔י _slavery_), and the _service_ (וַֽעְבוֹדַ֖ת
_and the slavery_) of the kingdoms of the countries.” So in _Esther_
vii. 4: “For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be
slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for _bond-men_
(וְלִשְׁפָח֤וֹת לַֽעֲבָדִ֨ים) and bond-women, I had held my tongue.”


                           ------------------

                               LESSON X.

Towards the close of the book of Deuteronomy, Moses, having delivered to
the children of Israel such of the laws of the Almighty as were then
deemed necessary for their government and guidance, proceeds to inform
them of the consequences of disobedience; and boldly informs them,
xxviii. 15, “But, if it shall come to pass if thou wilt not hearken unto
the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and to do all his
commandments, and his statutes which I command thee this day, that all
these curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee. 16: Cursed shalt
thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field. 17: Cursed
shall be thy basket and thy store. 18: Cursed shall be the fruit of thy
body and the fruit of thy land, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks
of thy sheep. 19: Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed
shalt thou be when thou goest out. 20: The Lord shall send upon thee
cursing, vexation, and rebuke, in all thou settest thy hand unto for to
do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly, because of
the wickedness of thy doings whereby thou hast forsaken me.” “And the
Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way whereof I
spake unto thee. Thou shalt see it no more again, and there ye shall be
sold unto your enemies for _bond-men_ (לַֽעֲבָדִ֥ים( for _slaves_), and
bond-women, and no man shall buy you.” They should be so trifling and
worthless that no one would wish to buy them. _Josh._ ix. 23–27: “Now,
therefore, ye are cursed, and there shall none of you be freed from
being bond-men (עֶ֗בֶד _slaves_), and hewers of wood and drawers of
water,” &c. “And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of
water, for the congregation, and for the altar of the Lord, even unto
this day.”


                           ------------------

                               LESSON XI.

Before closing this subject we offer a few more examples of the Hebrew
use of this word. “Who is David? and who is the son of Jesse? There be
many _servants_ (עֲבָדִ֔ים _slaves_) now-a-days that break away every
man from his master.” 1 _Sam._ xxv. 10. Nabal pretended in his
drunkenness, that he might be a runaway _slave_. 1 _Kings_ ii. 29, 40:
“And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the
_servants_ (עֲבָדִים_ebedim_, _slaves_) of Shimei ran away unto Achish,
son of Maachah king of Gath; and they told Shimei, saying, Behold thy
_servants_ (עַבְדֶּךָ _slaves_) be in Gath. And Shimei arose and saddled
his ass, and went to Gath to Achish to seek his _servants_ (עֲבָדָיו
_slaves_), and Shimei went and brought his _servants_ (עֲבָדָ֖יו
_slaves_) from Gath.” 1 _Kings_ ix. 20, 21, and 22: “And all the people
that were left of the Amorites, Hittites, Perizzites, Hivites, and
Jebuzites, which were not of the children of Israel, their children that
were left after them in the land, whom the children of Israel also were
not able utterly to destroy, upon these did Solomon levy a tribute of
_bond-service_ (עָבֶד _obed_, _slavery_) unto this day. But of the
children of Israel did Solomon make no _bond-men_,” (עָבֶד _ebed_,
_slaves_.) 2 _Chron._ viii. 9: “But of the children of Israel did
Solomon make no _servants_ (לַֽעֲבָדִ֖ים _la ebedim_, no _slaves_) for
his work, (לִמְלַאכְתּ֑וֹ _his works_, _labours_.) But they were men of
war, and chief of his captains, and captains of his chariots and
horsemen.” 2 _Kings_ iv. 1: “Now there cried a certain woman of the
wives of the sons of the prophets unto Elisha, saying, Thy servant, my
husband, is dead, and thou knowest that thy servant did fear the Lord,
and the creditor is come to take unto him my two sons to be _bond-men_,”
(לַֽעֲבָדִ֖ים _la ebedim_, for _slaves_.) In 1 _Chron._ xxvii. 26, this
word is used in a sense quite analogous to slave-labour, thus: “And over
them that did the _work_ (_meleketh_, _i.e._ the particular work or
labour) of the field for _tillage_ (לַעֲבֹדַת _slave-labour_) of the
ground, was Ezra, the son of Chelub.” _Job_ i. 2, 3: “And there were
born unto him seven sons and three daughters. His substance also was
seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five thousand yoke
of oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and a very great _household_.” The
word “household” is here translated from וַֽעֲבֻדָּה a body of slaves,
_i. e._ a large family of slaves. _Job_ iii. 19: “The small and the
great are there, and the _servant_ (וְעֶבֶד _ve ebed_, master.” _Job_
xxxi. 13: “If I did _despise_ (מִשְׁפַּטַ _misjudge_) the cause of my
_man-servant_,” (עַֽבְדִּי my _slave_.) _Job_ xxxix. 9: “Will the
unicorn be willing to _serve_ thee?” (עָבְדֶךָ be a _slave_ to thee.)
_Ps._ cxvi. 16: “O Lord, truly I am thy _servant_ (עַבְדֶךָ _obedeka_,
_slave_); I am thy _servant_ (עַבְדֶּךָ _slave_), and the son of thy
_hand-maid_ (אֲמָתֶ֑ךָ _amatheka_, _female slave_): thou hast loosed my
bonds.” It is a little remarkable how similar is this sentiment of David
to one expressed by St. Paul. _Prov._ xii. 9: “He that is despised and
hath a _servant_ (עֶבֶד _ebed_, _slave_) is better than he that
honoureth himself and lacketh bread.” _Prov._ xvii. 2: “A wise _servant_
(עֶבֶד _ebed_, _slave_), shall rule over a son that causeth shame, and
shall have part of the inheritance among the brethren.” _Prov._ xxx. 21,
22, 23: “For three things is the earth disquieted, and for four which it
cannot bear: For a _servant_ (עֶבֶד _ebed_, _slave_) when he _reigneth_
(יִמְ֑לוֹךְ _imlok_), and a fool when he is filled with meat. For an
odious woman when she is married, and a _hand-maid_ (וְשִׁפְחָה _female
slave_) that is heir to her mistress.” _Eccl._ ii. 7. “_I got me_
(קָנִ֨יתִי _kanithi_, _I purchased_) _servants_ (עֲבָדִ֣ים _male
slaves_) and _maidens_ (וּשְׁפָח֔וֹת _female slaves_), and had servants
born in my house.” _Eccl._ vii. 21: “Also take no heed unto all words
that are spoken, lest thou hear thy _servant_ (עַבְדְךָ _slave_) curse
thee.” _Jer._ ii. 14: “Is Israel a _servant_ (הָעֶבֶד _slave_)? is he a
home-born _slave_? why is he spoiled?” In the latter part of this
quotation, the word עבד _ebed_ is not expressed in Hebrew, but
_understood_, as is often the case in English: yet King James’s
translators did not hesitate to supply it in English with the word
_slave_, giving indisputable proof of what they understood the word
_ebed_ to mean, and also, that they used the English word _servant_ as a
synonyme of the word _slave_. The omission to express the word עֻבֶד
_ebed_ in Hebrew, in this instance, has the effect to make the idea
conveyed by the prophet more emphatic; and hence the translators seem to
have felt the necessity of using the most forcible synonyme, in order
that they might truly and beyond doubt convey the full import of the
prophet’s meaning. _Mal._ i. 6: “A son honoureth his father, and a
_servant_ (וְעֶ֣בֶד _slave_) his master.” This passage is a connecting
link in a chain of reasoning, and the prophet continues thus: “If then I
be a father, where is my honour? If I be a _master_, where is my fear?
saith the Lord of hosts unto you, O priests that despise my name. And ye
say, Wherein have we despised thy name?” As though they were astonished
at the accusation! And this is the answer—7: “Ye offer polluted bread
upon mine altar.” A figure, to show that they had become wholly
disobedient, and held in disregard the law of God. By their
disobedience, they were degenerating from the condition of the son to
that of the _ebed_. Instead of being influenced by love, they were about
to be operated upon by fear, and hence the prophet continues, ii. 1:
“And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you. If ye will not
hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory unto my name,
saith the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and I will
curse your blessings, yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not
lay it to heart. 3: Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung
upon your faces.” He would curse them with the hateful curse of Cain.
And we beg to notice this scriptural glancing at the doctrine that a
course of sin does produce some change upon the physical man,—some
change of countenance, which is continued, degenerating and
deteriorating the succeeding generations,—and ask, is not such a
doctrine alluded to in _Ezek._ xviii. 2, “The fathers have eaten sour
grapes, and the children’s teeth are set on edge.” And, again, in _Ps._
lviii. 2, 3: “The wicked are estranged from the womb: they go astray as
soon as they are born, speaking lies. Their poison is like the poison of
a serpent.” Again, in _Jer._ vii. 19: “Do they provoke me to anger?
saith the Lord. Do they not provoke themselves to the confusion of their
own faces?” And, in _Isa._ iii. 9: “The show of their countenance doth
witness against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom. They hide it
not. Wo unto their soul! for they have rewarded evil unto themselves.”
_Jer._ xiii. 22: “If thou say in thy heart, wherefore have these things
come upon me? for the greatness of thine iniquities are thy skirts
discovered and thy heels made bare.” And ii. 22: “For though thou wash
thee with nitre, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked
before me, saith the Lord God.” We will not enter into the examination
of this doctrine at present, but hasten to close our view of the Hebrew
use of the word עבד _ebed_. In _Joel_ iii. 2 (ii. 29th of the English
text) is this remarkable passage: “And also upon the _servants_
(הָֽעֲבָדִ֖ים _ha ebedim_, the _male slaves_) and upon the _hand-maids_
(הַשְּׁפָח֑וֹת _hashshephahoth_, the _female slaves_) in those days will
I pour out my Spirit.” This passage was translated at Jerusalem by St.
Peter, into Greek. See _Acts_ ii. 18: “And on my _servants_, and _on my
hand-maids_ (δουλους και επι τας δουλας), will I pour out in those days
my Spirit,”—using those Greek words that most unconditionally mean a
_slave_, and showing as effectually as language can show, and proving as
distinctly as language can prove, that St. Peter well understood these
words of Joel to mean _male_ and _female slaves_. He translates the
passage, referring to it, and quoting it. There can have been no
mistake. Besides, the passage is rendered definite by its particularity;
for the preceding sentence avers that his Spirit should be poured out
“upon all flesh,” and goes on to particularize, “your sons” and
“daughters,” “your old men,” “your young men,” and then in this passage
includes the _slaves_, thus explaining whom he means by “all flesh.” It
was on the day of Pentecost, when the disciples of Jesus Christ “were
all with one accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from
heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where
they were sitting; and there appeared upon them cloven tongues like as
of fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all filled with the
Holy Ghost.” _Acts_ ii. 1, 2, 3.

Such were the circumstances under which this translation was made—just
after the death of Jesus Christ. Circumstances more solemn, more
imposing, more awful to the human mind cannot well be conceived. In the
immediate presence of God the Father, and the Holy Ghost operating upon
the mind of St. Peter!! Should any one, timorous, decline to believe
men, or mortals, permit us, in the name of that Jehovah whose work we
all are, to call their reflection on what may be the nature of that sin
which contemns, denies, or treats as untruth the very language of the
Holy Ghost.


                           ------------------

                              LESSON XII.

The Hebrew noun _ebed_ belongs to the declension of _factitious_,
_euphonic segholate_ nouns of two syllables, with the tone on the penult
and a furtive vowel on the final:

          _Singular absolute._            _Construct state._
              עָ֑בֶד  or עֶבֶד                        עֶבֶד

          _With light suffix._             _Grave suffix._
                  עַבְדִי                          עַבְדְכֶם

           _Plural absolute._             _Construct state._
                 עֲבָדִים                           עַבְדֵי

          _With light suffix._            _Grave suffix._[1]
                  עֲבָדַי                          עַבְדֵיכֶם

-----

Footnote 1:

  Termed grave, because they always have the tone accent.

-----

Declined with the personal pronoun, thus:

    _Absolute_ _singular_,             עֶבֶד _a slave_.
       _Suff._ 1.                    עַבְדִי _my slave_.
               2. m.                 עַבְדְּךָ _thy slave_.
               2. f.                 עַבְדְךְ _thy slave_.
               3. m.                 עַכְדְּךָ _his slave_.
               3. f.                 עַבְדָהּ _her slave_.
               1. (plur.)           עַבְדֵנוּ _our slave_.
               2. m.                עַבְדְכֶם _your slave_.
               2. f.                עַבְדְכֶך _your slave_.
               3. m.                 עַבְדָם _their slave_.
               3. f.                 עַבְדָך _their slave_.
    _Absolute_ _plural_,            עֲבָדִים _slaves_.
       _Suff._ 1.                    עֲבָדַי _my slaves_.
               2. m.                עֲבָדֶיךָ _thy slaves_.
               2. f.                עֲבָדַיִךְ _thy slaves_.
               3. m.                עֲבָדָיו _his slaves_.
               3. f.                עֲבָדֶיהָ _her slaves_.
               1. (plur.)          עֲבָדֵינוּ _our slaves_.
               2. m.               עֲבָדֵיכֶם _your slaves_.
               2. f.               עֲבְדֵיכֶן _your slaves_.
               3. m.               עַבְדֵיהֶם _their slaves_.
               3. f.               עַבְדֵיהֶן _their slaves_.

Prefixed by a preposition, it will stand thus: בְּעבד _in_, _at_,
_with_, &c. a slave; or with ל thus, לְעבד _to_, _at_, _in_, _towards_,
_till_, _until_, &c. a slave; or, when the word עבד is used as a verb,
it will stand in place of our infinitive mood, thus, לַֽעֲבֹ֨ד _to
slave_, as in _Num._ iv. 47. So this word עבד or any form of it may be
prefixed by מ as a contraction of ןמ, a preposition of various meanings
or applications, as _from_, _apart from_, _of_, _out of_, _by_, &c. &c.;
and so it may be prefixed by any of the letters הֶ֥אֱמַנְתִּ֖י forming
the word _heemanti_, each prefixed letter giving to the _root word_ some
shade of meaning, emphasis, or adjective quality. So, also, it may be
prefixed by כּ, used both as a preposition, and as a conjunction, thus,
כִּעָבֶד _as_, _so_, _according to_, _after_, _about_, _nearly_,
_almost_, &c. &c. _a slave_. Hebrew nouns may also be prefixed by
particles of old obsolete words, varying their form, and exceedingly so
their phonetic representation; as for example, שְׁלֹמֹה _Shelomah_ was
the son and successor of King David. Now שׁ, as the particle of some
ancient word, and followed by ל, becomes the sign of the possessive
case; but when the word begins with these two letters, they then will be
duplicated, as in _Canticles_ iii. 7, מִטָתוֹ שֶׁלִּשְׁלֹמֹה _mittatho
shellishlomoh_, _Solomon’s bed_, &c.

Prepositions, sometimes two or more, are, or seem to be, compounded, yet
used in the sense of the last in the compound, thus: מִן and עַל used
thus, מֵעַל for עַל, or לְמִן for מִן, &c. &c.

The noun עֶבֶד _ebed_ may also be prefixed by a conjunction, thus, וְעבד
_and a slave_, &c. &c.

It may also often be compounded with other nouns. Thus, עֹבַדְיָהו _the
slave of God_. In this manner the composition of significant terms, and
their conversion into proper names, is unlimited: thus, עַבְדּוֹן _the
judgment_, or _government of a slave_, and made the name of a city. See
_Josh._ ii. 30; also 1 _Chron._ i. 59, the 74th of the English text; and
hence the word _abaddon_ has been used by some to signify a place of
punishment. We can give but a mere sketch of the grammatical formations
and variations of the word _ebed_; aware that even such sketch, can be
considered of value only by a few, we refrain from even a glimpse of its
phonetic variations and peculiarities, deeming them only interesting to
the advanced and more critical of the proficients in the language; but
we cannot refrain from giving a sketch of its declension as a verb, for
the benefit of the Greek and Roman scholar.

Conjugation of the word עָבַד as a verb, _to slave_, &c.

                                IN KAL.
     _Praet._                3. p. m.                           עָבַד
                             3. f.                             עָֽבָדָהּ
                             2. m.                             עָֽבַדְתָּ
                             3. (plur.)                        עָֽבְדוּ
                             2. m.                            עָבַדְתֶּם
     _Infinitive absolute_,                                    עָבוֹד
     _Construct state_,                                         עֲבֹד
     _Future_,               3. m.                             יַעֲבֹד
                             2. m.                             תַּעֲבד
                             3. (plur.)                       יַעַבְדוּ
                             3. f.                           תַּעֲבֹדְנָה
     _Imperative_,           2. p. m.                           עֲבֹד
                             2. f.                             עבְדִי
     _Participle_,           _act._                            עוֹבֵד
                             _pass._                           עָבוּד

                                NIPHAL.
     _Praet._                3. m.                             נֶעֱבַד
                             2. m.                            נֶעֱבַ֫דְתָּ
     _Infinitive_,                                             הֵעָבֵד
     _Future_,                                                 יֵעָבֵד
     _Imperative_,                                             הֵעָבֵד
     _Participle_,                                             נֶעֱבָד

                        PIEL, (_poel_, _polel_.)

     _Praet._                                                   עִבֵּד
     _Infinitive_,                                              עַבֵּד
     _Future_,                                                 יְעַבֵּד
     _Participle_,                                             מְעַבֵּד

                        PUAL, (_poal_, _polal_.)

     _Praet._                                                   עֻבַּד
     _Infinitive_,                                              עֻבַּד
     _Future_,                                                 יְעֻבַּד
     _Participle_,                                             מְעֻבָּד

                                HIPHIL.

     _Praet._                                                 הֶעֱבִיד
                             2. m.                            הֶעֱבַ֫דְתָּ
     _Infinitive_,                                            הַעֲבִיד
     _Future_,                                                יַעֲבִיד
     _Participle_,                                            מַעֲבִיד

                                HOPHAL.

     _Praet._                                                  הָעֳבַד
     _Infinitive_,                                             הָעֳבַד
     _Future_,                                                 יָעֳבַד
     _Participle_,                                             מָעֳבָד

                               HITHPAEL.

     _Praet._                                                 הִתְעַבֵּד
     _Infinitive_,                                            הִתְעַבֵּד
     _Future_,                                                יִתְעַבֵּד
     _Participle_,                                            מִתְעַבֵּד

The unusual conjugations sometimes found in the form of some Hebrew
words, _hothpaal_, _pilel_, _pulal_, _hithpalel_, and the Arabic
_iq-talla_, _pealal_, _pilpel_, and the Aramaen _tiphel_, and the Syriac
_shaphel_, are not known to the writer to have an example in the Hebrew
Scriptures in the word עבד, and are therefore not exemplified.

Paradigm of the verb עָבַד _to slave_, as a 1. guttural in KAL.

    _Praeter_,              _singular_,  3. m.                  עָבַֽד
                                         3. f.                 עָֽבְדָֽה
                                         2. m.                 עָבַֽדְתָּ
                                         2. f.                 עָבַֽדְתְּ
                                         1. com.              עָבַֽדְתִּי
                            _Plural_,    3. com.               עָֽבְדֽוּ
                                         2. m.                עֲבַדְתֶּם
                                         2. f.                עֲבַדְתֶּֽן
                                         1. com.              עָבַֽדְנוּ
    _Infinitive absolute_,                                     עָבֽוֹד
    _Infinitive construct_,                                     עֲבֹ֖ד
    _Imperative_,           _singular_,  m.                     עֲבֹ֥ד
                                         f.                    עִבְדִֽי
                            _Plural_,    m.                    עִבְד֖וּ
                                         f.                   עֲבֹֽדְנָה
    _Present_,              _singular_,  3. m.                 יַֽעֲבֹֽד
                                         3. f.                 תַּ֥עֲבֹֽד
                                         2. m.                 תַּ֖עֲבֹֽד
                                         2. f.                תַּ֖עַבְדִ֖י
                                         1. com.               אֶֽעֱבֹֽד
                            _Plural_,    3. m.                יַעַֽבְדֽוּ
                                         3. f.               תַּֽעֲבֹֽדְנָה
                                         2. m.                תַּ֖עַבְדוּ
                                         2. f.               תַּ֖עֲבֹֽדְנָה
                                         1. com.               נַֽעֲבָֹד
    _Pres. apocope_,                                           יַֽעֲבֽד
    _Participle_,                        _active_,              עֹבֵד
                                         _passive_,            עָבֽוּד

Paradigm of the verb עבד _to slave_, as a 1. guttural in NIPHAL.

    _Praeter_,              _singular_,  3. m.                 נֶֽעֱבַֽד
                                         3. f.                נֶ֖עֶבְדָ֖ה
                                         2. m.                נֶֽעֱבַ֖דְתָּ
                                         2. f.                נֶֽעֱבַ֖דְתְּ
                                         1. com.             נֶ֖עֱבַֽדְתִּי
                            _Plural_,    3. com.              נֶֽעֶבְד֭וּ
                                         2. m.               נֶֽעֱבַדְתֶּם
                                         2. f.               נֶֽעֱבַדְתֶּן
                                         1. com.             נֶֽעֱבַדְנוּ
    _Infinitive_,                                              הֵּעָבֵֽד
    _Imperative_,           _singular_,  m.                    הֵעָבֵ֖ד
                                         f.                   הֵעָ֖בְדִֽי
                            _Plural_,    m.                   הֵֽעָ֖בְדֽוּ
                                         f.                  הֵעָבֵ֖דְנָה
    _Present_,              _singular_,  3. m.                 יֵעָבֵֽד
                                         3. f.                 הֵּעָבֵֽד
                                         2. m.                 תֵּעָבֵֽד
                                         2. f.                תֵּעָֽבְדִ֖י
                                         1. com.               אֵעָֽבֵֽד
                            _Plural_,    3. m.                יֵעָֽבְדֽוּ
                                         3. f.               תּעָֽבֵ֖דְנָה
                                         2. m.                תֵּעָֽבְד֭וּ
                                         2. f.               תֵּ֥עָבֵדְנָה
                                         1. com.               נֵעָבֵ֖ד
    _Participle_,                                              נֶֽעֱבָֽד

Paradigm of the verb עבד _to slave_, as a 1. guttural in PIHEL or
_piel_, (_poel_, _polel_.)

    _Praeter_,              _singular_,  3. m.                  עִבֵּ֖ד
                                         3. f.                 עִבַּדָה
                                         2. m.                 עִבַּדְתָּ
                                         2. f.                 עִבַּדְתְּ
                                         1. com.              עִבַּדְתִּי
                            _Plural_,    3. com.               עִבְּדֽוּ
                                         2. m.                עִבַּדְתֶּם
                                         2. f.                עִבַּדתֶּן
                                         1. com.              עִבַּדְנוּ
    _Infinitive_,                                               עַבֵּד
    _Imperative_,           _singular_,  m.                     עַבֵּֽד
                                         f.                    עַבְּדִי
                            _Plural_,    m.                    עבּדוּ
                                         f.                   עַבֵּדְנָה
    _Present_,              _singular_,  3. m.                 יְעַבֵּֽד
                                         3. f.                 תּעַבֵּד
                                         2. m.                 תְּעַבֵּד
                                         2. f.                 תְּעַבֵּֽד
                                         1. com.               אֲעַבֵּֽד
                            _Plural_,    3. m.                יְעַבְדֽוּ
                                         3. f.               תְּעַבֵּדְנָה
                                         2. m.                תְּעַבֵּדֽוּ
                                         2. f.               תְּעַבֵּדְנָה
                                         1. com.               נְעַבֵּ֖ד
    _Participle_,                                              מְעַבֵּד

Paradigm of the verb עבד _to slave_, as a 1. guttural in PUHAL, (_pual_,
_poal_, _polal_.)

    _Praeter_,              _singular_,  3. m.                  עֻבַּד
                                         3. f.                 עֻבְּדָֽה
                                         2. m.                 עֻבַּדְתָּ
                                         2. f.                 עֻבַּֽדְתְּ
                                         1. com.              עֻבַּֽדְתִּי
                            _Plural_,    3. com.               עֻבְּדוּ
                                         2. m.                עֻבַּדְתֶּֽם
                                         2. f.                עֻבַּדְתֶּן
                                         1. com.              עֻבַּֽדְנוּ
    _Infinitive_,                                               עֻבַּֽד
    _Present_,              _singular_,  3. m.                 יְעֻבַּד
                                         3. f.                 תְּעֻבַּֽד
                                         2. m.                 תְּעֻבַּֽד
                                         2. f.                תְּעַבּדִי
                                         1. com.               אֲעֻבַּֽד
                            _Plural_,    3. m.                יְעֻבְּדֽוּ
                                         3. f.               תְּעֻבְּדֽנָה
                                         2. m.                תְּעֻבְּדֽוּ
                                         2. f.                תְּעֻבַּֽנָה
                                         1. com.               נְעֻבַּֽד
    _Participle_,                                              מְעֻבַּֽד

Paradigm of the verb עבד _to slave_, as a 1. guttural in HIPHIL.

    _Praeter_,              _singular_,  3. m.                הֶֽעֱבִֽיד
                                         3. f.               הֶֽעֱבִידָה
                                         2. m.                הֶֽעֱבַֽדְתָּ
                                         2. f.                הֶֽעֱבַֽדְתְּ
                                         1. com.             הֶֽעֱבַֽדְתִּי
                            _Plural_,    3. com.             הֶעֱבִֽידוּ
                                         2. m.               הֶעֱבַדְתֶּם
                                         2. f.               הֶעֱבַדְתֶּן
                                         1. com.             הֶעֱבַדְנוּ
    _Infinitive_,                                             הַֽעֲבִֽיד
    _Imperative_,           _singular_,  m.                    הַֽעֲבֵֽד
                                         f.                  הַֽעֲבִֽידִי
                            _Plural_,    m.                  הַֽעֲבִֽידוּ
                                         f.                  הַֽעֲבֵדְנָה
    _Present_,              _singular_,  3. m.                יַֽעֲבִֽיד
                                         3. f.                תַּֽעֲבִֽיד
                                         2. m.                תַּעֲבִֽיד
                                         2. f.               תַּֽעֲבִֽידִי
                                         1. com.              אַֽעֲבִֽיד
                            _Plural_,    3. m.               יַֽעֲבִֽידוּ
                                         3. f.               תַּֽעֲבֵֽדְנָה
                                         2. m.               תַּֽעֲבִֽידוּ
                                         2. f.               תַּֽעֲבֵדְנָה
                                         1. com.              נַעֲבִֽיד
    _Pres. apocope_,                                           יַֽעֲבֵד
    _Participle_,                                             מַֽעֲבִֽיד

Paradigm of the verb עבד _to slave_, as a 1. guttural in HOPHAL.

    _Praeter_,              _singular_,  3. m.                 הָעֳבַֽד
                                         3. f.                הָֽעָבְדָֽה
                                         2. m.                הַֽעֳבַֽדְתָּ
                                         2. f.                הָֽעֳבַֽדְתְּ
                                         1. com.             הָֽעֳבַֽדְתִּי
                            _Plural_,    3. com.              הָֽעָבִדֽוּ
                                         2. m.               הָֽעֳבַדְתֶּם
                                         2. f.               הָֽעֳבַדְתֶּן
                                         1. com.             הָֽעֳבַֽדְנוּ
    _Infinitive_,                                              הָֽעֳבַֽד
    _Present_,              _singular_,  3. m.                 יָֽעֳבַֽד
                                         3. f.                 תָּעֳבַד
                                         2. m.                 תָּעֳבַד
                                         2. f.                תָּֽעָבְֽדִי
                                         1. com.               אָֽעֳבַֽד
                            _Plural_,    3. m.                יָֽעָבְדֽוּ
                                         3. f.               תָּֽעֳבַֽדְנָה
                                         2. m.                הָּֽעָבְדוּ
                                         2. f.               הָּֽעֳבַֽדְנָה
                                         1. com.               נָֽעֳבַֽד
    _Participle_,                                              מָֽעֳבָֽד

Paradigm of the verb עבד _to slave_, as a 1. guttural in HITHPAEL.

    _Praeter_,              _singular_,  3. m.                הִתְעַבַּד
                                         3. f.               הִתְעַבְּדָה
                                         2. m.               הִתְעַבַּדְתָּ
                                         2. f.               הִתְעַבַּדְתְּ
                                         1. com.            הִתְעַבַּדְתִּי
                            _Plural_,    3. com.             הִתְעַבְּדוּ
                                         2. m.              הִתְעַבַּדְתֶּם
                                         2. f.              הִתְעַבְּדְתֶּן
                                         1. com.            הִתְעַבַּדְנוּ
    _Infinitive_,                                             הִתְעַבֵּד
    _Imperative_,           _singular_,  m.                   הִתְעַבֵּד
                                         f.                  הִתְעַבְּדִי
                            _Plural_,    m.                  הִתְעַבְּדוּ
                                         f.                 הִתְעַבֵּדְנָה
    _Present_,              _singular_,  3. m.                הִתְעַבֵּד
                                         3. f.                תִּתְעַבֵּד
                                         2. m.                תִּתְעַבֵּד
                                         2. f.               תִּתְעַבְּדִי
                                         1. com.              אֶתְעַבֵּד
    _Present_,              _plural_,    3. m.               יִתְעַבֵּדוּ
                                         3. f.              תִּתְעַבֵּדְנָה
                                         2. m.               תִּתְעַבְּדוּ
                                         2. f.              תִּתְעַבֵּדְנָה
                                         1. com.              נִתְעַבֵּֽד
    _Participle_,                                             מִתְעַבֵּד

In close, it may be remarked that there is perhaps no Hebrew verb found
in all the forms of conjugation in the Holy Books.

                                THE END.




                        -----------------------

                           Transcriber’s Note

Errors which are readily attributed to printer’s lapses have been
corrected, as noted below. There are a number of lapses in the
punctuation of quoted matter, which have been rectified as described in
the table below. Spelling has been retained, except where the printer
seems most likely to be at fault.

Greek words are sometimes given without diacritical marks including in
quoted passages, or the marks are incorrect, based upon what we now have
for the Greek sources. The Greek is given here as printed.

The Greek ‘ou’ ligature is represented here using the Latin version ‘ȣ’.

Likewise, the typesetting of Hebrew is problematic in many places,
particularly with the use of cantillation marks (tropes). In most
cases, cantillation for single words or phrases are moot, but the
author frequently includes them, not always accurately. Where modern
fonts are unable to represent the printed characters, or where the
typesetting was faulty, the text will follow the currently accepted
forms. Vowel marks are sometimes omitted in the original, and are
given here as printed. <span class='htmlonly'>The combination
hataf-patah is frequently reversed, and has been corrected everywhere
with no further notice. Likewise, the printer seems to have frequently
confused the trope merkha with the vowel point meteg, i.e. יְשָׁ֥רְתוּ
for יְשָֽׁרְתוּ. The standard Hebrew has been followed here, as noted
below.</span> <span class='epubonly'>In this version, bidirectional
text cannot be reliably rendered. The author provided a
transliteration of most of the Hebrew words and phrases; however a
separate transliteration has been included here based on the scheme
provided by the Society of Biblical Literature. These appear in bold
as =yĕšārĕtû=. These transliterations necessarily lose the
cantillation marks. (The same has been done for the Arabic and Syriac
words, which are also printed right-to-left.)</span>

On p. 461, the Hebrew word בּוּת requires the vav as printed be a shuruk
(וּ) to be read as a vowel 'û'. The character was printed without the
dot, and is corrected here.

Arabic, Coptic, and Syriac scripts are rendered using the available
Unicode characters. The script used by the author frequently could not
be confirmed to match either the stated translations or the
transliterations he provided. The Syriac script seems to be the
so-called Western script. The Unicode characters follow the Estrangela,
which was most widely used. Many of the Arabic words were either
unrecognizable, did not match the transliterations given by the author,
or both. Best guesses of the author’s intent are provided in the text.

On p. 390, the Arabic word which appears to be متصُعَادࣨ <il
arabic_metsuad_390.jpg/>, seems incorrect. The most likely word is
مِصعادٌ, which has the meaning given by the author. This has been
substituted.

On p. 592, the maqqef (־) in בַּתבְּלִיָּ־עַל is misplaced. The word,
from 1. _Samuel_ i. 16, should be בַּת־בְּלִיַּעַל, and has been corrected.

On p. 620, the Arabic غظنٌ does not exist; the
author may have intended either عَدْنٌ which means Eden or غَدَن, which
means languor, softness, limpness. etc. The former was used here.

Problematic cases with the original images and their replication here,
are given below:

On p. 95, the quoted phrase from Ephesians 6:5, ‘And ye masters, do the
_same things_ unto them;[’], is missing the closing single quotation
mark. The words which follow the semicolon seem to be a paraphrase. The
punctuation has been added.

On p. 141, the paragraph beginning ‘In _Judg._ iii. 7, 8, we have as
follows:’ has an unclosed double quotation. It is not clear where the
citation ends, and the text has been given here as printed.

On p. 486, the citation of Jeremiah li. 55 is misprinted as verse 15.
Immediately following, the first of two citations of Isaiah li. 13
should have been to verse 15. These have been corrected. The second
reference to verse 13 is correct.

In Lesson IV of Study VII (pp. 516–536), the punctuation of the extracts
is inconsistent, and, with just a few exceptions noted below, has been
retained as printed.

On p. 630, the Praet. 2 m. conjugation of עבד is printed as עְָבַדְתָּ,
which is an invalid combination of vowel marks on the leading ayin.
Either עָֽבַדְתָּ or עֳבַדְתָּ would be valid.

         p. 10 Acorimus                            _sic._ Acosimus
                                                   (p. 332).

         p. 16 legis[l]ator                        Added.

        p. 117 and heal his _servant_ (δοῦλον,     Added.
               _slave_.)[”]

               “And he called his ten _servants_   Added.
               (δοῦλους, _slaves_),[”] &c.

               Ye shall be made free?[”]           Added.

        p. 119 commo[m/n]wealth                    Corrected.

        p. 122 co[m/n]formity                      Corrected.

        p. 125 [“]And when the hand of thy God     Opening quote
                                                   added.

        p. 130 “For,[”] says Olybius               Missing quotation
                                                   mark added.

        p. 131 multit[i]utudes                     Removed.

        p. 141 the hand of _Chusan Rishathaim_,    Added.
               (כּוּשָׁן רִשְׁעֲתַיִם )[”]

        p. 151 of four o[f/r] five years old       Corrected.

        p. 183 property is an exclusive right.[”]  Added.

        p. 184 to the former.[”]                   Added.

        p. 201 “I[s/t] is the great appointed      Corrected.
               trial

        p. 251 “Their visage is blacker than a     Corrected.
               coal.[’/”]

        p. 267 shows the [“]sentence               Removed.

        p. 390 רֶנּל should be  רֶגּל                  Corrected.

        p. 405 “the spiritual power,[”]            Added.

        p. 436 “He should be a fugitive and a      Added.
               vagabond.[”]

        p. 437 become black.[’/”]                  Corrected.

        p. 439 Egypt[ai/ia]ns                      Transposed.

        p. 451 di[c/s]tinct                        Corrected.

        p. 456 offered infants and young children  _sic._ ‘as’
               [a] sacrifice.                      missing?

        p. 465 (מִצְרִ֖ית _Mitsrith_[)] a              Removed.
               descendant of Misraim,)

        p. 475 سُليْمَنࣨ should be  شُليْمَنࣨ              Corrected.

        p. 484 co[n]gnisance                       Removed.

        p. 485 œstus                               _sic._ œstrus?
                                                   castus?

        p. 486 li. [15/55] “When her waves do roar Corrected.

               Isa. li. [13/15]: “But I am the     Corrected.
               Lord...

        p. 487 _Jer._ [xliv/xlvi].                 Corrected.

        p. 530 “Such the slave’s nature, but this  Corrected.
               favours thee.[’/”]

        p. 593 _L[e/a]m._iii. 13.                  Corrected.

        p. 597 עָ֣מְׄלָה עָ֭מֵל                            _sic._ Words are
                                                   reversed.

        p. 600 _Ps._ lxxxi. 7[0]: “I delivered     ‘0’ removed.
               מִסֶּ֣בֶל thee.”

        p. 602 וַיִּ֥שְׁתַּ֥חֲוְוּ should be  וַיִּ֥שְׁתַּ֥חֲוֽוּ          Corrected.

        p. 610 יַעֲבַֹ֥ד should be  יַֽעֲבֹ֥ד                Corrected.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Studies on Slavery, in Easy Lessons, by 
John Fletcher

