III

THE EARLIEST CHAPTERS IN DIVINE REVELATION

[Sidenote: _The nature of inspiration_]

Since the days of the Greek philosophers the subject of inspiration and
revelation has been fertile theme for discussion and dispute among
scholars and theologians. Many different theories have been advanced,
and ultimately abandoned as untenable. In its simplest meaning and use,
inspiration describes the personal influence of one individual upon the
mind and spirit of another. Thus we often say, "That man inspired me."
What we are or do under the influence of that intellectual or spiritual
impulse is the effect and evidence of the inspiration. Similarly, divine
inspiration is the influence of God's spirit or personality upon the
mind and spirit of man. It may find expression in an exalted emotional
state, in an heightened clarity of mental perception, in noble deeds, in
the development of character, indeed in a great variety of ways; but its
seat is always the mind of man and its ultimate cause the Deity himself.

[Sidenote: _In the Old Testament_]

The early Old Testament expression most commonly used to describe
inspiration was that _the Spirit of God rushed upon the man_, as it did
upon Saul, causing him to burst forth into religious ecstasy or frenzy
(I Sam. x. 6, 10), and upon Samson, giving him great bodily strength or
prowess in war (Judg. xiv. 6, 19, xv. 14). Skill in interpreting dreams
and in ruling was also regarded as evidence that the Spirit of God was
in a man like Joseph (Gen. xli. 38); but above all the prophetic gift
was looked upon as the supreme evidence of the presence of the Spirit of
Jehovah (Hos. ix. 1; Micah ii. 7, iii. 8). The word _spirit_ as thus
used in the Old Testament is exceedingly suggestive. It means primarily
the breath, that comes from the nostrils. Though invisible to the eye,
the breath was in the thought of primitive man the symbol of the active
life of the individual. In the full vigor of bodily strength or in
violent exercise it came quick and strong; in times of weakness it was
faint; when it disappeared, death ensued; the living personality was
gone, and only the play remained. The same Hebrew word, _rúach_,
described the wind--unseen, intangible, and yet one of the most real and
irresistible forces in all the universe. Thus it was a supremely
appropriate term to describe the activity of God, as it produced visible
effects in the minds and lives of men. In the later Old Testament
literature its use was extended, so that to the Spirit of God was
ascribed activity in the natural world and in human history.

[Sidenote: _Nature of revelation_]

Of the two terms, _revelation_ is broader than _inspiration_. Sometimes
it is used collectively, to designate the truth revealed, but it more
properly describes the means or process whereby it is made apparent to
the human mind. It implies that truth is always existent, but only
gradually recognized. Inspiration is one of the chief means whereby the
human vision is clarified so as to perceive it. Natural phenomena,
environment, and above all experience, are also mighty agents in making
the divine character and truth clear to the mind of man. The author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews declares, with true insight, that _God spoke
in divers manners_. All the universe, all history, and all life reveal
him and his ultimate truths, for each is effective in opening the mental
and spiritual eye of man to see the realm long awaiting him as
conqueror.

[Sidenote: _Man's role in the process of revelation_]

For countless ages electricity has inscribed its magic tracery on the
storm-cloud and performed its all-important functions in organic life,
but not until men's eyes were opened by experience and trained
observation to recognize its laws, was it practically applied to the
needs of civilization. Similarly, unchanging moral and spiritual laws
have existed through all time, but they have not become operative in
human life until the eye of some seer is opened by a great experience,
or under the direct influence of the Spirit of God he is led to see and
proclaim them. Thus God is in all and reveals himself through all nature
and life, but it is only through the mind and on the lips of his highest
creature, man, that truth is fully appreciated, formulated, and applied.

[Sidenote: _The revelation recorded in the Bible_]

In the broader sense all revelation is divine, for it reveals God and
his laws; and yet it is obvious that there is a real difference between
the revelation recorded in a scientific book and that of the Bible. It
is a difference both in subject-matter and in the ends to which the
truth thus made manifest shall be applied. The one relates to the
objective world, the world of things; the other relates to human
beliefs, emotions, and acts.

[Sidenote: _Its breadth and gradualness_]

Moreover, it is evident that the spiritual revelation which is in part
recorded in the Bible was not limited to the Israelitish race or to the
twelve centuries represented by the Old and New Testaments. The biblical
writers themselves assume this fact. According to the early Judean
prophetic narratives, Enoch, who lived ages before Abraham and Moses,
was a worshipper of Jehovah (Gen. iv. 26). Cain and Abel are both
represented in the familiar story of Genesis iv., as bringing their
offerings to Jehovah. One of the chief teachings of the earliest stories
in the Old Testament is that men from the first knew and worshipped God
and were held responsible for their acts according to their moral
enlightenment. History, science, and the Bible unite in testifying that
the revelation of spiritual truth to mankind was something gradual,
progressive, and cumulative; also that it is dependent upon the ability
of men to receive it. This capacity of the individual to receive is,
after all, the determining factor in the process of divine revelation;
for God's truth and his desire to impart it are always the same. Hence,
whenever conditions favor, or national or private experiences clarify
the vision of a race or group of men, a revelation is assured.

[Sidenote: _Antiquity of human civilization and religion_]

In the light of ancient history and the result of recent excavations it
is possible, now as never before, to study the varied influences and
forces employed by God in the past to open the spiritual eyes of mankind
to see him and his truth. The geological evidence suggests that man, as
man, has lived on this earth, fifty, perhaps one hundred thousand years.
Anthropology, going farther back than history or primitive tradition,
traces the slow and painful stages by which early man learned his first
lessons in civilization and religion. From the beginning, man's
instincts as a religious being have asserted themselves, crude though
their expression was. The oldest mounds of Babylonia and Egypt contain
ruins of ancient temples, altars, and abundant evidence of the religious
zeal of the peoples who once inhabited these lauds. The earliest
examples of human literature thus far discovered are largely religious
in theme and spirit.

[Sidenote: _Primitive unfolding of the innate religious instinct_]

All these testify that early man believed in a power or powers outside
himself, and that his chief passion was to know and do the will of his
god or gods. Jesus himself bore witness in the opening words of the
prayer which he taught his disciples, that this is the essence of
religion. It was natural and inevitable that primitive man, with his
naive view of the universe, should believe not in one but in many forces
or spirits, and that he should first enthrone the physical above the
ethical and spiritual. It is the instinctive tendency of the child
to-day. The later identification of the divine powers with the sun, that
gave light and fertility to the soil, or with the moon, that guided the
caravans by night over the arid deserts, or with the other heavenly
bodies, that moved in majestic array across the midnight sky, was
likewise a natural step in the evolution of primitive belief.

[Sidenote: _Reasons why Babylonia developed an early civilization_]

Civilization and religion in antiquity developed, as a rule, side by
side. The two great rivers, the Tigris and the Euphrates, commanding
the trade of the north and the south; proximity to the desert with its
caravans of traders going back and forth from the Euphrates to the Nile;
the rich alluvial soil, which supported a dense population when properly
drained and cultivated; and the necessity of developing in a higher
degree the arts of defence in order to maintain the much contested
territory,--these were a few of the many conditions that made ancient
Babylonia one of the two earliest if not the oldest centre of human
civilization. The commercial habits and the abundance of the plastic
clay, which could easily be moulded into tablets for the use of the
scribe, also fostered the early development of the literary art. The
durability of the clay tablets and the enveloping and protecting
qualities of the ruined mounds of ancient Babylonia have preserved in
a marvellous way its early literature. The result is that we can now
study, on the basis of contemporary documents, this early and yet
advanced chapter in that divine revelation, the later culmination of
which is recorded in the Bible.

[Sidenote: _Progress during the period of city states_]

It begins as far back of Moses as he is removed from us in point of
time. Its political background at first is the little city states of
Babylonia, each with its independent organization and its local schools
of artists, whose products in many respects surpass anything that comes
from the hands of later Semitic craftsmen. Each city had its temple, at
which the patron god of the local tribe and district was worshipped. In
some places it was the moon god Sin, as at Haran and Ur beside the
desert; elsewhere, as at Nippur, Bel, or at Eridu near the Persian Gulf,
Ea, the god of the great deep, was revered. In the name of the local
deity offerings were brought, hymns were sung, and traditions were
treasured, which extolled his might. The life of these little city
states centred about the temple and its cult. To make it more glorious
the artisans vied with each other, and the kings made campaigns that
they might dedicate the spoils to the deity.

[Sidenote: _The growth of extensive empires_]

In time, perhaps as early as 4000 B.C., certain more energetic and
ambitious kings  succeeded in conquering neighboring cities; they even
broadened their boundaries until they ruled over great empires extending
to the Mediterranean on the west and the mountains of Elam on the east.
In the name of the local god, each went forth to fight, and to him was
attributed the glory of the victory. Naturally, when the territory of a
city state grew into an empire, the god of that city was proclaimed and
acknowledged as supreme throughout all the conquered territory. At the
same time the local deities of the conquered cities continued to be
worshipped at their ancient sanctuaries, and many a conquering king won
the loyalty of his subjects by making a rich offering to the god and at
the temple of a vanquished foe.

[Sidenote: _Its effect in developing the pantheon and popular theology_]

The logical and inevitable result of political union was the development
of a pantheon, modelled after the imperial court, with the god of the
victorious city at its head and the leading deities of the other cities
in subordinate positions. When, during the latter part of the third
millennium before Christ, Babylon's supremacy was permanently
established under the rule of Hammurabi. Marduk, the god of that city,
was thus placed at the head of the Babylonian pantheon. The theologians
of the day also recast and combined the ancient legends, as, for
example, those of the creation, so as to explain why he, one of the
later gods, was acknowledged by all as supreme. A relationship was also
traced between the leading gods, and their respective functions were
clearly defined. Corresponding to each male deity was a female deity:
thus, the consort of Marduk was Ishtar, while that of Bel was Belit.
Furthermore, the ancient myths appear to have been, coördinated, so that
from this time on Babylonian, theology presents a certain unity and
symmetry, although one is constantly reminded of the very different
elements out of which it had been built up.

[Sidenote: _Development of ethical standards and laws_]

Parallel to the evolution of Babylonian religion was that unfolding of
ethical ideals and laws which finds its noblest record and expression in
the remarkable code of Hammurabi (about 2250 B.C.). In its high sense of
justice; in its regard for the rights of property and of individuals; in
its attitude toward women, even though it comes from the ancient East;
and above all in its protection of widows and orphans, this code marks
almost as high a stage in the revelation of what is right as the
primitive Old Testament laws, with which it has points of striking
resemblance.

[Sidenote: _A general comparison between the religions and laws of Egypt
and Babylonia_]

The evolution of ancient Egyptian civilization and religion was parallel
at almost every  stage with that of Babylonia, only in the dreamy land
of the Nile the pantheon and the vast body of variant myths were never
so thoroughly coördinated. The result is that its religion forever
remains a labyrinth. Since all interest centred about the future life,
instead of commercial pursuits, there is no evidence that the Egyptians
ever produced a legal code at all comparable with that of Hammurabi.
They did, however, develop a doctrine of sin which anticipates that of
the Hebrew prophets. While the Babylonians conceived of sin as simply
the failure to bring offerings, or to observe the demands of the ritual,
or, in general, to pay proper homage to the gods, the Egyptians held
that each individual was answerable, not only to the state, but also to
the gods, for his every act and thought.

[Sidenote: _Significance of this early religious progress_]

If they admitted of a comparison, it would be safe to say that the
Babylonian religion and law in the days of Hammurabi were as far removed
from the crude belief in spirits and the barbarous cults and practices
of primitive man as the teachings of Jesus were from those of the kingly
Babylonian lawgiver and his priestly advisers. Humanity's debt is
exceedingly great to the thousands of devoted souls who, in ancient
Babylonia and Egypt, according to their dim light, groped for God and
the right. In part they found what they sought, although they never
ceased to look through, a glass darkly.

[Sidenote: _Its arrest and decline_]

The sad and significant fact is that from the days of Hammurabi to those
of Nebuchadrezzar, Babylonian religion, law, and ethics almost entirely
ceased to develop. No other great kings with prophetic insight appear to
have arisen to hold up before the nation the principles of justice and
mercy and true piety, The old superstitions and magic also continued in
Babylonia as in Egypt to exercise more and more their baneful influence.
Saddest of all the priesthood and ceremonialism, which had already
reached a point of development commensurate and strikingly analogous to
that of later Judaism, became the dominant power in the state, and
defined religion not in terms of life and action, but of the ritual, and
so constricted it that all true growth was impossible. Hence the
religions of the Babylonians and Egyptians perished, like many others,
because they ceased to grow, and therefore degenerated into a mere
worship of the letter rather than the spirit.




