XII

THE HISTORY OF THE PSALTER

[Sidenote: _Nature of the Psalter_]

Corresponding to the book of Proverbs, itself a select library
containing Israel's best gnomic literature, is the Psalter, the
compendium of the nation's lyrical songs and hymns and prayers. It is
the record of the soul experiences of the race. Its language is that of
the heart, and its thoughts of common interest to worshipful humanity.
It reflects almost every phase of religious feeling: penitence, doubt,
remorse, confession, fear, faith, hope, adoration, and praise. Even the
unlovely emotion of hatred is frankly expressed in certain of the
imprecatory psalms. The Psalms appeal to mankind in every age and land
because, being so divine and yet so human, they rest on the foundations
of universal experience. Whenever a heart is breaking with sorrow or
pulsating with thanksgiving and adoration, its strongest emotions find
adequate expression in the simple and yet sublime language of the
Psalter.

[Sidenote: _Influence of the prophets upon it_]

In the familiar doings of Mary and Zacharias, found in the opening
chapters of Luke, we may trace the beginnings of the hymn literature of
the early Christian Church, a literature which later became one of the
Church's most valued possessions. If the canon of the New Testament had
been closed in 1000 instead of 400 A.D., its books would doubtless have
included a hymnal which would have corresponded closely to the Psalter
of the Old. Just as the Psalms represent the application of the great
doctrines of the Hebrew prophets in the spiritual life of the community,
so this new hymnal would represent the personal application of the
teachings of Jesus and the apostles to the religious life of the Church
and the individual. The Psalter is also what it is because its
background is a period of stress and severe trial. In the hot furnace of
affliction and persecution the psalmists learned to appreciate the
truths which they so confidently and effectively proclaim. Then the
spiritual teachings of the earlier prophets, which were contemptuously
rejected by their contemporaries, were at last appropriated by the
community. The Psalter as a whole appears, therefore, to be one of the
latest and most precious fruits of the divine revelation recorded in the
Old Testament.

[Sidenote: _Evidence of distinct collections of psalms_]

In its present form, the Psalter is divided into five books or
collections. At the end of each collection there is a concluding
doxology (xli., lxxii., lxxxix., cvi). The last psalm (cl.) serves as a
concluding doxology, not only to the fifth collection, but also to the
Psalter as a whole. Certain psalms are also reproduced in two different
collections with only slight variations. For example, xiv. is
practically identical with liii., except that in the first _Jehovah_ is
always used as the designation of the Deity, and in liii. _Elohim_ or
_God_; again Psalm xl. 13-17 is reproduced in lxx.; lvii. 7-11 and lx.
5-12 are together practically equivalent to cviii. These and kindred
facts indicate that the Psalter, like the book of Proverbs, is made up
of collections originally distinct. The division into exactly five
groups appears to be comparatively late, and to be in imitation of the
fivefold division of the Pentateuch.

[Sidenote: _The oldest collection_]

The genesis of the book of Proverbs is exceedingly helpful in tracing
the closely analogous growth of the Psalter. The prevailing form of the
superscriptions and the predominant use of the name _Jehovah_ or
_Elohim_ also aid in this difficult task. Psalms i. and ii. are
introductory to the entire book. Psalms iii-xli. all bear the Davidic
superscription and use the designation _Jehovah_ two hundred and
seventy-two times, but _Elohim_ only fifteen. The form and contents of
these psalms, as well as their position, suggest that they are the
oldest collection in the book. In the Greek version all the psalms of
the collection found in li-lxxii., excepting Psalm lxvi., which is
anonymous, and lxxii., which is attributed to Solomon, have also the
Davidic superscription. Although certain subsequent psalms are ascribed
to David, as, for example, lxxxvi., ci., and ciii., the close of the
collection, is the significant epilogue (lxxii. 20), _the prayers of
David the son of Jesse are ended._

[Sidenote: _Meaning and value of the superscriptions_ ]

Before the approximate date of these collections can be determined the
significance of the Davidic title needs interpretation. In the Hebrew
version, this title is borne by seventy-three psalms. Two are ascribed
to Solomon (lxxii. and cxxvii.), one to Moses (xc.), and twenty-four to
the members of the post-exilic guilds of temple singers. The
superscriptions of the Greek and Syrian versions contain many variations
from those in the Hebrew. This is probably due to the fact that
superscriptions are usually added by later scribes in whose minds the
question of authorship first became prominent. In earlier Hebrew the
phrase commonly translated _Psalm of David_ would more naturally mean a
_psalm for David_ or _dedicated_ or _attributed to David._ The latter
appears to have been its original significance. Like the title,
_Proverbs of Solomon,_ it was used to distinguish an ancient poem,
which, being a psalm, was naturally ascribed to David, and to him later
Judaism, in common with the New Testament writers, attributed all psalm
literature. A detailed study of the superscriptions soon demonstrates
that the majority of them represent only the conjectures of scribes who
were guided by current traditions or suggestions embodied in the psalms
themselves. In this manner, to Solomon, the builder of the temple, is
ascribed Psalm cxxvii., because it refers to the building of the house
in its opening verse. The Greek version even attributes to David Psalm
xcvi., which, it states, was written _when the temple was being built
after the captivity._

[Sidenote: _David's relation to the psalter_]

Since the superscriptions to the Psalter were only very late additions,
the question still remains, What was the basis of the late Jewish
tradition that makes David the father of the psalm literature, as was
Solomon of the wisdom, Moses of the legal, and Enoch of the
apocalyptical? The other Old Testament books give no direct answer. They
tell us, however, that the warrior king was skilled in playing the lyre,
and we are aware that to this, in antiquity, an improvised accompaniment
was usually sung. We also have the account of David's touching elegies
over the death of Saul and Jonathan and of Abner (II Sam. i., iii. 33,
34). Moreover, the early historical books vividly portray the faults of
David, the limitations which he shared in common with his
contemporaries, and his deeply religious spirit; but they leave the
question of his relation to the Psalter to be settled by the testimony
of the individual psalms. Here the evidence is not conclusive. It is
clear that many of the psalms attributed by tradition to him were
written in the clearer light of later prophetic teaching and amid very
different circumstances from those which surrounded Israel's early king.
Still it would be dogmatic to assert that nothing from his lips is to be
found in the Psalter; and to point out with assurance those passages and
psalms which must be Davidic is quite as unwarrantable.

[Sidenote: _Evidence of pre-exilic elements in the Psalter_]

The Psalter is clearly the repository of that which was best in the
earlier spiritual life and thought of the race. While there are no
direct references to songs in connection with the pre-exilic Jewish
temple, Amos (v. 23) found them in use at the sanctuary at Bethel; and
from Psalm cxxxvii. 3, 4 it would appear that the exiles in Babylonia
were acquainted with certain _songs of Zion_ or _songs of Jehovah_.
Treasured in the hearts of the people, and attributed, perhaps even by
the time of the exile, as a whole to David, they constituted the
basis of the earliest collections of psalms, which, as we have noted,
practically without exception bear the Davidic superscription. The date
of each individual psalm, however, must be determined independently on
the basis of its own testimony, although the historical allusions are
few and the data in many cases are far from decisive.

[Sidenote: _Approximate date of the earliest collections_]

Just when the earliest collections, found in iii.-xli. and li.-lxxii.,
were made is a comparatively unimportant yet difficult question to
decide. Probably the rebuilding of the temple in 516 B.C. was one of the
great incentives. The example of the Babylonians, who possessed a large
and rich psalm literature, may also have exerted an indirect influence.
At least it is certain that the guilds of temple singers and the song
service became increasingly prominent in the religious life of the
Jewish community which grew up about the restored temple. The presence
of alphabetical psalms, as, for example, ix., x., xxv., xxxiv., xxxvii.,
in the earliest collection suggests also the leisure of the exile. The
historical background of many of these psalms is clearly the exile and
the long period of distress that followed. They voice the experiences of
the poor, struggling band of the pious, who, living in the midst of
oppressors, found in Jehovah alone their refuge and their joy. Some of
these psalms also reflect the prophetic teachings of Jeremiah (_e.g._,
xvi., xxxix) and of Isaiah xl.-lxvi. In general their attitude toward
sacrifice is that of the prophets:

  For thou desirest not sacrifice;
  Else would I give it.
  Thou delightest not in burnt offering.
  The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit;
  A broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.

Religion is defined in the terms of life and acts. Ceremonialism has not
yet cast its chilling influence over the heart of the nation. Therefore
the earliest collections may, with considerable assurance, be assigned
to a date not later than the days of Nehemiah (about 400 B.C.).

[Sidenote: _Later collections_]

Psalms xlii.-l. and lxxiii-lxxxiii. constitute a collection of Levitical
hymns. If we may follow the indications of their superscriptions,
they consist of two originally distinct groups, the one, xlii.-xlix.,
associated with and possibly at first collected and preserved by the
post-exilic guild of temple singers, known as the sons of Korah, and the
other, l., lxxiii.-lxxxiii., similarly attributed to Asaph, the guild of
temple singers, mentioned first in the writings of the Greek period. In
these two groups the priests and Levites and the liturgy are prominent.
Psalms lxxxiv.-lxxxix. constitute a short Levitical supplement.
The remainder of the Psalter is also made up of originally smaller
collections, as, for example, the Psalms of Ascent or the Pilgrim Psalms
(cxx.-cxxxiv.), and the Hallelujah Psalms (cxi.-cxiii. and cxlvi.-cl.).
Some of the latter come perhaps from the Jews of the dispersion. Each
collection appears to represent a fresh gleaning of the same or slightly
different fields, incorporating ancient with contemporary psalms, and,
as has been noted, not infrequently including some already found in
earlier collections.

[Sidenote: _Completion of the Psalter_]

Certain of the psalms, such as lxxiv., lxxix., lxxxiii., seem clearly
to reflect the horrors of the Maccabean struggle (169-165 B.C.). Later
Jewish literature bears testimony that in the last two centuries before
Christ psalm writing increased rather than decreased (_cf. e.g._, Psalms
of Solomon). Certainly the experiences through which the Jews passed
during the middle of the second century were of a nature to evoke psalms
similar to those in the Psalter. The probabilities, therefore, are that
the Psalter, in its final form, is, like the book of Daniel, one of
the latest writings in the Old Testament. It was possibly during the
prosperous reign of Simon, when the temple service was enriched and
established on a new basis, that its canon was finally closed.

[Sidenote: _The book of Lamentations_]

The fact that they all gather about a definite event in Israel's
history, and probably antedate the majority of the psalms in the
Psalter, explains why the little collection of lyrical poems, known as
the book of Lamentations, never found a place beside the kindred psalms
(_e.g._, Pss. xlii., xliii) in the larger book. Their theme is the
Babylonian exile and the horrors and distress that it brought to the
scattered members of the Jewish race. Their aim is prophetic, that is,
to point out and confess the guilt of the nation and its dire
consequences. They reflect the teachings of both Jeremiah and Ezekiel.
While it is not strange that later tradition attributed the collection
to the first of these prophets, its contents do not support the
conjecture. Four out of the five poems are alphabetical, and distinctly
different points of view are represented. Chapters ii. and iv. probably
come from the middle of the Babylonian exile, and to the remainder must
be assigned a still later period.

[Sidenote: _The national and individual element in the Psalter_]

The Psalter, with its natural appendix, the book of Lamentations, was
the song and prayer book of the Jewish community. A majority of the
psalms, and especially those in the latter part of the book, were
doubtless originally intended for liturgical use. Many, particularly
where the first person singular is used, are to be interpreted
collectively, for here, as often in the book of Lamentations, the
psalmist is speaking in behalf of the community. Others have been
adapted to liturgical ends. But in the final analysis it is the
experience and emotions of the individual soul that find expression
throughout all the psalms. Since these experiences and emotions were
shared in common by all right-minded members of the community, it was
natural that they should in time be employed in the liturgy.

[Sidenote: _E pluribus unum_]

Again, as we review the history of the Psalter, we are impressed with
the many sides of Israel's life and human experience that it represents.
Not one, but perhaps fifty or a hundred, inspired souls, laymen,
prophets, priests, sages, kings, and warriors, have each clothed the
divine truth that came to them or to their generation in exquisite
language and imagery, and given it thus to their race and humanity.
Successive editors have collected and combined the noblest of these
psalms, and the Psalter is the result. The exact date of each psalmist
and editor is comparatively unimportant, for though differing widely in
origin and theme, they are all bound together by a common purpose and
a common belief in the reality and the immediate presence of God. All
nature and history and life are to them but the manifestation of his
justice and mercy and love. In direct communion with the God whom they
personally knew, they found the consolation and peace and joy that
passeth all understanding, even though the heathen raged and their foes
plundered and taunted them. To that same haven of rest they still pilot
the world's storm-tossed mariners.




