XIV

THE INTERPRETATION OF THE EARLY NARRATIVES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

[Sidenote: _Importance of regarding each story as a unit_]

Of all the different groups of writings in the Old Testament,
undoubtedly the early narratives found in the first seven books present
the most perplexing problems. This is primarily due to the fact that
they have been subject to a long process of editorial revision by which
stories, some very old and others very late and written from a very
different point of view, have been closely joined together. While there
is a distinct aim and unity in the whole, in approaching them it is
simplest to study each story as a unit in itself. Not only is this
practical, but it is justified by the fact that almost every story was
once current in independent form. Often, as in the case of the accounts
of creation and the flood, it is possible to recover the older versions
and even to trace their origin and earlier history.

[Sidenote: _Classification necessary to determine the point of view_]

The first essential, however, is to determine to the point of view and
purpose of the biblical writer, who has taken the given story from the
lips of his contemporaries and incorporated it in the cycle of stories
in which it is now found, Here the language, literary style, theme, and
conceptions of God and religion are the chief guides. If, as in the
first chapter of Genesis, the Deity is always designated as _God_ or
_Elohim;_ if the literary style is formal, repetitious, and generic; if
the theme is the origin of an institution like the Sabbath; and if
the Deity is conceived of as a spirit, accomplishing his purpose by
progressive stages through the agency of natural forces,--it is not
difficult to recognize at once the work of a late priestly writer. If,
on the contrary, as in Genesis ii. 4b to iii. 24, _Jehovah_ is the name
of the Deity; if the style is vivid, picturesque, and flowing; if the
interest centres in certain individuals instead of species; if the
themes vitally concern the spiritual life of man; if the Deity is
conceived of after human analogies, as intimately associating with
men, and as revealing himself directly to them by word and visible
presence,--the work of an early prophetic writer is evidently before us.
The identification of the point of view of the author at once puts us
into appreciative sympathy with him.

[Sidenote: _Value of knowing an author's point of view_]

It also enables us intelligently to interpret his words and figures.
Knowing, for example, that the first chapter of Genesis was written by a
priest who lived long after his race had ceased to think of God as
having a body like a man, we cannot make the common mistake of
interpreting verse 26 as implying physical likeness. Rather, as his
conception of God as a spirit demands and the latter part of the verse
proves, his sublime teaching is that man, the end and culmination of the
entire work of creation, is like his Creator, a spiritual being, endowed
with a mind and a will, and as God's viceregent, is divinely commanded
to rule over all created things.

[Sidenote: _Practical value of the critical analysis_]

Where two distinct versions of the same narrative have been amalgamated
in the process of editorial revision, the analysis of the original
sources is indispensable to a true understanding and interpretation of
the thought of the prophet and priest who have each utilized the
ancient story,--as, for example, that of the flood,--to illustrate the
inevitable consequences of sin and God's personal interest in mankind.
Here the culminating purpose of the prophet, however, is to proclaim
Jehovah's gracious promise that he will never thus again destroy man or
living things; that (viii. 21, 22):

  While the earth remains,
  Seedtime and harvest,
  Cold and heat,
  Summer and winter,
  Day and night
  Shall not cease.

The priest, on the other hand, is interested in the renewal of the
covenant which insures man's dominion over the natural world, and in the
sanctity of blood, and in the primitive, divine origin of the command,
Thou shalt not kill (ix. 1-6).

[Sidenote: _The necessary basis for intelligent interpretation_]

Fortunately the work of analysis has been so thoroughly carried out
during the last century that there is practical agreement among the
Christian scholars of the world on the essential questions. These
results are now also available in popular form, so that, without wasting
time on technicalities, the pastor and teacher of to-day can utilize
them as the basis for more important study and teaching. The origin,
the literary form, and the scientific and historical accuracy of each
narrative all suggest definite and interesting lines of study, but, as
has been noted (p. 106), these are of secondary value compared with the
religious truths that each story is intended to illustrate.

[Sidenote: _Principles of religious interpretation_]

Since these stories were preserved because they conserve this higher
purpose, it is always  safe to ask, What are their distinctive
contributions to the grand total of ethical and spiritual teaching found
in the Old Testament? At the same time it is exceedingly important
always to be sure to read the teachings out of, and not into, a given
narrative. By unnatural and fanciful interpretation of these simple
stories the friends of the Bible in the past have often wronged it more
than have its avowed foes. Each story, like the parables of Jesus, had
its one or two central teachings, usually conveyed to the mind by
implication rather than by direct statement. The characters who figure
in them by their words and deeds proclaim the practical truths and
embody the ideals in the minds of the ancient prophets and priests.

[Sidenote: _Theme of Genesis ii. and iii._]

The heterogeneous group of stories found in Genesis i.-xi. constitute
the general introduction to the succeeding narratives which gather about
the names of the traditional ancestors of the Hebrews. Each of these
originally independent stories illustrates its own peculiar religious
teachings. None has taken a deeper hold on the imagination and made a
deeper impression on the thought and literature of the world than that
which is found in the second and third chapters of Genesis. Its theme--
the origin and nature and consequences of sin--is of vital, personal
interest to every man of every age.

[Sidenote: _The problem of presenting it in a form intelligible to
early man_]

The problem that confronted the early Judean prophet was to present in
form intelligible to the minds of his primitive readers a subject that
has taxed to the utmost the resources of the world's greatest
philosophers and theologians. The task was comparable to that which fell
to the Master when he sought to make clear to his untutored disciples
the real nature of the mighty tempest of temptation that raged in his
soul at the beginning, and, indeed, later in his ministry. The method
adopted was strikingly similar in each case. If the language of modern
philosophy and psychology had been at the command of these great
religious teachers, it would have but obscured the great truths. These
truths must be made objective; they must be expressed in the familiar
language of the people. Even the inner struggle of conflicting motives
must be presented in words so simple that a child could understand.

[Sidenote: _Pictorial elements drawn from popular tradition_]

The second and third chapters of Genesis record the effective way in
which a great early prophet dealt with his difficult problem. From the
lips of the people he took fragments of ancient Semitic traditions.
Almost all of the elements which enter into the story of man's fall have
been traced to far earlier sources; but the narrative in its present
unity and suggestiveness never has and never will be found outside the
Bible. How far the prophet adapted to his higher purpose the current
Hebrew version can not be absolutely determined. The fact alone remains
that it is one of the truest bits of history in the Old Testament, and
this not because it is a leaf from the diary of Adam and Eve, but
because it concretely and faithfully portrays universal human
experience.

[Sidenote: _Creation of man and the elements necessary for his
development_]

In the simple language of popular tradition it proclaims, among other
truths, that Jehovah, Israel's God, created man, breathing into him from
his own nostrils the vital principle of life and making him the
commanding figure in the universe; then that the Creator graciously
provided all that was needful and best for his true physical and
spiritual development. Incidentally the prophet calls attention to that
innate and divine basis of the marriage bond which Jesus re-emphasizes
(Matt. xix. 4-6). Physical death, according to the story in its present
form, was not a necessary part of Jehovah's plan; the implication is
that man would not die while he remained in the garden and ate of the
life-giving tree. Temptation is not in itself evil, but necessary, if
man is to develop positive virtue, for beside the tree of life grows the
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, with its attractive, alluring
fruit guarded by the divine prohibition.

[Sidenote: _The struggle in the woman's heart_]

The elements of the temptation are all presented in chapter ii., but the
serpent, the craftiest of animals, in his conversation with the woman is
required to make clear and objective the real nature of the conflict
within her mind. The rôle of the serpent is the opposite of that of
Balaam's ass, which figures in a story which comes from the same early
Judean prophetic school. In the conversation between the woman and the
serpent the true character of all temptation is revealed: it is the
necessity of choosing between two courses of conduct neither of which is
altogether bad. Curiosity, which is the guide to all knowledge, the
beauty of the apple, which appeals to the aesthetic sense, and physical
appetite, not in itself bad,--all these powerfully attracted the
Oriental woman of the ancient story. On the other side she felt the
compelling power of love and gratitude and the definite divine command.

[Sidenote: _The essence of all temptation_]

The prophet saw clearly that all the elements of temptation are within
man--a truth sometimes obscured in later Jewish thought. Milton has also
led us astray in identifying the crafty serpent with the Satan of later
Judaism. The prophet graphically presents another great fact of human
experience, namely, that what is one man's temptation is not another's,
that the temptation to be real must appeal to the one tested. The crafty
serpent is not represented as speaking to the man; he would probably
have turned away in loathing. His wife, she who had already sinned, the
one whom Jehovah had given him as a helpmeet, herself appeals to the
sense of chivalry within him. Hence the conflict rages in his soul
between love and obligation to Jehovah and his natural affection and
apparent duty to his wife. Thus in all temptation the diviner impulses
struggle with those which are not in themselves necessarily wrong but
only baser by contrast. Duty is the call of the diviner, sin is the
yielding to the baser, motives.

[Sidenote: _The real nature of sin_]

The Hebrew word for sin, which means the missing of the mark set up
before each individual, is the only altogether satisfactory definition
of sin ever devised, for it absolutely fits the facts of human
experience. Deflection from the moral standard set up by each man's
conscience, even though his resulting act seem in itself noble, is for
him a sin. Although the influences which led the man and woman of the
story to disobey were exceedingly strong, the higher standard had been
set up, and in falling short of it they sinned. Thus sin is not God's
but man's creation, and results from the deliberate choice of what the
sinner knows to be wrong.

[Sidenote: _The effects of sin_]

In the same simple yet powerful way the prophet depicts the inevitable
consequences of sin. At every point the picture is true to universal
experience. The most appalling effect of a wrong act is that it destroys
peace and purity of mind. It also makes cowards of brave men, and the
presence and tender affection of the one wronged suddenly become
intolerable. Sin also begets sin. To the cowering fugitives Jehovah
comes, as he always does, with a message intended to evoke a frank
confession which would tear down the hideous barrier that their sin had
reared between himself and them; but, like most foolish, blind Adams and
Eves, they hug their crime to their breasts and raise the barrier heaven
high by trying to excuse their guilt. Thus they pronounce their own
doom. For God himself only one course of action remains: it is to send
them forth from his presence and from the life-giving tree, out into the
school of hardship and bitter pain, that there they may learn the
lessons which are necessary before they can again become citizens of the
true Garden of Eden.

[Sidenote: _The sequel to the story of man's fall_]

Two simple yet exceedingly significant touches lighten the gloom of this
universal tragedy of human life. The one is that for the guilty,
unrepentant pair, Jehovah himself made tunics of skins to protect them
from the inclemency of their new life,--evidence that his love and care
still went with them. The other is the implication that the true garden
of Eden was still to be found on earth, and was closed simply to the
guilty and unrepentant. The Bible is the record of how men learned the
all-important lessons in the painful school of experience. Israel's
teachers, each in his characteristic way, led their race on toward the
common goal. The Gospels tell of how _a man, tempted in all points as we
are_ in a distant day and land found his way again into the abiding
presence of God. He _was one with the Father_, not because he did not
meet temptation in all its power, but because, unlike the actors in the
primitive story, and all other participants in the drama of life, he
yielded only to the guidance of divine impulses. Not content with
achieving the goal himself, he gave his energies and his life to showing
others how they also might overcome the baser impulses within them and
find their way to God's presence and become one with him. Thus, because
of what he did and said and was, he forever vindicated his title of
Saviour of Mankind.

[Sidenote: _The religious teachings of other early stories_]

No other early Old Testament narrative is perhaps so full of rich
spiritual suggestion as the one just considered, and yet each has its
valuable contribution. Even such a story as that of the killing of Abel
by Cain forcibly teaches the great prophetic truth that it is not the
form of the offering, but the character and deeds back of the sacrifice,
that determine Jehovah's favor or disfavor (iv. 7). Graphically it sets
forth the spirit that prompts the greatest of crimes. In contrast to
Cain, defiant yet pursued by haunting fear of vengeance, it also
presents the divine tenderness and mercy in granting him a tribal mark
to protect him from the hand of man. The similar story of Noah, the
first vineyard-keeper, preaches the first temperance sermon in all
literature, and also suggests the inevitable consequences of moral
depravity so forcibly illustrated in the history of the ancient
Canaanites. Even the prosaic table of the nations in Genesis x.
emphasizes the conception of the unity of the human family which was
destined in time to become the basis of Israel's belated missionary
activity.

[Sidenote: _Ideals presented in the early prophetic portrait of Abraham_]

When we pass to the twelfth chapter of Genesis the independent stories
coalesce into cycles, and each cycle, as well as each narrative, has its
own religious purpose. In definite outlines each successive group of
teachers painted the character of Abraham, the traditional father of the
Israelitish race, and held it up before their own and succeeding
generations as a perpetual example and inspiration. In the early Judean
prophetic narratives he is pictured as the friend of Jehovah. His own
material interests are entirely secondary, as illustrated in his dealing
with Lot. Without hesitation he leaves home and kindred behind, for his
dominating purpose in life is simply to know and do the will of Jehovah.
To this end he rears altars throughout the land of Canaan. His chief joy
is in communion with God and in the promises to be realized in his
descendants. Through warring, hostile Canaan he passes unscathed, for
his eyes are fixed on things heavenly.

[Sidenote: _Its significance_]

It matters little whether or not, far back in the primitive days of
Israel's history, a Bedouin sheik anticipated in actual character and
life all that was gradually revealed to the prophets of a much later
age. The supremely significant fact is that the noble ideal of Israel's
earliest teachers was thus vividly and concretely embodied in the
portrait of him whom the Hebrews regarded with pride and adoration as
the founder of their race. In Hosea and Jeremiah, and less imperfectly
in the nation as a whole, the ideal in time became an historical
reality.

[Sidenote: _Later portraits of Abraham_]

The early Ephraimite school of writers picture Abraham as a prophet
(Gen. xx. 7), and therefore as an exemplification of their highest
ideal. In the remarkable fourteenth chapter of Genesis he is a
courageous, chivalrous knight, attacking with a handful of followers the
allied armies of the most powerful kings of his day. Returning
victorious, he restores the spoil to the plundered and gives a princely
gift to the priest of the local sanctuary. In the later priestly
narratives the picture suddenly changes, and Abraham figures as the
faithful servant of the law, with whom originates the rite of
circumcision, the seal of a new covenant (xvii). Later Jewish and Moslem
traditions each have their characteristic portrait. One, which pictures
him as in heaven the protector of the faithful, is reflected in the New
Testament (Luke xvi. 23-30), Thus each succeeding age and group of
teachers made him the embodiment and supreme illustration of its noblest
ideals, and it is this ideal element that gives the Old Testament
stories their permanently practical value.

[Sidenote: _Practical teachings of the Abraham stories_]

Having noted the teachings that each individual story and the cycle as a
whole conveyed to the minds of their first readers, it only remains for
the teacher of to-day to translate them into modern terms. Some of the
most important implications of the Abraham stories thus interpreted are,
for example: (1) God calls each man to a high mission. (2) He will guide
and care for those who are responsive. (3) To those who seek to know him
intimately, and to do his will, he will reveal himself in fullest
measure, and for such he has in store his richest blessings. (4) _He
that findeth his life_ (Lot) _shall lose it, and he that loseth his
life_ (Abraham) _shall find it_.

[Sidenote: _Significance of the character of Esau_]

The Jacob and Esau stories contain marvellously exact and realistic
portraits of the two races (the Israelites and the Edomites) that they
respectively represent. Of the two brothers, Esau is in many ways the
more attractive. He suggests the open air and the fields, where he loved
to hunt. He is easy-going, ingenuous, and impulsive. His faults are
those of not being or doing. As long as he had enough to eat and was
comfortable, he was contented. He is the type of the world's drifters.
Since Aram was far distant he disregards the wishes of his parents and
marries one of the daughters of the land. No ambition stirred him and no
devotion to Jehovah or to the ideals of his race gave content and
direction to his life. Thus he remained a laggard, and the half-nomadic,
robber people that he represented became but a stagnant pool, compared
with the onrushing stream of Israel's life.

[Sidenote: _Jacob's faults_]

Jacob's faults are also presented by the early prophets with an
astonishing fidelity. Rarely does a race early in its history have a
portrait of its weaknesses as well as its strength held up thus
prominently before its eyes. Jacob is the antithesis of Esau. While his
brother was hunting care-free in the fields, he was at home plotting how
he could farther his own interests. When the opportunity offers, he
manifests a cold, calculating shrewdness. To make good the title to the
birthright thus acquired he does not hesitate to resort to fraud and
lying. Then he flees, pursued by his own guilty conscience, and, tricked
by Laban, he serves as a slave fourteen years to win the wife whom he
loves. At last, again a fugitive from the consequences of his own
questionable dealing, he returns with quaking heart to face the brother
that he had wronged.

[Sidenote: _The elements of strength in Israel's character_]

The character is far from a perfect one, and yet the ancient stories
suggest its elements of strength. By nature he was selfish and crafty;
and yet he has what Esau fatally lacks: energy, persistency, and a
commanding ambition. From the first his ambition looks beyond himself to
the future of his descendants. Measured by our modern standards, his
religious professions seem only hypocrisy; but as we analyze his
character we find that a faith in Jehovah, narrow and selfish though it
be, was ever his guiding star. Out of the tortuous windings of his
earlier years it ultimately led him to a calm old age. Imperfect though
his character was, like that of the race which he represented, the
significant fact is that God ever cared for him and was able to utilize
him as an agent in divine revelation.

[Sidenote: _The noble teachings of the Joseph stories_]

Even more obvious and universal are the practical lessons illustrated by
the Joseph stories. In the early prophetic narratives, Abraham is the
perfect servant of God, Jacob the type of the Israelitish race, but
Joseph is the ideal man of affairs. Graphically the successive stories
picture the man in his making and reveal his true character. He is
simple, affectionate, and yet strongly ambitious. His day-dreams make
him odious, as in the case of many a boy to-day, to his unimaginative
brothers. A seemingly hard fate rudely snatches him from the enervating
influences of his childhood home and places him in the severe school of
experience, where he is tested and trained. It also opens wide the door
of opportunity. Fidelity to every interest and an unselfish response to
every opportunity for service soon bring him into the presence of the
Pharaoh. His judicious counsels, diplomacy, and organizing ability win
for him the highest honors Egypt can confer. With modesty and fidelity
he endures this supreme test--success. Toward his brothers, who had
bitterly wronged him, he is nobly magnanimous, and to his kinsmen, who
belong to the shepherd class especially despised as boors by the
cultured Egyptians, he is loyal and considerate. Above all, not by
professions, but by deeds, he reveals the true source of his strength,--
a natural faith in the God of his race and an unfailing loyalty to him.

[Sidenote: _Conclusion_]

In the same way Moses, the exodus, and the great men and events of
Israel's dramatic history, all have a religious importance and
significance far surpassing the merely historical. At the same time the
methods of modern literary and historical investigation reveal rather
than conceal the deeper spiritual truths that they illustrate. The more
light that can be turned upon them the more clearly will their essential
teachings stand forth. Like the Old Testament as a whole, they grew up
out of real life and truly reflect and interpret it, and therefore have
a living, vital message to life to-day. Any interpretation that does not
ring true to life may well be questioned. Finally, the authority of
these ancient narratives depends not upon the historical or scientific
accuracy of the individual story that is used as an illustration, but
upon the fact that through the experiences and hearts of those who
employed them God was seeking to make men free by the knowledge of the
truth.




