VII


THE HISTORY OF THE PROPHETIC SERMONS, EPISTLES, AND APOCALYPSES

[Sidenote: _Real character and aims of the prophets_]

To understand and rightly interpret the prophetic writings of the Old
Testament it is necessary to cast aside a false impression as to the
character of the prophets which is widely prevalent. They were not
foretellers, but forth-tellers. Instead of being vague dreamers,
in imagination living far in the distant future, they were most
emphatically men of their own times, enlightened and devoted
patriots, social and ethical reformers, and spiritual teachers. Their
characteristic note of conviction and authority was due to the fact
that, on the one hand, they knew personally and distinctly the evils
and needs of their nation, and that, on the other hand, their minds and
hearts, ever open to receive the truth, were in vital touch with the
Infinite. Thus, just as Aaron became Moses' prophet to the people,
publicly proclaiming what the great leader imparted to him in private
(Ex. vii. 1, 2), so the Hebrew prophets became Jehovah's heralds and
ambassadors, announcing by word and life and act the divine will.

[Sidenote: _Influences that led the prophets to write down their
sermons_]

While the historians were perfecting their histories certain prophets
also were beginning to commit their sermons to writing. The oldest
recorded address in the Old Testament is probably that of Amos at
Bethel. His banishment from the northern kingdom under strict injunction
not to prophesy there (Am. vii. 10-17) may well explain why he resorted
to writing to give currency to his prophetic message, though, like Paul
in later days, he undoubtedly regarded writing as an inferior substitute
for the spoken word. Jeremiah appears to have preached twenty years
before he dictated a line to his scribe Baruch, and then it was because
he could not personally speak in the temple (xxxvi. 1-5). Sometimes
complete sermons of the prophets are preserved, but more often we seem
to have only extracts and epitomes. In some of the prophetic books, like
that of Jeremiah, there are also popular reports of a prophetic address,
and narrative sections, telling of the prophet's experience.

[Sidenote: _The editing of the earlier prophecies_]

Evidences of editing are very apparent in the earlier prophecies. Sudden
interruptions, and verses or clauses, in which appear ideas and literary
style very different from that of the immediate context, indicate that
many of the prophecies have been supplemented by later notes, some
explanatory and some hortatory. Other longer passages are intended to
adjust the earlier teaching to later conditions and beliefs and so to
adapt them to universal human needs that they are not limited to the
hour and occasion of their first delivery. Some of these passages come
from the hands of disciples of the prophets and often contain valuable
additional data; others are from later prophetic editors and scribes. A
detailed comparison, for example, of the Hebrew and Greek versions of
Jeremiah quickly discloses wide variations of words, verses, and even
long passages, added in one or the other text by later hands. All these
additions testify to the deep interest felt by later generations in the
earlier writings, even before they were assigned a final place in
the canon. It is one of the important tasks of biblical scholars to
distinguish the original from the additions and thus determine what were
the teachings of each prophet and what are the contributions of later
generations.

[Sidenote: _The background of Isaiah xl.-lv._]

Many of the later additions possess a value and authority entirely
independent of that possessed by the prophet with whose writings they
have been joined by their original authors or later editors. Thus the
sublime chapters appended to the original sermons of Isaiah contain some
of the noblest teachings in the Old Testament. The different themes
and literary style; the frequent references to the Babylonians, not as
distant allies, as in the days of Isaiah the son of Amoz, but as the
hated oppressors of the Jews; the evidence that the prophet's readers
are not exiles far from Judah; the many allusions to the conquests of
Cyrus,--all these leave little doubt that chapters xl.-lv. were written
in the latter part of the Babylonian or the first of the Persian period.
Interpreted in the light of this background, their thought and teachings
become clear and luminous. Similarly, the varied evidence within the
chapters themselves seems to indicate that Isaiah lvi.-lxvi. contain
sermons directed to the struggling Jewish community in Palestine during
the days following the rebuilding of the temple in 520 B.C.

[Sidenote: _The order and date of the prophetic books_]

The prophetic sermons, epistles, and apocalypses fall naturally into
five great groups. The books prophets of the Assyrian period were Amos
and Hosea, who between 750 and 734 B.C. preached to Northern Israel;
also Isaiah and Micah, whose work lies between 740 and 680 B.C. Nahum's
little prophecy, although much later, echoes the death-knell of the
great Assyrian kingdom, which for two or three centuries dominated
southwestern Asia. The prophets of Judah's decline were Zephaniah (about
628 B.C.), Jeremiah (628-690), and Habakkuk (609-605). To the same
period belong Ezekiel's earlier sermons, delivered between 592 and 586,
just before the final destruction of Jerusalem. The prophets of the
Babylonian exile were Obadiah, whose original oracle belongs to its
opening years; Ezekiel (xxv.-xlviii.), who continued to preach until 572
B.C., and the great prophet whose deathless messages ring through Isaiah
xl.-lv. The prophets of the Persian period were Haggai and Zechariah,
whose inspiring sermons kept alive the flagging zeal of those who
rebuilt the second temple; the authors of Isaiah lvi.-lxvi.; the author
of the little book of Malachi; and Joel. To this list we may perhaps
add the prophet who has given us that noble protest, found in the much
misunderstood book of Jonah, against the narrow and intolerant attitude
of later Judaism toward foreigners.

[Sidenote: _Growth of anonymous and apocalyptic literature_]

With the exception of Ezekiel, Haggai, Zechariah, and Joel, all the
prophecies which come from the centuries following the fall of Jerusalem
in 586 B.C. are anonymous. The worship of the authority of the past had
begun, and there is evidence that the belief was gaining currency that
the days of the prophets were past. Hence the natural tendency to resort
to anonymous authorship or else to append a later message to an earlier
prophecy. Chapters ix.-xiv. of the book of Zechariah illustrate this
custom,--chapters which apparently come from the last Old Testament
period, the Greek or Maccabean. The habit of presenting prophetic truth
in the highly figurative, symbolic form, of the apocalypse also became
prominent in later Judaism. This has already been noted in the study of
the growth of the New Testament, and is illustrated by the book of
Revelation. It was especially adapted to periods of religious
persecution, for it enabled the prophet to convey his message of
encouragement and consolation in language impressive and clear to his
people, yet unintelligible to their foreign masters.

[Sidenote: _The historical background of the book of Daniel_]

To the mind of one who has carefully studied the book of Daniel in the
light of the great crisis that came to the Jews as a result of the
relentless persecutions of Antiochus Epiphanes, between the years 169
and 165 B.C., there remains little doubt that it is in this period the
wonderful apocalypse finds its true setting and interpretation. The
familiar examples of the heroic fidelity of Daniel and his friends to
the demands of their religion and ritual were supremely well adapted
to arouse a similar resistance toward the demands of a tyrant who was
attempting to stamp out the Jewish, religion and transform the chosen
people into a race of apostates. The visions found in the book trace
rapidly, in succession, the history of the Babylonian, Median, Persian,
and, last of all, the Greek kingdoms. The culmination is a minute
description of the character and reign, of the tyrant Antiochus
Epiphanes (xi. 21-45). He is clearly the little horn of chapter viii.
But suddenly, in the midst of the account of the persecutions, the
descriptions become vague and general. Nor is there any reference to the
success of the Maccabean uprising; instead, the prediction is made that
Jehovah himself will soon come to establish his Messiah's kingdom.

[Sidenote: _Date of the book_]

The inference is, therefore, that the prophecy was written a short time
before the rededication of the temple in 165 B.C. This conclusion is
confirmed by many other indications. For example the language, in part
Aramaic, is that of the Greek period. The mistakes regarding the final
overthrow of the Babylonian empire, which was by Cyrus, not Darius,
and brought about not by strategy, but as a result of the voluntary
submission of the Babylonians, are identical with the errors current
in Greek tradition of the same late period. Here, as in the early
narratives of Genesis, a true prophet has utilized earlier stories as
effective illustrations. He has also given in the common apocalyptic
form an interpretation of the preceding four centuries of human history,
and showed how through it all God's purpose was being realized, The book
concludes with the firm assurance that those who now prove faithful are
to be richly rewarded and to have a part in Ms coming Messianic kingdom.

[Sidenote: _The common motive actuating the prophets and the authors of
the New Testament_]

Thus, from the minds of the prophets come the earliest writings of the
Old Testament. They consist of exhortations, warnings, messages of
encouragement, or else stories intended to illustrate a religious
principle or to present, in concrete form, a prophetic ideal. The
fundamental motive which produced them all was identical with that which
led the disciples and apostles to write the Gospels and Epistles of the
New. In the case of the historico-prophetic writings, like Samuel and
Kings, the desire to inspire and mould the minds and wills of their
readers was combined with the desire to preserve in permanent form a
record of the events which, in their national history, revealed most
clearly Jehovah's character and purpose. In this respect they correspond
perfectly to the Gospels and Acts of the New Testament. It is easy to
see, therefore, that kindred aims and ideals actuated these unknown
prophetic writers and their later successors, Matthew, Mark, and Luke.
Their literary products differ only because their subject-matter is
different. The one group records Jehovah's revelation of himself through
the life of the Messianic nation, the other through the life of the
perfect Messiah.

[Sidenote: _The New Testament the sequel of the prophetic writings_]

It is interesting to note, in conclusion, that from the point of view of
the Old, all the literature of the New may be designated as prophetic.
The three distinct groups of writings found in the New, namely, the
Gospels and Acts, the Epistles, and the Apocalypse, correspond exactly
to the three types of prophetic literature found in the Old: the
historico-prophetical writings, direct written prophecies, and
apocalypses. If the final canon of the Old Testament had been completed
before the days of Josiah, there is every reason to believe that it
also would have contained little beside prophetic writings. In divine
providence it was not closed until seven centuries later, so that, as it
has come to us, it is a comprehensive library, representing every stage
and every side of Israel's development. It is, however, in perfect
keeping with the spirit of the Master that the New Testament should
contain significant facts and broad principles rather than detailed laws
or even the songs of worship. He whose ideals, teachings, and methods
were in closest harmony with those of the Hebrew prophets, naturally
begat, through his immediate followers, a group of distinctively
prophetic writings.




