II

THE REAL NATURE AND PURPOSE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

[Sidenote: _A large and complex library_]

Turning from the Jewish and mediæval traditions and theories which so
easily beset us, we ask, What is the real nature of the Old Testament as
it is revealed in this new and clearer light? The first conclusion is
that it is a library containing a large and complex literature,
recording the varied experiences, political, social, ethical, and
religious, of the Israelitish race. The fact that it is a library
consisting of many different books is recognized by the common
designation of the two testaments. As is well known, our English word
_Bible_ came originally from the Papyrus or Byblus reed, the pith of
which was widely used in antiquity as the material from which books were
made. It was natural, therefore, that in the Greek a little book should
be designated as a _biblion_. About the middle of the second Christian
century the Greek Christians (first in the so-called Second Epistle of
Clement xlv. 2) began to call their sacred scriptures, _Ta Biblia_, the
books. When this title was transferred to the Latin it was, by reason of
a natural and yet significant error, treated as a feminine singular,
_Biblia_, which, reappears In English as _Bible_. This most appropriate
name emphasizes the fact that the books thus described are a unit and
yet a collection of little books, selected from a larger literature and
given their present position of preeminent authority.

[Sidenote: _The record of God's vital, personal relations to the
Israelitish race_]

The term Testament suggests not the form and authority of the books, but
their theme. It is the English translation, through the Latin and Greek,
of the Hebrew word, _berîth_, usually rendered, _covenant_. It means a
_bond_ or _basis of agreement_. It implies a close and binding contract
between two parties, and defines the terms to which each subscribes and
the obligations which they thus assume. The _Old Covenant_ or
_Testament_, therefore, is primarily the written record of the origin,
terms, and history of the solemn agreement which existed between the
Israelitish nation and Jehovah. The early narratives preserve the
traditions of its origin; the lawgivers endeavored to define its terms
and the obligations that rested upon the people; the prophets
interpreted them in the life of the nation, and the sages into the life
of the individual; and the historical books recorded its practical
working. The significant fact is that back of the Old Testament records
exists something greater and deeper than pen can fully describe: it is a
vital, living connection between Jehovah and his people that makes
possible the unique relation which finds expression in the remarkable
history of the race and in the experiences and souls of its spiritual
leaders. Thus through life, and in the concrete terms of life, God
reveals himself to the life of humanity.

[Sidenote: _Written in history and human minds and hearts_]

In the light of this truth the Jewish and medieval dogma that every
word, and even every letter of Scripture, was directly dictated by God
himself, seems sadly mechanical and bears the marks of the narrow
schools of thought in which it took form. Hebrew was not, and probably
will never be, the language of heaven! Not on skins and papyrus rolls,
but in the life of the Israelitish race and on the minds and consciences
of enlightened men, God wrote his revelation. History and the character
and consciousness of the human race are its imperishable records.
Fortunately he also aroused certain men of old, not by word and act
only, but by the pen as well, to record the revelation that was being
perfected in the life of their nation and in their own minds and hearts.
He did not, however, dictate to them the form of their writings nor
vouch for their verbal inerrancy. In time, out of their writings were
gradually collected and combined the most significant passages and
books, and to these was finally attributed the authority that they now
rightfully enjoy.

[Sidenote: _Secondary sources of its authority_]

The ultimate basis of that authority, however, is not their presence in
the canon of the Old Testament. At the same time their presence there is
deeply significant, for it represents the indorsement of many ages and
of countless thousands who, from the most varied points of view and amid
the most diverse experiences, have tested and found these ancient
scriptures worthy of the exalted position that has gradually been
assigned to them. It is not the support of the Church, although this
also for the same reason is exceedingly significant. It is not the calm
assumption, of authority that appears at every point throughout the Old
Testament, although this is richly suggestive; the sacred writings of
other religions make even more pretentious claims. It is not that its
commands and doctrines come from the mouths of great prophets and
priests, like Moses, Samuel, Isaiah, and Jeremiah. This fact undoubtedly
had great weight with those who formed the final canon of the Old
Testament, and the authority of a strong, noble personality is supremely
impressive; but divine authority never emanates primarily from a man,
however great be his sanctity. Furthermore, to establish the authority
derived from a Moses or a Samuel it is necessary in every case to prove
that the books attributed to them by late tradition actually came from
their pens. Even if this could in every case be done, some of the
noblest passages in the Old Testament remain avowedly anonymous; for the
tendency of the great majority of its authors was clearly to send forth
their messages without any attempt to associate their own names with
them.

[Sidenote: _Its ultimate basis of authority_]

The ultimate authority of the Old Testament, therefore, is not dependent
upon devoted canon-makers, nor the weighty testimony of the Church, nor
upon its own claims, nor the reputation of the inspired men who have
written it, nor the estimate of any age. Its seat of authority is more
fundamental. It contains the word of God because it faithfully records
and interprets the most important events in the early religious history
of man, and simply and effectively presents God's revelation of himself
and of his will in the minds and hearts of the great pre-Christian
heralds of ethical and spiritual truth. Back of the Old Testament is a
vast variety of vital experiences, national and individual, political
and spiritual, social and ethical, pleasurable and painful. Back of all
these deeply significant experiences is God himself, through them making
known his character and laws and purpose to man.

[Sidenote: _Its authority ethical and religious, not scientific_]

Students of the rediscovered Old Testament also recognize, in the light
of a broader and more careful study, the fact, so often and so fatally
overlooked in the past, that its authority lies not in the field of
natural science, nor even of history in the limited sense. Time and
patience were destined to increase man's knowledge in these great
departments and also to develop his mind in attaining it. The teaching
of the Old Testament is authoritative only in the far more important
realm of ethics and religion. Paul truly voiced its supreme claim
when he said that it was _profitable for teaching, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect, completely fitted for every good work_ (II Tim. iii. 16, 17).
The assertion by the Church in the past of claims nowhere made or
implied by the Old Testament itself is unfortunately still a fertile
source of perplexity and dissension to many faithful souls. Their
salvation is to be found in a clear and intelligent appreciation of the
real nature and claim of these ancient writings.

[Sidenote: _Its dominant purpose to teach spiritual truth_]

One dominant aim determines the form of each book and the selection of
individual passages and binds together the whole: it is effectively to
set forth spiritual truth and to mould in accordance with God's will the
characters and beliefs of men. It was the supreme bond that bound
together prophets, priests, sages, and psalmists, although the means by
which they accomplished their common purpose differed widely. Many a
current tradition, and the crude conceptions of the ancients regarding
the natural world, are recorded in the Old Testament; but they are not
there merely to perpetuate history nor to increase the total of
scientific knowledge, but rather because they concretely illustrate and
impress some vital ethical and spiritual truth. Such singleness of
religious purpose is paralleled nowhere else except in the work and
teachings of Jesus and his apostles.

[Sidenote: _Its present fruits the proof of its inspired authority_]

The ever-present evidence of the divine authority back of the spiritual
teachings of the Old Testament as a whole is that they ring true to
life and meet its needs. By their fruits we know them. It is the
demonstration of the laboratory. We know that they are inspired because
they inspire. The principles underlying the social sermons of Amos are
as applicable to present conditions as when first uttered. The sooner
they are practically applied the sooner our capitalistic civilization
can raise its head now bowed In shame. The faith that breathes through
the Psalms is the faith that upholds men to-day in the midst of
temptation and trial. The standards of justice, tempered by love, which
are maintained in the Old Testament laws make good citizens both of
earth and heaven. As long as men continue to test the teachings of the
Old Testament scriptures in the laboratory of experience and to know
them by their fruits, nothing can permanently endanger their position
in the Christian Church or in the life of humanity. Neglect and
indifference, not Higher Criticism, alone permanently threaten the
authority of the Old Testament as well as that of the New.

[Sidenote: _Significance of the variations and inconsistencies_]

Recognizing the real nature and purpose of these ancient records, the
true student neither denies nor is disturbed by the marks of their human
authorship. As in the case of the Gospels, the variations between the
parallel narratives are all evidence of their genuineness and of the
sincerity of their purpose. They demonstrate that God's revelation
is adapted to the needs of life and the comprehension of man, because it
was through life and expressed in the terms of life. Their individual
peculiarities and minor errors often introduce us more intimately to
the biblical writers and help us to understand more clearly and
sympathetically their visions of truth and of God. Above all, they teach
us to look ever through and beyond all these written records to the
greater revelation, which they reflect, and to the infinite Source of
all knowledge and truth.

[Sidenote: _The record of a gradual revelation_]

The inconsistencies and imperfect teachings which are revealed by a
critical study of the Old Testament are also but a few of the many
indices that it is the record of a gradually unfolding revelation. Late
Jewish tradition, which is traceable even in the Old Testament itself,
was inclined to assign the origin of everything which it held dear to
the very beginnings of Hebrew history, and in so doing it has done much
to obscure its true genesis. Fortunately, however, the history of God's
gradual training of the race was writ too plainly in the earlier Old
Testament scriptures to be completely obscured by later traditions. The
recognition that God's all-wise method of revealing spiritual as well as
scientific truth was progressive, adapted to the unfolding consciousness
of each succeeding age, at once sweeps away many of the greatest
difficulties that have hitherto obscured the true Old Testament. Jesus
with his divine intuition appreciated this principle of growth.
Unhesitatingly he abrogated certain time-honored Old Testament laws with
the words, _Ye have heard that it was said ... but I say to you_. His
own interpretation of his relation to the sacred writings of his race
was that he came to bring them to complete fulfilment. Rearranged in
their approximately chronological order, the Old Testament books become
the harmonious and many-sided record of ten centuries of strenuous human
endeavor to know and to do the will of God and of his full and gracious
response to that effort. The beatitude of those who hunger and thirst
after righteousness was as true in the days of Moses as it was when
Jesus proclaimed it.

[Sidenote: _Its different books of very different values_]

Finally, the right and normal attitude toward the Old Testament leads to
the wholesome conclusion that its different books are of very different
values. The great critic of Nazareth again set the example. As we have
just seen, certain of the Old Testament laws he distinctly abrogated;
others he quietly ignored; others, as, for example, the law of love
(Deut. vi. 5, and Lev. xix. 19) he singled out and gave its rightful
place of central authority. A careful study of the Gospels, in the light
of the Old Testament, demonstrates that a very important element in his
work, as the Saviour of men, was in thus separating the dross in the
older teachings from the gold, and then in giving to the vital truth a
clearer, more personal, and yet more universal application. For the
intelligent student and teacher of to-day the Old Testament still
remains a great mine of historical, ethical, and religious truth. Some
parts, like Genesis, Deuteronomy, Hosea, Jeremiah, Isaiah xl.-lv., and
the Psalter, are richly productive. Others, like Numbers, Chronicles,
and Esther, are comparatively barren.

[Sidenote: _Application of this truth_]

Since the Old Testament is the record of a progressively unfolding
revelation, it is obvious that all parts do not possess an equal
authority. To place the example of the patriarchs or of David, who lived
when ethical standards and religious beliefs were only partially
developed, on an equality with the exalted ideals of the later prophets,
is to misinterpret those ancient Scriptures and to reject the leadership
of the Great Teacher. At the same time, studied from the newer point of
view, the examples of those early heroes are found to illustrate vital
principles in human life and to inspire and warn the child of to-day as
effectively as they did far back in the childhood of the race.

[Sidenote: _The Old Testament not a fetish but a spiritual guidebook_]

In these later days God has taken the Bible from the throne of
infallibility on which Protestantism sought to place it. By a gradual
yet benign process, which we were nevertheless at first inclined
bitterly to resent, he has opened our eyes to its true character and
purpose. Again, he has pronounced his _Thou shall not_ to the natural
and yet selfish human desire to transfer moral and intellectual
responsibility from the individual conscience to some external
authority. Again, he has told us that only in the sanctuary of the human
soul is the Infallible One to be found. Yet in order that we each may
find him there, the cumulative religious experience of the countless
thousands who have already found him is of inestimable value. The Old
Testament contains not merely the word of God, but, together with its
complement the New, is the great guide-book in finding and knowing him,
It blazes the way which, the pilgrim of to-day, as in the past, must
follow from his cradle to the throne of God. At each point it is richly
illustrated by the actual religious experiences of real men and women.
Their mistakes and their victories, are equally instructive. From
many vantage-points reached by prophets and priests and psalmists,
we are able to catch new and glorious visions of God's character and
purpose for mankind. Through its pages--sometimes dimly, sometimes
brightly, But growing ever clearer--shines the giving light of God's
truth and revelation, culminating in the Christ, the perfected
revelation and the supreme demonstration that man, though beset by
temptation, baffled by obstacles, deserted by friends, and maligned
by foes, can nevertheless, by the invincible sword of love and
self-sacrifice, conquer the world and become one with God, as did the
peerless Knight of Nazareth.




