XIII

THE FORMATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT CANON

[Sidenote: _Israel's literature at the beginning of the fourth century
before Christ_]

Could we have studied the scriptures of the Israelitish race about 400
B.C., we should have classified them under four great divisions: (1)
The prophetic writings, represented by the combined early Judean,
Ephraimite, and late prophetic or Deuteronomic narratives, and their
continuation in Samuel and Kings, together with the earlier and exilic
prophecies; (2) the legal, represented by the majority of the Old
Testament laws, combined with the late priestly history; (3) the
wisdom, represented by the older small collections of proverbs; (4) the
devotional or liturgical, represented by Lamentations and the earlier
collections of psalms.

[Sidenote: _The combining of the prophetic and priestly histories_]

Even before all the Old Testament books were written, the work of
canonization began; before the first large canon was adopted, the
prophetic and priestly narratives, and with them the earlier and later
laws, were combined. This amalgamation was the work of a late priestly
editor. The Pentateuch and its immediate sequel, Joshua, is the result.

[Sidenote: _The method of combining_]

A study of these books makes clear the editor's method. Naturally he
gave the late priestly versions the precedence. He placed, therefore,
its version of the creation first,--a position that it well deserves.
Probably as a result of this arrangement the older and more primitive
prophetic version of Genesis ii. 4a-25 was somewhat abridged, for it
begins with the picture of a level plain, watered by a daily mist, and
is immediately followed by the account of the creation of man. Genesis
iii. and iv. are taken entirely from the prophetic, and practically all
of v. from the priestly, group of narratives. Confronted by two variant
versions of the flood, he joined them together into a closely knit
narrative; but all the elements of both versions are so faithfully
preserved that when they are again separated, behold! the two originally
complete and self-consistent versions reappear. The story of Noah,
the first vineyard-keeper, in ix. 20-27, is taken entirely from the
prophetic history, but in x. two distinct lists of the nations are
joined together. All the story of the tower of Babel in xi. 1-9 is from
the prophetic, while the genealogical list in the remainder of the
chapter is from the priestly history. The patriarchal and subsequent
narratives are likewise combined with, the same remarkable skill.

[Sidenote: _Later biblical analogies_]

Thus the first six Old Testament books were given their final form. The
method in general was the same as that followed by the authors of the
First and Third Gospels in their use of Matthew's Sayings of Jesus and
the original Mark narrative, or by the authors of Samuel, Kings, and
Chronicles in their citations from the older sources. In his close
fusion of three or four parallel narratives the editor's work resembled
most closely that of Tatian, who thus combined the four Gospels in his
_Diatessaron_. So far as we are able to observe, the final editor of
the Hexateuch preserved, like Tatian, most of the material in his older
sources, except where a parallel version verbally duplicated another.
The prophetic and priestly narratives also followed lines so distinctly
different that cases of duplication were comparatively few.

[Sidenote: _Deep significance of the work of the later editors_]

To the latest editor of the early narratives we owe the preservation of
some or the oldest and most valuable sections of the Old Testament. In
that age and land of perishable writing materials, the prevailing method
of compilation was one of the effective means whereby the important
portions of primitive records were handed down in practically their
original form. It is well that we are beginning to understand its
significance in the realization of the divine purpose. Important beyond
words, although often overlooked, were the services of the faithful
editors who without the slightest desire for personal glory or reward,
other than the perpetuation of truth, carefully selected, condensed, and
combined material gleaned from earlier and fuller sources. To them is
due the marvellous preservation of our Old Testament, To the honored
rôle of the prophets and apostles, therefore, let us add the anonymous
redactors.

[Sidenote: _Date of the beginning of the cannonization of the Law_]

The final editors were the immediate precursors of those who formed the
successive canons of the Old Testament. Indeed, between the work of the
former and the latter there is no clear line of demarcation. A period
shortly after 400 B. c. is the date usually accepted for the work of
the final editor of the Pentateuch; the canonization of the law, which
included these five books, is dated between 400 and 300 B.C. The real
canonization of Israel's laws had, however, begun much earlier. The
primitive decalogue, represented by Exodus xxxiv., and probably from
the first associated with Moses, appears, in the earliest periods of
Israel's history, to have enjoyed a canonical authority. The primitive
accounts, in Exodus xix., of the establishment of the covenant
by Jehovah with his people mark the real beginning of the process of
canonization,--a process, that is, of attributing to certain laws a
unique and commanding authority.

[Sidenote: _Popular acceptance and promulgation of the earlier codes_]

Likewise the successive civil, humane, and ceremonial decalogues appear
from the days of the united kingdom to have occupied a similar position.
Primarily this was probably due to the fact that each was based upon a
divine _torah_ or decision, received from Jehovah through the priestly
oracle. The public reading and promulgation of the Deuteronomic laws in
the days of Josiah, with the attestation of the prophets and the solemn
adoption by the people, was an act of canonization far more formal than
the final acceptance of the New Testament writings by the Council of
Carthage.

[Sidenote: _Adoption of the late priestly law_]

The next great stage in the canonization of the law is recorded in
Nehemiah x. Then the representatives of the Jewish community _entered
into a solemn obligation and took oath to walk in God's law, which was
given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe to do all the commands
of Jehovah our Lord and his ordinances and his statutes_ (v. 29.) This
action appears to be the historical basis of the fanciful and incredible
Jewish traditions concerning the work of the Great Synagogue and the
authority of Ezra. The new law thus adopted was evidently the one
gradually developed and finally formulated by the Jewish priests in
Babylonia. It was accepted, as was the earlier Deuteronomic code,
because it met the needs and appealed to the moral and religions sense
of those by whom it was adopted.

[Sidenote: _Acceptance of the completed Torah_]

To set completely aside the Deuteronomic lawbook and the primitive
decalogue of Exodus xx.-xxiii., already in force among the Jews of
Palestine, was impossible and unnecessary. Hence, as we have noted, it
was the task of some editor of the next generation to combine these
and the earlier prophetic histories with the late priestly law and its
accompanying history. Naturally this whole collection was still called
the _Torah_ or _Law_ and was at once accepted as canonical by the Jews.
This step was also most natural because their interests all centred
about the ritual, and for two centuries the dominant tendency had been
to exalt the sanctity of the written law.

[Sidenote: _Date of the final canonization of the Law_]

It is possible to fix approximately the date of this first edition of
the Old Testament writings, since the Samaritans adopted and still
retain simply the Pentateuch and an abbreviated edition of Joshua as
their scriptures. Although Josephus, following a late Jewish tradition,
dates the Samaritan schism at about 330 B.C., the contemporary evidence
of Nehemiah xiii. 28 suggests that it was not long after 400. It is
therefore safe to conclude that by 350 B.C. the first five books of our
Old Testament had not only been singled out of the larger literature
of the race, but were regarded as possessing a unique sanctity and
authority.

[Sidenote: _Principles of canonization_]

As the name _Law_ suggests, the chief reason for this was the fact that
these five books embodied laws long since accepted as binding. The
second reason was probably because they were by current tradition
ascribed to Moses. The third, and not the least, was, doubtless, because
they met the need felt by the community for a unified and authoritative
system of laws and for an authentic record of the earlier history of
their race, especially that concerning the origin of their beloved
institutions.

[Sidenote: _Evidence that the Law was first canonized_]

The priority of the canon of the law is also proved by the fact that,
although it contains some of the later Old Testament writings, it stands
first, not only in position but in the esteem of the Jewish race.
Furthermore, it became in time the designation of all the Old Testament
canonical writings. The term _Law_ is thus used in the New Testament
(_e.g._, John x. 34, xii. 34; I Cor. xiv. 21), in the Talmud, and by the
rabbis, indicating that the later groups of historical, prophetic, and
poetical books were simply regarded as supplements.

[Sidenote: _Canonization of the prophetic writings_]

The history of the canonization of the next group, known as the
_Prophets_, is very obscurely recorded, and this largely because it
reached its culmination in the Greek period, concerning which we have
only the most meagre information. Here analogy with the history of
the New Testament is helpful. The same influences which led the early
Christians to add the Epistles and Acts undoubtedly operated upon the
minds of the Jews. The Law represented only a limited period in their
national and religious history. But the addition of the early prophetic
and legal histories to the detailed laws prepared the way for the
expansion of the canon. This included first, the four historical books,
Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings, with the exception of Ruth. These
were designated as the _Former Prophets_. Thus even the later Jews
recognized their true character and authorship. The second division of
the _Prophets_ included Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the Book of the
Twelve, which contained the minor prophets.

[Sidenote: _Evidence that the historico-prophetic books were first added
to the Law_]

The order of the book and the probabilities of the situation suggest
that the _Former Prophets_, since they were the immediate sequel of the
prophetic histories of the Pentateuch, and recorded the deeds of such
heroes as David, Solomon, and Isaiah, were added first. That they also
bear the marks of late priestly revision, is direct evidence of the
esteem in which they were held by the late priestly school that
completed the canon of the Law. They therefore may have been added as
early as 300 B.C. They were certainly known to the author of Chronicles,
as his many quotations from them show, although it is difficult to see
how he would have felt as free as he does to substitute the testimony of
later tradition, if they were regarded as equally sacred with the Law.

[Sidenote: _Reverence for the prophetic word_]

The reference to the prediction of Jeremiah, in the opening verse
of Ezra, suggests the reverence with which the author of Chronicles
regarded the words of this prophet. The post-exilic Jews never ceased
to revere the prophetic word. The popular belief, current in the Greek
period, that the prophets had ceased to speak only deepened their
reverence for the teachings of Moses' successors (Deut. xviii. 15-19).
The devotion of the later scribes is evinced by the scores of glosses
which they have added to the older prophecies. It is manifest,
therefore, how strong was the tendency, even in priestly circles, to add
the Prophets to the Law.

[Sidenote: _Date of completion of the prophetic canon_]

The process was probably gradual and perhaps not complete until the Jews
had learned fully to appreciate the value of their ancient Scriptures,
after martyrs had died for the sacred writings during the Maccabean
struggle. Aside from supplements made to older books, as, for example,
Zechariah ix.-xiv., the canon of the prophets was probably closed not
later than 200 B.C. From direct evidence it is clear that the book of
Daniel (written about 165 B.C.) did not find a place in this canon. It
is also significant that in the prologue to the Greek version of Ben
Sira or Ecclesiasticus (132 B.C.) the translator refers repeatedly--as
though they were then regarded as of equal authority--to the _Law and
the Prophets and the rest of the books_, or to _the other books of the
fathers_. But most significant of all, Ben Sira, who wrote about 190
B.C., includes in his list of Israel's heroes (xliv.-l.) not only those
mentioned in the _Torah_, but also David, Solomon, Hezekiah, and the
chief characters in the _Former Prophets_. Furthermore, Isaiah and
Jeremiah and Ezekiel are introduced in their proper settings, and the
panegyric closes with a reference to the twelve prophets collectively,
indicating that Ben Sira was also acquainted with the _Latter Prophets_
as a group.

[Sidenote: _The beginning of the last stage in the canonization of the
Old Testament_]

The reference to _the rest of the books_ in the prologue to Ben Sira
indicates that even before 130 B.C. certain other writings had been
joined to the canon of the Law. Ben Sira himself, to judge from his
description of David (_cf_. xlvii. 8, 9, and I Chron. 25), Zerubbabel,
Joshua, and Nehemiah, was acquainted with the books of Chronicles, Ezra,
and Nehemiah. Chapter xlvii. 8 apparently contains an allusion to a
hymn-book attributed to David. Evidently he was also familiar with the
book of Proverbs, including its introductory chapters. Thus we have a
glimpse of the beginning of that third stage in the canonization of the
Old Testament which, as in the case of the New, continued for fully
three centuries.

[Sidenote: _Canonization of the Psalter and Lamentations_]

The Psalter doubtless passed through different stages of canonization,
as did the Old Testament itself. The earliest collection was, in the
beginning, probably made for liturgical purposes, and its adoption in
the service of the temple was practically equivalent to canonization.
When successive collections were added, they too were thus canonized.
The result was that the Psalter, when complete, enjoyed a position
somewhat similar to that of the Law and the Prophets, although the
authority of each rested upon a different basis. That the Psalter was
early canonized is further demonstrated by a quotation in I Maccabees
vii. 17 (about 125 B.C.) from Psalm lxxix. 2, 3, introduced by the
words, _as it is written in the Scriptures_. This conclusion is also
supported by the significant reference in the New Testament to the _Law,
the Prophets, and the Psalms_ (Lk. xxiv. 44). Jesus' use of the Psalter
indicates that in his day its canonicity was already thoroughly
established. Lamentations, by a late tradition attributed to Jeremiah,
was probably also canonized contemporaneously with the Psalms.

[Sidenote: _The other books of the fathers_]

The canonization of the book of Proverbs, like that of the Psalter, was
undoubtedly by successive stages. The Jews of the Greek and Maccabean
period were especially appreciative of this type of literature, and it
was doubtless accorded its position of authority primarily because it
rang true to human experience. That it was attributed to Solomon also
told in its favor. Ben Sira's indirect testimony suggests that it and
the books of Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah, which were in close accord
with the point of view of later Judaism, were already in his day
associated with the Law and the Prophets. The book of Ruth was probably
at this time added to the other historical books.

[Sidenote: _Canonization of the book of Daniel_]

The absence of any reference in Ben Sira to Daniel is significant. The
first allusion to it comes from the last half of the second century
before Christ. First Maccabees i. 54 appears to quote the prediction of
Daniel ix. 27, and in I Maccabees ii. 59, 60, Daniel and his three
friends are held up as noble examples of virtue. Thus it would seem that
within a half century after the book of Daniel was written its authority
was recognized. In New Testament times its canonicity is fully
established (_e.g., cf_. I Cor. vi. 2, and Dan. vii. 22).

[Sidenote: _Date of the completion of the Hebrew Old Testament canon_]

Concerning the canonicity of two books, Ecclesiastes and the Song of
Songs or Canticles, the opinions of the rabbis continued to differ until
the close of the first Christian century. From the Mishna we learn
that the school of Shammai accepted Ecclesiastes, while that of Hillel
rejected it. Finally, in a conference in Jamnia, about 100 A.D., the two
schools finally agreed to accept both books as canonical. From Second
Esdras and Josephus, however, we learn that the present Hebrew and
Protestant canon of the Old Testament had already for some time been
practically adopted by common consent.

[Sidenote: _Contents of the last group of writings_]

The last collection, which includes eleven books known as the
_Hagiographa_ or _Sacred Writings_, constitutes the third general
division of the Hebrew Scriptures. It is a heterogeneous group of
histories, prophecies, stories, and wisdom books. Some, like the
Psalter, were, as we have seen, probably canonized as early as the
Prophets; although the final canon of the Old Testament was not closed
until 100 A.D. Even later the canonicity of Ecclesiastes, the Song of
Songs, and Esther was sometimes questioned; most of them were regarded
as authoritative as early as 100 B.C. Here, as in the case of the New
Testament, the real decision was not the work of any school or council;
but gradually, on the basis of their intrinsic merit, the twenty-four
books of the Hebrew Bible were singled out of a much larger literature
and recognized, at least by the Jews of Palestine, as the authoritative
record of God's revelation through their race.

[Sidenote: _Differences between the Palestinian and Alexandrian canons_]

Jewish tradition, represented by Second Esdras xiv. and the Talmudic
treatise _Baba Bathra_ xv. a, states that all the canonical books were
in existence in the time of Ezra. While the tradition is refuted by the
historical facts, it appears to have influenced the Jews of Palestine in
shaping their canon; since no books purporting to come from a later date
or author are found in it. The broader-minded Jews of the dispersion,
and especially Alexandria and the early Christian Church, refused to be
bound by the narrow principle that divine revelation ceased with Ezra.
Accordingly we find them adopting a larger canon, that included many
other later writings known in time as the apocryphal or hidden books.

[Sidenote: _Additional books in the Greek and Christian canon_]

These consisted of three genuine works,--I and II Maccabees and Ben Sira
or Ecclesiasticus; two didactic stories,--Tobit and Judith; four books
wrongly ascribed to earlier authors,--the Wisdom of Solomon, Baruch, the
Epistle of Jeremy, and Second Esdras (Gk. IV Esdras); and four additions
to the Hebrew canonical books,--First Esdras, an expansion of the book
of Ezra, the Prayer of Manasses, and additions to Esther and Daniel.

[Sidenote: _History of the Apocryphal books in the Christian Church_]

As is well known, these books were retained by the Christian Church,
as they still are by the Roman Catholic and Greek churches, until the
Protestant reformers relegated them, as a whole, to a secondary place.
Ultimately the Bible societies, during the first part of the last
century, ceased to print them in the ordinary editions of the Bible.
The result is that the present generation has almost forgotten their
existence. The last decade or two, however, has witnessed a significant
revival of interest among the scholars of Christendom, and the wholesome
tendency to restore certain of the Apocrypha to the working Old
Testament canon is very marked. This is only a correction of the error
of the Protestant reformers in estimating the Apocryphal books, not by
the intrinsic merit of each individual writing but of the group as a
whole.

[Sidenote: _Great value of these later Jewish writings_]

Some of the Apocrypha and kindred books like the apocalypse of Enoch,
were quoted and recognized by New Testament scholars as having authority
equal to that of the other Old Testament Scriptures. The rejection of I
and II Maccabees and Ben Sira from the Palestinian canon because they
were written after the days of Ezra and not associated with the names
of any early Old Testament worthies, was due to a narrow conception
of divine revelation, directly contrary to that of Christianity which
recognized the latest as the noblest. These later Jewish writings
also bridge the two centuries which otherwise yawn between the two
Testaments--two centuries of superlative importance both historically
and religiously, witnessing as they do the final development of the life
and thought of Judaism and the rise of those conditions and beliefs
which loom so large in the New Testament.

[Sidenote: _The larger working canon of the Old Testament_]

While they will always be of great value in the study of later Jewish
history, literature, and religion, the majority of the apocryphal books
undoubtedly belong in the secondary group to which the Palestinian Jews
and the Protestant reformers assigned them. Three or four, however,
tested by the ultimate principles of canonicity, are equal, if not
superior, to certain books like Chronicles, Esther, and Ecclesiastes.
First Maccabees records one of the most important crises in Israelish
history. As a faithful historical writing, it is hardly equalled in
ancient literature. Its spirit is also genuinely religious. The later
but parallel history of II Maccabees is not the equal of the first,
although its religious purpose is more pronounced. Its historical
character, style, aim, and point of view are strikingly similar to those
of the book of Chronicles. The proverbs of Ben Sira, while not all
of the same value, yet abound in noble and practical teachings, very
similar to those in the book of Proverbs. Not only does the Wisdom of
Solomon contain many exalted and spiritual passages, but it is also of
unique importance because it represents that wonderful fusion of the
best elements in Hebrew and Hellenic thought which formed the background
of Christianity. Probably the Church, will ultimately restore to its
larger working Old Testament canon the beautiful Prayer of Manasses,
already largely adopted in the prayer-book of the Anglican Church.

[Sidenote: _Conclusion_]

Our rapid historical study has revealed the unity and the variety of
teaching reflected in the Old Testament, and has suggested its real
place in the revelation of the past and its true place in the life of
to-day. This older testament is the record of God's gradual revelation
of himself through the history of the Israelitish race and the
experiences and minds of countless men and women whose spiritual eyes
were open and whose ears were attentive to divine truth. The same benign
Father who has always spoken to his children has influenced them also to
recognize the writings that most faithfully and fully record the
spiritual truth thus revealed. Had the task been entrusted to our own or
later generations, it is not probable that the result would have
differed in any important essential. For a few brief centuries false
theories and traditions may partially obscure the truth, but these, like
the mists of morning, are sure in time to melt away and reveal the
eternal verities in their sublime beauty and grandeur.




