XV

PRACTICAL METHODS OF STUDYING THE OLD TESTAMENT

[Sidenote: _The various methods of approach_]

The Old Testament may be studied as literature, as history, as the
record of an important stage in the evolution of religion, as the
revelation of God to the race, or as a practical aid to the individual
in living the true life. Each angle of approach calls for different
methods and yields its correspondingly rich results. Studied in
accordance with the canons of modern literary investigation, a
literature is disclosed of surpassing variety, beauty, and fascination.
After the principles of historical criticism have been vigorously
applied, the Old Testament is found to contain some of the most
important and authentic historical data that have come down to us from
antiquity. To the general student of religion there is no group of
writings that equals in value those included in these ancient
Scriptures. As a simple, clear revelation of the character and will of
the Divine Ruler, present and regnant in all life, the Old Testament is
surpassed by only one other volume, and that is its complement, the New.

[Sidenote: _The supreme aim of Old Testament study_]

It is, however, as the guide to right thinking, and being, and acting,
_that the man of God may be perfect, completely equipped for every good
work_, that the Old Testament is and always will be studied by the
majority of people. In so doing they will be realizing its primary and
supreme purpose. Like true religion, it is not an end in itself, but
simply an effective force, drawing and binding individual men to God and
to the right. Any method of study that fails to attain this definite
and practical end does not achieve the chief aim of the Old Testament
writings.

[Sidenote: _Necessity of studying the Old Testament as an organic
whole_]

This practical and personal end, however, cannot be attained at a leap.
It is impossible to achieve the best results by taking a truth or a
passage here and there and applying it at once to the individual. Both
the Old Testament and the individual are something organic. Each book
has a unity and a history that must be understood, if a given passage is
to be fairly interpreted or its truths intelligently applied, Individual
books are also related to others and to their historical background.
Also, as has already been shown, to appreciate fully the vital message
of a given writer it is necessary, not to know his name, but his place
in history, his point of view, his method of expression, and his
purpose. The Old Testament and Israelitish history as a whole are the
best and most essential interpreters of individual books and passages.
The most serious handicap to the ordinary Bible teacher and scholar
is the lack of this broader, systematic, constructive knowledge. Much
earnest, devoted study, especially in the Old Testament fields, is
deficient in inspiration and results, because it is simply groping in an
unknown land. It is all important, therefore, to ascend some height and
spy out the land as a whole, to note the relation of different books and
events to each other, and to view broadly the great stream of divine
revelation which flows out of the prehistoric past on through the Old
and New Testaments to the present.

[Sidenote: _Remarkable adaptation of the Old Testament to different ages
and degrees of moral culture._]

In order effectively to apply the truths of the Old Testament to life,
it is also necessary to regard the point of view of the individual to
be taught. This fundamental principle of all education was fully
appreciated and applied by Israel's great spiritual teachers. The result
is that the Old Testament contains truths marvellously adapted to every
age and type of mind. The importance of the religious culture of the
child is emphasized by the comparatively large proportion, of writings
especially fitted to hold the attention and arouse the imagination and
shape the ideals even of the youngest. Nearly half of the Old Testament
consists simply of narratives. Those inimitable stories, which come from
the childhood of the race, have a perennial fascination for the child of
to-day. They find him on his own mental and moral plane, as they did the
primitive child, and by natural stages lead him on and up to the higher
standards and broader faith of Israel's later prophets and sages, and
thus prepare him to understand and appreciate the perfected life and
teachings of Jesus.

[Sidenote: _The prophetic stories the children's Bible_]

In the modern use of the Old Testament, the faithful application of this
fundamental principle also leads to a most practical conclusion; the
stories peculiarly adapted to children are not the mature, legalistic
narratives of the late priestly writers, but the early prophetic
stories, which begin in the second chapter of Genesis. If children are
taught only these, they will not be disconcerted by widely variant
versions of the same events. Above all, they will be delivered from the
inconsistencies and erroneous impressions which are often the cause of
stumbling to the child. The later process of unlearning, which is
always dangerous, will be avoided. If the problems presented by the
priestly narratives be reserved until they can be studied from the
broader and truer point of view, they will be readily solved, and the
great positive teachings of these later didactic stories will be fully
appreciated.

[Sidenote: _The prophets the best story-tellers_]

The subject-matter, therefore, supremely suitable for the earliest
moral and spiritual culture of the child, is clearly the simple and yet
profound prophetic stories of the Old Testament. It is very questionable
whether the many excellent paraphrases now current are a gain or a
hindrance. The ancient prophets and the generations who have retold them
were inimitable story-tellers. To attempt to improve upon their work is
futile. A simple, clear translation is all that is required. [Footnote:
A Children's Bible is now being prepared according to the plan suggested
above.] The interpretation and application of their practical teachings
can best be left to the intuition of the child and the direction of the
intelligent parent and teacher.

[Sidenote: _Their effective methods of presenting truths_]

It is also astonishing how readily even a little child appreciates the
essential lessons, as, for example, those regarding the nature and
consequences of sin, presented by the story of the Garden of Eden. Under
the charm of the attractive personalities that figure in them, and
the stirring achievements, so dramatically presented that they command
breathless attention, the early prophetic narrations unconsciously and,
therefore, all the more effectively, instil into the mind of the child
the most essential truths regarding God and life and duty. At the same
time, as they study in order the deeds of the heroes and makers of
Israel's history, they are becoming familiar with the real background of
the earlier revelation recorded in the Old Testament.

[Sidenote: _The present position of these stories_]

Therefore scattered throughout Genesis, Exodus, Numbers, Joshua, Judges,
Ruth, Samuel, Kings, and the older sections of Ezra, Nehemiah, and I
Maccabees, are to be found in rich profusion the material for the
earliest years of Bible study. These should naturally be supplemented by
the stories of the prophets, found in such books as Isaiah, Jeremiah,
and Haggai. Their sequel and culmination are the corresponding stories
in the Gospels and Acts.

[Sidenote: _Study of the direct personal teachings of the Old
Testament_]

In connection with the earliest study of the achievements of Israel's
heroes and spiritual leaders, many of their greatest teachings would be
appropriated and applied, but when the years of early adolescence are
reached, the prophets in their sermons, the priests in their laws, the
usages in their proverbs, and the psalmists in their psalms, each have
certain personal messages, superbly adapted to the critical, formative
years, when childhood begins to unfold into maturity. To make this
material available, judicious selection and interpretation are required.
The organism of each book and of the child must both be carefully
regarded to make the adjustment perfect. Naturally this most vital line
of study would be the introduction to a corresponding study of the
direct, personal teachings of Jesus and the apostles.

[Sidenote: _Study of the origin and growth of the Old Testament_]

This intensely practical work could profitably be preceded or followed
by a study of the origin and growth of the different books and groups of
Old Testament writings and the gradual stages whereby these Scriptures
attained their present form and authority. The guides in this
investigation should not be the Jewish rabbis or even the traditions of
the Church Fathers. We have been misled too long by the pious guesses of
the mediæval saints; but rather the testimony of the Bible itself and
the evidence of contemporary writings should be the guides. The spirit
should also be frank and constructive. The results cannot fail to be
practically helpful in a great variety of ways. Thus on the basis of
facts, in the light of history, and by the use of those methods of
research which alone command respect and acceptance in other kindred
lines of investigation, the questions which come to every thoughtful
boy and girl will be fairly and truly answered. In this way those
experiences which are inevitable in this critical age will deepen and
broaden rather than destroy the foundations of individual faith.

[Sidenote: _The historical method of approach_]

With this general introduction, many students and classes will find it
profitable to approach the Old and New Testaments from the distinctively
historical point of view. Beginning with the unfolding of the
civilization and religion of ancient Babylonia, they will study in
conjunction the history, the strong personalities, the literature, and
the thought of each successive period. The advantages of this method of
study are many. Each book will be read and its messages interpreted
in the light of the conditions and forces that constitute its true
background. The different characters will live again, and the
significance of their work and words will be fully appreciated as they
are viewed in the clear perspective of history.

[Sidenote: _Its practical aims and results_]

Above all, such a synthetic study of the unfolding of the supreme truths
of revelation lays a foundation for the individual faith as broad as
human experience. This is to attain one of the chief aims of all study,
which is to put the individual into practical possession of all that is
vital and best in the experiences and achievements of the past, that,
thus equipped, he may go forth to fight the battle of life, valiantly
and successfully.

[Sidenote: _Its natural sequel_]

This last course of study would call for several years, and, more than
that, for enthusiasm, devotion, and real work. It would also take the
student in time through the New Testament period, with its literature
and commanding personalities and events, and perhaps beyond to the great
epochs of Church history. Many would not stop until they had studied
the latest chapter in Church history, the noble missionary activity and
achievement of the past and present century.

[Sidenote: _Advances courses of study_]

When the Bible had thus been studied, the scholars in our schools would
not be ready to graduate, but rather to enter upon that still deeper
and more fundamental study which would mean an ultimate conquest of the
broad field that it represents. Then it might be safe and profitable to
adopt the topical method and study some one of the vital themes that are
treated from many different points of view in the various parts of the
Bible.

[Sidenote: _Study of Old Testament history_]

It will, however, probably be found easier and more natural next to
take up in succeeding years the detailed study of the nine or ten great
groups of writings which are found in the Bible. The natural and easiest
method of approach to those of the Old Testament would be through a
careful, constructive study of the history of the Israelitish race,
perhaps beginning with the definite historical period of Saul and Samuel
and concluding with the advent of Rome. Far better than any modern
history of Israel is that marvellous history written by its own
historians, which begins with the book of Samuel and ends with I
Maccabees. Analyzed and arranged in their chronological order, these
narratives tell the story with rare fascination and suggestiveness.
[Footnote: Volume II of the "Student's Old Testament": contains the
narratives from Samuel through I Maccabees, thus arranged.]

[Sidenote: _Study of the prophecies and earlier narratives_]

On the basis of this detailed study of the historical background, the
work and teachings of the prophets could next be traced in their true
and chronological order. No Old Testament field is more neglected and
none is more intensely interesting, when once the student understands
the problems and aims of each great prophet. None has a more practical
message for to-day, provided its supreme truths are interpreted into
modern terms and conditions. After becoming intimately acquainted with
the Hebrew prophets, it would be possible to go back and study with a
new understanding and appreciation the early narratives which gather
about the beginnings of Hebrew history. Then the intricate problems of
the first eight books of the Bible would vanish in the light of a fuller
knowledge. Above all, that which is essential and permanent would stand
out in clear relief.

[Sidenote: _Study of the devotional literature_]

From the earliest fruits of prophetic activity it would then be
profitable to turn to the later, represented by Lamentations and the
Psalter. Here the best results require a classification of the different
psalms according to their themes, so that their teachings can be studied
systematically and as a whole. In this field of study the student comes
very close to the heart of the Old Testament and the heart of the God
who speaks through it.

[Sidenote: _Study of the wisdom literature_]

Less spiritual and yet intensely interesting and practical is the great
department of the Old Testament known as the wisdom literature. _He that
walketh with the wise shall be wise_ (Prov. xiii. 20) is as true to-day
as when first uttered. This literature is a great mine of truth, almost
entirely neglected by the Christian world. Systematic classification
is the first requisite for the profitable study of the Proverbs and the
later Wisdom of Ben Sira. From these the student may pass on to the
fuller treatment of the omnipresent human problem, so sublimely
presented in the book of Job, and to the many fundamental questions
raised by Eccleslastes and the Wisdom of Solomon.

[Sidenote: _Study of the Old Testament laws and institutions_]

Last of all a year might well be spent in the study of the unfolding and
concrete application and illustration of Israel's ethical and religious
principles in the legal codes and institutions of the Old Testament.
Many of these have found a higher expression, some are but symbolic, but
others still have permanent authority and value. Studied as a whole and
on the basis of a logical classification, this little understood field
would also cease to be a jungle, and Instead would yield its own
practical spiritual fruits.




