IV

THE PLACE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT IN DIVINE REVELATION

[Sidenote: _Advent of the Hebrews_]

Modern discovery and research have demonstrated that the truth revealed
through the Babylonians and with less definiteness through the people of
the Nile was never entirely lost. Such a sad waste was out of accord
with the obvious principles of divine economy. As the icy chill of
ceremonialism seized decadent Babylonia and Egypt, there emerged from
the steppes south and east of Palestine a virile, ambitious group of
nomads, who not only fell heir to that which was best in the revelation
of the past, but also quickly took their place as the real spiritual
leaders of the human race. Possibly their ancestors, like those of
Hammurabi, belonged to that wave of nomadic emigration which swept out
of overpopulated northern Arabia about 2500 B.C., part of it to settle
finally in Babylonia and part in Palestine.

[Sidenote: _Why were they the chosen people?_]

Whatever be the exact date of their advent, the much mooted and more
fundamental question at once presents itself, Why were the Hebrews "the
chosen people"? It is safe to assert at once that this was not arbitrary
nor without reason. Moreover, the choice was not that of a moment, but
gradual. Rather the real question is, By what divine process were the
Israelites prepared to be the chosen people that their later prophets
and the event of history declare them to be? Certain definite historical
reasons at once suggest themselves; and these in turn throw new light
upon the true relation of the Old Testament to divine revelation as a
whole.

[Sidenote: _Their preparation to be the chosen people: genius for
religion_]

There is undoubtedly a basis for what Renan was pleased to call, "the
Semitic genius for religion." It is a truly significant fact that the
three great conquering religions of the world, Judaism, Christianity,
and Mohammedanism, sprang from Semitic soil. To this might be added the
religion of Babylonia, which, was unquestionably the noblest of early
antiquity. In general the Semitic mind is keen, alert, receptive, and
intuitional rather than logical. Restless energy and the tendency to
acquire have also tended to make them leaders in the widely different
fields of commerce and religion. The patriarch Jacob is a remarkable
example of these combined qualities and results. By day he got the
better of his kinsmen, and by night he wrestled with God. These combined
and highly developed characteristics of mind and nature at least suggest
why the Semites have furnished the greatest prophets and prophet nations
for the moulding of the faith of the world.

[Sidenote: _Inheritance through their Arabian antecedents_]

In contrast with contemporary Semitic nations, and especially the highly
civilized Babylonians, the Hebrews were fortunate in their immediate
inheritances through Arabian or Aramean ancestors. The wandering,
nomadic life leaves no place for established sanctuaries, with their
elaborate ceremonial customs and debasing institutions inherited from
more primitive ages. Instead, that life imposes limitations that make
for simplicity. The mysteries and constant dangers of the wild desert
existence also emphasize the constant necessity of divine help. The long
marches by night under the silent stars inspire awe and enforce
contemplation. The close unity of the tribe suggests the worship of one
tribal god rather than many. From the desert the ancestors of the
Hebrews brought strong bodies, inured to hardship, and a grim austerity
that found frequent expression on the lips of their prophets and a
response in the minds of the people, when luxury threatened to engulf
them. They also inherited from their desert days those democratic ideas
and high ideals of individual liberty which, enabled Elijah and Isaiah
to stand up add champion the rights of the people even though it
involved a public denunciation of their kings.

[Sidenote: _Contact with Babylonian civilization_]

On the other hand, the Israelites undoubtedly became in time the
inheritors of the best in religion and law that had been attained by the
older Semitic races. Their late traditions trace back their ancestry to
ancient Babylonia. Already for long centuries, by conquest and by
commerce, the dominant civilization of the Euphrates valley had been
regnant in the land of Canaan, The Tell-el-Amarna letters, written from
Palestine in the fourteenth century, employ the Babylonian language and
system of writing, and reveal a high Semitic civilization, closely
patterned after that of Babylonia. When the Israelites settled in Canaan
and began to intermarry and assimilate with the older inhabitants, as
the earliest Hebrew records plainly state (_cf_. Judg. I.), they found
there, among the Canaanites, established civil and religious
institutions and traditions which were largely a reflection of those of
Babylonia. Also, when in the eighth and seventh centuries Assyrian
armies conquered Palestine, they brought Babylonian institutions,
traditions, and religious ideas. We know that during the reigns of Ahaz
and Manasseh these threatened to displace those peculiar to the Hebrews.
Again, during the Babylonian exile the influence of the same powerful
civilization upon the thought and religion of Israel was also strongly
felt. Thus the opportunities, direct and indirect, for receiving from
Babylonia much of the rich heritage that it held were many and varied.

[Sidenote: _Heirs of the older Semitic civilizations_]

Certain parts of the Old Testament itself testify that the wealth of
tradition, of institutions, of laws, and religious ideas, gradually
committed to the Semitic ancestors of the Hebrews and best preserved by
the Babylonians, was not lost, but, enriched and purified, has been
transmitted to us through its pages. A careful comparison of the
biblical and Babylonian accounts of the creation and the flood leaves
little doubt that there is a close historical connection between these
accounts. Investigation reveals in language, spirit, and form many
analogies between the laws of Hammurabi and those of the Old Testament
which suggest at least an indirect influence. Many of the ceremonial
institutions of later Judaism are almost identical with those of
Babylonia. While it is exceedingly easy to over or under estimate this
influence, it is a mistake to deny or ignore its deep significance.

[Sidenote: _Recipients of all that was best in earlier revelation_]

Thus one of the chief elements in the providential training of the
Hebrews as the heralds and exponents of the most exalted religious and
ethical truths revealed before the advent of the Prophet of Nazareth was
the fact that they were the heirs and interpreters of the best that had
been hitherto attained. Babylonia, Egypt, and later, Persia and Greece,
each contributed their noblest beliefs and ideals. In the Israelites the
diverse streams of divine revelation converged. The result is that,
instead of many little rivulets, befouled by errors and superstitions,
through their history there flowed a mighty stream, ever becoming
broader and deeper and clearer as it received fresh contributions from
the new fountains of purest revelation that opened in Hebrew soil.

[Sidenote: _In close geographical relations to the earlier civilizations_]

Clear evidences of the divine purpose to be realized through the obscure
peasant people who lived among the uplands of central Canaan are found
in a study of the characteristics of the Old Testament world. It is
indeed the earliest and one of the most significant chapters in divine
revelation. Most of its area is a barren wilderness, supporting only a
small nomadic population. The three fertile spots are Babylonia, Canaan,
and Egypt. The first and last are fitted by nature and situation to be
the seats of powerful civilizations, destined to reach out in every
direction. Canaan, on the contrary, is shut in, with no good harbors
along the Mediterranean; and its largest river system leads to the Dead
Sea, far below the surface of the ocean,--an effective negation to all
commerce. Although thus shut in by itself, Canaan lies on the isthmus of
fertile land that connects the great empires of the Nile and the
Euphrates. On the east and south it is always subject to the influences
and waves of immigration, that come from the Arabian desert. It
attracted from their nomadic life the ancestors of the Israelites, and
during their early period of development gave them a secluded home. When
they were ready to learn the larger lessons in the stream of life, Egypt
and the great empires of the Tigris and Euphrates valley contended for
them, conquered and ultimately scattered them throughout the then known
world. While their conquerors, Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, Persia,
Greece, and Rome, the greatest powers of the ancient world, took from
them their gold and their freedom, from the same conquerors they appear
to have received the infinitely more precious treasures of tradition and
thought.

[Sidenote: _Trained by remarkable national experience_]

Great as was their heritage from the past, the truth that came through
the Hebrews themselves constitutes by far the greatest and most
significant part of that revelation which the Old Testament records.
Their history suggests the ways in which, Jehovah opened the spiritual
eyes of the people. From the beginning to the present day it has been
characterized by a series of crises unparalleled in the life of any
other race. Experiences, intense and often superlatively painful, have
come to them in rapid succession, forcing them to think and develop. The
little street Arab, alert, resourceful, uncanny in his prematurity, is a
modern illustration of what grim necessity and experience can produce.
It was in the school supremely adapted to divine ends that Jehovah,
trained his people to be his spokesmen to the world.

[Sidenote: _Guided by unique spiritual teachers_]

Other peoples, however, had their crises and yet had no such message as
did the Israelites. What made the crises in the history of the
Israelites richly fruitful in ethical and spiritual truth was the
presence within their midst of certain devoted, responsive teachers, and
especially the prophets, who guided them in their time of peril,
interpreted its significance, and appealed to the awakened conscience of
the nation. Like begets like. At the beginning of Israel's history
stands the great prophet Moses, and during the long centuries that
followed the voice of the prophets was rarely hushed.

[Sidenote: _Taught by inspired prophets_]

In seeking the ultimate answer to our question, How were the Israelites
prepared to be the chosen people, we are confronted by a miracle that
baffles our power to analyze: it is the supreme fact that the Spirit of
the Almighty touched the spirit of certain men in ancient Israel so that
they became seers and prophets. This is their own testimony, and their
deeds and words amply confirm it. The experiences of men to-day also
demonstrate its possibility. Indeed it is not surprising, but most
natural, that the one supreme Personality in the universe should reveal
himself to and through human minds, and that the most enlightened men of
the most spiritually enlightened race should be the recipients of the
fullest and most perfect revelation. It is the truth that they thus
perceived, and then proclaimed by word and deed and pen, that completed
the preparation of the chosen people, for it was none other than the
possession of a unique spiritual message that constituted the essence of
their choice. Furthermore, as the greatest of the later prophets
declares (Is. xl.-lv.), that divine choice did not mean that they were
to be the recipients of exceptional favors, but rather that they were
called to service. By the patient enduring of suffering and by voluntary
self-sacrifice they were to perfect the revelation of God's character
and will in the life of humanity.

[Sidenote: _Jesus' relation to the Old Testament_]

The Old Testament, therefore, is the final record of a revelation
extending through thousands of years, finding at last its most exalted
expression in the messages of the Hebrew prophets, and its clearest
reflection in the thoughts and experiences of the priests, sages, and
psalmists of ancient Israel. In varied literary forms and by many
different writers the best fruits of that revelation have been
preserved. Ancient traditions, songs, proverbs, laws, historical
narratives, prophecies, and psalms, each present their precious truth.
The Israelitish race, however, never fully completed the work to which
it was called. A master was needed to distinguish between the essential
and the non-essential, to simplify and unify the teachings of the Old
Testament as a whole, and to apply them personally to individual life, A
man was demanded to realize fully in his own character the highest
ideals of this ancient revelation. A divinely gifted prophet was
required to perfect man's knowledge, and to bring him into natural,
harmonious relations with his Eternal Father. The world awaited the
advent of a Messiah who would establish, on the everlasting foundations
of justice and truth and love, the universal kingdom of God. These
supreme needs were met in fullest measure by the Master, the perfect
Man, the Prophet, and the Messiah, whose work the New Testament records.

[Sidenote: _Points of likeness and contact between the two Testaments_]

While there are many superficial points of difference in language,
literary form, background, and point of view between the Old and the New
Testaments, these are insignificant in comparison with the essential
points of likeness and contact. Each Testament is but a different
chapter in the history of the same divine revelation. The one is
the foundation on which the other is built. The writers of the New
constantly assume the historical facts, the institutions, and the
teachings of the Old. Although in Greek garb, their language and idioms
are also those of the Old. On many themes, as, for example, man's duty
to society, Jesus said little, for the teachers of his race had fully
developed them and there was little to add. Repeatedly by word and act
he declared that he came not to destroy the older teachings, but simply
to bring them to full perfection. The Old Testament also tells of
the long years of preparation and of the earnest expectations of the
Israelitish race; the New records a fulfilment far transcending the
most exalted hopes of Hebrew seers. The same God reveals himself through
both Testaments. One progressively unfolding system of religious
teachings, one message of love, and one divine purpose bind both
together with bonds that no generation or church can break.




