VI

THE GROWTH OF THE OLD TESTAMENT PROPHETIC HISTORIES

[Sidenote: _Analogies between the influences that produced the two
Testaments_]

Very similar influences were at work in producing and shaping both the
Old and the New Testaments; only in the history of the older Scriptures
still other forces can be distinguished. Moreover, the Old Testament
contains a much greater variety of literature. It is also significant
that, while some of the New Testament books began to be canonized less
than a century after they were written, there is clear evidence that
many of the Old Testament writings were in existence several centuries
before they were gathered together into a canon and thus crystallized
into their final form. The inevitable result is that they bear the marks
of much more elaborate editorial revision than those of the New. It is,
however, not the aim of the present work to trace this complex process
of revision in detail, nor to give the cumulative evidence and the many
data and reasons that lead to each conclusion. These can be studied in
any modern Old Testament introduction or in the volumes of the present
writer's _Student's Old Testament_.

[Sidenote: _The present classification of the Old Testament books_]

In their present form, the books of the Old Testament, like those of the
New, fall into three classes. The first includes the historical books.
In the Old, corresponding to the four Gospels and Acts of the New, are
found the books from Genesis through Esther. Next in order, in the Old,
stand the poetical books, from Job through the Song of Songs, with which
the New Testament has no analogy except the liturgical hymns connected
with the nativity, preserved in the opening chapters of Matthew and
Luke. The third group in the Old Testament includes the prophecies from
Isaiah through Malachi.

[Sidenote: _Close correspondence between the Old Testament prophecies and
the New Testament apocalypses and epistles_]

One book in this group, Daniel, and portions of Ezekiel and Joel, are
analogous to the New Testament Apocalypse, but otherwise the prophetic
books correspond closely in character and contents to the epistles of
the New. Both are direct messages to contemporaries of the prophets and
apostles, and both deal with then existing conditions. Both consist of
practical warnings, exhortations, advice, and encouragement. The form is
simply incidental. The prophets of Jehovah preached, and then they or
their disciples wrote down the words which they had addressed to their
countrymen. When they could not reach with their voices all in whom
they were interested, the prophets, like the apostles, committed their
teachings to writing and sent them forth as tracts (_cf_. Jer. xxxvi.).
At other times, when they could not go in person, they wrote letters.
Thus, for example, the twenty-ninth chapter of the prophecy of Jeremiah
opens with the interesting superscription:

Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent
from Jerusalem unto the residue of the elders of the captivity, and
to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the people, whom
Nebuchadrezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon; by
the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah,
whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent unto Babylon to Nebuchadrezzar.

If it were not for this superscription, no one would suspect from the
nature of the letter which follows that it was anything other than a
regular spoken or written prophecy. Its contents and spirit are exactly
parallel to those of Paul's epistles. Undoubtedly many prophecies were
never delivered orally, but were originally written like Paul's Epistle
to the Ephesians, and sent out as circular letters. The Babylonian
exile scattered the Jews so widely that the exilic and post-exilic
prophets depended almost entirely upon this method of reaching their
countrymen and thus became writers of epistles.

[Sidenote: _The oldest literature poetry_]

Like the Epistles in the New, certain of the prophecies,--as, for
example, those of Amos, Hosea, and Isaiah,--are among the earliest
writings of the Old Testament. But in the light of modern biblical
study, it has become apparent that prose was not the earliest form of
expression among the Hebrews, In this respect their literary history
is parallel with that of other early peoples; for first they treasured
their thought in heroic song and ballad. While they were nomads,
wandering in the desert, and also while they were struggling for the
possession of Canaan, they had little time or motive for cultivating the
literary art. The popular songs which were sung beside the camp-fires,
at the recurring festivals, and as the Hebrews advanced in battle
against their foes, were the earliest records of their past. There is
evidence that many of the primitive narratives now found in the opening
chapters of Genesis were also once current in poetical form. In some
cases the poetic structure has been preserved.

[Sidenote: _Israel's early song-books_]

The earliest collections of writings referred to in the Old Testament
bear the suggestive titles, _The Book of the Upright_ (i.e., Israel),
and, _The Book of the Wars of Jehovah_. From the quotations which we
have from them it is clear that they consisted of collections of songs,
recounting the exploits of Israel's heroes and the signal victories of
the race.

[Sidenote: _The Song of Deborah_]

That stirring paean of victory known as the Song of Deborah was perhaps
once found in the Book of the Wars of Jehovah. It is one of the oldest
pieces of literature in the Old Testament, and breathes the heroic
spirit of the primitive age from which it comes. Through the eyes of the
poet one views the different scenes in the mighty conflict. [Footnote:
The translation is from "The Student's Old Testament," Vol. I., pp.
320-323.]

[Sidenote: _Exordium_]

  That the leaders took the lead in Israel,
  That the people volunteered readily,
  Bless Jehovah!
  Hear, O kings,
  Give ear, O rulers.
  I myself will sing to Jehovah,
  I will sing praise to Jehovah, the God of Israel.

[Sidenote: _Advent of Jehovah_]

  Jehovah, when thou wentest forth from Seir,
  When thou marchest from the land of Edom,
  The earth trembled, the heavens also dripped,
  Yea, the clouds dropped water.
  The mountains quaked before Jehovah,
  Yon Sinai before Jehovah, the God of Israel.

[Sidenote: _Conditions before the war_]

  In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath,
  In the days of Jael, the highways ceased to be used,
  And travellers walked by round-about paths.
  The rulers ceased in Israel, they ceased,
  Until than didst arise, Deborah,
  Until thou didst arise a mother in Israel.

         *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: _The rally about Deborah and Barak_]

  Then the people of Jehovah went down to the gates, crying,
  "Arise, arise, Deborah,
  Arise, arise, strike up the song!
  Arise Barak, and take thy captives, thou son of Abinoam!"
  So a remnant went down against the powerful,
  The people of Jehovah went down against the mighty,
  From Ephraim they rushed forth into the valley,
  Thy brother Benjamin among thy peoples,
  From Machir went down, commanders,
  And from Zebulun those who carry the marshal's staff.
  And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah;
  And Napthali was even so with Barak,
  Into the valley they rushed forth at his back.

[Sidenote: _The cowards who remained at home_]

  By the brooks of Reuben great were the resolves!
  Why didst they sit among the sheepfolds,
  Listening to the pipings for the flocks?
  By the brooks of Reuben there were great questionings!
  Gilead remained beyond the Jordan;
  And Dan, why does he stay by the ships as an alien?
  Asher sits still by the shore of the sea,
  And remains by its landings.

[Sidenote: _The battle and defeat of the Canaanites_]

  Zebulun was a people who exposed their lives to deadly peril,
  And Napthali on the heights of the open field.
  Bless Jehovah!
  Kings came, they fought;
  Then fought the kings of Canaan,
  At Taanach by the waters of Megiddo;
  They took no booty of silver.
  From heaven fought the stars,
  From their courses fought against Sisera.
  The river Kishon swept them away,
  The ancient river, the river Kishon.
  O my soul, march on with strength!
  Then did the horse-hoofs resound
  With the galloping, galloping of the powerful steeds.

[Sidenote: _David's dirge over Saul and Jonathan_]

  In the Book of the Upright is included that
  touching elegy which David sang after the
  death of Saul and Jonathan, and which stands
  next to the Song of Deborah as one of the
  earliest surviving examples of Old Testament
  literature.
  [Footnote: "Student's Old Testament," Vol. II., pp. 113,114.]

[Sidenote: _The greatness of the calamity_]

  Weep, O Judah!
  Grieve, O Israel!
  On thy heights are the slain!
  How have the mighty fallen!

  Tell it not in Gath,
  Declare it not in the streets of Askelon;
  Lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice,
  Lest the daughters of the uncircumcised exult.
  Ye mountains of Gilboa, may no dew descend,
  Nor rain upon you, O ye fields of death!
  For there was the shield of the mighty cast away,
  The shield of Saul, not anointed with oil.

[Sidenote: _Bravery and attractiveness of the fallen_]

  From the blood of the slain,
  From the fat of the mighty,
  The bow of Jonathan turned not back,
  The sword of Saul returned not empty.

  Saul and Jonathan, the beloved and the lovely!
  In life and in death they were not parted;
  They were swifter than eagles,
  They were stronger than lions.

[Sidenote: _Saul's services to Israel_]

  Daughters of Israel, weep over Saul,
  Who clothed you daintily in fine linen,
  Who put golden ornaments on your garments, [and say:]
  "How have the mighty fallen in the midst of battle!"

[Sidenote: _David's love for Jonathan_]

  Jonathan, in thy death hast thou wounded me!
  I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan!
  Thou wert surpassingly dear to me,
  Thy love to me was far more than the love of woman!

  How have the mighty fallen,
  And the weapons of war perished!

[Sidenote: _The blessing of Jacob_]

The so-called _Blessing of Jacob_ (Gen. xlix, 2-27) is a poetical
delineation of the strength and weakness of the different tribes of
Israel with references to specific events in their history. These
historical allusions suggest that it probably comes from the reigns of
David and Solomon, when the tribes were for the first time all united
under a common rule and had passed through certain of the experiences
alluded to in the poem.

[Sidenote: _Israel's heritage of oral traditions_]

The Israelitish race was supremely rich in possessing not only many
ancient songs, but also a large body of oral traditions which had
long been handed down from father to son or else treasured by the
story-tellers and by the priests of the ancient sanctuaries. Many of
these traditions were inherited from their Semitic ancestors, and, in
the light of recently discovered Babylonian literature, can be traced
back far beyond the days of Abraham and Moses. Some were originally
the possessions of certain nomadic tribes; others recorded the early
experiences of their ancestors or told of the achievements of early
heroes. In the process of continuous retelling, all unnecessary details
had been eliminated and the really dramatic and essential elements
emphasized, until they attained their present simple, graphic form,
which fascinates young and old alike.

[Sidenote: _Value of these oral traditions_]

The superlative value of these varied traditions is apparent. They were
the links which bound later generations to their prehistoric past.
Incidentally, in the characteristic language of Semitic tradition, they
preserved the memory of many important events in their early tribal
history. They are also the illuminating record of the primitive beliefs,
customs, and aspirations of their Semitic ancestors. Subject as they
inevitably were to the idealizing tendency, they became in time the
concrete embodiment of the noblest ideals of later generations. Thus
they presented before the kindled imagination of each succeeding age,
in the character and achievements of their traditional ancestors, those
ideals of courage, perseverance, and piety which contributed much toward
making the Israelites the chosen people that they were.

[Sidenote: _Influences that led to the writing of history_]

In time this growing heritage of traditions became too great for even
the remarkable Oriental memory to retain. Meantime the Hebrews had also
acquired that system of writing which they learned from their more
civilized neighbors the Canaanites and Phoenicians. From, the days of
Solomon, scribes were to be found in court and temple, and probably
among the prophetic guilds; although the common people, as in the same
land to-day, doubtless had little knowledge of the literary art. While
the nation was struggling for the soil of Canaan, or enjoying the full
tide of victory and achievement that came under the leadership of David,
there was no time or incentive to write history. But with the
quieter days of Solomon's reign, and the contrasting period of national
decline that followed his death, the incentive to take up the pen and
record the departed glories became strong. With a large body of definite
oral traditions dealing with all the important men and events of the
earlier periods, the task of the historian was chiefly that of writing
down and coordinating what was already at hand.

[Sidenote: _The early Judean prophetic history_]

The oldest Hebrew history that has been preserved in the Old Testament
was the work of an unknown Judean prophet or group of prophets who lived
and labored probably during the latter part of the ninth century before
Christ. This history corresponds closely in relative age and aim to
Mark's graphic narrative of the chief facts in the life of Jesus. The
motive which influenced the earliest historians both of the Old and New
Testaments to write was primarily the religious significance of the
events which they thus recorded. This early Judean prophetic history
(technically known as J) begins with the account of the creation of man
from the dust by the hand of Jehovah, and tells of the first sin and its
dire consequences (Gen. ii. 4 to iii. 24); then it gives an ancient list
of those who stood as the fathers of nomads, of musicians and workers in
metal (Gen. iv. 1, l6b-26). This is followed by the primitive stories
of the sons of God and the daughters of men (Gen. vi. 1-4), of Noah the
first vineyard-keeper (ix. 20-27), and of the tower of Babel and the
origin of different languages (xi. 1-9). In a series of more or less
closely connected narratives the character and experiences of the
patriarchs, the life of the Hebrews in Egypt and the wilderness, and the
settlement in Canaan are presented. Its basis for the history of the
united kingdom was for the most part the wonderfully graphic group of
Saul and David stories which occupy the bulk of the books of Samuel.
Thus this remarkable early Judean prophetic history begins with the
creation of the universe and man and concludes with the creation of the
Hebrew empire.

[Sidenote: _Its unity and characteristics_]

In its present Old Testament form it has been closely combined with
other histories, just as Mark's narrative is largely reproduced in
Matthew and Luke; but when, it is separated from the later narratives
its unity and completeness are astounding. Almost without a break it
presents the chief characters and events of Israel's history in their
relations to each other. The same peculiar vocabulary, the use of
Jehovah as the designation of the Deity, the same vivid, flowing
narrative style, the same simple, naïve, primitive conception of
Jehovah, the same patriotic interest in the history of the race, and the
same emphasis upon the vital religious significance of men and facts,
characterize every section of this narrative and make comparatively easy
the task of separating it from the other histories with which it has
been joined.

[Sidenote: _The early Ephraimite prophetic history_]

A little later, sometime about the middle of the eighth century before
Christ, a prophet or group of prophets in Northern Israel devoted
themselves to the similar task of writing the history of Israel from
the point of view of the northern kingdom. Since this state is called
_Ephraim_ by Hosea and other writers of the North, its history may be
designated as _the early Ephraimite prophetic_ (technically known as E).
Naturally its author or authors utilized as the basis of their work
the oral traditions current in the North. Sometimes these are closely
parallel, and sometimes they vary widely in order and representation
from the Judean versions. In general the variations are similar,
although somewhat greater than those between the parallel narratives of
Matthew and Luke.

[Sidenote: _Its characteristics_]

Marked peculiarities in vocabulary and literary style distinguish
this northern history from the Judean. Since _Elohim_ or _God_ is
consistently used to describe the Deity, it has sometimes been called
the _Elohistic_ history. Interest inclines to the sanctuaries and heroes
and events prominent in the life of the North. In that land which
produced a Samuel, an Elijah, an Elisha, and an Hosea, it was natural
that especial emphasis should be placed on the role of the prophet.
Throughout these narratives he is portrayed as the dominant figure,
moulding the history as God's representative. Abraham and Moses are here
conceived of as prophets, and the Ephraimite history of their age is
largely devoted to a portrayal of their prophetic activity.

[Sidenote: _Its scope_]

The interests of later editors who combined these early prophetic
histories, as we now find them in the Old Testament, were centred in the
Judean, and hence they have introduced citations from the Ephraimite
narratives chiefly to supplement the older history. Possibly it never
was as complete as that of the South. At present it begins with Abraham
and traces the parallel history of the patriarchs and the life of the
Hebrews in Egypt and the wilderness. Its account of the conquest, is
somewhat fuller, probably because Joshua was a northern leader. It also
preserves many of the stories of the heroes in the book of Judges. With
these the citations from the early Ephraimite prophetic history seem to
disappear, but the opening stories in the book of Samuel, regarding the
great prophet whose name was given to the book, apparently come from the
pen of later disciples of this same Ephraimite group of prophets.

[Sidenote: _Later editorial supplementing and combination of the two
histories_]

The eighth and seventh centuries before Christ were periods of intense
prophetic activity both in the North and the South. It was natural,
therefore, that these early prophetic histories should be supplemented
by the disciples of the original historians. Traditions that possessed a
permanent historical or religious value, as, for example, the familiar
story of Cain and Abel (Gen. iv. 2-16), and the earlier of the two
accounts of the flood, were thus added. Also when in 722 B.C. the
northern kingdom fell and its literary heritage passed to Judah, it was
most natural that a prophetic editor, recognizing the valuable elements
in each, and the difficulties presented by the existence of the two
variant versions of the same events, should combine the two, and
furthermore that, in the days of few manuscripts, the older originals
should be lost and only the combined history survive. To-day we find
this in turn incorporated in the still later composite history extending
from Genesis through Samuel.

[Sidenote: _Method of combining_]

The later editor's method of uniting his sources is exceedingly
interesting, and is analogous in many ways to the methods followed
in the citations in Matthew and Luke from their common sources, the
original Mark and Matthew's _Sayings of Jesus_. Where the two versions
were closely parallel, as in the account of Jacob's deception of
his father Isaac, or the story of the spies, the two are completely
amalgamated; short passages, verses, and parts of verses are taken in
turn from each. In other cases the editor introduced the different
versions--as, for example, the two accounts of the flight of Hagar--into
different settings. From subsequent allusions to two versions, of which
only one survives in the Old Testament, it is to be inferred that
sometimes he simply preserved the fuller, usually the Judean. As a rule,
however, there is clear evidence that he made every effort to retain
all that he found in his original sources, even though the resulting
composite narrative contained many inconsistencies.

[Sidenote: _Practical value of the rediscovery of the original histories_]

To the careful student, seeking to recover the original narratives in
their primal unity, these inconsistencies are guides as valuable as the
fossils and stratification of the earth are to the geologist intent upon
tracing the earth's past history. Guided by these variations and the
distinctive peculiarities in vocabulary, literary style, point of view,
religious conceptions, and purpose of each of the groups of narratives,
Old Testament scholars have rediscovered these two original histories;
and with their recovery the great majority of seeming inconsistencies
and many perplexing problems fade into insignificance. Supplementing
each other, as do the earliest Gospels, these two independent histories
present with new definiteness and authority the essential facts in
Israel's early political, social and religious life. Like eye-witnesses,
they testify to the still more significant fact that from the first God
was revealing his character and will through a unique race.

[Sidenote: _The brief late prophetic history_]

A third survey of the period beginning with the sojourn in Egypt and
concluding with the conquest of the east-Jordan land is found in the
introduction to the book of Deuteronomy. It is the prologue to the laws
that follow, appropriately and effectively placed in the mouth of the
pioneer prophet Moses. A comparison quickly demonstrates that it is in
reality a brief summary of the older histories, and especially of the
early Ephraimite prophetic. Like the Gospel of Matthew, its aim is not
merely to present historical facts, but to illustrate and establish a
thesis. The thesis is that Jehovah has personally led his people, and
that when they have been faithful to him they have prospered, but
when they have disobeyed calamity has overtaken, them. The message is
distinctly prophetic; and to distinguish this third history, which was
probably written near the close of the seventh century before Christ,
from the earlier, it may be designated as the late prophetic or
_Deuteronomic history_ (technically represented by D).

[Sidenote: _Comparison of the Old with the New Testament histories_]

These three prophetic histories correspond strikingly to the three
synoptic Gospels: Mark, Luke and Matthew. The essential differences in
their literary history are that they come, not from a single limited
group of writers and a brief quarter century, but represent the work
of many hands and at least two hundred and fifty years of literary
activity. Two, at least, of these histories, are no longer extant in
their original form, but only as they have been quoted verbatim by
later historians and closely amalgamated. Similarly, as is well
known, Tatian, the pupil of Justin Martyr, in the middle of the second
Christian century, did for the four Gospels precisely what an Old
Testament editor did for the two early prophetic histories,--he combined
them into one composite, continuous narrative. By joining passages
and verses and parts of verses taken from the different Gospels,
by omitting verbal duplicates, by rearranging in some cases and by
occasionally adding a word or phrase to join dissimilar parts, Tatian
produced a marvellous mosaic gospel, known as the _Diatessaron_. All of
the Fourth Gospel is thus preserved, and most of the first three.
So successfully was the work done that the volume was widely used
throughout the Eastern Church. If, as once seemed possible, it had
completely supplanted the original four Gospels, the literary history of
these would have been a repetition of that of the earliest Old Testament
records.

[Sidenote: _The dominant motive of the prophetic historians_.]

It is very important to note that the motive which led the prophetic
historians to commit to writing the earlier traditions of their race was
not primarily historical. Like the author of the Fourth Gospel, they
selected their material chiefly with a view to enforcing certain
important religious truths. If an ancient Semitic tradition illustrated
their point, they divested it of its heathen clothing and, irrespective
of its origin, pressed it into service. For example, it seems clear that
the elements which enter into the story of the Garden of Eden and man's
fall were current, with variations, among the ancient Babylonians
centuries before the Hebrews inherited them from their Semitic
ancestors. The early prophet who wrote the second and third chapters
of Genesis appreciated their value as illustrations, and made them the
medium for imparting some of the most important spiritual truths ever
conveyed to mankind. Like the preachers or moral teachers of to-day, the
first question the prophets asked about a popular story was not, Is it
absolutely historical or scientifically exact? but, Does it illustrate
the vital point to be impressed? Undoubtedly Israel's heritage of oral
traditions was far greater than is suggested by the narratives of the
Old Testament; but only those which individually and collectively
enforced some important religious truth, were utilized. Just as Jesus
drew his illustrations from nature and human life about him, so these
earlier spiritual teachers, with equal tact, took their illustrations
from the familiar atmosphere of song and story and national tradition in
which their readers lived. A secondary purpose, which they obviously
had in view, was also to remove from certain of the popular tales the
immoral implications which still clung to them from their heathen past,
and to reconsecrate them to a diviner end.

[Sidenote: _The permanent and vital value of these narratives_]

Questions of relative date and historical accuracy concern the
historian, but they should not obscure the greater value of these
narratives. To the majority of us, who turn to the Old Testament simply
as the record of divine revelation and as a guide to life, the essential
thing is to put ourselves into touch with these ancient prophets, who
taught by illustration as well as by direct address, and ask, What was
the ethical or spiritual truth that illumined their souls and finds
concrete expression and illustration through these primitive stories? To
discuss the literal historicity of the story of the Garden of Eden is as
absurd as to seek to discover who was the sower who went forth to sow
or the Samaritan who went down to Jericho. Even, if no member of
the despised Samaritan race ever followed in the footsteps of an
hypocritical Levite along the rocky road to Jericho and succored a needy
human being, the vital truth abides. Not until we cease to focus
our gaze on the comparatively unimportant, can we discern the great
spiritual messages of these early narratives.

[Sidenote: _The sequel to the early prophetic histories_]

The sequel to the great prophetic histories which underlie the Old
Testament books, from Genesis through Samuel, is in the books of Kings.
These carry the record of Israel's life down to the Babylonian exile.
The opening chapters of First Kings contain the conclusion of the Judean
prophetic David stories. Fortunately the rest of the biblical history to
the exile was largely compiled from much earlier sources. As in most of
the historical writings, the later editors, also, quoted _verbatim_ from
these earlier records and histories, so that in many cases we have the
testimony of almost contemporary witnesses. The titles of certain of
these earlier books are given: _The Book of the Acts of Solomon_, _The
Chronicles of the Kings of Israel_, and _The Chronicles of the Kings of
Judah_.

[Sidenote: _Earlier sources quoted by the editor of Kings_]

A careful study of the books of Kings suggests many other ancient
sources. For the reign of Solomon, state annals, temple records, and
popular Solomon traditions appear to have been utilized. The graphic
account of the division of the Hebrew empire was probably drawn from
an early Jeroboam history. In the latter part of First Kings appear
citations from an early Ahab history and a group of Ephraimite Elijah
stories. The political data throughout First and Second Kings were
probably drawn from the annals of the northern and southern kingdoms.
Furthermore, in II Kings ii.-viii. appear long quotations from two
cycles of Elisha stories, centring, respectively, about the ancient
northern sanctuary of Gilgal, near Shiloh, and about Samaria. The rest
of the book includes citations from sources which may be designated as a
prophetic Jehu history, temple records, a Hezekiah history, and a group
of Isaiah stories.

[Sidenote: _Influences that produced this later prophetic history_]

These valuable quotations the late prophetic editor of Kings has
arranged in chronological order and fitted into a framework which gives
the length of each reign and the date of accession of the different
kings, according to the chronology of the other Hebrew kingdom. To this
data he adds a personal judgment upon the policy of each ruler, thereby
revealing his prophetic spirit. History is to him, as to every true
prophet, a supreme illustration of fundamental spiritual principles.
Clearly the influence that led him to compile and edit his great work
was his recognition of the fact that the record of Israel's national
experience as a whole was of deep religious import. The same motive
undoubtedly guided him in the selection of material from his great
variety of sources. Only that which was essential was presented. Thus
he, or a later editor of his book, traced Israel's remarkable
history down to the middle of the Babylonian exile (560 B.C.), and
completed that wonderful chain of prophetic narratives which record
and interpret the first great chapter of divine revelation through the
chosen race.




