X

THE HEBREW SAGES AND THEIR PROVERBS

[Sidenote: _Rôle of the sages in Israel's life_]

In the days of Jeremiah and Ezekiel (Jer. xviii. 18; Ezek. vii. 26)
three distinct classes of religious teachers were recognized by the
people: the prophets, the priests, and the wise men or sages. From
their lips and pens have come practically all the writings of the Old
Testament. Of these three classes the wise men or sages are far less
prominent or well known. They wrote no history of Israel, they preached
no public sermons, nor do they appear to have been connected with any
sanctuaries. Quietly, as private teachers, they appealed to the nation
through the consciences and wills of individuals. Proverbs viii. 1-5
reveals their methods:

  Doth not wisdom cry,
  And understanding put forth her voice?
  On the top of high places by the way,
  Where the paths meet, she standeth;
  Beside the gates, at the entry of the city,
  At the coining in at the doors, she crieth aloud:
  Unto you, O men, I call;
  And my voice is to the sons of men.
  O ye simple, understand prudence;
  And ye fools, be of an understanding heart.

At the open spaces beside the city gates, where legal cases were tried,
at the intersections of the streets, wherever men congregated, the sages
of ancient Israel could be found, ready and eager to instruct or advise
the inexperienced and foolish.

[Sidenote: _Their functions_]

The wise man or sage is a characteristic Oriental figure. First Kings
iv. 30 speaks of the far-famed wisdom of the nomadic tribes of northern
Arabia and of the wisdom of Egypt. The sage appears to have been the
product of the early nomadic Semitic life, in which books were unknown
and the practical wisdom gained by experience was treasured in the minds
of certain men who were called the wise or sages. In our more complex
western life such functions have been distributed among the members of
the legal, medical, and clerical professions, but even now, in smaller
towns, may be found an Uncle Toby who is the counterpart of the ancient
Hebrew sage. To men of this type young and old resort with their private
problems, and rarely return without receiving real help and light. In
the East, sages are still to be found, usually gray-bearded elders,
honored and influential in the tribe or town.

[Sidenote: _Source of their knowledge and inspiration_]

Of the three classes of Israel's teachers the sages stood in closest
touch with the people. They were naturally the father-confessors of the
community. Observation was their guide, enlightened common sense their
interpreter, and experience their teacher. The great book of human life,
which is one of the most important chapters of divine revelation, was
thrown open wide before them. The truths that they read there, as their
eyes were divinely opened to see it, are recorded in the wisdom books of
the Old Testament,--Proverbs, Job, The Song of Songs, and Ecclesiastes.

[Sidenote: _The objects of their attention_]

It is significant that neither Israel nor the nation is mentioned in all
the wisdom literature, and that man is spoken of thirty-three times
in the book of Proverbs alone. Man was the object of their study and
teaching; the nation, only as it was made up of individuals. In this
respect the sages stand in contrast with the prophets, whose message
usually is to the nation. They also have little to say about the ritual
or the forms of religion. _To them the fear and knowledge of God is the
beginning of wisdom_, and its end a normal relation to God, to one's
fellowmen, and to life. Their message is directed equally to all
mankind. The subjects that command, their attention are of universal
interest: the nature and tendencies of man, and his relations and duties
to God, to society, to the family, and to himself. Everything that
concerns man, whether it be the tilling of the soil, the choice of a
wife, the conduct of a lawsuit, or the proper deportment in the presence
of a ruler, commands their earnest consideration.

[Sidenote: _Their aims not theoretical but practical_]

The Hebrew sages, however, were not mere students of human nature or
philosophers. Knowledge to them was not an end in itself, but only a
means. Their contribution to Israel's life was counsel (Jer. xviii.
18). Their aim was, by the aid of their tried maxims, to so advise the
inexperienced, the foolish, indeed, all who needed advice, that they
might live the fullest and best lives and successfully attain all worthy
ends. While their teaching was distinctively ethical and religious, it
was also very practical and utilitarian. As pastors and advisers of the
people, they drew their principles and ideals from Israel's prophets,
and applied them to the practical, every-day problems of life. It is
obvious that without their patient, devoted instruction the preparation
of the chosen people for their mission would have been imperfect, and
that without a record of their teachings the Old Testament would have
been incomplete.

[Sidenote: _Their teachings preserved in proverbs_]

The proverb was the most characteristic literary form in which the sages
treasured and imparted their teachings. Poetical in structure, terse,
often figurative or epigrammatic, the proverb was well calculated to
arouse individual thought and make a deep impression on the mind.
Transmitted from mouth to mouth for many generations, like the popular
tradition or law, it lost by attrition all its unnecessary elements, so
that, 'like an arrow,' it shot straight to the mark. Based on common
human experience, it found a ready response in the heart of man. In this
way crystallized experience was transmitted, gathering effectiveness
and volume in each succeeding generation. Job viii. 8-10 speaks of this
accumulated wisdom handed down from _the former age, that which the
fathers have searched out. They shall teach man and inform him, and
utter words out of their heart_. Job xv. 18 also refers to that _which
wise men have told from their fathers and have not hid it_. A proverb
thus orally transmitted not only gains in beauty of form but also in
authority, for it is constantly being tested in the laboratory of real
life and receives the silent attestation of thousands of men and of
many different generations.

[Sidenote: _Expansion of the proverb_]

When the sages desired to treat a many-sided subject, as, for example,
intemperance, they still used proverbs, but combined them into brief
gnomic essays (_e. g_., xxiii. 29-85, xxvi. 1-17). Sometimes, to fix the
attention of their hearers, they combined two proverbs, so as to produce
a paradox, as in Proverbs xxvi. 4, 5:

  Answer not a fool according to his folly,
  Lest them also be like unto him.
  Answer a fool according to his folly,
  Lest he be wise in his own conceit.

Later they developed the simple gnomic essay into a philosophical
drama, of which Job is the classic example, or into a homily, like
Ecclesiastes.

[Sidenote: _Use of fables and riddles_]

Side by side with the proverb, the sages appear from the earliest times
to have used the fable also; this is illustrated by the fable of Jotham
in Judges ix. 6-21. Of the riddle a famous examples is that of Samson
in Judges xiv. 14, 18, which combines rhythm of sound with rhythm of
thought and well illustrates the form of the earliest popular Hebrew
poetry:

  Out of the eater came something to eat,
  And out of the strong came something sweet,

  And its answer: If with my heifer you did not plow,
  You had not solved my riddle now.

Proverbs xxx. 15-31 contains a collection of numerical riddles, combined
with their answers.

[Sidenote: _Traces of proverbs and the work of sages in the Hebrew
history_]

Proverbs are found in the oldest Hebrew literature. The Midianite kings,
awaiting death at the hand of Gideon, cite a popular proverb, _For as
the man, so is his strength_. David in his conversation with Saul says,
_As runs the proverb, "Out of the wicked cometh forth wickedness"_ (I
Sam. xxiv. 13). Frequent references are also found to wise men and
women, and examples are given of their prudence and insight Thus Joab,
David's iron-hearted commander, brings a wise woman from Tekoa, the
later home of the prophet Amos, to aid him in securing the recall of the
banished Absalom. By her feigned story she succeeds in working upon the
sympathy of the king to such a degree that he commits himself finally to
a principle which she at once asks him to apply to the case of his own
son (II Sam. xiv. 1-24).

[Sidenote: _Basis of Solomon's reputation for wisdom_]

The stories told in I Kings iii. 16-28, to illustrate the wisdom of
Solomon, suggest the historical basis of the reputation which he enjoyed
in the thought of succeeding generations. Such stories also indicate, as
do the other early examples of the work of the wise, the conception of
wisdom held in that more primitive age. Such wisdom does not necessarily
include ethical righteousness or even practical executive ability, for
the true Solomon of history was lacking in both; but rather a certain.
shrewdness, versatility, and keenness of insight which enable its
possessor to discern what is not clearly apparent. First Kings iv. 29-34
contains the later popular tradition of Solomon's wisdom:

(29) And God gave Solomon wisdom and insight in plentiful measure, and
breadth of mind, even as the sand that is on the seashore, (30) so that
Solomon's wisdom surpassed the wisdom of all the eastern Arabians and
all the wisdom of Egypt. (31) For he was wiser than all men: than Ethan
the Ezrahite, and Heman, Calcol, Darda, the sons of Mahol, and his fame
was in all the surrounding nations. (32) And he uttered three thousand
proverbs, and his songs were five thousand. (33) And he spoke of
different varieties of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon even to
the hyssop that springs out of the wall; he spoke also of beasts, of
birds, of creeping things, and of fishes. (34) And there came some from
among all peoples to hear the wisdom of Solomon, deputed by all
kings of the earth, who had heard of his wisdom.

[Sidenote: _Reason why all ancient proverbs were attributed to him_]

A popular proverb, like a primitive oral law, usually grows out of
common human experience, and is gradually formulated and moulded into
its final literary form by successive generations. No one man can claim
it as his own, and even if he could, the ancient Semitic East, which
cared so little about authors' titles, would have quickly forgotten his
name. That Solomon did utter certain brilliant aphorisms, embellished by
illustrations drawn from animal and plant life, cannot be doubted;
and that some of them have been preserved in the book of Proverbs is
probable. These facts and the popular tradition that tended to exalt his
wisdom clearly explain why all Hebrew proverbs were attributed to him
(Prov. i. 1), in the days of the final editing of the book of Proverbs.

[Sidenote: _Evidence that Proverbs comes from many different writers_]

That our present book of Proverbs is the work of many unknown sages,
and consists of a collection of smaller groups coming from different
periods, is demonstrated by the superscriptions which recur throughout
the book, such as, _These are the proverbs of Solomon_ (x. 1), _These
also are the sayings of the wise_ (xxiv. 23), _These are the proverbs of
Solomon which the men of_ _Hezekiah king of Judah copied out_ (xxv. 5),
_The words of King Lemuel_ (xxxi. 1), The same proverbs also recur In
different groups, indicating that originally they were independent
collections, gleaned from the same field. When the first collection was
made, the title _Proverb of Solomon_ evidently meant a popular maxim
handed down from antiquity and therefore naturally attributed to the
most famous wise man in Israel's early history. It is an instructive
fact that later proverbs, the immediate superscriptions to which plainly
state that they come from many different sages, are still called
_Proverbs of Solomon;_ it betrays an exact parallel to the similar
tendency, apparent in the legal and prophetic literature, to attribute
late anonymous writings to earlier authors. This is also further
illustrated by such late Jewish books as _The Wisdom of Solomon_ or the
_Psalms of Solomon._

[Sidenote: _Testimony of the individual proverbs_]

The individual proverbs confirm the general conclusion that they come
from many different authors. Those which commend fidelity to one wife
and kingly consideration for the rights of subjects, qualities in which
Solomon was sadly lacking, do not fit in his mouth. Many are written
from the point of view of a subject, and describe what a man should do
in the presence of a ruler. Furthermore, the ethical standards upheld
are those of prophets who lived and taught long after the days of the
Grand Monarch who fascinated his own and succeeding generations by his
brilliant wit rather than by his sterling virtues.

[Sidenote: _Real nature of Proverbs_]

The book of Proverbs is far more than an epitome of his versatile
sayings: it represents at least ten centuries of experience divinely
guided, but won often through mistakes and bitter disappointments. It
contains the many index hands, set up before the eyes of men to point
them from error to truth, from folly to right, and from failure
to success. Like most of the Old Testament books, it embodies the
contributions of many different teachers writing from many different
ages and points of view. Their common aim is well expressed by the sage
who appended to Proverbs the preface:

  To acquire wisdom and training,
  To understand rational discourse,
  To receive training in wise conduct,
  In uprightness, justice, and rectitude,
  To impart discretion to the inexperienced,
  To the young knowledge and insight;
  That the wise man may hear and add to his learning,
  And the man of intelligence gain education,
  To understand a proverb and a parable,
  The words of sages and their aphorisms.

[Sidenote: _The first edition of Proverbs_]

The structure and contents of the book suggest its literary history.
Like the New Testament, it appears to have passed through different
stages, and to have been supplemented repeatedly by the addition of new
collections. The original nucleus is probably found in x. 1 to xxii.
16; this is introduced by the simple superscription, _The Proverbs of
Solomon_. The form of the proverb is simple; the atmosphere is joyous,
prosperity prevails, virtue is rewarded; a king who loves justice and
righteousness is on the throne (xiv. 35, xvi. 10, 12, 13, xx. 8, xxii.
11); the rich, and poor stand in the same relation to each other as
in the days of the pre-exile prophets; and the teaching of their
prophets--righteousness is more acceptable than sacrifice--is frequently
reiterated (xv. 8, xvi. 6, xxi. 3, 27). While this long collection
doubtless contains many proverbs antedating even the beginnings of
Israel's history and possibly some added later, the indications are that
they represent the original edition of the book which the Jews carried
with them into the Babylonian exile. This early collection was perhaps
made under the inspiring influence of the reign of Josiah.

[Sidenote: _Dates of the other collections_]

Undoubtedly the remaining collections also contain many very ancient
proverbs, but as a whole their literary form and thought is more
complex. The descriptions of the kings suggest the Persian and Greek
tyrants who ruled over the Jews during the long centuries after the
exile (_cf._ xxv. 1-7, xxviii. 2, 12, 15, 28, xxix. 2, 4, 16, xix. 14),
The age of the prophets has apparently been succeeded by that of
the priest and the law (xxix. 18). Already the Jews have tasted the
bitterness of exile (xxvii. 8). There are also certain points of close
contact with proverbs of Ben Sira, written about 190 B.C. The sages as a
class are very prominent, as in the later centuries before Christ. These
and many other indications lead to the conclusion that the different
collections were probably made after the exile, and that the noble
introduction, i.-ix., and the two chapters in the appendix were not
added until some time in the Greek period,--not long before 200 B.C. The
date, however, when these proverbs arose and were committed to writing
is comparatively unimportant, save as a knowledge of their background
aids in their interpretation, and as they, in turn, reveal the life and
thought of the persecuted, tempted Jews, whose religious life centred in
the second temple.

[Sidenote: _Teaching of the Song of Songs_]

Probably in the Greek period also a poet-sage collected and wove
together certain love and wedding songs of his race. The result was
called the Song of Songs, that is, the Peerless Song. According to one
interpretation, it presents, in a series of scenes, the heart struggle
of a simple country maiden with the promptings of a true, pure love for
a shepherd lover and the bewildering attractions of a royal marriage;
and true love in the end triumphs. Whatever be the interpretation, it is
clear that this exquisite little book, so filled with pictures of nature
and simple country life, was intended to emphasize the duty and beauty
of fidelity to nature and the promptings of the human heart. This
thought is expressed in the powerful passage which seems to voice the
central teaching of the poem:

  Love is strong as death;
  Jealousy is as cruel as Sheol;
  Its flashes are flashes of fire,
  A very flame of Jehovah.
  Many waters cannot quench love,
  Neither can floods drown it:
  If a man would give all the substance of his house for love,
  He would utterly be condemned.




