IX

INFLUENCES THAT GAVE RISE TO THE PRIESTLY LAWS AND HISTORIES

[Sidenote: _Influences in the exile that produced written ceremonial
laws_]

The Babylonian exile gave a great opportunity and incentive to the
further development of written law. While the temple stood, the
ceremonial rites and customs received constant illustration, and were
transmitted directly from father to son in the priestly families. Hence,
there was little need of writing them down. But when most of the priests
were carried captive to Babylonia, as in 597 B.C., and ten years later
the temple was laid in ruins and all sacrifice and ceremonial worship
suddenly ceased, written records at once became indispensable, if the
customs and rules of Israel's ritual were to be preserved. The integrity
and future of the scattered Israelitish race also largely depended upon
keeping alive their distinctive traditions. Torn from their altars,
the exiled priests not only had a strong incentive, but likewise the
leisure, to write. The ritualistic zeal of their Babylonian masters
doubtless further inspired them. The result was, that during the
Babylonian exile and the following century most of the ceremonial laws
in the Old Testament appear to have been first committed to writing.

[Sidenote: _Ezekiel's Code_]

Even Ezekiel, the prophet of the early exile, yielded to the influence
of his early priestly training and the needs of the situation. In 572 he
issued the unique code found in chapters xl.-xlviii. of his prophecy. It
provides for the rebuilding of the temple, and defines the duties of its
different officials and the form of ritual that is to be observed. The
whole is intended primarily to emphasize, through the arrangement of the
sanctuary and the forms of the ceremonial, the transcendent holiness of
Jehovah. Ezekiel also proclaims, through this elaborate program for the
restored community, the certainty that the exiles would be allowed to
return and rebuild the temple. He evidently reproduces many of the
proportions and regulations of the first temple, but, with the same
freedom that characterizes the authors of the Deuteronomic codes, he
unhesitatingly sets aside earlier usages where something better has been
revealed.

[Sidenote: _Genesis and character of the Holiness Code_]

Ezekiel's code was never fully adopted by the later Jews, for much of
it was symbolic rather than practical; but it powerfully influenced
subsequent lawmakers, and was indicative of the dominant tendency of
the day. Even before he issued his code, some like-minded priest had
collected and arranged an important group of laws, which appear to
have been familiar to Ezekiel himself. They are found in Leviticus
xvii.-xxvi., and have felicitously been designated as the _Holiness
Code_, because they constantly emphasize the holiness of Jehovah and the
necessity of the people's being holy in thought and act. In chapters
xvii.-xix. most of the original laws are still arranged in the decalogue
and pentad form. This strong evidence that they had been transmitted by
word of mouth from a much earlier period is supported by their contents.
They resemble and supplement the primitive laws of Exodus xx. 23
to xxiii. 19. Many of them probably came from the early periods of
Israelitish history. Most of the laws, like those of the prophetic codes
in Deuteronomy, are ethical and humane rather than ceremonial. The
code, as a whole, is a remarkable combination of prophetic and priestly
teaching. It marks the transition from the age of the prophets,
represented by Deuteronomy, to that of the priests and ritual,
represented by the priestly codes proper. Like every important early
collection of laws, It also has been much supplemented by later editors;
the original Holiness Code, however, may be given a date soon after the
first captivity in 597 B.C.

[Sidenote: _The priestly codes_]

The influences represented by Ezekiel and the Holiness Code have given
us the remaining laws of the Old Testament. These are found in Leviticus
i-xvi., xxviii., and, excepting Exodus xx.-xxiii., xxxiv., in the legal
sections of Exodus and Numbers. They deal almost entirely with
such ceremonial subjects, as the forms and rules of sacrifice, the
observation of the annual religious festivals, and the rights and duties
of priests. Many of them incorporated laws and customs as old or older
than the days of Moses. An early and important group, technically known
as the Priestly teaching (Lev. i.-iii., v.-vii., xi.-xv.; Num. v.,
vi., xv., xix. 14-22), is repeatedly designated as _the torah of the
burnt-offering_ (Lev. vi. 9), or _the torah of the meal-offering_ (vi,
14), or _the torah of the unclean and clean beast or bird_ (xi. 46, 47).
It is evidently based upon the _toroth_, or decisions, rendered by the
priests concerning the various ceremonial questions thus treated. The
recurring phrase, _according to the ordinance_, probably refers to the
fixed usage observed in connection with the first temple.

[Sidenote: _Their date_]

The atmosphere and point of view of these priestly laws as a whole are
the exilic and post-exilic periods. The ritual has become much more
elaborate, the position of the priests much more prominent, and their
income far greater than before the exile. The distinction between priest
and Levite, which was not recognized before the exile, is clearly
defined. The annual feasts have increased, and their old joyous
character has largely disappeared under the dark shadow of the exile.
Sin-offerings, guilt-offerings, trespass-offerings, and the day of
atonement (practically unknown before the fall of Jerusalem in 586 B.C.)
reflect the spirit of the later Judaism which sought to win Jehovah's
favor by its many sacrifices. Within these priestly codes there is also
evidence of development. The older collections, such as the priestly
teachings, were probably made early in the Babylonian exile. Others
represent the gradual expansion and supplementing of these older groups,
the process apparently continuing until the days of Nehemiah and Ezra.
The whole, therefore, is the fruit of the remarkable priestly literary
activity between 600 and 400 B.C., and possibly extending even later.

[Sidenote: _Adoption of the priestly law about 400 B.C._]

The Jewish community which Nehemiah found in Palestine was still living
under the Deuteronomic law, and apparently knew nothing of the very
different demands of the priestly codes. His reform measures recorded in
Nehemiah v. and xiii., as well as his effective work in repairing the
walls, prepared the way for the sweeping innovations which followed the
public acceptance of the new law-book, brought according to tradition by
Ezra. Five out of the eight regulations specified by the oath then taken
by the leaders of the nation (Neh. x. 30-39) are found only in the
priestly codes; one of them, indeed, is not presented elsewhere in the
Old Testament. Henceforth the life of the Jewish race is moulded
by these later codes. It is, therefore, safe to conclude that they
constituted the essence of the new law-book solemnly adopted by the
Jewish community as its guide somewhere about 400 B.C.

[Sidenote: _Aim and characteristics of the priestly narratives_]

Inasmuch as the interest of the priests centred in ceremonial
institutions and the history of the law rather than about individuals
and politics, it was natural that they also should write their own
history of the race. Their general purpose was to give an introduction
and setting to their laws. As might be anticipated, this priestly
history incorporates the traditions of the late priestly school, and
therefore those current long centuries after the events recorded
transpired. As in the case of the prophetic narratives, the aim is not
primarily historical, but doctrinal. The peculiar vocabulary, language,
and theological conceptions are those which distinguish the post-exilic
priestly editors of the latest Old Testament laws.

[Sidenote: _Their sketch of the earlier history_]

Their history begins with the majestic account of creation in Genesis i.
1 to ii. 4a. God does not form man from the dust, as in the primitive
prophetic account, but by a simple word of command; and by progressive
acts of creation he realizes his perfect plan, which culminates in the
creation of mankind. The literary style is that of a legalist: formal,
precise, repetitious, and generic. The ultimate aim of the narrative
is to trace the origin of the institution of the Sabbath back to the
creation. The genealogical history of Genesis v. connects this account
of creation with the priestly version of the flood story which leads
up to the covenant with Noah. The priestly genealogical histories of
Genesis x. and xi. 10-27 trace the ancestry of the Hebrews through
Abraham. Regarding this patriarch these later historians present only a
brief sketch; in Genesis xvii., however, they expand their narrative
to give in detail the origin of the rite of circumcision, which they
associate with him. Jacob is to them chiefly of interest as the father
of the ten tribes.

[Sidenote: _from Egypt to Canaan_]

The history of the experiences of the Hebrews in Egypt is briefly
outlined as the prelude to the traditional institution of the feast
of the passover. Sinai, however, is the great goal of the priestly
narratives, for about it they group all their laws. It is their concrete
method of proclaiming the antiquity and divine origin of Israelitish
legislation. The period of the wilderness wandering is also made the
background of many important legal precedents. The priestly history
concludes with an account of the conquest of Canaan and the allotment of
the territory to the different tribes.

[Sidenote: _The lack of historical perspective_]

In these late priestly narratives the historical perspective is
sometimes considerably shortened and sometimes lengthened. Moreover,
their representation often differs widely from that of the parallel but
much earlier prophetic histories. The original traditions have also
assumed larger proportions, and the supernatural element is much more
prominent. This is evidently the result of long transmission, in an age
that had largely lost the historic sense, and among the priestly exiles,
who were far removed from the real life of Palestine.

[Sidenote: _Variations between the older and later narratives_.]

The wide variations between the older prophetic and late priestly
accounts of the same events might be illustrated by scores of examples.
The following parallel account of the exodus will suffice:

[Sidenote: _Early Judean Prophetic Account_]

Ex. xiv. l9b. Then the pillar of cloud changed its position from before
them and stood behind them. (20b) And the cloud lighted up the night;
yet throughout the entire night the one _army_ did not come near the
other. (21b) And Jehovah caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind
all the night, and made the bed of the sea dry. (24b) And it came to
pass in the watch before the dawn that Jehovah looked forth through the
pillar of fire and of cloud upon the host of the Egyptians, (25) and he
bound their horsemen.

[Sidenote: _Late Priestly Account of the Exodus_]

(21a, c) Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the waters
were divided, (22) so that the Israelites went into the midst of the sea
on the dry ground; and the waters were a wall to them on their right
hand and on their left. (23b) And the Egyptians went in after them
into the midst of the sea, all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his
horsemen. (26) Then Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand over
the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon
their chariots and their chariot wheels, so that they proceeded with
difficulty. Then the Egyptians said, Let us flee from before Israel;
for Jehovah fighteth for them against the Egyptians. (27b) But the sea
returned to its ordinary level toward morning, while the Egyptians were
flying before it. And Jehovah shook off the Egyptians into the midst of
the sea, (28b) so that not one of them remained. (30) Thus Jehovah saved
Israel that day out of the power of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the
Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore.

(27a) So Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, (28a) and the
waters returned and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, even all the
host of Pharaoh that went in after them into the sea. (29) But the
Israelites walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea, the waters
being a wall to them on their right hand, and on their left. [Footnote:
"Student's Old Testament," Vol. I., 175, 176.]

[Sidenote: _Inferior historical value of the priestly narratives_]

No one can doubt for a moment that the older, simpler, and more natural
version is, from the historical point of view, the more accurate.
The normal man to-day has outgrown the craving for the grotesquely
supernatural. The omnipotent, omniscient, loving Creator, who
reveals himself through the growing flower, commands our admiration
as fully as a God who speaks through the unusual and extraordinary.
Everything is possible with God, and the man is blind indeed who would
deny the Infinite Being, who is all and in all, the ability to pass
beyond the bounds of that which we, with our extremely limited vision,
have designated as natural. The real question is, How did God see fit to
accomplish his ends? Our judicial and historical sense unhesitatingly
inclines to the older and simpler narratives as containing the true
answer. In distinguishing these different strands of narrative, it must
be acknowledged that modern biblical scholarship has performed a service
invaluable alike to the student of literature, of history, and of
revelation.

[Sidenote: _Recognition of their defects and real value_]

In passing, it is instructive to note that, almost without exception,
Ingersoll's once famous examples of the mistakes of Moses were drawn
from the priestly narratives. It is safe to predict that had that
learned jurist been introduced, when a boy, to the Old Testament, as
revealed in modern light, he would have enjoyed a very different popular
fame. In the divine economy, however, even the sledge-hammer of ridicule
may play an important rôle in shattering false claims and the untenable
theories which obscure the real truth. It is wholesome to apply the
principle of relative values to the Bible, since one cannot fully
appreciate the best without recognizing that which is inferior. These
priestly narratives come from a school which, in its reverence for the
form and the letter, had began to lose sight of the vital and spiritual.
Its still later product is that ritualistic Judaism which stands in such
unfavorable contrast to the perfected spiritual revelation which came
through Jesus. At the same time, the recognition of the defects of the
late priestly school should not deter us from appreciating the rich
religious teaching of a narrative like the first chapter of Genesis,
nor from accepting its great message, namely, that through all natural
phenomena and history God is revealing and perfecting his gracious
purpose.

[Sidenote: _The ecclesiastical history of Chronicles and Ezra-Nehemiah_]

The long ecclesiastical history found in I and II Chronicles and the
original sequel of these books, Ezra and Nehemiah, were written from the
same general point of view as the late priestly narratives, but in a
much later period. The same peculiar literary style and conceptions,
which recur throughout these four books, show clearly that they are from
one author and age. Since they trace the history to the beginning of the
Greek period and speak of the kings and events of the Persian period as
if they belonged to the distant past, it is evident that the anonymous
author, who is usually designated as the Chronicler, lived after the
conquests of Alexander. The internal evidence all points to the middle
of the third century before Christ as the date of their composition.

[Sidenote: _Its general point of view_]

From the author's evident interest in the ritual of the temple, and
especially its song service, it would appear that he belonged to one of
the guilds of temple singers that became prominent in the post-exilic
period. His history centres about the sanctuary and its services. Since
Judah, not Israel, is the land of the temple, Northern Israel is almost
completely ignored. Like the late priestly historians, his chief aim
is to trace the origin of the ceremonial institutions back to the
beginnings of Hebrew history. Thus he represents the song service and
the guilds of singers as having been established in the days of David.
Living as he did under the glamour of the great Persian and Greek
empires, he, in common with his contemporaries, idealized the past
glories of his race. As we compare his versions of early events with
the older parallel accounts of Samuel and Kings, we find that iron
has become gold, and hundreds have become thousands, and defeats are
transformed into victories. No mention is made of the crimes of such
kings as David and Solomon, since they are venerated profoundly as the
founders of the temple.

[Sidenote: _Sources of I and II Chronicles_]

The basis of I and II Chronicles is the prophetic history of Samuel and
Kings; from these the author quotes _verbatim_ chapter after chapter,
according as their contents are adapted to his purpose. This groundwork
he supplements by introducing the priestly traditions current in his
own day. Possibly he quotes also from certain somewhat earlier written
collections of traditions, for to those, following the example of
the author of Kings, he frequently refers his readers for further
information. In some cases these later traditions may have preserved
authentic, supplemental data; but when the representation of Chronicles
differs, as it frequently does, from that of Samuel and Kings, the older
and more sober prophetic history is undoubtedly to be followed.

[Sidenote: _The older sources quoted in Ezra-Nehemiah_]

In Ezra and Nehemiah the author has preserved some exceedingly valuable
historical material, for he has quoted, fortunately, long sections from
two or three older sources. Oae is the document in Ezra iv. 7 to vi. 14,
the original Aramaic of which is retained. This appears to have been
a temple record, dating from the middle or latter part of the Persian
period, and tells of the interruption of the temple building in the days
of Darius and the finding of the original decree of Cyrus sanctioning
the restoration of the shrine of Jerusalem. Still more important is the
wonderful memoir of Nehemiah quoted in Nehemiah i., ii., iv. to vii. 5,
xii. 31, 32, 37-40, and xiii. 4-31. Here we are able to study the events
of an exceedingly important period through the eyes of the man who, by
his able and self-sacrificing efforts, did more than any one else
to develop and shape later Judaism. Less important, yet suggestive,
citations are taken from the priestly traditions regarding the work of
Ezra. The final editor has apparently rearranged this material in order
to give to the work of Ezra the scribe such precedence over that of
Nehemiah the layman, as, from his later Levitical point of view, he
deemed proper. Restoring what seems to have been the original order
(_i.e._, Ezra vii. viii., Neh. vii. 70 to viii. 18; Ezra ix., x.; Neh.
ix., x.) and studying it as the sequel of Nehemiah's essential pioneer
work, the obscurities of this period begin to disappear and its
significant facts to stand out in clear relief.

[Sidenote: _Value of the writings of the priestly school_]

Thus we find that, quoting largely as he does, from much older sources,
the author of this great ecclesiastical history of Judah and the
temple has given us, in Ezra and Nehemiah, some exceedingly important
historical data. His writings also clearly reveal the ideas and
institutions of his own day; but otherwise it is not as history that his
work is of permanent value. Rather it is because, in common with all the
great teachers who speak to us through the Old Testament, he believed
firmly in the moral order of the universe, and that back of all events
and all history is an infinitely powerful yet just and merciful God who
is constantly revealing himself to mankind. While these later priestly
writers were not in such close touch with fact and life as were the
prophets, and while they were subject to the defects of all extreme
ritualists and theologians, they were faithful heralds of truth to their
own and later generations. Behind their symbolism and traditions lie
certain great universal principles which amply reward an earnest quest.




