The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Origin and Permanent Value of the Old Testament
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Origin and Permanent Value of the Old Testament

Author: Charles Foster Kent


        
Release date: July 1, 2005 [eBook #8566]
                Most recently updated: December 26, 2020

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/8566

Credits: Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, David Widger and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team






Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, David Widger
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




THE ORIGIN AND PERMANENT VALUE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

BY

CHARLES FOSTER KENT, PH.D.

WOOLSEY PROFESSOR OF BIBLICAL LITERATURE IN YALE UNIVERSITY




  "Ye shall know the Truth and the Truth shall make you free"



PREFACE

During the past generation the Old Testament has commanded equally with
the New the enthusiastic and devoted study of the great body of biblical
scholars throughout the world. Two out of every three graduate students
in our universities who specialize in the general field of biblical
literature choose the Old as the special centre of their work. At the
same time the tendency of the rank and file of the Christian church
within the past decade has undoubtedly been to neglect the older
Testament. Preachers as a rule select less than a fourth of their texts
from it; the prevailing courses of Bible study devote proportionately
less time to it; and teachers and scholars in the great majority of
cases turn to the Old Testament with much less enthusiasm than they
do to the New. Why are these two great currents setting in opposite
directions, and what are the causes of the present popular neglect of
the Old Testament? If the Old Testament should be relegated to a second
place in our working canon of the Bible, let us frankly and carefully
define our reasons. If, on the other hand, the prevailing apathy and
neglect are due to ignorance of the real character and value of the Old
Testament, let as lose no time in setting ourselves right.

The present volume has been suggested by repeated calls from ministerial
bodies, popular assemblies, and groups of college students for addresses
on the themes here treated. The aim has been to give in concise, popular
form answers to some of the many questions thus raised, with the
conviction that they are in the mind of every thoughtful man and woman
to-day, and especially on the lips of earnest pastors, missionaries,
and Sunday-school teachers. There are indications on every side of
a deepening and far more intelligent interest in the needs and
possibilities of religious education. Its vital importance to the life
of the Church and the nation is being understood as never before.
Earnest and fruitful efforts are being put forth to improve the methods
and courses of instruction. The first essential, however, is a true
understanding and appreciation of that Book of Books, which will
forever continue to be the chief manual "for teaching, for reproof, for
correction, for instruction, in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect, completely fitted for every good work." The supreme
importance and practical value of the New Testament are recognized by
all, but we usually forget when we quote the familiar words of Paul that
he had in mind simply the Scriptures of the Old Testament.

In divine Providence mighty forces have been quietly at work during the
past century removing false rabbinical traditions and misconceptions
that had gathered about these ancient Scriptures, while from other
sources has come new light to illumine their pages. The result is that
in the Old Testament the Christian world is discerning a new heritage,
the beauty and value of which is still only half suspected even by
intelligent people. This fact is so significant and yet so little
recognized that one feels impelled to go out and proclaim it on the
housetops. The Old Testament can never be properly presented from the
pulpit or in the class-room while the attitude of preacher and teacher
is apathetic and the motive a sense of duty rather than an intelligent
acquaintance with its real character and genuine admiration and
enthusiasm for its vital truths. The irresistible fascination which has
drawn many of the most brilliant scholars into the Old Testament field
is a proof that it has lost nothing, of its power and attractiveness.
Already the circle of those who have rediscovered the Old Testament is
rapidly broadening. Observation and experience confirm the conviction
that all that is lacking to make that devotion universal is a right
attitude toward it and an intelligent familiarity with its real origin,
contents, and teachings. The sooner this is realized the sooner some of
the most difficult problems of the Church, of the Sunday-school, and of
popular religious education will be solved.

As the repository of a great and varied literature, as a record of
many of the most important events in human history, and as a concrete
revelation of God's character and will through the life and experiences
of a race and the hearts of inspired men, the Old Testament has a vital
message marvellously adapted to the intellectual, moral, social, and
spiritual needs of to-day and supremely fitted to appeal to the thought
and imagination of the present age.

This little volume is intended to be simply a very informal introduction
to it. Since of the two Testaments the New is by far the more easily
understood and the better known, it is made the point of departure in
the approach to the more complex field represented by the Old. Many
unexpected analogies will aid in understanding the intricate literary
history of the older Scriptures. The point of view assumed throughout is
that of the busy pastor, missionary, Sunday-school teacher, and scholar,
who have little time for technical study, but who are not afraid
of truth because it is new and who firmly believe that God is ever
revealing himself more fully to men and that his truth shall make us
free. It is hoped that this general survey will prove for them but an
introduction to a far deeper and more profitable study.

To the Reverend J.F. McFarland, D.D., of the Bible Study Union, to the
Reverend S.A. Cooke, D.D., of the Methodist Book Concern, to Mr. John
H. Scribner of the Presbyterian Board of Publication and Sunday-school
Work, to the Reverend M.C. Hazard, D.D., of the Pilgrim Press, and to
the Reverend F.K. Sanders, Ph.D., of the Congregational Sunday-school
and Publishing Society, who have generously read the manuscript of this
book, I am deeply indebted, not only for their valuable suggestions, but
also for their strong expressions of personal interest in the practical
ends which it seeks to conserve, I am also under great obligation to the
Reverend Morgan Miller, of Yale, for his untiring vigilance in revising
the proof of a volume written within the all too brief limits of a
Christmas vacation.

C.F.K.

YALE UNIVERSITY,

January, 1906.



CONTENTS


I. THE ECLIPSE AND REDISCOVERY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

II. THE REAL NATURE AND PURPOSE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

III. THE EARLIEST CHAPTERS IN DIVINE REVELATION

IV. THE PLACE OF THE OLD TESTAMENT IN DIVINE REVELATION

V. THE INFLUENCES THAT PRODUCED THE NEW TESTAMENT

VI. THE GROWTH OF THE OLD TESTAMENT PROPHETIC HISTORIES

VII. THE HISTORY OF THE PROPHETIC SERMONS, EPISTLES, AND APOCALYPSES

VIII. THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE EARLIER OLD TESTAMENT LAWS

IX. INFLUENCES THAT GAVE RISE TO THE PRIESTLY LAWS AND HISTORIES

X. THE HEBREW SAGES AND THEIR PROVERBS

XL THE WRITINGS OF ISRAEL'S PHILOSOPHERS

XII. THE HISTORY OF THE PSALTER

XIII. THE FORMATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT CANON

XIV. THE INTERPRETATION OF THE EARLY NARRATIVES OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

XV. PRACTICAL METHODS OF STUDYING THE OLD TESTAMENT

XVI. RELIGIOUS EDUCATION--THE FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEM OF TO-DAY





I


THE ECLIPSE AND REDISCOVERY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT

[Sidenote: _Jesus' study of the Old Testament_]

The opening chapters of the Gospels record only three or four meagre
facts regarding the first thirty years of Jesus' life. The real history
of those significant years ran so far beneath the surface of external
events that it completely escaped the historian. The history of the
mental and spiritual life of the Master is recorded in his mature
character and teachings. The fugitive hints, however, vividly illustrate
the supreme fact that he ever _grew stronger, becoming filled with
wisdom;--and the grace of God was upon him_ (Luke ii. 40). They reveal a
soul not only in closest touch with God and with human life, but also in
eager quest for the vital truth regarding God and man recorded in the
Scriptures of his race. It requires no imagination to picture the young
Jew of Nazareth eagerly studying in the synagogue, at the temple, and
alone by himself the sacred writings found in our Old Testament, for
this fact is clearly recorded on every page of the Gospels.

[Sidenote: _His familiarity with all parts of it_]

The events of Hebrew history, and its heroes --Abraham, David, Elijah--
were all familiar to him. The Old Testament was the background of a
large portion of the Sermon on the Mount. From Deuteronomy vi. 4, 5, and
Leviticus xix. 18 he drew his marvellous epitome of all law and duty. In
the wisdom literature, and especially in the book of Proverbs, he found
many of those practical truths which he applied to life with new
authority and power. From the same storehouse of crystallized experience
he derived certain of those figures which he expanded into his
inimitable parables; he adopted also, and put to new use, the effective
gnomic form of teaching of the wisdom school. As in the mouth of his
herald, John the Baptist, the great moral and spiritual truths, first
proclaimed by the ancient prophets, live again on the lips of Jesus. At
every point in his teachings one recognizes the thought and language of
the older Scriptures. At the moments of his greatest temptation and
distress, even in the last agony, the words of the ancient law and
psalms were on his lips and their consoling and inspiring messages in
his mind.

[Sidenote: _Attitude of the apostles_]

What is so strikingly true of Jesus is equally true of the apostles and
disciples who have given us the New Testament books: the atmosphere in
which they lived, the thoughts which they thought, and the language in
which they spoke, were those of the Old Testament. Not bowing slavishly
before it, as did their Jewish contemporaries, but with true reverence,
singling out that which was vital and eternal, they made it the basis of
their own more personal and perfect message to humanity. But for them,
and for the early Church, until at least the middle of the second
Christian century, the only scriptures regarded as authoritative were
those of the Old Testament. Even then, only gradually, and under the
pressure of real needs, were different groups of Christian writings
added and ascribed an authority equal to that of the older Scriptures.

[Sidenote: _Attitude of the later Church, and especially Puritanism_]

Throughout the Middle Ages and in the eyes of the Protestant reformers
the two great divisions of the Bible continued to command equal respect
and attention. From the Old Testament and its reflection in the
teachings of Paul, Puritanism and the theology of the past three
centuries derived most of that which revealed their strength as well as
their weakness. From the law, the prophets, and the book of Proverbs
they drew their stern spirit of justice, their zeal for righteousness,
and their uncompromising condemnation of everything that seemed to them
wrong. Their preachers nobly echoed the thunders of Sinai and the
denunciations of an Elijah, an Amos, and an Hosea. They often failed,
however, to recognize the divine love which prompted the stern words
of the prophets, and to see that these denunciations and warnings were
simply intended to arouse the conscience of the people and to make
them worthy of the rich blessings that God was eager to bestow.
Misinterpretation of the spirit of the later Old Testament reformers,
who dramatically portrayed Jehovah's hatred for the abominable heathen
cults in the form of commands to slaughter the peoples practising them,
frequently led the Puritan fathers to treat their foes in a manner
neither biblical nor Christian. To this narrow interpretation of the
letter rather than the spirit of the Old Testament, and the emphasis
placed upon its more primitive and imperfect teachings can be directly
traced the worst faults of that courageous band who lived and died
fighting for what they conceived to be truth and right.

[Sidenote: _Reaction against the Bible of Puritanism_]

It is undoubtedly true that during the past two decades the Old
Testament has in fact, if not in theory, been assigned to a secondary
place in the life and thought of Christendom. This is not due to the
fact that the Christ has been exalted to his rightful position of
commanding authority and prestige. All that truly exalts him likewise
exalts the record of the work of his forerunners which he came to bring
to complete fulfilment and upon which he placed his eternal seal of
approval. Rather, the present eclipse of the Old Testament appears to be
due to three distinct causes. The first is connected with the reaction
from Puritanism, and especially from its false interpretation of the
Bible. Against intolerance and persecution the heart of man naturally
rebelled. These rang true neither with life nor the teaching of Jesus.
Refuge from the merciless and seemingly flawless logic of the earlier
theologians was found in the simple, reassuring words of the Gospels.
The result was that, with the exception of a very few books like the
Psalter, the Old Testament, which was the arsenal of the old militant
theology, has been unconsciously, if not deliberately, shunned by the
present generation.

[Sidenote: _Doubts aroused by the work of the "Higher Critics"_]

Within the past decade this tendency has been greatly accelerated by the
work of the so-called "Higher Critics." Because it presents more
literary and historical problems, and because it was thought, at first,
to be farther away from the New Testament, the citadel of the Christian
faith, the Old Testament has been the scene of their greatest activity.
With what seemed to the onlooker to be a supreme disregard for the
traditions long accepted as established by the Church, they have
persistently applied to the ancient Scriptures the generally accepted
canons and methods of modern historical and literary study. In their
scientific zeal they have repeatedly overturned what were once regarded
as fundamental dogmas. Unfortunately the first reports of their work
suggested that it was only destructive. The very foundations of faith
seemed to be shaking. Sinai appeared to be enveloped in a murky fog,
instead of the effulgence of the divine glory; Moses seemed to become a
vague, unreal figure on the distant horizon of history; David's voice
only faintly echoed through the Psalter; and the noblest messages of
prophet, sage, and psalmist were anonymous.

[Sidenote: _The mistakes of the critics_]

Little wonder that many who heard only from afar the ominous reports of
the digging and delving, and vague rumors,--all the more terrifying
because vague,--either leaped to the conclusion that the authority of
the Old Testament had been undermined or else rallied in a frantic
effort to put a stop, by shouting or compulsion, to the seemingly
sacrilegious work of destruction. When the history of the Higher
Criticism of the Old Testament is finally written, it will be declared
most unfortunate that the results first presented to the rank and file
of the Christian Church were, as a rule, largely negative and in many
cases relatively unimportant. In their initial enthusiasm for scientific
research scholars, alas! sometimes lost the true perspective and failed
to recognize relative values. The date, for example, of Isaiah xl.-lv.
is important for the right understanding and interpretation of these
wonderful chapters, but its value is insignificant compared with the
divine messages contained in these chapters and their direct application
to life. Moreover, instead of presenting first the testimony and then
patiently pointing out the reasonableness and vital significance of the
newer conclusions, scholars sometimes, under the influence of their
convictions, made the fatal mistake of enunciating those conclusions
simply as dogmas.

[Sidenote: _Resulting loss of faith in the Old Testament_]

History demonstrates that established religions and churches always hold
tenaciously to old doctrines, and therefore regard new conclusions with
suspicion. This tendency is clearly illustrated in the experience of
Jesus; for with all his divine tact and convincing authority, he was not
able to win the leaders of Judaism to the acceptance of his
revolutionizing teachings. Yet one cannot escape the conviction that if
in this age of enlightenment and open-mindedness, the positive results
of modern scholarship had been presented first, this latest chapter in
God's revelation of himself to man would have been better understood and
appreciated by the leaders of the Church, and its fruits appropriated by
those whose interests are fixed on that which is of practical rather
than theoretical import. At least many open-minded people might have
been saved from the supreme error of writing, either consciously or
unconsciously, _Ichabod_ across the pages of their Old Testament.

[Sidenote: _Difficulties in understanding it_]

The third reason why the Old Testament has suffered temporary eclipse in
so many minds is more fundamental; it is because of the difficulties in
understanding it. The background of the New Testament is the Roman world
and a brief century with which we Western readers are well acquainted;
but the background of the Old is the ancient East--the age and land of
wonder, mystery, and intuition, far removed from the logical, rushing
world in which we live. The Old Testament contains a vast and complex
literature, filled with the thoughts and figures and cast in the quaint
language of the Semitic past. Between us and that past there lie not
merely long centuries, but the wide gulf that is fixed between the East
and the West.

[Sidenote:_The new light from the monuments_]

With three such distinct and powerful currents--reaction, suspicion, and
misunderstand--bearing us from the Old Testament, it might be predicted
that in a decade or two it would lie far behind our range of vision.
Other forces however are, in divine providence, rapidly bringing it back
to us again, so that we are able to understand and appreciate it as
never before since the beginning of the Christian era. The chasm between
us and it is really being bridged rather than broadened. The long
centuries that lie back of the Old Testament have suddenly been
illuminated by great search-lights, so that today we are almost as well
acquainted with them as with the beginning of the Christian era. From
ancient monuments have arisen, as from the dead, an army of contemporary
witnesses, sometimes confirming, sometimes correcting, but at all times
marvellously supplementing the biblical data. Now the events and
characters of Old Testament history no longer stand alone in mysterious
isolation, but we can study in detail their setting and real
significance. At every point the biblical narrative and thought are
brought into touch with real life and history. The biographies and
policies, for example, of Sennacherib and Cyrus, are almost as well
known as those of Napoleon and Washington. The prophets are not merely
voices, but men with a living message for all times, because they
primarily dealt with the conditions and needs of their own day. The
vital relation and at the same time the infinite superiority of the
religious teachings of the Old Testament to those of earlier ages and
peoples are clearly revealed.

[Sidenote: _Modern aids in interpreting the Old Testament_]

Interpreted in the light of contemporary literature and language, most
of the obscurities of the Old Testament melt away. Modern research in
the fields of Semitic philology and syntax and the discovery of older
texts and versions have put into the hands of translators new and
valuable tools for making clear to all the thoughts in the minds of the
original writers of the Old Testament. Studies in comparative religion,
geography, and modern Oriental life and customs have illuminated and
illustrated at every point the pages of the ancient writings. To utilize
all these requires time and devotion, but he who is willing to study may
know his Old Testament to-day as well as he does the New.

[Sidenote: _Rejection of rabinical traditions_]

Fully commensurate with the great light that has been shed upon it from
without, is that which has come from a careful study of the testimony of
the Old Testament itself. Until recent times the Church has been content
to accept blindly the traditions of the late Jewish rabbis regarding the
origin, history, and interpretation of their scriptures. Handed down
through the Church Fathers and interwoven with creeds and popular
beliefs, they have been identified in many minds with the teaching of
the Bible itself. Yet, when we analyze their origin and true character,
we find that many of them have absolutely no support in the Scriptures,
and in many cases are directly contradictory to the plain biblical
teachings. Too often they are but the fanciful conjectures of the
rabbis. Developed in an uncritical age, and based upon the unreliable
methods of interpretation current among the Jews in the early Christian
centuries, they are often sadly misleading. A close analogy is found in
the traditional identifications of most of the Palestinian sacred sites.
To-day the Oriental guide shows the skull of Adam beneath the spot where
tradition places the cross of Christ. If the traveller desires, he will
point out the very stones which Jesus declared God could raise up to be
children of Abraham. Every question which curiosity or genuine interest
has raised is answered by the seemingly authoritative voice of
tradition. Investigation, however, proves that almost all of these
thousand identifications are probably incorrect. The discovery is a
shock to the pious imagination; but to the healthy mind uncertainty is
always better than error. Furthermore, uncertainty often proves the door
which leads to established truth.

[Sidenote: _Acceptance of the testimony of the Old Testament regarding
its origin and history._]

Even so the modern historical and critical spirit has led men to turn
from the generally accepted but exceedingly doubtful rabbinical
traditions regarding, for example, the date and authorship of many of
the Old Testament books, to the authoritative evidence found in those
writings themselves. In this they are but following the example of the
Great Teacher, who repeatedly appealed from the same rabbis and their
misleading traditions to the same ancient Scriptures. The saddest fact
is that many of his followers, even to-day, hesitate to follow his
inspired leadership. Fortunately, as the varied, strata and formations
of the rocks tell the story of the earth's early history, so these early
writings furnish the data for reconstructing the illuminating history of
their origin, growth, and transmission. Often the testimony of the facts
differs as widely from the familiar inherited traditions as the
conclusions of modern science from the vague guesses of primitive man
regarding the riddles of existence. Neither may represent absolute and
final truth, and yet no serious-minded man can question which is really
the more authoritative. To-day one of the most vital issues before the
Christian. Church is whether it will follow the guidance of its Founder
and accept the testimony of the Bible itself or cling blindly to the
traditions of the rabbis and Church Fathers.

[Sidenote: _Historical significance of the modern movement_]

The student of history at once recognizes in the modern movement, of
which the watchword is, "Back to the testimony of the Bible," the direct
sequel to the Protestant Reformation. The early reformers took the
chains off the Bible and put it into the hands of men, with full
permission to study and search. Vested interests and dogmatism soon
began to dictate how it should be studied and interpreted, and thus it
was again placed practically under lock and key. It is an interesting
fact that a young Zulu chief, a pupil of Bishop Colenso of South Africa,
first aroused the Anglo-Saxon world to the careful, fearless, and
therefore truly reverential study of its Old Testament. With this new
impetus, the task of the Reformers was again taken up, and in the same
open, earnest spirit. For two generations it has commanded the
consecrated energies of the most thorough scholars of Christendom. Those
of England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany, Austria, Switzerland,
Norway, Sweden, America, and Canada have worked shoulder to shoulder,
dividing the work, carefully collecting and classifying the minutest
data, comparing results, and, on the basis of all this work, formulating
conclusions, some assured and some hypothetical, which best explain the
facts.

[Sidenote: _The unveiling of the Old Testament_]

Often, to those who have not followed the detailed steps, these
conclusions have seemed only destructive. Many of them are assuredly so;
but the vital question which every honest man should ask is, Do they
destroy the Bible, or simply the false traditions that have gathered
about it? Fortunately, most of the leaders of the Church and most
intelligent laymen have already discerned the only emphatic answer to
this question. The Church is undoubtedly passing quietly through a
revolution in its conception and attitude toward the Bible, more
fundamental and far-reaching than that represented by its precursor the
Protestant Reformation; but its real significance is daily becoming more
apparent. Not a grain of truth which the Bible contains has been
destroyed or permanently obscured. Instead, the _débris_ of time-honored
traditions and dogmas have been cleared away, and the true Scriptures at
last stand forth again in their pristine splendor.

[Sidenote: _The true Old Testament_]

Freed from the misconceptions and false traditions which have gathered
about it, the true Old Testament rises from amidst the dust and din of
the much digging and delving. To those who have known only the old it is
a fresh revelation. Its literary beauty, its naturalness, its dignity,
its majestic authority are a surprise to those who have not followed its
unveiling. The old vagueness and mystery have in part disappeared, and
instead it is found to contain a thousand vital, living messages for to-
day. Its human as well as its divine qualities command our interest and
attention. Through it all God speaks with a new clearness and authority.
Thus, that which we thought was dead has risen, and lives again to
inspire us to noble thought and deed and service.




