XI

THE WRITINGS OF ISRAEL'S PHILOSOPHERS

[Sidenote: _Discussions the problem of evil_]

An intense interest in man led certain of Israel's sages in time to
devote their attention to more general philosophical problems, such as
the moral order of the universe. In the earlier proverbs, prophetic
histories, and laws, the doctrine that sin was always punished by
suffering or misfortune, and conversely that calamity and misfortune
were sure evidence of the guilt of the one affected, had been reiterated
until it had become a dogma. In nine out of ten cases this doctrine was
true, but in time experience proved that the tenth case might be an
exception. While most of the teachers of the race denied or ignored this
exception, certain wise men, faithful and unflinching in their analysis
of human life, faced the fact that the innocent as well as the guilty
sometimes suffer. Their quest for the answer to the eternal question,
Why? is recorded in the books of Job and Ecclesiastes.

[Sidenote: _The primitive story of Job_]

The basis of the book of Job Is undoubtedly a primitive story. Traces
of a tradition somewhat similar have recently been discovered in the
Babylonian-Assyrian literature. The Babylonian treatment of the moral
problem that it presents is even more strikingly similar. Ezekiel also
refers to a well-known popular Hebrew version of the story of Job (xiv.
14): _though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it_
(the guilty land), _they would deliver simply their own lives their
righteousness, saith the Lord Jehovah_ (_cf._ also xiv. 20). Evidently
in Ezekiel's day these names represented three ancient worthies, each
conspicuous for his superlative piety. The Hebrew word here used also
indicates that the righteousness attributed to them was conformity to
the demands of the ritual. This agrees closely with the representation
of the prose version of the story found in Job i. ii. and xlii. 7-17;
here the supreme illustration of Job's piety is that he repeatedly
sacrifices burnt-offerings, whenever there is the least possibility that
his sons have sinned (i. 4, 5). Also in describing his perfection (i.
1), the same unusual term is employed as in the priestly narrative of
Genesis vi. 9, where Noah's righteousness is portrayed.

[Sidenote: _Original teaching and application of the prose story_]

It seems probable, therefore, that the ancient story of Job was committed
to writing by some priest during the Babylonian exile. Since Job and his
friends live out on the borders of the Arabian desert to the east or
southeast of Palestine, it seems clear that the tradition came to the
Hebrews originally from some foreign source; but in the prose form in
which we find it in Job, it has been thoroughly naturalized, for Job is
a faithful servant of Jehovah and the law. Ignoring for the moment the
poetical sections (iii. 1 to xlii. 6), we find that the prose story has
a direct, practical message for the broken-hearted exiles, crushed
beneath an overpowering calamity. Jehovah is testing his servant people,
as he tests Job in the story, to prove whether or not they _fear God for
nought_ (i, 9). If they bear the test without complaint, as did Job, all
their former possessions will be restored to them in double measure
(xlii. 7-17).

[Sidenote: _The problem of the poetical sections of Job_]

This prose story has apparently been utilized and given a very different
interpretation by a later poet-sage in whose ears rang Jeremiah's words
of anguish, found in chapter xx. 14-18 of his prophecy (_cf_. Job iii.),
and to whose ears came also the cry of the pious voiced in Malachi ii.
17: _Every one who does evil is good in the sight of Jehovah, and he
delighteth in_ _them. Where is the God of justice_? The old solutions
of the problem of evil were being openly discarded. _They who feared
Jehovah_ were saying (iii, 13, 14), _It is vain to serve God; and what
profit is it to have kept his charge or to have walked in funeral garb
before Jehovah of hosts? Even now we must congratulate the arrogant;
yea, they who work wickedness are entrenched; yea, they tempt God and
escape!_ With a boldness and thoroughness that must have seemed to his
contemporaries dangerous and heretical, the great poet-sage presents the
problem in all its intensity.

[Sidenote: _The role of Job and his friends in presenting the problem_]

He adopts the popular story, utilizing it as his prologue and epilogue:
but as we pass to chapter iii, the simple, pure Hebrew yields to sublime
poetry, shot through with the words and idioms and ideas of a much later
age. The designation of God is no longer _Jehovah_ but _El_ or _Eloah_
or _Shaddai_. The character of Job suddenly changes; instead of being
the patient, submissive servant of the law, he boldly, almost defiantly,
charges God with injustice. The role of the friends also changes, and
they figure as champions of the Deity. In their successive speeches they
present in detail the current dogmas and the popular explanations of
suffering. In his replies Job points out their inapplicability to the
supreme problem of which he is the embodiment. The action and progress
in this great drama is within the mind of Job himself. By degrees he
rises to a clear perception of the fact that he is innocent of any crime
commensurate with the overwhelming series of calamities which have
overtaken him; and he thus throws off the shackles of the ancient dogma.
From the seemingly cruel and unjust God who has brought this undeserved
calamity upon him, he then appeals to the Infinite Being who is back of
all phenomena.

[Sidenote: _The message of the book_]

The reply to this appeal, and the author's contribution to the eternal
problem of evil, are found in xxxviii. I to xlii. 6. It is not a
solution, but through the wonders of the natural world, it is a fuller
revelation to the mind of Job, of the omnipotence, the omniscience,
the wisdom, and the goodness of God. Even though he cannot discern the
reason of his own suffering, he learns to know and to trust the wisdom
and love of the Divine Ruler.

  I had heard of this by the hearing of the ear;
  But now mine eye seeth thee (xlii. 5).

[Sidenote: _Teaching the Elihu passage xxxii-xxxvii_]

Faith triumphs over doubt, and the problem, though unsolved, sinks into
comparative insignificance. Apparently another poet-sage has added, out
of the depths of his own experience, his contribution to the problem
of suffering in the speeches of Elihu (chapters xxxii-xxxvii). It is
that suffering rightly borne becomes a blessing because it is one of
God's ways of training his servants. This indeed is an expansion of the
explanation urged by Eliphaz in v. 17, _Behold, happy is the man whom God
correcteth_. While these speeches of Elihu are written in a different
literary style and have, in fact, no vital connection with the original
poem of Job, they nevertheless contain a great and intensely practical
truth; they have rightly found a place in this marvellous book.
Similarly the sublime description of wisdom in chapter xxviii. makes
good its title; it can, however, be studied best by itself apart from
Job's impassioned protestations of his innocence (chapter xxix.).

[Sidenote: _Probable history of the book of Job_]

Thus the book of Job, like so many other Old Testament writings, has its
own literary history. Somewhere and sometime, back in an early Semitic
period, there doubtless lived a man, conspicuous for his virtue and
prosperity. Upon him fell a misfortune so great and apparently
undeserved that it made a deep impression, not only upon his
contemporaries, but also upon the minds of later generations. Thus there
grew up a common Semitic story of Job which was in time thoroughly
naturalized in Israel. Probably a Jewish priest in the exile first
committed it to writing in order to assure his fellow-sufferers that
could they but be patient and submissive Jehovah would soon restore them
to their former prosperity. The painful experiences that came to the
Jews, especially to the pious, during the middle and latter part of the
Persian period (sometime between 450 and 340 B.C.), convinced a poet-
sage that the old interpretations of the meaning of suffering did not
suffice. Accordingly into the heart of the familiar story of Job he
injected his powerful, impassioned message. Later writers, inspired by
his inspiring genius, added their contributions to the solution of the
perennial problem. Hence by 200 B.C., at least, the book of Job was
probably current in its present form.

[Sidenote: _Age and point of view of Ecclesiastes_]

The same ever-recurring, insistent questions regarding the moral value
and meaning of life led another later wise man to embody the results of
his observation and experience in what we now know as the book of
Ecclesiastes. Although i. 16 and ii. 7, 9 clearly imply that many kings
had already reigned in Jerusalem, the author seems to put his
observations in the mouth of Solomon, the acknowledged patron of wisdom
teaching. The evidence, however, that the book is one of the latest in
the Old Testament is overwhelmingly conclusive. The language is that of
an age when Hebrew had long ceased to be spoken. The life mirrored
throughout is that of the luxurious, corrupt Greek period. If not
directly, at least indirectly, it reflects the doctrines of the Stoics
and the Epicureans. It was a crooked, sordid, weary world upon which its
author looked. It is not strange that a vein of materialism and
pessimism runs through his observations and maxims. _All is vanity_ is
the dominant note, and yet light alternates with shadow. He loses faith
in human nature; yet he does not give up his faith in God, though that
faith is darkened by the desolateness of the outlook. While the book has
practical religious teachings, perhaps its chief mission, after all, is
vividly to portray the darkness just before the dawn of the belief in a
future life and before the glorious rising of the Sun of Righteousness.

[Sidenote: _Significance of the later additions_]

Its teachings naturally called forth many protests, explanations, and
supplements, and these have found the permanent place in the book that
they rightfully deserve. Its fragmentary structure and abrupt
transitions also made later insertions exceedingly easy. These are the
simplest and the most natural explanation of the sharp contradictions
that abound in the book (_cf. e.g_., ii. 22 and iii. 22, or iv. 2 and
ix. 4, or iii. 16 and iii. 17, or viii. 14 and ix. 2, or iii. 1-9 and
iii. 11). The preacher, whose painful experiences and prevailingly
pessimistic teachings are the original basis of the book, appears to
have been consistent throughout. He ends in xii. 8 with the same
refrain, _Vanity of vanities; all is vanity!_ In a divine library like
the Old Testament, reflecting every side of human thought and
experience, such a book is not inappropriate. Its contradictions provoke
thought; they beget also a true appreciation of the positive notes thus
brought into dramatic contrast with the ground tones of pessimism which
resound through all literature and history.




