CHAPTER II.

REINCARNATION AND THE MORAL LAW.


The Goodness, justice, and Omnipotence of God are the guarantees of
Providence.

It is absolutely impossible that the faintest breath of injustice
should ever disturb the Universe. Every time the Law appears to be
violated, every time Justice seems outraged, we may be certain that it
is our ignorance alone that is at work, and that a deeper knowledge of
the net-work of evolution and of the lines of action created by human
free will, sooner or later, will dissipate our error.

For all that, the whole universe appears to be the very incarnation of
injustice. The constellations as they come into manifestation shatter
the heavens with their titanic combats; it is the vampirism of the
greatest among them that creates the suns, thus inaugurating egoism
from the very beginning. Everywhere on earth is heard the cry of pain,
a never-ending struggle; sacrifice is everywhere, whether voluntary or
forced, offered freely or taken unwillingly. The law of the strongest
is the universal tyranny. The vegetable kingdom feeds upon the
mineral, and in its turn forms nourishment for the animal; the giants
of the forests spread ruin in every direction, beneath their
destructive influence the spent, exhausted soil can nourish nothing
but weeds and shrubs of no importance. In the animal kingdom a war to
the death is ever being waged, a terrible destruction in which those
best armed for the fray pitilessly devour the weak and defenceless.
Man piles up every kind and method of destruction, cruelty and
barbarity of every sort; he tears away gold from the bowels of the
earth, mutilates the mighty forests, exhausts the soil by intensive
culture, harasses and tortures animals when unable to utilise their
muscular strength, and, in addition, kills them when their flesh is
eatable; his most careful calculations are the auxiliaries of his
insatiable egoism, and, by might or cunning, he crushes everything
that hinders or inconveniences him. Finally, from time to time, the
Elements mingle their awful voice in this concert of pain and despair,
and we find hurricanes and floods, fires and earthquakes pile up
colossal wreck and ruin in a few hours, on which scenes of destruction
the morrow's calm and glorious sun sheds his impassive beams.

And so, before reaching individual evil and apparent injustice, there
rises up before us at the very outset the threatening spectre of
universal evil and injustice. This problem is so closely bound up with
our subject that we are compelled to spend a short time in considering
it.


WHY DOES PAIN EXIST?

To admit, as do certain ignorant fatalists, that the Universe was
created by the stroke of some magic wand, and that each planet,
kingdom, and being is condemned, so to speak, to a definite
crystallisation in the state in which it has pleased God to fix it; to
admit that the mineral will remain a mineral throughout eternity, that
the vegetable will ever reproduce the same types, that the animal will
definitely be confined to his instincts and impulses, without the
hope, some day, of developing the superior mentality of his torturers
in human form; to admit that man will never be anything but man,
_i.e._, a being in whom the passions have full play whereas the
virtues are scarcely born; to admit that there is no final
goal--perfection, the divine state--to crown man's labour; all this is
to refuse to recognise evolution, to deny the progress everywhere
apparent, to set divine below human justice; blasphemy, in a word.

It has been said by unthinking Christians that evidently God created
human suffering, so that those might gain Heaven who, but for this
suffering, would have no right to it. To speak thus is to represent
the Supreme Goodness in a very unworthy aspect and to attribute the
most gratuitous cruelty to Divine Justice. When, too, we see that this
absurd reasoning explains neither the sufferings of animals, which
have no right to enjoy the felicity of heaven, they say, nor the
fact[10] that "there are many called but few chosen," nor the saying
that "outside the Church there is no salvation," although for ages
past God has caused millions of men to be born in countries where the
Gospel has not been preached, we shall not be astonished to find that
those who arrogate to themselves a monopoly of Truth bring forward
none but arguments of childish folly in support of their claims.

Generally, however, it is original sin that is advanced as the cause
of suffering.

The absurdity of this doctrine is so apparent that it has lost all
credence by enlightened members of the Christian faith. First of all,
it does not explain the sufferings of animals, which have had no
participation in this sin, nor does it account for the unequal
distribution of pain amongst men themselves. This sin being the same
for all at birth,[11] punishment ought to have been equally severe for
all, and we ought not to see such frightful disproportions as are to
be found in the condition of children who have not attained to the age
of reason, _i.e._, of responsibility. Saint Augustine felt the weight
of this consideration; he reflected long on this torturing problem:

"When I come to consider the sufferings of children," he says,
"believe me, I am in a state of terrible perplexity. I have no wish
whatever to speak only of the punishment inflicted on them after this
life by eternal damnation to which they are of necessity condemned if
they have left their bodies without receiving the sacrament of Christ,
but of the pains they endure in this present life, under our very
eyes. Did I wish to examine these sufferings, time would fail me
rather than instances thereof; they languish in sickness, are torn by
pain, tortured by hunger and thirst, weakened in their organs,
deprived of their senses, and sometimes tormented by unclean beings. I
should have to show how they can with justice be subjected to such
things, at a time when they are yet without sin. It cannot be said
that they suffer unknown to God or that God can do nothing against
their tormentors, nor that He can create or allow unjust punishment.
When men suffer, we say they are being punished for their crimes, but
this can be applied only to adults. As children have in them no sin
capable of meriting so terrible a punishment, tell me what answer can
be given?"

The answer, indeed, cannot be made that original sin is capable of
explaining this unequal retribution; but then, ought not the very
absurdity of the consequences due to such sin to justify one in
refusing to examine this argument? What soul could admit that the
innocent should be punished for the guilty? Does human justice, in
spite of its imperfection, punish the offspring of criminals? Can the
millions of descendants of the mythical Adam have been chastised for a
crime in which they have had no share? And would this chastisement,
multiplied millions of times without the faintest reason, never have
stirred the conscience of the Church? Saint Augustine could not make
up his mind to accuse God of injustice; so, to avoid disputing the
truth of the Christian teaching in which he wholly believed, he
invented his famous theory of "generation," often called
"translation."

Men suffer because of original sin, he says, but it would not be just
of God to punish them for this, had they not shared therein[12];
this, indeed, they have done, for the soul of a man was not created
directly, by God, at the moment of the birth of the body; it is a
branch taken from the soul of his father, as the latter's comes from
that of his parents; thus, ascending the genealogical chain, we see
that all souls issue from that of the common father of mankind:
Adam.[13]

So that Saint Augustine preferred to deny the creation of souls and to
derive them from the soul of Adam, through a successive progeny of
human vehicles, rather than to allow God to be charged with injustice.
We are not called upon to demonstrate the falsity of his hypothesis,
which the Church has been forced to condemn, though without replacing
it with a better theory; all the same, if human souls suffer from a
sin in which they have not individually and consciously
participated--and such is the case, for even granting that translation
be a fact, these souls existed in Adam only potentially, as
unconscious, undeveloped germs, when the sin took place--their
punishment is none the less arbitrary and revolting. Saint Augustine
believed he was justifying Providence; he succeeded only in deceiving
his own reason and revolted sense of justice, but he preferred by
suggestion to deceive himself to such an extent as to believe in the
reality of his desire rather than enrol himself against the Church.

In order to reconcile divine Justice with the injustice of punishing
all for the fault of one alone, the theologians also said: "Adam
sinned, his sin has been distributed over the whole of his race, but
God, by sending down his son, instituted baptism; and the waters of
the sacrament wash the stains of original sin from the souls of men."

This reply is as childish as the former. As a matter of fact,
according to the Church, about four thousand years intervened between
the sin of Adam and the coming of the Redeemer, and so only after that
interval did the souls of the just, who were waiting in the Life
Beyond for the coming of the Messiah, enter Paradise!

Would not this delay in itself be an injustice? Ought not baptism to
have been instituted immediately after the sin, and should it not have
been placed within the reach of all? Besides, do we not see that even
in our days, two thousand years after the coming of the Christ,
millions of human beings are born and die without ever having heard of
the existence of this sacrament. This part of the argument is too
puerile to dwell upon at length, but we will spend a few moments on it
to show definitely how powerless this theory is to explain evil.

Before teaching the doctrine of "Limbo," the Church accepted the idea
of the damnation of children who died without being baptised, as we
have just seen in the case of Saint Augustine.[14] Bossuet, with
incredible blindness, also accepted it; and, sad to relate, his reason
did not feel called upon to furnish an explanation which would justify
Providence, as was the case with Saint Augustine. He rejected
"translation," and discovered nothing with which to veil the
blasphemy.

On this point the following is a faithful _resume_ of his letter to
Pope Innocent XII.:

     The damnation of children who have died without being
     baptised must be firmly believed by the Church. They are
     guilty because they are born under the wrath of God and in
     the power of Darkness. Children of wrath by nature, objects
     of hatred and aversion, hurled into Hell with the rest of
     the damned, they will remain there for all eternity punished
     by the horrible vengeance of the Demon.

     Such also are the decisions of the learned Denis Petau, the
     most eminent Bellarmin, the Councils of Lyons, of Florence,
     and of Trent; for these things are not decided by human
     considerations, but by the authority of tradition and of the
     Scriptures.

Such logic makes one really doubt human reason, and reminds one of the
spirit with which the courts of the Holy Inquisition were inspired.
Where in Nature can there be found such lack of proportion between
cause and effect, crime and punishment? Have such arguments ever been
justified by the voice of conscience?

Official Christianity remains powerless to explain suffering. Let us
see what we can learn from the philosophies and religions of the past
and the greatest of modern philosophers, as well as from the admirable
_resumes_ of Teachers of theosophy.

The problem of suffering is one with that of life, _i.e._, with that
of evolution in general. The object of the successive worlds is the
creation of millions of centres of consciousness in the germinal state
(_souls_) and the transformation of these germs into divinities
similar to their father, God. This is the divine multiplication,
creating innumerable "gods," in God.

To produce divine germs, homogeneous Unity must limit its immensity
and create within itself the diversity of matter, of form. This can
be obtained by the creation of "multiplicity" and by the "limitation"
of what might be called a portion of Divinity. Now, limitation implies
imperfection, both general and individual, _i.e._, suffering; and
multiplicity implies diversity of needs and interests, forced
submission to the general law _i.e._, suffering again. That the divine
germs may evolve, their potentialities must be awakened by their
surroundings; in other words, by the action of the "opposites," and
sensation must come into being; the action of the opposites on
sensation is also a cause of pain.

Outside of the unknown Being--which will be known at the end of
evolution--nothing can _be_. Everything is in Him. He is all; the
worlds, time and space are "aspects" which He assumes from time to
time[15]; for this reason it has been said that the Universe is an
illusion, which may be expressed more clearly by saying that it is an
illusion to believe that what exists is not one form of divine
activity, an "aspect" of God.

That anything may exist, or rather that aspects of God may appear,
there must be manifested in Him a special mode of being, to call
forth what we designate as multiplicity.

That multiplicity[16] may be manifest, differences must be produced in
Unity; these differences in the world are the "pairs of
opposites"--the contraries. These contraries are everywhere.

Matter is the fulcrum of force--both of these terms being "aspects" of
God--and without a fulcrum no force can manifest itself; there is no
heat without cold, and when it is summer in the northern hemisphere it
is winter in the southern. There is no movement that does not depend
upon a state of rest, no light without shadow, no pleasure without the
faculty of pain, no freedom that is not founded upon necessity, no
good that does not betoken an evil.

The following are a few examples of duality taken from nature. The
current of electricity is polarised into a positive and a negative
current. It is the same with the magnet; though you break a bar into a
hundred pieces, you bring into being a hundred small magnets, each
possessing its positive and negative side; you will not have destroyed
the "duality," the opposites.

Like the magnet, the solar spectrum forms two series, separated by a
neutral point, the blue series and the red one, united by the
violet.[17]

           Violet.

Indigo.                Yellow.
Blue.                  Orange.
Green.                 Red.

The terms of the two series are respectively complimentary to each
other; the violet dominates the two groups of opposites and is a
visible member of the axis formed by the colours that might be called
neutral.

Duality appears in every shape and form.

Symbolically, we may say with the Hindus that the Universe begins and
ends with two opposite movements: an emanation from Brahma, it is born
when the breast of God sends forth the heavenly outbreathing, it dies,
reabsorbed, when the universal inbreathing takes place. These
movements produce attraction and repulsion, the aggregation and
dissolution to be found everywhere. It is the attraction of a
force-centre, the "laya centre" of Theosophy, which permits of the
atomic condensation that gives it the envelope whose soul it is; when
its cycle of activity ends, attraction gives place to repulsion, the
envelope is destroyed by the return of its constituent elements to the
source from which they were drawn, and the soul is liberated until a
future cycle of activity begins.

Even the rhythm of pulmonary respiration, the contraction and dilation
(systole and diastole) of the heart, the ebb and flow of the tides, as
also day and night, sleeping and waking, summer and winter, life and
death, are all products of that law of contraries which rules
creation.

These "opposites" are the very essence of cosmic life, the twin
pillars of universal equilibrium; they have been represented in
Solomon's symbolical temple--here, the Universe--by Jakin and Boaz,
the white and the black columns; they are also the interlaced
triangles of "Solomon's Seal," the six-pointed star, the two Old Men
of the Kabbalah, the white Jehovah and the black Jehovah; Eros and
Anteros, the serpents of Mercury's caduceus, the two Sphinxes of the
car of Osiris, Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, Jacob and Esau, the
Chinese "Yang" and "Yin," the goblet and staff of Tarot, man and
woman. All these images represent the same law.

Multiplicity, the fruit of the contraries, makes its appearance in the
forms born in infinite, homogeneous Being; its goal is the goal of
creation; the production, in infinite Being, of centres which are
developed by evolution and finally become gods in God. These centres,
or "souls," these points in the supreme Point, are divine in essence,
though, so far, they have no share at all in the perfection
"manifested" by God; they are all "centres," for God is a sphere,
whose centre is everywhere and circumference nowhere, but they have
not developed consciousness which is as yet only potential in them.
Like cuttings of willow which reproduce the mother-tree, these points,
veritable portions of God, are capable of germinating, growing up, and
becoming "I's," self-conscious beings, intelligent and endowed with
will-power, and finally gods, having developed the entire
potentialities of the All by their repeated imprisonment in the series
of forms that make up the visible and invisible kingdoms of nature.

Every form, _i.e._ aggregate of substance-force, reflects within
itself one of these points of Divinity. This point is its Monad, its
centre of consciousness, or soul; it is the cause which is manifested
as qualities in the envelopes, and these give it the illusion of
separateness for a certain period,[18] just as a soap-bubble
momentarily acquires a fictitious individuality and appears separate
from the atmosphere--of which it forms part--so long as its illusory
envelope endures.

Thus do men imagine themselves separate from one another, when all the
time their soul is nothing more than a drop of the divine Ocean,
hidden momentarily in a perishable body.

The "contraries" are the anvil and the hammer which slowly forge souls
by producing what might be called sensation in general, and sensation
is a fertile cause of suffering each time the vehicles of
consciousness receive vibrations that greatly exceed their fundamental
capacity of sensation. Without sensation however--consequently without
suffering--the body could neither walk,[19] nor see, nor hear, nor
show any disturbance brought to bear upon it; there would exist no
possible relation between the Universe and the "I," between the All
and the parts, between bodies and souls; there would be no
consciousness, or sensation of being, since no vibration from without
would find an echo in the incarnated "centres" of life; no knowledge
would be possible; man would be, as it were, in a state of
nothingness; and, without suspecting it, his body might at any moment
be crushed to the ground by the forces of Nature.

But these material necessities are not by any means the only ones that
demand sensation; without it, one of the principal objects of
evolution--the development of "Egos"--would be impossible. As an
example borrowed from the domain of physical sensation, we need only
call to memory a well-known experience in childhood.

All who have been at a boarding school know how heavy and fetid is the
atmosphere of a dormitory in the early winter morning, when fifty boys
have been breathing the same air again and again during the whole of
the night. And yet, who suspected this until he had gone out for a few
minutes and then returned to the bed-room? It needed the "contrary,"
the pure outside air, to make known the state of the atmosphere
inside. The contrast produced sensation--that nauseous, suffocating
impression of foul, mephitic air; suffering[20] generated knowledge of
the vitiated air; as the result of this influence, the "centre of
consciousness" felt itself an "I" distinct from its surroundings, and
its "self-consciousness" received a slight increase.

What might be called passional sensibility--desire, emotion,
impulse--is, like physical sensation, another indispensable factor in
evolution; it is the special element in the development of the animal
kingdom as well as of the less evolved portion of the human kingdom.

The young souls of mankind must receive the comparatively simple lessons
of sensation, desire, and passion, before beginning the far more
complicated study of mentality. But for desire, a host of needs could
not be manifested, numberless functions would remain inactive; the body
would not feed itself, and would die, were it not for hunger; danger
would not be fled from, but for the instinct of self-preservation; nor
without this would there be any propagation of the species. None the
less is this life of sensation the source of many evils; desire and
passion amongst human beings create terrible misery, fill prisons and
hospitals, and are at the root of all kinds of moral suffering. In its
turn, intelligence--that sensation so characteristic of the human
state--is both an indispensable necessity and the most fertile source of
evil, so long as it has not experienced a yearning for that inner
"divinity," deep in the heart of man, which calls to it. A powerful
lever of progress, it might convert this earth into a paradise, whereas
it is the weapon which the strong, in their egoism, use to crush the
feeble, a terrible weapon which either creates or intensifies all the
evils under which the people writhe in despair. Once it becomes the
instrument of a regenerate humanity, that is to say, when men have
become compassionate, loving, and devoted, then the social question will
cease to exist, and the old instrument of torture will become a pledge
of general happiness.

Even spiritual sensibility is a cause of suffering to some noble souls
who have developed it, for however deep the joy of loving and giving
oneself, intense too is the pain of witnessing the cruel drama of
life, that fratricidal struggle in which passion strikes without
mercy, whilst illusion and ignorance deal blows even more terrible,
for into the wounds they make they instil the poison of revolt and
despair.

The action of multiplicity, and of its creators, the "contraries,"
engenders still other causes of suffering. Every being lives both for
others and at their expense. For instance, physical bodies are obliged
to replace with food and nourishment those particles which the various
functions of life cause them to lose. The vegetable kingdom takes its
constituent elements from the mineral kingdom, and itself serves as
food for large portions of the animal kingdom; up to this point
physical pain has not manifested itself, though there is a momentary
arrest of evolution for the animistic essence which represents the
individual in the destroyed vegetable. A portion of the animal kingdom
feeds on its own members; man, too, extorts from this same kingdom a
very heavy tribute; here, the arrested evolution of the victims is all
the more important, inasmuch as their stage of evolution is higher,
and the existence of a nervous system brings the possibility of
suffering, suffering which certain influences[21] either diminish or
suppress altogether, when caused by animal destructiveness, but which
may become intense when it is man who is the sacrificer.

Among the causes of pain, arising from multiplicity there is also the
physical, mental, and moral action exercised by the solidarity of all
beings. By exchanging, with those that come into contact with us, the
products thrown off by our visible and invisible bodies, we are the
dispensers of good or ill-health. Everyone, for instance, is aware of
the far-reaching effects of an evil intellectual and moral example;
physical contagion, in spite of the torture it inflicts, is far less
to be dreaded than moral contagion. The spiritual qualities alone do
not form a leaven of evil; they are not the double-edged instruments
we meet with elsewhere. The reason of this is that they belong to the
plane of Unity. But it is none the less true that, though the
presence of a highly developed soul is a help to younger souls within
its reach and influence, its powerful vibrations may, from certain
points of view, prove fatiguing to those still at the foot of the
ladder of evolution. This is one of the many reasons that have given
rise to the saying that it is dangerous prematurely to enter the
"circle of the ascetics."

But the most powerful causes of pain, due to multiplicity, are the
ignorance and the will of beings who have reached the human stage. Man
can employ his mental faculties for good or evil, and so long as he
does not know definitely that he is the brother of all beings, _i.e._,
until his divine faculties have been developed, and love and the
spirit of sacrifice have taken possession of his heart, he remains a
terrible egoist, more to be dreaded than the criminal dominated by a
momentary burst of passion, for he acts in cold blood, he evades or
refuses to recognise the law of humanity, he dominates and destroys.
This man is at the stage of ingratitude; he no longer possesses the
harmlessness of childhood, nor has he yet acquired the wisdom of
advanced age. Our Western race has reached this critical stage,
whereof the menacing demands of the suffering masses are a striking
testimony. Here, too, God could not do otherwise; He might create
bodies blindly obedient to his law, mere automata, but it would be
impossible for Him to cause divine germs to evolve into "gods" without
pulling them through the school of evolution which teaches them,
first, of the "ego," the root of all egoism, then knowledge by
ignorance, liberty by necessity, good by evil, and the perfect by the
imperfect.

It may at this point just be mentioned that though human egoism
appears to have free play and to be unrestrained in its cruelty,
divine Law never allows innocence to suffer for the errors of evolving
souls, it punishes only the guilty, whether their faults or misdeeds
be known or unknown, belonging to the present life or to past ones.

Such, briefly, is the cause of pain and suffering in evolution; in the
following pages we will set forth the causes of the unequal
distribution of this suffering.


THE PROBLEM OF THE INEQUALITY OF CONDITIONS.

If suffering in general is the child of Necessity--since it is born of
multiplicity and the limitation of the Infinite, without which the
Universe could not exist--it would seem that we ought to find it
falling upon all beings without distinction, in uniform, regular, and
impartial fashion. Instead of this, it is every moment losing its
character of impersonality; it respects those who are guilty on a
large scale; and, without any visible cause, strikes fiercely the most
innocent of persons; noble souls are born in the families of
criminals, whilst criminals have fathers of the utmost respectability;
we find parricides, and brothers hostile to each other; millionaires
die of surfeiting alongside of paupers dying of hunger; we find giants
by the side of dwarfs; the healthy and well-formed near the crippled
or those wasted away by terrible diseases; Apollos contrast with
Quasimodos; men of genius are met with, cheek by jowl with idiots;
some children are stillborn, others blind or deaf and dumb from birth.
Extremely different races people the earth--on the one hand,
unintelligent and cannibal negroes; on the other, the proud, handsome,
and intelligent, though selfish and cruel white race. Again, from a
moral standpoint, who can explain congenital tendencies to crime, the
vicious by birth, the wicked by nature, the persons with
uncontrollable passions? Wherefore are thrift and foresight lacking in
so many men, who are consequently condemned to lifelong poverty and
wretchedness? Why this excess of intelligence, used mainly for the
exploiting of folly? It is useless to multiply examples, one has only
to look around at hospitals and prisons, night-shelters, palaces and
garrets; everywhere suffering has taken up its abode. Can no reply be
given to this terrible charge brought against Divinity? Is man to
remain in a state of dejection and discouragement, as though some
irreparable catastrophe had befallen him?

According to the Church, all this is the work of the soul which God
gives at the birth of a man--a soul that is good or bad, prudent or
foolish, one which damns or saves itself according as its will can, or
cannot, dominate its passions, its intelligence discover the way to
heaven or not; according as grace or rejection predestine it to heaven
or to hell.

Is it not the depth of profanity to represent God as watching over
conceptions in order to create souls so unfairly endowed, most of whom
will never hear the Gospel message, and consequently cannot be saved,
whilst the rest are destined to animate the bodies of savages and
cannibals, devoid of moral consciousness? Is it not an act of
sacrilege thus to convert God, Who is all Wisdom and Love, into a kind
of accomplice of adulterers and lewd persons or the sport of
Malthusian insults. Unconscious blasphemers are they who would offer
this Dead Sea fruit as the true manna of Life!

There is also another theory, often advanced in certain quarters, on
which we must say a few words, for though it contains only a minimum
of truth, and consequently cannot withstand serious examination, it
has led astray more than one earnest thinker. Inequalities of
suffering, it has been said, arise from inequalities of social
conditions. Intelligence, morality, will, in fact all human faculties,
develop more or less according to their environment; men are born
equal; they become unequal as the result of different environment; pay
the same care and attention to all and they will remain equal, and if
they are equal, the theory seems to imply, evil will disappear from
the face of the earth.

This is not so.

Inequality of suffering does not result from inequality of condition.
Many a poor tiller of the fields enjoys a degree of peace and
happiness that those favoured by birth or fortune would envy. Disease
visits poor and rich alike; moral suffering is more especially the
appanage of the so-called higher classes, and if obscurity and poverty
render certain troubles specially severe, wealth and rank play the
same _role_ in afflictions of another kind; there is a dark side to
every picture. More than this, inequality of condition is one of the
fundamental factors of social equilibrium; without it, many urgent and
even indispensable functions would be neglected, numerous general
needs would remain unsatisfied; so-called menial work, which, in a
state of society that is still imperfect and consequently selfish, is
performed only in the hope of remuneration, would never be done at
all; every man would have to provide for the whole of his necessities;
no one could find time for self-improvement or for flinging himself
entirely into those divers branches of activity which, if personal
interest were absent, would make life infinitely better and progress
extremely rapid. The partisans of this theory rely on diversity of
tastes to fill the diversity of functions that are necessary in social
life: another illusion. The inferior, painful, or difficult tasks will
never find sufficient workers, whilst easy or honourable posts will
always be overcrowded. To believe the contrary would be to shut one's
eyes to the present imperfection of men; it would mean the belief that
they were noble and lofty beings, eager for self-sacrifice, demanding
only to work for the happiness of all, without a single thought of
their personal preferences; it would mean seeing, in present-day
humanity, that of the future in which each individual has attained to
such a degree of perfection that not a single idle, ill-disposed, or
stupid person is to be found amongst them, for each one would regard
himself as the brother and helper of all, and the universal standard
of life would be: Each for all and all for each! How ardently we
desire that this were so; how eagerly we pray for that future, so far
away, when we shall have grown to this nobler stature, and the
present fratricidal struggle shall have given place to a lasting
peace, the offspring of a higher, spiritual, universal love. Anxiously
do we await it; like lost travellers, we fix our eyes on the dark
horizon to catch the first faint streaks of light, harbingers of the
dawn. We greet with joy and gratitude all such as believe in that
blessed future and endeavour to hasten its coming, all who
impersonally and in sincerity aim at the social Unity towards which
the heart aspires, and especially those whose aim it is to advance in
accordance with that continuous, progressive evolution based on the
physical, moral, mental, and spiritual amelioration of men, for it is
they who have learned the secret of Nature. Indeed, evolution shows us
that, the more souls grow, the nearer they approach that perfection to
which progress destines them, and happiness exists only in perfection.

To return to other aspects of the subject.

Men are born equal, we are told.

A single glance at the differences in the moral and intellectual
qualities of races and individuals, at the differences between young
children, even at the differences in the instincts of infants at the
breast, is sufficient to prove the contrary.

There are savages in whom no trace whatever of the moral sense can be
discovered. Charles Darwin in one of his works relates a fact, which
Mrs. Besant has quoted, in illustration of this. An English missionary
reproached a Tasmanian with having killed his wife in order to eat
her. In that rudimentary intellect, the reproach aroused an idea quite
different from that of a crime; the cannibal thought the missionary
imagined that human flesh was of an unpleasant flavour, and so he
replied: "But she was very good!"

Is it possible to attribute to the influence of surroundings alone a
degree of moral poverty so profound as this?

Many a mother has been able to find out that souls are not equal, in
other words, that they are of different ages, by the discovery of
diametrically opposite qualities and tendencies in two children born
under the same conditions; in twins, for instance.

Every schoolmaster has noticed the same fact in the pupils under his
charge. Mrs. Besant says that amongst the 80,000 children who came
under her inspection in the London schools she would often find side
by side with gentle, affectionate little beings others who showed
criminal tendencies from birth.

Looking at the question from another point of view, are we not
continually finding in schools and educational establishments pupils
who, for no explicable reason, show a disposition for one branch of
instruction only? They shine in this, but are dunces in every other
subject.

As a final example, do not infant prodigies prove that men are not
born equal? Young, who discovered the undulatory theory of light,
could read with wonderful rapidity at the age of two, whilst at eight
he had a thorough knowledge of six languages.

Sir W. R. Hamilton began to learn Hebrew when he was three, and knew
it perfectly four years later. At the age of thirteen he knew thirteen
languages.

Gauss, of Brunswick--the greatest mathematician in Europe, according
to Laplace--solved problems in arithmetic when only three.

No, men are not born equal. Nor does environment cause the
inequalities we find; it favours or checks the development of
qualities, but has no part in their creation. Still, its influence is
sufficiently important for us to give it due consideration.

We are linked to one another by the closest bonds of solidarity,
whether we wish it and are conscious thereof or not. Everything
absorbs and throws off, breathes in and breathes out, and this
universal exchange, if at times bad, is none the less a powerful
factor in evolution. The atom of carbon, on entering into the
combinations of the human body, is endowed with a far higher power of
combining than the one which has just left the lump of ore; to obtain
its new properties, this atom has had to pass through millions of
vegetable, animal, and human molecules. Animals brought into close
contact with man develop mentally to a degree that is sometimes
incredible, by reason of the intellectual food with which our thoughts
supply them. The man who lives alone is, other things being equal,
weaker physically, morally, and mentally than he who lives in a large
social environment; it is for this reason that the mind develops far
more rapidly in large centres of life than in the country. And what is
true of good is, unfortunately, true also of evil qualities.

Consequently, environment has an undeniable influence, and it is
perfectly true to say that the social conditions under which
individuals are born favour or impede the development of their
faculties. There its influence stops; it can intensify inequality, but
does not create it.

Inequality of condition arises, above all else, from the continuity of
what might be called creation. Atoms are incessantly being formed in
the womb of the Virgin Mother,[22] by the might of the divine vortex
perceived by seers in ecstatic vision, and which theosophy has named
the Great Breath; ceaselessly are these atoms entering into multitudes
of organisms, ceaselessly is the plan of evolution being worked--some
ending, others beginning the great Pilgrimage. It is the existence of
this circuit which creates and keeps complete the hierarchy of beings,
brings into existence and perpetuates the known and the unknown
kingdoms of Nature; souls ascend slowly from one kingdom to another,
whilst the places they leave are filled by new-comers, by younger
souls.

A second cause of human inequality is the difference in effort and
deed accomplished by the will of human beings who have reached a
certain point in evolution. As soon as this will is guided by
intelligence and the moral sense, it hastens or delays individual
evolution, makes it easy when it acts in harmony with divine Law--by
doing what is called "good"--or disturbs evolution by pain, when it
opposes this Law, by doing "evil." By modifying the direction of the
Law, the Soul engenders beneficent or maleficent forces, which, after
having played in the universe within the limit the law has imposed on
them, return to their starting point--man. From that time, one
understands that the balance of the scales in different individuals
becomes unequal. These effects of the will influence to a noticeable
degree the life during which they have originated; they are preserved
in a latent condition after death, and appear again in future returns
to earth.

Thus are men born laden with the results of their past and in
possession of the capacities they have developed in the course of
their evolution. Those whom the difficulties of life have filled with
energy in the past return to existence on earth possessed of that
might which the world admires; now it is perseverance or courage; now
patient calm or violence, which is the stronger, according to the
aspect of the energy developed. Others, again, are born feeble and
devoid of energy; their former lives have been too easy. Men are
philosophers or mathematicians, artists or _savants_, from the very
cradle.

Objections have been brought against the doctrine of Rebirth by
opponents who have looked only on one side of the individual life, and
so have been unable to explain apparent anomalies, especially in those
cases where it is seen that the effect does not immediately follow the
cause. In reality, every force that emerges from a centre of will[23]
describes an ellipse, so to speak, which travels through a net-work of
other ellipses generated by thousands of other centres of energy, and
is accelerated or retarded in its course, according to the direction
and nature of the forces with which it is connected. It is for this
reason that certain actions meet with their reward or their punishment
almost immediately. Then the people say: "It is the finger of God!" In
other cases, again, and these are the most numerous, the reaction is
postponed; the noble-hearted man, who has made sacrifices the whole of
his life, seems to receive in exchange nothing but misfortune and
pain, whilst close by the wicked, selfish man prospers and thrives
exceedingly. Thereupon the ignorant say: "There is no God, for there
is no justice."

Not so! It is impossible to defeat Justice; though, in the interests
of evolving beings, it may allow the forces around to accelerate or
retard its progress. Nothing is ever lost; causes that have not
fructified remain potential; and, like the grain of corn gathered
thousands of years ago, grow and develop as soon as favourable soil
and environment are offered them. Debts are still recorded, when the
perishable sheaths of our physical bodies have been cast off; they
come up for future payment, often in the next life. But this next life
may not wipe off the whole of the liabilities, so the process is
continued for several successive existences, and this has given rise
to the saying that the sins of the parents[24] are visited upon the
children[25] unto the seventh generation.[26]

Such is the truth.

Souls, equal in potentialities whilst dormant as germs in the womb of
Being, become unequal, as soon as they are born into existence in the
manifested Universe, for they find predecessors, elder souls in front
of them; inequality is intensified when they have reached the human
stage, where intelligence and will come into play, for henceforth,
inequality in the actions of individuals, variations of what might be
called merit and demerit, set up a second factor in the inequality of
conditions. Evolution treasures up the causes that have not been able
to germinate in one existence, and, by successive returns to earth,
realises the aims and ends of that Justice which governs the Universe,
the designs of that Love which makes for progress and leads to
perfection.


OBJECTION.

An apparently serious objection to the doctrine of Rebirth is
constantly being made. It is unjust and useless, people say, to be
punished for misdeeds that are forgotten. As this objection has
reference to moral proofs, we must deal with it here.

Does forgetfulness efface faults or destroy their consequences? Could
the assassin, who has lost all memory of the crime committed the
previous evening, change his deed or its results in the slightest
degree? Rebirths are nothing more than the morrows of former lives,
and though the merciful waters of Lethe have effaced their memory, the
forces stored up in the soul, during the ages, perform their work all
the same in the future.

On the other hand, injustice would exist, and that under a very cruel
aspect, were memory to continue; for the painful vision of a past
always full of weaknesses, even when free from the stain of crime,
would be a continual one. And if, too--as our opponents would
prefer--man knew why he was punished, _i.e._, if he knew that each of
these past errors and faults, ever present before his eyes, would
carry with it a particular fruit, and that strict payment would be
exacted at every step in his new life, would not the punishment be far
greater than the sin? Would there not rise from every human heart an
outcry of blasphemy against a God who, by means of memory, transformed
life into an endless torment, destroying all activity or initiative
in the anxiety of expectancy, in a word, stifling the present beneath
the heavy nightmare of the past?

Men, though so unjust and little disposed to pity, have always refused
to inflict on a man condemned to death the torture of anticipation;
only at the last moment is he informed of the rejection of his appeal
for mercy. Could divine Law be less compassionate than human law?

Is it not rash for us, in our profound ignorance, to criticise the
workings of a boundless Wisdom? He who takes only a few steps along
the pathway of Knowledge, or enters, however slightly, into the secret
of the works of God, obtains the proof that Providence leaves no part
of the Cosmos, no being anywhere, deprived of its fatherly care and
protection. When, in our blindness, we imagine injustice, a void or an
imperfection of any kind, a radiant beam of light shows us the
omnipresent Life, bestowing love on all its children without
distinction, from the slumbering atom to the glorious planetary
Spirit, whose consciousness is so vast as to enfold the Universe.

It is more especially after death that the soul, set free from its
illusory sheaths, makes an impartial review of its recent incarnation,
attentively following its actions and their consequences, noting its
errors and failures, along with their motives and causes. In this
school it grows in knowledge and power; and when, in a future
incarnation, the same difficulties present themselves anew, it is
better equipped for the struggle; what has been learned, is retained
within the soul; it knows, where formerly it was ignorant, and by the
"voice of conscience," tells the personality[27] what its duty is.
This wisdom, sifted from the panorama of a thousand past images, is
the best of all memories, for on those numerous occasions when a
decision must be arrived at on the spur of the moment it would not be
possible to summon forth from the depths of the past such groups of
memories as refer to the decision to be reached, to see the events
over again, and deduce therefrom a line of conduct. The lesson must
have been learnt and thoroughly assimilated during the enlightened
peace and calm of the Hereafter; then only is the soul ready to
respond without delay, and its command is distinct; its judgment,
sure; do this, avoid that.

When a soul, in the course of evolution, has succeeded in impressing
its vibration--its thought--on a brain which it has refined and made
responsive by a training which purifies the entire nature of the man,
it is able to transmit to the incarnated consciousness the memory of
its past lives; but this memory then ceases to be painful or
dangerous, for the soul has not only exhausted the greater part of its
karma of suffering, it also possesses the strength necessary to
sustain its personality, whenever a foreboding of what we call
misfortune comes upon it.

In the divine work everything comes in its own time, and we recognise
the perfection of the Creator by the perfect concatenation of all
creation.

Reincarnation is so intimately bound up with the Law of Causality, and
receives from it such powerful support, that this chapter would be
left in a very incomplete form were we not to say a few words on
Karma.


THE LAW OF CAUSALITY (Karma).[28]

Karma is the Law of the Universe, the expression of divine Will. Its
seemingly essential attributes are Justice and Love; it neither
punishes nor rewards, but adjusts things, restores disturbed balance
and harmony, brings back evolving souls to the right path and teaches
them Law.

When a man acts against the Law, he is like a swimmer, struggling
against the current of a rapid river; his strength fails, and he is
borne away.

So does God bear away, in spite of all their efforts, those who,
whether ignorantly or consciously, fight against the Law, for it is
His love that wills evolution, _i.e._, the making human beings divine;
so he brings them back to the path, in spite of themselves, every time
they wander astray.

"God is patient because He is eternal," it has been said. The sentence
is incomplete and must be changed, since it attributes to Divinity a
vindictive nature. The Law is patient because it is perfect in Wisdom,
Power, and Love.

This Law is the divine Will which moves all things and vibrates
everywhere; it is the music of the spheres, the song of glory and
harmony, which murmurs in the heart like the rippling of a waterfall,
the chant of life and joy that eternally triumphs in its never-ending
creation of beings, who, after revolving for a moment in the universe,
have become perfect.

Its glorious strains resound in the heart of man, when the soul has
found peace in the Law, and we are told that, when once heard, its
divine accents continue for ever, like an ineffable whisper which
brings us back to hope and faith, when we are sunk in the depths of
despair.

God limited himself in order to become incarnate in the Universe: He
is the Soul of the world. His will is exerted everywhere, it finds its
reflection in every creature; and man, a portion of divinity in
course of evolution, possesses a germ of will that is infinite in its
essence, and consequently capable of limitless development; God
respects this will in His creatures, and submits to violence, in order
to teach them His will, which is supreme Love. Like a stone that falls
into a tranquil lake, a human action creates, all round, concentric
ripples which continue to the very shores or limits of the Universe;
then the wave is thrown back upon itself, returns to its
starting-point, and the man who began the first movement receives a
recoil exactly equivalent to the original impetus. Reaction is equal
to action; obstacles on the way may delay its return or break up its
energy, but the time comes when the fractions return to the centre
that generates the disturbance, which thus receives from the Law a
perfectly just retribution.

The principal element in actions is thought. Every thought is a form
in a state of vibration--a ray of intelligence which unites itself
with subtle matter[29] and forms a being, of which this matter is the
body, and thought, the soul. This being, often called a
"thought-form," possesses form, duration, and strength that bear a
strict relation to the energy of the thought that created it; if it
embodies a soul of hatred, it will react on the man who harbours this
thought, and on all who come into contact with him, as a leaven of
destruction, but if it is guided by love it will be, as it were, the
incarnation of some beneficent power.

In certain cases its action is expressed visibly and rapidly; for
instance, a venomous thought may[30] cause the death of the person
against whom it is directed--this is one aspect of the "evil eye"--as
also it may[31] return to its starting-point and kill the one who
generated it, by the recoil. Every mental projection of a criminal
nature, however, by no means necessarily reaches the object aimed at;
a sorcerer, for instance, could no more injure one who was positive,
consciously and willingly good, than he could cause a grain of corn to
sprout on a block of granite; favourable soil is needed to enable the
seed of evil to take root in a man's heart; otherwise, the evil
recoils with its full force upon the one who sent it forth and who is
an irresistible magnet, for he is its very "life-centre."

Thoughts cling to their creator and attract towards this latter those
of a similar nature floating about in the invisible world, for they
instinctively come to vitalise and invigorate themselves by contact
with him; they radiate around him a contagious atmosphere of good or
evil, and when they have left him, hover about, at the caprice of the
various currents, impelling those they touch towards the goal to which
they are making. They even recoil on the visible form of their
generator; it is for this reason that physical is closely connected
with moral well-being, and most of our diseases are nothing else than
the outer expression of the hidden leaven of passion. When the action
of this latter is sudden and powerful, diseases may be the immediate
consequence thereof; blinded by materialism, certain doctors seldom
acknowledge their real cause; and yet instances of hair turning white
in a single night are too numerous to be refuted, congestion of the
brain brought on by a fit of anger, jaundice and other grave maladies
caused by grief and trouble, are to be met with continually.

When the mental forces which disturb the physical organs meet with
obstacles which prevent their immediate outlet, they accumulate, like
the electric fluid in a condenser, until an unexpected contact
produces a discharge; this condensation often persists for a whole
life in a latent condition, and is preserved intact for a future
incarnation; this is the cause of original vices, which, incorporated
in the etheric double, react upon the organic texture of the body.
This also explains why each individual possesses an _ensemble_ of
pathological predispositions often radically different from those
heredity should have bequeathed to him; it is also, to some extent,
the key to physiognomy, for every single feature bears either the
stamp of our passions or the halo of our virtues.

Thought creates lasting bonds between human beings; love and hatred
enchain certain individuals to one another for a whole series of
incarnations; many a victim of the past is to be found again in those
unnatural sons who send a thrill of horror through society when it
hears of some heinous crime--they have become the torturers of their
former oppressors. In other cases, it is love which attracts and
unites in renewed affection those who formerly loved one another--they
return to earth as brothers, sisters, fathers, mothers, husbands or
wives.

But if we are the slaves of the past, if fate compels us to reap what
we have sown, we yet have the future in our hands, for we can tear up
the weeds, and in their place sow useful plants. Just as, by means of
physical hygiene, we can change within a few years the nature of the
constituents that make up our bodies, so also, by a process of moral
hygiene, we can purify our passions and then turn their strength in
the direction of good. According as we will, so do we actually become,
good or bad; every man who has taken his evolution in hand notices
this rapid transformation of his personality, and sees his successive
"egos" rise step by step, so to speak, throughout his whole life.
Speaking generally, the first part of life is the expression of the
distant past--of former lives--the second is a mixture of the past and
of the energies of the present incarnation; the end of life is nothing
but a sinking into an ever-deepening rut for those who crystallise in
only one direction; the force of habit sets up its reign, and man
finds himself bound by the chains he himself has forged. This is the
reason an old man does not like the present times; he has stopped
whilst time has advanced, and he is now being carried along like the
flotsam and jetsam of a wreck; the very tastes and habits of his
contemporaries violently clashing with his beloved past. Speak not to
him of progress or evolution, he has brought himself into a state of
complete immobility, and he will discover no favourable field of
action nor will he acquire real energy until he has drunk of the
waters of Lethe in a rest-giving Hereafter and a new body supplies his
will with an instrument having the obedient suppleness of youth.

H. P. Blavatsky, in the _Secret Doctrine_, has well described this
progressive enmeshing of man in the net he himself is weaving.

"Those who believe in Karma have to believe in destiny, which, from
birth to death, every man is weaving, thread by thread, around
himself, as a spider his web; and this destiny is guided either by the
heavenly voice of the invisible prototype outside of us, or by our
more intimate _astral_ or inner man, who is but too often the evil
genius of the embodied entity called man. Both these lead on the
outward man, but one of them must prevail; and from the very beginning
of the invisible affray the stern and implacable _Law of Compensation_
steps in and takes its course, faithfully following the fluctuations
of the fight. When the last strand is woven, the man is seemingly
enwrapped in the net-work of his own doing, then he finds himself
completely under the empire of this _self-made_ destiny...."

She adds shortly afterwards:

"An Occultist or a philosopher will not speak of the goodness or
cruelty of Providence; but, identifying it with Karma-Nemesis, he will
teach that nevertheless it guards the good and watches over them in
this as in future lives; and that it punishes the evil-doer, aye, even
to his seventh rebirth, so long, in short, as the effect of his having
thrown into perturbation even the smallest atom in the Infinite World
of harmony, has not been finally readjusted. For the only decree of
Karma--an eternal and immutable decree--is absolute Harmony in the
world of matter as it is in the world of Spirit. It is not, therefore,
Karma that rewards or punishes, but it is we who reward or punish
ourselves, according to whether we work with, through, and along with
nature, abiding by the laws on which that Harmony depends, or--break
them.

"Nor would the ways of Karma be inscrutable, were men to work in union
and harmony instead of disunion and strife. For our ignorance of those
ways--which one portion of mankind calls the ways of Providence, dark
and intricate, while another sees in them the action of blind
Fatalism, and a third, simple chance, with neither gods nor devils to
guide them--would surely disappear, if we would but attribute all
these to their correct cause....

"We stand bewildered before the mystery of our own making, and the
riddle of life that we will not solve, and then accuse the great
Sphinx of devouring us. But verily, there is not an accident in our
lives, not a mis-shapen day or a misfortune, that could not be traced
back to our own doings in this or in another life...."

On the same subject, Mrs. Sinnett says in _The Purpose of Theosophy_:

"Every individual is making Karma either good or bad in every action
and thought of his daily round, and is at the same time working out in
this life the Karma brought about by the acts and desires of the last.
When we see people afflicted by congenital ailments, it may be safely
assumed that these ailments are the inevitable results of causes
started by the same in a previous birth. It may be argued that, as
these afflictions are hereditary, they can have nothing to do with a
past incarnation; but it must be remembered that the ego, the real
man, the individuality, has no spiritual origin in the parentage by
which it is re-embodied, but is drawn by the affinities which its
previous mode of life attracted round it into the current that carries
it, when the time comes for re-birth, to the home best fitted for the
development of those tendencies....

"This doctrine of Karma, when properly understood, is well calculated
to guide and assist those who realise its truth to a higher and better
mode of life; for it must not be forgotten that not only our actions,
but our thoughts also, are most assuredly followed by a crowd of
circumstances that will influence for good or for evil our own future;
and, what is still more important, the future of many of our
fellow-creatures. If sins of omission and commission could in any case
be only self-regarding, the effect on the sinner's Karma would be a
matter of minor consequence. The fact that every thought and act
through life carries with it, for good or evil, a corresponding
influence on the members of the human family renders a strict sense of
justice, morality, and unselfishness so necessary to future happiness
and progress. A crime once committed, an evil thought sent out from
the mind, are past recall--no amount of repentance can wipe out their
results on the future....

"Repentance, if sincere, will deter a man from repeating errors; it
cannot save him or others from the effects of those already produced,
which will most unerringly overtake him either in this life or in the
next rebirth."

We will also quote a few lines from E. D. Walker in _Reincarnation_:

"Briefly, the doctrine of Karma is that we have made ourselves what we
are by former actions, and are building our future eternity by present
actions. There is no destiny but what we ourselves determine. There is
no salvation or condemnation except what we ourselves bring about....
Because it offers no shelter for culpable actions and necessitates a
sterling manliness, it is less welcome to weak natures than the easy
religious tenets of vicarious atonement, intercessions, forgiveness,
and death-bed conversions....

"In the domain of eternal justice, the offence and the punishment are
inseparably connected as the same event, because there is no real
distinction between the action and its outcome.

"It is Karma, or our old acts, that bring us back into earthly life.
The spirit's abode changes according to its Karma, and this Karma
forbids any long continuance in one condition, because it is always
changing. So long as action is governed by material and selfish
motives, just so long must the effect of that action be manifested in
physical rebirths. Only the perfectly selfless man can elude the
gravitation of material life. Few have attained this, but it is the
goal of mankind."

The danger of a too brief explanation of the law of Causality consists
in the possibility of being imperfectly understood, and consequently
of favouring the doctrine of fatalism.

"Why act at all, the objection will be urged, if everything is
foreseen by the Law? Why stretch out a hand to the man who falls into
the water before our very eyes? Is not the Law strong enough to save
him, if he is not to die; and if he is, have we any right to
interfere?...

"Such reasoning arises from ignorance and egoism.

"Yes, the law is powerful enough to prevent the man from drowning, and
also to prevent the possibility of his being saved by some passer-by,
who has been moved to pity by the sight; to doubt this were to doubt
the power of God. In the work of evolution, however, God does more
than supply man with means of developing his intelligence; in order to
enrich his heart, he offers him opportunities of sacrificing himself.
Again, the innumerable problems set by duty are far from being solved
for us; with difficulty can we distinguish a crime from a noble
action; very often we do wrong, thinking we are doing right, and it
not unfrequently happens that good results from our evil deeds; this
is why God sends us experiences which are to teach us our duty.

"The soul learns not only during its incarnations, but even more after
leaving the body,[32] for life after death is largely spent in
examining the consequences of deeds performed during life on earth.

"Whenever, then, an opportunity for action offers itself, let us
follow the impulse of the heart, the cry of duty, and not the sophisms
of the lower nature, the selfish "ego," the cold brain, which knows
neither compassion nor devotion. Do your duty, whatever happens, says
the Law, _i.e._, do not allege, as your excuse for being selfish, that
God, if He thinks it best, will help your brother in his trouble; why
do you not fling yourself into the fire, with the thought that, if
your hour has not yet come, God will prevent the flames from burning
you? Does not the man, who commits suicide, himself push forward the
hand on the dial of life, setting it at the fatal hour?

"The threads of karmic action are so wonderfully interwoven, and God,
in order to hasten evolution, makes such marvellous use of human
forces, both good and bad, that the first few glances cast at the
_melee_ of events are calculated to trouble the mind rather than
reveal to it the marvels of adjustment effected by divine Wisdom, but
no sooner does one succeed in unravelling some of the entanglements of
the karmic forces, and catching a glimpse of the harmony resulting
from their surprising co-operation, than the mind is lost in amaze.
Then, one understands how the murderer is only an instrument whose
passions are used by God in carrying out the karmic decree which
condemned the victim long before the crime was committed; then, too,
one knows that capital punishment is a legal crime of which divine
Justice makes use--yes, a crime, for none but God can judge; every
being has a right to live, and does live, until God condemns him.

"But man, by making himself, even ignorantly, the instrument of Karma,
acts against the universal law, and is preparing for himself that
future suffering which results from every attack made on the harmony
of the whole."[33]

On the other hand, Destiny is not an immutable mass of forces; will
can destroy what it has created, that is a question of time or energy;
and when these are unable, within a given period, to bring about the
total destruction of a barrier belonging to the past, none the less
does this barrier lessen day by day, for the "resultant" of this
system of opposing forces changes its direction every moment, and the
final shock, when it cannot be avoided, is always diminished to a
greater or less degree.

In the case of those who have attained to a perfect reading of the
past, their knowledge of the hostile forces is complete, and the
neutralisation of these forces immensely facilitated. They can seek
out, in this world or in the next, those they wronged in the past, and
thus repair the harm done; they can see the source of those thoughts
of hatred that are sent against them, and destroy them by the
intervention of love;[34] they can find out the weak points of their
personal armour and strengthen them: it is this that in theosophical
language is called the burning of Karma in the fire of "Wisdom."

None the less, there are two points in the law of Causality, which
appear to favour the idea of fatalism, though in reality, they are
merely corollaries of Karma. According to the first, every force is
fatal, in the sense that, if left to itself, it is indestructible.
This is not fatality, for the force can be modified by meeting with
forces differing in character, and if no such encounter takes place,
it finally unites with the cosmic Law, or else is broken to pieces
upon it, according as it moves with evolution or against it.[35] Only
in one sense, then, is it fatal; it cannot be destroyed save by an
opposing force of the same momentum. For instance, in order to
annihilate an obstructive force, created in the past, the soul must
expend an amount of energy that is equal and opposite to that force;
it meanwhile cannot devote itself to any other work, thus causing, in
one sense, a useless production of energy; in other words, evolution
will suffer delay,[36] but, we must repeat, that is not fatality.

Now to the second point.

Thought, by repetition, gains ever-increasing energy, and when the
forces which thoughts accumulate have become as powerful as those of
the will of the Ego which created them, a final addition of
energy--another thought--alone is needed for the will to be overcome
and the heavier scale of the balance to incline; then the thought is
fatally realised in the action. But so long as dynamic equilibrium has
not been reached, the will remains master, although its power is ever
diminishing, in proportion as the difference in the forces becomes
smaller. When equilibrium is reached, the will is neutralised; it
becomes powerless, and feels that a fall is only a question of
moments, and, with a fresh call of energy, the thought is fatally
realised on the physical plane; the hour of freedom has gone and the
fatal moment arrived. Like some solution that has reached saturation
point, obedient to the last impulse, this thought crystallises into an
act.

Many a criminal thus meets, in a single moment, the fatality he has
created in the course of several incarnations; he no longer sees
anything, his reason disappears; in a condition of mental darkness
his arm is raised, and, impelled by a blind force, he strikes
automatically. "What have I done?" he immediately exclaims in horror.
"What demon is this that has taken possession of me?"

Then only is the crime perpetrated, without there being time for the
will to be consulted, without the "voice of conscience" having been
invited to speak. The whole fatality of automatism is in the deed,
which has been carried through without the man suspecting or being
conscious of it; his physical machine has been the blind instrument of
the force of evil he has himself slowly accumulated throughout the
ages. But let there be no mistake; every time a man, who is tempted,
has time to think, even in fleeting fashion, of the moral value of the
impulse which is driving him onward, he has power to resist; and if he
yields to this impulse, the entire responsibility of this final lapse
is added on to that incurred by past thoughts.

Among the victims of these actions that have become fatal are often to
be found those who are near the stage of initiation, for before being
exposed to the dangers of the bewildering "Path," which bridges the
abyss--the abyss which separates the worlds of unity from the illusory
and transitory regions of the Universe--they are submitted to the most
careful tests.

There may even be found souls that tread this path,[37] bearing within
themselves[38] some old surviving residue which has not yet been
finally thrown into the physical plane, and must consequently appear
for the last time before falling away and disappearing for ever.[39]
Mankind, incapable of seeing the man--the divine fragment gloriously
blossoming forth in these beings--often halts before these dark spots
in the vesture of the great soul, these _excreta_ flung off from the
"centre," belonging to the refuse of the vehicle, not to the soul, and
in its blindness pretends to see, in its folly to judge, loftily
condemning the sins of a brother more evolved than itself!

The future will bring men greater wisdom, and teach them the greatness
of their error.[40]

At the conclusion of this important chapter, let us repeat that
Karma--divine Will in action--is Love as well as justice, Wisdom as
well as Power, and no one ought to dread it. If at times it uses us
roughly and always brings us back to the strait way when folly leads
us astray, it is only measuring its strength against our weakness, its
delicate scales balance the load according to our strength, and when,
in times of great anguish or terrible crisis, man is on the point of
giving way, it suddenly lifts the weight, leaves the soul a moment's
respite, and only when it has recovered breath is the burden replaced.
The righteous Will of God is always upon us, filling our hearts with
its might; His Love is ever about us, enabling us to grow and expand,
even through the suffering he sends, for it is ourselves who have
created this suffering.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 10: Fortunately, this is a fact only in the imagination of
those who are blinded by faith.]

[Footnote 11: Before men had sinned individually on earth.]

[Footnote 12: _De corruptione et gratia_, chap. 7, No. 19; _Cont. Jul.
Pelag._, Book 4, chap. 3, No. 16, et _De Peccat. merit. et remiss._,
Book 3, chap. 4, No. 7.]

[Footnote 13: "Omnes illae unus homo fuerunt." _De Peccat. merit. et
remiss._, Book 1, chap. 10, No. 11.

Theologians pass over St. Augustine's adoption of this theory, giving
one to understand that he abandoned his error shortly before his
death. (_Dictionnaire de Theol._, by Abbe Berger; volume viii.,
article x., "_Traduciens._")]

[Footnote 14: See also, on this subject, his letter to Sixtus, before
the latter became Pope. Chap. vii., No. 31, and chap. vi., No. 27.]

[Footnote 15: The movements of "creation" and "absorption," which are
called in Hindu symbolism the outbreathing and the inbreathing of
Brahma.]

[Footnote 16: Creation.]

[Footnote 17: After violet and red there stretches quite another
spectrum, invisible to the human eye; it is because violet is at the
beginning of our known spectrum, that one might think it was not the
neutral point thereof.]

[Footnote 18: The soul believes itself distinct from the All, because
it is subjected to the illusion engendered by its body.]

[Footnote 19: Without the aid of the eyes, walking is impossible to
those suffering from plantar anaesthesia.]

[Footnote 20: Pleasure, like every other form of sensation, produces
the same results, though perhaps with less force.]

[Footnote 21: A magnetic effect or an emotion. All travellers who have
escaped from the attacks of wild beasts mention this effect of
inhibition, manifested by the absence of fear and pain at the moment
of attack.]

[Footnote 22: Primordial matter which has not yet entered into any
combination and is not differentiated.]

[Footnote 23: A soul.]

[Footnote 24: In these cases, the soul.]

[Footnote 25: The personalities or new bodies created by the soul, on
each return to earth.]

[Footnote 26: That is to say, the seventh incarnation.]

[Footnote 27: Waking consciousness.]

[Footnote 28: See _Karma_, by A. Besant.]

[Footnote 29: Those who have studied thought know that it is capable
of being incorporated in diverse states of astral and mental matter.]

[Footnote 30: If the divine law allows it.]

[Footnote 31: If the divine law has not allowed the action to take
place.]

[Footnote 32: Man, after death, loses in succession his astral and
mental bodies.]

[Footnote 33: _La Theosophie en quelques chapitres_, by the author,
pages 31 to 34.]

[Footnote 34: "Hatred is destroyed only by love," said the Buddha.
"Return good for evil," said Jesus.]

[Footnote 35: It is this that causes the universal force of
opposition--_the Enemy_ or _demon_--to become evil only when ignorance
or the human will make use of it to oppose evolution: apart from such
cases, it is only the second pillar necessary for the support of the
Temple, the stepping-stone of the good.]

[Footnote 36: Perhaps this is only an apparent delay, for, on every
plane, force is correlative, and knowledge is the fruit of many
different kinds of energy. The only real cases in which there is delay
of individual evolution are probably those in which _evil is done in
return for evil_. Of course, we are speaking in relative terms and
from a relative standpoint.]

[Footnote 37: When human evolution is completed, man passes the
"strait gate" leading to superhuman evolution, to the spiritual life,
which develops the next higher principle, _Buddhi_; this is _the
Path_. Human evolution develops the mental principle, _Manas_;
Super-human evolution develops the spiritual body, _Buddhi._]

[Footnote 38: Here we are dealing with faults of a more or less venial
nature.]

[Footnote 39: For ever, in this case, for the soul is above these
residues, and, so to speak, has given them no vitality for ages past.]

[Footnote 40: In completion of this chapter on the Law of Causality,
we refer the reader to A. Besant's book: _Karma._]




