The Project Gutenberg eBook of Reincarnation: A Study in Human Evolution
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Reincarnation: A Study in Human Evolution

Author: Théophile Pascal

Translator: Fred Rothwell


        
Release date: May 19, 2007 [eBook #21533]
                Most recently updated: January 2, 2021

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/21533

Credits: Produced by Curtis Weyant, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
        Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
        (This file was produced from images generously made
        available by Case Western Reserve University Preservation
        Department Digital Library)






Produced by Curtis Weyant, Sankar Viswanathan, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by Case Western Reserve University Preservation
Department Digital Library)









                    [Illustration: Docteur Pascal]


                            REINCARNATION


                      A STUDY IN HUMAN EVOLUTION


                     THE RESURRECTION OF THE BODY

                                 AND

                    THE REINCARNATION OF THE SOUL



                                  BY

                            DR. TH. PASCAL


                     TRANSLATED BY FRED ROTHWELL


    "Were an Asiatic to ask me for a definition of Europe, I
    should be forced to answer him:--It is that part of the world
    which is haunted by the incredible delusion that man was
    created out of nothing, and that his present birth is his
    first entrance into life."--SCHOPENHAUER.

                          (_Parerga and Paralipomena_, Vol. 2, Chap. 15)




                                LONDON

                 The Theosophical Publishing Society

                       161 NEW BOND STREET, W.

                                 1910

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS


CHAP.

SKETCH OF THE AUTHOR'S LIFE

AUTHOR'S PREFACE

I. THE SOUL AND THE BODIES

II. REINCARNATION AND THE MORAL LAW

III.  REINCARNATION AND SCIENCE

IV. REINCARNATION AND THE RELIGIOUS AND
PHILOSOPHICAL CONSENSUS OF THE
AGES

CONCLUSION

       *       *       *       *       *




SKETCH OF THE AUTHOR'S LIFE.


Theophile Pascal was born on the 11th of May, 1860, at Villecroze, a
village in the South of France. His childhood was spent amid the
pleasant surroundings of a country life. Shortly after his sixteenth
birthday, a relative of his, a Catholic priest ministering in Toulon,
seeing that the youth showed considerable ability, sent for him and
presided over his studies in this large maritime centre. Before many
years elapsed, he entered the Naval Medical School of the town, which
he left at the age of twenty-two, with first-class honours. In his
professional capacity, he took several trips on vessels belonging to
the Mediterranean squadron. Four years afterwards he married, resigned
active naval service, and devoted himself to building up a practice on
land, becoming a homoeopathic physician in the great seaport itself.
It was about this time that the young doctor became interested in
Theosophy, owing to the kindly services of a former patient,
Commander Courmes. The closest friendship and sympathetic interest in
theosophic thought thus began, and continued during their common
labours subsequently in Paris, Dr. Pascal entered the Theosophical
Society in 1891, and during the course of the following year wrote a
series of articles for the _Revue Theosophique Francaise_. These were
continued year after year, and dealt with the most varied subjects:
Psychic Powers; The Fall of the Angels; Kama-Manasic Elementals;
Thought Forms; Christianity, Prehistoric Races, and many others.

The young doctor had previously made a deep study of human magnetism,
which proved a most fertile ground for the sowing of the seed of the
Ancient Wisdom.

In 1898 attacks of serious nervous depression became frequent, forcing
him to cease work of every kind. Mrs. Besant persuaded him to
accompany her to India, where his general health was gradually
restored, and he was enabled to return to France in the following
year.

He decided to leave Toulon, where he had built up a considerable
practice, and to settle in Paris, hoping to provide for the needs of
himself and his family--his wife and only daughter--by the exercise of
his profession, and at the same time to fight the good fight for
Theosophy in the capital itself.

The French Section of the Theosophical Society was founded in 1900,
and Dr. Pascal was elected General Secretary. Throughout the next two
years a number of thoughtful articles and publications appeared from
his pen. The incessant labour and attention, however, which he
bestowed on the spreading of theosophic instruction began to have its
effect on a naturally delicate constitution, and in July, 1902, when
attending the meetings of the British Convention in London, he was
prostrated by an attack of congestion of the brain. The most devoted
care was lavished on him, both in London and in Paris, the result
being that a rapid, though only temporary, recovery took place. Had he
relaxed his efforts somewhat, the cure might have been a permanent
one, but Dr. Pascal, with the penetrating vision of the mystic, saw
how pressing were the needs of the age, and how few the pioneers of
this new presentation of the Truth, so that, at whatever cost of
personal sacrifice, he plunged once more into the midst of his arduous
toil.

In 1903 a series of very fine articles on the Laws of Destiny appeared
in the _Revue Theosophique_, to be followed immediately by publication
in volume form. Two years afterwards appeared the present
volume--REINCARNATION: A STUDY IN HUMAN EVOLUTION; a work considered
the most complete of any that have so far appeared in France on this
subject, and the most popular of Dr. Pascal's publications.

In 1906 some of the nerve centres controlling the organs of speech
became affected, but not sufficiently to compel him to remain absent
from the International Theosophical Congress held that year in Paris
under the presidency of Colonel Olcott. It was on this occasion that
Dr. Pascal received from the hands of the President-Founder the Subba
Rao medal, awarded to members of the society whose literary labours in
the promulgation of the truths of Theosophy have proved eminently
useful.

Twelve months afterwards he attended the Congress at Munich, under the
presidency of Mrs. Besant, but was obliged to leave before the
termination of the meetings. This may be regarded as Dr. Pascal's last
public appearance as an active theosophist, for his subsequent
prolonged stay in the South of France effected no radical improvement
in the state of his health.

Returning to Paris in March, 1908, and realising how impossible it was
for him to fulfil the duties incumbent on a General Secretary, he
decided to resign his post. His colleagues, however, insisted on his
continuing as Honorary General Secretary. From this time onward his
health became gradually worse, and his physical life terminated on the
18th of April, 1909, his body being cremated three days afterwards at
the Cemetery of Pere Lachaise.

What was most striking about Dr. Pascal, in both public and private
life, was his intense earnestness--the index of a well-grounded habit
of concentration--and the calm strength of his convictions. It was
impossible to be in his presence for any length of time without
feeling the power that emanated from him, and recognising that here
was a mighty soul struggling for expression.

Other characteristics were his extreme modesty, and his continual
endeavour to accord praise and merit to those working for the cause so
dear to his own heart. When questioned on many of the intricate points
raised in a lecture or in conversation on some abstruse theosophical
subject, he made no pretence at knowledge he did not possess; on such
occasions his confession of ignorance would be charming, even touching
in its _naivete_.

But the qualities he seemed to feel it his special object to awaken in
the minds of others--as will be acknowledged, I think, by those who
knew him best--may be inferred from his continual insistence on the
double duty, incumbent on students of Theosophy, of practising on all
occasions the utmost tolerance, refusing not only to condemn but even
to judge harshly the opinions or actions of others, and of seizing
every opportunity to help another because of the recognition of the
One Life throughout the world, May we who read the following pages
catch somewhat of the deep earnestness and enthusiastic spirit
breathing through them, and may the joy of service dissipate all
meaner, motives, taking as our watchword also the only key to true
growth, the very heart of altruism, that exhortation he never wearied
of repeating: _Aidez! Aidez toujours!_

F. R.




AUTHOR'S PREFACE


It will soon be: 1500 years since the decision of the Council of 543
A.D.[1] condemned to oblivion sublime teachings which ought to have
been carefully preserved and handed down to future generations as a
beacon amid social reefs; teachings that would have uprooted that
frightful egoism which threatens to annihilate the world, and
instilled patience into the hearts of such as were being crushed
beneath the wheel of the cosmic law, by showing them the scales of
Justice inclining to the side filled with their iniquities of bygone
times; teachings which would have been welcomed by the masses, and the
understanding of which would not have called for any lofty
intellectual culture.

It was one of the greatest misfortunes that could have befallen the
races of the West, more especially the European, that they were thus
deprived for centuries of this indispensable knowledge. We look upon
it as a duty, following on so many others, to offer it anew, this time
in the clear, logical, illuminating form presented in theosophic
teachings. The necessity thereof is all the more imperative when we
consider the growth of scepticism and materialism amongst the more
intellectual classes, whilst the mass of the people have forsaken
their blind faith only to succumb to religious indifference.

To every awakened soul the question comes:

Why does evil exist?

So long as the enigma remains unsolved, Suffering remains a
threatening sphinx, opposing God and ready to devour mankind.

The key to the secret lies in Evolution, which can be accomplished
only by means of the continual return of souls to earth.

When once man learns that suffering is the necessary result of divine
manifestation; that inequalities of conditions are due to the
different stages which beings have reached and the changeable action
of their will; that the painful phase lasts only a moment in Eternity,
and that we have it in our power to hasten its disappearance; that
though slaves of the past, we are masters of the future; that,
finally, the same glorious goal awaits all beings--then, despair will
be at an end; hatred, envy, and rebellion will have fled away, and
peace will reign over a humanity made wise by knowledge.

Were this modest work to hasten forward this time by a few years, we
should feel sufficiently rewarded.

The subject will be divided into four chapters:

 (1)  The Soul and the bodies.

 (2)  Reincarnation and the moral law.

 (3)  Reincarnation and science.

 (4)  Reincarnation and the religious and philosophical
concensus of the ages.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: This Council came to the following decision:--_Whosoever
shall teach the pre-existence of the soul and the strange opinion of
its returns to earth, let him be anathema!_]




REINCARNATION

A STUDY IN HUMAN EVOLUTION




CHAPTER I.

THE SOUL AND THE BODIES.


In a book dealing with the resurrection of bodies and the
reincarnations of the Soul, a chapter must be devoted to the
fundamental elements of the question.

We will give the name of _Soul_ to abstract Being, to the Unknown,
that unmanifested Principle which cannot be defined, for it is above
all definition.

It is the Absolute of Western philosophers, the _Parabrahm_ of the
Hindus, the _Tao_ of the ancient sages of China, the causeless Cause
of all that has been or ever will be manifested in concrete time and
space.

Some feeble idea of it may perhaps be obtained by comparing it with
electricity, which, though the cause of various phenomena: heat,
movement, chemical action, light, is not, _per se_, any one of these
phenomena, undergoes no modification from their existence, and
survives them when the apparatus through which they manifest
disappears.

We shall set up no distinction between this Soul, which may be called
the universal Soul, and the individual soul, which has often been
defined as a ray, a particle of the total Soul, for logically one
cannot imply parts to the Absolute; it is illusion, limitation on our
part, which shows us souls in the Soul.

_Bodies_ are "aspects" of the Soul, results of its activity--if,
indeed, the Infinite can be said to be either active or passive; words
fail when we attempt to express the Inexpressible. These bodies, or,
more precisely, the varied forms assumed by force-matter[2] are
aspects of the Soul, just as light or chemical action are aspects of
electricity, for one cannot suppose anything outside of infinite
Being, nor can anything be imagined which is not a manifestation of
the abstract Whole.

Let us also define _Consciousness_.

Taken absolutely, it is Being, the Soul, God; the uncaused Cause of
all the states which, in beings, we call states of consciousness.

This limited consciousness may be defined as the faculty a "centre of
life" possesses of receiving vibrations from its surroundings. When,
in the course of evolution, a being is sufficiently developed to
become conscious of a separation between its "I" and the object which
sends it vibrations, consciousness becomes self-consciousness. This
_self_-consciousness constitutes the _human_ stage; it appears in the
higher animals, but as it descends the scale of being, gradually
disappears in non-individualised consciousness.

In a word, absolute Consciousness is one, though, as in the above
example, it is manifested differently, according to the differences in
the vehicles which express it in the concrete world in which we live.

The Soul, _per se_, is beyond the reach of beings who have not
finished the pilgrimage of evolution. To know it, one must have
attained to the eternal Centre, the unmanifested Logos. Up to that
point, one can only, in proportion as one ascends, feel it in oneself,
or acknowledge it by means of the logic which perceives it through all
its manifestations as the universal Mover of forms, the Cause of all
things, the Unity that produces diversity by means of the various
vehicles which serve it as methods of expression.

Science says that intelligence, or, to be more generic, consciousness,
results from the action of matter. This is a mistake.

Consciousness does not change in proportion as the cells of the body
are renewed; rather it increases with physical unconsciousness, as in
somnambulism.

Thought is not the fruit of the brain; it offers itself to the latter,
ready made, so to speak; the loftiest intellectual or artistic
inspirations are flashes which strike down into the awaiting brain,
when maintaining that passive expectant attitude which is the
condition in which a higher message may be received.

The senses are not the thinking-principle. They need to be controlled
by consciousness; thus, people blind from birth, when suddenly made to
see, cannot judge either distance or perspective; like animals and
primitive men, they see nothing but colours on a surface.

Science says also: the organ is created for the function it has to
perform; again a mistake. The eyes of the foetus are constructed in
the darkness of the womb. The human germ, notwithstanding its
unconsciousness and its simplicity of structure, develops a body that
is complex and capable of a considerable degree of consciousness;
though itself unintelligent, it produces prodigies of intelligence in
this body; here, consequently, the effect would be greatly superior to
the cause, which is absurd. Outside of the body and the germ is a
supreme Intelligence which creates the models of forms and carries out
their construction. This Intelligence is the Soul of the world.

If Consciousness _per se_, or the Soul, is above all direct proof at
the present stage of human evolution, the vehicles through which it
functions are more or less apparent to us provided they are capable of
affecting the brain. At the present stage of human evolution, this is
the case only with the astral body; the other bodies are too fine to
manifest through the nervous system such characteristics as are
calculated to furnish scientists with a proof of their existence; they
can only be felt and proved in and by _Yoga_.[3]

It is not without importance, however, to set forth the proofs of the
existence of a vehicle of consciousness immediately above the
physical, for it affords us a wider horizon and throws far more light
on the rest of the subject.


PROOFS OF THE ASTRAL BODY.

Certain normal and abnormal or morbid phenomena in man have proved the
existence of this vehicle, which we will call the _higher_
consciousness, for it is far greater than normal, waking
consciousness, that of the brain. In the somewhat rare cases in which
this consciousness is expressed in the physical world, it is forced to
make use of the brain. Now, in the majority of men, the latter is
still incapable of vibrating harmoniously with the matter which forms
the astral vehicle; this is because the density of the atoms of the
brain cells which preside over thought is incapable of reproducing the
rapid vibrations of the finer matter belonging to the body immediately
above it. By special training (the _yoga_ of the Hindus), by a
particular constitution of body (_sensitiveness_), by certain special
methods (_hypnotism_), or in certain maladies (_somnambulism_), the
brain may become receptive to these vibrations, and receive from them
an impression, though always an imperfect one. The rarity of this
impression, its imperfection, and especially the necessity for the
vibration of the physical brain that it may be manifested in our
environment; all these have made it very difficult to prove the
existence of this higher vehicle; still, there are certain
considerations which show that it exists, and that it alone is capable
of explaining the most characteristic phenomena of the higher
consciousness.

Let us first define these two states of consciousness rather more
completely, and fix their limits.

Normal consciousness is that which functions during waking hours, when
the brain is in full physiological activity, freely and completely
related to the outer physical world. This consciousness is more or
less developed according to the individual, but its component
parts--sensation, emotion, sentiment, reason, intelligence, will,
intuition--do not exceed known limits; for instance, we do not find
clairvoyance, the prophetic faculty, and certain other abnormal
faculties, which we shall class under the higher consciousness.

The higher consciousness works in the astral body, whether
externalised or not; it seldom manifests itself, and then
incompletely; it is accompanied by the more or less complete
inhibition of the senses, and by a kind of sleep in which the
relations of the subject with the physical world are wholly or
partially suspended. The characteristics of this state are greater
keenness of the normal faculties, and the appearance of new ones,
which are often inexplicable and extraordinary and the more remarkable
in proportion as sleep is more profound, the brain calmer, or the
physiological state more abnormal.

How can we explain the paradox that faculties shown by a brain in a
state of inactivity cover an extent of ground which the brain in a
state of activity cannot approach? The reason is that the brain, in
this case, is not an instrument moved directly by the cause of
consciousness, _the soul_, but a simple recipient, which the soul,
then centred in the astral body, impresses _on returning to the
physical body_ (if it has been far away) or impresses directly when,
whilst acting in the finer vehicle, the latter has not left the
body.[4]

In other words, the brain, by reason of its functional inactivity,
vibrates little or not at all in its higher centres; it plays the part
of a sounding-board at rest, capable of vibrating sympathetically
under the influence of a similar board placed by its side.

The necessity of cerebral quiet, if the higher consciousness is to
make an impression, is now easy to understand; the finer vibration of
the astral body cannot be impressed upon the brain when the latter is
already strongly vibrating under the action of normal consciousness.
For this reason also, the deeper the sleep of the physical body the
better the higher consciousness manifests itself.

In ordinary man, organic quiet is scarcely ever complete during sleep;
the brain, as we shall see shortly, automatically repeats the
vibrations which normal consciousness has called forth during the
waking state; this, together with an habitual density of the nervous
elements, too great to respond to the higher vibration, explains the
rarity and the confused state of the impression of astral
consciousness on the brain.

The facts relating to the higher consciousness are as numerous as they
are varied. We shall not enter into full details, but choose only a
few phenomena quoted in well-known works.


MANIFESTATIONS OF THE HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS DURING THE DIFFERENT KINDS
OF SLEEP.

_Normal dream._ During normal sleep there exists a special
consciousness which must not be confounded either with waking
consciousness or with that of the astral body. It is due to the
automatic, cerebral vibration which continues during sleep, and which
the soul examines on its return to the body--when awake. This dream is
generally an absurd one, and the reason the dreamer notices it only on
awaking is that he is absent from the visible body during sleep.

The proof of the departure of the astral body during sleep has been
ascertained by a certain number of seers, but the absurdity of the
commonplace dream is a rational proof thereof, one which must here be
mentioned. As another rational proof of the existence of a second
vehicle of consciousness, we must also notice the regular registering
of the commonplace dream, because it takes place in the brain, and the
habitual non-registering of the true dream experience, because this
latter takes place in the externalised astral body.

Why does the astral body leave the physical during sleep? This
question is beyond our power to answer, though a few considerations on
this point may be advanced.

Sleep is characterised by the transfer of consciousness from the
physical to the astral body; this transfer seems to take place
normally under the influence of bodily fatigue. After the day's
activity, the senses no longer afford keen sensations, and as it is
the energy of these sensations that keeps the consciousness "centred"
in the brain[5]; this consciousness, when the senses are lulled to
sleep, centres in the finer body, which then leaves the physical body
with a slight shock.

It is, however, of the real dream--which is at times so intelligent
that it has been called lucid, and at all events is reasonable,
logical, and co-ordinate--that we wish to speak. In most cases this
dream consists of a series of thoughts due to the soul in action in
the astral body; it is sometimes the result of seeing mental pictures
of the future[6] or else it represents quite another form of animistic
activity, as circumstances and the degree of the dreamer's development
permit.

It is in the lucid dream--whether belonging to normal or to abnormal
sleep--that occur those numerous and well-known cases of visions past
or future to be found in so many of the books dealing with this
special subject.

To these same states of higher consciousness are due such productions
as Walter Scott's _Ivanhoe_. The author, suffering from fever, wrote
this work whilst in a kind of delirious condition; _Ivanhoe_ was
printed before the recovery of the author, who, on reading it at a
later date, had not the slightest recollection that it was his own
production. (Ribot's _Maladies de la Memoire_, p. 41.)

Walter Scott remembered nothing, because _Ivanhoe_ was the fruit of
the astral consciousness impressed upon a brain which fever had
rendered temporarily receptive to the higher vibrations.

There are certain peculiarities of the real dream which prove almost
mathematically the superior nature of the vehicle which gives
expression to it. This dream, for instance, is never of a fatiguing
nature, however long it may appear to last, because it is only an
instantaneous impression made upon the brain by the astral body, when
the latter returns to the physical body, on awaking. On the other
hand, the cerebral ideation of the waking state is fatiguing if
intense or prolonged, or if the nervous system of the thinker is
deprived of its normal power of resistance (_in neurasthenia_); the
commonplace (_brain_) dream is also fatiguing if prolonged or at all
vivid.

Another peculiarity is that a dream--the real dream--which would
require several years of life on earth for its realisation, can take
place in a second. The dream of Maury (_Le Sommeil et le Reve_, p.
161), who in half a second lived through three years of the French
Revolution, and many other dreams of the same nature, are instances of
this. Now, Fechner has proved, in his _Elemente der Psychophysik_,
first, that a fraction of a second is needed for the sensorial contact
to cause the brain to vibrate--this prevents our perceiving the growth
of a plant and enables us to see a circle of fire when a piece of
glowing coal is rapidly whirled round; secondly, that another fraction
of a second is needed for the cerebral vibration to be transformed
into sensation. We might add that a third fraction of a second is
needed for sensation to be transformed into ideation, proving that in
these special dreams there can have been no more than an
instantaneous, mass impression of all the elements of the dream upon
the brain,[7] and that the dream itself has been produced by the
imaginative action of the soul in the astral body, an extremely subtle
one, whose vibratory power is such as to transform altogether our
ordinary notions of time and space.

_The death-bed dream._ In dying people, the bodily senses gradually
lose their vitality, and by degrees the soul concentrates itself
within the finer vehicle. From that time signs of the higher
consciousness appear, time is inordinately prolonged, visions present
themselves, the prophetic faculty is sometimes manifested, and
verified cases are related of removal to a distance, like that of the
Alsatian woman dying on board ship. During the final coma she went to
Rio de Janeiro and commended her child to the keeping of a
fellow-countryman. (D'Assier's _L'humanite posthume_, p. 47) Similar
instances are found in _The Night Side of Nature_, by C. Crowe, as
well as in other works of the same kind.

_The dream of intoxication._ Under the influence of soporifics the
same transfer of consciousness is produced, and we meet with more or
less remarkable phenomena due to the higher consciousness. Opium
smokers and eaters of hashish are able to form ideas with such
rapidity that minutes seem to them to be years, and a few moments in
dreamland delude them into the idea that they have lived through a
whole life. (Hervey's _Les reves et les moyens de les diriger_.)

_The dream of asphyxia._ During asphyxia by submersion the higher
consciousness enters into a minute study of the life now running to
its close. In a few moments it sees the whole of it again in its
smallest details. Carl du Prel (_Philos. der Mystik_) gives several
instances of this; Haddock (_Somnolism and Psychism_, p. 213) quotes,
among other cases, that of Admiral Beaufort. During two minutes' loss
of consciousness in a drowning condition, he saw again every detail of
his life, all his actions, including their causes, collateral
circumstances, their effects, and the reflections of the victim on the
good and evil that had resulted therefrom.

Perty's account (_Die Mystischen Erscheinungen der Menschlichen
Natur_) of Catherine Emmerich, the somnambulist nun, who, when dying,
saw again the whole of her past life, would incline one to think that
this strange phenomenon, which traditional Catholicism appears to have
called the "Private Judgment," and which theosophy defines with
greater preciseness, is not limited to asphyxia by submersion, but is
the regular accompaniment of life's ending.


MANIFESTATION OF THE HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS IN VARIOUS CASES OF MENTAL
FACULTIES LOST TO NORMAL CONSCIOUSNESS.

A rather large number of people born blind have images in dreams, and
can see with the higher consciousness, when placed in a state of
somnambulism. This proves that the higher consciousness possesses the
power of vision on its own plane, and can impress images thereof on
the brain.

That this impression may be translated into the language of the
physical plane,[8] it must evidently take place in one of the physical
centres of vision which make possible three-dimensional sight; these
centres may be intact even when the external visual apparatus does not
exist or is incapable of functioning.

A deaf and dumb idiot became intelligent and spoke during spontaneous
somnambulism (Steinbach's _Der Dichter ein Seher_). This is a case
which appears to us difficult to explain fully; indeed, if the
impression of the higher vibration on that portion of the brain which
presides over intelligence and thought can be understood, it is not
easy to see how tongue and lips could suddenly utter precise sounds
which they had never produced before. Another factor must have
intervened here, as was the case with the child prophets of the
Camisards. (V. Figuier's _Hist. du merveilleux_, _etc._)

Young Hebert, who had gone mad as the result of a wound, regained full
consciousness, the higher consciousness, during somnambulism.
(Puysegur's _Journal du traitement du jeune Hebert_.)

Dr. Teste (_Manuel pratiq. du magnet. anim._) came across madmen who
became sane just before death, _i.e._, when consciousness was passing
into the astral body. He also mentions a servant girl, quite
uneducated and of ordinary intelligence, who nevertheless became a
veritable philosopher during mesmeric somnambulism and delivered
learned discourses on lofty problems dealing with cosmogony.

This proves that the vibratory scale of the finer vehicle extends far
beyond that of the physical, and that the soul cannot impress on this
latter vehicle all that it knows when functioning in the former. By
this we do not mean that it is omniscient as soon as it has left the
visible body; this opinion, a current one, is contrary to the law of
evolution, and will not bear examination.


MANIFESTATIONS OF THE HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS UNDER THE FORM OF MEMORY.

The memory that is lost by the brain is preserved in its entirety by
the finer vehicle.

A musician, a friend of Hervey's, once heard a remarkable piece of
music; he remembered it on awaking, and wrote it down, regarding it as
his own inspiration. Many years afterwards, he found it in an old
parcel of music where he knew it had been long before; he had totally
forgotten it in his normal consciousness. (Hervey's _Dreams_.)

Coleridge tells of a servant girl who, when in a state of delirium,
would recite long passages of Hebrew which she had formerly heard from
the lips of a priest in whose service she had been. In the same way,
she would repeat passages from Latin and Greek theological books,
which she had heard under the same circumstances; in her normal state,
she had no recollection whatever of all this. (Dr. Carpenter's _Mental
Physiology_, p. 437, 1881 edition.)

Ricard (_Physiol. et Hygiene du Magnet._, p. 183) relates the case of
a young man, possessed of an ordinary memory, but who, in
somnambulism, could repeat almost word for word a sermon he had heard
or a book he had read.

Mayo, the physiologist, states that an ignorant young girl, in a state
of somnambulism, wrote whole pages of a treatise on astronomy,
including figures and calculations, which she had probably read in the
_Encyclopaedia Britannica_, for the treatise was afterwards found in
that work. (_Truths in Popular Superstitions._)

Ladame (_La Nevrose hypnotique_, p. 105) mentions a woman who, having
only on one occasion been to the theatre, was able, during
somnambulism, to sing the whole of the second act of Meyerbeer's
_L'Africaine_, an opera of which she knew nothing whatever in her
waking state.

During experiments with the inhaling of protoxyde of azote, H. Davy
said that normal consciousness disappeared, and was followed by a
wonderful power of recalling past events. (Hibbert's _Philosophy of
Apparitions_, p. 162.)


MANIFESTATIONS OF THE HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS IN PHENOMENA OF DOUBLE
CONSCIOUSNESS.

The "strata of memory" met with in many cases also prove the existence
of the second vehicle of consciousness which we are trying to
demonstrate.

Certain dreams continue night after night, beginning again just where
they stopped the previous night; this is noticed in the case of those
who talk in their sleep and in spontaneous or forced somnambulism.

The memory of one intoxicated, or in a state of fever delirium is lost
when consciousness returns from the astral to the physical body; it
comes back on the return of the delirium or the intoxication.

The same thing takes place in madness; at the termination of a crisis,
the patients take up the past just where they left it. (Wienholt's
_Heilkraft_.) Kerner relates that one of these unfortunate persons,
after an illness lasting several years, remembered the last thing he
did before the crisis happened, his first question being whether the
tools with which he had been cutting up wood had been put away. During
the whole of the interval he had been living in his higher
consciousness.

Ribot (_Maladies de la Memoire_ p. 63) has noted the fact that the
same thing happens with those who fall into a state of coma after
having received a hurt or wound.


MANIFESTATIONS OF THE HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS, INDICATING NOT ONLY THAT
IT EXTENDS FARTHER THAN NORMAL CONSCIOUSNESS, BUT DOMINATES, AND IS
SEPARATED FROM IT, RECOGNISING THAT ITS VEHICLE--THE BODY--IS NOTHING
MORE THAN AN INSTRUMENT.

The Soul functioning in the finer body sees the physical body in a
state of coma. Dr. Abercrombie relates the case of a child aged four,
who was trepanned as the result of fracture of the skull, and whilst
in a stale of coma. He never knew what happened. At the age of
fifteen, during an attack of fever, the higher consciousness impressed
itself upon the brain, and he remembered every detail of the accident;
he described to his mother where he had felt the pain, the operation,
the people present, their number, functions, the clothes they wore,
the instruments used, etc. (Kerner, _Magikon_, vol. 3, p. 364.)

The Soul, in the finer body, during somnambulism, is separated both
from the physical body and from normal consciousness, it calmly
foresees the illness or the death of the denser body on which it
sometimes imposes serious operations. Such facts were numerous in the
case of magnetisers in olden days.

Deleuze (_Hist. crit. du magn. animal_, vol. 2, p. 173) had a patient
who, in a state of somnambulism, held moral, philosophical, and
religious opinions quite contrary to those of his waking state.

Charpignon (_Physiol., medecine et metaphys. du magnetisme_, p. 341)
tells of a patient who, when awake, wished to go to the theatre, but
during somnambulism refused to do so, saying: "_She_ wants to go, but
_I_ don't want." On Charpignon recommending that she should try to
turn _her_ aside from her purpose, she replied: "What can I do? _She_
is mad!"

Deleuze (_Inst. pratiq. s. le maget. anim._, p. 121) says that many
somnambulists look into their body when the latter is ill; that they
are often indifferent to its sufferings, and sometimes are not even
willing to prescribe remedies to cure it.

Chardel (_Esquisse de la nat. humaine expliq. p. le magn. anim._, p.
282) relates that many somnambulists are unwilling to be awakened so
as not to return to a body which is a hindrance to them.

There are many madmen who speak of their body in the third person.
(Ladame, _La Nevrose_, p. 43). They function in the non-externalised
finer vehicle. Some explain their use of the third person as
follows:--"_It_ is the body; it is _I_ who am the spirit."


MANIFESTATION OF THE HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS IN THE PHENOMENA OF
POSSESSION AND MATERIALISATION.

In these strange phenomena, not only manifestations of the higher
consciousness, analogous with or similar to those just cited, have
been noted, but also a number of facts which prove, to some extent,
the casual presence in a normal human body or in materialised abnormal
forms, of beings other than that which constitutes the personality of
the one possessed, or of the medium who conditions these
materialisations. On this point, we would mention the well-known
investigations of Sir W. Crookes (_Katie King_), those of Colonel de
Rochas (Vincent, _Un cas de changement de personnalite, Lotus Bleu_
1896), and similar experiments of other savants.

"Incarnation mediums" have often lent their physical bodies to
disincarnated human entities, whose account of what happened or whose
identity it has been possible to verify. Here I will mention only one
case amongst several others, I heard it from my friend, D. A. Courmes,
a retired naval captain, a man who is well-informed in these matters,
thoroughly sincere, and of unquestioned veracity.

In 1895, he happened to be off Algiers, on a training vessel. A boat
had sunk in the harbour, and a man was drowned. His body had not been
recovered. On the evening of the accident, my friend, accompanied by a
doctor, a professor, and the vice-president of the Court of Algiers,
attended a spiritualistic meeting in the town. One of these
"incarnation mediums" happened to be present. M. Courmes suggested
that the drowned man should be called up. The latter answered to the
call, entered the medium, whose voice and attitude immediately
changed. He gave the following account of what had taken place: "When
the boat sank, I was on the ladder. I was hurled down, my right leg
passed between two bars, occasioning fracture of the leg, and
preventing me from releasing myself. My body will be found caught in
the ladder when the boat is brought to the surface. It is useless to
seek elsewhere."

This account was shortly afterwards confirmed.

These phenomena are more frequent than one would imagine; a sufficient
number might be given to show that, judging from the theory of
probabilities, serious consideration should be given to them.


MANIFESTATIONS OF THE HIGHER CONSCIOUSNESS IN APPARITIONS.

A final group of phenomena to which I wish to call attention is the
one which goes under the name of apparitions. A considerable number of
these are to be found; we will confine ourselves, however, to
referring the reader to a volume entitled _Phantasms of the Living_,
due to the patient investigations of a distinguished body of foreign
savants. Here we find, first of all, proof of the transmission of
thought to a distance. An examination into the conditions under which
most of these cases took place has convinced several students of the
existence of the finer body which we are here endeavouring to
demonstrate, as well as of the possibility of its instantaneous
transference to a great distance. As the proofs afforded by
apparitions are not mathematical, _i.e._, indisputable, and as they
give room for a variety of opinions, we will make no attempt to detail
them, preferring to pass on to a final proof--the least important,
perhaps, from a general point of view, since it is limited to the
individual possessing it; the only absolute and mathematical one,
however, to the man who has obtained it:--the personal proof.

There are persons--few in number, true--who, under divers influences,
have been able to leave the physical body and see it sleeping on a
couch. They have freely moved in an environment--the astral
world--similar to our physical one in some respects, though different
in many others, and have returned again to the body, bringing back the
memory of their wanderings. These accounts have been given by persons
deserving of credence and not subject to hallucinations.

There are other individuals, though not so numerous--of whom we have
the pleasure of knowing some personally--who are able to leave their
physical bodies and return at will. They travel to great distances
with the utmost rapidity and bring back a complete memory of their
journeyings. D'Assier gives a typical case in his work. (_L'Humanite
posthume_, p. 59.)

Such is the proof we look upon as irrefutable, as complete and
perfect. The man who can thus travel freely in his finer body knows
that the physical body is only a vehicle adapted to the physical world
and necessary for life in this world; he knows that consciousness does
not cease to function, and that the universe by no means provides the
conditions for a state of nothingness, once this body of flesh is laid
aside.

At this stage of his evolution man can, in addition, make use of his
astral body at will, and obtain on the astral plane, first by reason
and intuition, afterwards by personal experience, proof of another
vehicle of consciousness--the mental body. At a further stage he
obtains the certainty of possession of the causal body, then of higher
bodies, and from that time he can no longer doubt the teachings of the
Elder Brothers, those who have entered the higher evolution, the
worlds that are divine. He knows, beyond all possibility of doubt,
that what the ordinary man expresses in such childish language
regarding these lofty problems, what he calls the Absolute and the
Manifested, God and the Universe, the soul and the body, are more
vitally true than he imagined; he sees that these words are dense
veils that conceal the supreme, ineffable, infinite Being, of whom
manifested beings are illusory "aspects," facets of the divine
Jewel.[9]

With this introduction, we will plunge at once into the heart of the
subject.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 2: Which is nothing but an unknown "aspect" of abstract
Divinity.]

[Footnote 3: Present-day man possesses four bodies of increasing
fineness, the elements of which interpenetrate. Proceeding from the
most dense, these are: The physical, the astral, the mental, and the
causal body. In certain conditions they are capable of dissociation,
and they last for a longer or a shorter time. The astral body, also
called the body of desire, animal soul (Kamarupa, in Sanskrit) is the
seat of sensation. Evolution has in store for us higher bodies
stilt--the buddhic body, the atmic body, &c.... but these need only be
mentioned at this point.

_Yoga_--Sanskrit, _union_--is a training of the different bodies of
man by the will; its object is to make of those bodies complete and
perfect instruments, capable of responding to the vibrations of the
outer universe as well as to those of the individual soul. When this
process is accomplished, man can receive, consciously and at will, in
any one of his bodies, vibrations received by the soul primarily in
one of the others; for instance, he may feel in the physical brain the
direct action of his astral or higher bodies; he may also leave the
physical, and feel directly in his astral body the action of the
mental body, and so on.

_Yoga_ can be practised only under the guidance of a Master, _i.e._, a
highly developed being, capable of guiding the student safely through
the dangers incidental to this training.]

[Footnote 4: When the astral body is externalised, the subject cannot
speak; he must await its return; when only partially externalised or
not at all, and consciousness is centred in it, the subject can speak
and relate what he sees afar off, for astral vision is possible at
enormous distances. Such cases as these are frequently met with.]

[Footnote 5: In 1876, in a Leipzic hospital, there was a patient
possessed of neither sensibility nor muscular sense. He had only sight
in the right eye and hearing in the left ear. If this eye and ear were
closed, the patient immediately fell asleep. Neither by being touched
nor shaken could he be awakened; to effect this, it was necessary to
open his eye and unstop his ear. (_Archiv. fuer die ges. Physiologie_,
vol. 15, p. 573).]

[Footnote 6: These pictures are often visible in the astral world;
they explain the prophetic faculty of ordinary seers.]

[Footnote 7: In such cases, by association of ideas or any other
influence, the soul dramatises the physical impression which calls
forth the dream, and creates the long phantasmagoria of this dream in
so short a time as to be scarcely appreciable. Between the sleeping
physical body and the externalised astral body there is so close a
degree of sympathy that the latter is conscious of everything that
takes place in the former. This explains why the astral body returns
so rapidly to the physical when a noise, light, or any other sensation
impresses this latter.]

[Footnote 8: We say "language of the physical plane" because the soul,
in the astral body, sees in four dimensions, _i.e._, all the parts of
an object at once, as though these parts were spread out on a
two-dimensional plane. Consequently, the higher vision needs
interpretation in order to be expressed on the physical plane.]

[Footnote 9: There are other proofs of the existence of the causal
body, the reincarnating vehicle; the principal one is given in the
middle of Chapter 3. It is there shown that the physical germs explain
only a very small portion of heredity, and that logic imperiously
demands the existence of an invisible, durable body, capable of
gathering up the germs which preserve the moral and intellectual
qualities of man.]




