CHAPTER III.

REINCARNATION AND SCIENCE.


The secret of the Universe lies in observation; it is for man to
develop his senses and patiently to search into the hidden things of
Nature.

All science proceeds thus, and the reason that savants have not
unearthed the precious object for which they seek with such wonderful
perseverance is that the physical senses, even when aided by the most
delicate instruments, are able to cognise only a portion of the
physical Universe--the denser portion. This is proved by the fact that
when man has succeeded in directing into a channel some subtle force,
he remains as ignorant of its essence as he was before chaining it
down, so to speak; he has not the slightest knowledge of it. He can
utilise but he cannot dominate it, for he has not discovered its
source. This source is not in the physical world, but on the finer
planes of being, which will remain unknown to us, so long as our
senses are incapable of responding to their vibrations.

Because physical observation reveals only the bark, the outer crust of
the Cosmos, man sees nothing but the surface of the world, and remains
in ignorance of the heart and vital plexus that give it life;
consequently, he calls the disintegration following upon
disincarnation by the senseless name of "death."

He who has lifted the veil of Isis sees divine Life everywhere, the
Life that animates forms, builds them up, uses them, and finally
breaks them to pieces when they have ceased to be of use; and this
Life--God--thus spread about in numberless forms, by means of its many
rays, develops in itself centres--souls--which gradually grow and
awaken their infinite potentialities[41] in the course of these
successive incarnations.

Still, though the eye of the god-man alone can penetrate this
wonderful mechanism and study it in all its astonishing details, the
savant whose mind is unprejudiced can judge of the concealed mechanism
by examining its outer manifestations, and it is on this ground we now
place ourselves with the object of setting forth another series of
proofs of reincarnation.


THE EVOLUTIONARY SERIES.

If we look attentively at the totality of beings we perceive a
progressive series of forms expressing a parallel series of qualities
and states of consciousness. The portion of this scale we are able to
compass extends from the amorphous state[42]--which represents the
minimum of consciousness--up to those organic complexities which have
allowed of a terrestrial expression being given to the soul of the
Saviours of the world. In this glorious hierarchy each step forms so
delicate a transition between the one preceding and the one following
that on the borders of the different kingdoms it becomes impossible to
trace a line of demarcation between different beings; thus one does
not know whether such or such a family should be classed among
minerals, or vegetables or animals. It is this that science has called
the evolutionary series.[43]


THE CYCLIC PROCESS OF EVOLUTION.

Another fact strikes the observer: the cyclic march of evolution.
After action comes reaction; after activity, rest; after winter,
summer; after day, night; after inspiration--the breath of life during
which universal Movement works in a molecular aggregate and there
condenses in the form of vitality--expiration--the breath of death,
which causes the individualised life to flow back into the ocean of
cosmic energy; after the systole, which drives the blood into every
part of the body, comes the diastole, which breathes back the vital
liquid into the central reservoir; after the waking state comes sleep;
life here and life hereafter; the leaves sprout and fall away
periodically, with the rising and descending of the sap; annual plants
die at the end of the season, persisting in germinal state within a
bulb, a rhizome, or a root before coming again to the light; in
"metamorphoses," we find that the germ (_the egg_) becomes a larva (_a
worm_), and then dies as a chrysalis, to be reborn as a butterfly.

Ideas also have their successive cycles of glory and decadence; is not
the present theosophical movement the renaissance of the Neoplatonic
movement which brought the light to Greece and Egypt fifteen hundred
years ago? In 1875 H. P. Blavatsky restored it to life, whilst its
previous birth look place in the time of Ammonius Saccas, the
theosophist, in the Schools of Alexandria. Those who have acquired the
power to read the cosmic records[44] will easily recognise amongst the
present pioneers of theosophy many a champion who in a former age
struggled and fought in the same sublime cause.

Races are born and grow up, die and are born again; pass through a
state of childhood, of youth, of maturity, and of old age. They
flourish in all their splendour when the vital movement which animates
them is at its height; when it leaves them and passes to other
portions of the globe, they gradually fall into old age; then the more
developed Egos--those incarnated in these races during their
maturity--come down into the advanced nations, living on the
continents animated by the "life-wave," whilst the less evolved go to
form the so-called degenerate races vegetating in obscure parts of the
world. Look now at the adolescence of Russia, the youth of America,
the old age of France, and the decrepitude of Turkey. Look backwards
at the glorious Egypt of bygone ages; nothing remains but deserts of
sand on which imperishable structures still testify to the greatness
of her past; the race that witnessed the majesty of the Hierophants
and the divine Dynasties is now inhabiting other lands.

Continents submit to the same law; history and science show how they
pass through a series of immersions and emersions; after Lemuria,
which bore the third race, came Atlantis, the mother of the fourth;
Europe and America now hold the various branches of the fifth; and
later on, when this old land of ours is again sunk beneath the waters,
new lands will have emerged from the ocean depths to bear the future
race, the sixth.

The very planets, too, come under this law; issuing as nebulae from the
great womb of the Universe at the beginning of the evolution of a
solar system they are absorbed back again when the hour of their
dissolution strikes. Finally, the very Universes go forth from the
breast of Brahma when he out-breathes, and return to him when he
in-breathes again.

Everything, then, in appearance is born and dies. In reality, each
thing springs from its germ, makes an effort--the effort of the divine
Will incarnated in this germ--develops its potentialities up to a
certain step in the ladder of evolution, then garners the acquired
qualities and again returns to activity in continuous cycles of life
until its full development is reached.


PROGRESS.

The observer of Nature makes a third discovery. Every fresh cycle of
life is characterised by an advance on the preceding cycle; every
stage brings the end nearer. This represents progress, and it is seen
everywhere; when it does not appear, it is because our limited vision
cannot pierce its veil. Minerals slowly develop in the bowels of the
earth, and miners well know when the ore is more or less "ripe,"[45]
and that certain portions, now in a transition stage, will in a
certain number of centuries have become pure gold; experiments[46]
have proved that metals are liable to "fatigue" from excessive
tension; and that, after a rest, they acquire greater power of
resistance than before; magnets "are fed," _i.e._, they increase their
power of attraction, by exercise; cultivation improves and sometimes
altogether transforms certain species of vegetables; the rapid mental
development of domestic animals by contact with man is a striking
instance of the heights to which progress may attain when it is aided,
whilst the influence of teaching and education on the development of
individuals as well as of races is even more striking.[47]


THE GOAL OF EVOLUTION.

_The Formation of Centres of Consciousness that become "Egos."_

Through innumerable wanderings this general progress traces a clear,
unwavering line. Those capable of following evolution on the planes of
finer matter at once perceive, as it were, wide-spreading centres
forming in the sea of divine Essence, which is projected by the Logos
into the Universe. As the ages pass, these centres are sub-divided
into more restricted centres, into clearer and clearer "blocks" in
which consciousness, that is, the faculty of receiving vibrations from
without, is gradually developed, and when this consciousness within
them reaches its limit, they begin to differentiate from their
surroundings, to feel the idea of the "I" spring up within them. From
that time, there is added to the power of receiving vibrations
consciously, that of generating them voluntarily; no longer are they
passive centres, but rather beings that have become capable of
receiving and giving freely, individualities recognising and affirming
themselves more day by day; "I's," who henceforth regard themselves as
separated from the rest of the Universe; this stage is that of the
Heresy of Separateness. Regarding this heresy, however, one may well
say: _Felix culpa._

Fortunate error, indeed, for it is the condition, _sine qua non_ of
future divinity, of salvation. It is self-consciousness; man is born;
man, the centre of evolution, set midway between the divine fragment
which is beginning and that which is ending its unfoldment, at the
turning point of the arc which leads the most elementary of the
various kingdoms of Nature to the most divine of Hierarchies. This
stage is a terrible one, because it is that which represents egoism,
_i.e._ combat, the cause of every evil that afflicts the world, but it
is a necessary evil, for there can be no _individual_ wisdom, power,
and immortality without the formation of an "I." This ego is nothing
but the first shoot, or bud, of the individual soul; it is only one of
its first faculties; the finest show themselves subsequently. This bud
is to blossom into a sweet-smelling flower; love and compassion,
devotion, and self-sacrifice will come into manifestation, and the
"centre of consciousness," after passing through the primitive
stages--often called the elemental kingdoms--after being sheathed in
mineral, vegetable, and animal forms, after having thought, reasoned,
and willed in human forms and looked upon itself as separated from its
fellow-creatures, comes finally to understand that it is only a breath
of the spirit, momentarily clad in a frail garment of matter,
recognises its oneness with all and everything, passes into the
angelic state, is born as Christ and so ends as a finished, perfected
soul--a World-Saviour.

Such is the Goal of life, the wherefore of the Universes, the
explanation of these startling evolutions of souls in the various
worlds, the solution of the problem regarding the diversity in the
development of beings, the justification of Providence before the
blasphemy of the inequality of conditions.


A FEW DEDUCTIONS.

_The Germ._

From the facts established in the course of this comprehensive view of
the Universe, we are enabled to draw important deductions.

For instance, as the basis of every "cycle of life" is found the egg
or germ, that strange microcosm which appears to contain within itself
the entire organism from which it proceeds and which seems capable of
manifesting it in its entirety. The first embryologic discovery we
make as the result of this study--a discovery of the utmost
importance--is that germs are one in essence, and are all endowed with
the same possibilities and potentialities. The only difference that
can be found in them is that the more evolved have acquired the power
of developing, in the same cycle, a greater number of links, so to
speak, in the chain of forms that proceeds from the atom to the
sheath, or envelope, of the Gods-Men. Thus, the highest germ which the
microscope enables us to follow--the human ovule--is first a kind of
mineral represented by the nucleus (the point, unity) of its germinal
cell; then it takes the vegetable form--a radicle, crowned by two
cotyledons (duality); afterwards it becomes a fish (multiplicity),
which is successively transformed into a batrachian, then a bird,
afterwards assuming more and more complex animal forms, until, about
the third month of foetal life, it appears in the human form.

The process of transformation is more rapid when Nature has repeated
it a certain number of times; it then represents a more extensive
portion of the ladder of evolution, but, be it noted, the process is
the same for all, and for all the ladder is composed of the same
number of steps; beings start from the same point, follow the same
path and halt at the same stages; nothing but their age causes their
inequalities. They are more than brothers, they are all
representatives of the One, that which is at the root of the Universe,
Divinity, supreme Being.

We also see that progress, the result of the conservation of
qualities, offers us repeated instances of these stages in the
reappearance, at each step of the ladder, of the forms preceding it in
the natural series. In the course of its evolution, the germ of an
animal passes through the mineral and vegetable forms; if the animal
is a bird, its final embryological form will be preceded by the animal
forms, which, in the evolutionary series, make their appearance before
the avian type; if we are dealing with a mammifer, the animal will be
the summit of all the lower types; when it is the human germ that we
are following in its development, we see that it also has contained
within itself and is successively reproducing the potentialities of
the whole preceding series. The microscope is able to show only
clearly marked stages and the most characteristic types, for evolution
runs through its initial stages with a rapidity defying the closest
physical observation. If only Nature would slacken her pace in order
to humour our incapacity, we should see in an even more striking
fashion that she preserves everything she has attained and develops
the power of reconstruction with ever-increasing rapidity and
perfection.

True, each cycle of incarnation realises only an infinitesimal
fraction of the total progress made, each being advances only one step
at a time along this interminable series; but then, are not these
minor "cycles" in the course of which brings grow and advance towards
the final Goal, the visible, material expression, the tangible and
indisputable proof of the strict, the inexorable Law of Rebirths?


_What the Germ contains._

Now let us examine a little more carefully this process of physical
germination and attempt to discover an important secret from it; let
us see whether the material germ contains the whole being, or whether,
as the ancient wisdom teaches, the vehicles of the divine Spark in
evolution are as numerous as the germs which respectively effect their
development and preservation.

Although here, too, the doctrine of the Christian churches is
inadequate, we cannot altogether pass it by in silence. We will,
therefore, state it, recommending the reader to compare it with the
theory of science and the teachings of theosophy.

The Churches deny evolution. They say: one single body, one single
state of development for each human being. For the lower kingdoms a
state of nothingness before birth and after death, whatever may have
been the fate of these beings during the short life imposed upon them;
for man a single body for which God creates a single soul and to which
He gives a single incarnation on a single planet,[48] the Earth.

It is our ardent wish that the signs of the growing acceptance of the
idea of evolution now manifesting themselves in Christian teaching may
increase, and that the Church, whatever be the influence that induces
her to take the step, will in the end loyally hold out her hand to
Science. Instead of remaining hostile, the two will then help each
other to mount the ladder of Truth; and divine Life, the light of all
sciences, philosophies, and religions, will illumine the dark path
they are treading, and guide their steps towards that One Truth which
is both without and within them.

Scientific materialism says:

Yes, everything is born again from its germ--thus is progress made,
but that is the limit of my concessions. Everything is matter; the
soul has no existence. There is evolution of matter, for matter, and
by matter. When a form is destroyed, its qualities, like its power of
rebirth, are stored away in a latent condition, within the germs it
has produced during its period of activity. Along with the
disappearance of matter, everything disappears--qualities, thoughts,
"ego"--and passes into a latent slate within the germ; along with the
return of the form, qualities and attributes gradually reappear
without any hypothetical soul whatever having any concern in the
matter. So long as the form is in its germ stage, the being is nothing
more than a mass of potentialities; when fully developed its faculties
reappear, but they remain strictly attached to the form, and if the
latter changes, the faculties echo the change, so to speak, with the
utmost fidelity. Matter is the parent of intelligence, the brain
manufactures thought, and the heart distills love, just as the liver
secretes bile; such is the language of present-day science.

This theory accepts the idea of universal injustice in its entirety;
we shall shortly prove that, notwithstanding its apparent logic, it
explains only one side of evolution, and that if matter is the
condition _sine qua non_ of the manifestation of spirit, it is at
least curious that the latter acts so powerfully upon it, and is,
beyond the possibility of a doubt, its real master.[49]

Modern Theosophy, as well as the Wisdom of old, says in its turn:

Spirit is the All, the one Being, the only Being that exists.

Force-matter[50] is nothing but the product of the spirit's activity;
in it we find many and divers properties--density, weight,
temperature, volume, elasticity, cohesion, &c., because we judge it
from our sense perceptions; but in reality, we know it so little, that
the greatest thinkers have called it "a state of consciousness,"
_i.e._, an impression produced by it within ourselves.[51] It is the
result of the will of the supreme Spirit, which creates "differences"
(forms) in unfathomable homogeneous Unity, which is incarnated in them
and produces the modifications necessary for the development of its
powers, in other words, for the accomplishment of their evolution. As
this evolution takes place in the finite--for the Infinite can effect
its "sacrifice," _i.e._ its incarnation,[52] only by limiting
itself--it is progressive, proceeding from the simple to the complex.
Each incarnate, divine "fragment"[53] at first develops the simpler
qualities and acquires the higher ones only by degrees; these
qualities can appear only by means of a vehicle of matter, just as the
colour-producing properties of a ray of light only become manifest
with the aid of a prism. Form plays the part of the revealer of the
qualities latent in the divine germ (the soul); the more complex this
form becomes, the more atomic divisions it has in a state of activity;
the greater the number of senses it has awake, the greater the number
of qualities it expresses.

In this process, we see at work, three main factors; _Spirit_,[54]
awakening within itself _vibrations_,[55] which assume _divers
appearances_.[56] These three factors are one; force-matter and form
cannot exist without the all-powerful, divine Will (Spirit), for this
is the supreme Being, who, by his Will, creates force matter, by his
Intelligence gives it a form, and animates it with his Love.

Force-matter is the blind giant, who, in the Sankhya philosophy,
carries on his shoulders the lame man who can see--a giant, for it is
activity itself; and blind, because this activity is directed only by
the intelligent Will of the Spirit. The latter is lame, because when
it has not at its disposal an instrument of form-matter, it cannot
act, it cannot appear, it is no longer manifested, having disappeared
with the great periodical dissolution of things which the poetical
East calls the inbreathing of Brahma.

Form--all form--creates a germ which reproduces it. The germ is an
aggregate containing, in a very high state of vitalisation, all the
atomic types that will enter into the tissues of the form it has to
build up. These types serve as centres of attraction for the atoms
which are to collect round them when, under the influence of the
"vital fire,"[57] creative activity has been roused in the germ. Each
atomic type now attracts from the immediate surroundings the atoms
that resemble it, the process of segmentation which constitutes
germination begins, and the particular tissues represented by the
different atomic types are formed; in this way the fibrous, osseous,
muscular, nervous, epithelial, and other tissues are reproduced.

The creative activity that builds up tissues, if left to itself, could
create nothing but formless masses; it must have the help of the
intelligence to organise the atoms into molecules, the molecules into
tissues, and these again into organs capable of a corporate life as a
single organism, supplied with centres of sensation and action. This
intelligence cannot proceed from the mind bodies of the various
beings, for the latter manifest their qualities only when they possess
a fully-developed form--which is not the case with the germs;
moreover, the lower kingdoms show nothing but instinct, and even the
superior animals possess only a rudimentary form of mentality. The
most skilful human anatomist knows nothing more than the eye can teach
him regarding the forms he dissects, though even if he were acquainted
with their whole structure, he would none the less be quite incapable
of creating the simplest sense organ. The Form is the expression of
cosmic intelligence, of God incarnated in the Universe, the Soul of
the world, which, after creating matter, aggregates it into divers
types, to which it assigns a certain duration. The type of the form
varies with the stage of development of the being (_the soul_)
incarnated therein, for the instrument must be adapted to the artist's
capacity; the latter could not use an instrument either too imperfect
or too perfect for his degree of skill. What could the rudimentary
musician of a savage tribe do if seated before the complex organ of
one of our cathedrals; whilst, on the other hand, what kind of
harmony could a Wagner produce from a shepherd's pipe? The Cosmic
intelligence would appear to have created a single, radical form-type,
which gradually develops and at each step produces an apparently new
form, until its series has reached the finished type of evolution. It
stops the evolutionary process of each germ at the requisite point in
the scale; in the case of the most rudimentary souls it allows a
single step to be taken, thus supplying an instrument that possesses
the requisite simplicity; the process is continued longer for the more
advanced souls, but stops just when the form has become a suitable
instrument. When it does not furnish the fecundated germ with the
"model" which is to serve as a ground-plan for atomic deposits,
segmentation takes place in a formless mass, and in this the tissues
are shown without organisation; it is then a mole, a false conception.

It is the same cosmic Intelligence that derides the period during
which the form shall remain in a state of activity in the world. Until
a soul has learnt the lesson that incarnation in a form must teach it,
this form is necessary, and is given to it again and again until the
soul has assimilated the experience that form had to supply; when it
has nothing more to learn from the form, on returning to incarnation
it passes into one that is more complex. The soul learns only by
degrees, beginning with the letters of the alphabet of Wisdom, and
gradually passing to more complex matter; thus the stages of evolution
are innumerable and the transition from one to the other
imperceptible; modern science states this fact, though without
explaining it, when she says that "Nature makes no leaps."

The building up of forms is effected by numerous Beings, forming an
uninterrupted chain that descends from the mighty Architect, God, to
the humblest, tiniest, least conscious of the "builders."[58] God, the
universal Spirit, directs evolution, and could accomplish every detail
of it directly; but it is necessary, for their own development, that
the souls, whatever stage they have reached, should work in the whole
of creation, and therein play the part, whether consciously or
unconsciously, that they are fitted to play. Consequently they are
employed at every stage; and, in order to avoid mistakes, their
activity is guided by more advanced souls, themselves the agents of
higher cosmic Entities, right on up to God, the sovereign controller
of the hierarchies. Consequently there are no mistakes--if, indeed,
there are any real ones at all--in Nature, except those that are
compatible with evolution and of which the results are necessary for
the instruction of souls; but the Law is continually correcting them
in order to restore the balance. Such, in general outline, is the
reason for the intervention of beings in the evolutionary process.

So far as man is concerned, the highest of these Beings supply the
ideal type of the form which is to give the soul, when reincarnated,
the best means of expression; others take charge of these models and
entrust them to entities whose sole mission is to keep them before
their mental eyes and guide the thousands of "builders" who build
round them the atoms which are to form the tabernacle of flesh in its
minutest details; these Liliputian builders may be seen at work by the
inner eye; they are as real as the workmen who construct material
edifices in accordance with an architect's plans.

That everything may be faithfully reproduced in form the entity that
controls the building must not lose sight of the model for a single
moment. Nor does it do so, generally speaking, for one may say that
this being is, as it were, the soul of the model, being one with it
and conscious only of the work it has to perform. In many cases,
however, it receives certain impressions before birth from the
mother's thoughts: an influence capable either of forwarding or
hindering its work. The ancient Greeks were well acquainted with this
fact when they assisted Nature to create beautiful forms by placing in
the mother's room statues of rare plastic perfection, and removing
from her sight every suggestion of ugliness. More than this; certain
intense emotions of the pregnant woman are capable of momentarily
effacing the image of the model which the builder has to reproduce,
and replacing certain of its details with images arising from the
mother's imagination. If these images are sufficiently vivid, the
being follows them; and if they endure for a certain length of time
they are definitely incorporated in the building of the body. In this
fashion, many birth marks (_naevi materni_) are produced; strawberries
or other fruit, eagerly desired at times when they cannot be procured,
have appeared on the child's skin; divers objects that have left a
vivid impression on the imagination may have the same effect. The
clearness and perfection of the impression depend on the intensity and
continuance of the mental image; the part where it is to appear
depends on the sense impressions of the mother coinciding with the
desire which forms the image--for instance, a spot on the body touched
rather sharply at the moment. This has given rise to the idea that
the "longing" is impressed on that part of the body which the mother
is touching during her desire. When the image is particularly strong
and persistent considerable modifications of the body have been
obtained; in such cases, children are born with animal-like heads, and
treatises on teratology relate the case of a foetus born with the
head detached from the trunk, because the mother, after witnessing an
execution, had been horribly impressed by the sight of the separated
heads of the victims. Malebranche, in his _Recherche de la Verite_,
tells of a child that was born with broken limbs because his mother
had seen the torture of the wheel. In this case, the image must have
been of enormous vibratory power and of considerable persistence.[59]

A general or even a local arrest of development is almost always due
to the phenomenon of mental inhibition experienced by the same being;
it definitely ceases to see the plan, evolution stops, and the
embryo, expelled before the time takes on the form of the evolutionary
stage it had reached at that moment; if it ceases to deal with a
single detail only that detail remains in _statu quo_, and is often
embedded in portions of the organism quite away from the point where
it would have been found had it continued to evolve; certain cysts
belong to this class.

The third factor, the Spirit, the Soul--or, to be more exact, the
incarnated divine ray--follows a line of evolution parallel to that of
the matter which constitutes its form, its instrument; this
parallelism is so complete that it has deceived observers
insufficiently acquainted with the wonders of evolution. It is thus
that scientific materialism has taken root. We will endeavour to set
forth the mistake that has been made, and call to mind the correctness
of the Vedantin symbol, which represents the soul as lame, incapable
of acting without the giant, force-matter; though the latter, without
the guidance of the former, could not advance along the path of
evolution.

This soul is a "no-thing," which, in reality, is everything; a ray of
the spiritual sun (_God_), a divine spark incarnated in the vibration
(_matter_) produced by the supreme Being, it is a "centre," capable
of all its Father's potentialities. These potentialities, which may be
grouped together under three general heads--power, love, and
wisdom--we may sum up in the one word: consciousness. It is, indeed, a
"centre of consciousness" in the germinal state, that is about to
blossom forth, realising all its possibilities and becoming a being
fully aware of its unity with the Being from which it comes and which
it will then have become.

In this development the vibrations of outer matter play the part of
the steel, which, on striking flint, causes the life latent within the
latter to dart forth. Each vibration which strikes the soul arouses
therein a dormant faculty, and when all the vibrations of the universe
have touched it, this soul will have developed as many faculties as
that universe admits of, until, in the course of successive worlds, it
becomes increasingly divine in the one Divine Being. In order that all
the vibrations of which a universe is capable may reach the soul the
latter must surround itself with all the different types of atoms that
exist in the world, for every vibration is an atomic movement, and the
nature of the vibration depends on the quality of the atoms in motion.
Now, the first part of evolution consists in condensing round vital
centres[60] (_souls_) atoms aggregated in combinations of a
progressively increasing density, on to those that make up the
physical plane; when the soul has thus clothed itself with the
elements of all the planes, the resulting form is called a
"microcosm"--a small Cosmos--for it contains, in reality, all the
elements contained in the Universe. During this progressive
development, the soul, which thus effects its "fall" into matter,
receives from all the planes through which it passes and from all the
forms in which it incarnates, varied vibrations which awake within it
correspondingly responsive powers and develop a non-centred, diffused,
non-individualised consciousness.

In the second phase of evolution, the forms are limited, the
vibrations they receive are transmitted by specialised sensorial
groups, and the soul, hitherto endowed with a diffused consciousness,
begins to feel varieties of vibrations that grow ever more numerous,
to be distinguished from the surrounding world, to separate itself, so
to speak, from everything around; in a word, to develop
self-consciousness. This separation first takes place on the physical
plane; it is made easier by hard, violent contacts, and the forms, in
their turn, become more complex, varied, and specialised in proportion
as the soul is the more perfectly individualised. When it has
developed all the self-conscious responsive powers in the physical
body, it begins to develop those faculties which have as their organs
of transmission the finer bodies, and as planes of vibration the
invisible worlds.

In our planetary system the number of the invisible planes is
seven.[61] Each of them in turn supplies the soul with a form; thus,
when evolution--which in its second phase successively dematerialises
matter, _i.e._, disassociates the atoms from their combinations,
beginning with the denser ones--has dissolved the physical plane, the
human soul will utilise, as its normal body, a finer one which it is
at present using as a link between the mental and the physical
bodies. Before this dissolution is effected, however, human beings
will have developed, to some extent, several finer bodies, already
existing, though hitherto not completely organised.

The first of these bodies, the astral--a very inappropriate name,
though here used because it is so well known--is a copy, more or less,
of the physical form in its general aspect; the resemblance and
clearness of the features are pronounced in proportion to the
intellectual development of the person, for thought-vibration has
great influence over the building up of the centres of force and of
sensation in this body.[62]

The second is an even finer aggregate, composed of mental substance
and assuming, during incarnation, the form of a smaller or larger
ovoid--the causal body--surrounding the physical form.[63] At its
centre, and plunged in the astral body during incarnation, is another
kind of ovoid not so large and composed of denser substance--the
mental body.[64]

Above these states of matter, at the present stage there appears no
form to the consciousness of human beings, though perfect seers can
perceive, within the causal body, still higher grades of matter, which
will only subsequently become centres of self-consciousness.

During incarnation, the soul, in the majority of men, is clearly
conscious of itself and of its surroundings only when it is
functioning through the nervous system (the brain); when it leaves the
denser body, during sleep, its consciousness is in the astral body,
and there it thinks,[65] but without being conscious of what is taking
place around it. After disincarnation, it generally becomes highly
conscious in its astral body, where it passes its purgatorial life;
and this latter endures until the soul leaves the astral body. As soon
as the latter is thrown off, consciousness centres in the mental body;
this is the period of _Devachan_ or Heaven. When the mental body is
put off, paradise is at an end, and the soul, sheathed only in the
causal body, finds itself on a very lofty plane, but here,
consciousness is vague, when we are dealing with a man of average
development. Instead of laying aside this garment, as so far it has
done with the rest, it recommences, after the lapse of a certain
time, another descent into the matter of the lower planes and a new
incarnation begins.

To the centre of the causal body are drawn atoms from the inner mental
plane; these represent a new mental body.[66] When this latter has
been formed, there are attracted to it atoms of the astral plane, and
these form a new astral body; the soul, clothed in these two sheaths,
if one may so express it, is brought into conscious or unconscious
relation, according to its degree of development, with the two
corresponding planes, lives there generally for a short time, and is
directed to a mother's womb, in which is created the visible body of
flesh within the centre of its astral body.

This force of atomic attraction has its centre in the causal body, a
kind of sensitive plate on which are registered all those vibrations
which disturb or affect human vehicles during incarnation. This body is,
in effect, the present abode of the soul, it represents the terminal
point of human consciousness,[67] the real centre of man.[68] It
receives all the impressions of the plane on which it finds itself, as
well as those which come to it from the lower planes, and responds to
them the more readily as it has now attained a fuller development. It
possesses the power to attract and to repel; a microcosm, it has its
outbreathing and inbreathing, as has the Macrocosm; like Brahma, it
creates its bodies and destroys them, although in the vast majority of
mankind it exercises this power more or less unconsciously and under the
irresistible impulsion of the force of evolution--the divine Will. When
it attracts, it causes to recur within itself the vibrations it has
received and registered--like a phonographic roll--during the past
incarnations; these vibrations reverberate in the outer world, and
certain of them attract from this world[69]--in this case the mental
world--the atoms capable of responding to them. When they have created
the mental body, other vibrations can be transmitted through this body
to the astral world and attract atoms which will form the body bearing
the same name--the astral--and finally other vibrations, making use of
these two bodies as a means of transmission, will affect the physical
plane and attract atoms which will assist in the building up of the
denser body.

Everywhere the formative power of vibration is guided by cosmic
intelligence, but it is effected far more easily in the reconstruction
of the higher bodies, that precedes incarnation properly so-called,
than in the creation of the now physical body. Indeed, in the astral
and mental bodies, nothing is produced but an atomic mass, the many
elements of which will be aggregated into complete organisms only
during incarnation properly so-called, whilst the construction of the
visible body admits of a mass of extremely delicate and important
details. It is for this reason that we have seen this work of
construction entrusted to special Beings who prepare, control and
watch over it unceasingly.

It is because the causal body registers every vibration the
personality[70] has generated or received in the course of its series
of incarnations, that the vices and virtues are preserved, as is the
case with the faults or the good qualities of the physical body. The
man who has created for himself a coarse astral body by feeding the
passions and thoughts which specially vivify the coarser matter of
this body will on returning to earth find a new astral body composed
of the same elements, though then in a dormant state. He who, by the
cultivation of a lofty intellect, has built up a refined mental body,
will return to incarnation with a like mental body, whilst the one
who, by meditation and the practice of devotion which bring into being
the noblest qualities of the heart, has set vibrating the purest
portions of the causal body and of the divine essence (Atma-Buddhi, as
it is named in Sanskrit), with which it is filled, will return to
birth endowed with those qualities which make apostles and saints, the
Saviours of the world.

In other words:

Matter has more remote boundaries than science recognises; the
numberless grades of atoms of which it consists, their powers of
aggregation, the multiplicity and duration of the bodies they form,
are not even suspected by materialism.

Materialism sees nothing but the part played by matter; it denies that
intelligence plays any part, and will by no means admit--in spite of
evolution and progress--that above man there exists an almost endless
chain of higher and higher Beings, whilst below him are kingdoms of an
increasingly restricted range of consciousness. By refusing to believe
in the multiplicity of the vehicles which the human soul uses, it is
unable to understand individual survival or to solve the problem of
heredity. Indeed, evolution is only partially explained by the
physical germ; the latter, in order to act alone and of itself in the
development of the human embryo should possess a degree of
intelligence considerably superior to that of man. This is the
opposite of what we find, however, and we are brought face to face
with the absurd fact of a cause vastly inferior to its effect. Indeed,
the intelligence shown by the germ is not its own; it is that of the
cosmic Mind reflected by mighty Beings, its willing servants. Besides,
this germ contains only the qualities that belong to physical matter,
and, as we shall show, the moral, mental, and spiritual qualities are
preserved by the finer--the causal--body, which represents the real
man at the present time.


THE PROBLEM OF HUMAN HEREDITY.

If materialism were the whole truth, it ought to explain the whole of
heredity; instead of that it clashes with almost all the problems of
life. Physical substance offers for analysis none but physical
phenomena: attraction, repulsion, heat, electricity, magnetism, vital
movement; the anatomical constitution of the highest--the
nerve--tissue, presents only the slightest differences in the animal
series, if these differences are compared with the enormous
distinctions in the qualities it expresses. Differences of form,
visible to the microscope, are at times important, we shall be told,
and those that affect the atomic activity and groupings[71] are
perhaps even more important. That is true, especially in whatever
concerns man.

Intelligence cannot always be explained by the complexity of the
brain--though this complexity is the condition of faculty, as a
rule--insects such as ants, bees, and spiders, whose brains are
nothing but simple nerve ganglia, display prodigies of foresight,
architectural ability and social qualities; whilst along with these
dwarfs of the animal kingdom, we see giants that manifest only a
rudimentary mind, in spite of their large, convoluted brains. Among
the higher animals, there is not one that could imitate the
beaver--which, all the same, is far from being at the head of the
animal series--in building for itself a house in a river and storing
provisions therein.

There is a vast gulf, in the zoological series, before and after these
insects, as there is before and after the beaver; whilst an even wider
gulf separates the highest specimens of the animal world from man
himself.

Nor do the weight and volume of the brain afford any better
explanation of the difference in intellect than does its structural
complexity.

The weight relations between the brain and the body of different
animals have been estimated as follows by Debierre (_La Moelle et l'
Encephale_):--

Rabbit    1 of brain for 140 of body.
Cat       1      "       156   "
Fox       1      "       205   "
Dog       1      "       351   "
Horse     1      "       800   "

If matter were the only condition _sine qua non_ of intelligence, we
should have to admit that the rabbit was more intelligent than the
cat, the fox, the dog, and even than the horse.

In the same work the following figures express the average size of the
brain in different races of men.

Pariahs of India      1332 cubic centimetres.
Australians           1338         "
Polynesians           1500         "
Ancient Egyptians     1500         "
Merovingians          1537         "
Modern Parisians      1559         "

This would prove that the people who built Karnac and the Pyramids,
who raised to an elevation of about 500 feet blocks of granite, one of
which would require fifteen horses to drag it along a level road, who
placed these enormous stones side by side without mortar or cement of
any kind and with almost invisible joints, who possessed the secret of
malleable glass and of painting in colours that have not faded even
after the lapse of centuries ... that such a race of men were inferior
to the rude, uncultured Merovingians, and scarcely the equals of the
Polynesians!

Science also tells us that in a child five years of age the human
brain weighs, on an average, 1250 grammes--this, too, would bear no
relation whatever with the intellectual and moral development of a
child of that age and that of an adult man.

Though Cuvier's brain weighed 1830 grammes, and Cromwell's 2230, that
of Tiedemann, the great anatomist, when placed on the scales, weighed
no more than 1254, and that of Gambetta only 1246.

The physical body of itself can give no reason for a host of
psychological phenomena on which, however, a flood of light is shed if
one recognises the existence of other vehicles of consciousness
possessing more far-reaching vibrations, and consequently capable of
expressing higher faculties. During sleep, for instance, which is
characterised by the Ego having left his physical body, reason is
absent, and what we call dreams are generally nothing but a tissue of
nonsense, at which the dreamer feels astonishment only when returning
to his body on awaking. On the other hand, as we have seen in Chapter
I., when the Ego succeeds in imprinting on the brain the vibrations of
the higher consciousness, it is able to regain the memory of facts
long forgotten and to solve problems that could not be solved during
the waking state. There are madmen who have ceased to be mad during
somnambulism; persons of rudimentary intelligence have proved
themselves to be profound thinkers during the mesmeric trance; when
under somnambulism vision is possible to those born blind and certain
people can see things that are happening a great distance away, and
their reports have been proved correct; certain phenomena of
double-consciousness cannot be explained without the plurality--the
duality, at all events--of the vehicles of consciousness.

To return to the _role_ played by the germ in the question of
heredity, we repeat that the physical germ, of itself alone, explains
only a portion of man; it throws light on the physical side of
heredity, but leaves in as great darkness as ever the problem of
intellectual and moral faculty. If it represented the whole man, one
would expect to find in any individual the qualities manifested in his
progenitors or parents--never any other; these qualities could not
exceed the amount possessed by the parents, whereas we find criminals
from birth in the most respectable families and saints born to parents
who are the very scum of society. You may come across twins, _i.e._,
beings born from the same germs, under the same conditions of time
and environment, one of whom is an angel and the other a demon,
though their physical forms closely resemble each other.

Child prodigies are sufficiently numerous to frequently trouble the
thinker with the problem of heredity. Whence came that irresistible
impulse towards poetry in Ovid which showed itself from his earliest
youth and in the end overcame the vigorous opposition of his parents?

Pascal in his youth met with keen opposition from his parents, who
forbade him to think of mathematics and geometry. He besought his
father to tell him, at all events, "what was that science of which he
was forbidden to think, and what it treated of." The answer was given
to him that "it is the method of making correct figures and finding
out the proportions they bear to each other." With nothing more than
this information and the aid of reflection, he discovered for himself
the first thirty-two propositions of Euclid by means of "circles and
lines" traced in secret.

Mozart, at the age of three, learnt the clavecin by watching his
sister play; a year afterwards he composed admirably, at the age of
seven he played the violin at first sight without having had any
teacher, and proved himself a composer of genius before he reached his
twelfth birthday.

Pepito Ariola, the little Spaniard, was only three years of age when,
about ten years ago, he filled with astonishment the Court of Madrid
by his wonderful playing on the piano.

In the lineage of these prodigies has there been found a single
ancestor capable of explaining these faculties, as astonishing as they
are premature? If to the absence of a cause in their progenitors is
added the fact that genius is not hereditary, that Mozarts,
Beethovens, and Dantes have left no children stamped from birth as
prodigies of genius, we shall be forced to the conclusion that, within
the limits it has taken up, materialism is unable to explain heredity.

A few more words must be said on physical heredity to explain why
moral qualities in men of average development are often on a par with
the same in their parents.

In reality, the physical germs only multiply the organic elements of
the ovule, and as this latter contains the cell-types of all the
tissues, it follows that these cell-types will possess the qualities
of the tissues that exist in the parents. For instance, germs of
sufferers from arterio-sclerosis will supply a vascular apparatus
predisposed to arterio-sclerosis; tuberculous subjects will supply
germs in which the vital vibrations and cellular solidity will be
below the normal, and bring about those degenerate tendencies which
characterise the tuberculous subject; those of sanguine constitution
will transmit a faculty for vital assimilation and considerable
corpuscular production, and so on.[72]

In this transmission there are two main factors: the male and the
female germs. The former represents force, it imprints on the ovule
the initial vital vibration which is to be that of each of the cells
of the organism in course of construction. The function of this germ
may be studied more easily in animals, because their heredity is not
complicated by the individual differences due to the mental vehicle.
The stallion supplies the vital qualities--the blood, _i.e._, the
vivacity, _brio_, pace; physical resistance comes from the mare. To
sum up, the modalities of matter are supplied by the feminine germ.

Peculiarities of form proceed from several causes. Phrenology and
physiognomy are sciences, though the studies hitherto known by these
names are almost valueless because they have not been carried on with
the necessary scientific precision. Doubtless Gall and Lavater
possessed the gift of penetrating both mind and heart, as was also the
case with Mlle. Lenormand Desbarolles and the genuine graphologists;
but this gift was not the result of mathematical deduction, but
rather a psychometric or prophetic faculty; for this reason neither
they nor their books have produced pupils worthy of the name. The main
features and lines only of the human form have a known meaning--and
not always a very precise one--for every physical, passional, mental,
or spiritual force possesses an organ of expression in the visible
body, and the varieties of form of this organ enable one to judge of
the degrees of force they express on the earth plane. On this basis,
peculiarities of form mainly stand; and the intensity of certain
defects or qualities is at times expressed so strongly that it
completely modifies the tendencies it would seem that heredity ought
to pass on. The similarity of form between parent and child is not
exact, because it proceeds from the peculiarities of the individual in
incarnation far more than from the collective tendencies of the
embryonic cells in process of proliferation.

The being charged with building the body can, in turn, considerably
modify its form, copying specially striking features found in the
mother's thought; certain characteristic family traits, the Bourbon
nose, for instance; those belonging to strangers in continual
relationship with the mother, and those that a babe, fed and brought
up away from home, takes from his nurse or from the surroundings amid
which he lives; all these probably leave their impress in the same
way. In this case, indeed, the "builder"--who, it must be added,
ceases the work of construction only when it is on its way to
completion, which happens about the age of seven--is influenced by the
forms of the new surroundings, and at times copies them, more or less,
and we may ask ourselves if the unexplained fact of negro children
being born to a white woman--the widow of a negro--remarried to a
white man is in no way connected with the reproduction of a mental
image of the coloured children of a former marriage.

Another fact: observers have noticed that almost all great men have
had as their mother a woman of lofty character. This preponderance of
the maternal influence will be understood if we remember that the
cellular mass that composes the child's body belongs to the mother,
not only because this mass originates from the proliferation of the
ovule, and, consequently, is only the multiplication of the maternal
substance, but also because the materials that have formed it and have
been transmuted into flesh have been supplied by her; indeed,
everything comes from this cellular mass, the elements drawn from the
amniotic fluid and the blood, the milk, which, after birth, continues
for long months to build up the child's body and the magnetic fluid,
the "atoms of life," which are continually escaping from it and which
the babe absorbs whilst receiving incessant attention from his mother.

This exchange of atoms is of the utmost importance, for these
ultra-microscopic particles are charged with our mental and moral
tendencies as well as with the physical qualities; personally, I have
had many direct proofs of this, but the most striking came at a
critical period of my life. One day, when nervous exhaustion, steadily
increased by overwork, had reached an extreme stage, a great
Being--not a Mahatma, but a Soul at a very lofty stage of
evolution--sent to me by destiny at the time, poured into my shattered
body a portion of his physical life. Shortly afterwards a real
transformation took place, far more of a moral than of a physical
nature, and for a few hours I felt myself the "copy" or counterpart of
that great Soul, and the divine influence lasted twenty-four hours
before it gradually died away.

I then understood, better than by any other demonstration, the
influence of the physical upon the moral nature and the method of the
subtle contagion often effected by mesmerism. _A man is known by the
friends he keeps_ is an old proverb.

If atoms of life can have so marked an influence upon a man nearly
forty years of age, _i.e._, at a period when he is in full possession
of himself, how much more powerful is this influence when exercised
upon the child--a delicate, sensitive body, almost entirely lacking
the control of the soul? This is the reason hired nurses often
transmit to the child their own physical features and countless moral
tendencies which last some time after weaning; orphans, too, morally,
often resemble the strangers who have brought them up. Like physical
tendencies these moral propensities disappear only by degrees,
according to change of environment, and especially to the degree in
which the body is controlled by the reincarnated soul.[73]

The most important, however, of the moral influences at work on the
being again brought into touch with earth-life is connected with the
emotions, the passions and thoughts of those around. The child--and
under this name must be included the embryo and the foetus--possesses
bodies the subtle elements of which are in a dormant state; his mental
and sense organisms are scarcely more than masses of substance that have
not yet been vitalised--a sort of collection of germs of good or of
evil, which will yield fruit when they awake. The passional and mental
vibrations of the parents play on the matter capable of responding to
them in the invisible bodies of the child; they vivify it, attract atoms
of the same nature taken from the finer atmosphere around, and awake in
it passional and mental centres which, but for them, might have remained
latent, or, at all events, would only have developed at a later stage,
when the Ego, master of its vehicles, would be in a position to struggle
against the outer evil influences and not permit them to have effect
save within the limits imposed by will. In this way, it is possible to
bring to birth evil instincts in a child, and intensify them to a
considerable extent, before a single virtue has succeeded in expressing
itself on the new instrument in course of development. This mental
action is so strong that it colours vividly, if not altogether, the
morality of the little ones living beneath its influence, and even older
children are still so sensitive to it that whole classes are seen to
reflect the moral character of the teacher who has charge of them. This
influence, too, does not cease with childhood, it weighs--though far
less heavily--on the man during the whole of his life; and families,
nations, nay, even races, each see through the prism of their own
special atmosphere. Mighty and subtle is this illusion which man, in the
course of his pilgrimage towards divine Unity, must succeed in piercing
and finally entirely dissipating.

Our responsibility towards children is all the more serious in that,
to the deep impression which thought makes on the subtle, plastic, and
defenceless mental bodies of the little ones, is added the fact that,
could one prevent the development of the germs of evil in the course
of one incarnation, these germs, not having fructified, would transmit
nothing to the _causal body_ after death, and would disappear[74] with
the disintegration of the matter of which they were composed.
Consequently, with regard to children especially, we should cultivate
none but noble emotions and lofty thoughts, so as to create centres of
pure and worthy activity within their vehicles in course of
reconstruction, and to turn their early impulses in the direction of
good, their first actions towards duty and their first aspirations
towards the lofty and luminous heights of spirituality.

One may see from this rapid sketch how numerous and important are the
influences added to and blended with those of physical heredity. This
group of influences, some maleficent, some beneficent, is chosen by
the Beings who control destiny and give to each Ego, on reincarnation,
the body and environment it has merited, or rather that are needed,
for the harmonious development of its faculties. A young soul[75]
still at the mercy of the animal impulses--necessary impulses at the
outset of human development--of its kamic, _i.e._, desire, vehicle, is
sent to parents who will be able to supply its body with material
elements of a particular density without which these impulses could
not manifest themselves. An Ego that is approaching maturity will be
drawn to a family that is physically and morally pure, in which it
will receive both the finer physical vehicle it needs and that lofty
environment which, when it enters upon earth life, will develop the
centres of expression for its nobler faculties. Those who are named in
the mystic phraseology of the East, the "Lords of Karma," in their
choice of the race, the family, and the environment in which the
reincarnated soul is to appear, seek to give this latter the most
favourable conditions for its evolution. An Ego whose artistic side
needs to be developed will often be born in a family which will supply
it with a nervous system accustomed to the kind of vibrations
required, and an environment favourable to the early development of
the physical centres of these faculties; to assist a being whose
scientific, mystical, or metaphysical side needs to be developed,
other environment and parentage will be chosen, and it is this
relative parallelism existing between the moral qualities of the
parents and those of the children which has deceived observers
insufficiently instructed in the mystery of heredity, and made them
believe in the influence of the physical germ alone.

It is an easy matter to supply an Ego of average development with a
vehicle; an ordinary body is all that is needed. There may be extreme
difficulty, however, when a new instrument has to be found for a lofty
soul, and when we think that, in pressing instances when the fortune
of humanity is at stake and the hour of destiny has struck, certain
great Souls accept very imperfect bodies for want of better ones, we
shall no longer be astonished at finding that any particular
Messenger, in his compassion for the humanity he has to enlighten and
to direct to the ancient, eternal Source of Truth, has clothed himself
with a body of flesh the ancestry of which was far from being adapted
to the expression of his lofty faculties; courageous Souls are well
able to put on the robe of pain and to submit to slander and calumny
when the world's salvation can only be achieved at such a cost. We
know scarcely anything of the conditions that control the return to
earth of the Avataras, the "Sons of God," except that sometimes great
Initiates, after purifying their bodies, voluntarily hand them over to
the "gods," who come down to earth--a sublime sacrifice which, like
that of the Saviours who consent to come amongst us, shows forth that
supreme characteristic of divinity; the gift of oneself.

Nor is heredity always realised; many a physical characteristic is not
reproduced; in families tainted with dangerous physiological defects,
many children escape the evil, and the diseased tendencies of the
tissues remain latent in them, although they often afflict their
descendants. On the other hand, as already stated, extremely divergent
mental types are often met with in the same family, and many a
virtuous parent is torn with grief on seeing the vicious tendencies of
his child. Here, as elsewhere, the hand of Providence, as Christianity
calls it--the Intelligence that brings about evolution, the Justice
that controls and the Love that animates it--the hand of God or of
those who, having become divine, collaborate in the divine plan, comes
to make up for the imperfection of the vehicles, and they permit only
what is necessary to come to each one--only what he has deserved, as
is generally said: this hand can create a physical or a psychic malady
even where heredity and environment could not supply it, just as it
can preserve a pure soul from the moral infection of the surroundings
into which it is thrown.[76] This is the reason we find that heredity
and environment either fail to fulfil their promise or else give what
was not their's to give.


OBJECTION.

Reincarnation is not necessary, it has been alleged; the soul's
evolution is continued after death in the invisible worlds in finer
bodies; consequently it is needless to return to the denser bodies of
earth.

In our opinion, the trials of life, so exhausting to the will, must
have given rise to this theory, for not only have those who advance it
never given the slightest proof of its truth, but it is utterly
opposed to the law of evolution.

In a world which prefers the flights of imagination to logical
reasoning we are too accustomed to regard man as a being apart in
Nature; we are only too prone to make exceptions on his behalf. The
patient scientific researches of all ages have laid down this
universally accepted axiom: _Nature does not proceed by leaps_. It has
not so far entered anyone's mind--we think not at all events--to teach
that the development of the mineral, the vegetable, and even of the
animal kingdom, comes to a sudden halt on this planet, once the forms
in these kingdoms are dispersed, to be completed in finer worlds; but
regarding man other thoughts have prevailed, as though his
intelligence and his heart had learnt all the lessons this earth is
capable of teaching! From the most undeveloped of savages up to those
glorious Spirits that have been the Manu, the Buddha, and the Christ,
we find every step occupied on the long ladder of humanity. In the
lower kingdoms all the stages exist also and are utilised, each link
receiving something from its neighbours and giving them something in
return, thus expressing on the visible plane that gracious unity which
is divine Love: love that is instinctive and imperative in beings of a
low degree of evolution; obeyed by those who, without loving it,
understand its good services, and actually lived by such souls as have
entered upon the path of sacrifice--souls that comprehend the Unity of
beings. If this earth has been capable of teaching the Saviours of the
world, why should divine Wisdom send thereon only for one short life
this mass of imperfect men, to hurl them afterwards on to other
worlds, like careless butterflies flitting from flower to flower?

Can the evolutionary effort be so easy and simple; is divine energy of
such slight value that it can thus be squandered to no purpose; is the
process of creation the sport of an infant God; is the Logos,
sacrificing himself in order to give life to the Universe, a prodigal,
working without rhyme or reason, sending forth His intelligence and
might in aimless sport and leaving evolution at the mercy of His
caprice; did not Brahma, by means of meditation, which, as the
Oriental scriptures tell us, preceded creation, practise the gentlest,
the most rapid, and the easiest method of guiding beings to the Goal?
Is it not sheer blasphemy to attribute such folly to the Soul of the
world? Does not the study of Nature, at each step, belie this
insensate waste, of which no human being would be guilty? Everywhere
with the minimum of force, Nature produces the maximum of effect;
everywhere energy is consolidated with one end in view; and yet, amid
the general order around, is the evolution of man to form a solitary,
an incomprehensible exception?

No, we cannot believe it for a moment. American spiritists,[77]
however--for it is they who have given out this hypothesis--are not in
agreement with the school of Allan Kardec on this fundamental point,
and this fact is by no means calculated to strengthen, the authority
for this doctrine. Did we not know that disincarnate beings are as
ignorant in the life beyond as they were on earth; that they tend to
group themselves, as they did here below, with those who think as they
do, whilst remaining aloof from such as profess hostile opinions; that
the Hindu remains a Hindu, the Christian a Christian, and the
Mussulman a Mussulman; that sceptics are still sceptics; and atheists,
atheists; we should think that spirit "communications" with their
incessant contradictions were unparalleled nonsense, since the
"spirits" are by no means agreed on the very things regarding which
they pretend to pronounce a judgment from which there is no appeal.

Fortunately, there is a reason for these divergences. Death neither
lifts the veil of Isis nor brings the soul into the presence of
omniscient Light; man remains what he was, with all his former
beliefs, opinions, passions, qualities, sympathies, and antipathies.
True, he knows a little more than he did upon earth; no more has he
doubts as to the after-life, he regains a precise memory of the whole
of his life here, and the recollection of many a forgotten fact comes
back to him; he understands better, for his intelligence is being
served by a much finer body--but that is all. Therefore "spirits"
reflect both the morality and the mentality of the nation to which
they belonged on earth, and in the other life are to be found friends
and enemies, believers and unbelievers, reincarnationists and
non-reincarnationists.

Rebirths can be established only by personal proof, by memory; now,
the soul that has entered the life beyond, after disincarnation, has
not reached the end of its pilgrimage; it is learning that it must, by
self-purification, pass from world to world until it attains to a
state of supreme and final rest; but when this latter has been
reached, it has lost its lower sheaths and the memory they gave it,
and when the Law brings it back to earth, it puts on new bodies,
which, having had no participation in preceding events, are ignorant
of the past.

Remembrance, we shall see later on, is preserved in the cosmic Memory,
but until the soul has readied a sufficient development, it cannot
summon it forth, and even could it do so, it would succeed in leaving
its impress on the brain only when the physical, the astral, and the
mental bodies have submitted to a process of purification which
harmonises[78] them and binds them closely together. Then only does
man know that Reincarnation is true, and takes place on earth until
this latter passes into a slate of obscuration,[79] or, at all events,
until the development of the soul enables it to utilise for its
evolution some environment on the planet, other than the physical
one.[80]

We shall be told that we are now proving what we before denied. No, we
are simply stating an exception which happens in very few cases and
only then to the pioneers of the race--an exception which is nothing
but an apparent one and finds its place in the progressive order which
unifies all the beings in the planetary chain to which we belong.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 41: Each part possesses in a potential state the properties
of the whole.]

[Footnote 42: The kingdoms that are invisible to physical sight are as
interesting as those we see, but we have no occasion to speak of them
here. Logic compels us to acknowledge them until the time comes when
human development enables them to be discovered and affords direct
proof of their existence.]

[Footnote 43: We do not mean to affirm that evolutionists have not
committed serious errors in their theory of development. But the law
they have set prominently forth is one of the fundamental expressions
of the working of God in the Universe.]

[Footnote 44: The vibratory impressions that constitute the memory of
the Universe. See in Chapter 4, the final _Objection._]

[Footnote 45: See _L'or et la Transmutation des metaux_, by
Tiffereau.]

[Footnote 46: Such as the one with the magnet which, if too great a
weight is suspended to its armature, loses strength, and this it only
regains by degrees when "fed" with successively stronger charges. A
steel spring that has borne too great a weight loses strength, and may
break if subjected anew to the same weight that "fatigued" it. Pieces
of iron break after being "fatigued" by a weight they easily carried
before. Professor Kennedy made very useful experiments regarding the
"fatigue" of metals at the time when metallic bridges were continually
breaking, thus causing great perplexity in the engineering world.]

[Footnote 47: There has been much discussion as to the causes of
Evolution.

In his _Progress and Poverty_, Henry George endeavours to show that
Evolution is in no way brought about by individual or collective
heredity. He says that the factors of Progress are: First, the mind,
which causes the advance of civilisation when not exercised solely in
the "struggle for life," or in frequent conflicts between nation and
nation; second, association or combination, which ensures all the
benefits to be derived from division of work; third, justice, which
harmonises the units of the social body, and without which
civilisation decays and dies.

H. George saw only these elements in evolution; consequently, he could
neither solve the problem of progress nor explain the rise and fall of
empires. Indeed, egoism and war are in no way, as he says they are,
the sole causes of the fall of races: the soil cannot feed a great
nation for an indefinite period even if the country is prevented by
emigration from becoming over-populated; the very nature itself of the
civilisation of the time prevents it from continuing for ever. Modern
western races, for instance, have for centuries past been developing
energy and intelligence; a limit must be fixed to that particular line
of progress, under penalty of destroying equilibrium both in the
individual and the race.

If, indeed, man is to learn strength and intelligence, he must also
develop love, or he will fail. The Elder Brothers behind Evolution
control the advance of the races in accordance with the plan of God,
whose servants they are.

The real cause of evolution does not lie in environment, as H. George
and his school would have it: it is in the divine Will, incarnate in
the Universe. It is God who creates the world, God who fills it with
life, guides it and permits its development. All the laws of Nature
are the expression of the supreme Intelligence; all progress is
nothing but the realisation of the possibilities of the divine Will.

The evolutionary edifice is based on solidarity, and here environment
is undoubtedly an indispensable factor in development; still, it only
acts as the field or soil, and soil without seed remains barren.

The mind is also a powerful lever in evolution, but it affects only
one side of the matter. Association or co-operation facilitates only
the growth of certain faculties whilst checking the development of
others. Justice calls forth only certain individual and social forces,
and leaves many of them in a state of stagnation.

In a word, H. George forgets that there is no useless force in the
whole of Nature; that they all collaborate in the general task, and
finally that there would be no progress, were it not for the existence
of opposing forces. If, _e.g._, egoism were non-existent, those still
incapable of working without the hope of personal gain would lack a
powerful incentive to action. True is the saying that evil is the
stepping-stone to good.

Were the Law of Rebirths known, it would prove to be an explanation of
the problems of evolution.]

[Footnote 48: A few theologians have feebly affirmed the possibility
of human life on other planets than the Earth, but their voices have
either been stifled or have met with no echo.

At the Congress of Fribourg, in Switzerland, August, 1897, evolution
was adopted by an assembly of 700 eminent Catholics--laymen and
clergy. Dr. Zahn said that _although creation is possible a priori, it
is a posteriori so very improbable that it ought to be rejected; that
those who believe in this creation rely upon the literal
interpretation of Genesis, whilst the contemporary students of the
Bible affirm that the book is allegorical, that God, in the beginning
created the elements and gave them power to evolve in all the forms
that characterise the organic and inorganic worlds_. One voice alone
was raised in protest, but it was drowned beneath the refutations of
the rest. The question, however, might be asked: How is the transition
made from one kingdom to another? What is the missing link? Who is to
interpret the Bible if it is an allegorical book? Is it the Church
which has always imposed _the letter_ of the Bible and condemned all
who have attempted to set forth _its spirit_?]

[Footnote 49: In hypnosis, indeed, the thought suggested is strong
enough to modify organic life and bring about hematic extravasion
(stigmata), burnings, vomiting, etc.... In certain ecstatic cases,
fixity of thought produces analogous effects. No one who has studied
these questions can have the slightest doubt that mind dominates
matter.]

[Footnote 50: We say force-matter, for there is no force without
matter, they are the two poles of the same thing. Moreover, what is
considered force in relation to dense matter plays the _role_ of
matter to subtler forces; electricity, _e.g._, is force-matter,
probably capable of serving as a vehicle for subtler force-matter,
just as it plays the _role_ of force in relation to its conductors.
Force is born and dies with matter and _vice versa_; both alike arise
from the activity of God.]

[Footnote 51: The sensations it calls forth vary with the forms. That
which burns us, gives life to other beings; water, which suffocates
us, enables fishes to live; whilst air suffocates creatures that live
in the water, etc.]

[Footnote 52: All this must be taken figuratively. God does not
incarnate Himself. He is the All. To our limited conceptions, He seems
to limit Himself, in order to be the Life of a Universe.]

[Footnote 53: Here, too, we are speaking relatively; in reality, there
are no fragments of the Absolute. We describe the process as it seems
to us in the world of illusion.]

[Footnote 54: Being: Divinity.]

[Footnote 55: Force-matter.]

[Footnote 56: Forms.]

[Footnote 57: The movement given to the germ by the union of its
positive and negative forces.]

[Footnote 58: The "builders" are inferior beings utilised by Nature in
every process of germination and development. To certain readers, this
will perhaps appear to be an aberration of the theosophic imagination,
in which case we recommend them to supply us with a better theory and
to believe in that, until the time comes when the functioning of the
"inner senses" takes place in them, and enables them to perceive these
beings in action.]

[Footnote 59: Teratological phenomena attributable to the imagination
of the mother are so numerous that they cannot be refuted. The case
mentioned here is taken from Van Helmont's _De Injectis Materialibus_.
The woman in question had been present at the decapitation of thirteen
soldiers, condemned to death by the Duc d'Alva. In the same work are
two other instances which occurred under similar circumstances: in the
first, the foetus at birth was lacking a hand; and in the second, it
was the whole arm that was missing; whilst, what is perhaps even
stranger than this, neither arm, nor hand, nor head were found, they
had been absorbed by the body of the mother.]

[Footnote 60: To be strictly logical, one should say round the only
centre, the one Being, but looked upon from the side of manifestation,
evolution appears as stated.]

[Footnote 61: Hellenbach, in his book, _Magie der Zahlen_, says
regarding the number seven.

"_The law governing the phenomena on which our knowledge is based
decrees that the vibrations of sound and light regularly increase in
number, that they are grouped in seven columns, and that the vibratory
elements of each column have so close a relation to one another that
not only can it be expressed in figures, but it is even confirmed by
practice in music and chemistry._

"_The fact that this variation and periodicity are governed by the
number seven cannot be disputed; it is not a matter of chance: there
is a cause and we ought to discover it._"

In his table of the elements grouped according to atomic weight,
Mendelejef also acknowledges that the number seven controls what he
calls the _Law of periodical function_. He reaches conclusions similar
to those of Hellenbach.

Dr. Laycock, in his Articles on the _Periodicity of Vital Phenomena_
(_Lancet_) 1842, sums up as follows:--

"_It is, I think, impossible to come to any less general conclusion
than this, that, in animals, changes occur every 3-1/2, 7, 14, 21 or
28 days, or at some definite period of weeks._"]

[Footnote 62: See _Man and his Bodies_, by A. Besant.]

[Footnote 63: The size of the causal body varies according to its
development. It has been named _causal_, because it contains within
itself the causes or germs of all the other bodies, with the exception
of the denser part of the physical. We say denser because the physical
body is double: its etheric part belongs to the causal body, its
visible part comes from the parents.]

[Footnote 64: The mental body, which is, as it were, an ephemeral
flower of the causal, is born and developed in each incarnation,
disintegrating after the _devachanic_ (heavenly) life.]

[Footnote 65: It moves more or less freely on the astral plane,
according to the development of the astral body. In men of low
development, this body cannot be separated from the physical, under
penalty of a nightmare which brings about a waking condition.]

[Footnote 66: The atoms interpenetrate in consequence of their
differences of tenuity.]

[Footnote 67: Later on, the centre of consciousness passes from the
human to the superhuman state and ascends unceasingly until it reaches
the centre of the Divinity incarnate in the world.]

[Footnote 68: When this centre is fixed in one of the higher bodies,
the buddhic for instance, the man has passed into the superhuman
stage.]

[Footnote 69: As sand, placed on a plate in a state of vibration,
assumes varying forms.]

[Footnote 70: The soul acting in the mental, the astral, and more
especially--in the average man--the physical body. The Individuality
is the soul acting in the causal body.]

[Footnote 71: See the diagram in the chapter on the Atom in _The
Ancient Wisdom_, by A. Besant.]

[Footnote 72: We have seen that the organs formed by these tissues are
the special work of a particular being controlled by lofty
Intelligences.]

[Footnote 73: As the building of the body is reaching completion, the
Ego (the Soul) begins to make use of the new instrument. It is at
about the age of seven years that the development of the nerve centres
becomes sufficiently advanced to allow of the brain receiving the
vibrations of the soul; up to this point, the real man has scarcely
had any influence upon the body, although the mental projection (the
mental body) which he has formed can express itself to a certain
extent much earlier, from the seventh month of foetal life; up to
this time, the instinctive energies of the astral body alone affect
the embryo.]

[Footnote 74: In Kamaloka (Purgatory). The desires, in purgatory,
cannot be satisfied, because there is no physical body to express
them, and this causes a state of suffering which has been compared to
a burning fire. This fire burns up the passions and leaves behind only
the "germs," which the causal body takes up and bequeaths to the
future astral body. But for this providential burning away, the
passions would exist from early childhood in the future incarnation,
_i.e._, at a time when the Ego has no hold whatever upon the new
personality, and when the latter would be terribly affected by this
influx of the forces of evil.]

[Footnote 75: Souls are of different ages: the savage is not so old as
the civilised man, while the latter is the younger brother of those
strong and wise Souls who compose the vanguard of humanity.]

[Footnote 76: It is impossible for heredity and environment to supply
_all_ the conditions that a soul's evolution calls for, and _nothing
but these conditions_; that is the reason Providence intervenes in the
interests of justice.]

[Footnote 77: It is in this great body, with which we are in sympathy,
though we claim the right to dispute their theories when we regard
them as erroneous, that this hypothesis is met with more especially.
True, certain schools of lower occultism teach it also, but they form
a minority, and are of no importance.]

[Footnote 78: Harmony is established when there is vibratory
synchronism of all the states of matter of the different bodies
_i.e._, when each slate of matter in a body vibrates in unison with
the analogous states of matter of all the other bodies.]

[Footnote 79: When the "life wave" has ended its cycle on this earth,
it passes in succession over the other planets of our chain and leaves
the earth in a state of slumber. This slumber ceases with the return
of the "life wave"; it becomes death when the evolution of the chain
is accomplished. See A. P. Sinnett's _Esoteric Buddhism._]

[Footnote 80: At a certain stage on the _Path_, return to earth is no
longer obligatory.]




