CHAPTER IV.

REINCARNATION AND THE RELIGIOUS AND PHILOSOPHIC CONSENSUS OF THE AGES.


In the rapid review we are now about to make of the religion and
philosophy of the past, we shall find that, under many and divers
names and veils, the doctrine of Rebirths has been taught from the
farthest antiquity right up to the present time. There is not a nation
that has not preserved clear traces of this doctrine; not a religion
that has not taught it, either openly or in secret, or, at all events,
retained the germ of the teaching; and if we count only those peoples
of whose national religion it forms part, _i.e._, Hindus and
Buddhists, the number of believers in Reincarnation may be summed up
in round figures at 540 millions of the present population of 1400
millions throughout the world. The greatest of philosophers, both
ancient and modern, have regarded palingenesis as the basis of life,
but whereas in the past the pledge of initiation prevented its
details from being promulgated, in our days, along with the flood of
light which this cycle has brought us, the veil of secrecy has been
partially lifted, and theosophy has been privileged to set forth this
glorious teaching in its main outlines and its most important details.


INDIA.

Northern India was the cradle of the present race--the fifth--the Eden
of our humanity, our physical, moral, mental, and spiritual
mother.[81] From her womb issued the emigrant hordes that peopled
Europe after spreading over Egypt, Asia Minor, and Siberia; it was her
code of ethics that civilised Chaldaea, Greece, Rome, and the whole of
the East; our own code is full of traces of the Laws of Manu, whilst
both the Old and New Testament are, in many respects, an abridged and
often almost a literal copy of the sacred Books of ancient Aryavarta.

The presence of the doctrine of reincarnation in the Vedic hymns has
been disputed; this proves nothing more than the present fragmentary
condition of the Vedas. Nothing, indeed, could be more absurd than to
find that the sacred Scriptures of India had maintained silence on a
doctrine which, along with that of Karma, form the two main columns of
the Hindu temple; for the Brahman as well as for the Buddhist--who is
only a member of a powerful offshoot of Hinduism--these two laws rule
throughout the whole Universe, from the primordial kingdoms up to the
gods, including man; and the principal, nay, the only goal of human
life is Moksha--salvation, in Christian terminology--liberation from
the chain of rebirths.

In this land, in which, along with strict obedience to the rules of
conduct set forth by its great Teachers, there existed the most
complete freedom of opinion, and where the most divergent and numerous
philosophic sects consequently developed, there has always been
perfect unanimity regarding the doctrine of rebirth, and in that
inextricable forest of metaphysical speculations two giant trees have
always overtopped the rest: the tree of Karma and the tree of
Reincarnation.

In spite of the intentional obscurity in which we are left as to the
teachings regarding rebirth from the time of the decadence of India,
it is no difficult matter, with the aid of theosophy, to discover its
main points. Thus we find in them the return of the "life-atoms"[82]
and animal souls[83] to existence in new physical bodies; the rebirths
of the human Egos are indicated in their main phases; but here, the
deliberate omission of certain points which had long to remain
incomprehensible--and consequently dangerous--to the masses, makes
obscure, and at times absurd, certain aspects of transmigration. I
have heard a great Teacher clearly explain these points to some of the
most enlightened of the Hindu members of the Theosophical Society, but
I do not feel authorised to repeat these explanations, and so will
leave this portion of the subject under a veil, which the reader will,
with the aid of intuition, be able to lift after reflecting on the
following pages.

The Sages of ancient India, then, teach three distinct phases in the
return-to-birth process: Resurrection, Transmigration or
Metempsychosis and Reincarnation properly so-called.


RESURRECTION.

The human body is a species of polyp colony, a kind of coral island
like those that emerge above the waves of the Pacific, by reason of
the collective efforts of lower organisms.

The most numerous of the compounds of the human aggregate are known to
physiology as microbes, bacteria, and bacilli; but amongst them our
microscopes discover only comparative monsters, "those that are to the
ordinary infinitesimal organisms as the elephant is to the invisible
infusorium."[84]

Each cell is a complete being; its soul is a vital ray of the general
life of our planet; its body consists of molecules that are attracted
and then repelled, whilst the cellular soul remains immutable in the
ceaseless fluctuations of its corporeal elements.

The molecules, too, are animated by a vital soul, connected with the
cellular soul, which, in turn, is subordinate to a higher[85] unit of
the collective life of the human body.

The most infinitesimal of these beings--often called
"lives"--penetrate the body freely; they circulate in the aura[86] and
in each plexus of the organism; there they are subjected to the
incessant impact of the moral, menial, and spiritual forces, and
become impregnated with a spirit of good or of evil, as the case may
be. They enter the cells and leave them with intense rapidity, for
their cycles of activity as well as of passivity are being incessantly
repeated.

We are all the time emanating millions of "lives," which are at once
drawn into the different kingdoms of Nature to which they carry the
energies they have gathered in us; they impress on their new organisms
the tendencies we have given them, and in this way become ferments of
regeneration or of decay; they aid or retard, pollute or purify, and
it is for this reason that it is not a matter of indifference whether
one lives in town or country, with men or animals, the temperate or
the intemperate, the wicked or the good. The animal gains from
association with human beings, man loses from association with
animals; the disciples of the great schools of initiation, at a
certain stage of their discipline, are carefully isolated from any
inferior contact.

It is these subtle forces that are at play in the physical
accomplishment of an action.[87] "For material sins," says Manu,
"one[88] passes into mineral and vegetable forms." When, at death,
the outer sheath of man disintegrates, these "life atoms" are thrown
back into the general surroundings of the earth, where they are
subjected to the magnetic currents around; these currents either
attract or repel them, and thus bring about that wise selection, which
directs them to organisms in affinity with them.

The doctrine of metempsychosis[89] is true only for the atoms or
emanations sent out by man after death or during the whole course of
life. The hidden meaning of the passage from Manu, where we read that
"he who slays a Brahman enters into the body of a dog, a bear, an ass,
a camel, &c.," does not apply to the human Ego, but only to the atoms
of his body, _i.e._, to the lower triad[90] and its fluidic
emanations, as H. P. Blavatsky says, and she adds:

"The Hina-yana, the lowest form of transmigration of the Buddhist, is
as little comprehended as the Maha-yana, its highest form, and,
because Sakya Muni--the Buddha--is shown to have once remarked to his
Bhikkus--Buddhist monks--while pointing out to them a broom, that it
had formerly been a novice who neglected to sweep out the Council
room, hence was reborn as a broom,(!) therefore the wisest of all the
world's sages stands accused of idiotic superstition. Why not try and
understand the true meaning of the figurative statement before
criticising? Is or is not that which is called magnetic effluvia a
something, a stuff or a substance, invisible and imponderable though
it be?... The mesmeric or magnetic fluid which emanates from man to
man, or even from man to what is termed an inanimate object, is far
greater. Indeed, it is 'life atoms' that a man in a blind passion
throws off unconsciously. Let any man give way to any intense feeling
such as anger, grief, &c., under or near a tree, or in direct contact
with a stone, and many thousands of years after that any tolerable
psychometrist will see the man and sense his feelings from one single
fragment of that tree or stone that he has touched. Why then should
not a broom, made of a shrub, which grew most likely in the vicinity
of the building where the lazy novice lived--a shrub, perhaps,
repeatedly touched by him while in a state of anger, provoked by his
laziness and distaste of his duty--why should not a quantity of his
life atoms have passed into the materials of the future broom, and
therein have been recognised by Buddha owing to his superhuman (not
supernatural) powers?"[91]

Such is the meaning of the Resurrection of the body, taught in the
Christian church in a form that is repellent to reason, for it kills
the spirit of the doctrine and leaves this latter like a corpse from
which the life has gone.


METEMPSYCHOSIS.

After the disintegration of the body, the kamic[92] elements continue
for some time, us a "shade"[93] or a "phantom,"[94] in the finer and
invisible atmosphere;[95] then they, in turn, become disintegrated by
the various forces of this environment,[96] and are lost in the strata
of matter from which they have been taken. Like the physical elements
(_life-atoms_), they whirl about in their environment and there submit
to the same law of attraction and repulsion as that which controls
universal selection; they are drawn towards the kamic elements of men
and animals, and it is here that we ought to place the list of those
misdeeds, by reason of which these elements pass into bodies of
animals or men of inferior development. "A drunken priest becomes a
worm," says Manu, "a stealer of corn, a rat; the murderer of a
Brahman, a dog, a tiger, or a serpent"--and this means that those
elements which, in man, serve as a basis for the passions, at death,
pass over into the bodies of animals that possess the same passions or
experience the same needs.

The transmigration of human souls into the bodies of animals is still
generally accepted amongst the less intelligent Hindus; it has
contributed, perhaps more than anything else, to that wonderful
respect for life one meets with all over India. The thought that some
ancestor or other might happen to be in the body of an animal prevents
its destruction; even the sacrifice of his life offered by a man to
one of his brothers in the animal world is regarded as a sublime
virtue, and legend tells us of the Buddha, the Lord of Compassion,
giving himself up as food for a famishing tigress, that she and her
cubs might not perish of hunger.


REINCARNATION.

The process of disintegration[97] which, after disincarnation,
destroys the physical, astral, and mental bodies of the man leaves
the Soul--or, to be more exact, the causal body, for the soul is not
the causal body any more than it is any of the other human
vehicles--intact. Indeed, the causal body is at present the only
vehicle that resists the cyclic dissolution of the human compound;
this it will be subjected to only when the divine spark which
constitutes the Soul--an eternal spark in its essence, since it is a
fragment of God, and immortal as an "ego," once it has attained to
individualisation, the goal of evolution--has formed for itself a new
and superior body with the substance of the finer planes above the
mental; but ages will pass before the masses of mankind reach this
point.

After thus throwing off, one after the other, all its sheaths, the Ego
finds that it has ended a "life-cycle," and is preparing to put on new
bodies, to return to reincarnation on earth. On Reincarnation properly
so called, the Hindu scriptures are so precise and complete, so
generally accepted, than it is unnecessary to quote from them in
detail. A few extracts will suffice.

These we will take from the _Bhagavad Gita_, that glorious episode in
the mighty civil war which shattered India, and left her defenceless
against the successive invaders who were to complete her fall. This
great epic poem introduces to us Arjuna, a noble prince, about to take
part in the strife. The two armies, arrayed for battle, are on the
point of engaging, arrows have already begun to pierce the air. In the
opposing ranks Arjuna sees cherished relatives, dear friends, and
revered teachers, whom destiny has placed in hostile array, thus
giving to the battle all the horrors of parricide and fratricide.
Overwhelmed with grief and pity, his heart moved to its inmost depths,
Arjuna drops his bow on the ground and thus addresses his Teacher, the
divine Krishna:

"Seeing these my kinsmen arrayed, O Krishna, eager to fight,

"My limbs fail and my mouth is parched, my body quivers and my hair
stands on end.

"Gandiva (Arjuna's bow) slips from my hand, and my skin burns all
over; I am not able to stand, and my mind is whirling.

"And I see adverse omens, O Keshava (hairy one). Nor do I foresee
advantage by slaying kinsmen in battle.

"For I desire not victory, O Krishna, nor kingship nor pleasures; what
is kingship to us, O Govinda (Thou who knowest all that is done by our
senses and organs), what enjoyment or even life?

"Those for whose sake we desire kingship, enjoyments, and pleasures,
they stand here in battle, abandoning life and riches.

"Teachers, fathers, sons, as well as grandfathers, mothers' brothers,
fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law, and other relatives.

"These I do not wish to kill, though (myself) slain, O Madhusudana
(slayer of Madhu, a demon), even for the sake of the kingship of the
three worlds (the habitations of men, gods, and semi-divine beings);
how then for earth?

... "I will not do battle."

The divine Krishna then smiled upon his well-beloved disciple, and
said to him:

"Thou grievest for those that should not be grieved for, and speakest
words of wisdom (words that sound wise but miss the deeper sense of
wisdom). The wise grieve neither for the living nor for the dead.

"Nor at any time verily was I not, nor thou, nor these princes of men,
nor verily shall we ever cease to be hereafter.

"As the Dweller in the body seeketh in the body childhood, youth, and
old age, so passeth he on to another body; the well-balanced grieve
not thereat....

"These bodies of the Embodied One, who is eternal, indestructible, and
boundless, are known as finite. Therefore fight, O Bharata.

"He who regardeth This (the Dweller in the body) as a slayer, and he
who thinketh it is slain, both of them are ignorant. It slayeth not,
nor is it slain....

"Who knoweth It indestructible, perpetual, unborn, undiminishing; how
can that man slay, O Partha, or cause to be slain?

"As a man casting off worn-out garments, taketh new ones, so the
Dweller in the body, casting off worn-out bodies, entereth into others
that are new.

"Weapons cleave It not, nor fire burneth It, nor waters wet It, nor
wind drieth It away....

"Further, looking upon thine own Dharma,[98] thou shouldst not
tremble, for there is nothing more welcome to a Kshattriya than
righteous war."

Here are other extracts of this wonderful teaching:

"Many births have been left behind by Me and by thee, O Arjuna. I know
them all, but thou knowest not thine, Parantapa."

"He who thus knoweth My divine birth and action, in its essence, is
not born again, having abandoned the body, but he cometh unto Me, O
Arjuna."

"Having attained to the worlds of the pure-doing, and having dwelt
there for eternal years, he who fell from Yoga is reborn in a pure and
blessed house.... There he obtaineth the complete yogic wisdom
belonging to his former body, and then again laboureth for perfection,
O joy of the Kurus!"

"But the Yogi, verily, labouring with assiduity, purified from sin,
fully perfected through manifold births, he treadeth the supreme
Path.... He who cometh unto Me, O Kaunteya, verily he knoweth birth no
more."

The daily life of Hindu and Buddhist is so entirely based on
Reincarnation and on its foundation, the law of Causality, that this
faith gives them patience in the present and hope for the future; for
it teaches that man, every moment he lives, is subject to the
circumstances he has created, and that, though bound by the past, he
is yet master of the future.

Why cannot we, in this troubled Europe of ours, accept this belief as
the solution of the distressing problem of the inequality of
conditions, for to the weak in rebellion against oppression it would
come as a soothing balm, whilst the strong would find in it a stimulus
to devoted pity such as wealth owes to poverty and happiness to
misfortune? Herein lies the solution of the whole social problem.


EGYPT.

If we pass from India to Egypt, the land of mystery, we again find the
world-wide doctrine of palingenesis hidden beneath the same veil.

According to Egyptian teaching, the theory of the "fall of the angels"
was accepted; the fallen angels were human souls[99] who had to become
reincarnated till they reached a state of purification; fallen into
the flesh, subjected to its vicissitudes and passions, these souls had
to evolve, in successive rebirths, until they had developed all their
faculties, obtained complete control over the lower nature, and won
back their original purity; then this latter would no longer be the
unconscious purity of youthful innocence, but the conscious purity of
mature age, _i.e._, of the soul that has known both good and evil in
the course of its experiences, has overcome the serpent of matter, the
tempter, and voluntarily chosen the life of virtue.

The "Judgment" of the after-life is determined by the degree of
purity that has been attained; if insufficient, the soul returns to
earth, there to inhabit a human, an animal, or a vegetable form, in
accordance with its merits or demerits.

These lines prove that Egyptian teaching has come down to us, covered
with gross dross and slag, as it were, which must be subjected to
careful sifting; when this is done, we see that it also sets forth the
transmigrations to which the elements of the various vehicles are
subjected,[100] the physical ternary[101] rises from the dead, the
animal man[102] transmigrates; and man, properly so-called,[103]
reincarnates, but the details of these processes have been so confused
in such fragments of Egyptian palingenesis as we possess that it is no
easy matter to find the traces of this classification.

For instance. Herodotus tells us:

"The Egyptians were the first to hold the opinion that the soul of man
is immortal and that when the body dies it enters into the form of an
animal which is born at the moment, thence, passing on from one animal
into another until it has circled through the forms of all the
creatures which tenant the earth, the water, and the air, after which
it enters again into a human form and is born anew. The whole period
of the transmigration is (they say) three thousand years."[104]

This passage evidently refers to the resurrection of the "life atoms."
H. P. Blavatsky, in the _Theosophist_, vol. 4, pages 244, 286,
confirms this in the following words:

"We are taught that for 3000 years, at least, the 'mummy,'
notwithstanding all the chemical preparations, goes on throwing off to
the last invisible atoms, which, from the hour of death, re-entering
the various vortices of being, go indeed 'through every variety of
organised life forms.' But it is not the soul, the fifth,[105] least
of all, the sixth[106] principle, but the life atoms of the Jiva,[107]
the second principle. At the end of the three thousand years,
sometimes more, sometimes less, after endless transmigrations, all
these atoms are once more drawn together, and are made to form the new
outer clothing or the body of the same monad (the real soul) which
they had already been clothed with two or three thousands of years
before. Even in the worst case, that of the annihilation of the
conscious personal principle,[108] the monad, or individual
soul,[109] is ever the same, as are also the atoms of the lower
principles,[110] which, regenerated and renewed in this ever-flowing
river of being, are magnetically drawn together owing to their
affinity and are once more reincarnated together...."

Certain authors have stated that belief in Resurrection was the origin
of embalming, because it was thought that after three thousand years
the soul returned to the same body, that it immediately rose again,
when the body had been preserved, whereas if such had not been the
case, it entered wherever it could, sometimes even into the body of a
lower creature. Herodotus, however, says that after the cycle of three
thousand years the soul enters a new body, not the mummified
one,[111] and this would lead one to imagine that there were other
reasons for the process of embalming. Indeed, it became general only
during the decline of Egypt; at the beginning, it was reserved for the
hierophants alone, with the object of allowing their physical
molecular elements to pass into the still coarse bodies of the masses
and help forward ordinary souls by the powerful influence of the
magnetic potency with which they were charged. It is also for this
reason that the body of a Yogi, in India, is interred, whilst in the
case of other men cremation is the rule.

On the other hand, among the multitude of beliefs left in Egypt by
degenerate traditions, there were found some which hinted, more or
less clearly, at occult truths, and which might have perpetuated or
generalised this practice. It was supposed, according to Servius, that
the transmigrations[112] began only when the magnetic bond between the
soul and its remains had been broken by the complete disintegration of
the corpse; consequently they did all in their power to preserve this
latter.

This belief may readily be connected with theosophic teaching which
says that the affinity existing between the visible corpse and the
soul clad in its kamic (astral) body, the animal soul in Kamaloka
(Purgatory), is capable, in certain cases, of detaining this soul on
earth, after its disincarnation, and thus delaying, for a longer or
shorter period, the disintegration of the elements of the passional
body. It is these elements, not the soul, that pass over into animal
bodies, and, contrary to the opinions set forth in Egyptian
exotericism, it is to the interest of the soul to free itself from
terrestrial attraction and from its kamic (astral) vehicle, and not to
remain bound down to earth. Consequently, embalming was a mistaken
action, the result of an error of doctrine, or at all events of
teachings that were incomplete, imperfectly transmitted, and
misunderstood.

Egypt multiplied her symbols of palingenesis. Resurrection--in the
sense of re-birth in general--was symbolised by the toad which then
became the goddess Hiquet. This animal was chosen because it lives in
air and in water,[113] because it can remain imprisoned a very great
number of years without either air or food[114] and afterwards come
back to life. G. Maspero, in his _Guide du Visiteur au Musee de
Boulac_, tells us that the early Christians in Egypt had adopted this
symbolism, and that the lamps in their churches were formed in the
shape of a toad, and bore the inscription, "I am the Resurrection," in
the Greek language. This goddess-toad may still be seen in the museum
of Boulac.

The Scarabeus, or beetle,[115] symbolised the "personality," the
expansion of the mental substance, projected, so to speak, by the
higher mental body, at each incarnation, into the new kamic (astral)
body; a certain number of them were always deposited with the mummies,
and the beetle was represented standing on an ear of corn, a symbol of
the attainments acquired during the past earth life. Indeed, the
development of the Ego is effected by that of the personality it sends
on to the earth each incarnation; it is the new mental body which
controls the new astral and physical bodies of each incarnation, and
which is, in very truth, the flower and the fruit of the labour of
life.

Sacred Egyptology tells us that the scarabeus requires to be
"osirified," united to its "living soul," or Ego, which sent it forth.
I will now give the reason for this emanation.

When, after disincarnation, the purgatorial life begins, the Ego
endeavours to throw off the kamic (astral) body, to pass into the
higher world--the mental plane--which is its home, there to enjoy the
delights of heaven. Thereupon a veritable battle begins. On the one
hand, the Ego endeavours to withdraw the mental body, which, at the
beginning of the incarnation, it sent into the kamic body, and to take
it to itself; on the other hand, the passional body[116]--which
instinctively feels its life bound to that of the mental element,
which gives it its strength, vital activity, and personal
characteristics--tries to keep back this centre of individual life,
and generally succeeds in doing so up to a certain point. When desire,
during incarnation, has regularly gained the victory over the will,
the passional body, or Kama, maintains the supremacy beyond the grave,
and the Ego, in endeavouring to rescue its mental projection from the
kamic bonds, yields up a more or less considerable fragment thereof,
and this fragment is restored to liberty only when the passional body
of the deceased has become disintegrated by the forces of the astral
world. This has been called the _fire_ of purgatory.

On the other hand, when the Ego, during life, has always refused the
appeals of the lower nature, it easily withdraws, after death, from
the net of passion, the substance it has infused therein, and passes
with this substance into that part of the mental plane which is called
"heaven."

Such is the struggle that Egypt committed to her annals when she
inscribed upon papyrus or engraved upon stone the journeyings of the
soul into the world of shades. The soul--the mental personality--which
demands "osirification," and invokes the Ego, its god and projector,
beseeching him to draw it to himself that it may live with him, is the
lower "I." This "I" has not exhausted the "desire to live" on earth;
its desire is impressed on the germs it has left in the causal body,
and brings the Ego back to incarnation; this is the reason it prays
and desires the resurrection[117] of its "living soul," the Ego.
Denon, in his _Journeyings in Egypt_, has made known to us the Sha-En
(the book of metamorphoses), written in hieratic signs and republished
in Berlin, by Brugsch, in the year 1851. Explicit mention is here made
of reincarnations, and it is stated that they are very numerous.

The third part of the _Book of the Dead_ sets forth a detailed account
of the resurrection of an Osiris; the identification of the departed
one with Osiris, God of Light, and his sharing in the life, deeds, and
power of the God; in a word, it is the final reintegration of the
human soul with God.

The loftiest and most suggestive of Egyptian palingenetic symbols is
unquestionably that of the egg. The deceased is "resplendent in the egg
in the land of mysteries." In Kircher's _Oedipus Egyptiacus_[118] we
have an egg--the Ego freed from its vehicles--floating over the mummy;
this is the symbol of hope and the promise of a new birth to the soul,
after gestation in the egg of immortality.[119]

The "winged globe," so widely known in Egypt, is egg-shaped, and has
the same meaning; its wings indicate its divine nature and prevent it
from being confused with the physical germ. "Easter eggs" which are
offered in spring, at the rebirth of Nature, commemorate this ancient
symbol of eternal Life in its successive phases of disincarnation and
rebirth.


CHALDAEA.

It is said that the Magi taught the immortality of the soul and its
reincarnations, but that they considerably limited the number of
these latter, in the belief that purification was effected after a
restricted number of existences on the soul returning to its heavenly
abode.

Unfortunately we know nothing definite on this special point in
Chaldaean teaching, for some of the most important sources of
information were destroyed when the library of Persepolis was burnt by
the Macedonian vandal, Alexander the Great, whilst Eusebius--whom
Bunsen criticises so harshly[120]--made such great alterations in the
manuscripts of Berosus, that we have nothing to proceed upon beyond a
few disfigured fragments.[121] And yet Chaldaeism comprises a great
mass of teachings; he whom we know as "the divine Zoroaster" had been
preceded by twelve others, and esoteric doctrine was as well known in
Chaldaea as in Egypt.

The descendants of the Chaldaeans--Fire-worshippers, Mazdeans, Magi,
Parsees--according to the names they received at different
periods--have preserved the main points of palingenetic instruction up
to the present, and, from time to time, have set them forth in the
most charming style of Oriental poetry. Book 4 of the great Persian
poem, _Masnavi i Ma'navi_, deals with evolution and its corollary,
reincarnation, stating that there is one way of remembering past
existences, and that is by attaining to spiritual illumination, which
is the crown of human evolution and brings the soul to the threshold
of divinity.

"If your purified soul succeeds in escaping from the sea of ignorance,
it will see, with eyes now opened, 'the beginning' and 'the end.' Man
first appeared in the order of inorganic things; next, he passed
therefrom into that of plants, for years he lived as one of the
plants, remembering naught of his inorganic state, so different from
this, and when he passed from the vegetable to the animal state he had
no remembrance of his state as a plant.... Again the great Creator, as
you know, drew man out of the animal into the human state. Thus man
passed from one order of nature to another, till he became wise and
intelligent and strong as he is now. Of his first soul he has now no
remembrance, and he will be again changed from his present soul. In
order to escape from his present soul, full of lusts, he must rise to
a thousand higher degrees of intelligence.

"Though man fell asleep and forgot his previous states, yet God will
not leave him in this self-forgetfulness; and then he will laugh at
his own former state, saying: 'What mattered my experiences when
asleep, when I had forgotten the real state of things, and knew not
that the grief and ills I experienced were the effect of sleep and
illusion and fancy?'"

These lines are concise, but they sum up the whole of evolution, and
render it unnecessary to quote at greater length from Chaldaean
tradition on this point. Still, those who desire other passages
relating to the same doctrine may find them in the "Desatir."[122]


THE CELTS.

Sacerdotal India--and perhaps also Atlantis--in early times sent
pioneers into the West to spread religious teachings amongst their
energetic inhabitants; those who settled in Gaul and the British Isles
were the Druids. "I am a serpent, a druid," they said. This sentence
proves that they were priests, and also the Atlantaean or Indian origin
of their doctrines; for the serpent was the symbol of initiation in
the sacred mysteries of India, as also on the continent of Atlantis.

We know little of their teaching, which was entirely oral, though it
covered so much ground that, according to Caesar, not less than thirty
years of study were needed to become a druid. The Roman conquest
dispersed them by degrees; then it was that their disciples, the
bards, committed to writing more or less imperfect and mutilated
fragments of the teachings of their masters. Their "triads"[123] are
undoubtedly akin to Hindu teachings; Evolution results from the
manifestation of the Absolute, it culminates in man, who possesses a
maximum of individualisation, and terminates in the personal,
conscious union of the beings thus created with the ineffable All.

The Absolute is "Ceugant"; manifestation, or the Universe, is "Abred";
the divine state of freed souls is in "Gwynvyd"; these are in the
three circles.[124]

In "Ceugant" there is only the Unknowable, the rootless Root. Souls
are born and develop in "Abred," passing into the different kingdoms;
"Amwn" is the state through which beings pass only once, which means
that the "I," when once gained, continues for ever. "Gwynvyd" is the
world of perfect and liberated souls, eternal Heaven, great Nirvana.

During this long pilgrimage, the Monad--the divine fragment in a state
of incarnation--undergoes an endless number of rebirths, in myriads of
bodies.

"I have been a viper in the lake," said Taliesin, the bard[125]; "a
spotted adder on the mountain, a star, a priest. This was long, long
ago; since then, I have slept in a hundred worlds, revolved in a
hundred circles."

It was their faith in rebirth that gave the Gauls their indomitable
courage and extraordinary contempt of death:

"One of their principal teachings," said Caesar,[126] "is that the soul
does not die, but passes at death into another body--and this they
regard as very favourable for the encouragement of valour and for
inculcating scorn of death."

Up to a few years ago, belief in the return of the soul to earth was
still prevalent in those parts of Brittany in which civilisation had
not yet exercised its sceptical, materialising influence; there even
existed druids--probably degenerate ones--in Great Britain and France;
in the Saone-et-Loire district, they seem to have been called the
"Adepts of the White Religion"[127]; both in them and in their
ancestors, belief in rebirth remained unshakable.


ANCIENT GREECE (_Magna Graecia_).

In Greece, the doctrine of Rebirths is met with in the Orphic
tradition, continued by Pythagoras and Plato. Up to the present time,
this tradition has probably found its best interpreter in Mr. G. R.

S. Mead, an eminent theosophist and a scholar of the first rank. We
recommend our readers to study his _Orpheus_, if they desire a
detailed account of this tradition.

Its origins are lost in antiquity, only a few obscure shreds
remaining; Pherecydes, however,[128] when speaking of the immortality
of the soul, refers to the doctrine of Rebirths; it is also presented
very clearly by both Pythagoras and Plato.

According to the Pythagorean teaching, the human soul emanates from
the Soul of the World, thus affirming, at the outset, the divine
nature of the former. It teaches subsequently that this soul assumes
successive bodies until it has fully evolved and completed the "Cycle
of Necessity."[129]

Pythagoras, according to Diogenes of Laertius,[130] was the first in
Greece to teach the doctrine of the return of souls to earth. He gave
his disciples various details of his past lives; he appears to have
been the initiate Oethalides, in the times of the Argonauts; then,
almost immediately afterwards, Euphorbus, who was slain by Menelaus at
the siege of Troy; again he was Hermotimus of Clazomenae, who, in the
temple of Juno at Argos,[131] recognised the shield he was carrying
when his body was slain as Euphorbus, and which Menelaus had given as
an offering to the goddess[132]; at a later date he was Pyrrhus, a
fisherman of Delos, and, finally, Pythagoras.

In all likelihood this genealogy is not correct in every detail, it
comes to us from the disciples of the sage of Samos, who were not very
trustworthy in their reports.

Empedocles, one of the early disciples of Pythagoras, said that he
inhabited a female body in his preceding existence. Saint Clement of
Alexandria quotes a few lines of his, in which we find the philosopher
of Agrigentum teaching the general evolution of forms.

"I, too, have been a boy, a maiden, a star, a bird, a mute fish in the
depths of the sea."

Iarchas, the Brahman chieftain, said to the great Apollonius:

"In bygone ages thou wert Ganga, the famous monarch, and, at a later
date, captain of an Egyptian vessel."[133]

The Emperor Julian said that he had been Alexander the Great.[134]
Proclus affirmed that he had been Nichomachus the Pythagorean.[135]

The works of Plato are full of the idea of rebirth, and if the
scattered fragments of the teaching are gathered together and
illumined with the torch of theosophy, a very satisfactory _ensemble_
will be the result.

Souls are older than bodies, he says in _Phaedo_; they are ever being
born again from _Hades_ and returning to life on earth; each man has
his daimon,[136] who follows him throughout his existences, and at
death takes him to the lower world[137] for Judgment.[138] Many souls
enter Acheron,[139] and, after a longer or shorter period, return to
earth to be incarnated in new bodies. Unpardonable sins fling the soul
into Tartarus.[140]

"Know that if you become worse you will go to the worse souls, or if
better to the better, and in every succession of life and death you
will do and suffer what like may fitly suffer at the hands of
like...."[141]

According to Plato, the period between two incarnations is about a
thousand years.[142] Man has reminiscences of his past lives that are
more or less distinct; they are manifested rather by an intuitive
impression than by a definite memory, but they form part of the
individual,[143] and at times influence him strongly. "Innate ideas"
are only one aspect of memory, often it is impossible to explain them
by heredity, education, or environment; they are attainments of the
past, the store which the soul takes with it through its incarnations,
which it adds to during each sojourn in heaven.

There can be no doubt that Plato would appear to have taught
metempsychosis, _i.e._, the possibility of a human soul passing into
the body of an animal:

"Men who have followed after gluttony and wantonness and drunkenness,
and have had no thought of avoiding them, would pass into asses and
animals of that sort. And those who have chosen the portion of
injustice and tyranny and violence will pass into wolves or hawks or
kites, and there is no difficulty in assigning to all of them places
according to their several natures and propensities."[144]

Under the heading of _Neoplatonism_, we shall show that, beneath these
coarse symbols, Plato concealed truths which it was then necessary to
keep profoundly secret; which, even nowadays, it is not permitted to
reveal to all.


OLD TESTAMENT.

H. P. Blavatsky tells us that the _Old Testament_ is not a homogeneous
composition; that _Genesis_ alone is of immense antiquity; that it is
prior to the time when the Libra of the Zodiac was invented by the
Greeks, for it has been noticed that the chapters containing the
genealogies have been touched up so as to adapt them to the new
zodiac, and this is the reason that the rabbis who compiled them twice
repeated the names of Enoch and Lamech in the Cain list. The other
parts seem to be of a comparatively recent date and to have been
completed about 150 B.C.

The first part of the _Book of God_--as the Scriptures were then
called--was written by Hilkiah, jointly with the prophetess Huldah; this
disappeared at a later date, and Ezra had to begin a new one which was
finished by Judas Maccabaeus. This was recopied some time after, with the
object of changing the pointed letters into square ones, and in this way
was quite disfigured. The Masoretes ended by mutilating it completely.
The result is that the text we now possess is one not more than nine
hundred years old, bristling with premeditated omissions,
interpolations, and perverted interpretations.[145]

By the side of this initial difficulty we find another, quite as
important. Almost every page of the _Old Testament_ contains veiled
meanings and allegories, as is frankly confessed by the rabbis
themselves.

"We ought not to take literally that which is written in the story of
the Creation, nor entertain the same ideas of it as are held by the
vulgar. If it were otherwise, our ancient sages would not have taken
so much pains to conceal the sense, and to keep before the eyes of the
uninstructed the veil of allegory which conceals the truth it
contains...."[146]

Does not Saint Paul, speaking of the hidden meaning of the Bible, say
that Agar is Mount Sinai?[147] Origen and Saint Augustine are of the
opinion that the _Old Testament_ must be regarded as symbolical, as
otherwise it would be immoral; the Jewish law forbade anyone to read
it who had not attained the age of thirty years; Fenelon would have
liked it to be thrust away in the recesses of the most secret
libraries; the Cardinal de Noailles says that Origen, so full of zeal
on behalf of the Holy Scriptures, would not allow anyone to read the
_Old Testament_, unless he were firmly anchored in the practice of a
virtuous life; he affirms too that Saint Basilius, in a letter to
Chilon, the monk, stated that the reading of it often had a harmful
influence; for the same reasons, the _Index expurgatorius_ forbids the
publication of the Bible in the vulgar tongue, and orders that no one
be allowed to read it without the written permission of his
confessor.[148]

A third difficulty arises from the fact that the Old Testament--its dead
"letter" and its commandments, at all events--is no longer suitable to
our own race. It was intended for a nation that was composed of young
souls, at a low stage of evolution, for whom nothing more than the
rudiments of instruction were necessary, and on whom stern rules of
morality, suitable for advanced souls, ought not to be imposed. This is
why divorce,[149] polygamy,[150] slavery,[151] retaliation, _lex
talionis_,[152] the blood of sacrifice[153] are instituted; it is the
reason God is represented as a being to be dreaded, punishing those who
do not obey him, wicked, jealous, bloodthirsty.[154] Bossuet understood
all this when he said that the primitive Hebrew race was not
sufficiently advanced to have the immortality of the soul taught to it.
This, too, is the only explanation we can find for the sensual
materialism of _Ecclesiastes_.[155]

Consequently one need not be astonished to find that the Old Testament
nowhere deals--directly, at all events--with the doctrine of Rebirth.

All the same, here and there we come across a few passages that point
in this direction. For instance, we read in _Genesis_, chapter 25,
regarding the birth of Jacob and Esau:

"And the children (of Rebecca) struggled together within her.

"And the Lord said unto her: Two nations are in thy womb, and two
manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels, and the one
people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall
serve the younger.

"And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold there were
twins in her womb."

This passage has been the occasion of lengthy commentaries on the part
of certain Fathers of the Church--more especially of Origen. Indeed,
either we must acknowledge divine injustice, creating, without any
cause, two hostile brothers, one of whom must submit to the rule of
the other, and who begin to strive together even before birth, or we
must hark back to the pre-existence of the human soul and to a past
Karma which had created inequality in condition.

David begins the ninetieth _Psalm_ with a verse which only a belief in
reincarnation can explain:

"Lord, thou hast been our dwelling-place in all generations...."

The dwelling-place of the soul, at death, is in heaven, whence it
returns to earth when the hour of rebirth has struck; thus, in all
generations, that is, from life to life, "the Lord is our
dwelling-place."

In Chapter 8 of the _Book of Wisdom_, Solomon says in more explicit
language:

"For I was a witty child, and had a good spirit, yea, rather, being
good, I came into a body undefiled."

This clearly points to the pre-existence of the soul and the close
relation that exists between the conditions of its rebirth and the
merits or demerits of its past.

Verse 5 of the first chapter of _Jeremiah_ is similar to verse 23 of
the twenty-fifth chapter of _Genesis_:

"Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before thou camest
forth out of the womb I sanctified thee, and I ordained thee a
prophet unto the nations...."

It is the deeds done in the past lives of Jeremiah that accompany him
on his return to earth; God could not, in an arbitrary fashion, have
conferred on him the gift of prophecy had he not acquired it by his
efforts in a past life; unless, here too, we altogether abandon reason
and go back to a capricious or unjust--consequently altogether
impossible--God.


THE KABALA.

Contact with the Babylonians, during the Captivity, brought about a
rapid development in the Hebrews, who were at that time far more
advanced souls than those that animated the bodies of their
fathers,[156] and taught them many important details of religious
instruction. It was then that they learned the doctrine of rebirth and
that the Kabala came into being.[157]

In it the cycle of rebirths is called Gil'gool'em[158] or the
"revolving of the Incorporeal" in search of the "promised land." This
promised land, the Christian Paradise, or Buddhist Nirvana, was
symbolised by Palestine; the soul in its pilgrimage was brought to
this abode of bliss,[159] and, according to the allegory, "the bodies
of Hebrews buried in a foreign land contained an animistic principle
which only found rest when, by the 'revolving of the Incorporeal,' the
immortal fragment had returned to the promised land."[160]

There are other aspects from which this "revolution of souls" may be
regarded. Certain Kabalists speak of it as a kind of purgatory in
which, by means of this "revolving," the purging of the soul is
brought about before it enters paradise.

In this connection, H. P. Blavatsky states that in the language of the
Initiates the words "soul" (_ame_) and "atom" were synonyms, and were
frequently used for each other. She says that the "revolution of
souls" was in reality only the revolving of the atoms of the bodies
which are continually transmigrating from one body to another
throughout the various kingdoms of nature. From this point of view, it
would seem that "Gil'gool'em" is more especially the cycle of atomic
transmigration: _Resurrection_.

The doctrine of the reincarnation of the human soul, however, is
clearly set forth in the _Zohar_:

"All souls are subjected to the tests of transmigration; men know not
the designs of the Most High with regard to them; they know not how
they are being at all times judged, both before coming into this world
and when they leave it; they have no knowledge of the mysterious
transformations and sufferings they must undergo, or how numerous are
the spirits who coming; into this world never return to the palace of
their divine King; they are ignorant of the revolutions to which they
are subjected, revolutions similar to those of a stone when it is
being hurled from a sling. And now the time has come when the veil
shall be removed from all these mysteries.... Souls must in the end be
plunged back into the substance from which they came. But before this
happens, they must have developed all the perfections the germs of
which are implanted within them; if these conditions are not realised
in one existence, they must be born again until they reach the stage
that makes possible their absorption in God."[161]

According to the Kabala, incarnations take place at long intervals;
souls completely forget their past, and, far from being a punishment,
rebirth is a blessing which enables men to develop and to attain to
their final goal.

The Essenes taught reincarnation and the immortality of the soul.
Ernst von Bunsen,[162] speaking of this sect, says:

"Another marked peculiarity of the doctrine of the Essenes was the
doctrine concerning the pre-existence of souls. They exist originally
in the purest ether, which is their celestial home. By a natural
attraction they are drawn towards the earth and are enclosed in human
bodies, as in a prison. The death of the body causes the return of the
soul to its heavenly abode. The Essenes can, therefore, not have
believed in the resurrection of the body, but of the soul only, or, as
Paul says, of the 'spiritual body.' This is positively asserted by
Josephus."[163]


ROME.

Although Rome, above all else, was a warlike republic, and religion
principally a State cult, that allowed but slight opportunity for the
outer expression of spirituality, none the less did it inherit the
beliefs of Egypt, Greece, and Persia; the Bacchic mysteries, previous
to their degradation, were a copy of the Orphic and Eleusinian
mysteries. In the reign of Pompey, Mithraism, a cult borrowed from
Persia, was spread throughout the empire. Consequently, we need not be
surprised at finding the doctrine of Rebirth mentioned by the great
Latin writers.

We will quote only from Virgil and Ovid.

In the speech addressed by Anchises to AEneas, his son, the Trojan
prince deals with the life beyond death, the tortures endured by souls
in expiation of their misdeeds, their purification, their passing into
Tartarus,[164] into the Elysian Fields,[165] then their return to
earth after having drunk of the river of forgetfulness. In Book VI. of
the _AEneid_, we find AEneas visiting the lower regions:

"After having for a thousand years turned the wheel (of existence),
these souls come forth in a mighty troop to the Lethean stream to
which God calls them that they may lose the memory of the past, see
the higher regions,[166] and begin to wish to return into bodies."

Ovid, in his _Metamorphoses_ also deals with the teaching of
Pythagoras, his master, on the subject of palingenesis:

    "Then Death, so-called, is but old matter drest
    In some new figure, and a varied vest;
    Thus all things are but alter'd, nothing dies,
    And here and there th' embodied spirit flies,
    By time, or force, or sickness dispossest,
    And lodges, when it lights, in man or beast.
    Th' immortal soul flies out in empty space
    To seek her fortune in some other place."


NEW TESTAMENT.

The _New Testament_ is far more explicit than the _Old_, even though
we find the teachings of reincarnation indicated in only a vague,
indirect fashion. All the same, it must not be forgotten that the
canonical Gospels have suffered numerous suppressions and
interpolations. On the other hand, there can be no doubt that the
early Fathers of the Church made use of gospels that are now either
lost or have become apocryphal.[167] It has been proved that neither
Jesus nor his disciples wrote a single word, and that no version of
the Gospels appeared earlier than the second century.[168] It was at
that time that religious quarrels gave birth to hundreds of gospels,
the writers of which signed them with the name of an apostle or even
with that of Jesus, after forging them in more or less intelligent
fashion.

Celsus, Jortin, Gibbons, and others have shown that Christianity is
directly descended from Paganism; it was by combining the doctrines of
Egypt, Persia, and Greece with the teachings of Jesus that the
Christian doctrine was built up. Celsus silenced all the Christian
doctors of his time by supplying evidence of this plagiarism; Origen,
the most learned doctor of the age, was his opponent, but he was no
more fortunate than the rest, and Celsus came off victorious.
Thereupon recourse was had to the methods usual in those days; his
books were burnt.

And yet it is evident that the author of the _Revelation_ was a
Kabalist; and the writer of the _Gospel of Saint John_ a Gnostic or a
Neoplatonist. The _Gospel of Nicodemus_ is scarcely more than a copy
of the _Descent of Hercules into the Infernal Regions_; the _Epistle
to the Corinthians_ is a distinct reminiscence of the initiatory
Mysteries of Eleusis; and the Roman Ritual, according to H. P.
Blavatsky, is the reproduction of the Kabalistic Ritual.

One gospel only was authentic, the secret or Hebrew _Gospel of
Matthew_, which was used by the Nazareans, and at a later date by
Saint Justin and the Ebionites. It contained the esoterism of the
One-Religion, and Saint Jerome, who found this gospel in the library
of Caesarea about the end of the fourth century, says that he "received
permission to translate it from the Nazareans of Beroea."

These considerations prove that interested and narrow-minded writers
selected from the mass of existing traditions whatever seemed to them
of a nature to support their spiritual views as well as their material
interests, and that they constructed therefrom not only what has come
down to us as the four canonical gospels, but also the whole edifice
of Christian dogma.

Consequently, we need not be surprised to find in the _New Testament_
only unimportant fragments dealing with reincarnation; but even these
are not to be despised, for they prove that the doctrine was, to a
certain extent at all events, known and accepted in Palestine.


_Reincarnation in the Gospels._

_Saint Mark_, Chapter 6.

v. 14. And King Herod heard of him; and he said, That John the Baptist
was risen from the dead....

v. 15. Others said, That it is Elias; and others said, That it is a
prophet, or as one of the prophets.

v. 16. But when Herod heard thereof, he said, It is John whom I
beheaded; he is risen from the dead.

_Saint Matthew_, Chapter 14.

v. 1. At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard of the fame of Jesus.

v. 2. And said unto his servants, This is John the Baptist; he is
risen from the dead....

_Saint Luke_, Chapter 9.

v. 7. Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him; and he
was perplexed because it was said of some that John was risen from the
dead.

v. 8. And of some, that Elias had appeared; and of others, that one of
the old prophets was risen again.

v. 9. But Herod said, John have I beheaded; but who is this of whom I
hear such things?

The account here given proves that the people as well as Herod
believed in reincarnation, and that it applied, at all events, "to the
prophets" and to those like them.

_Saint Matthew_, Chapter 16.

v. 13. When Jesus came into the coasts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked
his disciples, saying, Whom do men say that I, the Son of man, am?

v. 14. And they said, Some say that thou art John the Baptist; some,
Elias; and others, Jeremias, or one of the prophets.

The same account is given in _Saint Luke_, chapter 9, verses 18, 19.

_Saint Matthew_, Chapter 17.

v. 12. But I say unto you, That Elias is come already, and they knew
him not, but have done unto him whatsoever they listed. Likewise shall
also the Son of man suffer of them.

v. 13. Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John
the Baptist.

He continued in _Saint Matthew_, Chapter 11.

v. 7. Jesus began to say unto the multitudes concerning John, What
went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?

v. 8. But what went ye out for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment?
Behold, they that wear soft clothing are in kings' houses.

v. 9. But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you,
and more than a prophet.

v. 14. And if ye will receive it, this is Elias which was for to come.

Here we have a distinct declaration: Reincarnation is a fact; John is
the rebirth of Elias.[169]

Judging from these texts, one might be tempted to think that
reincarnation was confined to the prophets or to people of importance,
but Saint John shows us that the Jews, though perhaps ignorant that it
was a law of universal application, recognised, at any rate, that it
might happen in the case of any man.

_Saint John_, Chapter 9.

v. 1. And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his
birth.

v. 2. And his disciples asked him, saying: Master, who did sin, this
man or his parents, that he was born blind?

v. 3. Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned nor his parents;
but that the works of God should be made manifest in him.

Here we are dealing with a man _blind from birth_, and the Jews ask
Jesus if he was blind because he sinned; this clearly indicates that
they were referring to sins committed in the course of a former
existence[170]; the thought is, therefore, quite a natural,
straightforward one, referring to something well known to everyone and
needing no explanation.

As one well acquainted with this doctrine of Rebirth, without
combating it as an error or as something doubtful which his disciples
ought not to believe, Jesus simply replies:

"Neither hath this man sinned nor his parents; but that the works of
God should be made manifest in him."

And yet it appears as though this answer must have been distorted, as
so many others have been, otherwise it would mean that the only reason
for this man's blindness was the caprice of the Deity.


_Reincarnation in the Apocalypse._

The _Apocalypse_, an esoteric book _par excellence_, confirms the
doctrine of Reincarnation, and throws considerable light on it:

"Him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and
he shall go no more out...."[171]

In another verse it is stated that to him who overcometh "I will give
the morning star."[172] In the language of theosophy, this means: He
who has overcome the animal soul, shall, by mystic Communion, be
united to the divine soul, which, in the _Apocalypse_, is the symbol
of the Christ:

"I, Jesus, am the bright and morning star."[173]

Another verse clearly characterises the nature and the cost of
victory:

"To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and I
will give him a _white stone_, and in the stone a new _name_ written,
which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it."[174]

The hidden manna is the ambrosia of the Greeks, the _kyteon_ of the
mysteries of Eleusis, the _soma_ of the Hindus, the eucharist of the
Christians, the sacred drink offered to the disciples at Initiation,
which had the Moon as its symbol, conferred the gift of divine
clairvoyance and separated the soul from the body.

The "white stone" is none other than the _alba petra_, the white
cornelian, the chalcedony, or stone of Initiation. It was given to the
candidate who had successfully passed through all the preliminary
tests.[175] The "Word" written on the stone is the _sacred Word_, the
"lost Word" which Swedenborg said was to be sought for amongst the
hierophants of Tartary and Tibet, whom theosophists call the Masters.

"He who overcometh" is, therefore, the disciple ready for initiation;
it is of him that "a pillar in the temple of God" will be made. In
esoteric language, the column signifies Man redeemed, made divine and
free, who is no longer to revolve on the wheel of Rebirths, who "shall
no more go out," as the _Apocalypse_ says, _i.e._, shall not again
leave Heaven.

If we examine the text of both _Old_ and _New Testament_ by the light
of esoteric teaching, the dead letter, often absurd and at tunes
repellent and immoral, would receive unexpected illumination, and
would fully justify the words of the great rabbi, Maimonides, quoted a
few pages back.[176]

Origen, the most learned of the Fathers of the Church, adds in his
turn:

"If we had to limit ourselves to the letter, and understand after the
fashion of the Jews or the people, what is written in the Law, I
should be ashamed to proclaim aloud that it was God who gave us such
laws; I should find more dignity and reason in human laws, as, for
instance, in those of Athens, Rome, or Sparta...." (_Homil 7. in
Levit._)

Saint Jerome, in his _Epistle to Paulinus_, continues in similar
fashion:

"Listen, brother, learn the path you must follow in studying the Holy
Scriptures. Everything you read in the divine books is shining and
light-giving without, but far sweeter is the heart thereof. He who
would eat the nut must first break the shell."

It is because they have lost the Spirit of their Scriptures that the
Christians--ever since their separation from the Gnostics--have
offered the world nothing more than the outer shell of the World
Religion.


NEOPLATONISM.

The great philosophic body that formed a bridge, as it were, between
the Old World and the New was the famous School of Alexandria, founded
about the second century of our era by Ammonius Saccas and closed in
the year 429 A.D. through the intolerance of Justinian. Theosophical
in its origin, this school had received from Plato the esoteric
teaching of Egypt and the East, and the dogma of Rebirth was secretly
taught in its entirety, though its meaning may have been travestied by
the ignorance of the masses to whom only the grosser aspects of the
teaching were given.

"It is a dogma recognised throughout antiquity," says Plotinus,[177]
"that the soul expiates its sins in the darkness of the infernal
regions, and that afterwards it passes into new bodies, there to
undergo new trials."

"When we have gone astray in multiplicity,[178] we are first punished
by our wandering away from the path, and afterwards by less favourable
conditions, when we take on new bodies."[179]

"The gods are ever looking down upon us in this world, no reproach we
bring against them can be justifiable, for their providence is
never-ending; they allot to each individual his appropriate destiny,
one that is in harmony with his past conduct, in conformity with his
successive existences."[180]

The following is a quotation from the same philosopher, dealing with
metempsychosis, and which, when compared with the foregoing sentences,
appears strangely absurd. We make no comment here, as this obscure
question will be dealt with a few pages farther on.

"Those who have exercised human faculties are reborn as men; those who
have lived only the life of the senses pass into animals' bodies,
especially into the bodies of wild beasts if they have given way to
excesses of anger ... those who have sought only to satisfy their lust
and gluttony, pass into the bodies of lascivious and gluttonous
animals ... those who have allowed their senses to become atrophied,
are sent to vegetate in trees ... those who have reigned tyranically
become eagles, if they have no other vice."[181]

Porphyry says:

"The souls that are not destined for the tortures of hell
(_Tartarus_), and those that have passed through this expiation, are
born again, and divine Justice gives them a new body, in accordance
with their merits and demerits."[182]

The following remarkable lines are from Iamblichus:

"What appears to us to be an accurate definition of justice does not
also appear to be so to the Gods. For we, looking at that which is
most brief, direct our attention to things present, and to this
momentary life, and the manner in which it subsists. But the powers
that are superior to us know the whole life of the Soul, and all its
former lives; and, in consequence of this, if they inflict a certain
punishment in obedience to the entreaties of those that invoke them,
they do not inflict it without justice, but looking at the offences
committed by souls in former lives: which men, not perceiving, think
that they unjustly fall into the calamities which they suffer."[183]

Proclus gave out the same teaching; he affirmed that he had been
incarnated in Nichomachus, the Pythagorean.

In his commentary on the _Golden Verses of Pythagoras_, Hierocles
expresses himself thus:

"The ways of the Lord can be justified only by metempsychosis."[184]

Damascius and Hermias, as also their masters, proclaimed their belief
in Rebirth.

Here a short explanation must be given of what has been said regarding
transmigration or metempsychosis, in order that all misunderstanding
may be removed.

Neither Pythagoras nor Plotinus nor any of the great Teachers of the
past believed in metempsychosis, as it has been described; all their
disciples have affirmed if, and these affirmations, set over against a
line of teaching which seems to contradict them, because it is
incomplete and intended for the less intelligent portion of society at
that time, ought to have reminded its opponents that there might be
hidden reasons capable of explaining the paradox.

We must first remember that a veil of strictest secrecy was flung over
the noblest and most sublime spiritual teachings of the day. According
to Bossuet, the teaching of the immortality of the soul seems not to
have been deemed suitable for the Hebrew race, and, indeed, it is easy
to understand that no double-edged truth should be taught except under
conditions that would safeguard it. Ptolemy Philadelphus exiled
Hegesias,[185] whose eloquent fanaticism had caused some of his
disciples to commit suicide, at Cyrene, after a lesson on immortality.
Ptolemy ordered those schools of philosophy to be closed which
continued teaching this doctrine, for in the case of a people
insufficiently developed, the instinct which binds to physical life,
and the dread of the torture that awaits guilty souls in the
Hereafter, are preferable to doctrines of immortality deprived of the
safeguards with which they should be surrounded.

The doctrine of Rebirths called for even stricter secrecy than that of
immortality, and this secrecy was accorded it in ancient times; after
the coming of the Christ, it grew less rigorous, and the
Neoplatonists, though obliged to keep the esoteric teaching to
themselves, were permitted to throw light on certain points.

Timaeus of Locris, one of the masters of Plotinus, hinted at the
existence of a more profound doctrine in the following words:

"Just as by the threat of punishment imperfectly evolved souls are
prevented from sinning, so the transmigration of the souls of
murderers into the bodies of wild beasts, and of the souls of unchaste
persons into the bodies of swine, was taught; and the previous
punishment of these souls in the infernal regions was entrusted to
Nemesis (Karma)."

Certain modern commentators--though imperfectly instructed in the
teachings of palingenesis--have also seen that the masters of
philosophy in the past could not possibly have made a mistake which
less far-seeing minds would have avoided. Dacier[186] says:

"A sure token that Pythagoras never held the opinion attributed to him
lies in the fact that there is not the faintest trace of it in the
symbols we have left of him, or in the precepts his disciple, Lysis,
collected together and handed down as a summary of the master's
teachings."

Jules Simon also speaks as follows regarding Plotinus:[187]

"Here we have the doctrine of metempsychosis which Plotinus found all
around, among the Egyptians, the Jews, the Neoplatonists, his
predecessors, and finally in Plato himself. Does Plato take
metempsychosis seriously, as one would be tempted to believe after
reading the _Republic_? Did he mention it only to ridicule the
superstitions of his contemporaries, as seems evident from the
_Timaeus_?[188]

"However important Plato may have considered metempsychosis, it can
scarcely be imagined that Plotinus took it seriously.... Even granting
that this doctrine were literally accepted by Plotinus, the question
would still have to be asked whether the human soul really does dwell
in the body of an animal, or simply enters a human body, which, in its
passions and vices, recalls the nature of that particular animal."

The reasons mentioned by Dacier and Jules Simon form only a trifling
portion of the whole explanation, but if they are added to the
constant protests raised by the disciples of the Masters of the
Pythagorean and Platonic traditions, against those who said that their
instructors taught metempsychosis in all its crudeness, they assume
considerable importance, and show that, although the restrictions of
esoteric teaching travestied by the ignorance of the masses may have
caused it to be believed that the contrary was the case, none the less
the Initiates, from the very beginning, denied that human
transmigration into the bodies of animals ever took place.

On this question many of them have frequently said that it is the soul
which, in such cases, changes its nature, and assumes the passions of
animals into which, as is said exoterically, it transmigrates, though
it does not enter into their bodies.

"He who believes that he transmigrates, after death, into the body of
a beast or a plant," says Hierocles,[189] "is grossly mistaken; he is
ignorant of the fact that the essential form of the soul cannot
change, that it is and it remains human, and only, metaphorically
speaking, does virtue make of it a god, and vice an animal."

"A human soul," adds Hermes, "cannot go back into the body of an
animal; it is preserved from such pollution, for all time, by the will
of the gods."[190]

Mrs. Besant says as follows in a letter dealing with Theosophy and
Reincarnation (_The Theosophist_, April, 1906):

"Even with the wealth of detail given in the Hindu Shastras, thousands
of facts of the invisible world are omitted, because their statement
would hopelessly bewilder the public mind.

"If all the details are given, ere the main principles are grasped,
hopeless confusion is caused to the beginner.

"When an Ego, a human soul, by vicious appetite or otherwise, forms a
very strong link of attachment to any type of animal, the astral body
(Kamarupa) of such a person shows the corresponding animal
characteristics, and in the astral world, where thoughts and passions
are visible as forms, may take the animal shapes; thus, after death,
in _Pretaloka_, the soul would be embodied in an animal vesture,
resembling or approximating to the animal whose qualities had been
encouraged during earth-life. Either at this stage, or when the soul
is returning towards reincarnation, and is again in the astral world,
it may, in extreme cases, be linked by magnetic affinity to the astral
body of the animal it has approached in character, and will then,
through the animal's astral body, be chained as a prisoner to that
animal's physical body. Thus chained, it cannot go onwards to
_Svarga_, if the tie be set up while it is a _Preta_; nor go onwards
to human birth, if it be descending towards physical life. It is truly
undergoing penal servitude, chained to an animal; it is conscious in
the astral world, has its human faculties, but it cannot control the
brute body with which it is connected, nor express itself through
that body on the physical plane. The animal organisation does not
possess the mechanism needed by the human Ego for self-expression; it
can serve as a jailor, not as a vehicle. Further, the "animal soul" is
not ejected, but is the proper tenant and controller of its own body.
S'ri Shankaracharya hints very clearly at the difference between this
penal imprisonment and becoming a stone, a tree, or an animal. Such an
imprisonment is not "reincarnation," ... the human Ego "cannot
reincarnate as an animal," cannot "become an animal."

"In cases where the Ego is not degraded enough for absolute
imprisonment, but in which the astral body has become very animal, it
may pass on normally to human re-birth, but the animal characteristic
will be largely reproduced in the physical body--as witness the
"monsters" who in face are sometimes repulsively animal, pig-faced,
dog-faced, &c. Men, by yielding to the most bestial vices, entail on
themselves penalties more terrible than they, for the most part,
realise; for Nature's laws work on unbrokenly and bring to every man
the harvest of the seed he sows. The suffering entailed on the
conscious human entity, thus cut off from progress and from
self-expression, is very great, and is, of course, reformatory in its
action; it is somewhat similar to that endured by other Egos, who are
linked to bodies human in form, but without normal brains--those we
call idiots, lunatics, &c. Idiocy and lunacy are the results of vices
different in kind from those that bring about the animal servitude
above explained, but the Ego in these cases also is attached to a form
through which he cannot express himself."

"True reason," says Proclus,[191] "affirms that the human soul may at
times find lodgment in brutes, but that it is possible for it to live
its own life and rise above the lower nature whilst bound to it by the
similarity of its tendencies and desires. We have never meant anything
else, as has often been proved by the reasoning in our commentaries on
_Phaedrus_."

There is a note in the _Vahan_[192] on a passage from _Phaedrus_ which
sheds all the light that can be shed on the question of
metempsychosis; in the space of a few lines everything is said that
may be publicly revealed, without trespassing on forbidden ground.

After stating that, on returning from the internal regions, the soul
passes into the "life" of a beast, and that if it were human
previously, it afterwards goes into another human body, the note
continues:

"We must not understand by this that the soul of a man becomes the
soul of a brute, but that by way of punishment it is bound to the soul
of a brute, or carried in it, just as daemons used to reside in our
souls. Hence all the energies of the rational soul are absolutely
impeded, and its intellectual eye beholds nothing but the dark and
tumultuous phantasms of a brutal life."[193]

This passage contains the explanation of what might be called the
metempsychosis of certain human souls at the present time; we once
heard a great Teacher fully reveal this mystery to a chosen group of
Hindus, but it must for some time to come remain a mystery to the
western world. All that can be said on the matter is that it has
nothing to do with the incarnation of a human soul in the body of an
animal, but rather with a certain temporary karmic bond, in the life
Hereafter, between a human soul and an animal one, a bond intended to
teach many a hard lesson to the one who has brought upon himself so
unpleasant an experience.

Metempsychosis included many other facts in human evolution, facts
that were plainly taught to the disciples in the "inner circles" of
the ancient Schools and passed out to the confused medley of public
teaching.

The astral body, for instance, of a man of an exceedingly passionate
nature, when the soul leaves the physical body, sometimes assumes
forms resembling those of the animals which represent these passions
on the physical plane, and so the disincarnate soul of an assassin has
been said to pass into the body of a wild beast.

Metempsychosis, properly so-called, that is to say, the passing of a
human soul into the body of a brute, did however exist during the
infancy of the human race, when highly developed animal souls were
becoming fit to enter the human kingdom. The bodies of these
newly-born human souls were coarse and rudimentary in their nature,
showing scarcely any difference in form and organic function from the
bodies of the higher animals of that period, for these instruments
were very similar to one another. The improvements subsequently
effected by human bodies did not then exist; the difference, or
distinction, which has now widened into a gulf, was scarcely
perceptible, and in the early incarnations of these rudimentary human
souls back-slidings and falls were so frequent that some of them, thus
enfeebled, might find it to their advantage[194] to become incarnate,
at times, in highly-developed animal bodies. But that was always an
exception, and the exception has long ago become an impossibility.

We think these explanations, along with those given in other portions
of this work, will throw as much light as is permitted publicly on the
subject of metempsychosis--a subject frequently discussed and one that
has hitherto been so obscure. Such illumination as is here given is
due to the teachings of theosophy.


THE EARLY CHRISTIAN CHURCH.

The documents to which we have access, dealing with the philosophical
and religious history of Christianity in the first few centuries of
our era, are so questionable, that we can place but faint reliance
upon them, if we would really become acquainted with the thought of
that period. We have already seen that the number of spurious or
counterfeit productions was so great that a strange kind of sorting
out, or selection, took place at the first Council of Nicaea, resulting
in the choice of four so-called canonical Gospels. It is evident, too,
that the copyists, compilers, and translators of the period were
anxious, above all else, to make facts and opinions agree with their
preconceived ideas and personal sympathies or likings. Each author
worked _pro domo sua_, emphasising whatever fitted in with his
personal views and carefully concealing what was calculated to weaken
them; so that at the present time the only clues we have to guide us
out of the labyrinth consist of the brief opinions expressed by a few
historians, here and there, on whose honesty reliance may be placed.

In the present chapter, for instance, it is no easy matter to unravel
the Truth from out of these tangled threads of personal opinions. Some
believe that the early Christians and the Fathers of the Church were
reincarnationists; others say they were not; the texts, we are in
possession of, contradict one another. Thus, whereas Saint Jerome
brings against Origen the reproach of having in his book _De
Principiis_ taught that, in certain cases, the transmigration of human
souls into the bodies of animals, was possible--as, indeed, seems to
be the case--certain writers deny that he ever said anything on the
subject. These contradictory affirmations are easy to explain, once we
know that Ruffinus, when translating into Latin the Greek text of _De
Principiis_, omitted all that referred to this question, that the
conspiracy of silence might be preserved on the matter of Origenian
transmigration.

At the close of his article "_Origen on Reincarnation_," in the
_Theosophical Review_, February, 1906, G. R. S. Mead says:

"It therefore follows that those who have claimed Origen as a believer
in reincarnation--and many have done so, confounding reincarnation
with pre-existence--have been mistaken. Origen himself answers in no
uncertain tones, and stigmatises the belief as a false doctrine,
utterly opposed to Scripture and the teaching of the Church."

Others affirm that Saint Justin Martyr believed in rebirths and even
in the transmigration of human souls into animal bodies. In his book
_Against Heresies_, volume 2, chapter 33, the _Absurdity of the
Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls_ is dealt with; and in the
following chapter, the pre-existence of the soul is denied! Is this
another instance, like the one just mentioned, of tampering with the
writings of this Father of the Church?[195]

At times an author gives two contradictory opinions on the same
subject. In Tertullian's _Apology for the Christians_, for instance,
we find the following:

"If you can find it reasonable to believe the transmigration of human
souls from body to body, why should you think it incredible for the
soul to return to the substance it first inhabited?[196] For this is
our notion of a resurrection, to be that again after death which we
were before, for according to the Pythagorean doctrine these souls now
are not the same they were, because they cannot be what they were not
without ceasing to be what they were.... I think it of more
consequence to establish this doctrine of the resurrection; and we
propose it as more consonant with reason and the dignity of human
nature to believe that man will be remade man, each person the person
he was, a human being a human being; in other words, that the soul
shall be habited with the same qualities it was invested with in its
former union, though the man may receive some alteration in his
form.... The light which daily departs rises again with its original
splendour, and darkness succeeds by equal turns; the stars which leave
the world, revive; the seasons, when they have finished their course,
renew it again; the fruits are consumed and bloom afresh; and that
which we sow is not quickened except it die, and by that dissolution
rises more fruitful. Thus you see how all things are renewed by
corruption and reformed by dying.... How, then, could you imagine that
man, the lord of all these dying and reviving things, should himself
die for ever?"

After such a clear and noble profession of faith, we may well wonder
if it were the same man who, in _De Anima_, could have both refuted
and pitilessly ridiculed the idea of rebirth, and denied the
separation of the soul from the body as well as the influence of the
former upon the latter. We prefer to believe that we are dealing with
two writers, or else that some literary forger, anxious to create a
diversion, deliberately made Tertullian responsible for this strange
contradiction.

Another reason for the difficulty in unravelling the tangled skein of
the religious and philosophical teachings prevalent in the early
centuries of Christianity is the lack of precision in the language of
the writers, the loss of the key to the special vocabulary they used,
and the veils which writers who possessed some degree of initiation,
deliberately threw over teachings which could only be given to the
masses in general terms.

There is one very important point to consider; and this is that in the
earlier centuries, outside the circles of initiation, there was not
that precision which the present-day teaching of theosophy has given
to the doctrine of Reincarnation; this latter, in the mind of the
people, became confused with the doctrine of Pre-existence, which
affirms that the soul exists before coming into the present body, and
will exist in other bodies after leaving this one. This confusion has
continued up to the present time, and we find schools of spiritualism
in England and America, as well as in other countries, teaching that
existence on earth has been preceded and will be followed by a great
number of existences on the invisible planes.

In reality, this is the doctrine of Rebirths, though there is nothing
precise about the teaching. Whether the soul has a single physical
body, or takes several in succession, it is none the less continually
evolving as it passes into material vehicles, however subtle the
matter be; the difference is, therefore, insignificant, unless we wish
to enter into details of the process involved, as was the case in the
West in the early centuries of Christianity.

Did the Fathers of the Church teach Pre-existence? There can be no
doubt on this point. In a letter to St. Anastasius, Rufinus said that
"this belief was common amongst the early Christian fathers."
Arnobius[197] shows his sympathy with this teaching, and adds that St.
Clement, of Alexandria, "wrote wonderful accounts of metempsychosis";
and afterwards, in other passages of the same book, he appears to
criticise the idea of the plurality of lives. St. Jerome affirms that
"the doctrine of transmigration has been secretly taught from ancient
times to small numbers of people, as a traditional truth which was not
to be divulged."[198] A. Franck quotes this passage on page 184 of his
_Kabbale_; Huet, too, gives it in _Origeniana_.[199] The same Father
proves himself to be a believer in Pre-existence, in his 94th _Letter
to Avitus_, where he agrees with Origen on the subject of the
interpretation of a passage from St. Paul,[200] and says that this
means "that a divine abode and true repose are to be found in Heaven,"
and "that there dwell creatures endowed with reason in a state of
bliss, before coming down to our visible world, before they fall into
the grosser bodies of earth...."

Lactantius, whom St. Jerome called the Christian Cicero, though he
opposed pagan doctrines, maintained that the soul was capable of
immortality and of bodily survival only on the hypothesis that it
existed before the body.[201]

Nemesius, Bishop of Emissa in Syria, stoutly affirmed the doctrine of
Pre-existence, declaring that every Greek who believed in immortality
believed also in the pre-existence of the soul.

St. Augustine said: "Did I not live in another body, or somewhere
else, before entering my mother's womb?"[202]

In his _Treatise, on Dreams_, Synesius states that "philosophy assures
us that our past lives are a direct preparation for future lives...."
When invited by the citizens of Ptolemais to become their bishop, he
at once refused, saying that "he cherished certain opinions of which
they might not approve, as, after mature reflection, they had struck
deep root in his mind. Foremost among these, he mentioned the doctrine
of Pre-existence."

Dr. Henry More, the famous Platonist of the seventeenth century,
quotes Synesius as one of the masters who taught this doctrine,[203]
and Beausobre reports a typical phrase of his,[204] "Father, grant
that my soul may merge into Light and be no more thrust back into the
illusion of earth."

St. Gregory of Nysa says it is absolutely necessary that the soul
should be healed and purified, and if this does not take place during
its life on earth, it must be accomplished in future lives.

St. Clement of Alexandria says that, although man was created after
other beings, "the human species is more ancient than all these
things."[205] In his _Exhortations to the Pagans_, he adds:

"We were in being long before the foundation of the world; we existed
in the eye of God, for it is our destiny to live in him. We are the
reasonable creatures of the divine Word; therefore, we have existed
from the beginning, for in the beginning was the Word.... Not for the
first time does He show pity on us in out wanderings. He pitied us
from the very beginning."

He also adds:[205]

"Philolaus, the Pythagorean, taught that the soul was flung into the
body as a punishment for the misdeeds it had committed, and his
opinion was confirmed by the most ancient of the prophets."

As regards Reincarnation, _i.e._, the descent of the human soul into
successive physical bodies, and even its temporary association with
the physical bodies of animals, more than one Christian writer
advocated this teaching.

Chalcidius, quoted by Beausobre in the book just mentioned, says:

"The souls, that are not able to unite with God, are destined to
return to life until they repent of their misdeeds."

In the _Pistis Sophia_, a Christian treatise on the mysteries of the
divine Hierarchies and the evolution of souls in the three worlds, we
find the doctrine of Rebirth frequently mentioned:

"If he is a man who (after passing out of his body)[206] shall have come
to the end of his cycles of transmigrations, without repenting, ... he
is cast into outer darkness."

A few pages earlier, in the same work, we find:

"The disincarnate soul which has not solved the mystery of the
breaking of the bonds and of the seals is brought before the virgin of
light, who, after judging it, hands it over to her agents
(_receivers_), who carry it into a new body."

Let us now see what Origen says on the matter[207]:

"Celsus, then, is altogether ignorant of the purpose of our writings,
and it is therefore upon his own acceptation of them that he casts
discredit and not upon their real meaning; whereas if he had reflected
on what is appropriate[208] to a soul which is to enjoy an everlasting
life, and on the idea which we are to form of its essence and
principles, he would not so have ridiculed the entrance of the
immortal into a mortal body, which took place, not according to the
metempsychosis of Plato, but agreeably to another and higher order of
things."

The teaching of Origen is not easy to set forth clearly, for he is
very reticent about many things, and employs a language to which
present-day philosophy cannot always find the key; still, the teaching
seems full and complete. It comprises pre-existence and even those
special associations of certain human souls with animal souls, which
we have just spoken of and which form one of the chief mysteries of
metempsychosis.

In the following words he explains the existence of souls in previous
worlds:

"The soul has neither beginning nor end....

"Rational creatures existed undoubtedly from the very beginning in
those (ages) which are invisible and eternal. And if this is so, then
there has been a descent from a higher to a lower condition on the
part not only of those souls who have deserved the change, by the
variety of their movements, but also on that of those who, in order to
serve the whole world, were brought down from those higher and
invisible spheres to these lower and visible ones, although against
their will. 'For the creature was made subject to vanity, not
willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope'
(_Rom._, chap. 8, v. 20); so that both sun and moon and stars and
angels might discharge their duly to the world, and to those souls
who, on account of their excessive mental defects, stood in need of
bodies of a grosser and more solid nature; and for the sake of those
for whom this arrangement was necessary, this visible world was also
called into being.

"This arrangement of things, then, which God afterwards appointed not
being understood by some, who failed to perceive that it was owing to
preceding causes originating in free will, that this variety of
arrangement had been instituted by God, they have concluded that all
things in this world are directed either by fortuitous movements or by
a necessary fate, and that nothing is in the power of our own
will."[209]

"Is it not rational that souls should be introduced into bodies, in
accordance with their merits and previous deeds, and that those who
have used their bodies in doing the utmost possible good should have a
right to bodies endowed with qualities superior to the bodies of
others?"[210]

All souls will arrive at the same goal;[211] it is the will of souls
that makes of them angels, men or demons, and their fall can be of
such a nature that they may be chained down to the bodies of
animals.[212] Certain souls, on attaining to perfect peace, return to
new worlds; some remain faithful, others degenerate to such a degree
that they become demons.[213]

Concerning bodies, he says:

"The soul, which is immaterial and invisible in its nature, exists in
no material place, without having a body suited to the nature of that
place; accordingly, it at one time puts off one body which was
necessary before, but which is no longer adequate in its changed
state, and it exchanges it for a second."[214]

Although _metensomatosis_ (re-embodiment of the soul), _i.e._, the
true teaching of Origen, was not clearly expounded, it considerably
influenced the early Christian philosophers, and was favourably
received up to the time of its condemnation by the Synod of
Constantinople. It appeared in most of the sects of that time and in
those of the following centuries: Simonians, Basilidians,
Valentinians, Marcionites, Gnostics, Manichaeans, Priscillianites,
Cathari, Patarins, Albigenses, Bogomiles, &c....

Chivalry, too, in these ages of darkness and persecution, was an
instrument for the dissemination of esoteric doctrines, including
Reincarnation. The heart of this noble institution consisted of
students of divine Wisdom, pure devoted souls who communicated with
one another by means of passwords.

The Troubadours were their messengers of the sacred Teaching, which
they skilfully concealed in their songs, carrying it from group to
group, from sect to sect, in their wanderings. "Sons of the teachings
of the Albigenses and of the Manichaean-Marcion tradition"[215] they
kept alive belief in the rebirths of the soul, "Izarn the Monk," in
his book _Historie d' un Heretique_,[216] apostrophised an Albigensian
bishop in the following terms:

"Tell me what school it was in which you learnt that the spirit of
man, after losing his body, passes into an ox, an ass, a sheep, or a
fowl, and transmigrates from one animal to another, until a new human
body is born for it?"

Izarn was acquainted with only so much of the teachings of the
Troubadours as had got abroad and been distorted and misrepresented by
ignorant or evil-minded persons; still, his criticism plainly shows
traces of the teachings of palingenesis in the darkest and most
blood-stained periods of the Middle Ages.

The Inquisition put an end to the Troubadours, though certain of them,
Dante and St. Francis of Assisi, for instance, by reason of their
popularity or the special circumstances of the case, were left in
peace. In Europe the secret teaching was continued by the
Rosicrucians; the _Roman de la Rose_ is pure Hermetic esotericism. The
struggle of official Christianity--that of the letter--against those
who represented the spirit of the Scriptures, raged ever more
bitterly, and the idea of Rebirth disappeared more and more from the
Church; its sole representatives during the Middle Ages were St.
Francis of Assisi, the learned Irish monk, Johannes Scotus Erigena,
and St. Bonaventura, "the Seraphic Doctor." At the present time there
remains nothing more than a disfigured and misunderstood fragment of
this idea: the dogma of the _Resurrection of the Body_.


ISLAMISM.[217]

It has been said that the Arabs believed in Reincarnation before
Mohammed forbade it. Some, however, think that the Koran was written
only after the death of the Prophet, and that the latter committed
nothing to writing, but taught by word of mouth. Besides, it is clear
that Mohammedanism is an offshoot of Zoroastrianism and Christianity.
Like these, it teaches the Unity of the Whole, the divine Presence in
all creatures and things (_Ubiquity_), Predestination, which is only
one form of _Karma_, and Resurrection, which expresses one phase of
Palingenesis.

Mohammed, like all great mystics, had discovered or learnt many of the
truths of esotericism. The verses of the Koran that refer to the
"Companions of the Cave"[218] indicate that he knew more than he
taught in public, and that there may be some ground for certain
Asiatic nations holding the exaggerated belief that he was an
Avatar,[219] the tenth incarnation of the _Aum_--the Amed, the
Nations' Desire.[220] He was a Disciple.

Had there not been in the heart of Islamism a strong germ of esoteric
teaching, Sufism could never have sprung from it. The Sufis are the
saints of Mohammedanism, they are those who aspire after the union of
the individual "I" with the cosmic "I," of man with God; they are
frequently endowed with wonderful powers, and their chiefs have almost
always been thaumaturgists.

The _New Koran_, a modern exposition of part of the secret doctrine of
Islam, shows the correctness of this view. In it we find the following
passages on the subject of Palingenesis:

"And when his body falleth off altogether, as an old fish-shell, his
soul doeth welt by the releasing, and formeth a new one instead.

"The disembodied spirits of man and beast return as the clouds to
renew the young streamlets of infancy....

"When a man dieth or leaveth his body, he wendeth through the gate of
oblivion and goeth to God, and when he is born again he cometh from
God and in a new body maketh his dwelling; hence is this saying:

"The body to the tomb and the spirit to the womb....

"This doctrine is none other than what God hath taught openly from the
very beginning....

"For truly the soul of a man goeth not to the body of a beast, as some
say....

"But the soul of the lower beast goeth to the body of the higher, and
the soul of the higher beast to the body of the savage, and the soul
of the savage to the man....

"And so a man shall be immortal in one body and one garment that
neither can fade nor decay.

"Ye who now lament to go out of this body, wept also when ye were born
into it...."[221]

"The person of man is only a mask which the soul putteth on for a
season; it weareth its proper time and then is cast off, and another
is worn in its stead....

"I tell you, of a truth, that the spirits which now have affinity
shall be kindred together, although they all meet in new persons and
names."[222]

In _Asiatic Researches_, Colebrooke states that the present Mohammedan
sect of the _Bohrahs_ believes in metempsychosis, as do the Hindus,
and, like the latter, abstains from flesh, for the same reason.

Thus we find the doctrine of Reincarnation at the heart of all the
great religions of antiquity. The reason it has remained in a germinal
state in recent religions--Christianity and Islamism--is that in the
latter Mohammed did not attain to the degree of a Hierophant, and in
all likelihood the race to which he brought light did not greatly need
to become acquainted with the law relating to the return to earth
life; whereas in the former the real teachings of the Christ were lost
when the Gnostics were exterminated, and Eusebius and Irenaeus, the
founders of exoteric Christianity, unable to grasp the _spirit_,
imposed the _letter_ throughout the religion.


THE DOCTRINE OF REBIRTH IN MODERN PHILOSOPHY.

In antiquity, science and philosophy were scarcely anything else than
parts of religion[223]; the most eminent scientists and the greatest
philosophers alike were all supporters of the established form of
religion, whenever they did not happen to be its priests, for the
temples were the common cradle of science and philosophy. No wonder,
then, that we find these three great aspects of Truth always hand in
hand, never opposed to or in conflict with one another through the
whole of antiquity. Science was for the body, philosophy for the
intellect, and religion for that divine spark which is destined to
flash forth and finally become a "god" in the bosom of the World Soul.
Every intelligent man knew that on this tripod lay the life of the
individual, the life of society, and the life of the world. Divorce
between these took place only at a later date, when the divine
Teachers had disappeared, and mutilated traditions handed down to the
nations nothing but disfigured and incomplete teachings buried beneath
the ruins of temples that had been crumbling away ever since spiritual
Life had left them.

Then followed the era of separation; science and philosophy became
debased and went their own ways, whilst a degenerate religion
reflected nothing higher than the narrow mentality of fallen
ministers. As this degradation continued, there sprang into being
religious wars, monstrosities that were unknown in those times when
Divinity shed illumination and guidance on the nations by means of
those mighty souls, the Adept-Kings: gods, demi-gods, and heroes.

Nevertheless, Truth never remained without her guardians, and when
apostleship had been destroyed by persecutions the sacred treasure
which was to be handed down from age to age was secretly entrusted by
the sages to faithful disciples. Thus did Esoterism pass through fire
and bloodshed, and one of its greatest teachings, the doctrine of
Palingenesis, has left a stream of light in its wake. Now we will give
a rapid sketch of it in modern times, examining the philosophical
teachings of the greatest of recent thinkers. We will borrow mainly
from Walker's work on this subject, quoting only the writers most
deserving of mention, and making only short extracts, for all that is
needed is to plant a few sign-posts to guide the student along the
path.

In the 128th verse of _Lalla Rookh_, Thomas Moore speaks of rebirths:

            "Stranger, though new the frame
    Thy soul inhabits now, I've traced its flame
    For many an age, in every chance and change
    Of that Existence, through whose varied range,--
    As through a torch-race, where, from hand to hand
    The flying youths transmit their shining brand,--
    From frame to frame the unextinguished soul
    Rapidly passes, till it reach the goal!"

Paracelsus, like every Initiate, was acquainted with it, and Jacob
Boehme, the "nursling of the Nirmanakayas,"[224] knew that it was a law
of Nature.

Giordano Bruno--also a great Soul--quotes from Ovid's _Metamorphoses_,
Book 15, Line 156, &c., as follows:

    "O mortals! chilled by dreams of icy death,
    Whom air-blown bubbles of a poet's breath,
    Darkness and Styx in error's gulph have hurl'd,
    With fabled terrors of a fabled world;
    Think not, whene'er material forms expire,
    Consumed by wasting age or funeral fire,
    Aught else can die: souls, spurning death's decay,
    Freed from their old, new tenements of clay
    Forthwith assume, and wake to life again.
                            ... All is change,
    Nought perishes" ...

_Orger's translation_[225]

Campanella, the Dominican monk, was sent into exile on account of his
belief in the successive returns of the soul to earth.

The Younger Helmont, in his turn, was attacked by the inquisition for
leaching this doctrine in his _De Revolutione Animarum_, in which he
brings forward, in two hundred problems, all the arguments; that make
reincarnation necessary.

Cudworth and Dr. Henry More, the Platonists of Cambridge, were
faithful believers in Palingenesis; whilst Joseph Glanvill, in _Lux
Orientalis_, finds that there are "Seven Pillars" on which
Pre-existence rests.

Dr. Edward Beecher, in _The Conflict of Ages_ and _The Concord of
Ages_, as well as Julius Muller, the well-known German theologian, in
_The Christian Doctrine of Sin_, warmly uphold it.

Schelling acknowledges it in his _Dissertation on Metempsychosis_.

Leibnitz, in his _Monadology_, and more especially his _Theodicy_,
witnessed to his belief in this doctrine. Had he dared to speak out
his thoughts openly, he would more effectively have advocated his
"Optimism," by the teachings of evolution and rebirths, than by all
the other arguments he advanced.

Chevalier Ramsey, in _The Philosophical Principles of Natural and
Revealed Religion_, writes:

"The holy oracles always represent Paradise as our native country, and
our present life as an exile. How can we be said to have been banished
from a place in which we never were? This argument alone would suffice
to convince us of pre-existence, if the prejudice of infancy inspired
by the schoolmen had not accustomed us to look upon these expressions
as metaphorical, and to believe, contrary to Scripture and reason,
that we were exiled from a happy state, only for the fault and
personal disobedience of our first parents....

"Our Saviour seems to approve the doctrine of pre-existence in his
answer to the disciples, when they interrogate him thus about the man
born blind,[226] 'Master, who did sin, this man or his parents, that
he was born blind?' It is clear that this question would have been
ridiculous and impertinent if the disciples had not believed that the
man born blind had sinned before his corporal birth, and consequently
that he had existed in another state long ere he was born on earth.
Our Saviour's answer is remarkable, 'Neither hath this man sinned nor
his parents, but that the works of God might be manifested in him.'
Jesus Christ could not mean that neither this man nor his parents had
ever committed any sin, for this can be said of no mortal; but the
meaning is that it was neither for the sins committed by this man in a
state of pre-existence, nor for those of his parents, that he was born
blind; but that he was deprived of sight from his birth, by a
particular dispensation of Providence, in order to manifest, one day,
the power of God in our Saviour. Our Lord, therefore, far from blaming
and redressing this error in his disciples, as he did those concerning
his temporal kingdom, answers in a way that seems to suppose with
them, and confirm them in the doctrine of pre-existence. If he had
looked upon this opinion as a capital error, would it have been
consonant or compatible with his eternal wisdom to have passed it
over so lightly and thus tacitly authorised it by such silence? On the
contrary, does not his silence manifestly indicate that he looked upon
this doctrine, which was a received maxim of the Jewish Church, as the
true explanation of original sin?

"Since God says that he loved Jacob and detested Esau ere they were
born, and before they had done good or evil in this mortal life, since
God's love and hatred depend upon the moral dispositions of the
creature, ... it follows clearly that if God hated Esau, type of the
reprobate, and loved Jacob, type of the elect, before their natural
birth, they must have pre-existed in another state.

"If it be said that all these texts are obscure, that pre-existence is
largely drawn from them by induction, and that this belief is not
revealed in Scripture by express words, I answer that the doctrines of
the immortality of the soul are nowhere revealed, least of all in the
oracles of the _Old_ and _New Testament_. We may say the same of
pre-existence. This doctrine is nowhere expressly revealed as an
article of faith, but it is evidently implied in the _Wisdom of
Solomon_, by the author of _Ecclesiasticus_, by our Saviour's silence,
by St. Paul's comparisons, and by the sacred doctrine of original sin,
which becomes not only inexplicable, but absurd, repugnant, and
impossible, if that of pre-existence be not true.... The Fifth General
Council held at Constantinople pronounces anathema against all those
who maintain the fabulous doctrine of pre-existence in the Origenian
sense. It was not then the simple doctrine of pre-existence that was
condemned by the council, but the fictitious mixtures and erroneous
disguises by which this ancient tradition had been adulterated by the
Origenites."

Soame Jenyns writes:

"That mankind had existed in some state previous to the present was
the opinion of the wisest sages of the most remote antiquity. It was
held by the Gymnosophists of Egypt, the Brahmans of India, the Magi of
Persia, and the greatest philosophers of Greece and Rome; it was
likewise adopted by the _Fathers of the Christian Church, and
frequently enforced by her early writers_; why it has been so little
noticed, so much overlooked rather than rejected, by the divines and
metaphysicians of latter ages, I am at a loss to account for, as it is
undoubtedly confirmed by reason, by all the appearances of nature and
the doctrines of revelation.

"In the first place, then, it is confirmed by reason, which teaches us
that it is impossible that the conjunction of a male and female can
create an immortal soul; they may prepare a material habitation for
it; but there cannot be an immortal, pre-existent inhabitant ready to
take possession. Reason assures us that an immortal soul, which will
exist eternally after the dissolution of the body, must have eternally
existed before the formation of it; _for whatever has no end can never
have had any beginning_....

"Reason likewise tells us that an omnipotent and benevolent Creator
would never have formed such a world as this, and filled it with such
inhabitants if the present was the only, or even the first, state of
their existence; for this state which, if unconnected with the past
and the future, would seem calculated for no purpose intelligible to
our understanding, neither of good or evil, of happiness or misery, of
virtue or vice, of reward or punishment; but a confused jumble of them
all together, proceeding from no visible cause and tending to no
end....

"Pre-existence, although perhaps it is nowhere in the _New Testament_
explicitly enforced, yet throughout the whole tenour of these writings
is everywhere implied; in them, mankind is constantly represented as
coming into the world under a load of guilt; as condemned criminals,
the children of wrath and objects of divine indignation; placed in it
for a time by the mercies of God to give them an opportunity of
expiating this guilt by sufferings, and regaining, by a pious and
virtuous conduct, their lost state of happiness and innocence....

"Now if by all this a pre-existent state is not constantly supposed,
that is, that mankind has existed in some state previous to the
present, in which this guilt was incurred, and this depravity
contracted, there can be no meaning at all or such a meaning as
contradicts every principle of common sense, that guilt can be
contracted without acting, or that we can act without existing...."

The following is a quotation from Hume, the great positivist
philosopher:

"Reasoning from the common course of nature, what is incorruptible
must also be ingenerable. The soul, therefore, if immortal, existed
before our birth, and if the former existence in noway concerned us,
neither will the latter.... Metempsychosis is, therefore, the only
system of this kind that philosophy can hearken to." (_The Immortality
of the Soul_.)

Young, in his _Night Thoughts_ (Night the Sixth), has the following
lines:

    "Look nature through, 'tis revolution all;
    All change, no death. Day follows night; and night
    The dying day; stars rise, and set, and rise;
    Earth takes th' example ...

                   ... All, to reflourish, fades;
    As in a wheel, all sinks, to re-ascend.
    Emblems of man, who passes, not expires."

"It is not more surprising to be born twice than once; everything in
Nature is resurrection," said Voltaire.

Delormel, Descartes, and Lavater were struck with the tremendous
importance of the doctrine of Palingenesis.

_The Philosophy of the Universe_, of Dupont de Nemours, is full of the
idea of successive lives, as a necessary corollary of the law of
progress; whilst Fontenelle strongly advocates it in his _Entretiens
sur la Pluralite des Mondes_.

It is needless to state that these ideas formed part of the esoteric
teachings of Martinez Pasqualis, Claude Saint-Martin, and their
followers.

Saint-Martin lived in times that were too troubled for him to speak
freely. In his works, however, not a few passages are found in which
there can be no doubt that reincarnation is hinted at, to anyone able
to read between the lines. (_Tableau nat._, vol. I, p. 136; _L'homme
de Desir_, p. 312.)

In his _Oeuvres Posthumes_ (vol. I, p. 286) appears this remarkable
passage:

"Death ought to be looked upon only as one stage in our journey. We
reach this stage with tired, worn-out horses, and we start again with
horses that are fresh and able to take us farther on our road; all the
same, we must pay what we owe for the portion of the journey that has
been traversed, and until the account is settled, we are not allowed
to continue our way."

Goethe writes as follows to his friend Madame von Stein:

"Tell me what destiny has in store for us? Wherefore has it bound us
so closely to each other? Ah! in bygone times, thou must have been my
sister or my wife ... and there remains, from the whole of those past
ages, only one memory, hovering like a doubt above my heart, a memory
of that truth of old that is ever present in me."

Ballanche, an orthodox Christian mystic, says:

"Each one of us is a reincarnating being, ignorant both of his present
and of his former transformations." (_Pal. Sociale_, book III., p.
154.)

"Man is brought to perfection only by becoming a more perfect order of
things, and even then he does nothing more than bring back, as Plato
said, a confused memory of the state that preceded his fall." (_Essai
sur les Instit. Sociales_, vol. ii., p. 170.)

"This life we spend on earth, shut in between an apparent birth and an
equally apparent death, is, in reality, only a portion of our
existence, one manifestation of man in time." (_Orphee_, vol. iv., p.
424.)

"Our former lives belong to astronomical cycles lost in the mighty
bosom of previous ages; not yet has it been given to us to know them."
(_Orphee_, vol. iv., p. 432.)

Balzac's _Seraphita_ abounds with references to the idea of successive
lives:

"All human beings spend their first life in the sphere of instincts,
in which they endeavour to discover how useless are the treasures of
earth."

".... How often we live in this first world...."

"Then we have other existences to wear out before we reach the path on
which the light shines. Death is one stage on this journey."

Constant Savy[227] describes as follows the conditions of immortality
and a succession of lives by means of reincarnation:

"In proportion as its soul is developed by successive lives, the body
to which it is to be united will necessarily be superior to those it
has worn out; otherwise there would be no harmony between these two
elements of human existence; the means given to the soul would bear
no relation to the development of its power. This body, gifted with
more perfect and numerous senses, could not have an equal value for
all....

"Besides, these natural inequalities are also advantageous for
individual progress in another way; the errors resulting therefrom
cause truths to be discovered; vices laid bare almost form a reason
for the practice of virtue by all men, or at all events they protect
one from vice by reason of the horror they inspire; the ignorance of
some arouses the love of science in others; the very idleness which
dishonours some men inspires others with a love for work.

"So that these inequalities, inevitable because they are necessary,
are present in the successive lives we pass through. There is nothing
in them contrary to universal harmony; rather, they are a means for
effecting this harmony, and are the inevitable result of the
difference in value that bodies possess. Besides, no man remains
stationary; all advance at a more or less rapid rate of progress....

"When faith is born, it is an illumination. Since man's immortality is
one progressive advance, and, to effect this, he prepares the life he
enters by the life he is leaving; since, in short, there are
necessarily two worlds, one material, the other intellectual, these
two worlds, which make up the life to come, must be in harmonious
relationship with our own.

"Man's work will, therefore, be a continuation of his past work....

"I would never believe that our intelligence, which begins to develop
in this life, comes to a halt after such an imperfect growth, and is
not exercised or perfected after death....

"... Nature always advances, always labours, because God is life and
he is eternal, and life is the progressive movement in the direction
of the supreme good, which is God himself. Could man alone in the
whole of nature, man so imperfect and full of faults, stop in his
onward course, either to be annihilated, or suddenly, without
participating in it, though he was created free, find that he was as
perfect as he could possibly be? This is more than I can understand.

"No, when the time comes, man will not find that his life has been
useless, a thing for mere contemplation; he will not find that he is
improved without personal participation therein, without effort and
toil on his part; above all, he will not be reduced to a state of
nothingness. He will again have a life of toil; he will participate,
to the extent God has permitted him, in the endless creations produced
by divine omnipotence; he will again love, he will never cease to
love; he will continue his eternal progress, because the distance
between himself and God is infinite."

Pierre Leroux says:

"If God, after creating the world and all creation, were then to
abandon them, instead of guiding them from life to life, from one
state of progress to another, to a goal of real happiness, he would be
an unjust God. It is unnecessary for St. Paul to say; 'Shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it. Why hast thou made me thus?'
(_Romans_, chap, 9, v. 20.) There is an inner voice, doubtless coming
to us from God himself, which tells us that God cannot bring about
evil, or create in order to cause suffering. Now this is what would
certainly happen were God to abandon his creatures after an imperfect,
a truly unhappy life.

"On the other hand, if we regard the world as a series of successive
lives for each creature, we see very well how it comes about that God,
to whom there is neither time nor space, and who perceives the final
goal of all things, permits evil and suffering as being necessary
phases through which creatures must pass, in order to reach a state of
happiness which the creature does not see, and, consequently, cannot
enjoy in so far as it is a creature, but which God sees, and which,
therefore, the creature virtually enjoys in him, for the time will
come when it will partake of that happiness."[228]

In Fourier we find the following lines[229]:

"Where is there an old man who would not like to feel certain that he
would be born again and bring back into another life the experience he
has gained in the present one? To affirm that this desire cannot be
realised is to confess that God is capable of deceiving us. We must,
therefore, recognise that we have already lived before being what we
now are, and that many another life awaits us, some in this world, and
the rest in a higher sphere, with a finer body and more delicate
senses...."

Alphonse Esquiros expresses himself as follows[230]:

"The question may well be asked whether the talents, the good and the
evil tendencies man brings with him at birth may not be the fruit of
acquired intelligence, of qualities and vices gained in one or many
former existences. Is there a previous life the elements of which have
prepared the conditions of the life now being lived by each of us?
People in ancient times thought so. Inborn dispositions, so different
in children, caused them to believe in impressions left by previous
existences in the imperishable germ of man. From the time when
intelligence begins to show itself in children we faintly discern a
general attitude towards things, which is very like a memory thereof.
It would appear that, according to this system, no one is unconnected
with the elements he introduces into life at each birth.

"All the same, rebirth in humanity constitutes no more than an initial
circle of tests. When, after one or several incarnations, man has
attained to the degree of perfection necessary to cause a change, he
passes to another life, and, in another sphere, begins an existence of
which we know nothing, though it is possible for us to regard it as
linked to the present life by the closest of bonds....

"The limit to the progress man must have attained to, before entering
upon another circle of tests in another sphere, is at present unknown
to us; science and philosophy will doubtless succeed in determining
this limit later on.

"They alone are reborn to earthly flesh who have in no way raised the
immortal principle of their nature to a degree of perfection that will
enable them to be reborn in glory....

"I affirm the perpetual union of the soul to organic bodies; these
bodies succeed each other, being born from one another, and fitting
themselves for the constitutive forms of the worlds traversed by the
immortal ego in its successive existences. The principle of life,
extended to divers evolutions of rebirth, is ever for the Creator
nothing more than a continuation of one and the same state. God does
not regard the duration of a being as limited to the interval between
birth and death; he includes all possible segments of existence, the
succession of which, after many interruptions and renewals, forms the
real unity of life. Must souls, when they leave our globe, put on,
from sphere to sphere, an existence hidden from us, whose organic
elements would continually be fitting themselves for the characters
and natures of the different worlds? Reason can come to no decision on
this point. Only let us not forget that the soul always carries off a
material germ from one existence to the next, making itself anew, so
to speak, several times, in that endless ascent of lives through the
worlds, wherein it attains, heaven after heaven, a degree of
perfection increasingly linked with the eternal elements of our
growing personality.

"It may be seen, from what is here stated, how vain is the hypothesis
of perfect bliss following on the death of the righteous.

"It is useless for the Christian to soar beyond time, beyond some
limit that separates him from infinite good; he cannot do this by a
single effort. God proportions his intervention and aid to the
totality of the states man must pass through in the course of an
indefinitely long series of existences...."

M. d'Orient, an orthodox Catholic, writes as follows[231]:

"In this doctrine, so evidently based on reason, everything is linked
and held together: the foreknowledge of God and the agreement thereof
with man's free-will. This problem, hitherto impossible to solve, no
longer offers any difficulty, if by it is meant that God, knowing
before birth, by reason of his previous deeds, what there is in the
heart of man, brings man to life and removes him from it in
circumstances that best fit in with the accomplishment of his
purposes....

"We see in this way how it is that God is the controller of all the
main events that take place in the world, for the knowledge he has of
souls in former lives, and his power to dispose of each and all in the
way he pleases, enable him to foresee events in his infinite knowledge
and arrange the whole sequence of things in conformity with his plans,
somewhat as an ingenious, skilful workman, by the aid of various
colours, conceives of and arranges the life-like reproduction of a
mosaic, a picture, or a piece of inlaid work. We understand all his
forecasts of the future, how it was that Daniel foretold so exactly
the greatness of Alexander and his conquests; how Isaiah called Cyrus
by name many centuries before these mighty conquerors appeared to
spread confusion and terror over the world; how God, in order to show
forth his might before the nations and spread abroad the glory of his
name, is said to have hardened Pharaoh's heart and roused his
obstinate will; for all that was needed in order to bring to pass
these various results was for God to call back into existence certain
souls he knew to be naturally suited to his purpose. This is
distinctly pointed out in the passage from the apostle St. Jude,
which, if we accept the meaning that first offers itself to the mind,
would seem positively to imply that certain souls had undergone a
sentence of eternal reprobation: 'For there are certain men crept in
unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation,
turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness....'

"And so there falls away and disappears the greatest difficulty in the
doctrine of grace, which consisted in explaining how it came about
that God made some men pitiful and others hard-hearted, without there
being in him either justice or acceptance of persons; showing pity,
says St. Augustine, only by grace that was unmerited, and hardening
hearts only by judgment that was always just; since evidently
according to this theory it is not (as Origen has already said) apart
from previous merit that some are formed for vessels of honour, and
others for vessels of shame and wrath. That harsh sentence pronounced
upon Judas by the Bishop of Hippon, which so grievously scandalised
most of the Catholic theologians, although only the confirmation of
the quotation from St. Jude, viz., that the wretched man had been
predestined to shed the Saviour's blood, will seem to be a very just
one in the sense that God causes that already lost soul to be born
again, that demon, as Jesus Christ called him, for the very purpose of
perpetrating the hateful crime.

"Consequently the most sublime mysteries of religion, the most
wonderful facts regarding the destiny of the soul, find their natural
explanation in a clear understanding of this doctrine of
metempsychosis, however strange and extraordinary it may at first
appear. What more striking proof can be asked for, what stronger and
more convincing reason than such agreement, concerning matter wherein
all positive proof will always, humanly speaking, be impossible? A
doctrine which meets all the facts of the case so accurately, which
explains, without difficulty, all the phenomena of our existence in
this world, can, of necessity, be nothing else than true."

Jean Reynaud expresses himself in these terms in _Terre el Ciel_:

"How glorious the light that would be cast on the present order of
things on earth by a knowledge of our former existences! And yet, not
only is our memory helpless regarding the times that preceded birth,
it is not even conscious of the whole of the intervening period, often
playing us false in the course of a lifetime. It retains absolutely
nothing of the period immediately preceding birth, and scarcely any
trace of our education as children; we might even be altogether
ignorant of the fact that we were children once, were there not around
us witnesses of that time. On every hand we are wrapped in a veil of
ignorance, as with a pall of darkness, we no more distinguish the
light beyond the cradle than that beyond the tomb. So far as memory is
concerned, it would seem that we might be compared with a rocket such
as we sometimes see flashing through the sky in the night-time,
leaving behind it a line of light, this light never shows anything
more than a limited portion of the way. Of like nature is memory, a
trail of light left behind on our journey; we die, and everything is
dark around us; we are born again, and the light begins to appear,
like a star through the mist; we live, and it develops and grows,
suddenly disappears again and reappears once more; from one eclipse to
another we continue our way, and this way, interrupted by periods of
darkness, is a continuous one, whose elements, only apparently
separated, are linked to each other by the closest of bonds; we always
bear within ourselves the principle of what we shall be later on, we
are always rising higher. Question us on our past, and, like the
rocket, we reply that we are going forward, but that our path is
illumined only in our immediate neighbourhood, and that the rest of
the road is lost in the blackness of night; we no more know from where
we came than we know our destination, but we do know that we came from
below and are rising higher, and that is all that is necessary to
interest us in ourselves and make us conscious of what we are. And who
knows but what our soul, in the unknown secret of its essence, has
power some day to throw light on its successive journeyings, like
those streaks of flame to which we are comparing it? There are strong
reasons for thinking that such is the case, since the entire
restoration of memory appears, with good reason, to be one of the main
conditions of our future happiness....

"In like manner the soul, passing from one abode to another, and
leaving its first body for a new one, ever changing its appearance and
its dwelling, guided by the Creator's beams, from transmigration to
transmigration, from metamorphosis to metamorphosis, pursues the
palingenesic course of its eternal destiny....

"... Let us, then, add the teachings of metempsychosis to those of the
Gospel, and place Pythagoras by the side of Jesus...."

Andre Pezzani concludes in the following words his remarkable book on
_The Plurality of the Soul's Lives_:

"Apart from the belief in previous lives, nothing can be explained,
neither the coming of a new soul into this evil world, the often
incurable bodily infirmities, the disproportionate division of wealth,
nor the inequality in intelligence and morality. The justice of God
lies behind the monstrous phantom of chance. We understand neither
what man is, whence he comes, nor whither he goes; original sin does
not account for the particular fate of individuals, as it is the same
for all. Roughly speaking, it clears up no difficulties, but rather
adds to them the most revolting injustice. Once accept the theory of
pre-existence, and a glorious light is thrown on the dogma of sin, for
it becomes the result of personal faults from which the guilty soul
must be purified.

"Pre-existence, once admitted as regards the past, logically implies a
succession of future existences for all souls that have not yet
attained to the goal and that have imperfections and defilements from
which to be cleansed. In order to enter _the circle of happiness_ and
leave _the circle of wanderings_, one must be pure.

"We have opposed error, and proclaimed truth, and we firmly believe
that the dogmas of pre-existence and the plurality of lives are true."

Thomas Browne, in _Religio Medici_, section 6, hints at Reincarnation:

"Heresies perish not with their authors, but, like the river Arethusa,
though they lose their currents in one place, they rise up again in
another ... revolution of time will restore it, when it will flourish
till it be condemned again. For as though there were a Metempsychosis,
and the soul of one man passed into another, opinions do find, after
certain Revolutions, men and minds like those that first begat
them.... Each man is not only himself, there hath been many Diogenes
and as many Timons, though but few of that name; men are lived over
again, the world is now as it was in ages past; there was none then
but there hath been someone since that parallels him, and is, as it
were, his revived self."

Lessing, in _The Divine Education of the Human Race_, vigorously
opposes a Lutheran divine who rejects reincarnation:

"The very same way by which the race reaches its perfection must every
individual man--one sooner, another later--have travelled over. Have
travelled over in one and the same life? Can he have been in one and
the self-same life a sensual Jew and a spiritual Christian?

"Surely not that! But why should not every individual man have existed
more than once in this world?

"Is this hypothesis so laughable merely because it is the oldest?
Because the human understanding, before the sophistries of the schools
had disciplined and debilitated it, lighted upon it at once? Why may
not even I have already performed those steps of my perfecting which
bring to men only temporal punishments and rewards? And once more, why
not another time all those steps, to perform which the views of
Eternal Rewards so powerfully assist us? Why should I not come back as
often as I am capable of acquiring fresh knowledge, fresh expertness?
Do I bring away so much from once that there is nothing to repay the
trouble of coming back?

"Is this a reason against it? Or because I forget that I have been
here already? Happy is it for me that I do forget. The recollection of
my former condition would permit me to make only a bad use of the
present. And that which even I must forget _now_, is that necessarily
forgotten for ever?"

Schlosser gives expression to similar thoughts in a fine work of his:
_Ueber die Seelenwanderung_.

Lichtemberg says in his _Seibstcharacteristik_:

"I cannot get rid of the thought that I died before I was born, and
that by this death I was led to this rebirth. I feel so many things
that, were I to write them down, the world would regard me as a
madman. Consequently, I prefer to hold my peace."

Charles Bonnet is the author of a splendid work, full of noble and
lofty thoughts, on this subject. It is entitled _Philosophic
Palingenesis_.

Emmanuel Kant believes that our souls start imperfect from the sun,
and travel through planetary stages farther and farther away to a
paradise in the coldest and remotest star in our system. (_General
History of Nature_.)

In _The Destiny of Man_, J. G. Fichte says:

"These two systems, the purely spiritual and the sensuous--which last
may consist of an immeasurable series of particular lives--exist in me
from the moment when my active reason is developed and pursue their
parallel course....

"All death in nature is birth.... There is no death-bringing principle
in nature, for nature is only life throughout.... Even because Nature
puts me to death, she must quicken me anew...."

Herder, in his _Dialogues on Metempsychosis_, deals with this subject
more fully:

"Do you not know great and rare men who cannot have been what they are
in a single human existence; who must have often existed before in
order to have attained that purity of feeling, that instinctive
impulse for all that is true, beautiful, and good?... Have you never
had remembrances of a former state?... Pythagoras, Iarchas,
Apollonius, and others remembered distinctly what and how many times
they had been in the world before. If we are blind or can see but two
steps before our noses, ought we, therefore, to deny that others may
see a hundred or a thousand degrees farther, even to the bottom of
time ...?"

"He who has not become ripe in one form of humanity is put into the
experience again, and, some time or other, must be perfected."

"I am not ashamed of my half-brothers the brutes; on the contrary, so
far as I am concerned, I am a great advocate of metempsychosis. I
believe for a certainty that they will ascend to a higher grade of
being, and am unable to understand how anyone can object to this
hypothesis, which seems to have the analogy of the whole creation in
its favour."

Sir Walter Scott had such vivid memories of his past lives that they
compelled a belief in pre-existence. Instances of this belief may be
found in _The Life of Scott_, by Lockhart (vol. 7, p. 114, first
edition).

According to Schlegel:

"Nature is nothing less than the ladder of resurrection, which, step
by step, leads upward, or rather is carried from the abyss of eternal
death up to the apex of life." (_AEsthetic and Miscellaneous Works_;
and, _The Philosophy of History_.)

Shelley held a firm belief in Reincarnation:

"It is not the less certain, notwithstanding the cunning attempts to
conceal the truth, that all knowledge is reminiscence. The doctrine is
far more ancient than the times of Plato," (Dowden's _Life of
Shelley_, vol. 1, p. 82.)

Schopenhauer adopted the idea of Reincarnation which he had found in
the _Upanishads_; regarding this portion of his teaching, his
contemporaries and followers set up a kind of conspiracy of silence.
In _Parerga and Paralipomena_, vol. 2, chap. 15, _Essay on Religions_,
he says:

"I have said that the combination of the _Old Testament_ with the
_New_ gives rise to absurdities. As an example, I may cite the
Christian doctrine of Predestination and Grace as formulated by
Augustine and adopted from him by Luther, according to which one man
is endowed with grace and another is not. Grace thus comes to be a
privilege received at birth and brought ready into the world.... What
is obnoxious and absurd in this doctrine may be traced to the idea
contained in the _Old Testament_, that man is the creation of an
external will which called him into existence out of nothing. It is
quite true that genuine moral excellence is really innate; but the
meaning of the Christian doctrine is expressed in another and more
rational way by the theory of Metempsychosis, common to Brahmans and
Buddhists. According to this theory, the qualities which distinguish
one man from another are received at birth, _i.e._, are brought from
another world and a former life; these qualities are not an external
gift of grace, but are the fruits of the acts committed in that other
world....

"What is absurd and revolting in this dogma is, in the main, as I
said, the simple outcome of Jewish theism with its 'creation out of
nothing,' and the really foolish and paradoxical denial of the
doctrine of metempsychosis which is involved in that idea, a doctrine
which is natural to a certain extent, self-evident, and, with the
exception of the Jews, accepted by nearly the whole human race at all
times.... Were an Asiatic to ask me for a definition of Europe, I
should be forced to answer him: It is that part of the world which is
haunted by the incredible delusion that man was created out of
nothing, and that his present birth is his first entrance into life."

In _The World as Will and Idea_, he also says:

"What sleep is for the individual, death is for the Will (character).

"It flings off memory and individuality, and this is Lethe; and
through this sleep of death it reappears refreshed and fitted out with
another intellect, as a new being."

In _Parerga and Paralipomena_, vol. 2, chap. 10, he adds:

"Did we clearly understand the real nature of our inmost being, we
should see how absurd it is to desire that individuality should exist
eternally. This wish implies that we confuse real Being with one of
its innumerable manifestations. The individuality disappears at death,
but we lose nothing thereby, for it is only the manifestation of quite
a different Being--a Being ignorant of time, and, consequently,
knowing neither life nor death. The loss of intellect is the Lethe,
but for which the Will would remember the various manifestations it
has caused. When we die, we throw off our individuality, like a
worn-out garment, and rejoice because we are about to receive a new
and a better one."

Edgar Allen Poe, speaking of the dim memories of bygone lives, says:

"We walk about, amid the destinies of our world-existence, encompassed
by divine but ever present Memories of a Destiny more vast--very
distant in the bygone time and infinitely awful.

"We live out a Youth peculiarly haunted by such dreams, yet never
mistaking them for dreams. As Memories we _know_ them. During our
_Youth_ the distinction is too clear to deceive us even for a moment.

"But now comes the period at which a conventional World-Reason awakens
us from the truth of our dream ... a mis-shapen day or a misfortune
that could not be traced back to our own doings in this or in another
life...." (_Eureka._)

Georges Sand, in _Consuelo_, sets forth the logic of Reincarnation;
and G. Flammarion expounds this doctrine in most of his works:
_Uranie_; _Les Mondes Imaginaires et les Mondes Reels_; _La Pluralite
des Mondes Habites_, etc.

Professor William Knight wrote in the _Fortnightly Review_ for
September, 1878:

"It seems surprising that in the discussions of contemporary philosophy
on the origin and destiny of the soul there has been no explicit revival
of the doctrines of Pre-existence and Metempsychosis.... They offer
quite a remarkable solution of the mystery of Creation, Translation, and
Extinction....

"Stripped of all extravagances and expressed in the modest terms of
probability, the theory has immense speculative interest and great
ethical value. It is much to have the puzzle of the origin of evil
thrown back for an indefinite number of cycles of lives and to have a
workable explanation of Nemesis...."

Professor W. A. Butler, in his _Lectures on the History of Ancient
Philosophy_, says:

"There is internally no greater improbability that the present may be
the result of a former state now almost wholly forgotten than that the
present should be followed by a future form of existence in which,
perhaps, or in some departments of which, the oblivion may be as
complete."

The Rev. William R. Alger, a Unitarian minister, adds:

"Our present lack of recollection of past lives is no disproof of
their actuality.... The most striking fact about the doctrine of the
repeated incarnations of the soul ... is the constant reappearance of
that faith in all parts of the world and its permanent hold on certain
great nations....

"The advocates of the resurrection should not confine their attention
to the repellent or ludicrous aspects of metempsychosis, ... but do
justice to its claim and charm." (_A Critical History of the Doctrine
of a Future Life_.)

Professor Francis Bowen, of Harvard University, writes in the
_Princetown Review_ for May, 1881, when dealing with the subject of
_Christian Metempsychosis_:

"Our life upon earth is rightly held to be a discipline and a
preparation for a higher and eternal life hereafter. But if limited to
the duration of a single mortal body, it is so brief as to seem hardly
sufficient for so great a purpose.... Why may not the probation of the
soul be continued or repeated through a long series of successive
generations, the same personality animating, one after another, an
indefinite number of tenements of flesh, and carrying forward into
each the training it has received, the character it has formed, the
temper and dispositions it has indulged, in the stage of existence
immediately preceding?...

"Every human being thus dwells successively in many bodies, even
during one short life.[232] If every birth were an act of absolute
creation, the introduction to life of an entirely new creature, we
might reasonably ask why different souls are so variously constituted
at the outset.... One child seems a perverse goblin, while another has
the early promise of a Cowley or a Pascal.... The birthplace of one is
in Central Africa, and of another in the heart of civilised and
Christian Europe. Where lingers eternal justice then? How can such
frightful inequalities be made to appear consistent with the infinite
wisdom and goodness of God?...

"If metempsychosis is included in the scheme of the divine government
of the world, this difficulty disappears altogether. Considered from
this point of view, everyone is born into the state which he has
fairly earned by his own previous history.... We submit with enforced
resignation to the stern decree; ... that the iniquities of the
fathers shall be visited upon the children even to the third and
fourth generation. But no one can complain of the dispositions and
endowments which he has inherited, so to speak, from himself, that is,
from his former self in a previous stage of existence.

"And it matters not, so far as the justice of the sentence is
concerned, whether the former self from whom we receive this heritage
bore the same name with our present self, or bore a different
name...."

Professor F. H. Hedge, in _Ways of the Spirit, and other Essays_, p.
359, maintains that:

"Whatever had a beginning in time, it should seem, must end in time.
The eternal destination which faith ascribes to the soul presupposes
an eternal origin.... An obvious objection, and one often urged
against this hypothesis, is the absence of any recollection of a
previous life.... The new organisation with its new entries must
necessarily efface the record of the old. For memory depends on
continuity of association. When the thread of that continuity is
broken, the knowledge of the past is gone....

"And a happy thing, if the soul pre-existed, it is for us that we
remember nothing of its former life.... Of all the theories respecting
the origin of the soul this seems to me the most plausible, and
therefore the one most likely to throw light on the question of a life
to come."

The Spiritualists of Europe--those belonging to the school of Allan
Kardec, at all events--place reincarnation in the very forefront of
their teaching. We may add that those of America do not acknowledge
that the soul has more than one existence on earth, driven, however,
by the logic of things, which insists on progress, they state that
there are a series of lives passed in subtler bodies on invisible
planets and worlds.

All true philosophers have been attracted by the mystery of
palingenesis, and have found that its acceptance has thrown a flood of
light on the questions that perplexed them.

In Asia there are 400 millions of believers in reincarnation,
including the Chinese, Tartars, Thibetans, Hindus, Siamese,
Mongolians, Burmese, Cambodians, Koreans, and the people of Japan.

Tradition has handed down this teaching even to the most savage
tribes. In Madagascar, when a man is on the point of death, a hole is
made in the roof of his straw hut, through which his soul may pass out
and enter the body of a woman in labour. This may be looked upon as a
stupid superstition, still it is one which, in spite of its degenerate
form, sets forth the doctrine of the return of souls back to evolution
through earthly experiences. The Sontals, Somalis, and Zulus, the
Dyaks of Borneo and Sumatra, and the Powhatans of Mexico have similar
traditions. In Central Africa, slaves who are hunchbacked or maimed
forestall the hour of death by voluntary self-immolation, in the hope
of being reborn in the bodies of men who will be free and perfectly
formed.

To sum up: all tradition, whether popular, philosophical, or
religious, is instinct with the teaching of Rebirth.


OBJECTION.

_Reincarnation and Forgetfulness of the Past._

Sceptics are ever bringing forward against reincarnation the absence
of all memory of past lives, convinced that there can be no answer to
this argument.

They do not reflect that human ignorance is a bottomless abyss, whilst
the possibilities of Life are endless. The schools of the future will
smile at the claims made by those of the present, just as the latter
doubtless regard with pitying indulgence that school which, only a few
years ago, in the person of one of its most famous members, Dr.
Bouillaud, mercilessly condemned the exponent of Edison's invention,
because the _savant_, listening to a phonograph for the first time,
could not believe that it was anything else than ventriloquism!
Instances of this kind are sufficiently numerous and recent not to be
forgotten, in spite of the shortness of human memory.

In the present instance, there are many men of science who have not
yet been made sufficiently wise by experience to see that the very
mystery of memory itself might furnish an explanation of that general
absence of all power of recollection, which now seems to them
altogether incompatible with the doctrine of Rebirth.

So as not to appear to be running away from this objection, by dealing
with it only on the surface, we will endeavour to develop the question
somewhat, for we shall have to set forth to readers unacquainted with
theosophical teachings--which alone, up to the present, have thrown
light on these difficult subjects--certain doctrines which will be
well understood by none but theosophists, since they are incapable of
proof by a simple statement thereof, but form part, of a long chain of
teachings. We will offer them simply as theories--though they are
facts to us--theories that contain many an error, it may be, and are
imperfectly stated, though capable of widening the horizon of thought
and shedding a brilliant light upon many an obscure question. Earnest
seekers after truth, it is hoped, will not be disheartened by the
difficulties of the subject, but will endeavour to grasp the meaning
of the following pages, by reading them over again, if need be.

First, a few words must be said on memory in general, next we will
give a rapid sketch of what constitutes memory in atoms and molecules,
in the varied forms of the many kingdoms of nature and in human forms;
finally, we will speak of cosmic Memory, that veritable _Judgment
Book_ which takes account of all the vibrations of the Universe.

Amongst beings capable of memory, a distinction must be made between
those which have not reached the stage of self-consciousness, and
those which have done so, for memory, properly so-called, takes for
granted an "I." That which has not an "I" can only have a memory of
which it is not conscious[233]; the atom, for instance, of whose
memory we shall speak later on; that which has only a rudimentary "I"
possesses only a rudimentary memory from the point of view of its
bearing on the individual--such is that possessed by the souls of the
lower kingdoms, that which constitutes instinct; to the perfect "I"
alone belongs an individual memory--the human memory, and that of
beings who have attained to the superhuman stage. This memory may be
defined as the faculty possessed by an individualised "centre of
consciousness" voluntarily to reproduce the vibrations it has received
or generated.

A "centre of consciousness" is a form that serves, for the time being,
as the instrument of an individualised ray of that indefinable
principle called the soul. But for the presence of this individual
soul in a form, this latter would remain inactive as a centre of
consciousness--although active in its constituent parts[234]--and
could it not then, consciously, either generate or receive vibrations
on the plane from which the soul is momentarily absent--it could only
transmit them; for instance, when a man is in a brown study, he is not
conscious in his brain, of what is taking place on the physical
plane.[235]

The vehicles of consciousness are often numerous in a being, and the
more numerous in proportion to the degree this latter has attained in
the scale of evolution. The present day man possesses four bodies: the
visible, the astral, the mental, and the causal. They are not all
equally developed, and therefore not equally conscious, for the
clearness and intensity of consciousness depend on the decree of
perfection of its vehicles, just as the beauty of electric light
depends on the perfection of the apparatus producing it.

The Ego--the man--is the consciousness that is called forth by the
soul in the causal body. This consciousness varies in power with the
development of the body that gives birth to it. At first it is dim and
uncertain,[236] and acquires some degree of intensity only when it
receives, through the mental and astral vehicles, the simple and
intense vibrations of the physical body.[237] In savage races, for
instance, man possesses a definite consciousness only in his waking
condition; as soon as the soul is attached to the astral body,
externalised by sleep, it experiences only a dim consciousness in this
undeveloped vehicle. In advanced races, the astral body, being far
more developed, brings about distinct consciousness during sleep. As
man evolves, consciousness begins to function in the mental and the
astral bodies, without the assistance of the vibrations of the lower
vehicles, and when all the grades[238] of matter which compose the
human constitution are thus vitalised, man has become perfect; he
knows the Universe because he feels it within himself--he echoes it,
so to speak, and possesses all its powers.[239]

In ordinary man, the memory of events that have taken place in his
waking state can be brought back by that special effort of will which
sets in motion the cerebral molecules that have previously been put
into vibration by these events.

Sometimes the will, of itself, is powerless to recall this vibration,
either because the brain is tired or in some unfavourable condition or
other; it is then aided by bringing its automatism into play, by
endeavouring, for instance, to call back one constituent element of
the fact desired, a place, sound, scent, person, &c, and often in this
way is brought about the vibration of the molecules that constituted
the rest of the circuit, and the fact sought for presents itself;
association of ideas is a phenomenon based on this mechanical process.

A third method--a far more difficult one--is also used; the bringing
of every mental effort, to a standstill. The suppression of thought,
when sufficiently complete, brings the brain into a state of calm,
allows of the soul concentrating on the astral body whose memory is
keen and only slightly subject to obstruction, and then it often
happens that the vibration of the astral memory repercusses on to the
physical apparatus which suddenly remembers the thing desired.

On the death of the physical, the soul acts in the astral body; there
it retains a complete memory of life on earth, but the vibrations of
the physical plane no longer reach it,[240] these memories soon cease
to occupy its attention, and it gives itself up wholly to the
impressions received from the new world into which it has entered. In
this first stage of the after-life, then, there is a kind of darkening
of the memory of the past earth life--darkening, not oblivion.

When the purgatorial life is at an end and the astral body
disintegrates in its turn, the soul functions in the mental body, in
the mental world.[241] On this new plane, the memory of the worlds
left behind continues, though far less clearly than the memory of the
physical existed in the astral world; this is owing to the fact that,
in ordinary man, the mental body is not sufficiently developed to
constitute a complete vehicle of consciousness, capable of registering
all the vibrations that come to it; everything in the past that has
been _purely_ the work of the astral or the physical plane then
disappears from his memory; there remain only memories that have been
caused either by the mental qualities or qualities superior to these,
all the highest elements concerned with affection, intelligence, or
art. The mental world, generally speaking, is seen only to a small
extent or not at all, because of the incomplete development of the
mental body. Besides, recollections assume a new character[242]; every
thought takes a concrete form--that of a friend, for instance, appears
as the friend himself, speaking and thinking, more vivid than on the
earth plane[243]; everything is dramatised in marvellous fashion, and
life is intense throughout the realms of paradise.

The mental body, after exhausting the forces that make it up, also
dies, and the soul is "centred" in the only vehicle it has left, the
causal body, a body that is immortal, one may say, up to a certain
point, since the soul retains it until the time comes when it can
function in a still higher and more lasting vehicle,[244] and this
happens only after millions of years.[245] Here, another diminution of
memory takes place, because the soul loses a large portion of its
consciousness when it comes into contact with none but the vibrations
of this body, which is even more incompletely developed than the
former ones, though holding within itself all the germs of these
latter. The Ego then remains apparently sunk in sleep for a varying
period, though never for very long; then the germs in the causal body
become active, build up a new series of bodies in succession--the
mental, the astral, and finally the physical--and the soul returns
once more to incarnation.

It will now be understood how it comes about that a soul of average
development--on entering a new cycle, with the memory of the last
cycle considerably obliterated by the loss of the physical, astral,
and mental bodies, sheathed in new bodies on these planes, bodies that
have nothing in common with the life of the past--is unable to impress
its dim memories on to the brain; but it will also be seen that, with
the progress of evolution, the soul acquires ever clearer
consciousness in the causal body, in which it finally preserves the
memory of the various life-cycles. Since, at this stage, it has become
capable of projecting its vibrations, voluntarily, through the lower
bodies, it is able to transmit this memory first to the mental body,
then to the astral, and lastly to the physical body; when this is
possible, man, in waking consciousness, remembers his former lives.

This transmission requires a purificatory process in the vehicles and
a special training of the will. The matter of all the bodies--that of
the brain in particular--must be refined, its constituent elements
must be subtler, and its atoms must be fully awakened to
activity[246]; whereupon the cerebral cell becomes capable of
responding to the thought of the Ego, _i.e._, of vibrating in harmony
with the higher matter.

The second condition of the brain's receptivity is that this organ be
brought into a state of complete rest. So long as the waking
consciousness is active, the brain vibrates powerfully, and if, at
this time, the soul sends the brain its thought, this latter can no
more make an impression on the existing cerebral activity than a faint
note could be heard amid the clash of an orchestra. Consequently, man,
by the training of his will, must have acquired the power to stop the
thinking activity in the waking state, and to "centre" his attention
on the causal body, the only vehicle in which he can know the facts of
his past incarnations; this done he is able, at will, to project on to
his brain the scenes of his former lives and to imprint them thereon
with greater distinctness, in proportion to his development and
training.

In order to avoid continued explanations, we will deal with another
side of the question, however incomprehensible it be to such as have
not studied theosophy.

A vehicle of consciousness is both a registering apparatus[247] and a
conductor of vibrations.[248] The kinds of matter of which forms are
made up are perfectly graduated; the finest atom of the physical body
is built up of the densest atoms of the astral plane, the finest atom
of the astral body is made of the densest atoms of the mental plane,
and so on. Each atom is linked to the one that precedes and to the one
that follows it in that immense chain which stretches from the densest
to the subtlest plane of the Cosmos. Every vibration follows this
path, passes in all directions--in the seven[249] dimensions of
space-and terminates in the very Centre of consciousness, the Logos,
God incarnate in the world.

It is then comprehensible, even logical, that God should be both
conscious, on his receptive side, of everything that takes place in
the world (_omniscient_), and should produce, on his active side, all
the forces of the world (_omnipotent_). It is likewise admissible that
the human soul, when fully developed, should find in the causal body
the memory of the facts that have echoed therein, from the time when
it could function consciously in it. But, it will be asked, how could
it find, in the causal body, memories of existences it has not been
able to register individually, of which it has not been conscious,
those, for instance, that form the early stages of its evolution at a
time when it was conscious only in the lower vehicles?

Memory possesses many store-houses. The vibrations of which it is
composed affect the whole Universe, there is not a single local shock
that is not felt throughout all the worlds. The eternal registering of
things takes place in the great centre of consciousness, God, or
rather, it exists in him, for to him there is neither future nor past,
only one eternal present; evolution is unceasingly accomplished[250];
but if we look upon ourselves as finite beings, living in the illusion
of time and space, we find that vibrating matter preserves for a
longer or a shorter period the movement imparted to it. The denser the
substance, which forms the medium in which vibration takes place, the
feebler the vibration; that is why it speedily ceases on the physical
plane; it continues long, however, in the higher conditions of matter,
and it is there we must look for it,[251] if we would recall certain
events at which we have not been present. When anything exciting, a
murder, a battle, for instance, has happened anywhere, the subtler
atoms of the surrounding objects receive a powerful shock and continue
to vibrate for centuries. Those who have developed their inner senses
can thus witness the scene which is continually repeating itself, or
rather, is happening all the time.[252] Thus, psychometrists,[253] in
presence of a portion of a fossil, are enabled to bring back scenes
that this fragment has witnessed millions of years ago.[254]

In these cases, the memory of the facts is connected with that of the
atoms which register it; this memory can only be recalled by coming
into contact with these atoms.[255]

There is also another memory, midway between the unconscious memory of
atoms and the conscious memory of the human soul; that of the forms of
the various sub-human kingdoms. It is only slightly conscious, for it
is not individualised; all the same, it is precise in its nature. It
dwells in the vital essence of the form, an essence taken from a
collective "block" which supplies a portion of its substance to the
individuals of the same species; this incarnate portion of essence,
when the form disintegrates at death, returns to the parent "block,"
to which it communicates the result of its experiences, and when the
latter sends out a portion of itself, into a new form, this tentacle,
which is, so to speak, the soul of the form, is in possession of the
whole of the experiences of the "block."[256] This explains how it is
that the individual members of certain hostile species know one
another from birth--the chicken, for instance, which, immediately it
has left the egg, trembles before the hawk hovering above in the air;
such is also the reason why a duckling plunges into water as soon as
it comes to a pond, and the same instinct impels a bird to leave its
nest and trust itself to the air when fully fledged.

In these collective souls, belonging to the mineral, vegetable, and
animal kingdoms, there can be recovered the past to which they bore
witness, when the atoms of their bodies have been dispersed and
entered into new combinations.

When the elemental Essence[257] has definitely split up, and the
"blocks" have become separate, individualised, human fragments,[258]
each of these fragments is a causal body, a definite, immortal
_centre_ in the total Centre. Consequently there are in man three
kinds of memory: atomic memory, that of the atoms of his bodies;
instinctive memory of the special elemental essences which are the
collective souls of his various vehicles; and finally, the individual
memory of the centre,[259] which is one with the total Centre from
which it comes.

This element of unity, this human "I" in the divine "I," when
sufficiently developed, is able to evoke the memory of all the events
in which it has participated in the causal body, and also the memory
of those it has witnessed as a collective soul (elemental "block") in
bygone ages when active in various mineral, vegetable, and animal
species. As a centre in the great Centre, it can also call forth the
memory of everything in the Universe that its consciousness can
grasp.[260] And when, in this long pilgrimage, it has developed to the
farthest limits of the Universe it knows all that has been, is now,
and is to be in this Universe, consequently it knows both what it has
and what it has not participated in, for everything in the Universe
has then become part of itself.

Thus it is seen that the memory of the past is everywhere registered,
and that the difficulty a man has in bringing it back is caused by
nothing more than his imperfect development. Once he has entered the
"Strait Gate,"[261] and his consciousness is awake on the first plane
of Unity,[262] he becomes able to read the Great Book of Nature, in
which all vibrations are kept in potentiality; he can revive them by
an effort of will, similar to that he makes in a waking state, when he
wishes to bring back past impressions to his brain. The difference
lies in the fact that, in the latter case, being in the physical body,
he calls up the memory retained in the astral body; whilst in the
former case, being in the causal body, he brings memory within the
influence of the buddhic body, or even at times of higher bodies
still. The more the Being grows, and becomes able to fix his
consciousness on the higher planes, the wider extends his sphere of
influence, approaching that of divine Consciousness.

It is ignorance that brings forward this objection regarding loss of
memory, ignorance of life and of death, ignorance of the phenomena
that follow the last breath of a dying man, as well as of those
preceding the first faint cry of a new-born child. Sceptics, however,
might have shown a little more indulgence, for, as they are well
aware, ordinary memory _is_ even now so unreliable that a man has
great difficulty in recalling the whole of the thoughts that have
entered his brain during the last few minutes; he has forgotten the
details of the various events of the week; the facts of the past year
have mostly vanished from his mind, and when he comes to the end of
the journey, mere fragments of the story of his life are all that is
left. For all that, he has all the time retained the notion of the
identity of his "I"; he has the same body, the same senses, and the
same brain; his environment is the same; everything is there to bring
about association of ideas, to awaken memory. On the other hand,
centuries have elapsed before Rebirth takes place; the human being has
undergone the most radical changes and modifications; everything in
him that was perishable has disappeared, and is preserved only in a
germinal state. The visible bodily sheath has had its atoms scattered
to the four elements; the etheric body[263] has become separated from
the physical molecules whose vital support it formed; the body of
passions and desires (_astral body_) has lived for a few years in what
Catholics call _Purgatory_, Greeks, _Hades_, and Hindus, _Kamaloka_;
after which, only germs have been left behind; then the intelligence
(_mental body_) has been dispersed in turn and endures only in a
germinal state. Almost everything that made up the man of bygone times
has disappeared, and is now concentrated in a complex germ hidden away
in the causal body and destined to develop a new personality later
on,[264] heir to the former one, though it will not be capable of
remembering events in which it took no part.

This is the explanation of the myth of Lethe.

The soul, in the causal body, drinks of the river of Life, and from
its sleep-giving draught forms the sheaths of the new incarnation, the
new bodies that altogether blot out the memory of the past; it is, in
very truth, a new-born babe who appears on earth.

The Root-Being,[265] however, survives the successive wrecks of
fleeting personalities, remaining in the new man as a guide, as the
"Voice of Conscience." He is the Watcher who strings, as on a thread,
the numberless pearls (_personalities_) which form the inevitable
cycle of human evolution, and is able, when fully developed, to summon
up the distant panorama of past lives. For him, nothing is lost.

The pioneers of the race have obtained direct proof of successive
incarnations, but apart from these rare and special instances,
ordinary individuals frequently have reminiscences and distinct
memories which are not investigated, either because they are
fragmentary in their nature or are related by children. In India,
where the natives believe in Reincarnation, such cases are regarded
without astonishment, and efforts are made to prove their truth by
serious investigation, whenever possible. And such proof is often
possible. When a child dies in infancy, before he is able to use his
body intelligently and of his own free will--before being able to
generate karma--the higher sheaths (_the astral and mental bodies_)
are not separated into their component parts. Return to earth quickly
takes place, the memory of the past life exists in the astral
body--which has not changed--and, more especially during the first few
years of life, can be impressed on the new brain with tolerable ease,
if this latter is at all delicately constituted. Then if reincarnation
takes place in the same country and in the neighbourhood of the past
incarnation, it can be proved to be true. Such instances do exist; the
reason they are not mentioned here is that they would add nothing to
the general proofs on which stress has been laid in this work. These
proofs form part of universal Law; they cannot be separated therefrom.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 81: The fifth, or Aryan race, in theosophic nomenclature;
the fourth was that of Atlantis; the third lived on the great southern
continent, Lemuria; the two preceding ones were, so to speak, only the
embryologic preparation for the following races.]

[Footnote 82: The "life-atoms," infinitesimal particles which by
aggregation form the human body. Certain of these atoms are preserved,
on the death of the body, as germs which will facilitate the
reconstruction of the physical body at the next rebirth.]

[Footnote 83: The divine Essence which animates animals, and so, in
another sense the astral bodies of men and animals, bodies whose
particles _transmigrate_ as do the physical atoms.]

[Footnote 84: H. P. Blavatsky, _Secret Doctrine._]

[Footnote 85: These words are relative; they express differences in
the evolution of souls.]

[Footnote 86: The atmosphere of subtle physical elements radiating
round the human body and acting in a defensive _role_ by preventing
the penetration of unhealthy elements from the immediate
surroundings.]

[Footnote 87: The "material sin" of Manu.]

[Footnote 88: One, here means the "life atoms" of a man's body.]

[Footnote 89: The word is here used in a generic sense; in the present
work, it would be more precise to replace it by the word
Resurrection.]

[Footnote 90: This "triad" comprises the visible matter of the body,
the etheric substance, and the life (Prana) which the human ether
absorbs and specialises for the vitalising of the body. See _Man and
his Bodies_, by A. Besant.]

[Footnote 91: H. P. Blavatsky, _The Theosophist_, Vol. 4, pages 287,
288.]

[Footnote 92: The finer elements invisible to physical eye. Their
function is sensation, and by their association with the human mental
body incarnated in them, they give birth to the emotions and passions,
in a word, to the animal in man.]

[Footnote 93: The _Umbra_ of the Latin races.]

[Footnote 94: The _Kama Rupa_ of the Hindus.]

[Footnote 95: The purgatory of Christians, the astral plane of
theosophists, and the _Kamaloka_ of Hindus.]

[Footnote 96: By the _fire_ of purgatory, says the Catholic metaphor.]

[Footnote 97: See A. Besant's masterly work on _Reincarnation._]

[Footnote 98: Dharma is a wide word, primarily meaning the essential
nature of a thing; hence the laws of its being, its duty; and it
includes religious rites, appropriate to those laws. This definition,
as also the extracts quoted, are taken from A. Besant's translation of
the _Bhagavad Gita._]

[Footnote 99: Human souls, not all of them, but only the pious ones,
are daimonic and divine. Once separated from the body, and after the
struggle to acquire piety, which consists in knowing God and injuring
none, such a soul becomes all intelligence. The impious soul, however,
remains in its own essence and punishes itself by seeking a human body
to enter into, for no other body can receive a human soul, it cannot
enter the body of an animal devoid of reason: divine law preserves the
human soul from such infamy. Hermes Trismegistus, Book I, _Lacle_:
Hermes to his son Tat.]

[Footnote 100: Bodies.]

[Footnote 101: The physical body with its etheric "double," and life
(_Prana_).]

[Footnote 102: The kamic body.]

[Footnote 103: The causal body.]

[Footnote 104: _History_. Book 2, chap. 123.]

[Footnote 105: The causal body.]

[Footnote 106: The buddhic body, which, in ordinary man, is only in an
embryonic stage.]

[Footnote 107: Generally called _Prana_, in man. _Jiva_ is the solar
life which, on being transmuted by the physical body, becomes _Prana_,
the human physical life. Both _Jiva_ and _Prana_ differ from each
other in nature and in vibration.]

[Footnote 108: The mental body.]

[Footnote 109: The causal body. In annihilation--what has been called
the loss of the soul--the kamic principle (astral body) in the course
of a rather long succession of lives, does not allow the mental body
to become separated from it in purgatory; it keeps it imprisoned up to
the time of its disintegration; the causal body reaps nothing from the
incarnations, at each re-birth it loses the forces it is putting forth
in order to form the new mental body. It gradually atrophies until the
time comes when it is no longer fit to make use of the ordinary bodies
of the race to which it belongs. Then it remains at rest, whilst the
mental body gradually disintegrates; afterwards it takes up once again
its series of incarnations in the imperfectly evolved bodies of
primitive races. This will be understood only by those who have
studied theosophy.]

[Footnote 110: In this passage, H. P. Blavatsky alludes to the few
etheric, astral, and mental atoms which, at each disincarnation, are
incorporated in the causal body and form the nuclei of the future
bodies corresponding to them.]

[Footnote 111: _History._ Vol. 2, book 2, chap. 123 (already quoted).]

[Footnote 112: Of the elements of the personality--of the astral body,
in all probability.]

[Footnote 113: The Ego (soul) also lives in the air (the symbol of
heaven) and on the earth (whose symbol is water, dense matter)--in
heaven, after disincarnation; on earth, during incarnation.]

[Footnote 114: The soul is immortal and needs no food.]

[Footnote 115: Its name, Khopiroo, comes from the root Koproo, to
become, to be born again (H. P. Blavatsky).

Hartley says: "At the centre of the solar disk appears the Scarabeus
as the symbol of the soul re-uniting itself with the body. The
Scarabeus is called by Pierret the synthesis of the Egyptian
religion--type of resurrection--of self-existence--of self-engendering
like the Gods. As Tori, or Chepi, the Sun is the Scarabeus, or
self-engenderer, and the mystery of God."]

[Footnote 116: Also called kamic body, astral body, body of desire,
etc.]

[Footnote 117: Reincarnation.]

[Footnote 118: Vol. 3, p. 124.]

[Footnote 119: The causal body illumined by the divine Essence, which
theosophy names Atma-Buddhi.]

[Footnote 120: He calls him "the prince of lying fathers and dishonest
writers." (_Egypt_, vol. 1, p. 200).]

[Footnote 121: Eusebius even confesses this himself: "I have set forth
whatever is calculated to enhance the glory of our religion, and kept
back everything likely to cast a stain upon it." (_Proeparatio
Evangelica._ Book 12, chap. 31).]

[Footnote 122: _Namae-Sat Vakhshur-i-Mahabad_, also in the fourth
"Journey" in chap. 4 of _Jam-i-Kaikhoshru_ (see _The Theosophist_, p.
333, vol. 21).]

[Footnote 123: See _Bardic Triads_, by E. Williams. Translated from
the original Welsh.]

[Footnote 124: "'Abred' is the circle of the migrations through which
every animated being proceeds from death: man has passed through it."
_Triad_ 13.

"Transmigration is in 'Abred.'" _Triad_ 14.

"There are three primitive calamities in 'Abred': the necessity of
evolution (of rebirths), the absence of memory (of past incarnations)
and death (followed by rebirth)." _Triad_ 18 (the words in parentheses
are our own).

"By reason of three things man is subjected to 'Abred' (or
transmigration): by the absence of the effort to attain knowledge, by
non-attachment to good, and by attachment to evil. As the result of
these, he descends into 'Abred,' to the stage corresponding to his
development, and begins his transmigrations anew." _Triad_ 25.

"The three foundations of science are: complete transmigration through
every state of being, the memory of the details of each
transmigration, the power to pass again at will through any state, to
acquire experience and judgment, (_a_) This comes to pass in the
circle of Gwynvyd." _Triad_ 36.

(_a_) The liberated being has power to call up the past, to tune his
consciousness with that of every being, to feel everything that being
feels, to be that being.]

[Footnote 125: In the poem _Cad-Godden_, quoted by Pezzani in _La
Pluralite des Existences de l'Ame_, p. 93. Taliesin is a generic name
indicating a function rather than the name of an individual.]

[Footnote 126: _Gallic War_ (Book 2, chap. 6). Valerius Maximus
relates that these nations lent one another money which was to be paid
back in the other world, and that at Marseilles a sweet-tasted poison
was given to anyone who, wishing to commit suicide, offered the judges
satisfactory reasons for leaving his body.]

[Footnote 127: _The Mystery of the Ages_, by the Duchesse de Pomar.]

[Footnote 128: In _Theologia_ or the _Seven Adyta._]

[Footnote 129: The "Cycle of Necessity" extends from the time when the
soul begins to evolve to the moment when it attains to liberation.]

[Footnote 130: _Life of Pythagoras._ Book 8, chap. 14.]

[Footnote 131: Ovid's _Metamorphoses_. Book 15.]

[Footnote 132: All that remained of the shield was the carved ivory
ornamentation, the iron had been eaten away by rust.]

[Footnote 133: Philostratus, _Life of Apollonius of Tyana._]

[Footnote 134: Philostratus, _Life of Apollonius of Tyana._]

[Footnote 135: Marinas, _Vita Procli._]

[Footnote 136: The Ego, the human soul properly so-called, what Egypt
named the liberated intelligence which resumes its sheath of light,
and again becomes a "daimon" (_Maspero_). In antiquity the name of
daimon was given to the human soul or to higher intelligences.]

[Footnote 137: _Hades_; the Purgatory of Catholics; the _Kamaloka_ of
Hindus.]

[Footnote 138: Allusion to the struggle which separates the mental
from the astral body in Purgatory.]

[Footnote 139: _Kamaloka_; Purgatory.]

[Footnote 140: The subterranean hell, the lowest world in Purgatory.]

[Footnote 141: Plato's _Laws_, Book 10.]

[Footnote 142: Plato's _Republic_, Book 10.]

[Footnote 143: They are in the causal body.]

[Footnote 144: _Phaedo._]

[Footnote 145: These considerations are taken from the writings of H.
P. Blavatsky, and are also confirmed by modern criticism of biblical
texts.]

[Footnote 146: Maimonides. Quoted in _The Perfect Way_, by A.
Kingsford and E. Maitland.]

[Footnote 147: _Galatians_, chap. 4, verses 24, 25.]

[Footnote 148: _Starli_, part 4, p. 5.]

[Footnote 149: _Deuteronomy_, chap. 24, verses 1 to 4.]

[Footnote 150: _Deuteronomy_, chap. 17, verse 17.]

[Footnote 151: _Exodus_, chap. 21, verses 2 to 11.]

[Footnote 152: _Exodus_, chap. 21, verses 23, 24, 25.]

[Footnote 153: _Genesis_, chap. 9, verses 5, 6; also _Leviticus_,
chap. 7.]

[Footnote 154: _Exodus_, chapters 6, 12, 14, 22, 32,]

[Footnote 155: _Ecclesiastes_, chap. 3, verses 18, 19, 20, 22.]

[Footnote 156: The souls of a race in its maturity are of a more
advanced type than those of its infancy or old age.]

[Footnote 157: The Kabala is the secret teaching of the Jews; in it
lie hidden doctrines that are too profound to be taught in public.]

[Footnote 158: _Zohar_, 2, 99, quoted in Myer's _Qabbalah_, p. 198.]

[Footnote 159: Evolution develops the soul, enabling it to reach its
goal: the divine state.]

[Footnote 160: The force of evolution comes from God and ceases only
when the soul is fully developed, and has reached the "promised land"
at the end of its pilgrimage: the divine state.]

[Footnote 161: Franck, _La Kabbale_, p. 244, etc.]

[Footnote 162: _The Hidden Wisdom of Christ_, 1864, vol. 1, p. 39.]

[Footnote 163: _De Bell. jud._ 2, 11.]

[Footnote 164: One of the lowest sub-planes of _Kamaloka_
(Purgatory).]

[Footnote 165: The Christian Heaven (_Devachan_ of theosophy).]

[Footnote 166: The earth, which is above when compared with Tartarus,
but not so in relation to the Elysian Fields; versification imposes
such strict limits on expression, that it must have the benefit of
poetic licence.]

[Footnote 167: Freret, _Examen crit. des apologistes de la relig.
chret._, pages 12 and 13, Paris, 1823.]

[Footnote 168: Faustus.]

[Footnote 169: And yet the _Gospel of Saint John_ denies this (chap.
1, v. 21). The contradictions in the gospels are so numerous that they
alone have created thousands of infidels.]

[Footnote 170: Stolberg expresses himself as follows on this matter:
"This question was evidently based on the opinion that the disciples
of Jesus had formed, that this man, whose punishment dated from his
very birth, had sinned in a previous life." (_Histoire de N. S.
Jesus-Christ et de son siecle_, Book 3, chap. 43).]

[Footnote 171: _Revelation_, chap. 3, v. 12.]

[Footnote 172: _Revelation_, chap. 2, v. 28.]

[Footnote 173: _Revelation_, chap. 22, v. 16.]

[Footnote 174: _Revelation_, chap. 2, v. 17.]

[Footnote 175: H. P. Blavatsky.]

[Footnote 176: "Taken literally, the Book of the Creation gives us the
most absurd and extravagant ideas of Divinity."]

[Footnote 177: First _Ennead_, chap. I.]

[Footnote 178: The Universe, which can exist only through
_multiplicity._]

[Footnote 179: Second _Ennead_, chap. 3.]

[Footnote 180: Second _Ennead_, chap. 8.]

[Footnote 181: Third _Ennead_, chap. 4.]

[Footnote 182: _Concerning Abstinence_; Book 2.]

[Footnote 183: _Egyptian Mysteries_, Book 4, chap. 4.]

[Footnote 184: Here, _reincarnation_ is meant.]

[Footnote 185: This philosopher was surnamed _Peisithanatos_ (the
death-persuader).]

[Footnote 186: _Vie de Pythagore_, vol. I, p. 28.]

[Footnote 187: _Hist. de l'Ec. a'Alex._, vol. I, p 588.]

[Footnote 188: In this work, he says:

"The winged tribe, that has feathers instead of hair, is formed of
innocent but superficial human beings, pompous and frivolous in
speech, who, in their simplicity, imagine that the sense of vision is
the best judge of the existence of things. Those who take no interest
whatever in philosophy become four-footed animals and wild
beasts...."]

[Footnote 189: _Commentaries on the Golden Verses of Pythagoras._]

[Footnote 190: Hermes, _Commentaries of Chalcidius on the Timaeus._]

[Footnote 191: _Procli Diadochi in Platonis Timaeum Commentaria._]

[Footnote 192: September, 1898, p. 3.]

[Footnote 193: The life of the animal to which it is bound.]

[Footnote 194: The instrument must be suited to the development of the
artist; too highly developed a body would be bad for a man very low
down in the scale of humanity. This will, in some measure, explain the
paradoxical word here used; the _advantage_ there may sometimes be in
putting on a rudimentary body.]

[Footnote 195: G. R. S. Mead tells us that Justin believed in
Reincarnation only whilst he was a Platonist; he opposed this teaching
after his conversion to Christianity (See _Theosophical Review_,
April, 1906).]

[Footnote 196: Does this obscure passage refer to the resurrection of
the body?]

[Footnote 197: _Adversus Gentes_. "We die many times, and as often do
we rise again from the dead."]

[Footnote 198: Hyeronim., _Epistola ad Demetr...._]

[Footnote 199: Book 2, quest. 6, No. 17.]

[Footnote 200: _Ephesians_, ch. 1, v. 4 ... he hath chosen us in him
before the foundation of the world.]

[Footnote 201: _Instit. divin._, 3, 18.]

[Footnote 202: _Confessions_, I, ch. 6.]

[Footnote 203: _On the Immortality of the Soul_, chap. 12.]

[Footnote 204: _Hist. de Manichee et du Manicheisme_, vol. 2, p. 492.]

[Footnote 205: _Stromata._, vol. 3, p. 433. Edition des Benedictins.]

[Footnote 206: The words in parenthesis are by the author.]

[Footnote 207: _Cont. Cels._ Book 4, chap. 17.]

[Footnote 208: [Greek: ti akolouthei].]

[Footnote 209: _De Principiis_, Book 3, chap. 5.]

[Footnote 210: _Contra Celsum_, Book 1.]

[Footnote 211: _Contra Celsum_, Book 1, chap. 6.]

[Footnote 212: _De Principiis_, Book 3, chap. 5.]

[Footnote 213: _De Principiis_, Book 4, chap. 5.]

[Footnote 214: _Contra Celsum_, Book 7, chap. 32.]

[Footnote 215: E. Aroux. _Les Mysteres de la Chevalerie._]

[Footnote 216: Quoted by I. Cooper Oakley in _Traces of a Hidden
Tradition in Masonry and Mediaeval Mysticism_, a very interesting work
on the sects which connect the early centuries with modern times.]

[Footnote 217: See _L'Islamisme et son Enseignement Esoterique_, by
Ed. Bailly. _Publications theosophiques_, Paris, 1903.]

[Footnote 218: Chapter 18.]

[Footnote 219: Islam is now awaiting the coming of the Mahdi, its last
prophet; prophecy says that he will be the reincarnation of Mohammed
(_Borderland_, April, 1907).]

[Footnote 220: This is the reason Afghans still undertake pilgrimages
to Mecca.]

[Footnote 221: Chap. 22, verses 5, 14, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 41. Quoted
by Lady Caithness in _Old Truths in a New Light._]

[Footnote 222: Chap. 23, verses 17, 26, 27, etc.]

[Footnote 223: By religion is here understood the devotional aspect
and the scientific side of the teaching of Truth, _i.e._, the science
of the divine Soul.]

[Footnote 224: _Nirmanakayas_ are beings who have become perfect, and
who, instead of entering the Nirvana their efforts have won, renounce
peace and bliss in order to help forward their human brothers in their
evolution.]

[Footnote 225:

    O! genus attonitum gelidae formidine mortis,
    Quid Styga, quid tenebras, quid nomina vana timetis,
    Materiam vatum, falsique piacula mundi?
    Corpora sive rogus flamma, seu tabe vetustas
    Abstulerit, mala posse pati non ulla putetis
    Morte carent animae: semperque priore relicta
    Sede, novis domibus habitant vivuntque receptae
                   . . . . . . . . .
    Omnia mutantur, nihil interit ...

]

[Footnote 226: _S. John's Gospel_, chap. 9, verse 2.]

[Footnote 227: The following passages are taken from three of C.
Savy's works: _Comment. du Sermon sur la Montagne_ (1818); _Pensees et
Meditations_ (1829); _Dieu et l'Homme en cette Vie et Audela_ (1838).]

[Footnote 228: _De l'Humanite_, vol. 1., p. 233.]

[Footnote 229: _Theorie de l'Unite Universelle_, vol. 2, p. 304-348.]

[Footnote 230: _Vie Future au Point de Vue Socialiste_, and
_Confession d'un Cure de Village._]

[Footnote 231: _Destinees de l'Ame._]

[Footnote 232: Alluding to the complete renewing of the material
molecules of the body, every seven years.]

[Footnote 233: Whose consciousness, however (along with memory), is at
the summit of the hierarchy which is its origin.]

[Footnote 234: Molecules and atoms have a particular consciousness of
their own which does not cease to function when, on the departure of
the individual soul, the body, as such, ceases to function.]

[Footnote 235: If sufficiently developed, however, he can be made
conscious of this in a higher vehicle.]

[Footnote 236: When man has barely entered the human stage--in
primitive man.]

[Footnote 237: Consciousness begins in the physical body, its simplest
instrument.]

[Footnote 238: There are other vehicles above the causal body.]

[Footnote 239: All the powers of the Universe are in the divine germ,
as the tree is in its seed.]

[Footnote 240: Because it no longer has a dense physical body. There
are exceptions to this rule, but there is no necessity to mention them
here.]

[Footnote 241: The Christian Heaven, the _Devachan_ of Theosophy.]

[Footnote 242: This character has already appeared on the astral
plane, though not in so striking a fashion.]

[Footnote 243: Unity exists on the plane of the Ego, and the latter
sends his thought into the forms made out of his vehicles; this will
be understood only by the few, but an explanation cannot be given at
this point, without writing a volume on the whole of theosophy.]

[Footnote 244: We are still dealing with the ordinary man.]

[Footnote 245: When liberation is attained. This can be effected
rapidly by those who _will_ to attain it.]

[Footnote 246: Only four of the seven atomic _spirillae_ are active in
this our fourth planetary Round (one for each Round). They can be
rapidly vitalised by the will.]

[Footnote 247: When the soul is "centred" in it.]

[Footnote 248: The vibrations, whether registered as they pass or not
registered, continue their course through the substance of the
Universe.]

[Footnote 249: Science even now recognises four of these dimensions.]

[Footnote 250: This is said in order to satisfy such as are of a
metaphysical turn of mind, and frequently prone to criticism.]

[Footnote 251: When the inner senses are developed.]

[Footnote 252: A question will doubtless at once rise to the minds of
many readers; how can the same atoms produce, at once and almost
eternally, millions of different facts? We will reply briefly. Science
has been able to conceive of an explanation of a fact apparently quite
as absurd--the phenomenon of the balls of Russian platinum mentioned
by Zoellner (_Transcendental Physics_, ch. 9) which pass through
hermetically sealed glass tubes, and that of the German copper coins
dropping through the bottom of a sealed box on to a slate--by
accepting a fourth dimension of space. Who would affirm that the
dimensions of space are limited to four? Or that the science of the
immediate future will not be brought face to face with facts, and
find, in a fifth or sixth dimension of space, a possible explanation
of the phenomenon here mentioned, one which initiated seers can test
whenever they please, because it is a real fact?

Still, as these seers say, the coarsest atoms generally register only
one image, others register fresh images, so that in many cases there
is quite a superposition of images which must be carefully examined to
avoid errors.]

[Footnote 253: A psychometrist is a person endowed with a very fine
nervous system, capable of repeating the delicate vibrations which act
upon the inmost atoms of a body. In this way, by placing himself in
presence of an object that has been in contact with some individual,
he can clearly describe the latter's physical, moral, and mental
characteristics. Hitherto, Buchanan and Professor Denton have been the
most remarkable psychometrists; the experiments related in their works
have been made before witnesses and permit of no doubt whatever as to
the reality of this strange faculty.]

[Footnote 254: Instances of this are numerous in Professor Denton's
_The Soul of Things._]

[Footnote 255: This memory is preserved in the first "life-wave."]

[Footnote 256: This is _instinct_, _i.e._, a semi-conscious memory,
located in the "life-wave" of the second Logos.]

[Footnote 257: The divine Essence incarnated in the matter of the
lower planes of the Universe.]

[Footnote 258: When the "essence," after the destruction of the form
to which it gives life, no more returns to the parent-block from which
it came, it has become individualised, ready to enter into the _human
kingdom._]

[Footnote 259: The memory of the third life-wave, of the first Logos.]

[Footnote 260: Everything, for instance, that concerns the planes of
the planetary system, on which it has finished its evolution.]

[Footnote 261: The passing of consciousness from the causal body to
the nascent buddhic body.]

[Footnote 262: The buddhic plane (the one immediately above the
mental) is one in which the forms are so subtle that they no longer
_limit_ the Life (_the Soul of the World_) animating them. This Life
comes directly into contact with the Life which causes all forms to
live; it then sees Unity: it sees itself everywhere and in everything,
the joys and sorrows of forms other than its own are its joys and
sorrows, for it is universal Life.]

[Footnote 263: This body is composed of physical matter, and therefore
belongs to the physical plane. It has been given a special name, not
only because it is made of ether, but because it can be separated from
the physical body.]

[Footnote 264: The whole of the bodies: mental, astral, and physical.]

[Footnote 265: The Ego (soul) in the causal body.]




CONCLUSION.


We have now come to the end of our study: a task to which we have
certainly not been equal, so far is it beyond our powers. As, however,
we have drawn inspiration from our predecessors, so have we also, in
our turn, endeavoured to shed a few more rays of light on certain
points of this important subject, and indicate fresh paths that may be
followed by such as enter upon this line of investigation in the
future.

It is our most ardent desire to see this fertile soil well tilled, for
it will yield an abundant harvest. Mankind is dying in strife and
despair; the torrent of human activity is everywhere seething and
foaming. Here ignorance buries its victims in a noisome den of slime
and filth; there, the strong and ruthless, veritable vampires, batten
on the labour and drain away the very life of the weak and helpless;
farther away, science stumbles against the wall of the Unknown;
philosophy takes up its stand on the cold barren glacier of
intellectualism; religions are stifled and struggle for existence
beneath the age-long accumulations of the "letter that killeth." More
now than ever before do we need to find a reason for morality, a guide
for science, an Ariadne's thread for philosophy, a torch to throw
light on religion, and Love over all, for if mankind continues to
devote the whole of its strength to the pursuit of material benefits,
if its most glorious conquests become instruments to advance
selfishness, if its progress merely increases physical wretchedness
and makes moral decadence more terrible than before, if the head
continues to silence the appeals of the heart, then divine Compassion
will have no alternative but to destroy beneath the waters of another
flood this cruel, implacable civilisation, which has transformed earth
into an inferno.

Amongst the most pressing and urgent truths, the most fruitful
teachings, the most illuminating doctrines, the most comforting
promises, we have no hesitation in placing the Law of Rebirths in the
very front. It is supported by ethics, by reason, and by science; it
offers an explanation of the enigma of life, it alone solves almost
all the problems that have harassed the mind of man throughout the
ages; and so we hope that, in spite of its many imperfections, this
work of ours will induce many a reader to say: _Reincarnation must be
true, if could not be otherwise!_

THE END

       *       *       *       *       *








