VII

PROFESSOR PRATT ON TRUTH

I

[Footnote: Reprinted from the Journal of Philosophy, etc., August 15,
1907 (vol. iv, p. 464).]

Professor J. B. Pratt's paper in the Journal of Philosophy for June 6,
1907, is so brilliantly written that its misconception of the pragmatist
position seems doubly to call for a reply.

He asserts that, for a pragmatist, truth cannot be a relation between
an idea and a reality outside and transcendent of the idea, but must
lie 'altogether within experience,' where it will need 'no reference to
anything else to justify it'--no reference to the object, apparently.
The pragmatist must 'reduce everything to psychology,' aye, and to the
psychology of the immediate moment. He is consequently debarred from
saying that an idea that eventually gets psychologically verified WAS
already true before the process of verifying was complete; and he is
equally debarred from treating an idea as true provisionally so long as
he only believes that he CAN verify it whenever he will.

Whether such a pragmatist as this exists, I know not, never having
myself met with the beast. We can define terms as we like; and if that
be my friend Pratt's definition of a pragmatist, I can only concur with
his anti-pragmatism. But, in setting up the weird type, he quotes words
from me; so, in order to escape being classed by some reader along with
so asinine a being, I will reassert my own view of truth once more.

Truth is essentially a relation between two things, an idea, on the one
hand, and a reality outside of the idea, on the other. This relation,
like all relations, has its fundamentum, namely, the matrix of
experiential circumstance, psychological as well as physical, in which
the correlated terms are found embedded. In the case of the relation
between 'heir' and 'legacy' the fundamentum is a world in which there
was a testator, and in which there is now a will and an executor; in the
case of that between idea and object, it is a world with circumstances
of a sort to make a satisfactory verification process, lying around
and between the two terms. But just as a man may be called an heir and
treated as one before the executor has divided the estate, so an idea
may practically be credited with truth before the verification process
has been exhaustively carried out--the existence of the mass of
verifying circumstance is enough. Where potentiality counts for
actuality in so many other cases, one does not see why it may not so
count here. We call a man benevolent not only for his kind acts paid in,
but for his readiness to perform others; we treat an idea as 'luminous'
not only for the light it has shed, but for that we expect it will
shed on dark problems. Why should we not equally trust the truth of our
ideas? We live on credits everywhere; and we use our ideas far oftener
for calling up things connected with their immediate objects, than for
calling up those objects themselves. Ninety-nine times out of a hundred
the only use we should make of the object itself, if we were led up to
it by our idea, would be to pass on to those connected things by its
means. So we continually curtail verification-processes, letting our
belief that they are possible suffice.

What CONSTITUTES THE RELATION known as truth, I now say, is just the
EXISTENCE IN THE EMPIRICAL WORLD OF THIS FUNDAMENTUM OF CIRCUMSTANCE
SURROUNDING OBJECT AND IDEA and ready to be either short-circuited
or traversed at full length. So long as it exists, and a satisfactory
passage through it between the object and the idea is possible, that
idea will both BE true, and will HAVE BEEN true of that object, whether
fully developed verification has taken place or not. The nature and
place and affinities of the object of course play as vital a part in
making the particular passage possible as do the nature and associative
tendencies of the idea; so that the notion that truth could fall
altogether inside of the thinker's private experience and be something
purely psychological, is absurd. It is BETWEEN the idea and the object
that the truth-relation is to be sought and it involves both terms.

But the 'intellectualistic' position, if I understand Mr. Pratt rightly,
is that, altho we can use this fundamentum, this mass of go-between
experience, for TESTING truth, yet the truth-relation in itself remains
as something apart. It means, in Mr. Pratt's words, merely 'THIS SIMPLE
THING THAT THE OBJECT OF WHICH ONE IS THINKING IS AS ONE THINKS IT.'

It seems to me that the word 'as,' which qualifies the relation here,
and bears the whole 'epistemological' burden, is anything but simple.
What it most immediately suggests is that the idea should be LIKE the
object; but most of our ideas, being abstract concepts, bear almost no
resemblance to their objects. The 'as' must therefore, I should say, be
usually interpreted functionally, as meaning that the idea shall lead
us into the same quarters of experience AS the object would. Experience
leads ever on and on, and objects and our ideas of objects may both
lead to the same goals. The ideas being in that case shorter cuts, we
SUBSTITUTE them more and more for their objects; and we habitually waive
direct verification of each one of them, as their train passes through
our mind, because if an idea leads AS the object would lead, we can say,
in Mr. Pratt's words, that in so far forth the object is AS we think it,
and that the idea, verified thus in so far forth, is true enough.

Mr. Pratt will undoubtedly accept most of these facts, but he will deny
that they spell pragmatism. Of course, definitions are free to every
one; but I have myself never meant by the pragmatic view of truth
anything different from what I now describe; and inasmuch as my use of
the term came earlier than my friend's, I think it ought to have the
right of way. But I suspect that Professor Pratt's contention is not
solely as to what one must think in order to be called a pragmatist. I
am cure that he believes that the truth-relation has something MORE in
it than the fundamentum which I assign can account for. Useful to
test truth by, the matrix of circumstance, he thinks, cannot found the
truth-relation in se, for that is trans-empirical and 'saltatory.'

Well, take an object and an idea, and assume that the latter is true of
the former--as eternally and absolutely true as you like. Let the object
be as much 'as' the idea thinks it, as it is possible for one thing to
be 'as' another. I now formally ask of Professor Pratt to tell what this
'as'-ness in itself CONSISTS in--for it seems to me that it ought to
consist in something assignable and describable, and not remain a pure
mystery, and I promise that if he can assign any determination of it
whatever which I cannot successfully refer to some specification of what
in this article I have called the empirical fundamentum, I will confess
my stupidity cheerfully, and will agree never to publish a line upon
this subject of truth again.


II

Professor Pratt has returned to the charge in a whole book, [Footnote
1: J. B. Pratt: What is Pragmatism. New York, The Macmillan Company,
1909.--The comments I have printed were written in March, 1909, after
some of the articles printed later in the present volume.] which for
its clearness and good temper deserves to supersede all the rest of
the anti-pragmatistic literature. I wish it might do so; for its author
admits all MY essential contentions, simply distinguishing my account
of truth as 'modified' pragmatism from Schiller's and Dewey's, which he
calls pragmatism of the 'radical' sort. As I myself understand Dewey and
Schiller, our views absolutely agree, in spite of our different modes of
statement; but I have enough trouble of my own in life without having to
defend my friends, so I abandon them provisionally to the tender mercy
of Professor Pratt's interpretations, utterly erroneous tho I deem these
to be. My reply as regards myself can be very short, for I prefer to
consider only essentials, and Dr. Pratt's whole book hardly takes the
matter farther than the article to which I retort in Part I of the
present paper.

He repeats the 'as'-formula, as if it were something that I, along with
other pragmatists, had denied, [Footnote: Op. cit., pp. 77-80.] whereas
I have only asked those who insist so on its importance to do something
more than merely utter it--to explicate it, for example, and tell us
what its so great importance consists in. I myself agree most cordially
that for an idea to be true the object must be 'as' the idea declares
it, but I explicate the 'as'-ness as meaning the idea's verifiability.

Now since Dr. Pratt denies none of these verifying 'workings' for which
I have pleaded, but only insists on their inability to serve as the
fundamentum of the truth-relation, it seems that there is really nothing
in the line of FACT about which we differ, and that the issue between us
is solely as to how far the notion of workableness or verifiability
is an essential part of the notion of 'trueness'--'trueness' being Dr.
Pratt's present name for the character of as-ness in the true idea.
I maintain that there is no meaning left in this notion of as-ness or
trueness if no reference to the possibility of concrete working on the
part of the idea is made.

Take an example where there can be no possible working. Suppose I have
an idea to which I give utterance by the vocable 'skrkl,' claiming at
the same time that it is true. Who now can say that it is FALSE, for why
may there not be somewhere in the unplumbed depths of the cosmos some
object with which 'skrkl' can agree and have trueness in Dr. Pratt's
sense? On the other hand who can say that it is TRUE, for who can lay
his hand on that object and show that it and nothing else is what I MEAN
by my word? But yet again, who can gainsay any one who shall call my
word utterly IRRELATIVE to other reality, and treat it as a bare fact in
my mind, devoid of any cognitive function whatever. One of these
three alternatives must surely be predicated of it. For it not to be
irrelevant (or not-cognitive in nature), an object of some kind must be
provided which it may refer to. Supposing that object provided, whether
'skrkl' is true or false of it, depends, according to Professor Pratt,
on no intermediating condition whatever. The trueness or the falsity is
even now immediately, absolutely, and positively there.

I, on the other hand, demand a cosmic environment of some kind to
establish which of them is there rather than utter irrelevancy.
[Footnote: Dr. Pratt, singularly enough, disposes of this primal
postulate of all pragmatic epistemology, by saying that the pragmatist
'unconsciously surrenders his whole case by smuggling in the idea of a
conditioning environment which determines whether or not the experience
can work, and which cannot itself be identified with the experience or
any part of it' (pp. 167-168). The 'experience' means here of course the
idea, or belief; and the expression 'smuggling in' is to the last degree
diverting. If any epistemologist could dispense with a conditioning
environment, it would seem to be the antipragmatist, with his immediate
saltatory trueness, independent of work done. The mediating pathway
which the environment supplies is the very essence of the pragmatist's
explanation.] I then say, first, that unless some sort of a natural path
exists between the 'skrkl' and THAT object, distinguishable among the
innumerable pathways that run among all the realities of the universe,
linking them promiscuously with one another, there is nothing there to
constitute even the POSSIBILITY OF ITS REFERRING to that object rather
than to any other.

I say furthermore that unless it have some TENDENCY TO FOLLOW UP THAT
PATH, there is nothing to constitute its INTENTION to refer to the
object in question.

Finally, I say that unless the path be strown with possibilities
of frustration or encouragement, and offer some sort of terminal
satisfaction or contradiction, there is nothing to constitute its
agreement or disagreement with that object, or to constitute the as-ness
(or 'not-as-ness') in which the trueness (or falseness) is said to
consist.

I think that Dr. Pratt ought to do something more than repeat the name
'trueness,' in answer to my pathetic question whether that there be not
some CONSTITUTION to a relation as important as this. The pathway, the
tendency, the corroborating or contradicting progress, need not in every
case be experienced in full, but I don't see, if the universe doesn't
contain them among its possibilities of furniture, what LOGICAL MATERIAL
FOR DEFINING the trueness of my idea is left. But if it do contain them,
they and they only are the logical material required.

I am perplexed by the superior importance which Dr. Pratt attributes
to abstract trueness over concrete verifiability in an idea, and I wish
that he might be moved to explain. It is prior to verification, to be
sure, but so is the verifiability for which I contend prior, just as a
man's 'mortality' (which is nothing but the possibility of his death) is
prior to his death, but it can hardly be that this abstract priority of
all possibility to its correlative fact is what so obstinate a quarrel
is about. I think it probable that Dr. Pratt is vaguely thinking
of something concreter than this. The trueness of an idea must mean
SOMETHING DEFINITE IN IT THAT DETERMINES ITS TENDENCY TO WORK, and
indeed towards this object rather than towards that. Undoubtedly there
is something of this sort in the idea, just as there is something in man
that accounts for his tendency towards death, and in bread that accounts
for its tendency to nourish. What that something is in the case of truth
psychology tells us: the idea has associates peculiar to itself, motor
as well as ideational; it tends by its place and nature to call these
into being, one after another; and the appearance of them in succession
is what we mean by the 'workings' of the idea. According to what they
are, does the trueness or falseness which the idea harbored come to
light. These tendencies have still earlier conditions which, in a
general way, biology, psychology and biography can trace. This whole
chain of natural causal conditions produces a resultant state of things
in which new relations, not simply causal, can now be found, or into
which they can now be introduced,--the relations namely which we
epistemologists study, relations of adaptation, of substitutability, of
instrumentality, of reference and of truth.

The prior causal conditions, altho there could be no knowing of any
kind, true or false, without them, are but preliminary to the question
of what makes the ideas true or false when once their tendencies have
been obeyed. The tendencies must exist in some shape anyhow, but their
fruits are truth, falsity, or irrelevancy, according to what they
concretely turn out to be. They are not 'saltatory' at any rate, for
they evoke their consequences contiguously, from next to next only; and
not until the final result of the whole associative sequence, actual
or potential, is in our mental sight, can we feel sure what its
epistemological significance, if it have any, may be. True knowing is,
in fine, not substantially, in itself, or 'as such,' inside of the idea
from the first, any more than mortality AS SUCH is inside of the man, or
nourishment AS SUCH inside of the bread. Something else is there first,
that practically MAKES FOR knowing, dying or nourishing, as the case may
be. That something is the 'nature' namely of the first term, be it idea,
man, or bread, that operates to start the causal chain of processes
which, when completed, is the complex fact to which we give whatever
functional name best fits the case. Another nature, another chain of
cognitive workings; and then either another object known or the same
object known differently, will ensue.

Dr. Pratt perplexes me again by seeming to charge Dewey and Schiller
[Footnote: Page 200] (I am not sure that he charges me) with an account
of truth which would allow the object believed in not to exist, even
if the belief in it were true. 'Since the truth of an idea,' he writes,
'means merely the fact that the idea works, that fact is all that you
mean when you say the idea is true' (p. 206). 'WHEN YOU SAY THE IDEA IS
TRUE'--does that mean true for YOU, the critic, or true for the believer
whom you are describing? The critic's trouble over this seems to come
from his taking the word 'true' irrelatively, whereas the pragmatist
always means 'true for him who experiences the workings.' 'But is the
object REALLY true or not?'--the critic then seems to ask,--as if
the pragmatist were bound to throw in a whole ontology on top of his
epistemology and tell us what realities indubitably exist. 'One world at
a time,' would seem to be the right reply here.

One other trouble of Dr. Pratt's must be noticed. It concerns the
'transcendence' of the object. When our ideas have worked so as to bring
us flat up against the object, NEXT to it, 'is our relation to it then
ambulatory or saltatory?' Dr. Pratt asks. If YOUR headache be my object,
'MY experiences break off where yours begin,' Dr. Pratt writes,
and 'this fact is of great importance, for it bars out the sense of
transition and fulfilment which forms so important an element in the
pragmatist description of knowledge--the sense of fulfilment due to a
continuous passage from the original idea to the known object. If this
comes at all when I know your headache, it comes not with the object,
but quite on my side of the "epistemological gulf." The gulf is still
there to be transcended.' (p. 158).

Some day of course, or even now somewhere in the larger life of
the universe, different men's headaches may become confluent or be
'co-conscious.' Here and now, however, headaches do transcend each other
and, when not felt, can be known only conceptually. My idea is that
you really have a headache; it works well with what I see of your
expression, and with what I hear you say; but it doesn't put me in
possession of the headache itself. I am still at one remove, and the
headache 'transcends' me, even tho it be in nowise transcendent of human
experience generally. Bit the 'gulf' here is that which the pragmatist
epistemology itself fixes in the very first words it uses, by
saying there must be an object and an idea. The idea however doesn't
immediately leap the gulf, it only works from next to next so as to
bridge it, fully or approximately. If it bridges it, in the pragmatist's
vision of his hypothetical universe, it can be called a 'true' idea.
If it only MIGHT bridge it, but doesn't, or if it throws a bridge
distinctly AT it, it still has, in the onlooking pragmatist's eyes, what
Professor Pratt calls 'trueness.' But to ask the pragmatist thereupon
whether, when it thus fails to coalesce bodily with the object, it is
REALLY true or has REAL trueness,--in other words whether the headache
he supposes, and supposes the thinker he supposes, to believe in, be
a real headache or not,--is to step from his hypothetical universe of
discourse into the altogether different world of natural fact.



VIII

THE PRAGMATIST ACCOUNT OF TRUTH AND ITS MISUNDERSTANDERS [Footnote:
Reprint from the Philosophical Review, January, 1908 (vol. xvii, p. 1).]

The account of truth given in my volume entitled Pragmatism,
continues to meet with such persistent misunderstanding that I
am tempted to make a final brief reply. My ideas may well deserve
refutation, but they can get none till they are conceived of in their
proper shape. The fantastic character of the current misconceptions
shows how unfamiliar is the concrete point of view which pragmatism
assumes. Persons who are familiar with a conception move about so
easily in it that they understand each other at a hint, and can converse
without anxiously attending to their P's and Q's. I have to admit, in
view of the results, that we have assumed too ready an intelligence,
and consequently in many places used a language too slipshod. We should
never have spoken elliptically. The critics have boggled at every word
they could boggle at, and refused to take the spirit rather than the
letter of our discourse. This seems to show a genuine unfamiliarity in
the whole point of view. It also shows, I think, that the second stage
of opposition, which has already begun to express itself in the stock
phrase that 'what is new is not true, and what is true not new,' in
pragmatism, is insincere. If we said nothing in any degree new, why
was our meaning so desperately hard to catch? The blame cannot be laid
wholly upon our obscurity of speech, for in other subjects we have
attained to making ourselves understood. But recriminations are
tasteless; and, as far as I personally am concerned, I am sure that some
of the misconception I complain of is due to my doctrine of truth being
surrounded in that volume of popular lectures by a lot of other opinions
not necessarily implicated with it, so that a reader may very naturally
have grown confused. For this I am to blame,--likewise for omitting
certain explicit cautions, which the pages that follow will now in part
supply.

FIRST MISUNDERSTANDING: PRAGMATISM IS ONLY A RE-EDITING OF POSITIVISM.

This seems the commonest mistake. Scepticism, positivism, and
agnosticism agree with ordinary dogmatic rationalism in presupposing
that everybody knows what the word 'truth' means, without further
explanation. But the former doctrines then either suggest or declare
that real truth, absolute truth, is inaccessible to us, and that we
must fain put up with relative or phenomenal truth as its next best
substitute. By scepticism this is treated as an unsatisfactory state of
affairs, while positivism and agnosticism are cheerful about it, call
real truth sour grapes, and consider phenomenal truth quite sufficient
for all our 'practical' purposes.

In point of fact, nothing could be farther from all this than what
pragmatism has to say of truth. Its thesis is an altogether previous
one. It leaves off where these other theories begin, having contented
itself with the word truth's DEFINITION. 'No matter whether any mind
extant in the universe possess truth or not,' it asks, 'what does
the notion of truth signify IDEALLY?' 'What kind of things would true
judgments be IN CASE they existed?' The answer which pragmatism offers
is intended to cover the most complete truth that can be conceived of,
'absolute' truth if you like, as well as truth of the most relative and
imperfect description. This question of what truth would be like if it
did exist, belongs obviously to a purely speculative field of inquiry.
It is not a theory about any sort of reality, or about what kind of
knowledge is actually possible; it abstracts from particular terms
altogether, and defines the nature of a possible relation between two of
them.

As Kant's question about synthetic judgments had escaped previous
philosophers, so the pragmatist question is not only so subtile as to
have escaped attention hitherto, but even so subtile, it would seem,
that when openly broached now, dogmatists and sceptics alike fail to
apprehend it, and deem the pragmatist to be treating of something wholly
different. He insists, they say (I quote an actual critic), 'that the
greater problems are insoluble by human intelligence, that our need of
knowing truly is artificial and illusory, and that our reason, incapable
of reaching the foundations of reality, must turn itself exclusively
towards ACTION.' There could not be a worse misapprehension.

SECOND MISUNDERSTANDING: PRAGMATISM IS PRIMARILY AN APPEAL TO ACTION.

The name 'pragmatism,' with its suggestions of action, has been an
unfortunate choice, I have to admit, and has played into the hands of
this mistake. But no word could protect the doctrine from critics so
blind to the nature of the inquiry that, when Dr. Schiller speaks of
ideas 'working' well, the only thing they think of is their immediate
workings in the physical environment, their enabling us to make money,
or gain some similar 'practical' advantage. Ideas do work thus, of
course, immediately or remotely; but they work indefinitely inside of
the mental world also. Not crediting us with this rudimentary insight,
our critics treat our view as offering itself exclusively to engineers,
doctors, financiers, and men of action generally, who need some sort
of a rough and ready weltanschauung, but have no time or wit to study
genuine philosophy. It is usually described as a characteristically
American movement, a sort of bobtailed scheme of thought, excellently
fitted for the man on the street, who naturally hates theory and wants
cash returns immediately.

It is quite true that, when the refined theoretic question that
pragmatism begins with is once answered, secondary corollaries of a
practical sort follow. Investigation shows that, in the function called
truth, previous realities are not the only independent variables. To
a certain extent our ideas, being realities, are also independent
variables, and, just as they follow other reality and fit it, so, in
a measure, does other reality follow and fit them. When they add
themselves to being, they partly redetermine the existent, so that
reality as a whole appears incompletely definable unless ideas also
are kept account of. This pragmatist doctrine, exhibiting our ideas
as complemental factors of reality, throws open (since our ideas are
instigators of our action) a wide window upon human action, as well as a
wide license to originality in thought. But few things could be sillier
than to ignore the prior epistemological edifice in which the window is
built, or to talk as if pragmatism began and ended at the window. This,
nevertheless, is what our critics do almost without exception. They
ignore our primary step and its motive, and make the relation to action,
which is our secondary achievement, primary.

THIRD MISUNDERSTANDING: PRAGMATISTS CUT THEMSELVES OFF FROM THE RIGHT TO
BELIEVE IN EJECTIVE REALITIES.

They do so, according to the critics, by making the truth of our beliefs
consist in their verifiability, and their verifiability in the way in
which they do work for us. Professor Stout, in his otherwise admirable
and hopeful review of Schiller in Mind for October, 1897, considers that
this ought to lead Schiller (could he sincerely realize the effects of
his own doctrine) to the absurd consequence of being unable to believe
genuinely in another man's headache, even were the headache there.
He can only 'postulate' it for the sake of the working value of the
postulate to himself. The postulate guides certain of his acts and leads
to advantageous consequences; but the moment he understands fully that
the postulate is true ONLY (!) in this sense, it ceases (or should
cease) to be true for him that the other man really HAS a headache. All
that makes the postulate most precious then evaporates: his interest in
his fellow-man 'becomes a veiled form of self-interest, and his world
grows cold, dull, and heartless.'

Such an objection makes a curious muddle of the pragmatist's universe
of discourse. Within that universe the pragmatist finds some one with
a headache or other feeling, and some one else who postulates that
feeling. Asking on what condition the postulate is 'true' the pragmatist
replies that, for the postulator at any rate, it is true just
in proportion as to believe in it works in him the fuller sum of
satisfactions. What is it that is satisfactory here? Surely to BELIEVE
in the postulated object, namely, in the really existing feeling of
the other man. But how (especially if the postulator were himself a
thoroughgoing pragmatist) could it ever be satisfactory to him NOT
to believe in that feeling, so long as, in Professor Stout's words,
disbelief 'made the world seem to him cold, dull, and heartless'?
Disbelief would seem, on pragmatist principles, quite out of the
question under such conditions, unless the heartlessness of the world
were made probable already on other grounds. And since the belief in the
headache, true for the subject assumed in the pragmatist's universe of
discourse, is also true for the pragmatist who for his epitemologizing
purposes has assumed that entire universe, why is it not true in that
universe absolutely? The headache believed in is a reality there, and no
extant mind disbelieves it, neither the critic's mind nor his subject's!
Have our opponents any better brand of truth in this real universe of
ours that they can show us? [Footnote: I see here a chance to forestall
a criticism which some one may make on Lecture III of my Pragmatism,
where, on pp. 96-100, I said that 'God' and 'Matter' might be regarded
as synonymous terms, so long as no differing future consequences were
deducible from the two conceptions. The passage was transcribed from my
address at the California Philosophical Union, reprinted in the Journal
of Philosophy, vol. i, p. 673. I had no sooner given the address than
I perceived a flaw in that part of it; but I have left the passage
unaltered ever since, because the flaw did not spoil its illustrative
value. The flaw was evident when, as a case analogous to that of a
godless universe, I thought of what I called an 'automatic sweetheart,'
meaning a soulless body which should be absolutely indistinguishable
from a spiritually animated maiden, laughing, talking, blushing, nursing
us, and performing all feminine offices as tactfully and sweetly as if
a soul were in her. Would any one regard her as a full equivalent?
Certainly not, and why? Because, framed as we are, our egoism craves
above all things inward sympathy and recognition, love and admiration.
The outward treatment is valued mainly as an expression, as a
manifestation of the accompanying consciousness believed in.
Pragmatically, then, belief in the automatic sweetheart would not work,
and is point of fact no one treats it as a serious hypothesis. The
godless universe would be exactly similar. Even if matter could do
every outward thing that God does, the idea of it would not work as
satisfactorily, because the chief call for a God on modern men's part
is for a being who will inwardly recognize them and judge them
sympathetically. Matter disappoints this craving of our ego, so God
remains for most men the truer hypothesis, and indeed remains so for
definite pragmatic reasons.]

So much for the third misunderstanding, which is but one specification
of the following still wider one.

FOURTH MISUNDERSTANDING: NO PRAGMATIST CAN BE A REALIST IN HIS
EPISTEMOLOGY.

This is supposed to follow from his statement that the truth of our
beliefs consists in general in their giving satisfaction. Of course
satisfaction per se is a subjective condition; so the conclusion is
drawn that truth falls wholly inside of the subject, who then may
manufacture it at his pleasure. True beliefs become thus wayward
affections, severed from all responsibility to other parts of
experience.

It is difficult to excuse such a parody of the pragmatist's opinion,
ignoring as it does every element but one of his universe of discourse.
The terms of which that universe consists positively forbid any
non-realistic interpretation of the function of knowledge defined there.
The pragmatizing epistemologist posits there a reality and a mind with
ideas. What, now, he asks, can make those ideas true of that reality?
Ordinary epistemology contents itself with the vague statement that the
ideas must 'correspond' or 'agree'; the pragmatist insists on being more
concrete, and asks what such 'agreement' may mean in detail. He finds
first that the ideas must point to or lead towards THAT reality and no
other, and then that the pointings and leadings must yield satisfaction
as their result. So far the pragmatist is hardly less abstract than the
ordinary slouchy epistemologist; but as he defines himself farther, he
grows more concrete. The entire quarrel of the intellectualist with him
is over his concreteness, intellectualism contending that the vaguer and
more abstract account is here the more profound. The concrete pointing
and leading are conceived by the pragmatist to be the work of other
portions of the same universe to which the reality and the mind belong,
intermediary verifying bits of experience with which the mind at one
end, and the reality at the other, are joined. The 'satisfaction,' in
turn, is no abstract satisfaction ueberhaupt, felt by an unspecified
being, but is assumed to consist of such satisfactions (in the plural)
as concretely existing men actually do find in their beliefs. As we
humans are constituted in point of fact, we find that to believe in
other men's minds, in independent physical realities, in past events, in
eternal logical relations, is satisfactory. We find hope satisfactory.
We often find it satisfactory to cease to doubt. Above all we find
CONSISTENCY satisfactory, consistency between the present idea and the
entire rest of our mental equipment, including the whole order of our
sensations, and that of our intuitions of likeness and difference, and
our whole stock of previously acquired truths.

The pragmatist, being himself a man, and imagining in general no
contrary lines of truer belief than ours about the 'reality' which he
has laid at the base of his epistemological discussion, is willing to
treat our satisfactions as possibly really true guides to it, not as
guides true solely for US. It would seem here to be the duty of his
critics to show with some explicitness why, being our subjective
feelings, these satisfactions can not yield 'objective' truth. The
beliefs which they accompany 'posit' the assumed reality, 'correspond'
and 'agree' with it, and 'fit' it in perfectly definite and assignable
ways, through the sequent trains of thought and action which form
their verification, so merely to insist on using these words abstractly
instead of concretely is no way of driving the pragmatist from the
field,--his more concrete account virtually includes his critic's. If
our critics have any definite idea of a truth more objectively grounded
than the kind we propose, why do they not show it more articulately?
As they stand, they remind one of Hegel's man who wanted 'fruit,' but
rejected cherries, pears, and grapes, because they were not fruit in the
abstract. We offer them the full quart-pot, and they cry for the empty
quart-capacity.

But here I think I hear some critic retort as follows: 'If satisfactions
are all that is needed to make truth, how about the notorious fact that
errors are so often satisfactory? And how about the equally notorious
fact that certain true beliefs may cause the bitterest dissatisfaction?
Isn't it clear that not the satisfaction which it gives, but the
relation of the belief TO THE REALITY is all that makes it true? Suppose
there were no such reality, and that the satisfactions yet remained:
would they not then effectively work falsehood? Can they consequently be
treated distinctively as the truth-builders? It is the INHERENT RELATION
TO REALITY of a belief that gives us that specific TRUTH-satisfaction,
compared with which all other satisfactions are the hollowest humbug.
The satisfaction of KNOWING TRULY is thus the only one which the
pragmatist ought to have considered. As a PSYCHOLOGICAL SENTIMENT,
the anti-pragmatist gladly concedes it to him, but then only as a
concomitant of truth, not as a constituent. What CONSTITUTES truth
is not the sentiment, but the purely logical or objective function of
rightly cognizing the reality, and the pragmatist's failure to reduce
this function to lower values is patent.'

Such anti-pragmatism as this seems to me a tissue of confusion. To begin
with, when the pragmatist says 'indispensable,' it confounds this with
'sufficient.' The pragmatist calls satisfactions indispensable for
truth-building, but I have everywhere called them insufficient unless
reality be also incidentally led to. If the reality assumed were
cancelled from the pragmatist's universe of discourse, he would
straightway give the name of falsehoods to the beliefs remaining, in
spite of all their satisfactoriness. For him, as for his critic, there
can be no truth if there is nothing to be true about. Ideas are so
much flat psychological surface unless some mirrored matter gives
them cognitive lustre. This is why as a pragmatist I have so carefully
posited 'reality' AB INITIO, and why, throughout my whole discussion, I
remain an epistemological realist. [Footnote: I need hardly remind
the reader that both sense-percepts and percepts of ideal relation
(comparisons, etc.) should be classed among the realities. The bulk of
our mental 'stock' consists of truths concerning these terms.]

The anti-pragmatist is guilty of the further confusion of imagining
that, in undertaking to give him an account of what truth formally
means, we are assuming at the same time to provide a warrant for
it, trying to define the occasions when he can be sure of materially
possessing it. Our making it hinge on a reality so 'independent' that
when it comes, truth comes, and when it goes, truth goes with it,
disappoints this naive expectation, so he deems our description
unsatisfactory. I suspect that under this confusion lies the still
deeper one of not discriminating sufficiently between the two notions,
truth and reality. Realities are not TRUE, they ARE; and beliefs are
true OF them. But I suspect that in the anti-pragmatist mind the two
notions sometimes swap their attributes. The reality itself, I fear, is
treated as if 'true' and conversely. Whoso tells us of the one, it is
then supposed, must also be telling us of the other; and a true idea
must in a manner BE, or at least YIELD without extraneous aid, the
reality it cognitively is possessed of.

To this absolute-idealistic demand pragmatism simply opposes its non
possumus. If there is to be truth, it says, both realities and beliefs
about them must conspire to make it; but whether there ever is such a
thing, or how anyone can be sure that his own beliefs possess it, it
never pretends to determine. That truth-satisfaction par excellence
which may tinge a belief unsatisfactory in other ways, it easily
explains as the feeling of consistency with the stock of previous
truths, or supposed truths, of which one's whole past experience may
have left one in possession.

But are not all pragmatists sure that their own belief is right? their
enemies will ask at this point; and this leads me to the

FIFTH MISUNDERSTANDING: WHAT PRAGMATISTS SAY IS INCONSISTENT WITH THEIR
SAYING SO.

A correspondent puts this objection as follows: 'When you say to your
audience, "pragmatism is the truth concerning truth," the first truth is
different from the second. About the first you and they are not to be at
odds; you are not giving them liberty to take or leave it according as
it works satisfactorily or not for their private uses. Yet the second
truth, which ought to describe and include the first, affirms this
liberty. Thus the INTENT of your utterance seems to contradict the
CONTENT of it.'

General scepticism has always received this same classic refutation.
'You have to dogmatize,' the rationalists say to the sceptics,' whenever
you express the sceptical position; so your lives keep contradicting
your thesis.' One would suppose that the impotence of so hoary an
argument to abate in the slightest degree the amount of general
scepticism in the world might have led some rationalists themselves to
doubt whether these instantaneous logical refutations are such
fatal ways, after all, of killing off live mental attitudes. General
scepticism is the live mental attitude of refusing to conclude. It is
a permanent torpor of the will, renewing itself in detail towards each
successive thesis that offers, and you can no more kill it off by logic
than you can kill off obstinacy or practical joking. This is why it is
so irritating. Your consistent sceptic never puts his scepticism into
a formal proposition,--he simply chooses it as a habit. He provokingly
hangs back when he might so easily join us in saying yes, but he is
not illogical or stupid,--on the contrary, he often impresses us by his
intellectual superiority. This is the REAL scepticism that rationalists
have to meet, and their logic does not even touch it.

No more can logic kill the pragmatist's behavior: his act of utterance,
so far from contradicting, accurately exemplifies the matter which he
utters. What is the matter which he utters? In part, it is this, that
truth, concretely considered, is an attribute of our beliefs, and that
these are attitudes that follow satisfactions. The ideas around which
the satisfactions cluster are primarily only hypotheses that
challenge or summon a belief to come and take its stand upon them.
The pragmatist's idea of truth is just such a challenge. He finds it
ultra-satisfactory to accept it, and takes his own stand accordingly.
But, being gregarious as they are, men seek to spread their beliefs,
to awaken imitation, to infect others. Why should not YOU also find the
same belief satisfactory? thinks the pragmatist, and forthwith endeavors
to convert you. You and he will then believe similarly; you will hold
up your subject-end of a truth, which will be a truth objective and
irreversible if the reality holds up the object-end by being itself
present simultaneously. What there is of self-contradiction in all this
I confess I cannot discover. The pragmatist's conduct in his own case
seems to me on the contrary admirably to illustrate his universal
formula; and of all epistemologists, he is perhaps the only one who is
irreproachably self-consistent.

SIXTH MISUNDERSTANDING: PRAGMATISM EXPLAINS NOT WHAT TRUTH IS, BUT ONLY
HOW IT IS ARRIVED AT.

In point of fact it tells us both, tells us what it is incidentally to
telling us how it is arrived at,--for what IS arrived at except just
what the truth is? If I tell you how to get to the railroad station,
don't I implicitly introduce you to the WHAT, to the being and nature of
that edifice? It is quite true that the abstract WORD 'how' hasn't
the same meaning as the abstract WORD 'what,' but in this universe of
concrete facts you cannot keep hows and whats asunder. The reasons why
I find it satisfactory to believe that any idea is true, the HOW of my
arriving at that belief, may be among the very reasons why the idea IS
true in reality. If not, I summon the anti-pragmatist to explain the
impossibility articulately.

His trouble seems to me mainly to arise from his fixed inability to
understand how a concrete statement can possibly mean as much, or be as
valuable, as an abstract one. I said above that the main quarrel between
us and our critics was that of concreteness VERSUS abstractness. This is
the place to develop that point farther.

In the present question, the links of experience sequent upon an idea,
which mediate between it and a reality, form and for the pragmatist
indeed ARE, the CONCRETE relation of truth that may obtain between the
idea and that reality. They, he says, are all that we mean when we speak
of the idea 'pointing' to the reality, 'fitting' it, 'corresponding'
with it, or 'agreeing' with it,--they or other similar mediating trains
of verification. Such mediating events make the idea 'true.' The idea
itself, if it exists at all, is also a concrete event: so pragmatism
insists that truth in the singular is only a collective name for truths
in the plural, these consisting always of series of definite events; and
that what intellectualism calls the truth, the inherent truth, of any
one such series is only the abstract name for its truthfulness in act,
for the fact that the ideas there do lead to the supposed reality in a
way that we consider satisfactory.

The pragmatist himself has no objection to abstractions. Elliptically,
and 'for short,' he relies on them as much as any one, ending upon
innumerable occasions that their comparative emptiness makes of them
useful substitutes for the overfulness of the facts he meets, with. But
he never ascribes to them a higher grade of reality. The full reality
of a truth for him is always some process of verification, in which the
abstract property of connecting ideas with objects truly is workingly
embodied. Meanwhile it is endlessly serviceable to be able to talk of
properties abstractly and apart from their working, to find them the
same in innumerable cases, to take them 'out of time,' and to treat
of their relations to other similar abstractions. We thus form whole
universes of platonic ideas ante rem, universes in posse, tho none of
them exists effectively except in rebus. Countless relations obtain
there which nobody experiences as obtaining,--as, in the eternal
universe of musical relations, for example, the notes of Aennchen von
Tharau were a lovely melody long ere mortal ears ever heard them. Even
so the music of the future sleeps now, to be awakened hereafter. Or, if
we take the world of geometrical relations, the thousandth decimal of
'pi' sleeps there, tho no one may ever try to compute it. Or, if we take
the universe of 'fitting,' countless coats 'fit' backs, and countless
boots 'fit' feet, on which they are not practically FITTED; countless
stones 'fit' gaps in walls into which no one seeks to fit them actually.
In the same way countless opinions 'fit' realities, and countless truths
are valid, tho no thinker ever thinks them.

For the anti-pragmatist these prior timeless relations are the
presupposition of the concrete ones, and possess the profounder dignity
and value. The actual workings of our ideas in verification-processes
are as naught in comparison with the 'obtainings' of this discarnate
truth within them.

For the pragmatist, on the contrary,--all discarnate truth is static,
impotent, and relatively spectral, full truth being the truth that
energizes and does battle. Can any one suppose that the sleeping quality
of truth would ever have been abstracted or have received a name, if
truths had remained forever in that storage-vault of essential timeless
'agreements' and had never been embodied in any panting struggle of
men's live ideas for verification? Surely no more than the abstract
property of 'fitting' would have received a name, if in our world
there had been no backs or feet or gaps in walls to be actually fitted.
EXISTENTIAL truth is incidental to the actual competition of opinions.
ESSENTIAL truth, the truth of the intellectualists, the truth with no
one thinking it, is like the coat that fits tho no one has ever tried
it on, like the music that no ear has listened to. It is less real, not
more real, than the verified article; and to attribute a superior
degree of glory to it seems little more than a piece of perverse
abstraction-worship. As well might a pencil insist that the outline
is the essential thing in all pictorial representation, and chide
the paint-brush and the camera for omitting it, forgetting that THEIR
pictures not only contain the whole outline, but a hundred other things
in addition. Pragmatist truth contains the whole of intellectualist
truth and a hundred other things in addition. Intellectualist truth is
then only pragmatist truth in posse. That on innumerable occasions men
do substitute truth in posse or verifiability, for verification or truth
in act, is a fact to which no one attributes more importance than the
pragmatist: he emphasizes the practical utility of such a habit. But
he does not on that account consider truth in posse,--truth not alive
enough ever to have been asserted or questioned or contradicted, to be
the metaphysically prior thing, to which truths in act are tributary and
subsidiary. When intellectualists do this, pragmatism charges them with
inverting the real relation. Truth in posse MEANS only truths in act;
and he insists that these latter take precedence in the order of logic
as well as in that of being.

SEVENTH MINUNDERSTANDING: PRAGMATISM IGNORES THE THEORETICAL INTEREST.

This would seem to be an absolutely wanton slander, were not a
certain excuse to be found in the linguistic affinities of the word
'pragmatism,' and in certain offhand habits of speech of ours which
assumed too great a generosity on our reader's part. When we spoke of
the meaning of ideas consisting "in their 'practical' consequences",
or of the 'practical' differences which our beliefs make to us; when we
said that the truth of a belief consists in its 'working' value, etc.;
our language evidently was too careless, for by 'practical' we were
almost unanimously held to mean OPPOSED to theoretical or genuinely
cognitive, and the consequence was punctually drawn that a truth in our
eyes could have no relation to any independent reality, or to any other
truth, or to anything whatever but the acts which we might ground on it
or the satisfactions they might bring. The mere existence of the idea,
all by itself, if only its results were satisfactory, would give full
truth to it, it was charged, in our absurd pragmatist epistemology.
The solemn attribution of this rubbish to us was also encouraged by two
other circumstances. First, ideas ARE practically useful in the narrow
sense, false ideas sometimes, but most often ideas which we can verify
by the sum total of all their leadings, and the reality of whose objects
may thus be considered established beyond doubt. That these ideas should
be true in advance of and apart from their utility, that, in other
words, their objects should be really there, is the very condition of
their having that kind of utility,--the objects they connect us with are
so important that the ideas which serve as the objects' substitutes grow
important also. This manner of their practical working was the first
thing that made truths good in the eyes of primitive men; and
buried among all the other good workings by which true beliefs are
characterized, this kind of subsequential utility remains.

The second misleading circumstance was the emphasis laid by Schiller
and Dewey on the fact that, unless a truth be relevant to the mind's
momentary predicament, unless it be germane to the 'practical'
situation,--meaning by this the quite particular perplexity,--it is
no good to urge it. It doesn't meet our interests any better than a
falsehood would under the same circumstances. But why our predicaments
and perplexities might not be theoretical here as well as narrowly
practical, I wish that our critics would explain. They simply assume
that no pragmatist CAN admit a genuinely theoretic interest. Having used
the phrase 'cash-value' of an idea, I am implored by one correspondent
to alter it, 'for every one thinks you mean only pecuniary profit and
loss.' Having said that the true is 'the expedient in our thinking,' I
am rebuked in this wise by another learned correspondent:

'The word expedient has no other meaning than that of self-interest. The
pursuit of this has ended by landing a number of officers of national
banks in penitentiaries. A philosophy that leads to such results must be
unsound.'

But the word 'practical' is so habitually loosely used that more
indulgence might have been expected. When one says that a sick man has
now practically recovered, or that an enterprise has practically failed,
one usually means I just the opposite of practically in the literal
sense. One means that, altho untrue in strict practice, what one says
is true in theory, true virtually, certain to be true. Again, by the
practical one often means the distinctively concrete, the individual,
particular, and effective, as opposed to the abstract, general, and
inert. To speak for myself, whenever I have emphasized the practical
nature of truth, this is mainly what has been in my mind. 'Pragmata' are
things in their plurality; and in that early California address, when I
described pragmatism as holding that the meaning of any proposition
can always be brought down to some particular consequence in our future
practical experience, whether passive or active, expressly added these
qualifying words: the point lying rather in the fact that the experience
must be particular than in the fact that it must be active,--by 'active'
meaning here 'practical' in the narrow literal sense. [Footnote: The
ambiguity of the word 'practical' comes out well in these words of a
recent would-be reporter of our views: 'Pragmatism is an Anglo-Saxon
reaction against the intellectualism and rationalism of the Latin
mind.... Man, each individual man is the measure of things. He is able
to conceive one but relative truths, that is to say, illusions. What
these illusions are worth is revealed to him, not by general theory, but
by individual practice. Pragmatism, which consists in experiencing
these illusions of the mind and obeying them by acting them out, is a
PHILOSOPHY WITHOUT WORDS, a philosophy of GESTURES AND OF ACTS,
which abandons what is general and olds only to what is particular.'
(Bourdeau, in Journal des. debats, October 89, 1907.)] But particular
consequences can perfectly well be of a theoretic nature. Every remote
fact which we infer from an idea is a particular theoretic consequence
which our mind practically works towards. The loss of every old opinion
of ours which we see that we shall have to give up if a new opinion
be true, is a particular theoretic as well as a particular practical
consequence. After man's interest in breathing freely, the greatest of
all his interests (because it never fluctuates or remits, as most of his
physical interests do), is his interest in consistency, in feeling
that what he now thinks goes with what he thinks on other occasions.
We tirelessly compare truth with truth for this sole purpose. Is the
present candidate for belief perhaps contradicted by principle number
one? Is it compatible with fact number two? and so forth. The particular
operations here are the purely logical ones of analysis, deduction,
comparison, etc.; and altho general terms may be used ad libitum, the
satisfactory practical working of the candidate--idea consists in
the consciousness yielded by each successive theoretic consequence in
particular. It is therefore simply idiotic to repeat that pragmatism
takes no account of purely theoretic interests. All it insists on
is that verity in act means VERIFICATIONS, and that these are always
particulars. Even in exclusively theoretic matters, it insists that
vagueness and generality serve to verify nothing.

EIGHTH MISUNDERSTANDING: PRAGMATISM IS SHUT UP TO SOLIPSISM.

I have already said something about this misconception under the third
and fourth heads, above, but a little more may be helpful. The objection
is apt to clothe itself in words like these: 'You make truth to consist
in every value except the cognitive value proper; you always leave your
knower at many removes (or, at the uttermost, at one remove) from his
real object; the best you do is to let his ideas carry him towards it;
it remains forever outside of him,' etc.

I think that the leaven working here is the rooted intellectualist
persuasion that, to know a reality, an idea must in some inscrutable
fashion possess or be it. [Footnote: Sensations may, indeed, possess
their objects or coalesce with them, as common sense supposes that they
do; and intuited differences between concepts may coalesce with the
'eternal' objective differences; but to simplify our discussion. here
we can afford to abstract from these very special cases of knowing.]
For pragmatism this kind of coalescence is inessential. As a rule our
cognitions are only processes of mind off their balance and in motion
towards real termini; and the reality of the termini, believed in by the
states of mind in question, can be guaranteed only by some wider knower
[Footnote: The transcendental idealist thinks that, in some inexplicable
way, the finite states of mind are identical with the transfinite
all-knower which he finds himself obliged to postulate in order to
supply a fundamentum far the relation of knowing, as he apprehends it.
Pragmatists can leave the question of identity open; but they cannot do
without the wider knower any more than they can do without the reality,
if they want to prove a case of knowing. They themselves play the part
of the absolute knower for the universe of discourse which serves them
as material for epistemologizing. They warrant the reality there,
and the subject's true knowledge, there, of it. But whether what they
themselves say about that whole universe is objectively true, i.e.,
whether the pragmatic theory of truth is true really, they cannot
warrant,--they can only believe it To their hearers they can only
propose it, as I propose it to my readers, as something to be verified
ambulando, or by the way is which its consequences may confirm it]. But
if there is no reason extant in the universe why they should be doubted,
the beliefs are true in the only sense in which anything can be true
anyhow: they are practically and concretely true, namely. True in the
mystical mongrel sense of an Identitatsphilosophie they need not be; nor
is there any intelligible reason why they ever need be true otherwise
than verifiably and practically. It is reality's part to possess its
own existence; it is thought's part to get into 'touch' with it by
innumerable paths of verification.

I fear that the 'humanistic' developments of pragmatism may cause a
certain difficulty here. We get at one truth only through the rest of
truth; and the reality, everlastingly postulated as that which all our
truth must keep in touch with, may never be given to us save in the
form of truth other than that which we are now testing. But since Dr.
Schiller has shown that all our truths, even the most elemental, are
affected by race-inheritance with a human coefficient, reality per se
thus may appear only as a sort of limit; it may be held to shrivel to
the mere PLACE for an object, and what is known may be held to be only
matter of our psyche that we fill the place with. It must be confessed
that pragmatism, worked in this humanistic way, is COMPATIBLE with
solipsism. It joins friendly hands with the agnostic part of kantism,
with contemporary agnosticism, and with idealism generally. But worked
thus, it is a metaphysical theory about the matter of reality, and flies
far beyond pragmatism's own modest analysis of the nature of the knowing
function, which analysis may just as harmoniously be combined with less
humanistic accounts of reality. One of pragmatism's merits is that it
is so purely epistemological. It must assume realities; but it prejudges
nothing as to their constitution, and the most diverse metaphysics can
use it as their foundation. It certainly has no special affinity with
solipsism.

As I look back over what I have written, much of it gives me a queer
impression, as if the obvious were set forth so condescendingly that
readers might well laugh at my pomposity. It may be, however, that
concreteness as radical as ours is not so obvious. The whole originality
of pragmatism, the whole point in it, is its use of the concrete way of
seeing. It begins with concreteness, and returns and ends with it. Dr.
Schiller, with his two 'practical' aspects of truth, (1) relevancy to
situation, and (2) subsequential utility, is only filling the cup of
concreteness to the brim for us. Once seize that cup, and you cannot
misunderstand pragmatism. It seems as if the power of imagining the
world concretely MIGHT have been common enough to let our readers
apprehend us better, as if they might have read between our lines, and,
in spite of all our infelicities of expression, guessed a little
more correctly what our thought was. But alas! this was not on fate's
programme, so we can only think, with the German ditty:--

   "Es waer' zu schoen gewesen, Es hat nicht sollen sein."



IX

THE MEANING OF THE WORD TRUTH [Footnote: Remarks at the meeting of the
American Philosophical Association, Cornell University, December, 1907.]

My account of truth is realistic, and follows the epistemological
dualism of common sense. Suppose I say to you 'The thing exists'--is
that true or not? How can you tell? Not till my statement has developed
its meaning farther is it determined as being true, false, or irrelevant
to reality altogether. But if now you ask 'what thing?' and I reply 'a
desk'; if you ask 'where?' and I point to a place; if you ask 'does it
exist materially, or only in imagination?' and I say 'materially'; if
moreover I say 'I mean that desk' and then grasp and shake a desk
which you see just as I have described it, you are willing to call
my statement true. But you and I are commutable here; we can exchange
places; and, as you go bail for my desk, so I can go bail for yours.

This notion of a reality independent of either of us, taken from
ordinary social experience, lies at the base of the pragmatist
definition of truth. With some such reality any statement, in order
to be counted true, must agree. Pragmatism defines 'agreeing' to mean
certain ways of 'working,' be they actual or potential. Thus, for my
statement 'the desk exists' to be true of a desk recognized as real by
you, it must be able to lead me to shake your desk, to explain myself
by words that suggest that desk to your mind, to make a drawing that is
like the desk you see, etc. Only in such ways as this is there sense in
saying it agrees with THAT reality, only thus does it gain for me the
satisfaction of hearing you corroborate me. Reference then to something
determinate, and some sort of adaptation to it worthy of the name
of agreement, are thus constituent elements in the definition of any
statement of mine as 'true'.

You cannot get at either the reference or the adaptation without using
the notion of the workings. THAT the thing is, WHAT it is, and WHICH it
is (of all the possible things with that what) are points determinable
only by the pragmatic method. The 'which' means a possibility of
pointing, or of otherwise singling out the special object; the 'what'
means choice on our part of an essential aspect to conceive it by (and
this is always relative to what Dewey calls our own 'situation');
and the 'that' means our assumption of the attitude of belief, the
reality-recognizing attitude. Surely for understanding what the word
'true' means as applied to a statement, the mention of such workings is
indispensable. Surely if we leave them out the subject and the object
of the cognitive relation float-in the same universe, 'tis true--but
vaguely and ignorantly and without mutual contact or mediation.

Our critics nevertheless call the workings inessential. No functional
possibilities 'make' our beliefs true, they say; they are true
inherently, true positively, born 'true' as the Count of Chambord was
born 'Henri-Cinq.' Pragmatism insists, on the contrary, that statements
and beliefs are thus inertly and statically true only by courtesy:
they practically pass for true; but you CANNOT DEFINE WHAT YOU MEAN by
calling them true without referring to their functional possibilities.
These give its whole LOGICAL CONTENT to that relation to reality on a
belief's part to which the name 'truth' is applied, a relation which
otherwise remains one of mere coexistence or bare withness.



The foregoing statements reproduce the essential content of the lecture
on Truth in my book PRAGMATISM. Schiller's doctrine of 'humanism,'
Dewey's 'Studies in logical theory,' and my own 'radical empiricism,'
all involve this general notion of truth as 'working,' either actual or
conceivable. But they envelop it as only one detail in the midst of much
wider theories that aim eventually at determining the notion of what
'reality' at large is in its ultimate nature and constitution.



X

THE EXISTENCE OF JULIUS CAESAR [Footnote: Originally printed under the
title of 'Truth versus Truthfulness,' in the Journal of Philosophy.]

My account of truth is purely logical and relates to its definition
only. I contend that you cannot tell what the WORD 'true' MEANS, as
applied to a statement, without invoking the CONCEPT OF THE STATEMENTS
WORKINGS.

Assume, to fix our ideas, a universe composed of two things only:
imperial Caesar dead and turned to clay, and me, saying 'Caesar really
existed.' Most persons would naively deem truth to be thereby uttered,
and say that by a sort of actio in distans my statement had taken direct
hold of the other fact.

But have my words so certainly denoted THAT Caesar?--or so certainly
connoted HIS individual attributes? To fill out the complete measure
of what the epithet 'true' may ideally mean, my thought ought to bear
a fully determinate and unambiguous 'one-to-one-relation' to its own
particular object. In the ultrasimple universe imagined the reference is
uncertified. Were there two Caesars we shouldn't know which was meant.
The conditions of truth thus seem incomplete in this universe of
discourse so that it must be enlarged.

Transcendentalists enlarge it by invoking an absolute mind which,
as it owns all the facts, can sovereignly correlate them. If it intends
that my statement SHALL refer to that identical Caesar, and that the
attributes I have in mind SHALL mean his attributes, that intention
suffices to make the statement true.

I, in turn, enlarge the universe by admitting finite intermediaries
between the two original facts. Caesar HAD, and my statement HAS,
effects; and if these effects in any way run together, a concrete medium
and bottom is provided for the determinate cognitive relation, which, as
a pure ACTIO IN DISTANS, seemed to float too vaguely and unintelligibly.

The real Caesar, for example, wrote a manuscript of which I see a
real reprint, and say 'the Caesar I mean is the author of THAT.' The
workings of my thought thus determine both its denotative and its
connotative significance more fully. It now defines itself as neither
irrelevant to the real Caesar, nor false in what it suggests of him. The
absolute mind, seeing me thus working towards Caesar through the cosmic
intermediaries, might well say: 'Such workings only specify in detail
what I meant myself by the statement being true. I decree the cognitive
relation between the two original facts to mean that just that kind of
concrete chain of intermediaries exists or can exist.'

But the chain involves facts prior to the statement the logical
conditions of whose truth we are defining, and facts subsequent to it;
and this circumstance, coupled with the vulgar employment of the terms
truth and fact as synonyms, has laid my account open to misapprehension.
'How,' it is confusedly asked, 'can Caesar's existence, a truth already
2000 years old, depend for its truth on anything about to happen now?
How can my acknowledgment of it be made true by the acknowledgment's own
effects? The effects may indeed confirm my belief, but the belief was
made true already by the fact that Caesar really did exist.'

Well, be it so, for if there were no Caesar, there could, of course,
be no positive truth about him--but then distinguish between 'true' as
being positively and completely so established, and 'true' as being so
only 'practically,' elliptically, and by courtesy, in the sense of
not being positively irrelevant or UNtrue. Remember also that Caesar's
having existed in fact may make a present statement false or irrelevant
as well as it may make it true, and that in neither case does it itself
have to alter. It being given, whether truth, untruth, or irrelevancy
shall be also given depends on something coming from the statement
itself. What pragmatism contends for is that you cannot adequately
DEFINE the something if you leave the notion of the statement's
functional workings out of your account. Truth meaning agreement with
reality, the mode of the agreeing is a practical problem which the
subjective term of the relation alone can solve.

NOTE. This paper was originally followed by a couple of paragraphs meant
to conciliate the intellectualist opposition. Since you love the word
'true' so, and since you despise so the concrete working of our ideas,
I said, keep the word 'truth' for the saltatory and incomprehensible
relation you care so much for, and I will say of thoughts that know
their objects in an intelligible sense that they are 'truthful.'

Like most offerings, this one has been spurned, so I revoke it,
repenting of my generosity. Professor Pratt, in his recent book, calls
any objective state of FACTS 'a truth,' and uses the word 'trueness'
in the sense of 'truth' as proposed by me. Mr. Hawtrey (see below, page
281) uses 'correctness' in the same sense. Apart from the general evil
of ambiguous vocabularies, we may really forsake all hope, if the term
'truth' is officially to lose its status as a property of our beliefs
and opinions, and become recognized as a technical synonym for 'fact.'



XI

THE ABSOLUTE AND THE STRENUOUS LIFE [Footnote: Reprinted from the
Journal of Philosophy, etc., 1906.]

Professor W. A. Brown, in the Journal for August 15, approves my
pragmatism for allowing that a belief in the absolute may give
holidays to the spirit, but takes me to task for the narrowness of this
concession, and shows by striking examples how great a power the same
belief may have in letting loose the strenuous life.

I have no criticism whatever to make upon his excellent article, but let
me explain why 'moral holidays' were the only gift of the absolute which
I picked out for emphasis. I was primarily concerned in my lectures with
contrasting the belief that the world is still in process of making
with the belief that there is an 'eternal' edition of it ready-made
and complete. The former, or 'pluralistic' belief, was the one that my
pragmatism favored. Both beliefs confirm our strenuous moods. Pluralism
actually demands them, since it makes the world's salvation depend upon
the energizing of its several parts, among which we are. Monism permits
them, for however furious they may be, we can always justify ourselves
in advance for indulging them by the thought that they WILL HAVE BEEN
expressions of the absolute's perfect life. By escaping from your finite
perceptions to the conception of the eternal whole, you can hallow any
tendency whatever. Tho the absolute DICTATES nothing, it will SANCTION
anything and everything after the fact, for whatever is once there will
have to be regarded as an integral member of the universe's perfection.
Quietism and frenzy thus alike receive the absolute's permit to exist.
Those of us who are naturally inert may abide in our resigned passivity;
those whose energy is excessive may grow more reckless still. History
shows how easily both quietists and fanatics have drawn inspiration from
the absolutistic scheme. It suits sick souls and strenuous ones equally
well.

One cannot say thus of pluralism. Its world is always vulnerable, for
some part may go astray; and having no 'eternal' edition of it to draw
comfort from, its partisans must always feel to some degree insecure.
If, as pluralists, we grant ourselves moral holidays, they can only be
provisional breathing-spells, intended to refresh us for the morrow's
fight. This forms one permanent inferiority of pluralism from the
pragmatic point of view. It has no saving message for incurably sick
souls. Absolutism, among its other messages, has that message, and is
the only scheme that has it necessarily. That constitutes its chief
superiority and is the source of its religious power. That is why,
desiring to do it full justice, I valued its aptitude for moral-holiday
giving so highly. Its claims in that way are unique, whereas its
affinities with strenuousness are less emphatic than those of the
pluralistic scheme.

In the last lecture of my book I candidly admitted this inferiority of
pluralism. It lacks the wide indifference that absolutism shows. It
is bound to disappoint many sick souls whom absolutism can console.
It seems therefore poor tactics for absolutists to make little of this
advantage. The needs of sick souls are surely the most urgent; and
believers in the absolute should rather hold it to be great merit in
their philosophy that it can meet them so well.

The pragmatism or pluralism which I defend has to fall back on a certain
ultimate hardihood, a certain willingness to live without assurances or
guarantees. To minds thus willing to live on possibilities that are
not certainties, quietistic religion, sure of salvation ANY HOW, has a
slight flavor of fatty degeneration about it which has caused it to be
looked askance on, even in the church. Which side is right here, who can
say? Within religion, emotion is apt to be tyrannical; but philosophy
must favor the emotion that allies itself best with the whole body
and drift of all the truths in sight. I conceive this to be the more
strenuous type of emotion; but I have to admit that its inability to
let loose quietistic raptures is a serious deficiency in the pluralistic
philosophy which I profess.



XII

PROFESSOR HEBERT ON PRAGMATISM [Footnote: Reprint from the Journal of
Philosophy for December 3, 1908 (vol. v, p. 689), of a review of Le
Pragmatisme et ses Diverses Formes Anglo-Americaines, by Marcel Hebert.
(Paris: Librairie critique Emile Nourry. 1908. Pp. 105.)]

Professor Marcel Hebert is a singularly erudite and liberal thinker
(a seceder, I believe, from the Catholic priesthood) and an uncommonly
direct and clear writer. His book Le Divin is one of the ablest reviews
of the general subject of religious philosophy which recent years have
produced; and in the small volume the title of which is copied above he
has, perhaps, taken more pains not to do injustice to pragmatism than
any of its numerous critics. Yet the usual fatal misapprehension of its
purposes vitiates his exposition and his critique. His pamphlet seems to
me to form a worthy hook, as it were, on which to hang one more attempt
to tell the reader what the pragmatist account of truth really means.

M. Hebert takes it to mean what most people take it to mean, the
doctrine, namely, that whatever proves subjectively expedient in the way
of our thinking is 'true' in the absolute and unrestricted sense of the
word, whether it corresponds to any objective state of things outside of
our thought or not. Assuming this to be the pragmatist thesis, M. Hebert
opposes it at length. Thought that proves itself to be thus expedient
may, indeed, have every OTHER kind of value for the thinker, he says,
but cognitive value, representative value, VALEUR DE CONNAISSANCE
PROPREMENT DITE, it has not; and when it does have a high degree of
general utility value, this is in every case derived from its previous
value in the way of correctly representing independent objects that have
an important influence on our lives. Only by thus representing things
truly do we reap the useful fruits. But the fruits follow on the truth,
they do not constitute it; so M. Hebert accuses pragmatism of telling us
everything about truth except what it essentially is. He admits, indeed,
that the world is so framed that when men have true ideas of realities,
consequential utilities ensue in abundance; and no one of our critics,
I think, has shown as concrete a sense of the variety of these utilities
as he has; but he reiterates that, whereas such utilities are secondary,
we insist on treating them as primary, and that the connaissance
objective from which they draw all their being is something which we
neglect, exclude, and destroy. The utilitarian value and the strictly
cognitive value of our ideas may perfectly well harmonize, he says--and
in the main he allows that they do harmonize--but they are not logically
identical for that. He admits that subjective interests, desires,
impulses may even have the active 'primacy' in our intellectual life.
Cognition awakens only at their spur, and follows their cues and aims;
yet, when it IS awakened, it is objective cognition proper and not
merely another name for the impulsive tendencies themselves in the state
of satisfaction. The owner of a picture ascribed to Corot gets uneasy
when its authenticity is doubted. He looks up its origin and is
reassured. But his uneasiness does not make the proposition false, any
more than his relief makes the proposition true, that the actual Corot
was the painter. Pragmatism, which, according to M. Hebert, claims that
our sentiments MAKE truth and falsehood, would oblige us to conclude
that our minds exert no genuinely cognitive function whatever.

This subjectivist interpretation of our position seems to follow from my
having happened to write (without supposing it necessary to explain that
I was treating of cognition solely on its subjective side) that in the
long run the true is the expedient in the way of our thinking, much as
the good is the expedient in the way of our behavior! Having previously
written that truth means 'agreement with reality,' and insisted that the
chief part of the expediency of any one opinion is its agreement
with the rest of acknowledged truth, I apprehended no exclusively
subjectivistic reading of my meaning. My mind was so filled with the
notion of objective reference that I never dreamed that my hearers
would let go of it; and the very last accusation I expected was that
in speaking of ideas and their satisfactions, I was denying realities
outside. My only wonder now is that critics should have found so silly
a personage as I must have seemed in their eyes, worthy of explicit
refutation.

The object, for me, is just as much one part of reality as the idea
is another part. The truth of the idea is one relation of it to the
reality, just as its date and its place are other relations. All three
relations CONSIST of intervening parts of the universe which can in
every particular case be assigned and catalogued, and which differ in
every instance of truth, just as they differ with every date and place.

The pragmatist thesis, as Dr. Schiller and I hold it,--I prefer to let
Professor Dewey speak for himself,--is that the relation called 'truth'
is thus concretely DEFINABLE. Ours is the only articulate attempt in the
field to say positively what truth actually CONSISTS OF. Our denouncers
have literally nothing to oppose to it as an alternative. For them, when
an idea is true, it IS true, and there the matter terminates; the word
'true' being indefinable. The relation of the true idea to its object,
being, as they think, unique, it can be expressed in terms of nothing
else, and needs only to be named for any one to recognize and understand
it. Moreover it is invariable and universal, the same in every single
instance of truth, however diverse the ideas, the realities, and the
other relations between them may be.

Our pragmatist view, on the contrary, is that the truth-relation is a
definitely experienceable relation, and therefore describable as well
as namable; that it is not unique in kind, and neither invariable nor
universal. The relation to its object that makes an idea true in any
given instance, is, we say, embodied in intermediate details of reality
which lead towards the object, which vary in every instance, and which
in every instance can be concretely traced. The chain of workings which
an opinion sets up IS the opinion's truth, falsehood, or irrelevancy,
as the case may be. Every idea that a man has works some consequences
in him, in the shape either of bodily actions or of other ideas. Through
these consequences the man's relations to surrounding realities are
modified. He is carried nearer to some of them and farther from others,
and gets now the feeling that the idea has worked satisfactorily, now
that it has not. The idea has put him into touch with something that
fulfils its intent, or it has not.

This something is the MAN'S OBJECT, primarily. Since the only realities
we can talk about are such OBJECTS-BELIEVED-IN, the pragmatist, whenever
he says 'reality,' means in the first instance what may count for the
man himself as a reality, what he believes at the moment to be such.
Sometimes the reality is a concrete sensible presence. The idea, for
example, may be that a certain door opens into a room where a glass of
beer may be bought. If opening the door leads to the actual sight and
taste of the beer, the man calls the idea true. Or his idea may be
that of an abstract relation, say of that between the sides and the
hypothenuse of a triangle, such a relation being, of course, a reality
quite as much as a glass of beer is. If the thought of such a relation
leads him to draw auxiliary lines and to compare the figures they make,
he may at last, perceiving one equality after another, SEE the relation
thought of, by a vision quite as particular and direct as was the taste
of the beer. If he does so, he calls THAT idea, also, true. His idea
has, in each case, brought him into closer touch with a reality felt at
the moment to verify just that idea. Each reality verifies and validates
its own idea exclusively; and in each case the verification consists in
the satisfactorily-ending consequences, mental or physical, which
the idea was able to set up. These 'workings' differ in every single
instance, they never transcend experience, they consist of particulars,
mental or sensible, and they admit of concrete description in every
individual case. Pragmatists are unable to see what you can possibly
MEAN by calling an idea true, unless you mean that between it as a
terminus a quo in some one's mind and some particular reality as a
terminus ad quem, such concrete workings do or may intervene. Their
direction constitutes the idea's reference to that reality, their
satisfactoriness constitutes its adaptation thereto, and the two things
together constitute the 'truth' of the idea for its possessor.
Without such intermediating portions of concretely real experience the
pragmatist sees no materials out of which the adaptive relation called
truth can be built up.

The anti-pragmatist view is that the workings are but evidences of the
truth's previous inherent presence in the idea, and that you can wipe
the very possibility of them out of existence and still leave the truth
of the idea as solid as ever. But surely this is not a counter-theory
of truth to ours. It is the renunciation of all articulate theory. It is
but a claim to the right to call certain ideas true anyhow; and this is
what I meant above by saying that the anti-pragmatists offer us no real
alternative, and that our account is literally the only positive theory
extant. What meaning, indeed, can an idea's truth have save its power of
adapting us either mentally or physically to a reality?

How comes it, then, that our critics so uniformly accuse us of
subjectivism, of denying the reality's existence? It comes, I think,
from the necessary predominance of subjective language in our analysis.
However independent and elective realities may be, we can talk about
them, in framing our accounts of truth, only as so many objects
believed-in. But the process of experience leads men so continually
to supersede their older objects by newer ones which they find it more
satisfactory to believe in, that the notion of an ABSOLUTE reality
inevitably arises as a grenzbegriff, equivalent to that of an object
that shall never be superseded, and belief in which shall be endgueltig.
Cognitively we thus live under a sort of rule of three: as our private
concepts represent the sense-objects to which they lead us, these being
public realities independent of the individual, so these sense-realities
may, in turn, represent realities of a hypersensible order, electrons,
mind-stuff. God, or what not, existing independently of all human
thinkers. The notion of such final realities, knowledge of which would
be absolute truth, is an outgrowth of our cognitive experience from
which neither pragmatists nor anti-pragmatists escape. They form an
inevitable regulative postulate in every one's thinking. Our notion of
them is the most abundantly suggested and satisfied of all our beliefs,
the last to suffer doubt. The difference is that our critics use this
belief as their sole paradigm, and treat any one who talks of
human realities as if he thought the notion of reality 'in itself'
illegitimate. Meanwhile, reality-in-itself, so far as by them TALKED OF,
is only a human object; they postulate it just as we postulate it; and
if we are subjectivists they are so no less. Realities in themselves
can be there FOR any one, whether pragmatist or anti-pragmatist, only by
being believed; they are believed only by their notions appearing true;
and their notions appear true only because they work satisfactorily.
Satisfactorily, moreover, for the particular thinker's purpose. There is
no idea which is THE true idea, of anything. Whose is THE true idea of
the absolute? Or to take M. Hebert's example, what is THE true idea of a
picture which you possess? It is the idea that most satisfactorily meets
your present interest. The interest may be in the picture's place, its
age, its 'tone,' its subject, its dimensions, its authorship, its price,
its merit, or what not. If its authorship by Corot have been doubted,
what will satisfy the interest aroused in you at that moment will be
to have your claim to own a Corot confirmed; but, if you have a normal
human mind, merely calling it a Corot will not satisfy other demands of
your mind at the same time. For THEM to be satisfied, what you learn of
the picture must make smooth connection with what you know of the rest
of the system of reality in which the actual Corot played his part.
M. Hebert accuses us of holding that the proprietary satisfactions of
themselves suffice to make the belief true, and that, so far as we are
concerned, no actual Corot need ever have existed. Why we should be thus
cut off from the more general and intellectual satisfactions, I know
not; but whatever the satisfactions may be, intellectual or proprietary,
they belong to the subjective side of the truth-relation. They found our
beliefs; our beliefs are in realities; if no realities are there, the
beliefs are false but if realities are there, how they can even be KNOWN
without first being BELIEVED; or how BELIEVED except by our first having
ideas of them that work satisfactorily, pragmatists find it impossible
to imagine. They also find it impossible to imagine what makes the
anti-pragmatists' dogmatic 'ipse dixit' assurance of reality
more credible than the pragmatists conviction based on concrete
verifications. M. Hebert will probably agree to this, when put in
this way, so I do not see our inferiority to him in the matter of
connaissance proprement dite.

Some readers will say that, altho I may possibly believe in realities
beyond our ideas Dr. Schiller, at any rate, does not. This is a great
misunderstanding, for Schiller's doctrine and mine are identical,
only our exposition follow different directions. He starts from the
subjective pole of the chain, the individual with his beliefs, as the
more concrete and immediately given phenomenon. 'An individual claims
his belief to be true,' Schiller says, 'but what does he mean by true?
and how does he establish the claim?' With these questions we embark
on a psychological inquiry. To be true, it appears, means, FOR THAT
INDIVIDUAL, to work satisfactorily for him; and the working and the
satisfaction, since they vary from case to case, admit of no universal
description. What works is true and represents a reality, for the
individual for whom it works. If he is infallible, the reality is
'really' there; if mistaken it is not there, or not there as he thinks
it. We all believe, when our ideas work satisfactorily; but we don't yet
know who of us is infallible; so that the problem of truth and that of
error are EBENBURTIG and arise out of the same situations. Schiller,
remaining with the fallible individual, and treating only
of reality-for-him, seems to many of his readers to ignore
reality-in-itself altogether. But that is because he seeks only to tell
us how truths are attained, not what the content of those truths, when
attained, shall be. It may be that the truest of all beliefs shall be
that in transsubjective realities. It certainly SEEMS the truest for
no rival belief is as voluminously satisfactory, and it is probably
Dr. Schiller's own belief; but he is not required, for his immediate
purpose, to profess it. Still less is he obliged to assume it in advance
as the basis of his discussion.

I, however, warned by the ways of critics, adopt different tactics. I
start from the object-pole of the idea-reality chain and follow it in
the opposite direction from Schiller's. Anticipating the results of the
general truth-processes of mankind, I begin with the abstract notion
of an objective reality. I postulate it, and ask on my own account, I
VOUCHING FOR THIS REALITY, what would make any one else's idea of it
true for me as well as for him. But I find no different answer from that
which Schiller gives. If the other man's idea leads him, not only
to believe that the reality is there, but to use it as the reality's
temporary substitute, by letting it evoke adaptive thoughts and acts
similar to those which the reality itself would provoke, then it is
true in the only intelligible sense, true through its particular
consequences, and true for me as well as for the man.

My account is more of a logical definition; Schiller's is more of a
psychological description. Both treat an absolutely identical matter of
experience, only they traverse it in opposite ways.

Possibly these explanations may satisfy M. Hebert, whose little
book, apart from the false accusation of subjectivism, gives a fairly
instructive account of the pragmatist epistemology.





