The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Short History of Greek Philosophy
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A Short History of Greek Philosophy

Author: J. Marshall


        
Release date: February 1, 2007 [eBook #20500]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20500

Credits: Produced by Al Haines






Produced by Al Haines





A SHORT HISTORY

OF

GREEK PHILOSOPHY


BY

JOHN MARSHALL

M.A. OXON., LL.D. EDIN.


RECTOR OF THE ROYAL HIGH SCHOOL, EDINBURGH

FORMERLY PROFESSOR OF CLASSICAL LITERATURE AND PHILOSOPHY

IN THE YORKSHIRE COLLEGE, LEEDS




LONDON

PERCIVAL AND CO.

1891

_All rights reserved_




PREFACE

The main purpose which I have had in view in writing this book has been
to present an account of Greek philosophy which, within strict limits
of brevity, shall be at once authentic and interesting--_authentic_, as
being based on the original works themselves, and not on any secondary
sources; _interesting_, as presenting to the ordinary English reader,
in language freed as far as possible from technicality and
abstruseness, the great thoughts of the greatest men of antiquity on
questions of permanent significance and value.  There has been no
attempt to shirk the really philosophic problems which these men tried
in their day to solve; but I have endeavoured to show, by a sympathetic
treatment of them, that these problems were no mere wars of words, but
that in fact the philosophers of twenty-four centuries ago were dealing
with exactly similar difficulties as to the bases of belief and of
right action as, under different forms, beset thoughtful men and women
to-day.

In the general treatment of the subject, I have followed in the main
the order, and drawn chiefly on the selection of passages, in Ritter
and Preller's _Historia Philosophiae Graecae_.  It is hoped that in
this way the little book may be found useful at the universities, as a
running commentary on that excellent work; and the better to aid
students in the use of it for that purpose, the corresponding sections
in Ritter and Preller are indicated by the figures in the margin.

In the sections on Plato, and occasionally elsewhere, I have drawn to
some extent, by the kind permission of the Delegates of the Clarendon
Press and his own, on Professor Jowett's great commentary and
translation.

JOHN MARSHALL.




Transcriber's notes:

The passage numbers in the Ritter-Preller book mentioned in the second
paragraph above are indicated in this book with square brackets, e.g.
"[10]".  In the original book they were formatted as sidenotes.  In
this e-book they are embedded in the text approximately where they
appear in the original book, unless they are at the start of a
paragraph, in which case they appear immediately before that paragraph.

Page numbers are indicated with curly brackets, e.g. "{5}".  They are
embedded into the text where page breaks occurred in the original book.

In the original book, pages had headings that varied with the material
being discussed on that pair of pages.  In this e-book, those headings
have been collected into an "introductory" paragraph at the beginning
of each chapter.


The original book uses several Greek words.  These words, the chapters
they are used in, and their transliterations are as follows:

Chapter I (pages 3, 4, 12) - "arche" - alpha (with the soft-breathing
mark), rho, chi, eta; "phloios" - phi, lambda, omicron, iota, omicron,
final sigma.

