PART II.




SENTIMENTS OF THE PEOPLE OF COLOR.


If the American Colonization Society were indeed actuated by the purest
motives and the best feelings toward the objects of its supervision; if
it were not based upon injustice, fraud, persecution and incorrigible
prejudice; still if its purposes be contrary to the wishes and injurious
to the interests of the free people of color, it ought not to receive
the countenance of the public. Even the trees of the forest are keenly
susceptible to every touch of violence, and seem to deprecate
transplantation to a foreign soil. Even birds and animals pine in exile
from their native haunts; their local attachments are wonderful; they
migrate only to return again at the earliest opportunity. Perhaps there
is not a living thing, from the hugest animal down to the minutest
animalcule, whose pleasant associations are not circumscribed, or that
has not some favorite retreats. This universal preference, this love of
_home_, seems to be the element of being,--a constitutional attribute
given by the all-wise Creator to bind each separate tribe or community
within intelligent and well-defined limits: for, in its absence, order
would be banished from the world, collision between the countless
orders of creation would be perpetual, and violence would depopulate the
world with more than pestilential rapidity.

Shall it be said that beings endowed with high intellectual powers,
sustaining the most important relations, created for social enjoyments,
and made but a little lower than the angels--shall it be said that their
local attachments are less tenacious than those of trees, and birds, and
beasts, and insects? I know that the blacks are classed, by some, who
scarcely give any evidence of their own humanity but their shape, among
the brute creation: but are they _below_ the brutes? or are they more
insensible to rude assaults than forest-trees?

'Men,' says an erratic but powerful writer[AE]--'men are like trees:
they delight in a rude [and native] soil--they strike their roots
downward with a perpetual effort, and heave their proud branches upward
in perpetual strife. Are they to be removed?--you must tear up the very
earth with their roots, rock and ore and impurity, or they perish. They
cannot be translated with safety. Something of their home--a little of
their native soil, must cling to them forever, or they die.'

This love of home, of neighborhood, of country, is inherent in the human
breast. It accompanies the child from its earliest reminiscence up to
old age: it is written upon every tangible and permanent object within
the habitual cognizance of the eye--upon stone, and tree, and
rivulet--upon the green hill, and the verdant plain, and the opulent
valley--upon house, and garden, and steeple-spire--upon the soil,
whether it be rough or smooth, sandy or hard, barren or luxuriant.

    'Like ivy, where it grows, 'tis seen
    To wear an everlasting green.'

The man who does not cherish it is regarded as destitute of sensibility;
and to him is applied by common consent the burning rebuke of Sir Walter
Scott:

    'Breathes there the man, with soul so dead,
    Who never to himself hath said,
      This is my own, my native land!
    Whose heart hath ne'er within him burned,
    As home his footsteps he hath turned,
      From wandering on a foreign strand!
    If such there breathe, go, mark him well;
    For him no Minstrel raptures swell;
    High though his titles, proud his name,
    Boundless his wealth as wish can claim;
    Despite those titles, power, and pelf,
    The wretch, concentred all in self,
    Living, shall forfeit fair renown,
    And, doubly dying, shall go down
    To the vile dust, from whence he sprung,
    Unwept, unhonored, and unsung.'

Whose bosom does not thrill with pleasurable emotion whenever he listens
to that truest, sweetest, tenderest effusion,--'Home, sweet home?'

    ''Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam,
    Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home;
    A charm from the skies seems to hallow us there,
    Which, seek thro' the world, is ne'er met with elsewhere.
                  Home--home!
                  Sweet, sweet home!
            _There's no place like home!_

    'An exile from home, splendor dazzles in vain--
    O give me my lowly thatched cottage again;
    The birds singing gaily that came at my call--
    Give me them, with the peace of mind dearer than all!
                  Home--home!
                  Sweet, sweet home!
            _There's no place like home!_'

No one will understand me to maintain that population should never be
thinned by foreign emigration; but only that such an emigration is
unnatural. The great mass of a neighborhood or country must necessarily
be stable: only fractions are cast off and float away on the tide of
adventure. Individual enterprise or estrangement is one thing: the
translation of an entire people to an unknown clime, another. The former
may be moved by a single impulse--by a love of novelty, or a desire of
gain, or a hope of preferment: he leaves no perceptible void in
society. The latter can never be expatriated but by some extraordinary
calamity, or by the application of intolerable restraints. They must
first be rendered broken-hearted or loaded with chains--hope must not
merely sicken but die--cord after cord must be sundered--ere they will
seek another home. Our pilgrim-fathers were driven out from the mother
country by ecclesiastical domination: to worship God according to the
dictates of their own consciences, was the only cause of their exile.
Had they been permitted to enjoy this sacred right,--no matter how great
were their temporal privations, or their hopes of physical
enjoyments,--they would not have perilled their lives on the stormy
deep, to obtain an asylum in this western hemisphere.

It may be said, in reply to the foregoing remarks upon the love of home
and of country, that the people of color cannot cherish this abhorrence
of migration, because here they have no 'continuing city,' and are not
recognised as fellow-countrymen. In PART I., I have shown, by copious
extracts, that colonizationists artfully represent them as aliens and
foreigners, wanderers from Africa--destitute of that _amor patriæ_,
which is the bond of union--seditious--without
alliances--irresponsible--unambitious--cherishing no attachment to the
soil--feeling no interest in our national prosperity--ready for any
adventure--eager to absent themselves from the land--malignant in their
feelings towards society--incapable of local preference--content to
remain in ignorance and degradation--&c. &c. &c.

Every such representation is a libel, as I shall show in subsequent
pages. The language of the people of color is,--'This is our country:
here were we born--here will we live and die--we know of no other place
that we can call our true and appropriate home--here are our earliest
and most pleasant associations--we are freemen, we are brethren, we are
countrymen and fellow-citizens--we are not for insurrection, but for
peace and equality.' This is not the language of sedition or alienated
affection. Their _amor patriæ_ is robust and deathless: like the oak,
tempests do but strengthen its roots and confer victory upon it. Even
the soil on which the unhappy slave toils and bleeds, is to him
consecrated earth.

African colonization is directly and irreconcileably opposed to the
wishes of our colored population as a body. Their desires ought to be
tenderly regarded. In all my intercourse with them in various towns and
cities, I have never seen one of their number who was friendly to this
scheme--and I have not been backward in canvassing their opinions on
this subject. They are as unanimously opposed to a removal to Africa, as
the Cherokees from the council-fires and graves of their fathers. It is
remarkable, too, that they are as united in their respect and esteem for
the republic of Hayti. But _this is their country_--they are resolute
against every migratory plot, and willing to rely on the justice of the
nation for an ultimate restoration to all their lost rights and
privileges. What is the fact? Through the instrumentality of BENJAMIN
LUNDY,[AF] the distinguished and veteran champion of emancipation, a
great highway has been opened to the Haytien republic, over which our
colored population may travel _toll free_, and at the end of their brief
journey be the free occupants of the soil, and meet such a reception as
was never yet given to any sojourners in any country, since the
departure of Israel into Egypt. One would think, that, with such
inducements and under such circumstances, this broad thoroughfare would
present a most animating spectacle; that the bustle and roar of a
journeying multitude would fall upon the ear like the strife of the
ocean, or the distant thunder of the retiring storm; and that the song
of the oppressor and the oppressed, a song of deliverance to each, would
go up to heaven, till its echoes were seemingly the responses of angels
and justified spirits. But it is not so. Only here and there a traveller
is seen to enter upon the road--there is no noise of preparation or
departure; but a silence, deeper than the breathlessness of midnight,
rests upon our land--not a shout of joy is heard throughout our
borders!

How shall we account for this amazing apathy but on the ground that our
colored population are unwilling to leave their native homes, no matter
how strong soever are the inducements held out to them abroad?

If it be said that they are not compelled to emigrate against their
wishes--I answer, it is true that direct _physical force_ is not
applied; but why are they induced to remove? Is it because they
instinctively prefer Africa to their native country? Do they actually
_court_ the perils of the sea,--the hostilities of a savage tribe,--the
sickening influences of an African climate? Or are they not peremptorily
assured that they never can, _and never shall_, enjoy their rights and
privileges at home--and thus absolutely compelled to leave all that is
dear behind, and to seek a shelter in a strange land--a land of darkness
and cruelty, of barbarism and wo?

The free people of color, and even the slaves, have on numerous
occasions given ocular demonstration of their attachment to this
country. Large numbers of them were distinguished for their patient
endurance, their ardent devotion, and their valorous conduct during our
revolutionary struggle. In the last war, they signalized themselves in a
manner which extorted the applause even of their calumniators--of many
who are doubtless at the present day representing them as seditious and
inimical to the prosperity of the country. I have before me a
Proclamation in the French language, issued by General Andrew Jackson,
of which the following is a translation:

    'PROCLAMATION TO THE FREE PEOPLE OF COLOR.

    'Soldiers!--When on the banks of the Mobile, I called you to
    take up arms, inviting you to partake the perils and glory of
    your white fellow citizens, _I expected much from you_; for I
    was not ignorant that you possessed qualities most formidable to
    an invading enemy. I knew with what fortitude you could endure
    hunger and thirst, and all the fatigues of a campaign. _I knew
    well how you loved your_ NATIVE _country_, and that you had, as
    well as ourselves, to defend what man holds most dear--his
    parents, relations, wife, children and property. YOU HAVE DONE
    MORE THAN I EXPECTED. In addition to the previous qualities I
    before knew you to possess, I found, moreover, among you _a
    noble enthusiasm_ which leads to the performance of great
    things.

    'Soldiers!--The President of the United States shall hear how
    praiseworthy was your conduct in the hour of danger, and the
    Representatives of the American people will, I doubt not, give
    you the praise your exploits entitle you to. _Your General
    anticipates them in applauding your noble ardor._

    'The enemy approaches; his vessels cover our lakes; our brave
    citizens are united, and all contention has ceased among them.
    Their only dispute is, who shall win the prize of valor, or who
    the most glory, its noblest reward.

    'By order.

                 'THOMAS BUTLER, _Aid de Camp_.'

In commenting upon the above Proclamation, an intelligent writer in the
New-Orleans 'LIBERALIST' of March 15, 1830, very expressively
remarks:--'Those who served in the memorable campaign of 1814 will know
if the hero of the west was guilty of exaggeration. Just as fatal as was
every glance of his keen eye to the English lines, so is every word of
this Proclamation a killing thunderbolt to the detractors of this
portion of our fellow beings, now so inhumanly persecuted.' Yes--when
peril rears its crest, and invasion threatens our shores, then prejudice
is forgotten and the tongue of detraction is still--then the people of
color are no longer brutes or a race between men and monkeys, no longer
turbulent or useless, no longer aliens and wanderers from Africa--but
they are complimented as intelligent, patriotic citizens from whom much
is expected, and who have property, home and country at stake! Ay, and
richly do they merit this compliment.

A respectable colored gentleman in the city of New-York, referring to
this famous Proclamation, makes the following brief comment: 'When we
could be of any use to the army, we possessed all the cardinal virtues;
but now that time has passed, we forsooth are the most miserable,
worthless beings the Lord in his wise judgment ever sent to curse the
rulers of this troublesome world! I feel an anathema rising from my
heart, but I have suppressed it.'

How black is the ingratitude, how pitiful the hypocrisy, manifested in
our conduct as a people, toward our colored population! Every cheek
should wear the blush of shame--every head be bowed in self-abasement!

From the organization of the American Colonization Society, down to the
present time, the free people of color have publicly and repeatedly
expressed their opposition to it. They indignantly reject every overture
for their expatriation. It has been industriously circulated by the
advocates of colonization, that I have caused this hostility to the
African scheme in the bosoms of the blacks; and that, until the
Liberator was established, they were friendly to it. This story is
founded upon sheer ignorance. It is my solemn conviction that I have not
proselyted a dozen individuals; for the very conclusive reason that no
conversions were necessary. Their sentiments were familiar to me long
before they knew my own. My opponents abundantly overrate my influence,
in acknowledging that I have overthrown, in a single year, the
concentrated energies of the mightiest men in the land, and the
perpetual labors of fifteen years. They shall not make me vain. Such a
concession affords substantial evidence of perverted strength and
misapplied exertion.

If the people of color were instantly to signify their willingness to
emigrate, my hostility to the American Colonization Society would
scarcely abate one jot: for their assent could never justify the
principles and doctrines propagated by the Society. Those principles and
doctrines have been shown, I trust, to be corrupt, selfish,
proscriptive, opposed to the genius of republicanism and to the spirit
of christianity.

The first public demonstration of hostility to the colonization scheme
was made in 1817, by the free colored inhabitants of Richmond, Virginia.
The proceedings of their meeting, copies of which were printed for
distribution, I have accidentally mislaid. To the sentiments of the
people of color, as expressed in the following pages, I cannot too
earnestly solicit the serious attention of every good man and true
philanthropist. After such an exhibition, persistance in expelling this
portion of our population from our shores must be productive of
aggravated guilt and the most dreadful collisions.


A VOICE PROM PHILADELPHIA.

                        PHILADELPHIA, January, 1817.

At a numerous meeting of the people of color, convened at Bethel church,
to take into consideration the propriety of remonstrating against the
contemplated measure, that is to exile us from the land of our nativity;
James Forten was called to the chair, and Russell Parrott appointed
secretary. The intent of the meeting having been stated by the chairman,
the following resolutions were adopted, without one dissenting voice.

Whereas our ancestors (not of choice) were the first successful
cultivators of the wilds of America, we their descendants feel ourselves
entitled to participate in the blessings of her luxuriant soil, which
their blood and sweat manured; and that any measure or system of
measures, having a tendency to banish us from her bosom, would not only
be cruel, but in direct violation of those principles, which have been
the boast of this republic.

Resolved, That we view with deep abhorrence the unmerited stigma
attempted to be cast upon the reputation of the free people of color, by
the promoters of this measure, 'that they are a dangerous and useless
part of the community,' when in the state of disfranchisement in which
they live, in the hour of danger they ceased to remember their wrongs,
and rallied around the standard of their country.

Resolved, That we never will separate ourselves voluntarily from the
slave population in this country; they are our brethren by the ties of
consanguinity, of suffering, and of wrong; and we feel that there is
more virtue in suffering privations with them, than fancied advantages
for a season.

Resolved, That without arts, without science, without a proper knowledge
of government, to cast into the savage wilds of Africa the free people
of color, seems to us the circuitous route through which they must
return to perpetual bondage.

Resolved, That having the strongest confidence in the justice of God,
and philanthropy of the free states, we cheerfully submit our destinies
to the guidance of Him who suffers not a sparrow to fall, without his
special providence.

Resolved, That a committee of eleven persons be appointed to open a
correspondence with the honorable Joseph Hopkinson, member of Congress
from this city, and likewise to inform him of the sentiments of this
meeting, and that the following named persons constitute the committee,
and that they have power to call a general meeting, when they in their
judgment may deem it proper.

Rev. Absalom Jones, Rev. Richard Allen, James Forten, Robert Douglass,
Francis Perkins, Rev. John Gloucester, Robert Gorden, James Johnson,
Quamoney Clarkson, John Summersett, Randall Shepherd.

                        JAMES FORTEN, Chairman.

RUSSELL PARROTT, Secretary.


At a numerous meeting of the free people of color of the city and county
of Philadelphia, held in pursuance of public notice, at the school house
in Green's court, on the evening of August 10th, for the purpose of
taking into consideration the plan of colonizing the free people of
color of the United States, on the coast of Africa, James Forten was
appointed chairman, and Russell Parrott, secretary.

Resolved unanimously, That the following address, signed on behalf of
the meeting, by the Chairman and Secretary, be published and circulated.

    _To the humane and benevolent Inhabitants of the city and county
                            of Philadelphia._

The free people of color, assembled together, under circumstances of
deep interest to their happiness and welfare, humbly and respectfully
lay before you this expression of their feelings and apprehensions.

Relieved from the miseries of slavery, many of us by your aid,
possessing the benefits which industry and integrity in this prosperous
country assure to all its inhabitants, enjoying the rich blessings of
religion, by opportunities of worshipping the only true God, under the
light of Christianity, each of us according to his understanding; and
having afforded to us and to our children the means of education and
improvement; we have no wish to separate from our present homes, for any
purpose whatever. Contented with our present situation and condition, we
are not desirous of increasing their prosperity but by honest efforts,
and by the use of those opportunities for their improvement, which the
constitution and laws allow to all. It is therefore with painful
solicitude, and sorrowing regret, we have seen a plan for colonizing the
free people of color of the United States on the coast of Africa,
brought forward under the auspices and sanction of gentlemen whose names
give value to all they recommend, and who certainly are among the
wisest, the best, and the most benevolent of men, in this great nation.

If the plan of colonizing is intended for our benefit; and those who now
promote it, will never seek our injury; we humbly and respectfully urge,
that it is not asked for by us; nor will it be required by any
circumstances, in our present or future condition; as long as we shall
be permitted to share the protection of the excellent laws and just
government which we now enjoy, in common with every individual of the
community.

We, therefore, a portion of those who are the objects of this plan, and
among those whose happiness, with that of others of our color, it is
intended to promote; with humble and grateful acknowledgments to those
who have devised it, renounce and disclaim every connexion with it; and
respectfully but firmly declare our determination not to participate in
any part of it.

If this plan of colonization now proposed, is intended to provide a
refuge and a dwelling for a portion of our brethren, who are now held in
slavery in the south, we have other and stronger objections to it, and
we entreat your consideration of them.

The ultimate and final abolition of slavery in the United States, by the
operation of various causes, is, under the guidance and protection of a
just God, progressing. Every year witnesses the release of numbers of
the victims of oppression, and affords new and safe assurances that the
freedom of all will be in the end accomplished. As they are thus by
degrees relieved from bondage, our brothers have opportunities for
instruction and improvement; and thus they become in some measure fitted
for their liberty. Every year, many of us have restored to us by the
gradual, but certain march of the cause of abolition--parents, from whom
we have been long separated--wives and children whom we had left in
servitude--and brothers, in blood as well as in early sufferings, from
whom we had been long parted.

But if the emancipation of our kindred shall, when the plan of
colonization shall go into effect, be attended with transportation to a
distant land, and shall be granted on no other condition; the
consolation for our past sufferings and of those of our color who are in
slavery, which have hitherto been, and under the present situation of
things would continue to be, afforded to us and to them, will cease for
ever. The cords, which now connect them with us, will be stretched by
the distance to which their ends will be carried, until they break; and
all the sources of happiness, which affection and connexion and blood
bestow, will be ours and theirs no more.

Nor do we view the colonization of those who may become emancipated by
its operation among our southern brethren, as capable of producing their
happiness. Unprepared by education, and a knowledge of the truths of our
blessed religion, for their new situation, those who will thus become
colonists will themselves be surrounded by every suffering which can
afflict the members of the human family.

Without arts, without habits of industry, and unaccustomed to provide by
their own exertions and foresight for their wants, the colony will soon
become the abode of every vice, and the home of every misery. Soon will
the light of Christianity, which now dawns among that portion of our
species, be shut out by the clouds of ignorance, and their day of life
be closed, without the illuminations of the gospel.

To those of our brothers, who shall be left behind, there will be
assured perpetual slavery and augmented sufferings. Diminished in
numbers, the slave population of the southern states, which by its
magnitude alarms its proprietors, will be easily secured. Those among
their bondmen, who feel that they should be free, by rights which all
mankind have from God and from nature, and who thus may become dangerous
to the quiet of their masters, will be sent to the colony; and the tame
and submissive will be retained, and subjected to increased rigor. Year
after year will witness these means to assure safety and submission
among their slaves, and the southern masters will colonize only those
whom it may be dangerous to keep among them. The bondage of a large
portion of our brothers will thus be rendered perpetual.

Should the anticipations of misery and want among the colonists, which
with great deference we have submitted to your better judgment, be
realized; to emancipate and transport to Africa will be held forth by
slaveholders as the worst and heaviest of punishments; and they will be
threatened and successfully used to enforce increased submission to
their wishes, and subjection to their commands.

Nor ought the sufferings and sorrows, which must be produced by an
exercise of the right to transport and colonize such only of their
slaves as may be selected by the slaveholders, escape the attention and
consideration of those whom with all humility we now address. Parents
will be torn from their children--husbands from their wives--brothers
from brothers--and all the heart-rending agonies which were endured by
our forefathers when they were dragged into bondage from Africa, will be
again renewed, and with increased anguish. The shores of America will,
like the sands of Africa, be watered by the tears of those who will be
left behind. Those who shall be carried away will roam childless,
widowed, and alone, over the burning plains of Guinea.

Disclaiming, as we emphatically do, a wish or desire to interpose our
opinions and feelings between all plans of colonization, and the
judgment of those whose wisdom as far exceeds ours as their situations
are exalted above ours; _we humbly_, respectfully, and fervently
intreat and beseech your disapprobation of the plan of colonization now
offered by 'the American Society for colonizing the free people of color
of the United States.'--Here, in the city of Philadelphia, where the
voice of the suffering sons of Africa was first heard; where was first
commenced the work of abolition, on which heaven has smiled, for it
could have had success only from the Great Maker; let not a purpose be
assisted which will stay the cause of the entire abolition of slavery in
the United States, and which may defeat it altogether; which proffers to
those who do not ask for them what it calls benefits, but which they
consider injuries; and which must insure to the multitudes whose prayers
can only reach you through us, MISERY, _sufferings, and perpetual
slavery_.

                        JAMES FORTEN, Chairman.

RUSSELL PARROTT, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM NEW-YORK.

                        NEW-YORK, January, 1831.

At a public meeting of the colored citizens of New-York, held at Boyer
Lodge Room, on Tuesday evening, the 25th ult. Mr Samuel Ennals was
called to the chair, and Mr Philip Bell appointed secretary. The
chairman stated that the object of the meeting was to take into
consideration the proceedings of an association, under the title of the
'New-York Colonization Society.' An address to the 'Citizens of
New-York' relative to that Society, was read from the Commercial
Advertiser of the 8th ult.; whereupon the following resolutions were
unanimously adopted.

Whereas a number of gentlemen in this city, of mistaken views with
respect to the wishes and welfare of the people of this state, on the
subject of African colonization, and in pursuance of such mistaken views
are using every exertion to form 'African Colonization Societies;' and
whereas a public document, purporting to be an address to the people of
the 'city of New-York' on this subject, contains opinions and assertions
regarding the people of color as unfounded as they are unjust and
derogatory to them--Therefore

Resolved, That this meeting do most solemnly protest against the said
address, as containing sentiments with respect to the people of color,
unjust, illiberal and unfounded; tending to excite the prejudice of the
community.

Resolved, That in our opinion the sentiments put forth in the
resolution at the formation of the 'Colonization Society of the city of
New-York,' are such as to impress this community with the belief that
the colored population are a growing evil, immoral, and destitute of
religious principles.

Resolved, That we view the resolution calling on the worshippers of
Christ to assist in the unholy crusade against the colored population of
this country, as totally at variance with true Christian principles.

Resolved, That we claim _this country, the place of our birth, and not
Africa_, as our mother country, and all attempts to send us to Africa we
consider as gratuitous and uncalled for.

Resolved, That a committee of three persons be appointed to draft an
address to the people of New-York, and to be published, together with
these resolutions, and the same be signed by the Chairman and Secretary.

                        SAMUEL ENNALS, Chairman.

PHILIP BELL, Secretary.


_An Address to the Citizens of New-York._

In protesting against the sentiments and declarations to our prejudice
with which the above noticed 'address' and 'resolutions' abound, we are
well aware of the power and influence we have attempted to resist. The
gentlemen named as officers of the 'Colonization Society' are men of
high standing, their dictum is law in morals with our community; but we
who feel the effect of their proscription, indulge the hope of an
impartial hearing.

We believe many of those gentlemen are our friends, and we hope they all
mean well; we care not how many Colonization Societies they form to send
slaves from the south to a place where they may enjoy freedom; and if
they can 'drain the ocean with a bucket,' may send '_with their own
consent_,' the increasing free colored population: but we solemnly
protest against that Christian philanthropy which in acknowledging our
wrongs commits a greater by vilifying us. The conscientious man would
not kill the animal, but cried 'mad dog,' and the rabble despatched him.
These gentlemen acknowledge the anomaly of those political ethics which
make a distinction between man and man, when their foundation is, 'that
all men are born equal,' and possess in common 'unalienable rights;' and
to justify the withholding of these 'rights' would proclaim to
foreigners that we are 'a distinct and inferior race,' without religion
or morals, and implying that our condition cannot be improved here
because there exists an unconquerable prejudice in the whites towards
us. We absolutely deny these positions, and we call upon the learned
author of the 'address' for the indications of distinction between us
and other men. There are different _colors_ among all species of
animated creation. A difference of color is not a difference of species.
Our structure and organization are the same, and not distinct from other
men; and in what respects are we inferior? Our political condition we
admit renders us less respectable, but does it prove us an inferior part
of the human family? Inferior indeed we are as to the means which we
possess of becoming wealthy and learned men; and it would argue well for
the cause of justice, humanity and true religion, if the reverend
gentlemen whose names are found at the bottom of President Duer's
address, instead of showing their benevolence by laboring to move us
some four thousand miles off, were to engage actively in the furtherance
of plans for the improvement of our moral and political condition in the
country of our birth. It is too late now to brand with inferiority any
one of the races of mankind. We ask for proof. Time was when it was
thought impossible to civilize the red man. Yet our own country presents
a practical refutation of the vain assertion in the flourishing
condition of the Cherokees, among whom intelligence and refinement are
seen in somewhat fairer proportions than are exhibited by some of their
white neighbors. In the language of a writer of expanded views and truly
noble sentiments, 'the blacks must be regarded as the real authors of
most of the arts and sciences which give the whites at present the
advantage over them. While Greece and Rome were yet barbarous, we find
the light of learning and improvement emanating from this, by
supposition, degraded and accursed continent of Africa, out of the midst
of this very woolly-haired, flat-nosed, thick lipped, and coal black
race, which some persons are tempted to station at a pretty low
intermediate point between men and monkeys.'[AG] It is needless to dwell
on this topic; and we say with the same writer, the blacks had a long
and glorious day: and after what they have been and done, it argues not
so much a mistaken theory, as sheer ignorance of the most notorious
historical facts, to pretend that they are naturally inferior to the
whites.

We earnestly desire that this address may not be misunderstood. We have
no objection in the abstract to the Colonization Society; but we do
protest against the means which that Society uses to effect its
purposes. It is evident, to any impartial observer, that the natural
tendency of all their speeches, reports, sermons, &c. is to widen the
breach between us and the whites, and give to prejudice a tenfold
vigor. It has produced a mistaken sentiment toward us. Africa is
considered the home of those who have never seen its shores. The poor
ignorant slave, who, in all probability, has never heard the name of
Christ, by the colonization process is suddenly transformed into a
'missionary,' to instruct in the principles of Christianity and the arts
of civilized life. The Friends have been the last to aid the system
pursued by the Society's advocates. And we say (for we feel it) that in
proportion as they become colonizationists, they become less active and
less friendly to our welfare as citizens of the United States.

There does exist in the United States a prejudice against us; but is it
unconquerable? Is it not in the power of these gentlemen to subdue it?
If their object is to benefit us, why not better our condition here?
What keeps us down but the want of wealth? Why do we not accumulate
wealth? Simply because we are not encouraged. If we wish to give our
boys a classical education, they are refused admission into your
colleges. If we consume our means in giving them a mercantile education,
you will not employ them as clerks; if they are taught navigation, you
will not employ them as captains. If we make them mechanics, you will
not encourage them, nor will white mechanics work in the same shop with
them. And with all these disabilities, like a mill-stone about us,
because we cannot point to our statesmen, bankers and lawyers, we are
called an inferior race. Look at the glaring injustice towards us. (A
foreigner, before he knows one of our streets from another, mounts a
cart under the license of another man, or is a public porter, a
lamp-lighter, a watchman, &c.)

These gentlemen know but little of a large portion of the colored
population of this city. Their opinions are formed from the unfortunate
portion of our people whose characters are scrutinized by them as judges
of courts. Their patrician principles prevent an intercourse with men in
the middle walks of life, among whom a large portion of our people may
be classed. We ask them to visit the dwellings of the respectable part
of our people, and we are satisfied that they will discover more
civilization and refinement than will be found among the same number of
white families of an equal standing.

Finally, we hope that those who have so eloquently pleaded the cause of
the Indian, will at least endeavor to preserve consistency in their
conduct. They put no faith in Georgia, although she declares that the
Indians shall not be removed but '_with their own consent_.' Can they
blame us if we attach the same credit to the declaration that they mean
to colonize us 'only with our consent?' They cannot indeed use force;
that is out of the question. But they harp so much on 'inferiority,'
'prejudice,' 'distinction,' and what not, that there will no alternative
be left us but to fall in with their plans. We are content to abide
where we are. We do not believe that things will always continue the
same. The time must come when the declaration of independence will be
felt in the heart as well as uttered from the mouth, and when the rights
of all shall be properly acknowledged and appreciated. God hasten that
time. This is our home, and this our country. Beneath its sod lie the
bones of our fathers: for it some of them fought, bled, and died. Here
we were born, and here we will die.


A VOICE FROM BOSTON.

                        BOSTON, March 12, 1831.

Pursuant to public notice, a meeting was held by the colored citizens of
Boston, February 15th, at their school-house, for the purpose of
expressing their sentiments in a remonstrance against the doings of the
State Colonization Society, Feb. 10th. It was called to order by Mr J.
G. Barbadoes. Mr Robert Roberts was elected chairman, and Mr James G.
Barbadoes secretary. A prayer was then offered up to the throne of
grace, by the Rev. Mr Snowden. The chairman having explained the object
of the meeting, sundry resolutions were offered by Mr Barbadoes, and
fairly discussed. On motion, a committee of five was chosen to amend the
resolutions, and to draft an address to certain white citizens who had
formed a State Society auxiliary to the American Colonization Society,
and to the enlightened public. John T. Hilton, James G. Barbadoes, Rev.
Hosea Easton, Thomas Dalton and Thomas Cole were placed on the
committee.


The committee, to whom was referred the subject of an attempt, by
certain white citizens, to establish in this State a Society auxiliary
to the American Colonization Society, whose supposed object was the
removal of the free colored population to western Africa, have with
diligence sought for and obtained every fact within their reach,
relative to what was enjoined upon them by the respectable body by whom
they were delegated; and now respectfully

REPORT:

That they have attended to the duty with which they were charged, with
all the wisdom, prudence and fidelity which they possessed, and which
the merits of the case required. They therefore submit to the
consideration of the meeting their several conclusions on the subject.

The duty of your committee seemed to be divided into three general
inquiries:--1st. To ascertain whether the Society above named was truly
established in this metropolis. 2d. By whom it was established, and for
what purpose. 3d. If established for the purpose entertained by the free
colored population, what method should be adopted in regard to
expressing their disapprobation thereto.

As to the first inquiry, your committee can state, that every doubt is
now removed respecting the formation of such a Society, the proceedings
of the meeting being published, together with the names of the officers.

On the second inquiry, your committee refer you to the 2d Article of the
Constitution of said Society, (published in the Boston Courier of Feb.
16, 1831,) which reads thus:

    'The object to which this Society shall be exclusively devoted,
    shall be to aid the parent institution at Washington, in the
    colonization of the free people of color of the United States on
    the coast of Africa; and to do this not only by the contribution
    of money, but by the exertion of its influence to promote the
    formation of other societies.'

We deem any explanation here unnecessary.

In regard to the third and most essential inquiry, your committee
report, that they know of no better way of expressing their
disapprobation of such measures, than to use every exertion to persuade
their brethren not to leave the United States upon any consideration
whatever; but if there are or should be any exasperated in consequence
of abuse from their white countrymen, and who are determined to leave
the country, we think it desirable to recommend them to Hayti or Upper
Canada, where they will find the laws equal. Your committee deem it
expedient also to urge this duty upon the several ministers of color
throughout the United States, and all other persons of color whose
influence may have any bearing in preventing their brethren from
yielding to a request so unjust and cruel.

And if your respectable body should not think your committee were going
beyond the bounds of their duty, they would recommend the clerical order
throughout the United States, who have had or who are having any thing
to do with the deceptive scheme above alluded to, to read the 13th
chapter of Ezekiel. Read it--read it--and understand it. Your committee
would recommend those clergymen, who have not defiled their garment with
the blood of the innocent, to read the 1st, 2nd, 11th and 12th verses of
the 24th chapter of Proverbs.

In support of the sentiments thus expressed, it becomes necessary that
our reasons should accompany them, why we object to the plan of dragging
us to Africa--a country to us unknown, except by geography. In the first
place, we are told that Africa is our native country; consequently the
climate will be more congenial to our health. We readily deny the
assertion. How can a man be born in two countries at the same time? Is
not the position superficial to suppose that American born citizens are
Africans? In regard to the climate, what better proof do we want of its
salubrity, than to know that of the numerous bodies who have embarked, a
large portion of them have immediately fallen victims, on their arrival,
to the pestilence usual to that place?

It is again said, that the establishment of a colony on the coast of
Africa will prevent the slave trade. We might as well argue, that a
watchman in the city of Boston would prevent thievery in New-York, or
any other place; or that the custom-house officers there would prevent
goods being smuggled into any other port of the United States.

We are aware, that such an unnecessary expense devoted to the
application of a remedy so far from the disease, is absolutely contrary
to common sense. We are sensible that the moral disease, _slavery_, is
in America, and not in Africa. If there was no market for the vending of
slaves, there would be no inducement for the thief to steal them. The
remedy for this evil, we humbly conceive, consists of three general
prescriptions, viz. 1st. Let him who stealeth obey the word of God, and
steal no more. 2d. Let him who hath encouraged the thief by purchase,
(and consequently is a partaker with him,) do so no more. 3rd. Let the
clerical physicians, who have encouraged, and are encouraging, both the
thief and the receiver, by urging their influence to the removal of the
means of their detection, desist therefrom, and with their mighty weight
of influence step into the scale of justice: then will be done away this
horrible traffic in blood.

From the above considerations, we sincerely recommend to our white
countrymen honor and humanity, which will render useless the
transportation of the colored population to the coast of Africa, it
being altogether gratuitous and uncalled for.

We proceed to offer several objections to the operation alluded to--one
is, the circumstance of the project originating with those who were
deeply interested in slavery, and who hold slaves as their property. We
consider the fact no evidence of the innocence of its design. We further
object, because its members admit slavery to be an evil, and use no
means to destroy it; but are exerting all their influence to urge every
free person of color to Africa, (whose right to this soil holds good
with any other citizen,) thereby rivetting the chains of slavery
stronger than ever upon their oppressed brethren.

Again we object, because the whole spring of action seems to originate
in the fear lest the free colored people may whisper liberty in the ears
of the oppressed. We would suggest, however, that they who are fond of
liberty should not be annoyed at its sound, from whatever source it may
come.

Again we object, on the ground of there being sufficient land in the
United States, on which a colony might be established that would better
meet the wishes of the colored people, and at a much cheaper rate than
could possibly be done by sending them to a howling wilderness far away,
and to them unknown.

One of the leaders of the newly formed Society argued that in case a
colony was formed for the blacks in the United States, they would in a
short time be removed, as has been the case with the poor Indians. To
obviate this objection, we here inform him that Hayti will hold all the
slaves he will send her; and as for the free people, we expect they can
go where they please, either to Africa, Hayti or Upper Canada, or remain
at home, without asking the consent of a slaveholding party. Nor can we
conceive why free citizens, acting this liberty, should interfere with
them, if they are--as they have represented themselves to be--honest and
benevolent men. We conceive that the question in view stands in two
distinct points--the removal of the free colored population from this
country, or the acknowledgment of them as citizens. The former position
must be acknowledged, on all sides, a means of perpetuating slavery in
our land; the latter, of abolishing it; consequently it may be seen who
are for the well-being of their country.

We regret that our interest has thus drawn us before the public, on
account of the regard we entertain towards many of our warmest friends
who have been deceived by a cloak of philanthropy, smooth words, and a
sanctified appearance. We remind them, however, that the blood of Abel
is beginning to be heard by many who are willing to acknowledge that
they hear it.

We cannot close our duty without gratefully acknowledging the respect we
entertain for those who have defended our cause with more than Spartan
courage. It is the opinion of your committee, that they are to be
respected as our countrymen, our brethren, and our fellow citizens--not
to say they are to be applauded as men, whose great acts are based upon
the acclamation of their fellow men; but rather let us hold up their
hands, and let their works praise them. We shall only add an expression
of our hopes, that the Spirit of Liberty, recently awakened in the old
world, may redouble its thundering voice, until every tyrant is seized
with a Belshazzar tremble at the hand-writing upon the wall of his
corrupt palace.

In addition to the above, your committee submit the following
resolutions for your acceptance.

Resolved, That this meeting contemplate, with lively interest, the rapid
progress of the sentiments of liberty among our degraded brethren, and
that we will legally oppose every operation that may have a tendency to
perpetuate our present political condition.

Resolved, That this meeting look upon the American Colonization Society
as a clamorous, abusive and peace-disturbing combination.

Resolved, That this meeting look upon the conduct of those clergymen,
who have filled the ears of their respective congregations with the
absurd idea of the necessity of removing the free colored people from
the United States, as highly deserving the just reprehension directed to
the false prophets and priests, by Jeremiah the true prophet, as
recorded in the 23d chapter of his prophecy.

Resolved, That this meeting appeal to a generous and enlightened public
for an impartial hearing relative to the subject of our present
political condition.

Resolved, That the gratitude of this meeting, which is so sensibly felt,
be fully expressed to those editors whose independence of mind and
correct views of the rights of man have led them so fearlessly to speak
in favor of our cause; that we rejoice to behold in them such a strong
desire to extend towards us the inestimable blessing in the gift of a
wise Providence which is demanded by all nature, and for which their
veteran fathers struggled in the revolution.

                        ROBERT ROBERTS, Chairman.

JAMES G. BARBADOES, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM BALTIMORE.

                        BALTIMORE, March 21, 1831.

At a respectable meeting of persons of color, convened, pursuant to
public notice, for the purpose of expressing their sentiments in regard
to the pretensions of the American Colonization Society, William
Douglass was called to the chair, and William Watkins appointed
secretary. The object of the call having been explicitly stated, the
meeting immediately proceeded to the consideration of the following
resolutions, which were unanimously adopted:--On motion,

Resolved, That it is the belief of this meeting, that the American
Colonization Society is founded more in a selfish policy, than in the
true principles of benevolence;--and, therefore, so far as it regards
the life-giving spring of its operations, is not entitled to our
confidence, but should be viewed by us with all that caution and
distrust which our happiness demands.

Resolved, That we are not insensible to the means usually employed by
that Society, and its auxiliaries, to effectuate our removal--that we
sincerely deprecate their gratuitous and illiberal attacks upon, and
their too frequently exaggerated statements of our moral standing in the
community--that such means are unworthy of a magnanimous people, and of
a virtuous and noble cause.

Resolved, That we consider the land in which we were born, and in which
we have been bred, our only '_true and appropriate home_,'--and that
when _we_ desire to remove, we will apprise the public of the same, in
due season.

Resolved, That we are deeply sensible that many of our warm and sincere
friends have espoused the colonization system, from the purest
motives,--and that we sincerely regret their efforts to ameliorate our
condition are not more in accordance with our wishes.

Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be published in the daily
papers of this city, signed by the Chairman and Secretary.

                        WILLIAM DOUGLASS, Chairman.

WILLIAM WATKINS, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM WASHINGTON.

                        WASHINGTON, May 4, 1831.

Pursuant to previous notice, a large and very respectable meeting of the
colored citizens of Washington, D. C., convened at the African Methodist
Episcopal church on Wednesday evening last, for the purpose of
expressing their views upon the subject of African colonization. Mr John
W. Prout was called to the chair, and Arthur Waring was appointed
secretary.

The chairman briefly explained the object of the meeting, in a short
speech well adapted to the occasion, which was followed by several neat
and very appropriate addresses delivered by sundry gentlemen present.

The following preamble and resolutions were offered and adopted, nearly
unanimously.

Whereas we consider that the period has arrived for the colored citizens
of this place to express their opinion upon the subject of colonization
in Liberia; a subject of great importance to themselves, as well as to
the colored citizens of the United States generally; and whereas our
brethren at a distance are desirous of obtaining information relative to
the object and policy pursued by the American Colonization Society:
Therefore, be it

Resolved, That this meeting view with distrust the efforts made by the
Colonization Society to cause the free people of color of these United
States to emigrate to Liberia on the coast of Africa, or elsewhere.

Resolved, That it is the declared opinion of the members of this
meeting, that the soil which gave them birth is their only _true and
veritable home_, and that it would be impolitic, unwise and improper for
them to leave their home without the benefits of education.

Resolved, That this meeting conceive that among the advocates of the
colonization system, they have many true and sincere friends; and do
regret that their actions, although prompted no doubt by the purest
motives, do not meet our approbation.

Resolved, That we believe the PRESS to be the most efficient means of
disseminating light and knowledge among our brethren; and that this
meeting do acknowledge with gratitude the efforts made in our behalf, by
the editors of the Genius of Universal Emancipation, and the
Liberator;--and do most earnestly recommend their respective papers to
our brethren generally, for their approval and support.

Resolved, That the foregoing resolutions be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary, and published.

                        JOHN W. PROUT, Chairman.

ARTHUR WARING, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM BROOKLYN.

                        BROOKLYN, (N. Y.) June 3, 1831.

At a numerous and respectable meeting of the colored inhabitants of the
village and township of Brooklyn, convened in the African Hall,
Nassau-street, for the purpose of taking into consideration our views in
relation to the Colonization Society--

The throne of grace was addressed by the Rev. Mr Hogarth, after which
Henry C. Thompson was called to the chair, and George Hogarth appointed
secretary.

Appropriate addresses were delivered by Messrs George Hogarth, James
Pennington, and George Woods. The following resolutions were then
adopted:--

Resolved, unanimously, That the call of this meeting be approved of; and
that the colored citizens of this village have, with friendly feelings,
taken into consideration the objects of the American Colonization
Society, together with all its auxiliary movements, preparatory for our
removal to the coast of Africa; and we view them as wholly gratuitous,
not called for by us, and not essential to the real welfare of our race:
That we know of no other country in which we can justly claim or demand
our rights as citizens, whether civil or political, but in these United
States of America, our native soil: And, that we shall be active in our
endeavors to convince the members of the Colonization Society, and the
public generally, that we are _men_, that we are _brethren_, that we are
_countrymen_ and _fellow-citizens_, and demand an equal share of
protection from our federal government with any other class of citizens
in the community.

It was also Resolved, That the following persons, viz.: James
Pennington, Henry C. Thompson, and George Woods, be appointed a
committee to draft an address to the public, expressing our views more
fully in relation to the Colonization Society; and that a delegate be
appointed to proceed to the city of Philadelphia, to represent us in the
ensuing convention, (which will commence its sitting the 6th inst.) to
co-operate with the measures that may then be adopted for the general
welfare of our race.

                        HENRY C. THOMPSON, Chairman.

GEORGE HOGARTH, Secretary.


_Address to the Colored Citizens of Brooklyn, (N. Y.) and its Vicinity._

Respected brethren, and fellow-citizens:--As men and as christians,
whose secular and eternal interests are the same, we are seriously
called upon by truth and reason, and every thing of which human action
is composed, to take into consideration the objects of the American
Colonization Society; which aims to remove us, the free people of color,
from this, our beloved and native land, to the coast of Africa; a
country unknown to us in every respect.

As they propose to remove us with our own free will and consent, we do
not contradict the assertion, that their objects, in the abstract, are
salutary and benevolent; but when we hear those influential gentlemen,
who are advocating this cause, generalize by language directly
calculated to increase that prejudice, which is already one grand reason
of our wretchedness, we are moved by a spirit of reliance upon justice
and humanity, to lift our positive and decided voice against their
proceedings; and consider them as a stigma upon our morals as a people,
as natives and citizens of this country, to whom equal rights are
guaranteed by the Declaration of Independence.

When we consider that by abridging men in their moral liberty, we touch
their responsibility to the highest authority in the universe, we should
shudder at the thought of retaining such feelings as would lead to any
irreligious or impolitic acts; nor should we be willing to yield one
particle of ours to others, unless it be on the ground of expediency,
and in some way conducive to the glory of God.

We are sorry to say that those gentlemen have injured their cause, and
perhaps caused much good to be evil spoken of, by making use of improper
language, in their discussions upon our character and condition in this
country; without using one effort to improve or prepare us for the posts
of honor and distinction which they hold forth to us, whenever we set
foot on this much talked of, and long expected promised land. We would
ask the Colonization Society, what are they doing at home to improve our
condition? It is a true proverb, that 'charity begins at home.' How can
they extend their charities with christian sympathies and feeling some
thousand miles across the Atlantic ocean, when they are not willing,
with a few exceptions, to give us even a christian instruction while
among them? To prove the assertion, we would inquire, how many of our
sable brethren have been elevated to any post of distinction in this
country? Even in states, where our numbers have almost doubled, have we
seen one statesman, one officer, or one juror? No! in our village and
its vicinity, how many of us have been educated in colleges, and
advanced into different branches of business; or taken into mercantile
houses, manufacturing establishments, &c.? Are we not even prohibited
from some of the common labor and drudgery of the streets, such as
cartmen, porters, &c.? It is a strange theory to us, how these gentlemen
can promise to honor and respect us in Africa, when they are using every
effort to exclude us from all rights and privileges at home.

They say, 'that those of our friends, who look for the day when we shall
have equal rights in this country, are mistaken.' May we not accept it
as an assurance, that they will do all they can to prevent us from
arriving to any degree of respectability at home, in our own land? Away
then with such false sympathies and friendships! they are as foreign to
us as the coast of Africa!

We truly believe, that many gentlemen who are engaged in the
Colonization Society are our sincere friends and well-wishers; they
wish to do something for us, consequently they have subscribed largely
to it, because there was no other plan on foot. Some of them have been
deluded into its schemes, with a view of thoroughly civilizing and
christianizing Africa, by our free people of color and emancipated
slaves, who may, from time to time, be colonized on its coasts, with
their consent. We conceive that such measures are fraught with
inconsistency, and in no way calculated to have such an effect. To send
a parcel of uninstructed, uncivilized, and unchristianized people, to
the western coast of Africa, with bibles in their hands to teach the
natives the truths of the gospel, social happiness, and moral virtue, is
mockery and ridicule in the extreme.

Missionary families should be well instructed in the rudiments of our
holy religion, that their example may shine forth as lights in that much
neglected and benighted land. We are much in favor of christianizing
Africa; but not according to the plans of the Colonization Society, to
purchase their lands of them, with a few paltry guns, beads, &c., and
then establish forts and garrisons, to protect traders and traffickers,
without, perhaps, once naming the religion of Jesus to them. We well
know that the examples of traders and traffickers are in no way
calculated to induce heathens to embrace our religion. For example, we
will refer to the early settlements of our American colonies, and
inquire what religious impressions did the settlers make (who were wise
and learned from Europe) upon the aborigines of our country? We believe
that a few men, well instructed and possessing a true missionary spirit,
are calculated to do more good in that country, than a thousand on the
colonization plan.

Many wish us to go to Africa, because they say that our constitutions
are better adapted to that climate than this. If so, we would ask why so
many of our hearty, hale and healthy brethren, on arriving in that
country, fall victims to the malignant fevers and disorders, prevalent
in those regions? We would observe, that none are exempt from being
touched with the contagion. It operates more severely upon those from
the higher latitudes.

Some of our brethren have come to the conclusion to leave this country,
with all its prejudices, and seek an asylum in foreign climes. We would
recommend to your serious consideration, the location in Upper Canada; a
place far better adapted to our constitutions, our habits, and our
morals; where prejudice has not such an unlimited sway; where you will
be surrounded by Christians, and have an opportunity to become civilized
and christianized.

Brethren, it is time for us to awake to our interests; for the
Colonization Society is straining every nerve for the accomplishment of
its objects. By their last publications we see, that they have invoked
all Christian assemblies and churches throughout the Union, to exert
their influence, by raising subscriptions to send us (the strangers
within their gates, as they call us) to the coast of Africa. They have
got the consent of eleven states, who have instructed their senators to
do something in the next Congress for our removal. Maryland calls
imperatively on the general government to send us away, or else they
will colonize their own free blacks. They have, by their influence,
stopped the emancipation of slaves in a measure, except for colonization
purposes.

We owe a tribute of respect to the state of New-York, for her not having
entered into the confederacy. Though she is the last in proclaiming
general emancipation to the slave, yet we find her slow in adopting any
such unchristian measures. We may well say, she is deliberate in her
councils, and determinate in her resolutions.

Finally, brethren, we are not strangers; neither do we come under the
alien law. Our constitution does not call upon us to become naturalized;
we are already American citizens; our fathers were among the first that
peopled this country; their sweat and their tears have been the means,
in a measure, of raising our country to its present standing. Many of
them fought, and bled, and died for the gaining of her liberties; and
shall we forsake their tombs, and flee to an unknown land? No! let us
remain over them and weep, until the day arrive when Ethiopia shall
stretch forth her hands to God. We were born and nurtured in this
Christian land; and are surrounded by christians, whose sacred creed is,
to do unto all men as ye would they should do unto you--to love our
neighbors as ourselves; and which expressly declares, if we have respect
to persons, we commit sin. Let us, brethren, invoke the christian's God,
in our behalf, to do away the prejudices of our brethren, that they may
adopt the solemn truths of the gospel, and acknowledge that God is no
respecter of persons--that he has made of one blood all the nations that
dwell on the face of the earth--that they may no longer bring their
reasonings in contact with the omniscience of Deity; and insinuate to
the public, that our intellect and faculties are measurably inferior to
those of our fairer brethren. Because adversity has thrown a veil over
us, and we, whom God has created to worship, admire and adore his divine
attributes, shall we be held in a state of wretchedness and degradation,
with monkeys, baboons, slaves, and cattle, because we possess a darker
hue?

We feel it our duty ever to remain true to the constitution of our
country, and to protect it, as we have always done, from foreign
aggressions. Although more than three hundred thousand of us are
virtually deprived of the rights and immunities of citizens, and more
than two millions held in abject slavery, yet we know that God is just,
and ever true to his purpose. Before him the whole world stands in awe,
and at his command nations must obey. HE who has lately pleaded the
Indian's cause in our land, and who has brought about many signal
events, to the astonishment of our generation, we believe is in the
whirlwind, and will soon bring about the time when the sable sons of
America will join with their fairer brethren, and re-echo liberty and
equal rights in all parts of Columbia's soil.

We pray the Lord to hasten the day, when prejudice, inferiority,
degradation and oppression shall be done away, and the kingdoms of this
world become the kingdoms of our God and his Christ.

Signed in behalf of a public meeting in Brooklyn.

                        H. C. THOMPSON, Chairman.

GEORGE HOGARTH, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM HARTFORD.

                        HARTFORD, Ct., July 14, 1831.

At a large and respectable meeting of the colored inhabitants of the
city of Hartford and its vicinity, convened at the vestry room of the
African church, on the 13th inst. for the purpose of expressing their
views in relation to the American Colonization Society, Mr Henry Foster
was called to the chair, and Mr Paul Drayton appointed secretary. The
object of the meeting was then stated in a brief and pertinent manner,
after which extracts from several speeches delivered by the founders of
the colonization scheme, together with the general sentiments of
colonizationists extracted from the African Repository, were laid before
the meeting, and the following resolutions were unanimously adopted:

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this meeting, that the American
Colonization Society is actuated by the same motives which influenced
the mind of Pharaoh, when he ordered the male children of the Israelites
to be destroyed.

Resolved, That it is the belief of this meeting, that the Society is the
greatest foe to the free colored and slave population with whom liberty
and equality have to contend.

Resolved, That we look upon the man of color that would be influenced by
the Society to emigrate to Liberia, as an enemy to the cause and a
traitor to his brethren.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this meeting, that many of those who
are engaged in this unjust scheme would be willing, if it were, in their
power, to place us before the point of the bayonet, and drive us out of
existence--so that they may get rid of that dark cloud, as we are
termed, which hangs over these United States.

Resolved, That, in our belief, we have committed no crime worthy of
banishment, and that we will resist all the attempts of the Colonization
Society to banish us from this our native land.

Resolved, That we consider ourselves the legitimate sons of these United
States, from whence we will never consent to be transported.

Resolved, That we will resist, even unto death, all the attempts of this
Society to transport us to the pestilential shores of Liberia.

Resolved, That we will not countenance the doctrine of any pretended
minister of the gospel, who is in league with those conspirators against
our rights. We would, therefore, warn them to beware of following the
footsteps of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a stumbling block in the
way of the children of Israel; for we verily believe, that if God
almighty have to deliver his people by his mighty arm of power, they
will share the fate of that false prophet.

Resolved, That, though we be last in calling a meeting, we feel no less
the pernicious influence of this Society than the rest of our brethren;
and that we consider all their pretexts, whether under the cloak of
religion or philanthropy, gratuitous and uncalled for. We would,
therefore, advise the Society, that as we have learned that there are
one hundred and fifty thousand dollars in its funds, it had better
appropriate this sum in meliorating the condition of our brethren the
slaves, in this their native land, and raising them from that
degradation into which they are plunged.

Resolved, That the thanks of the meeting be returned to Messrs William
Lloyd Garrison, Isaac Knapp, and every friend of emancipation, for their
benevolent exertions in our behalf.

Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary, and sent to the Liberator for publication.

                        HENRY FOSTER, Chairman.

PAUL DRAYTON, Secretary.

A VOICE FROM MIDDLETOWN.

                        MIDDLETOWN, Ct., July 15, 1831.

At a meeting of the colored citizens of Middletown, pursuant to public
notice, held in the Lecture Room in the African church--Mr Joseph
Gilbert was called to the chair, and Amos L. Beman appointed secretary.
The meeting being thus opened, it was warmly and freely addressed by
Messrs Jeffrey, Condoll and Gilbert, when, on motion, it was

Resolved, That the proceedings of our brethren in Brooklyn, N. Y., meet
our entire approbation: they breathe our sentiments in full, and may our
voices cheerfully accord with them in protesting against leaving this
our native soil. Why should we leave this land, so dearly bought by the
blood, groans and tears of our fathers? Truly this is our home: here let
us live, and here let us die. What! emigrate to Liberia, a land so
detrimental to our health! We have now before us a letter written by a
friend who emigrated from this place to the burning shores of Africa, in
hopes of splendor, wealth and ease; and he says that 'sickness and
distress prevail to a great extent--and it is a clear case that those
who come from the United States must undergo a long and protracted
sickness with this country's fever, and I would not advise my friends to
emigrate.'

                        JOSEPH GILBERT, Chairman.

AMOS G. BEMAN, Secretary


A VOICE FROM NEW-HAVEN.

                        NEW-HAVEN, August 8, 1831.

At a meeting of the Peace and Benevolent Society of Afric-Americans,
held on the 7th inst., Mr Henry Berrian was called to the chair, and Mr
Henry N. Merriman was appointed secretary. The following resolutions
were then unanimously adopted.

Resolved, That we consider those christians and philanthropists, who are
boasting of their liberty and equality, saying, that all men are born
free and equal, and yet are endeavoring to remove us from our native
land, to be inhuman in their proceedings, defective in their principles,
and unworthy of our confidence.

Resolved, That we consider those colonizationists and ministers of the
gospel, who are advocating our transportation to an unknown clime,
because our skin is a little darker than theirs, (notwithstanding God
has made of one blood all nations of men, and has no respect of
persons,) as violaters of the commandments of God and the laws of the
bible, and as trying to blind our eyes by their vain movements--their
mouths being smooth as oil, and their words sharper than any two-edged
sword.

Resolved, That, while we have no doubt of the sinister motives of the
great body of colonizationists, we believe some of them are our friends
and well-wishers, who have not looked deeply into the subject; but when
they make a careful examination, we think they will find themselves in
error.

Resolved, That it is our earnest desire that Africa may speedily become
civilized, and receive religious instruction; but not by the absurd and
invidious plan of the Colonization Society--namely, to send a nation of
ignorant men to teach a nation of ignorant men. We think it most wise
for them to send missionaries.

Resolved, That we will resist all attempts made for our removal to the
torrid shores of Africa, and will sooner suffer every drop of blood to
be taken from our veins than submit to such unrighteous treatment.

Resolved, That we know of no other place that we can call our true and
appropriate home, excepting these United States, into which our fathers
were brought, who enriched the country by their toils, and fought, bled
and died in its defence, and left us in its possession--and here we will
live and die.

Resolved, That we consider the American Colonization Society founded on
principles that no Afric-American, unless very weak in mind, will
follow; and any man who will be persuaded to leave his own country and
go to Africa, as an enemy to his country and a traitor to his brethren.

Resolved, That we have heard with pleasure of the proceedings of our
brethren in neighboring cities; and that a number of this Society will
willingly become auxiliary to the parent Society of Philadelphia, for
the mutual benefit of the Afric-Americans throughout the United States.

Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary, and sent to the Liberator for publication.

                        HENRY BERRIAN, Chairman.

HENRY N. MERRIMAN, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM COLUMBIA.

                        COLUMBIA, Pa., August 5, 1831.

At a respectable meeting of Afric-Americans convened pursuant to public
notice, at their school-house, with a view of taking into consideration
the novel scheme of the American Colonization Society, Mr Stephen Smith
was called to the chair, and Mr James Richards appointed secretary. A
prayer was then offered to the throne of grace, by Mr Smith. The
chairman called the house to order, and explained the object of the
meeting in a few preliminary remarks; after which, the meeting proceeded
to business, and adopted the subsequent resolutions.

Resolved, That we view the country in which we live as our only true and
appropriate home; and let colonizationists pour contempt upon our race,
and slaveholders look on our brethren as a nuisance to the country, yet
here will we live, here were we born, this is the country for which some
of our ancestors fought and bled and conquered, nor shall a conspiring
world be able to drive us hence.

Resolved, That it is our firm belief, that the Colonization Society is
replete with infinite mischief, and that we view all the arguments of
its advocates as mere sophistry, not worthy our notice as freemen. Being
citizens of these United States, we could call upon our brethren to
awake from their slumber of ignorance, break the chain of prejudice that
has so long bound them, and in the strength of the omnipotent Spirit
give their hearts to God.

Resolved, That we will resist all attempts to send us to the burning
shores of Africa. Beware of Alexander, the coppersmith, for he hath
done us much harm. May the Lord reward him! We verily believe that if by
an extraordinary perversion of nature, every man and woman, in one
night, should become white, the Colonization Society would fall like
lightning to the earth.

Resolved, That we will not be duped out of our rights as freemen, by
colonizationists, nor by any other combination of men. All the encomiums
pronounced upon Liberia can never form the least temptation to induce us
to leave our native soil, to emigrate to a strange land.

Resolved, That we readily coalesce with our brethren in the different
towns and cities, and take the liberty to say, that we as a little flock
feel a fixed resolution to maintain our ground, till the great Author of
our being shall say to those who deprive us of our rights,--Thus saith
the Lord, because ye have not hearkened to me in proclaiming liberty,
every one to his brother, and every man to his neighbor, behold I will
proclaim liberty for you, saith the Lord, to the sword, to the
pestilence, and to the famine.

Resolved, That it is the decided opinion of this meeting, that African
colonization is a scheme of southern policy, a wicked device of
slaveholders who are desirous of riveting more firmly, and perpetuating
more certainly, the fetters of slavery; who are only anxious to rid
themselves of a population whose presence, influence and example have a
tendency (as they suppose) to produce discontent among the slaves, and
to furnish them with incitements to rebellion.

Resolved, That this meeting will not encourage a scheme, which has for
its basis prejudice and hatred. Though there may be some good wheat, yet
it is to be feared the enemy has sown tares among it.

Resolved, That we will support the colony at Canada, the climate being
healthier, better adapted to our constitutions, and far more consonant
with our views than that of Africa.

Resolved, That we unanimously agree to patronize the Liberator, and use
our best endeavors to get subscribers for the same; and that we are
under renewed obligations to God, that he ever raised up such honest
hearted men as Messrs Garrison and Knapp.

Resolved, That this meeting cause its proceedings to be sent to the
Liberator for publication; praying that the Lord will succeed all the
lawful efforts of its conductor to meliorate the condition of our
brethren in these United States, trusting his weapons are not carnal,
but mighty through God to pull down the strong holds of the devil.

Signed by the Chairman and Secretary.

                        STEPHEN SMITH, Chairman.

JAMES RICHARDS, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM NANTUCKET.

                        NANTUCKET, August 5, 1831.

At a respectable meeting of the colored inhabitants of the town of
Nantucket, convened for the purpose of taking into consideration our
views in relation to the American Colonization Society, Mr Arthur Cooper
was called to the chair, and Edward J. Pompey appointed secretary.

Addresses were delivered by Messrs William Harris and Edward J. Pompey,
in which they took a general view of the Colonization Society, of its
leading members, and some of the speeches and remarks made by gentlemen
at the meetings of said Society. The following resolves were then
adopted:

Resolved, That the call of this meeting be approved of, and that the
colored citizens of this town have with friendly feelings taken into
consideration the objects of the Colonization Society, together with its
movements preparatory for our removal to the coast of Africa; and we
view them as wholly gratuitous, not called for by us, and in no way
essential to the welfare of our race; and we believe that our condition
can be best improved in this our own country and native soil, the United
States of America.

Resolved, That we hold this truth to be self-evident, that all men are
born free and equal; and we are men, and therefore ought to share as
much protection and enjoy as many privileges under our federal
government as any other class of the community.

Resolved, That we will be zealous in doing all that lies in our power to
improve the condition of ourselves and brethren in this our native land.

Resolved, That there is no philanthropy towards the people of color in
the colonization plan, but that it is got up to delude us away from our
country and home into a country of sickness and death.

Resolved, That the thanks of this meeting be returned to every friend
who vindicates our rights and interests.

Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary, and sent to Boston, to be published in the Liberator.

                        ARTHUR COOPER, Chairman.

EDWARD J. POMPEY, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM PITTSBURGH.

                        PITTSBURGH, (Pa.,) Sept. 1, 1831.

At a large and respectable meeting of the colored citizens of
Pittsburgh, convened at the African Methodist Episcopal church, for the
purpose of expressing their views in relation to the American
Colonization Society, Mr J. B. Vashon was called to the chair, and Mr R.
Bryan appointed secretary. The object of the meeting was then stated at
considerable length, and in an appropriate manner, by the chairman. The
following resolutions were then unanimously adopted:

Resolved, That 'we hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men
are created equal, and endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable
rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness'--Liberty and Equality now, Liberty and Equality forever!

Resolved, That it is the decided opinion of this meeting, that African
colonization is a scheme to drain the better informed part of the
colored people out of these United States, so that the chain of slavery
may be rivetted more tightly; but we are determined not to be cheated
out of our rights by the colonization men, or any other set of
intriguers. We believe there is no philanthropy in the colonization plan
towards the people of color, but that it is got up to delude us away
from our country and home to the burning shores of Africa.

Resolved, That we, the colored people of Pittsburgh and citizens of
these United States, view the country in which we live as our only true
and proper home. We are just as much natives here as the members of the
Colonization Society. Here we were born--here bred--here are our
earliest and most pleasant associations--here is all that binds man to
earth, and makes life valuable. And we do consider every colored man who
allows himself to be colonized in Africa, or elsewhere, a traitor to our
cause.

Resolved, That we are freemen, that we are brethren, that we are
countrymen and fellow-citizens, and as fully entitled to the free
exercise of the elective franchise as any men who breathe; and that we
demand an equal share of protection from our federal government with any
class of citizens in the community. We now inform the Colonization
Society, that should our reason forsake us, then we may desire to
remove. We will apprise them of this change in due season.

Resolved, That we, as citizens of these United States, and for the
support of these resolutions, with a firm reliance on the protection of
divine providence, do mutually pledge to each other our lives, our
fortunes, and our sacred honor, not to support a colony in Africa nor in
Upper Canada, not yet emigrate to Hayti. Here we were born--here will we
live by the help of the Almighty--and here we will die, and let our
bones lie with our fathers.

Resolved, That we return our grateful thanks to Messrs Garrison and
Knapp, publishers of the Liberator, and Mr Lundy, editor of the Genius
of Universal Emancipation, for their untiring exertions in the cause of
philanthropy.

Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary, and published in the Liberator.

                        J. B. VASHON, Chairman.

R. BRYAN, Secretary.

A VOICE FROM WILMINGTON.

                        WILMINGTON, July 12, 1831.

At a large and respectable meeting of the people of color of the borough
of Wilmington, convened in the African Union Church, July 12th, 1831,
for the purpose of considering the subject of colonization on the coast
of Africa:

On motion, the Rev. Peter Spencer was called to the chair, and Thomas
Dorsey appointed secretary.

The meeting was addressed by Abraham D. Shad, Junius C. Morell, Benjamin
Pascal and John P. Thompson, after which the following resolutions were
unanimously adopted.

Resolved, That this meeting view with deep regret the attempt now making
to colonize the free people of color on the western coast of Africa;
believing as we do that it is inimical to the best interests of the
people of color, and at variance with the principles of civil and
religious liberty, and wholly incompatible with the spirit of the
Constitution and Declaration of Independence of these United States.

Resolved, That we disclaim all connexion with Africa; and although the
descendants of that much afflicted country, we cannot consent to remove
to any tropical climate, and thus aid in a design having for its object
the total extirpation of our race from this country, professions to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Resolved, That a committee of three persons be appointed to prepare as
soon as practicable an address to the public, setting forth more fully
our views on the subject of colonization. The following persons were
appointed: Abraham D. Shad, Rev. Peter Spencer and W. S. Thomas.

Signed on behalf of the meeting.

                        PETER SPENCER, Chairman.

THOMAS DORSEY, Secretary.


_Address of the Free People of Color of the Borough of Wilmington,
Delaware._

We the undersigned, in conformity to the wishes of our brethren, beg
leave to present to the public in a calm and unprejudiced manner, our
decided and unequivocal disapprobation of the American Colonization
Society, and its auxiliaries, in relation to the free people of color in
the United States. Convinced as we are, that the operations of this
Society have been unchristian and anti-republican in principle, and at
variance with our best interests as a people, we had reason to believe
that the precepts of religion, the dictates of justice and humanity,
would have prevented any considerable portion of the community from
lending their aid to a plan which we fear was designed to deprive us of
rights that the Declaration of Independence declares are the
'unalienable rights' of all men. We were content to remain silent,
believing that the justice and patriotism of a magnanimous people would
prevent the annals of our native and beloved country from receiving so
deep a stain. But observing the growing strength and influence of that
institution, and being well aware that the generality of the public are
unacquainted with our views on this important subject, we feel it a duty
we owe to ourselves, our children and posterity, to enter our protest
against a device so fraught with evil to us. That many sincere friends
to our race are engaged in what they conceive to be a philanthropic and
benevolent enterprise, we do not hesitate to admit; but that they are
deceived, and are acting in a manner calculated most seriously to injure
the free people of color, we are equally sensible.

We are natives of the United States; our ancestors were brought to this
country by means over which they had no control; we have our attachments
to the soil, and we feel that we have rights in common with other
Americans; and although deprived through prejudice from entering into
the full enjoyment of those rights, we anticipate a period, when in
despite of the more than ordinary prejudice which has been the result of
this unchristian scheme, 'Ethiopia shall stretch forth her hands to
God.' But that this formidable Society has become a barrier to our
improvement, must be apparent to every individual who will but reflect
on the course to be pursued by the emissaries of this unhallowed
project, many of whom, under the name of ministers of the gospel, use
their influence to turn public sentiment to our disadvantage by
stigmatizing our morals, misrepresenting our characters, and endeavoring
to show what they are pleased to call the sound policy of perpetuating
our civil and political disabilities for the avowed purpose of
indirectly forcing us to emigrate to the western coast of Africa. That
Africa is neither our nation nor home, a due respect to the good sense
of the community forbids us to attempt to prove; that our language,
habits, manners, morals and religion are all different from those of
Africans, is a fact too notorious to admit of controversy. Why then are
we called upon to go and settle in a country where we must necessarily
be and remain a distinct people, having no common interest with the
numerous inhabitants of that vast and extensive country? Experience has
proved beyond a doubt, that the climate is such as not to suit the
constitutions of the inhabitants of this country; the fevers and
various diseases incident to that tropical clime, are such as in most
cases to bid defiance to the force of medicine.

The very numerous instances of mortality amongst the emigrants who have
been induced to leave this their native, for their adopted country,
clearly demonstrate the fallacy of those statements so frequently made
by the advocates of colonization in regard to the healthiness of
Liberia.

With the deepest regret we have witnessed such an immense sacrifice of
life, in advancing a cause which cannot promise the least advantage to
the free people of color, who, it was said, were the primary objects to
be benefitted by this 'heaven-born enterprise.' But we beg leave most
respectfully to ask the friends of African colonization, whether their
christian benevolence cannot in this country be equally as
advantageously applied, if they are actuated by that disinterested
spirit of love and friendship for us, which they profess? Have not they
in the United States a field sufficiently extensive to show it in? There
is embosomed within this republic, rising one million free people of
color, the greater part of whom are unable to read even the sacred
scriptures. Is not their ignorant and degraded situation worthy of the
consideration of those enlightened and christian individuals, whose zeal
for the cause of the African race has induced them to attempt the
establishment of a republican form of government amid the burning sands
of Liberia, and the evangelizing of the millions of the Mahometans and
pagans that inhabit the interior of that extensive country?

We are constrained to believe that the welfare of the people of color,
to say the least, is but a secondary consideration with those engaged in
the colonization project. Or why should we be requested to move to
Africa, and thus separated from all we hold dear in a moral point of
view, before their christian benevolence can be exercised in our behalf?
Surely there is no country of which we have any knowledge, that offers
greater facilities for the improvement of the unlearned; or where
benevolent and philanthropic individuals can find a people, whose
situation has greater claims on their christian sympathies, than the
people of color. But whilst we behold a settled determination on the
part of the American Colonization Society to remove us to Liberia,
without using any means to better our condition at home, we are
compelled to look with fearful diffidence on every measure of that
institution. At a meeting held on the 7th inst. in this borough, the
people of color were politely invited to attend, the object of which was
to induce the most respectable part of them to emigrate. The meeting was
addressed by several reverend gentlemen, and very flattering accounts
given on the authority of letters and statements said to have been
received from individuals of unquestionable veracity. But we beg leave
to say, that those statements differ so widely from letters that we have
seen of recent date from the colony, in regard to the condition and
circumstances of the colonists, that we are compelled in truth to say
that we cannot reconcile such contradictory statements, and are
therefore inclined to doubt the former, as they appear to have been
prepared to present to the public, for the purpose of enlisting the
feelings of our white friends into the measure, and of inducing the
enterprising part of the colored community to emigrate at their own
expense. That we are in this country a degraded people, we are truly
sensible; that our forlorn situation is not attributable to ourselves is
admitted by the most ardent friends of colonization; and that our
condition cannot be bettered by removing the most exemplary individuals
of color from amongst us, we are well convinced, from the consideration
that in the same ratio that the industrious part would emigrate, in the
same proportion those who would remain would become more degraded,
wretched and miserable, and consequently less capable of appreciating
the many opportunities which are now offering for the moral and
intellectual improvement of our brethren. We, therefore, a portion of
those who are the objects of this plan, and amongst those whose
happiness, with that of others of our color, it is intended to promote,
respectfully but firmly disclaim every connexion with it, and declare
our settled determination not to participate in any part of it.

But if this plan is intended to facilitate the emancipation of those who
are held in slavery in the South, and the melioration of their
condition, by sending them to Liberia; we question very much whether it
is calculated to do either. That the emancipation of slaves has been
measurably impeded through its influence, except where they have been
given up to the Board of Managers, to be colonized in Africa, to us is
manifest. And when we contemplate their uneducated and vitiated state,
destitute of the arts and unaccustomed to provide even for themselves,
we are inevitably led to the conclusion that their situation in that
pestilential country will be miserable in the extreme.

The present period is one of deep and increasing interest to the free
people of color, relieved from the miseries of slavery and its
concomitant evils, with the vast and (to us) unexplored field of
literature and science before us, surrounded by many friends whose
sympathies and charities need not the Atlantic between us and them,
before they can consent to assist in elevating our brethren to the
standing of men. We therefore particularly invite their attention to
the subject of education and improvement; sensible that it is much
better calculated to remove prejudice, and exalt our moral character,
than any system of colonization that has been or can be introduced; and
in which we believe we shall have the co-operation of the wisest and
most philanthropic individuals of which the nation can boast. The
utility of learning and its salutary effects on the minds and morals of
a people, cannot have escaped the notice of any rational individual
situated in a country like this, where in order successfully to
prosecute any mechanical or other business, education is indispensable.
Our highest moral ambition, at present, should be to acquire for our
children a liberal education, give them mechanical trades, and thus fit
and prepare them for useful and respectable citizens; and leave the
evangelizing of Africa, and the establishing of a republic at Liberia,
to those who conceive themselves able to demonstrate the practicability
of its accomplishment by means of a people, numbers of whom are more
ignorant than even the natives of that country themselves.

In conclusion, we feel it a pleasing duty ever to cherish a grateful
respect for those benevolent and truly philanthropic individuals, who
have advocated, and still are advocating our rights in our native
country. Their indefatigable zeal in the cause of the oppressed will
never be forgotten by us, and unborn millions will bless their names in
the day when the all-wise Creator, in whom we trust, shall have bidden
oppression to cease.

      ABRAHAM D. SHAD, }
      PETER SPENCER,   }  Committee to prepare
      WM. S. THOMAS,   }  an Address.


A VOICE FROM HARRISBURG.

                        HARRISBURG, Pa., October, 1831.

At a large, well informed and respectable meeting of the citizens of
Harrisburg, convened at the African Wesleyan Methodist church, for the
purpose of expressing their sentiments in a remonstrance against the
proceedings of the American Colonization Society, Rev. Jacob D.
Richardson was called to the chair, and Jacob G. Williams appointed
secretary. After singing and prayer, Rev. Mr Richardson in some concise
remarks,--equalled by few, and exceeded by none,--expressed the object
of the meeting. The chairman called the house to order, and the
following resolutions were unanimously acceded to:

Resolved, That we hold these truths to be self-evident, (and it is the
boasted declaration of our independence) that all men (black and white,
poor and rich) are born free and equal; that they are endowed by their
Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. This is the language of America,
of reason, and of eternal truth.

Resolved, That we feel it to be our duty to be true to the constitution
of our country, and are satisfied with the form of government under
which we now live; and, moreover, that we are bound in duty and reason
to protect it against foreign invasion. We always have done so, and will
do so still.

Resolved, That we view the efforts of the Colonization Society as
officious and uncalled for by us. We have never done any thing worthy of
banishment from our friends and home: but this we would say--if the
Colonization Society will use their best endeavors to get our slave
brethren transported to Liberia, when we as a free body of people wish
to go, we will give the colonizationists timely notice.

Resolved, That it is the firm and decided opinion of this meeting, that
were there no free people of color among us, or if those who are free
had remained in the degraded character of slaves, (or, as they sometimes
call us, monkeys, apes and baboons,) they would never have got up the
chimerical scheme for our transportation to the burning shores of
Africa, with the fancied vision of elevating us, as they say, to dignity
and affluence.

Resolved, That we cannot remain inactive while colonizationists are
straining every nerve and racking their inventions to find out arguments
to persuade our free colored brethren to migrate to an unknown land,
which we can no more lay claim to than our white brethren can to England
or any other foreign country.

Resolved, That we reject the inhuman and unchristian measures taken by
the Colonization Society, for the illumination of the colored citizens
of the United States, their appropriate home, in a land of sickness,
affliction and death, when they are not willing, with few exceptions, to
give us a christian education while among them. We would wish to know of
the colonizationists, how, in the name of common sense and reason, do
they expect to do any thing for us thousands of miles across the
Atlantic, when they oppose almost every measure taken by our white
friends and brethren to improve our condition here?

Resolved, That it is the united opinion of this meeting, that the
enemies of our race, who are members of the Colonization Society, see
that the great Author of universal existence, who 'is no respecter of
persons,' who taught Balaam's ass to speak, and taught Solomon wisdom,
is now enlightening the sable sons of America: hence their object to
drain the country of the most enlightened part of our colored brethren,
so that they may be more able to hold their slaves in bondage and
ignorance.

Resolved, That we object to leaving the land of our birth, as there is
sufficient land in these United States, on which a colony can be
established that would be far more consonant to the wishes of the
colored population generally, and would be more adapted to their
constitution: neither would it involve the country in such expense as
would be incurred by sending them to a howling wilderness, far away from
the graves of their forefathers, unknown to us in every respect, unless
by geography, which few of us understand.

Resolved, That this meeting look upon the Colonization Society as a
vicious, nefarious and peace-disturbing combination, and that its
leaders might as well essay to cure a wound with an argument, or set a
dislocated bone by a lecture on logic, as to tell us their object is to
better our condition; because its members acknowledge slavery to be a
national evil, and use no means to annihilate it, but are exerting all
their energies and influence to persuade the free people of color to
remove to Africa, whose rights to Columbia's happy soil holds good with
any other citizen in America.

Resolved, That we look upon the conduct of those clergymen who have
misled their respective congregations with the preposterous idea of the
necessity of transporting the free people of color to Africa, as highly
deserving the just reprehension directed to the false priests and
prophets by the true prophets of the Most High; yet we gratefully
acknowledge the respect we entertain for those who have defended our
cause--we mean our white friends.

Resolved, That this meeting appoint Mr George Chester of Harrisburg, as
agent for the Liberator, and will use our utmost endeavors to get
subscribers for the same.

Resolved, That we will support the Colony in Canada, the climate being
healthy and the rights of our brethren secured.

Resolved, That the gratitude of this meeting, which is so sensibly felt,
be fully expressed to the Editors of the Liberator and Genius of
Universal Emancipation, Messrs Garrison and Lundy, whose independence of
mind and correct views of the rights of man have led them so intrepidly
to speak in favor of our cause.

Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary, and sent to the Liberator for publication.

                        JACOB D. RICHARDSON, Chairman.

JACOB G. WILLIAMS, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM ROCHESTER.

                        ROCHESTER, N. Y., October, 1831.

A large number of the colored citizens of Rochester having convened
themselves together, for the important object of taking into
consideration the anti-republican principles of the American
Colonization Society, the Rev. Mr Johnson was called to the chair, and
Mr A. Lawrence was appointed secretary.

The meeting was then briefly addressed by the secretary as follows:

Countrymen and Brothers--When viewing the inhumanity and anti-christian
principles of the American Colonization Society, in plotting our removal
to Africa, (which is unknown to us as our native country,) it seems as
though we were called upon publicly to express our feelings on the
subject. We do not consider Africa to be our home, any more than the
present whites do England, Scotland, or Ireland. This is the land our
fathers have tilled before us; this is the land that gave us our
birthright.--The meeting then

Resolved, That we never will remove to Africa; but should any of our
brethren wish to emigrate, we would recommend Canada as a country far
more congenial to our constitutions;--that we give our most sincere
thanks to our friendly advocates Messrs Garrison and Knapp, and Mr
Benjamin Lundy, who are crying unto their fellow men, night and day, to
let their countrymen go free: they will be called blessed by many
generations yet to come. The Colonization Society say that they cannot
treat us as men while we are with them; but if we will go out of their
reach, they will begin their charity. What should we think of such
religion as this? Because our skin is a little darker than theirs, they
say they cannot think of treating us as men. The scripture says, 'Beware
of wolves in sheep's clothing'--and such they seem to be. We earnestly
believe, with our generous friend Garrison, that it would not be a hard
matter to exceed them in doing right. Our blessed Lord said, that we
should do to all men as we would have them do to us. Now what would they
think, if we should tell them that they would be better off in New
Holland or in Tartary?

Resolved, That we will do all in our power to support the Liberator,
printed by Mr Garrison, and all other works in our behalf.

Resolved, That the foregoing proceedings be published in the Liberator.

                        HENRY JOHNSON, Chairman.

A. LAWRENCE, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM PROVIDENCE.

                        PROVIDENCE, November 1, 1831.

At a respectable meeting of the colored people of Providence, R. I.,
duly appointed and publicly holden at the African church, on the 31st of
October, 1831, to take into consideration the objects and motives of the
American Colonization Society, Mr George C. Willis was called to the
chair, and Mr Alfred Niger appointed secretary. The meeting was then
addressed at some length by the chairman, stating their object in
assembling together, and exposing the injustice and prejudice by which
he believed the friends of African colonization were actuated. The
following preamble and resolutions were read by the secretary, and
unanimously adopted:

Whereas our brethren, in different parts of the United States, have
thought proper to call meetings to express their disapprobation of the
American Colonization Society; we, concurring fully with them in
opinion, have assembled ourselves together for the purpose of uniting
with them, in declaring that we believe the operations of the Society
have been unchristian and anti-republican, and at variance with our best
interests as a people. Therefore,

Resolved, That we will use every fair and honorable means in our power,
to oppose the operations of the above mentioned Society.

Resolved, That we are truly sensible that we are in this country a
degraded and ignorant people; but that our ignorance and degradation are
not to be attributed to the inferiority of our natural abilities, but to
the oppressive treatment we have experienced from the whites in general,
and to the prejudice excited against us by the members of the
Colonization Society, their aiders and abettors.

Resolved, That we view, with unfeigned astonishment, the anti-christian
and inconsistent conduct of those who so strenuously advocate our
removal from this our native country to the burning shores of Liberia,
and who with the same breath contend against the cruelty and injustice
of Georgia in her attempt to remove the Cherokee Indians west of the
Mississippi.

Resolved, That we firmly believe, from the recent measures adopted by
the freemen of the city of New Haven, in regard to the establishment of
a College for our education in that place, that the principal object of
the friends of African colonization is to oppose our education and
consequent elevation here, as it will deprive them of one of their
principal arguments for our removal.

Resolved, That as our fathers participated with the whites in their
struggle for liberty and independence, and believing with the
Declaration of that Independence, 'that all men are created free and
equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness;'
and as we have committed no crime worthy of banishment--Therefore

Resolved, That we will not leave our homes, nor the graves of our
fathers, and this boasted land of liberty and christian philanthropy.

Resolved, That, our unfeigned and sincere thanks be tendered to Messrs
Garrison and Knapp, and to every true friend to our cause, for their
unwearied and truly benevolent exertions in our behalf.

Resolved, That we will earnestly recommend the Liberator, published in
Boston by the above mentioned gentlemen, to the patronage of our friends
throughout the country.

Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary, and sent to Boston, with the request that they may be
published in the Liberator.

                        GEORGE C. WILLIS, Chairman.

ALFRED NIGER, Secretary.


A VOICE FROM TRENTON.

                        TRENTON, November 30, 1831.

At a respectable meeting of the free people of color in Trenton,
convened in the Mount Zion church, November 30, 1831, for the purpose of
considering the subject of colonization on the coast of Africa--On
motion, the Rev. Lewis Cork was called to the chair, and Abner H.
Francis appointed secretary. The meeting was addressed by Messrs
Gardener and Thompson; after which, the following resolutions were
unanimously adopted.

Resolved, Inasmuch as we, free people of color, have done all that is in
our power to convince the white inhabitants of these United States, that
it is our wish to live peaceably with all men; and inasmuch as our
general demeanor has been that of industry and sobriety, notwithstanding
there are some among us to the contrary, as well as among the whites;
therefore we do most solemnly declare, that the statements made to the
contrary by the Rev. Mr Crosby, in his late addresses in this city, and
all statements by petitioners to legislative bodies, and by the
Colonization Society, or any thing of the same nature, are a positive
libel on our general character.

Resolved, Whereas we have lived peaceably and quietly in these United
States, of which we are natives, and have never been the cause of any
insurrectionary or tumultuous movements as a body, that we do view every
measure taken by any associated bodies to remove us to other climes,
anti-christian and hostile to our peace, and a violation of the laws of
humanity.

Resolved, That if, in the opinion of government, our stay or liberty can
no longer be granted in the States in which we live, we see nothing
contrary to the constitution of these United States, or to christianity,
justice, reason or humanity, in granting us a portion of the Western
territory, as a state, with the same franchise as that of Pennsylvania,
New Jersey, or any other free State; for we challenge the Union to prove
that, as free men, we have ever given the least ground for the
uncharitable censures that have been cast upon us.

Resolved, That we view the American Colonization Society as the most
inveterate foe both to the free and slave man of color; forasmuch as the
agents thereof, and its members who have petitioned the several
legislatures, have unequivocally declared its object, to wit, the
extermination of the free people of color from the Union; and to effect
this they have not failed to slander our character, by representing us
as a vagrant race; and we do therefore disclaim all union with the said
Society, and, once for all, declare that we never will remove under
their patronage; neither do we consider it expedient to emigrate any
where, but to remain in the land and see the salvation of God.
Nevertheless, if any of our brethren should be compelled or see proper
to emigrate, we would recommend to them Upper Canada or Mexico.

Resolved, That we view with the highest emotion of gratitude, the
benevolence of Great Britain and that of the Canada Company, in
affording an asylum in the Wilberforce settlement, in Upper Canada, for
our oppressed brethren of the South, who have been or may be forced, by
unconstitutional laws, to leave their rightful home and place of
nativity, without any cause except that of having a dark skin.

Resolved, That this meeting approve the establishment of a college, as
recommended by the Annual Convention held in Philadelphia last June, and
that we give all possible aid to that institution.

Resolved, That we view the Liberator, edited by William Lloyd Garrison,
as a great herald in the cause of liberty, and that we recommend to the
colored citizens of Trenton the utility of subscribing to the above
named paper.

Resolved, That there be a committee of three appointed to draft an
address more expressive of our views on the above subject.

Resolved, That the following persons compose that committee--Sampson
Peters, Robert Thomas, George Cole.

                        LEWIS CORK, Chairman.

ABNER H. FRANCIS, Secretary.


ADDRESS.

We, the undersigned, in conformity to the above appointment, beg leave
to present to the public, in a calm, unprejudiced manner, our decided
disapprobation of the American Colonization Society and its auxiliaries,
in relation to the people of color in the United States. We are well
convinced, from the mass that has been written on the above subject by
those who have preceded us, that it will be difficult to avoid
repetition; nevertheless; we hope to touch some points which have not
been fairly understood by that Society. They have supposed that our
objections are to civilizing and evangelizing Africa; but we beg leave
to say, that it is an error. We are well aware, that there is no surer
way to effect this great object than to plant among the heathen,
colonies of Christian missionaries. We wish, therefore, to be
understood, that we highly approve of the evangelizing of Africa, but
disapprove of the present measures of the American Colonization Society,
if their motives have not been misrepresented by their agents and
others, in some previous addresses in this city and elsewhere. But
viewing them as we now do, we must say that, in our opinion, their false
representations of our general character--their recommending our removal
from our native land--their opposition to our having a part of the West
appointed to us--their objections to our proposed college, and of our
march to science--their false statements in relation to the health of
the colony at Liberia, with a variety of other subjects of the same
nature--all lead to a conclusion, that it is our greatest foe.

We would here ask the public a few questions. First--Is the gospel of
Jesus Christ calculated to lead to insurrectionary measures? If so, why
then send it to the heathen? Second--What gentleman, who has set his
slaves free, has been murdered by them for so doing? Third--What have
those States, who have washed their hands clean of the cursed stain of
slavery, lost by it? Fourth--What neighborhood, where education and
general information have been disseminated among the people of color, is
the worse for it?

In closing our remarks, we would say, that we do think that the subjects
looked to by the Colonization Society, to civilize Africa, are
incompetent; for we do suppose that men selected for such an important
enterprise, should be men of deed and sound piety--men of regular and
industrious habits, of scientific knowledge and general experience: that
such men can be obtained, we have no doubt; and if there cannot, let us
first prepare some in this country.

      SAMPSON PETERS, }
      ROBERT THOMAS,  } Committee.
      GEORGE COLE,    }


A VOICE FROM LYME.

                        LYME, Ct., January 9, 1832.

At a respectable meeting of the colored citizens of this place, held
pursuant to public notice--Mr Luther Wright was called to the chair, and
Mr Daniel R. Condol appointed secretary.

After some animated remarks by Messrs Wright and Condol, it was

Resolved, That it is the sincere opinion of this meeting, that the
American Colonization Society is one of the wildest projects ever
patronised by a body of enlightened men; and further, that many of those
who support it would be willing, if it were in their power, to drive us
out of existence.

Resolved, That though we be last in calling a meeting, we feel no less
the pernicious influence of this Society than the rest of our brethren;
and that we will resist every attempt to banish us from this our native
land.

Resolved, That we place unshaken reliance upon the promises of Jehovah,
and believe that he will take our reproach away, and give freedom to
those who are held in captivity.

Resolved, That we are not for insurrection, but for peace, freedom and
equality.

Resolved, That the thanks of this meeting be rendered to Messrs Garrison
and Knapp, for their benevolent exertions in behalf of the oppressed
descendants of Africa; and that they be requested to insert these
proceedings in the Liberator.

                        LUTHER WRIGHT, Chairman.

DANIEL R. CONDOL, Secretary.


A VOICE PROM LEWISTOWN.

                        LEWISTOWN, Pa., January 9, 1832.

At a numerous meeting held by the free people of color of the borough of
Lewistown, in the African Methodist Episcopal church, Samuel Johnston
was called to the chair, and Martin Johnston appointed secretary. The
following resolutions were then read, and unanimously adopted:

Resolved, That we will not leave these United States, the land of our
birth, for a home in Africa.

Resolved, That we will strenuously oppose the colonizing of the free
people of color in Liberia.

Resolved, That we are willing to emigrate to any part of the United
States which may be granted to us.

Resolved, That we will support the Liberator, a paper published in
Boston, edited by William Lloyd Garrison; and also the colony in Upper
Canada as an asylum for our oppressed brethren.

Resolved, That a committee be appointed to prepare an address to be
published in the Liberator.

Resolved, That the proceedings of this meeting be signed by the Chairman
and Secretary, and forwarded to the editor of the Liberator for
publication.

                        SAMUEL JOHNSTON, Chairman.

MARTIN JOHNSTON, Secretary.


ADDRESS.

We, the undersigned, in conformity to the above appointment, beg leave
to present to the public, in a calm and unprejudiced manner, our reasons
for opposing the scheme of African colonization. This is the land of our
birth. The Declaration of Independence declares, that 'all men are born
free and equal:' it does not say that the _white_ man or the _black_ man
is free,--but all, without respect to color, tongues, or nation. We
therefore consider all laws to enslave or degrade the people of color as
contrary to the letter and spirit of this Declaration; and that
according to it we are freemen, and have as indisputable a right to
enjoy our liberty as any white man. To deny it to us, because we differ
in color, is oppression. To say that Africa is our native country is
untrue. Here we were born, and here we mean to die; for all men are born
free.

We wish to return our grateful thanks to our friends, and to the friends
of the abolition of slavery. We consider slavery a national sin, which,
if not speedily overthrown, will cause this nation to mourn and weep;
for God has declared that Ethiopia shall stretch forth her hands unto
him, and he will hear her cry.

We would say to colonizationists that we consider them our foes instead
of our friends. It is vain for them to say that we would do better in
Liberia; for we do not believe it. There is room enough in this country
for us; and if they be our friends, let them meliorate our condition
here. Let them join in the work of immediate abolition of slavery. Let
them wash out the stains which disfigure the national character. And
then let them tell us about Liberia.

One reason why we are opposed to leaving these United States is this:
you have so long denied us the enjoyment and protection of the laws of
God and man in this country, that you wish now to oppress us still more.
But thanks be to Him who holds all things in his hand, we believe He
will plead our cause. Your skirts are already dyed with the blood of
millions of souls. 'Vengeance is mine--I will repay,' saith the Lord.

Awake, ye wolves in sheep's clothing. Your cup is now full. You are
daily causing innocent blood to be shed. How long, ye slavites, ye
kidnappers, ye that traffic in human flesh, will you sleep? When will
you awake to your best interests? For remember that you will not always
be able to hold your victims in servile chains.

      J. G. SMITH, }
      M. WALKER,   } Committee.
      M. JOHNSTON, }


A VOICE FROM NEW-BEDFORD.

                        NEW-BEDFORD, January 23, 1832.

At a meeting of the people of color in New-Bedford, January 23d, for the
purpose of considering and giving their opinion of the American
Colonization Society, and the actual evil or benefit of that Society to
the objects of its supervision, the free people of color, Mr Richard
Johnson was called to the chair, and Richard G. Overing appointed
secretary. After an address from the chair, it was moved that
resolutions expressive of the views of the meeting, respecting the
Colonization Society, be drawn up, and published in some newspaper not
adverse to the rights and well being of all men, be their color what it
may. The following are the resolves of the meeting:

Resolved, That in whatever light we view the Colonization Society, we
discover nothing in it but terror, prejudice and oppression; that the
warm and beneficent hand of philanthropy is not apparent in the system,
but the influence of the Society on public opinion is more prejudicial
to the interest and welfare of the people of color in the United States,
than slavery itself.

Resolved, That the Society, to effect its purpose, the removal of the
free people of color, (not the slaves) through its agents, teaches the
public to believe that it is patriotic and benevolent to withhold from
us knowledge and the means of acquiring subsistence, and to look upon us
as unnatural and illegal residents in this country; and thus by force of
prejudice, if not by law, endeavor to compel us to embark for Africa,
and that too, apparently, by our own free will and consent.

Resolved, That as great a nuisance as we may be in the estimation of
that Society, we yet have a hope in Him who has seen fit to continue our
existence through days worse than which we do not fear, and which
emboldens us as peaceable citizens, to resolve to abide the issue of
coming days in our native land, in which we ask no more than the age in
which we live demands, and which this nation, as republicans and
christians, should not refuse to grant.

Signed in behalf of the meeting.

                        RICHARD JOHNSON, Chairman.

R. G. OVERING, Secretary.


The foregoing resolutions and addresses are given in plain, it may be
occasionally in severe language; and display an intensity of feeling, a
depth of abhorrence, and a firmness of purpose, honorable to men who
appreciate their rights and love their country. Before I proceed,
however, to comment upon these important proceedings, I shall make some
quotations from the essays and addresses of colored writers, in order to
sustain my assertion that the American Colonization Society is directly
opposed to the wishes of our free colored population.

'A COLORED BALTIMOREAN'[AH] records his sentiments in the following
style:

    'We believe, sirs, that the people of color in the United States
    will never be prevailed over to abandon the land of their birth,
    and every thing vernacular with them--to forego many advantages
    which they now possess, and many more which they have in
    prospect, for the imaginary, or if real, the fleeting and
    short-lived honors held out to them by our "Americo-African
    empire." Why should we exchange a temperate and salubrious
    climate, adapted to our constitutions as Americans, for one, to
    us, fraught with disease and death? Why should we leave a land
    in which the arts and sciences are flourishing, and which is
    beginning to yield to our research, for one, where the
    irradiating beams of the sun of science have yet to be announced
    by the bright star of hope? Why should we leave a land
    illuminated with the blaze of gospel light, for one enshrouded
    in pagan gloom? Why should we, who are in tolerable
    circumstances in America, who enjoy many of the comforts of
    life, and are evidently on the advanced march of mind, cast away
    these certain, real, and growing advantages, for those which are
    precarious and chimerical? Why should we abandon our firesides,
    and every thing associated with the dear name of _home_--undergo
    the fatigues of a perilous voyage, and expose ourselves, our
    wives, and our little ones, to the deleterious influences of an
    uncongenial sun, for the enjoyment of a liberty divested of its
    usual accompaniments, surrounded with circumstances which
    diminish its intrinsic value, and render it indeed "a dear
    earned morsel"? * * * * * *

    'But "it is the hope of accomplishing the entire subversion of
    the slave trade and Mahometan superstition, and all their
    subsidiary concomitants, that has actuated the Christian and
    stimulated the philanthropist." Noble objects indeed! And who
    are those christians and philanthropists? Our friend tells us,
    without distinction, that they are "those noble and heroic men
    who have enlisted under the banner of colonization." But how
    happens it that some of the most distinguished of these
    _christians_ and _philanthropists_ are themselves slaveholders,
    and so far abettors of the _slave trade_ as to be actually
    guilty of selling into a cruel and interminable vassalage the
    hapless victims of their tender mercies? Again, how is it that
    none but the free people of color have been chosen to evangelize
    Africa? Is it because they are under an exclusive moral
    obligation to dispel the "gloom of Mahometan superstition?" Is
    it because they are pre-eminently qualified in point of morals
    and information for the missionary enterprise? None will say
    this. Perhaps we shall be told, that the identity of their color
    gives them a decided advantage over every other people. But how
    is it that those wicked white men, who are in the habit of
    resorting thither for the most nefarious purposes, have access
    to these people? And we have not forgotten that during the visit
    of the Rev. G. R. McGill, in Baltimore, he informed us that
    colored men from the United States, being thought by the natives
    to be men of information, are received and treated as white men,
    and denominated by the same epithet. Since then it does not
    appear that we are pre-eminently qualified for this work, why
    should it be pressed upon us? * * * *

    'Tell us not that the Sovereign Ruler of the universe, who is
    not a respecter of persons, whose "tender mercies are over all
    his works," will _never_ elevate us to the dignity of men and
    christians, unless we emigrate to Africa. Tell us not that in
    this _christian_ country, this "land of the free and home of the
    brave," we must _for ever_ remain a degraded and proscribed
    race--that we must _for ever_ be treated as the outcasts of
    creation. We are aware that this doctrine has been asserted with
    all the confidence of inspiration by _some_ of our gospel
    ministers. We have heard them proclaim it in a tone calculated
    to strengthen the prejudices existing against us. They seem to
    forget that there is a superintending providence--that He, who
    "sits upon the whirlwind and directs the storm," has ever
    manifested himself a friend to the oppressed of every clime.
    They seem to forget that the religion of Jesus, wherever it
    reigns with unrestrained sway, demolishes every partition wall,
    and exterminates out of the heart all those bitter prejudices
    which impede the march of the Messiah's kingdom. We should like
    to have these prophets give us their ideas in relation to the
    millennial reign of Christ. We should like to have them inform
    us whether or not the general prejudices and their inseparable
    accompaniments, which now lie upon, and operate against us, on
    account of our color, will be consistent with this glorious
    reign of _peace_, and _love_, and _joy_. Let these ministers
    consider that much of our degradation is chargeable to the
    indifference (to say the least) that they manifest in regard to
    our situation--that if they as patterns of piety hold us at a
    distance, it is but natural for the inconsiderate to follow
    their example. Let them recollect that while they are making
    powerful and irresistible appeals to the humanity of the
    American people in behalf of the oppressed of other climes, they
    have a people among them whose claims upon their liberality are
    paramount to those of any other. Let these ministers tell us how
    often they make it their business to visit those portions of
    their flocks whose crime is, their color. Nay, one of them said
    not long since, to be familiar with the people of color would
    destroy his _usefulness_ among the whites. But whether they do
    their duty in relation to us or not, we indulge in no fears in
    regard to our future condition. We are not distrustful of the
    goodness and power of Him who has overruled the evil designs of
    those men that first tore our ancestors from their native
    shores, who is still overruling, and who will continue to
    overrule the designs of all who would treat us as the
    offscouring of the earth, because our Creator has not given us a
    color as white as their own. If ever there was a people who
    could look up to Heaven with unshaken confidence for protection,
    it is that people whose sufferings are not the consequences of
    their crimes; it is that people whose misfortunes work in them
    the graces of faith, patience and hope. And why should we not
    cherish these invaluable graces? We are told by high authority,
    that "_all things_ shall work together _for good_ to them that
    love God"--that "He will give grace and glory, and _no good
    thing_ will He _withhold_ from them that walk uprightly." You
    see, sirs, we have one straight forward course to pursue--one
    marked out by the hand of unerring wisdom. This course we intend
    to pursue, without giving ourselves any uneasiness as to the
    issue; this we leave to Him who has the administration of the
    universe in his hands, and who has declared for our
    encouragement, "even the very hairs of your head are all
    numbered." Tell us not of the wisdom, and power, and number of
    our enemies; He who has given us a hope, which at least makes
    our condition tolerable, will say to them, as He did to the
    tempestuous billows, "Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further;
    and here shall thy proud waves be stayed."'

    * * * * * * * * *

    'What effect have the evils of slavery in this _happy_ land upon
    the mind of the liberal, the unprejudiced, and philanthropic
    Lafayette?

    'Hear him, he will speak for himself: "When I am indulging in my
    views of American prospects and American liberty, it is
    mortifying to be told that in that very country a large portion
    of the people are slaves. It is a dark spot on the face of the
    nation. _Such a state of things cannot always exist._" It was a
    sight of the evils alluded to, and their inseparable
    concomitants, that extorted from the pen of Mr Jefferson that
    comprehensive and soul-thrilling sentence--"I tremble for my
    country when I reflect that God is just, and that his justice
    cannot sleep for ever." But may we not indulge the hope that
    the evils spoken of will yet awaken the sympathies of the
    American people--soften their cruel prejudices--arouse their
    slumbering energies--and produce in them an unconquerable
    determination to wash from their "stars and stripes" one of the
    blackest spots that ever cursed the globe, or stained the
    historic page? Shall we be told that _invincible_ prejudices
    render this great desideratum impracticable? And what is this
    but a libel upon the American people? What is it but to say,
    there is in them a moral incapacity to do justice, love mercy,
    and walk uprightly? Colonization orators, designing politicians,
    ministers of Jesus, tell me, how can you thus libel your
    countrymen? Surely, there is a regenerating, a redeeming spirit
    in the land--a spirit transforming misanthropes into
    philanthropists--bondmen into freemen--abettors of slavery into
    champions of liberty--a spirit that will yet drive from America
    the demon of slavery, and render it indeed "the land of the free
    and the home of the brave."'[AI]

    * * * * * * * *

    'I have just found time to notice a few very exceptionable
    features of a communication over the signature of "A
    Marylander," published, a few days ago, in the American of our
    city. The writer is unquestionably entitled to the credit of
    being a thorough-going colonizationist. He writes in the _true
    spirit_ of the cause. He seems to be under an excitement
    produced by the publication of our anti-colonization
    resolutions. This being the case, it is not to be expected that
    he would, throughout his communication, avail himself of the
    guarded, accommodating, and conciliating language usual with
    colonization writers and declaimers. After being convinced that
    the people of color are not to be persuaded to leave the land of
    their birth, and every thing vernacular with them, for "regions"
    which he tells us are "now dark as the valley of the shadow of
    death," he says, "I would propose then that Maryland should
    colonize her own free blacks." He does not add the usual
    qualification, "_with their own consent_:" he knows this will
    never be obtained. He therefore says: "I earnestly _hope_ that
    the time _is now_ come when our state will wake up to all the
    importance of this subject, and will instantly commence _a
    system of measures_ imperatively demanded by the _sternest_
    principles [colonization principles?] of _sound_ policy." We
    would tell this precocious statesman that we are not to be
    intimidated into colonization "_measures_" by the angry
    effusions of his illiberal soul; that we had rather die in
    Maryland under the pressure of unrighteous and cruel laws than
    be driven, like cattle, to the pestilential clime of Liberia,
    where grievous privation, inevitable disease, and premature
    death, await us in all their horrors. We are emboldened thus to
    speak, not from a reliance on the mere arm of flesh; no--it is
    the righteousness of our cause, a knowledge of the attributes of
    Deity, combined with a consciousness of innocence under
    suffering, that have inspired us with a moral courage which no
    oppression shall shake, no fulminations overawe. Our limits will
    not permit us to expatiate, at this time, on the import of the
    terms, "_a system of measures--the sternest principles_," &c. We
    would barely remark that the climax of injustice and cruelty,
    here suggested, nay, recommended, is the legitimate fruit of the
    operations of the American colonization societies relative to
    the free people of color. We have always believed that the
    "_system of measures_" here recommended, would be the dernier
    resort of these _christian_ associations. The unmerited abuse,
    that has been so unsparingly heaped upon us by colonizationists
    for expressing our opinions of their project as connected with
    our happiness, their manifest determination to effectuate their
    object regardless of our consent, abundantly corroborate the
    opinion we have long since entertained. We turn, however, from
    the contemplation of the persecution and oppression, which, it
    seems, are in reserve for us, to notice, briefly, the moving
    cause of this virulent and relentless attack upon our rights and
    happiness. "The _census just taken_," says A Marylander,
    "_admonishes_ us in the strongest manner, of the necessity of
    prompt and efficient measures to drain off this description of
    our population." Here then is the _patriotic_, the _benevolent_,
    the _christian_ principle, by which the colonization societies,
    throughout our land, are actuated. This is the selfish policy of
    which we complain, and which should be execrated by all _true_
    patriots, philanthropists, and christians. Our increase is
    represented as an "_alarming evil--an evil_," said one of our
    colonization orators in the pulpit, not long since, "which
    _threatens_ our very _existence_." Now, if all this be true, how
    can they, on their own principles, say we can _never_ be a
    people in this country? Surely, they are taking effectual steps
    to convince us, that the enjoyment of our rights in this, our
    native land, is not only possible, but highly probable. This we
    have always believed. And we hope and pray, that it may be
    accomplished in a way sanctioned by the gospel of peace:
    "without confused noise, or garments rolled in blood." But this
    glorious victory over pride and prejudice, by gospel weapons,
    will never be accomplished by colonization principles. Nor will
    those ministers of the gospel have any part or lot in this
    matter, who solemnly declare, in the face of heaven and earth,
    that we can _never enjoy, in this country_, those inalienable
    rights of man, whose inviolable preservation promotes the
    welfare of the whole human family. Such ministers virtually
    declare that they do not believe the doctrines they are bound to
    preach; that He, from whom they profess to have received their
    commission, is, indeed, "a hard man, reaping where he has not
    sown, and gathering where he has not strawed;" that He requires
    of them and their flocks, that which they are morally incapable
    of performing; that they _cannot_ love their neighbor as
    themselves, or do unto others what they wish done unto
    themselves, because their Lord, in his wisdom, has given some of
    their fellow creatures a different color from their own. These
    temporising, retrograde reformers are doing a serious injury to
    the people of color. They heed not the warning of Heaven: "Do my
    people no harm." They are doing more to strengthen the cruel and
    unchristian prejudices, already too powerful against us, than
    all the slaveholders in the Union. They hesitate not to declare,
    that, in America, we are out of the reach of humanity. They seem
    to think that the religion of the benevolent Saviour which
    enjoins, "_honor all men_," and which explicitly says, "if ye
    have _respect to persons_, ye _commit sin_," is nothing more
    than a dead letter, or must _for ever_ remain powerless, in the
    United States of America. And have these men the face to contend
    with the infidels of our land? Why, one infidel, with the bible
    in his hands, would "chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand
    to flight." But notwithstanding these discouraging
    circumstances, our cause will yet triumph. He who is for us, is
    stronger than all that are against us. "The rulers" of the land
    may "take counsel together," and some of the professed ministers
    of Jesus may "come into their secret," but "He that sitteth in
    the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in derision."
    Fear not then, my colored countrymen, but press forward, with a
    laudable ambition, for all that heaven has intended for you and
    your children, remembering that the path of duty is the path of
    safety, and that "righteousness" alone "exalteth a nation."'


If excellence of style, a dignified carriage, sound logic, a high and
abiding faith, and fervent piety, confer credit upon a writer, few have
ever better illustrated these traits than 'A COLORED BALTIMOREAN,' or
deserved a nobler tribute of praise. He who would be ashamed to
acknowledge such a man as his countryman and brother, has yet to learn
his own insignificance and what constitutes the majesty of human nature.

The following is an extract of a letter from a colored gentleman of
wealth and respectability in Philadelphia, whose friendship is courted
by honorable men, and whose usefulness is scarcely exceeded by any other
citizen:

    'Is it not preposterous to one, like myself, whose family has
    resided in the state of Pennsylvania ever since the great
    lawgiver, William Penn, came last to this state from England;
    and who fought for the independence of my country, whose
    Declaration asserts, that all men are born with free and equal
    rights--is it not preposterous to be told that this is not my
    country? I was seven months on board of the old Jersey Prison
    ship in the year 1780, "the times that tried men's souls;" and
    am I now to be told that Africa is my country, by some of those
    whose birth-place is unknown? Is it not a contradiction to say
    that a man is an alien to the country in which he was born? To
    separate the blacks from the whites is as impossible, as to bale
    out the Delaware with a bucket. I have always been decidedly of
    opinion, that if the Colonization Society would take but half
    the pains to improve the children of color in their own country,
    and expend but half the money that they are devoting to
    accomplish their visionary scheme of christianizing Africa, by
    offering premiums to master mechanics to take them as
    apprentices, they would do more to destroy prejudice than any
    thing else. When I look at this globe, containing eight or nine
    hundred millions of inhabitants, and see that they differ in
    color from the frozen to the temperate and torrid zones, and
    that every thing is variegated, I am astonished that any man
    should be so prejudiced against his fellow-man; but we pray for
    the aid of the Almighty to take the scales from their eyes; and
    that the Liberator may be one of the instruments in commencing
    the work.'[AJ]


    'I would ask some of our pretended white friends, and the
    members of the American Colonization Society, why they are so
    interested in our behalf as to want us to go to Africa? They
    tell us that it is our home; that they desire to make a people
    of us, which we can never be here; that they want Africa
    civilized; and that we are the very persons to do it, as it is
    almost impossible for any white person to exist there. I deny
    it. Will some of those guardian angels of the people of color
    tell me how it is that we, who were born in the same city or
    state with themselves, can live any longer in Africa than they?
    I consider it the most absurd assertion that any man of common
    sense could make, unless it is supposed, as some have already
    said, that we are void of understanding. If we had been born on
    that continent, the transportation would be another matter; but
    as the fact is the reverse, we consider the United States our
    home, and not Africa as they wish to make us believe;--and if we
    do emigrate, it will be to a place of our own choice.

    'I would also mention to the supporters of the Colonization
    Society, that if they would spend half the time and money that
    they do, in educating the colored population and giving them
    lands to cultivate here, and secure to them all the rights and
    immunities of freemen, instead of sending them to Africa, it
    would be found, in a short time, that they made as good citizens
    as the whites. Their traducers would hear of fewer murders,
    highway robberies, forgeries, &c. &c. being committed, than they
    do at present among some of the white inhabitants of this
    country.'[AK]


    'Colonization principles, abstractly considered, are
    unobjectionable; but the means employed for their propagation,
    we think, are altogether objectionable. We are deprived of our
    birthright, and pointed by the colonization partisans to another
    country as a home. They speak of the prejudices which exist
    against us, as an insuperable hindrance to the improvement of
    our situation here. We are sickened by the constant reiteration
    of "_extraneous mass_," "_African inferiority_," &c. which tends
    immediately to justify the slaveholder in his crime, and
    increase already existing prejudice. The Colonization Society
    never will effect the removal of slavery. The God of justice
    will never, in my opinion, let this nation off so easily. It is
    in vain to hold back. The eyes of all will ultimately be opened
    to see that nothing but universal emancipation can possibly
    avert impending wrath.'[AL]


    'How long, oh! ye boasters of freedom, will ye endeavor to
    persuade us, your derided, degraded fellow countrymen, to the
    belief that our interest and happiness are prized in high
    estimation among you? Be it known, that we are not all such
    misguided, deluded mortals as to be duped by your plans; that we
    will not suffer ourselves to become so infatuated as to "hurl
    reason from her throne," and succumb to your glittering, showy,
    _dissimulating_ path to eminence. We spurn with contempt your
    unrighteous schemes, and point the finger of derision at your
    fruitless attempts. You have commenced them in a day, when
    liberty, justice and equality are claimed by almost all, as
    nature's rights; for behold! a beam of science, lucid as the
    sun, has divinely fallen upon the lightless intellects of a
    portion of that ignoble part of your fellow creatures, who have
    been so long the victims of your fell injustice and inhumanity.
    Would to God that conscience might subdue your malignant
    prejudices. Tell us not that our condition can never be bettered
    in the land of our birth: you know it not. Make but the attempt
    in consecrating a portion of your time, talents and money upon
    us here, and you would soon find the cause of Afric's injured
    race vindicated by her descendants; and the day which now dawns
    would be speedily ushered into blazing light, declaring in its
    effulgence the joyful sound of Liberty--Justice--Equality, to
    all mankind.'[AM]


    'There is much to be surprised at, little to admire, and nothing
    worthy of imitation, in the "bubbles" of our friends, the
    colonizationists. They have enlisted the prejudices and the
    support of the wealthy and influential in their favor; they have
    succeeded in sending some two or three thousand to Liberia; and
    they are flattered with their partial success, and no doubt look
    forward to the time when they will behold the whole of the
    colored inhabitants of America, in the far distant land of
    Africa. But let them not anticipate too much; they have yet one
    obstacle to overcome which threatens to overthrow their
    "baseless fabric;" or at any rate impede their progress. Their
    proceedings have not obtained the approbation of those, whose
    approbation is most needed, _the colored people themselves_.
    They are most strangely mistaken if they suppose that it is an
    easy matter to win them, either by _sophistry_ or _force_. The
    press has begun its revolutionizing work, overturning in its
    progress every thing calculated to suppress inquiry or to blind
    the understanding. Already have the intrigues of the designing
    been exposed, and already have the colored people set their
    faces against oppression.

    'The Colonization Society has erred in matters of _policy_; for
    instead of exerting themselves to gain the confidence of the
    colored people, and thus by persuasion to have rid the country
    of them, they have acted in a manner calculated to disgust every
    humane mind, and have rendered it an utter _impossibility_ to
    remove them; and it is most fortunate for the unfortunate, that
    they have detected those intriguing spirits in their _humane_
    and _charitable_ undertaking.

    'How many hours of anguish, how much incalculable misery has been
    prevented; in short, how many human beings have been saved from
    an untimely grave, by the timely interposition of the PRESS! It
    has said, let it be so, and it _was_ so; its thunders have been
    heard, and the oppressor trembles like the earthquake: it has
    overthrown, yea, totally demolished the sharp-edged sword of
    the Colonization Society.

    'Support the PRESS then, ye people of color, and the result will
    be a total overthrow of all the darling schemes of the aforesaid
    darling Society; it has accomplished wonders, yea, wonders
    already; much more can, nay, will be done; again I say, support
    the PRESS.'[AN]


    'The African Colonization Society declares that we the people of
    color shall have no part nor lot in the free institutions of
    this country. Why? Because the Creator of all--the sovereign
    Ruler of the universe, who holds in his hands the destiny of
    nations, thought fit and proper, in his infinite wisdom, to
    tincture us with a darker hue than the paler part of community!
    or, if I may say, because the lot of our predecessors happened
    to be cast in the torrid zone, beneath the scorching beams of a
    vertical sun! These are the objections the African Colonization
    Society offer to this community to our remaining in this
    country--in the land of freemen! These are the considerations
    that prompt them to tell us that we the descendants of Africa
    can never be men unless we abandon the land of our birth, our
    homes and people, and submit to that uncongenial clime, the
    barbarous regions of Africa, amidst unyielding contagion and
    mortality! O, that man would remember, that knowledge and
    virtue, not complexion, are the emblems that constitute the
    value of human dignity! With these, we are worthy--without them,
    we are unworthy. By the acts and operations of wicked men,
    shielded under a cloak of religion, we the people of color are
    doomed to all the miseries that the human body is able to
    sustain--deprived of light, knowledge and social intercourse, by
    the colonization gentlemen. With all their pretended zeal and
    love of liberty, manifested towards the African race, I count
    them as enemies, not friends. I do not solicit their love, nor
    regard their friendship. I speak for one: I never did, and never
    will court an enemy as a friend, knowingly, let him be whom he
    may--let him belong to church or state, I feel the weight of
    their predominant power, and the finishing blow they are about
    to strike. Thus we move by them, poor and pennyless, despised
    and forsaken by all; creeping through your streets, submissively
    bowed down to every foot whose skin is tinctured with a lighter
    hue than ours--thus we sojourn in solitude, not for our crimes
    but color.

    'I came here for the purpose of showing to this community, that
    the people of color of the United States disapprove of the
    African Colonization plan. They do not wish to emigrate to
    Africa. These six hundred or more, that the gentleman tells you
    are now waiting for a passage to Liberia, are not the free
    people of color of the United States; they are, if any, the
    poor, old, worn-out southern slaves, freed on the condition to
    go to Africa, or die in the tracks of slavery, no more fit for
    their cotton and rice fields--for the laws of those states
    forbid the master, let him be possessed of all the fine feelings
    that the human mind is able to contain; unless he banishes them
    to some distant region, across that "mighty ocean" they speak
    of, they cannot be free. According to the laws of those states,
    and the basis on which the Society is built, the emancipated
    slaves are not free until they stand upon the shores of Liberia.
    Thus the Northern and Middle States are called upon for
    donations to enable the monarch of the south to bury his slaves
    in the sands of Africa; thus far, northern capital is
    instrumental in parting asunder parents and children--no more to
    meet, until Jehovah will stand upon the four corners of the
    earth, and proclaim deliverance to the captive!--when the arm of
    tyrants shall cease to sway the rod of tyranny over the heads of
    their helpless children--until all creation shall vanish and
    crumble into nothing.

    'About the time of the formation of this Society, the people of
    color, in different sections of the Union, took the alarm--they
    thought there was something wrong in the views of that combined
    body. So, the free people of color of Richmond, convened
    themselves together in the state of Virginia, where the
    gentleman says the African Colonization Society first
    originated. They assembled themselves together for the purpose
    of ascertaining each other's feelings with regard to that
    combined body, and after mature reflection, they petitioned
    Congress--I will give you the words of their memorial, which are
    sufficient evidence to substantiate in the mind of every
    rational person, that the people of color wish to remain in this
    country.


    '"At a meeting of a respectable portion of the free people of
    color of the city of Richmond, on Friday, January 24, 1817,
    William Bowler was appointed chairman, and Lentey Craw,
    secretary. The following preamble and resolution were read,
    unanimously adopted, and ordered to be printed.

    '"Whereas a Society has been formed at the seat of government,
    for the purpose of colonizing, with their own consent, the free
    people of color of the United States; therefore we, the free
    people of color of the city of Richmond, have thought it
    advisable to assemble together under the sanction of authority,
    for the purpose of making a public expression of our sentiments
    on a question in which we are so deeply interested. We perfectly
    agree with the Society, that it is not only proper, but would
    ultimately tend to the benefit and advantage of a great portion
    of our suffering fellow creatures, to be colonized; but while we
    thus express our approbation of a measure laudable in its
    purposes, and beneficial in its designs, it may not be improper
    in us to say, that we prefer being colonized in the most remote
    corner of the land of our nativity, to being exiled to a foreign
    country--and whereas the president and board of managers of the
    said Society have been pleased to leave it to the entire
    discretion of Congress to provide a suitable place for carrying
    these laudable intentions into effect--Be it therefore

    '"Resolved, That we respectfully submit to the wisdom of
    Congress whether it would not be an act of charity to grant us a
    small portion of their territory, either on the Missouri river,
    or any place that may seem to them most conducive to the public
    good and our future welfare, subject, however, to such rules and
    regulations as the government of the United States may think
    proper to adopt."

                        'WM. BOWLER, Chairman.

    'LENTEY CRAW, Secretary.'[AO]


    'The _colonization craft_ is a diabolical pursuit, which a great
    part of our christian community are engaged in. Now, brethren, I
    need not enlarge on this point. You that have been observing,
    have already seen the trap under the bait; and although some of
    our population have been foolish enough to sell their birthright
    for a mess of pottage, yet I doubt whether the Colonization
    Society will entrap many more. It is too bare-faced, and
    contrary to all reason, to suppose, that there is any good
    design in this project. If they are willing to restore
    four-fold for what they have taken by false accusation, they
    can do it to better advantage in the bosom of our country, than
    at several thousand miles off. How would you do, brethren, if
    your object was really to benefit the poor? Would you send them
    into a neighboring forest, and there deal out that food which
    they were famishing for? Now we stand different from beggars.
    Our ancestors were stolen property, and property which belonged
    to God. This is well known by our religious community; and they
    find that the owner is about to detect them. Now if they can
    slip away the stolen goods, by smuggling all those out of the
    country, which God would be likely to make an instrument of, in
    bringing them to justice, and keep the rest in ignorance; by
    such means, things would go on well with them, and they would
    appease their consciences by telling what great things they are
    doing for the colored population and God's cause. But we
    understand better how it is. The deception is not so well
    practised, but that we can discover the mark of the beast. They
    will steal the sons of Africa, bring them to America, keep them
    and their posterity in bondage for centuries, letting them have
    what education they can pick up of themselves; then transport
    them back to Africa; by which means America gets all her
    drudgery done at little expense, and endeavors to flatter the
    Deity, by making him a sacrifice of good works of this kind. But
    to the awful disappointment of all such blasphemers, they will
    meet the justice of God, which will be to them a devouring
    sword.'[AP]


    'Though delivered from the fetters of slavery, we are oppressed
    by an unreasonable, unrighteous, and cruel prejudice, which aims
    at nothing less, than the forcing away of all the free colored
    population of the United States to the distant shores of Africa.
    Far be it from me to impeach the motives of every member of the
    American Colonization Society. The civilizing and christianizing
    of that vast continent, and the extirpation of the abominable
    traffic in slaves, (which, notwithstanding all the laws passed
    for its suppression, is still carried on in all its horrors,)
    are no doubt the principal motives, which induce many to give it
    their support.

    'But there are those, and those who are most active and
    influential in this cause, who hesitate not to say, that they
    wish to rid the country of the free colored population; and
    there is sufficient reason to believe that with many, this is
    the principal motive for supporting that Society; and that
    whether Africa is civilized or not, and whether the slave-trade
    be suppressed or not, they would wish to see the free colored
    people removed from this country to Africa.

    'Africa could certainly be brought into a state of civil and
    religious improvement, without sending all the free people of
    color in the United States there.

    'A few well-qualified missionaries, properly fitted out and
    supported, would do more for the instruction and improvement of
    the natives of that country, than a host of colonists, the
    greater part of whom would need to be instructed themselves, and
    all of whom for a long period would find enough to do to provide
    for themselves, instead of instructing the natives.

    'How inconsistent are those who say, that Africa will be
    benefitted by the removal of the free people of color of the
    United States there, while they say, they are the _most vile and
    degraded_ people in the world!--If we are as vile and degraded
    as they represent us, and they wish the Africans to be rendered
    a virtuous, enlightened and happy people, they should not
    _think_ of sending _us_ among them, lest we should make them
    worse instead of better.

    'The colonies planted by white men on the shores of America, so
    far from benefitting the aborigines, corrupted their morals, and
    caused their ruin; and yet those who say _we_ are the most vile
    people in the world, would send us to Africa, to improve the
    character and condition of the natives! Such arguments would not
    be listened to for a moment, were not the minds of the community
    strangely warped by prejudice.

    'Those who wish that that vast continent should be _compensated_
    for the injuries done it, by sending thither the light of the
    gospel and the arts of civilized life, should aid in sending and
    supporting well qualified missionaries, who should be wholly
    devoted to the work of instruction, instead of sending
    colonists, who would be apt to turn the ignorance of the natives
    to their own advantage, and do them more harm than good.

    'Much has also been said by colonizationists, about improving
    the character and condition of the people of color of this
    country, by sending them to Africa. This is more inconsistent
    still. We are to be improved by being sent far from civilized
    society. This is a novel mode of improvement. What is there in
    the burning sun, the arid plains, and barbarous customs of
    Africa, that is so peculiarly favorable to our improvement? What
    hinders our improving here, where schools and colleges abound,
    where the gospel is preached at every corner, and where all the
    arts and sciences are verging fast to perfection? Nothing,
    nothing but prejudice. It requires no large expenditures, no
    hazardous enterprises, to raise the people of color in the
    United States to as highly improved a state, as any class of the
    community. All that is necessary is, that those who profess to
    be anxious for it, should lay aside their prejudices, and act
    towards them as they do by others.

    'We are NATIVES of this country; we ask only to be treated as
    well as FOREIGNERS. Not a few of our fathers suffered and bled
    to purchase its independence; we ask only to be treated as well
    as those who fought against it. We have toiled to cultivate it,
    and to raise it to its present prosperous condition; we ask only
    to share equal privileges with those who come from distant lands
    to enjoy the fruits of our labor. Let these moderate requests be
    granted, and we need not go to Africa nor any where else, to be
    improved and happy. We cannot but doubt the purity of the
    motives of those persons who deny us these requests, and would
    send us to Africa, to gain what they might give us at home.

    'But they say, the prejudices of the country against us are
    invincible; and as they cannot be conquered, it is better that
    we should be removed beyond their influence. This plea should
    never proceed from the lips of any man, who professes to believe
    that a just God rules in the heavens.

    'The American Colonization Society is a numerous and influential
    body. Would they lay aside their _own_ prejudices, much of the
    burden would be at once removed; and their example (especially
    if they were as anxious to have _justice done us here_, as to
    send us to Africa,) would have such an influence upon the
    community at large, as would soon cause prejudice to hide its
    deformed head.

    'But alas! the course which they have pursued, has an opposite
    tendency. By the _scandalous misrepresentations_, which they are
    continually giving of our character and conduct, we have
    sustained much injury, and have reason to apprehend much more.

    'Without any charge of crime, we have been denied all access to
    places, to which we formerly had the most free intercourse; the
    colored citizens of other places, on leaving their homes, have
    been denied the privilege of returning; and others have been
    absolutely driven out.

    'Has the Colonization Society had no effect in producing these
    barbarous measures?

    'They profess to have no other object in view, than the
    colonizing of the free people of color on the coast of Africa,
    with their _own consent_; but if our homes are made so
    uncomfortable that we cannot continue in them; or if, like our
    brethren of Ohio and New Orleans, we are driven from them, and
    no other door is open to receive us but Africa, our removal
    there will be any thing but voluntary.

    'It is very certain, that very few free people of color _wish_
    to go to that _land_. The Colonization Society _know_ this, and
    yet they do certainly calculate, that in time they will have us
    all removed there.

    'How can this be effected, but by making our situation worse
    here, and closing every other door against us?'[AQ]


    'My attention was forcibly attracted by a communication in Mr
    Poulson's Daily Advertiser of the 16th inst. which states, that
    Mrs Stansbury of Trenton, N. J. has presented _one thousand
    dollars_ to the Colonization Society. Now I think it is greatly
    to be regretted, that this highly generous and benevolent lady
    has been induced to make this donation for the purpose of
    conveying some of the superannuated slaves to Africa, when
    objects of much greater importance could be attained by offering
    a premium to master mechanics to take colored children as
    apprentices, so that they would become useful to themselves and
    others. It is an inquiry becoming of the utmost importance, what
    is to become of those children who are arriving at the age of
    manhood?

    'I am greatly astonished that the ministers of the gospel should
    take so active a part, in endeavoring to convey the freemen of
    color to Africa. Even in Boston and New-York, they have taken
    the lead in support of this object. They cannot be aware of the
    great injury they will be the means of inflicting on us: instead
    of doing this, they should endeavor to remove prejudice, to
    ameliorate and improve the condition of the colored people by
    education, and by having their children placed in a situation to
    learn a trade. I hope, through the assistance of Divine
    Providence, that the Liberator may be the means (especially in
    Boston, the Cradle of Liberty and Independence) of guiding the
    people of this country in the path, which equal justice and the
    public good so evidently indicate.

    'I have never conversed with an intelligent man of color, (not
    swayed by interested and sinister motives,) who was not
    decidedly opposed to leaving his home for the fatal clime of
    Africa. I am well acquainted with all the masters of vessels,
    belonging to this port, who have been to the coast of Africa;
    and they all agree in representing it as one of the most
    unhealthy countries in the latitude of 40. In the months of June
    and July, the thermometer is at from 88 to 90 degrees. What must
    it be, then, in the latitude of 6 or 7, under a vertical sun,
    and where, after the rainy season, the effluvium which arises
    from the putrefaction of vegetables is productive of the most
    fatal effects? Sir James L. Yeo agrees with their account, in
    his statement laid before the Admiralty of Great Britain.

    'Has any one, in either of our southern States, given any thing
    like a thousand dollars to promote emigration to Africa? Not one
    has shown so much compassion for the oppressed slave. General
    Mercer,--who is, I believe, the President of the Colonization
    Society,--promised to emancipate his slaves, and to sell his
    large possessions in Virginia, and to remove with them to
    Africa--(my friends inform me, and I believe him to be one of
    the most humane and best of masters.) Mr Key, the great
    advocate, and the late Judge Washington, promised to liberate
    their slaves: I believe that neither of them has performed his
    promise.

    'According to a statement made by Mr Key, they have removed in
    fourteen years about as many hundred emigrants. I will venture
    to say, that at least a half million have been born during the
    same period. We ask not their compassion and aid, in assisting
    us to emigrate to Africa: we are contented in the land that gave
    us birth, and for which many of our fathers fought and died,
    during the war which established our independence. I well
    remember that when the New England regiment marched through this
    city on their way to attack the English army under the command
    of Lord Cornwallis, there were several companies of colored
    people, as brave men as ever fought; and I saw those brave
    soldiers who fought at the battle of Red Bank, under Col. Green,
    where Count Donop the commander was killed, and the Hessians
    defeated. All this appears to be forgotten now; and the
    descendants of these men, to whom we are indebted for the part
    they took in the struggle for independence, are intended to be
    removed to a distant and inhospitable country, while the
    emigrants from every other country are permitted to seek an
    asylum here from oppression, and to enjoy the blessings of both
    civil and religious liberty, equally with those who are entitled
    to it by birthright.

    'I think the ministers of the gospel might do much towards
    destroying the domestic slave trade, which breaks asunder the
    sacred ties of husband, wife and children. Not a voice is
    raised by them against this most cruel injustice. In the British
    colonies, this is not permitted; yet it exists in the only true
    republic on earth.'[AR]


    '_My Friends and Countrymen_:--I trust, by this time, you have
    known well my sentiments in relation to the American
    Colonization Society; and the great objects, which have been set
    forth, of a general union of interest, in funds and education,
    for the permanent establishment and furtherance of our
    prosperity, in this our native country.

    'In addition to what has been already said on the subject, I
    shall briefly set forth some of the leading causes of our
    wretchedness and misery; and the prominent motives of the
    Colonization Society in sending us away. Much theory has been
    used, in the discussions upon our civil and political situation,
    in this country. We have been branded, in many instances,--may I
    not say, in the highest courts of the nation, courts of justice
    and equity, in public and family circles?--as being an inferior
    race of beings, not possessing like intellect and faculty with
    the whites. We are represented as being incapable of acting for
    ourselves; consequently not educated and qualified to be
    admitted into public places, to vindicate the integrity of our
    race, and the qualifications we are capable of acquiring. Many
    of our noble statesmen, orators and lawyers, have made our
    capital ring with the empty sound of
    inferiority,--degradation,--the impossibility of tolerating
    equality with the blacks. Sacred writ has been carefully
    examined by these gentlemen of science, and construed to suit
    their narrow consciences. Prophets have arisen among them, who
    hold forth to the people the continuation of our political
    thraldom, unless there be a general removal of all the free
    among us to the coast of Africa. Others argue, that, although
    they have good feelings towards us, and would do any thing for
    us, if we were out of their sight and out of the hearing of
    their slaves, yet to admit us into their circles would be to
    pervert the present order of society, and the happiness of the
    good white citizens of the country. These are generally bible
    men, such as hold forth the true oracles of God; yet deny him,
    in their actions and words, the supreme control over all his
    creatures. There is hardly ever an action performed, whether
    good or bad, but there is generally a reason given for so doing;
    and he is a wicked, daring character, who cannot find a cloak,
    at any time, to cover his hideous crimes. The men who have been
    foremost, in withholding from us our dearest and most sacred
    rights, have always held out false colors to the community at
    large, (such as, inferiority, degradation, nuisance, pest,
    slaves, species of monkey, apes, &c.) to justify their inhuman
    and unchristian acts towards us, and to deaden the severe pangs
    of conscience that harass them. They would wish to appear
    innocent before the world; as doing unto all men as they would
    they should do unto them. Do they base their objects, in full,
    upon such frivolous excuses as these? No. The truth is, actions
    speak louder than words. It is my candid opinion, there would
    have been no Colonization Society formed for our transportation
    to the western coast of Africa, had there been no free colored
    people, and did not our numbers increase daily. If we, as a free
    body of people, had remained in the same character with slaves,
    monkeys and baboons, there would not have been so much
    excitement in the community about us; but as they see by our
    improvement, (a great improvement, indeed, within forty years,)
    that the period is hastening on, 'when there will be no other
    alternative but we must rank among them in civilization, science
    and politics, they have got up this colonization scheme to
    persuade us to leave our slave brethren, and flee to the
    pestilential shores of Africa, where we shall be in danger of
    being forced to hang our harps upon the willows, and our song of
    liberty and civilization will be hushed by the impelling force
    of barbarian despots.'[AS]


    'And in pursuit of this great object [the elevation of the
    people of color] various ways and means have been resorted to;
    among others, the American Colonization Society is the most
    prominent. Not doubting the sincerity of many friends who are
    engaged in that cause; yet we beg leave to say, that it does not
    meet with our approbation. However great the debt which these
    United States may owe to injured Africa, and however unjustly
    her sons have been made to bleed, and her daughters to drink of
    the cup of affliction, still we who have been born and nurtured
    on this soil, we, whose habits, manners and customs are the same
    in common with other Americans, can never consent to take our
    lives in our hands, and be the bearers of the redress offered by
    that Society to that much afflicted country.

    'Tell it not to barbarians, lest they refuse to be civilized,
    and eject our Christian missionaries from among them, that in
    the nineteenth century of the christian era, laws have been
    enacted in some of the States of this great republic, to compel
    an unprotected and harmless portion of our brethren to leave
    their homes and seek an asylum in foreign climes: and in taking
    a view of the unhappy situation of many of these, whom the
    oppressive laws alluded to, continually crowd into the Atlantic
    cities, dependent for their support upon their daily labor, and
    who often suffer for want of employment, we have had to lament
    that no means have yet been devised for their relief.'[AT]


    'The Convention has not been unmindful of the operations of the
    American Colonization Society; and it would respectfully suggest
    to that august body of learning, talent and worth, that, in our
    humble opinion, strengthened, too, by the opinions of eminent
    men in this country, as well as in Europe, that they are
    pursuing the direct road to perpetuate slavery, with all its
    unchristianlike concomitants, in this boasted land of freedom;
    and, as citizens and men whose best blood is sapped to gain
    popularity for that Institution, we would, in the most feeling
    manner, beg of them to desist: or, if we must be sacrificed to
    their philanthropy, we would rather die at home. Many of our
    fathers, and some of us, have fought and bled for the liberty,
    independence and peace which you now enjoy; and, surely, it
    would be ungenerous and unfeeling in you to deny us a humble and
    quiet grave in that country which gave us birth!'[AU]


    'Sir, upon the whole, my view of the operations of the
    Colonization Society, in relieving the slave States of the evil
    which weighs them down more than a hundred tariffs, is
    illustrated by an old fable, in which it is stated, that a man
    was seen at the foot of a mountain, scraping away the dust with
    his foot. One passing by, asked him what he was doing? I wish to
    remove this mountain, said he. You fool, replied the other, you
    can never do it in that way. Well, said he, I can raise a dust,
    can't I?

    'Sir, I do not wish to censure the motives of this Society, but
    surely they are visionary. Its supporters are bewildered in
    their own dust, which is well calculated to injure the vision of
    good men. The Commercial Advertiser says they do indeed wish to
    wipe away from the national records the stain of slavery, "but
    hope it may be accomplished (as the Virginia Enquirer has it)
    surely but quietly." Yes, Sir, and quietly enough!

    'Our ambition leads not to superiority, but to our _freedom_ and
    _political rights_. _Grant this!_ we ask no more! If the places
    in which we dwell are too straight for us and the white
    population, place us in a state far to the West--take us
    into the Union--give us our _rights_ as _freemen_. Let the
    southern states make all born after a date not two years
    distant, free! and let the Colonization Society turn its
    attention and energies to the removing of liberated slaves
    there: the free people will go without their aid. But if the
    Government is fearful of retaliation, it may allay its fears by
    a consideration of the fact of there not being one freeman
    engaged in the late insurrections--of freemen informing against
    slaves--the peaceable manner in which we live in the
    neighborhoods of the south, and throughout the whole Union. The
    meetings that have lately been held, and resolutions passed
    expressive of our disapprobation of such measures, may all show
    that such fears are groundless. I repeat again--_Give us our
    rights--we ask no more!_

    'Yes, Sir, if I possessed the Indies, I would pledge the whole
    that if such measures were taken, and such grants made, no
    retaliation would be made by us as a body for former evils.'[AV]


    'In no age of our existence have there been more pains taken by
    priests and people, in public and private, in church and state,
    to give them currency, than at present. The whole theme of that
    wicked, persecuting combination--the Colonization Society--is
    calculated to impress upon the mind of the public these
    atrocious maxims which every day strengthen a prejudice not only
    cherished by the whites against the blacks, but by the blacks
    against the whites. That foul fiend of hell, that destroying
    angel who hath power to take peace from the earth, and to kill
    with the sword, is gaining a commanding influence very fast over
    both parties. And who, but the advocates of the Colonization
    Society, receive him as a welcome guest? Who but they have built
    him a temple, and cried, "Long live Prejudice against free born
    Americans of sable hue!" Who but they are continually crying,
    "The free blacks are dangerous! the free blacks are dangerous!
    Away with them--away with them to Africa!" Who but they are the
    apologists for murder, theft, and all the horrid concomitants of
    slavery? Who but they have defiled our temples of worship
    dedicated to God for his service, making merchandise of the
    souls of men by transferring them over to the keeping of
    prejudice?'[AW]


Other extracts might be recorded, but these must suffice. I have given
the sentiments of the people of color as expressed individually, in
public orations, in conventions of delegates, and in popular assemblies.
Their proceedings evince a keen discrimination between true and false
philanthropy, and an intellectual ability successfully to defend their
cause. Their instincts are more than a match for the specious sophistry
and learned sense of colonizationists: they meet them on every point,
and on every point achieve a victory. Conscious of the fact that in
their complexion is found the only motive for their banishment, they
clearly illustrate the hypocrisy and injustice of the African crusade.
Their union of purpose is such as cannot be broken. How intense is their
love of country! how remarkable their patient endurance of wrongs! how
strong their abhorrence of expatriation! how auspicious the talents
which they display!

Every humane and honorable man will assent to the proposition, that no
scheme for the removal of a numerous people from one continent to
another, ought to be prosecuted contrary to their desires. A scheme
cannot be benevolent which thrives upon persecution. Benevolent
oppression is a solecism.

Another self-evident truth is, that no such removal can be effected
merely by the presentation of selfish inducements, or without resorting
to coercive measures. To show that coercion is openly advocated by some
of the prominent supporters of the Colonization Society, I make the
following extracts from the speeches of Messrs Broadnax and Fisher,
delivered during the 'Great Debate' in the Virginia House of Delegates a
short time since. Mr Broadnax said:

    'IT IS IDLE TO TALK ABOUT NOT RESORTING TO FORCE. Every body
    must look to the introduction of force of some kind or
    other--and it is in truth a question of expediency; of moral
    justice; of political good faith--whether we shall fairly
    delineate our whole system on the face of the bill, or leave the
    acquisition of extorted consent to other processes. The real
    question--the only question of magnitude to be settled, is the
    great preliminary question--Do you intend to send the free
    persons of color out of Virginia, or not?'

    'If the free negroes are willing to go, they will go--if not
    willing, they must be compelled to go. Some gentlemen think it
    politic not now to insert this feature in the bill, though they
    proclaim their readiness to resort to it when it becomes
    necessary; they think that for a year or two a sufficient number
    will consent to go, and then the rest can be compelled. For my
    part, I deem it better to approach the question and settle it at
    once, and avow it openly. The intelligent portion of the free
    negroes know very well what is going on.--Will they not see your
    debates? _Will they not see that coercion is ultimately to be
    resorted to?_ They will perceive that the edict has gone forth,
    and that it must fall, if not now, in a short time upon them.'

    'I have already expressed it as my opinion that few, very few,
    will _voluntarily_ consent to emigrate, if no COMPULSORY MEASURE
    be adopted.--With it--many, in anticipation of its sure and
    certain arrival, will, in the mean time, go away--they will be
    sensible that the time would come when they would be forced to
    leave the State. Without it--you will still, no doubt, have
    applicants for removal equal to your means. Yes, Sir, people who
    will not only consent, but beg you to deport them. But what sort
    of _consent_--a consent extorted by a series of oppression
    calculated to render their situation among us insupportable.
    Many of those who have already been sent off, went with _their
    avowed consent_, but under the influence of a more decided
    compulsion than any which this bill holds out. I will not
    express, in its full extent, the idea I entertain of what has
    been done, or what enormities will be perpetrated to induce this
    class of persons to leave the State. Who does not know that when
    a free negro, by crime or otherwise, has rendered himself
    obnoxious to a neighborhood, how easy it is for a party to visit
    him one night, take him from his bed and family, and apply to
    him the gentle admonition of a severe flagellation, to induce
    him to _consent_ to go away? In a few nights the dose can be
    repeated, perhaps increased, until, in the language of the
    physicians, _quantum suff._ has been administered to produce the
    desired operation; and the fellow then becomes _perfectly
    willing_ to move away. I have certainly heard, if incorrectly,
    the gentleman from Southampton will put me right, that of the
    large cargo of emigrants lately transported from that country to
    Liberia, all of whom _professed_ to be _willing_ to go, were
    rendered so by some such severe ministrations as those I have
    described. A lynch club--a committee of vigilance--could easily
    exercise a kind of inquisitorial _surveillance_ over any
    neighborhood, and convert any desired number, I have no doubt,
    at any time, into a willingness to be removed. But who really
    prefers such means as these to the course proposed in this bill?
    And one or the other is inevitable. For no matter how you change
    this bill--sooner or later the free negroes will be _forced_ to
    leave the State. Indeed, Sir, ALL OF US LOOK TO FORCE of some
    kind or other, direct or indirect, moral or physical, legal or
    illegal. Many who are opposed, they say, to any compulsory
    feature in the bill, desire to introduce such severe regulations
    into our police laws--such restrictions of their existing
    privileges--such inability to hold property--obtain
    employment--rent residences, &c., as to make it impossible for
    them to remain amongst us. _Is not this force?_'

Mr Fisher said:

    'If we wait until the free negroes consent to leave the State,
    we shall wait until "time is no more." _They never will give
    their consent_; and if the House amend the bill as proposed,
    their consent is in a manner pointed out by the gentleman from
    Dinwiddie--and it is a great question whether we shall force the
    people to extort their consent from them in this way.--He
    believed if the compulsory principle were stricken out, this
    class of people would be forced to leave by the harsh treatment
    of the whites. The people in those parts of the State where they
    most abound, were determined,--as far as they could learn
    through the newspapers and other sources,--to get rid of the
    blacks.'

What a revelation, what a confession, is here! The free blacks taken
from their beds, and severely flagellated, to make them willing to
emigrate! And legislative compulsion openly advocated to accomplish this
nefarious project! Yes, the gentlemen say truly, 'few, very few will
_voluntarily_ consent to emigrate'--'they never will give their
consent'--and therefore they must be expelled by force! It is true, the
bill proposed by Mr Broadnax was rejected by a small majority; but it
serves to illustrate the spirit of the colonization leaders.

The editor of the Lynchburg Virginian, an advocate of the Society, uses
the following language:

    'But, if they will not consider for themselves, WE _must
    consider for them_. The safety of the people is the supreme law;
    and to that law all minor considerations must bend. If the free
    negroes will not emigrate, _they must be contented to endure
    those privations which the public interest and safety call
    for_.--In the last Richmond Enquirer we notice an advertisement,
    setting forth, that "a petition will be presented to the next
    legislature of Virginia, from the county of Westmoreland,
    praying the passage of some law to _compel_ the free negroes in
    this commonwealth to emigrate therefrom, under a penalty which
    will effectually promote this object." So, too, at a meeting of
    the citizens of Prince George county, in Maryland, it was
    resolved to "petition the next legislature to remove all the
    free negroes out of that State, and to prohibit all persons from
    manumitting slaves without making provision for their removal."'

I close this work with a specimen of the sophistry which is used to give
_eclat_ to the American Colonization Society.

In the month of June, 1830, I happened to peruse a number of the
Southern Religious Telegraph, in which I found an essay, enforcing the
duty of clergymen to take up collections in aid of the funds of the
Colonization Society on the then approaching fourth of July. After an
appropriate introductory paragraph, the writer proceeds in the following
remarkable strain:

    'But--we have a plea like a peace offering to man and to God. We
    answer poor blinded Africa in her complaint--that we have her
    children, and that they have served on our plantations. And we
    tell her, look at their returning! We took them barbarous,
    though measurably free,--untaught--rude--without
    science--without the true religion--without philosophy--and
    strangers to the best civil governments. And now we return them
    to her bosom, _with the mechanical arts_ ... _with science_ ...
    _with philosophy_ ... with civilization ... with republican
    feelings ... and above all, with the true knowledge of the true
    God, and the way of salvation through the Redeemer.'

'The mechanical arts!'--with whom did they serve an apprenticeship?
'With philosophy!'--in what colleges were they taught? It is strange
that we should be so anxious to get rid of these scientific men of
color--these philosophers--these republicans--these christians, and that
we should shun their company as if they were afflicted with the
hydrophobia, or carried a deadly pestilence in their train! Certainly,
they _must_ have singular notions of the christian religion which
tolerates--or, rather, which is so perverted as to tolerate--the
oppression of God's rational creatures by its professors! They must feel
a peculiar kind of brotherly love for those _good men_ who banded
together to remove them to Africa, because they were too proud to
associate familiarly with men of a sable complexion! But the writer
proceeds:

    'We tell her, look at the little colony on her shores. We tell
    her, look to the consequences that must flow to all her borders
    from religion, and science, and knowledge, and civilization, and
    republican government! And then we ask her--_is not one ship
    load of emigrants returning with these multiplied blessings,
    worth more to her than a million of her barbarous sons?_'

So! every ship load of ignorant and helpless emigrants is to more than
compensate Africa for every million of her children who have been
kidnapped, buried in the ocean and on the land, tortured with savage
cruelty, and held in perpetual servitude! Truly, this is a compendious
method of balancing accounts. In the sight of God, of Africa, and of the
world, we are consequently blameless--and rather praiseworthy--for our
past transgressions. It is such sophistry as is contained in the
foregoing extract, that kindles my indignation into a blaze. I abhor
cant--I abhor hypocrisy--and if some of the advocates of the
Colonization Society do not deal largely in both, I am unable to
comprehend the meaning of these terms.

Of the whole number of individuals constituting the officers of the
Society, nearly three-fourths, I believe, _are the owners of slaves_, or
interested in slave property; not one of whom, to my knowledge, has
emancipated any of his slaves to be sent to Liberia!! The President of
the Society, (CHARLES CARROLL,) owns, I have understood, nearly _one
thousand slaves_! And yet he is lauded, beyond measure, as a patriot, a
philanthropist, and a christian! The former President, (Judge BUSHROD
WASHINGTON,) so far from breaking the fetters of his slaves, actually
while holding his office offered a large reward for a runaway female
slave, to any person who would secure her by putting her into any jail
within the United States! What a mockery it is for such persons to
profess to deplore the existence of slavery, or to denounce the foreign
slave trade! for they neither cease from their own oppressive acts, nor
act much more honestly than the slave dealers--the latter stealing those
who are born on the coast of Africa, and the former those who are born
in this country!

FOOTNOTES:

[AE] John Neal.

[AF] _Vide_ the Fourth Volume of the Genius of Universal Emancipation
for 1829.

[AG] Alexander H. Everett, Esq. vide his work entitled 'America, or a
General Survey,' &c. &c. pp. 212, 225.

[AH] Genius of Universal Emancipation for November 27, 1829.

[AI] Genius of Universal Emancipation, January 29, 1830.

[AJ] 'The Liberator' for January 22, 1832.

[AK] 'A Colored Philadelphian'--vide 'The Liberator' for Feb. 12, 1831.

[AL] Correspondent of 'The Liberator,' Feb. 26, 1831.

[AM] Correspondent of 'The Liberator,' March 12, 1831.

[AN] 'African Sentinel,' Oct. 8, 1831, printed at Albany.

[AO] Extracts from 'An Address to the Gentlemen and Ladies of the County
of Otsego, N. Y., delivered on the 30th September, 1830, by Hayden
Waters, a man of color.' The proceedings of the colored inhabitants of
Virginia, incorporated into this Address, are those referred to on page
8 as having been accidentally mislaid.

[AP] 'Address delivered before the colored population of Providence, R.
I., November 27, 1828, by Rev. Hosea Easton.'

[AQ] 'A Discourse delivered in St. Philip's Church, for the benefit of
the colored community of Wilberforce, in Upper Canada, on the Fourth of
July, 1830. By Rev. Peter Williams, Rector of St. Philip's Church,
New-York.' Mr Williams is a clergyman of superior talents and great
moral worth, and beloved by an extensive circle of acquaintance.

[AR] From the pen of the Colored Gentleman in Philadelphia, referred to
on page 58--vide 'The Liberator,' March 12, 1831.

[AS] 'Address delivered before a Colored Association in Brooklyn, N. Y.,
August 5, 1831,' by George Hogarth. Vide 'The Liberator' for August 27,
1831.

[AT] Conventional Address of the People of Color in Philadelphia, in
1830.

[AU] 'Minutes and Proceedings of the First Annual Convention of the
People of Color, held by adjournment in the city of Philadelphia, in
June, 1831.'

[AV] 'Philadelphia Evangelist'--vide 'The Liberator' for November 26,
1831.

[AW] Correspondent of 'The Liberator,' December 17, 1831.


END OF PART II.







