CHAPTER IV.

MORAL SENTIMENT.


[Sidenote: 1. A uniform theory such as psychological hedonism]

Psychological hedonism possesses the merit of offering a simple and
uniform theory of mental action. It may admit conflicting accounts of
the kinds of action and sufferance which actually give men pleasure
and pain,--a point on which, for example, Hobbes and J. S. Mill
differ widely. But it has one general formula for the relation of
feeling to action, which has been precise and clear enough to attract
many psychologists. The ethical consequences of the theory have,
indeed, turned out--if the argument of the preceding chapters is
valid--to be neither so obvious nor so satisfactory as its adherents
have commonly supposed. But it must nevertheless be admitted that, if
psychology shows pleasure to be, as a matter of fact, the constant
end of action, it will be useless--even if it is not impossible--for
ethics to prescribe any other end.

[Sidenote: not supplied by the opponents of ethical hedonism,]

The opponents of ethical hedonism have thus uniformly insisted that
the theory which makes pleasure the end and motive of all conscious
activity is imperfect; and this psychological question has been the
battle-field of many of the controversies, at any rate, of English
ethics. Psychological hedonism has not, however, been confronted by
the English moralists with an opposed theory of equal simplicity,
nor can the controversy be said to have led to a thorough analysis
of action. The psychological investigation has, in most cases,
been carried no farther than the ethical interests at stake seemed
to require; and the predominance of these interests has perhaps
prevented the inquiry from being carried out with complete freedom
from preconception on either side.

A uniform theory under which our various particular desires might
be brought may, indeed, be said to have been suggested by Butler.
He meets the hedonistic proposition that all desire is for personal
pleasure, by the doctrine that no particular desire has pleasure as
its end, since all pleasure presupposes a previous desire in the
satisfaction of which it consists.[69] This theory, which may have
been derived from Plato,[70] and was afterwards used by Schopenhauer
to prove the negative nature of pleasure and consequent worthlessness
of life, is, however, a generalisation which cannot be made to
include the whole facts to be taken account of.[71] Many pleasures
occur independently of any precedent desire. And what Butler had
to show--and was really concerned to show--was that desire was not
exclusively directed to objects thus independently found to be
pleasurable: the contradictory, that is to say, and not the contrary,
of psychological hedonism.

[Sidenote: in maintaining the reality of non-hedonistic activity.]

For this purpose Butler pointed to the whole class of affections
which, although they may also tend to private interest, have an
immediate reference to the good of others; and, in addition to
these, he contended for an original principle of benevolence towards
others in human nature, as well as of self-love or care for one's
own interests and happiness. This latter, he held, so far from being
the sole principle of action, implied the existence of a number of
particular passions and affections, directed immediately to external
objects--the satisfaction of these desires giving pleasure, though
pleasure was not the end they aimed at. Voluntary action is thus not
brought under any common rubric; for, at the same time that the calm
principle of self-love is directed to the agent's greatest pleasure,
the object of hunger, for example, is said to be not pleasure but
food, that of benevolence not personal pleasure but the good of
others.

[Sidenote: Non-hedonistic action generalised by Herbart,]

[Sidenote: from the tendency of ideas to self-realisation.]

The attempt to give unity to the non-hedonistic view of desire has
come from a different quarter. Uninfluenced by the exigencies of
ethical controversy, which formed the entire motive of Butler's
investigation, Herbart and his school have worked out a theory of
desire, which has many points of comparison with that of Butler.
However much they may differ from the English moralist--of whose
existence they are mostly ignorant--they are at one with him in
rejecting the maxim of psychological hedonism, _nihil appetimus nisi
sub specie boni_; and their differences from him are largely due
to their having gone further in their analysis of the facts, and
endeavoured to bring them under a general principle.

Butler's view of the object of desire is distinguished from the
Herbartian chiefly in two respects. In the first place, he identifies
that object with the external or real thing, whereas Herbart is
careful to point out that it is a presentation or idea. In the
second place, while Butler is content to postulate an original
tendency of our nature towards certain objects, Herbart attempts
to get behind this tendency, and explain the phenomena of striving
from the interaction of presentations. Over and above the ordinary
hypothesis of natural realism, Butler's theory implies a sort of
pre-established harmony between our active tendencies and things
outside the mind, in virtue of which some of these things do, and
some do not, attract our desires. Herbart, on the other hand,
attempts nothing less than a complete genetic account of mental
phenomena, explaining the facts of presentation, desire, and feeling
through "the persistence of presentation in consciousness and their
rise into clearer consciousness."[72] The phenomena of desire and
feeling are both accounted for by this mechanism of impelling and
inhibiting forces.[73]

[Sidenote: This tendency recognised in the doctrine of fixed ideas]

It would be beyond the scope of this Essay to examine the above view
of the active side of mental phenomena. For present purposes it is
enough to draw attention to the fact that the common deduction of
the phenomena of desire and will from the feelings of pleasure and
pain is not the only "scientific" theory of human action, and that
it is rejected on its merits by writers who have no hankering after
what the psychological hedonist would call the mystical element of
free-will. It is of interest to note, too, that Professor Bain,
in whose works the traditions of psychological hedonism find
their most careful expression, has modified the doctrine so as
to allow of desire of pleasure and avoidance of pain explaining
less than had been formerly required of them. Outside the circle
of hedonistically-determined motives, he recognises the influence
of the presentation or idea as a self-realising element in the
individual consciousness, apart from its pleasurable or painful
characteristics.[74] Those "fixed ideas," as Mr Bain calls them,
tend both to persist in the mind, and to project themselves into
action, independently of pleasure and pain--or at least with a force
which is out of proportion to the pleasure they bring. As has been
already seen, it is by means of this doctrine that he explains "the
great fact of our nature denominated sympathy, fellow-feeling, pity,
compassion, disinterestedness."[75] To the same category belongs
"much of the ambition and the aspirations of human beings.... A
certain notion--say of power, wealth, grandeur--has fixed itself in
our mind and keeps a persistent hold there." It is asserted, indeed,
that the action of such fixed ideas "perverts the regular operation
of the will which would lead us to renounce whatever is hopeless or
not worth the cost." And, certainly, their admission among mental
phenomena seems to imply the superposition of a new theory of action
upon the old theory of psychological hedonism. There is no disguising
the importance of the modification thus introduced. The name "fixed
idea" is misleading if it be taken to imply that persistency and
tendency to action are properties belonging to a certain class of
ideas only. Mr Bain's doctrine is founded on the hypothesis of the
identity of the nervous centres which function in representation
and in sensation, and is therefore valid of all representations
or ideas. The characteristics of persistency, and of tendency to
action, are therefore normal characteristics of presentations,
though they may belong in an unusual degree to some ideas from
the relation these hold to the dominant cluster of ideas in the
individual consciousness. And if we thus attribute to all ideas
without exception the tendency to self-realisation, and recognise--as
we must--the relation of mutual assistance or inhibition which ideas
bear to one another in virtue of their being "presented" to the same
subject, we have granted the material out of which, in Herbart's
skilful "Mechanik des Geistes," the phenomena of feeling and desire
are woven.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: 2. The non-hedonistic theory of action.]

The view of individual human nature, which holds that all its desires
are not directed to personal pleasure, thus claims consideration.
With its less restricted theory of action, this doctrine may
seem to offer a larger means of determining the appropriate end
of human conduct. In particular, the suggestion naturally occurs
that the ethical end will, on this theory, be something else than
pleasure.[76] But there is, nevertheless, no contradiction in
holding--as Mr Sidgwick does--that although other objects than
pleasure are actually desired, there is nothing else which can be
held to be ultimately desirable, or the tendency to which can be said
to have moral worth.

[Sidenote: Difficulty of unifying the various impulses it implies,]

The ethical barrenness of psychological hedonism has been seen to
result from its narrow and inflexible view of human nature. But
theories such as those now to be considered have, in an ethical
regard, to overcome a difficulty of another kind in the variety of
impulses which they admit upon the stage. The "objects" to which
these impulses or desires relate have as yet received no further
characterisation than that they are objects of desire. And the
difficulty of finding a principle by which some order of precedence
or value amongst them may be determined is just, in other words, the
difficulty of obtaining a moral standard.

[Sidenote: so as to determine a standard for action.]

The question does not ordinarily arise in the above form, because
the moral standard is commonly taken for granted, and the various
impulses, affections, and dispositions are made to derive their
ethical rank from their relation to that standard. But this method is
obviously inappropriate when the standard is still to be ascertained,
its determination being the object of inquiry. And it may seem that
the constitution of man contains in itself a means of distinguishing
the moral value of its various elements, or of the actions to which
they lead, and thus furnishing a moral standard or end for conduct.
This purpose seems to have been to some extent, though not quite
clearly, kept in view by the writers who, in last century, contended
against the selfish theory which had been so crudely enunciated by
Hobbes. They attempted to show that selfishness was not the only, nor
even the most prominent, principle of action; and, from the system of
diverse principles which they found implanted in human nature, they
endeavoured to work out a theory of conduct.

[Sidenote: This attempted by the English moralists,]

[Sidenote: but along with a utilitarian criterion,]

[Sidenote: and with egoistic arguments.]

Especially amongst the later English moralists--Adam Smith, for
instance--the question of the end or standard came almost to drop
out of sight in the midst of the controversy regarding the nature
of the "moral sense" or "moral faculty"--the way, that is, in which
we become aware of the difference between right and wrong. But in
Shaftesbury, Butler, and Hutcheson--the writers who formulated this
doctrine of the moral sense--the attempt is made to connect a theory
of the criterion of morality with the source of our knowledge of it.
Shaftesbury and Hutcheson both looked upon social welfare or the
general happiness as the end of moral conduct, and the criterion in
accordance with which moral character is ascribed to actions; at the
same time that their main contention was for the immediateness of the
"sense" by which we perceive these moral qualities. And they sought
to establish the connection of the two doctrines by means of the
benevolent feelings--which they held to be original and independent
of private interest--and their immediate approval by the reflex or
moral sense of the individual man. Similar ideas appear in Butler, at
the same time that he tended to make conscience or the moral sense
the standard of morality, as well as the source of our knowledge of
it. They, as well as he, however, found it necessary to come back
from the social or political to the individual point of view. Even
if their conception of "the good" was not evolved from the nature
of the individual man, their philosophical standpoint required them
to leave broader ground, and show it to be the individual's natural
goal. And in doing this, their constant tendency is to revert to
egoistic arguments--demonstrating the complete harmony of virtue and
interest, or attempting to prove to the individual that his own
happiness consists in the exercise of the social affections. Thus
Shaftesbury tries to show, by an empirical collection of results,
that to have the "natural" (or social) affections too weak, or the
private affections too strong, is a source of misery,[77] as well as
the chief source of vice; and that, largely owing to the pleasure of
virtuous action, it is "to the private interest and good of every
one to work to the general good."[78] Hutcheson, again, devotes a
large portion of his most mature work to allay the suspicion "that in
following the impulse of our kind affections and the moral faculty
we are counteracting our interests, and abandoning what may be of
more consequence to our happiness than either this self-approbation
or the applauses of others;"[79] while Butler, referring to virtuous
conduct, says, in a well-known passage, that "when we sit down in
a cool hour we can neither justify to ourselves this or any other
pursuit, till we are convinced that it will be for our happiness, or
at least not contrary to it."[80] Opposed as the whole school were to
the selfish theory of human action, they never spoke of any sacrifice
of private happiness as a thing to be looked for, or in any way taken
into account, in conduct which is the result of calm deliberation.
It is difficult, therefore, to avoid the judgment passed upon them
by Schleiermacher, that "the English school of Shaftesbury, with all
their talk about virtue, are really given up to pleasure."[81]

[Sidenote: 3. Ethics may be made to depend on the moral sense.]

At the same time, their writings constantly suggest a theory of
morals which is neither obliged to adopt off-hand a utilitarian
criterion of virtue, nor forced to fall back upon the egoistic
sanctions of personal pleasure and pain. Their psychological theory
points to an ethical doctrine in which pleasure is neither the sole
end of action, nor its sole motive. They do not, indeed, make quite
clear the transition from the psychological to the ethical point
of view; and critics are still fond of confronting Butler with the
objection he anticipated--Why ought I to obey my conscience? The
apparent _petitio principii_ of Butler's answer, Because it is the
law of your nature, is due to the way in which the teleological
standpoint is introduced. The purpose of which (according to Butler)
man is the vehicle or realising organism is spoken of as a law
externally imposed, and deriving its authority, not from its own
nature, but from the nature of its origin.

[Sidenote: Different views of the nature of the moral sense.]

There would seem to be one way only to surmount the difficulty
arising from the variety of impulses of which the nature of man is
made up, and that is by consistently following out the teleological
point of view. But what, the question is, is the final or
comprehensive end to which human nature points amidst this diversity
of objects of striving? The doctrine of the "moral sense" attempts
to answer the question. Now this moral sense may either be regarded
as not itself a separate faculty, but simply an expression for the
harmony of human tendencies; or it may be looked upon as a separate
and superior capacity, which, again, may either be interpreted in
terms of sense, or of the understanding--the former interpretation
leading to its identification with pleasure, the latter to its being
conceived as law.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: (_a_) The harmony of impulses. Shaftesbury's theory.]

These different methods were attempted by the English moralists--the
first, however, to a less extent than the others. But it inspired
much of Shaftesbury's work, though it cannot be said to have been
consistently developed by him. The conflict of impulses in man
was too obvious a fact not to be apparent even in Shaftesbury's
roseate view of life. He recognised, indeed, not only private
or self-affections, promoting the good of the individual, and
"natural" or social affections, which led to the public good, but
also "unnatural affections," which tended to no good whatever.[82]
The reference to consequences is thus made prominent at once.
The last class of affections is condemned outright because of
its infelicific results; while an attempt is made to prove from
experience that the courses of conduct to which the two former lead
coincide. Shaftesbury contended for a real organic union between the
individual and society; but, when he came to establish its nature,
he made it consist in an asserted harmony of interests, while the
obligation to virtue was allowed to rest on its conduciveness to
personal pleasure. He sometimes spoke of virtue as identical with the
harmonious development of the affections of the individual man;[83]
but he expressly defined it as consisting in the individual "having
all his inclinations and affections ... agreeing with the good of
his kind or of that system in which he is included, and of which he
constitutes a part."[84] And the two views can only be connected by
proving that the harmonious development of an individual's affections
will lead to the good of the species: the proof of this depending
on a one-sided summation of consequences. Shaftesbury does, indeed,
throw out the idea that both the self-affections and the "natural" or
social affections become self-destructive when carried out so as to
interfere with one another. But this, again, has only the previous
calculus of the results of conduct to support it. He cannot show
that the contradiction in the conception of a completely solitary
being belongs also to the conception of a judiciously selfish
being. The latter being loses the pleasures of virtuous action;
but perhaps he may gain greater pleasures in their room. He does
not develop his whole nature; but if that nature contains totally
infelicific passions, the development of the whole nature is not to
be recommended.

Thus Shaftesbury is unable to reach a conception of man's nature
as a harmony of impulses just on account of the external point of
view which makes him treat it as an aggregate, though he contends
that it is an organism. His ingenious and subtle account of the
relations between the individual and society does not really go to
the root of the matter, because, after all, it remains a calculus
of the results of action, not an analysis of its nature. And his
view of the affections constituting the individual system leaves
them wanting in the unity of organic connection. An effort is made,
however, to supply this defect by means of the reflex affections
called the "moral sense," to which he ascribes an oversight over the
other affections and their resultant actions. In what way, then, must
we regard the nature of this faculty and the important functions
assigned to it?

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: (_b_) A separate faculty. Hutcheson.]

[Sidenote: Two questions regarding it:]

It was left to Shaftesbury's disciple, Francis Hutcheson, to
elaborate with thoroughness this conception of the moral sense as
a separate faculty. Hutcheson did not make any important addition
to the ideas of Shaftesbury and Butler. But he worked them out
more systematically; and in his last work, the 'System of Moral
Philosophy,' the protest against the egoism of Hobbes has found
expression in a complete theory of human nature, in which the
"moral sense" is supreme, and the ends of conduct independent of
self-interest. Hutcheson, too, keeps more closely than either of his
immediate predecessors to the way of looking at human nature which
is spoken of in this volume as "naturalistic." He rejects even more
decidedly than Shaftesbury--much more so than Butler--any creative
function of reason in determining the constitution and direction of
the moral sense.[85] The questions thus arise--(_a_) What is the
moral sense when not regarded as a rational determination of the
ends of conduct? and (_b_) To what determination of ends or other
distinction between right and wrong in action does it lead? On both
these points there is a difference between his early 'Inquiry into
the Original of our Ideas of Beauty and Virtue' (1725), and the more
mature 'System,' published in 1755, eight years after his death.

[Sidenote: (α) Nature of this faculty: not reason;]

[Sidenote: at first defined as feeling of pleasure or pain,]

Hutcheson is in earnest with the rejection of reason as a creative
force. The moral sense is not, he says, a source of new ideas.
Its objects are received in the ordinary ways by which, through
"sensation and reflection," we come by our knowledge.[86] But just
as we have a sense of beauty in the forms of sensible objects, so
there is a moral sense given us from which, in the contemplation
of our actions, we derive "still nobler pleasures" than those of
physical sensation. This moral sense is "a determination of our minds
to receive amiable or disagreeable ideas of actions."[87] So far,
therefore, it seems to be simply a pleasure in the contemplation of
certain actions which, we say, have "an immediate goodness." "By
a superior sense," says Hutcheson, "which I call a moral one, we
perceive pleasure in the contemplation of such actions in others,
and are determined to love the agent (and much more do we perceive
pleasure in being conscious of having done such actions ourselves)
without any view of further natural advantage from them."[88] The
significance of this position is easily seen. It is not only meant
to give a criterion of moral action; it is also a short cut to the
conclusion that virtue is for our private interest. The disquieting
suspicion that morality may involve a sacrifice of individual
happiness "must be entirely removed, if we have a moral sense and
public affections, whose gratifications are constituted by nature
our most intense and durable pleasures."[89] The elaborate analysis
of conduct and enumeration of the pleasures which various affections
and actions bring in their train, which Hutcheson gave in his latest
work, were thus unnecessary as long as the position was maintained
that the moral sense is emphatically a pleasure or pain, and that the
pleasures it gives are the most intense and durable we have.

There was only an apparent contradiction in this theory which
placed the test of morality in a pleasure consequent upon moral
action, and yet held that such actions were not performed from
interested motives. In the spirit of Butler's psychology, Hutcheson
contends[90] that virtue is pleasant only because we have a natural
and immediate tendency towards virtuous action; our true motive is
"some determination of our nature to study the good of others;" and
this, although not always immediately pleasant in itself, is yet
succeeded by the calm satisfaction of the moral sense. The real
weakness of Hutcheson's position is the fatal one that he cannot show
that it corresponds with facts; that the pleasures incidental to the
moral sense outweigh all others. Indeed, he defends his opinion in
their favour only, in a way which reminds one of Mill's method in the
'Utilitarianism,' by making every juror stand aside unless he has
pledged himself to morality.[91] It is open to any one, however, to
hold that the pleasures of benevolent action and the "relish" of the
moral sense are not of sufficient hedonistic value to make up for
the restraints they put upon conduct and the enjoyments they oblige
one to forego. Even if this position be not correct, it is merely a
mistake in estimating doubtful quantities. The man who chooses the
smaller pleasure will be the loser by his mistake; but we cannot say
that the selfish man is to blame for not being benevolent, because
the pleasures of benevolence and the moral sense are greatest, any
more than we could blame the benevolent man for not being selfish,
if selfishness should turn out on the whole to leave a greater
hedonistic balance at the individual's credit.

[Sidenote: afterwards spoken of as a judgment,]

[Sidenote: but this judgment allowed to depend on feeling.]

A more objective determination of the moral sense is afterwards given
by Hutcheson. Without professedly changing ground, he ceases to speak
of it as a mere feeling of pleasure, and calls it a judgment of
approbation or disapprobation. "It is," he says,[92] "a natural and
immediate determination to approve certain affections and actions
consequent upon them; or a natural sense of immediate excellence
in them, not referred to any other quality perceivable by our
other senses or by reasoning." Nor is this judgment of approbation
consequent upon the feeling of pleasure the affection or action
produces in us. The action is not "judged good because it gains to
the agent the pleasure of self-approbation, but it gains to him this
pleasure because it was antecedently good, or had that quality which,
by the constitution of this sense, we must approve."[93] But, in
attempting to make clear the nature of this judgment, Hutcheson seems
to return, though not in so many words, to his earlier position.
To seek a basis for the judgment in reason would have been to make
the "moral sense" what Kant afterwards made it, simply practical
reason. This, however, would have been a "metaphysic of ethics"
inconsistent with Hutcheson's whole position. He had always opposed
the narrowly intellectual view of morality in Clarke and Wollaston,
and he had no conception of the function of reason which would admit
of an interpretation of the judgment of approbation by an appeal
to a rational determination, depending upon an idea conceived as
inherent in the human constitution, and to be realised in action.
The judgment, therefore, is referred to a "taste or relish"[94]
for certain affections and actions, and this he takes no pains to
distinguish from pleasure.

The analogy he seeks to draw between the moral sense and our other
powers does not really favour a distinction of it from pleasure. "To
each of our powers," he says, "we seem to have a corresponding taste
or sense, recommending the proper use of it to the agent, and making
him relish or value the like exercise of it by another. This we see
as to the powers of voice, of imitation, designing, or machinery,
motion, reasoning; there is a sense discerning or recommending the
proper exercise of them."[95] That is to say, besides the sense of
hearing, which has to do with sounds, there must needs be another
sense which has to do with our way of hearing sounds; besides the
sense of sight, which has to do with form and colour, there must
needs be another sense which has to do with our way of perceiving
form and colour; and so with every other activity, especially those
which proceed from our "highest powers." A doctrine such as this sets
no limits to the manufacture of additional senses. The whole view of
human nature upon which it proceeds is one of meaningless complexity,
which serves the one good purpose only of showing how much ethics has
suffered from a defective psychology.

The mental objects or presentations which are distinguished from
one another by the difference of their characteristic qualities,
and which we therefore call colours, or sounds, or movements, are
accompanied by varying degrees of pleasurable or painful feeling;
and it is possible to hold that the moral sense is a name for such
feelings following in the train of those complexes of presentations
to which we give the name of actions, or of those other recurring
complexes we call affections. This, practically, was the position
with which Hutcheson started in the 'Inquiry.' Benevolence pleased us
and selfishness pained us; just as the taste of sugar was pleasant,
and that of wormwood disagreeable. Perhaps Hutcheson departed from
this theory, because he saw that if conduct was made a matter of
taste, there would be no sufficient reason for condemning selfishness
any more than an unusual taste. He therefore relinquished, or seems
to have relinquished, the view of the moral sense as a feeling of
pleasure or pain; and under the influence, no doubt, of Butler,
spoke of it as a judgment of approbation or disapprobation. But he
fell back on his original theory by making this judgment depend on
"a taste or relish," which only lends itself to interpretation as a
peculiar feeling of pleasure.

[Sidenote: (β) The objects of the moral sense: first said to be
actions;]

[Sidenote: afterwards to be affections;]

The reflex nature of the moral sense is brought out more distinctly
in the 'System' than in the 'Inquiry.' In his earlier work, Hutcheson
had spoken of it as directly related to _actions_. But it was more
consistent with his maturer thought to regard it as having to do
with mental powers or "affections" in the first instance, and with
actions only indirectly or mediately. "The object of this sense,"
he says,[96] "is not any external motion or action, but the inward
affections or dispositions;" and this is made by him to account for
the discrepancy which the deliverances of the moral sense show in
regard to actions. It "seems ever to approve and condemn uniformly
the same immediate objects, the same affections and dispositions;
though we reason very differently about the actions which evidence
certain dispositions or their contraries." This distinction is
applied with unlimited confidence in its efficacy. By means of it
he would explain the most fundamental differences in the moral code
of men and nations. Thus people unacquainted with the industrial
improvements which give the character of permanence to property,
may "see no harm in depriving men of their artificial acquisitions
and stores beyond their present use,"--that is to say, "no evil may
appear in theft."[97]

But it is more important in another respect; for it enables the
author to avoid the difficulty of finding any principle according
to which the moral sense may be related to the empirical content of
action. As long as the moral sense was simply spoken of as a feeling
of pleasure, it could be conveniently regarded as the consequent
of external actions. But if it is an internal sense distinct from
pleasure, it is easier to relate it to what he calls our internal
powers or affections than to action. The moral sense, then, is to
be the regulator of all our powers; and by means of it Hutcheson
attempts to reduce human nature to a scale of morality.

[Sidenote: but its grounds of preference]

[Sidenote: mainly depend not on the nature of the affection, but on
its objects.]

It is to be noted that, in the classification he offers,[98]
what are commonly called the virtues of candour, veracity, &c.,
are not accounted virtues at all, but only immediately connected
with virtuous affections: these are identified with the "kind" or
benevolent affections, directed to the happiness of sentient beings.
Within the latter there are two grounds of preference: the deliberate
affections are preferred to the passionate; those which are more
extensive in the range of their objects to the less extensive.
With regard to the former ground of preference, the "moral sense"
of the community has perhaps undergone some modification since
Hutcheson's time, and looks upon enthusiasm with less suspicion than
it formerly did. The other ground of preference ascribed to the
moral sense refers not so much to the affection itself--which is
the direct or immediate object of the moral sense--as to the way in
which the affection is applied, the number of the objects to which
it is directed. The affection of benevolence is the same in nature
whether its object be wide or restricted; though difference in this
respect profoundly influences the actions to which it leads. The
object approved or most approved by the moral sense is therefore,
according to Hutcheson, utilitarian conduct, or rather, as he would
say, the calm disposition leading thereto.[99] In this way he obtains
a principle for determining the morality of actions; but only through
the arbitrary assertion that this principle is immediately approved
by the moral sense. The connection of the moral sense with an object
such as universal benevolence could only be made out by showing
a rational, or at any rate an organic union between individual
sentiment and social wellbeing; and Hutcheson, like Shaftesbury,
has no conception of attempting this in any other way than the
traditional one of exhibiting the personal advantages of benevolent
conduct, and the disadvantages that accompany selfishness.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Sidenote: (_c_) Third view of the moral sense.]

[Sidenote: Butler.]

[Sidenote: Conscience an authoritative law,]

Both Shaftesbury and Hutcheson were often led astray by a tendency
to interpret facts as they wished them to be, rather than as they
were. Their view of the consequences of action was coloured by their
optimism. Butler, too, in spite of the difference in his general
attitude to the value of human life, was not altogether free from
a similar error. He thinks that Shaftesbury "has shown beyond all
contradiction that virtue is naturally the interest of happiness,
and vice the misery of such a creature as man."[100] But, in view of
particular exceptions, or of any one not being convinced of "this
happy tendency of virtue," he thinks it necessary to emphasise the
"natural authority of the principle of reflection." Conscience is,
he holds, a part of our inward nature; but it differs from the other
parts of our nature inasmuch as it is not related immediately to an
external object, but to the actions dealing with such objects, and
to the dispositions leading to those actions. It is a principle of
"reflex approbation or disapprobation," which is said to have equal
respect to both public and private good. This tendency, however,
would seem to be ascertained empirically. The deliverances of
conscience are immediate judgments as to the morality of actions and
affections (for Butler speaks of it as referring to both equally);
and its reference to the ends which those actions or the exercise of
these affections may ultimately tend to would, therefore, seem to be
indirect.[101] Butler was careful, moreover, not to speak of it as
an æsthetic or sensitive faculty, but as a judgment. It is not a
feeling of pleasure, but the revelation of law.

[Sidenote: and the criterion of morality.]

The approval of conscience is thus made the criterion of morality.
But a difficulty arises as to the way in which we are to regard the
authority which conscience is said to carry along with it. Butler's
utterances here commonly imply a teleological reference to an end
implanted in human nature, and to be discovered by observing that
nature--the realisation of the end being obligatory, because it is
shown to be the purpose which the author of nature had in view in
making man as he is.[102] The authority of conscience thus seems to
be derived from the divine purpose which it displays. It carries
within itself a claim to obedience; but the justification of this
claim depends on a theological basis. And hence the question of
the nature and origin of conscience is at once raised, in order to
determine the legitimacy of its claim to be, rather than any other
part of our constitution, a divinely-implanted guide.

[Sidenote: Teleological and jural views not reconciled, nor fully
developed.]

But more than one current of thought runs through Butler's ethical
treatise. The theological reference is sometimes so used as to
make the obligation to morality, and even the nature of morality,
depend on the will of God: though hardly according to Paley's crude
method of seeking in the external revelation of the divine command
a means of uniting the divergent interests of the individual and
of society. In general, Butler's ruling idea is the idea of the
system or unity of human nature, for which he was largely indebted
to Shaftesbury's revival of the Platonic conception. Conscience is
regarded by him as the expression of this unity. But its nature is
never more deeply probed. Its deliverances are justified now by
its supernatural mission, and now by the more prosaic fact that it
leads to our individual interest[103]--at any rate, "if we take in
the future"--while it could not be recommended as a guide if it
did not.[104] On one side, therefore, Butler tends to a form of
theological utilitarianism, such as was common in his own day, and
was afterwards formulated by Paley.[105] On the other hand, his
ethics more naturally allies itself with a different theory, in which
the moral law is conceived as having its source in practical reason,
and the naturalistic basis of ethics is definitely abandoned.

[Sidenote: 4. The ethics of moral sentiment a mediating theory;]

[Sidenote: explanation of its facts attempted by theory of evolution.]

On the whole, it would appear that the psychological ethics worked
out by Shaftesbury and his school occupies an insecure position
between the view discussed in the two preceding chapters and that
which ascribes to reason a function in the formation of objects of
desire. Shaftesbury and his followers tried to strike out a middle
course between the theory that ends of action may be determined by
reason, and that which looks upon all desires as being desires for
objects as pleasurable. They made the attempt to found a system of
ethics on human nature, and they held that that nature could not be
accounted for by the simple psychological analysis of the Epicurean
school as then represented by Hobbes. On the other hand, they did
not see their way to adopt the "rational" ethics only known to them
in the abstract form it had received at the hands of Clarke and
Wollaston. But their own theory of human nature requires a principle
of harmony and co-ordination among the various impulses which they
were unable to give a satisfactory account of. It may seem, however,
that the idea of the development of man with which we are now
familiar, may enable us to overcome the difficulties which formerly
appeared insurmountable--showing the unity of human nature, and the
tendency of its activity. The general course of evolution, to which
all life has been subject, is thought to have brought about a harmony
between individual and social feelings, as well as between individual
and social interests, and thus to have removed the obstacles in
the way of founding morality on the basis of Naturalism. It is,
therefore, of importance to examine with care the ethical bearings of
the theory of evolution.

FOOTNOTES:

[69] "The very idea of an interested pursuit necessarily presupposes
particular passions or appetites; since the very idea of interest or
happiness consists in this, that an appetite or affection enjoys its
object."--Sermons, Pref.; cf. Serm. xi.

[70] Phil., 31 ff.; cf. Gorg., 495 f.; Rep., ix. 585.

[71] Cf. Sidgwick, Methods of Ethics, I. iv. 2, 3d ed., p. 44.

[72] Herbart, Psychologie als Wissenschaft, § 104, Werke, vi. 74;
cf. Waitz, Lehrbuch der Psychologie als Naturwissenschaft, § 40, p.
418: "It is not difficult to recognise the basis of desire in the
presentations brought forward by reproduction, and, at the same time,
held back by an inhibition."

[73] With Herbart's doctrine may be compared Mr H. Spencer's view
of the genesis of feeling and voluntary action, Principles of
Psychology, 2d ed., part iv. chaps. viii. and ix.

[74] Cf. note to James Mill's Analysis, ii. 383 f.

[75] The Senses and the Intellect, 3d ed., p. 344; cf. Mental and
Moral Science, pp. 90, 91.

[76] "If there be any principles or affections in the mind of man
distinct from self-love, that the things those principles tend
towards, or the objects of those affections are, each of them in
themselves eligible to be pursued upon its own account, and to be
rested in as an end, is implied in the very idea of such principle or
affection."--Butler, Sermons, Pref.

[77] Inquiry concerning Virtue, II. i. 3.

[78] Ibid., II. ii., conclusion.

[79] System of Moral Philosophy, i. 99.

[80] Sermons, xi.

[81] Kritik der bisherigen Sittenlehre (1803), p. 54.

[82] Inquiry, II. i. 3.

[83] Inquiry, II. i. 3; II. ii. 2.

[84] Ibid., II. i. 1.

[85] "What is Reason but that sagacity we have in prosecuting any
end? The ultimate end proposed by the common moralists is the
happiness of the agent himself, and this certainly he is determined
to pursue from instinct. Now may not another instinct towards the
public, or the good of others, be as proper a principle of virtue as
the instinct toward private happiness?"--Hutcheson, Inquiry, p. 115.

[86] Cf. System, i. 97; Inquiry, p. 124.

[87] Inquiry, p. 124.

[88] Ibid., p. 106.

[89] Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the Passions and Affections,
with Illustrations on the Moral Sense (1728), p. xix.

[90] Cf. Inquiry, p. 140 ff.

[91] Introduction to Moral Philosophy, translated from the Latin, 2d
ed., 1753, p. 43; cf. Essay on the Passions and Affections, &c., p.
128.

[92] System, i. 58.

[93] System, i. 53.

[94] Ibid., i. 59.

[95] System, i. 59.

[96] System, i. 97.

[97] System, i. 93.

[98] System, i. 68 ff. With this may be compared the elaborate
classification of motives, according to their moral quality, in Dr
Martineau's 'Types of Ethical Theory,' ii. 176 ff.

[99] System, i. 50.

[100] Sermons, Pref.

[101] Although it is not "at all doubtful in the general, what course
of action this faculty or practical discerning power within us,
approves.... It is ... justice, veracity, and regard to the common
good."--Dissertation on Virtue.

[102] Sermons, ii. iii.

[103] Sermons, iii. v.

[104] Ibid., xi.

[105] Cf. Jodl, Geschichte der Ethik, i. 192.




