PART I.

THE INDIVIDUALISTIC THEORY.


CHAPTER II.

EGOISM.


[Sidenote: Definition of Naturalism.]

It is difficult to give an exact definition or even description of
what I have called the "natural" view of man. Perhaps it may be
best defined, negatively, as the view which denies to reason any
spontaneous or creative function in the human constitution. For this
definition, if it still leaves the positive description wanting,
will at least make the classification into "natural" and "rational"
exhaustive and mutually exclusive. At the same time it is to be
noted that, on the theory of Naturalism, reason is not supposed to
be excluded from all share in determining questions of conduct or
the choice of ends. It would, indeed, be impossible to have even
the pretence of an ethical theory without a certain use of reason.
But its function, in this case, is limited to the merely formal one
of bringing different presentations (or objects) and feelings into
connection, and comparing the different states of mind thus formed
with one another, not with a reason-given standard.

[Sidenote: Psychological hedonism.]

Since the function of reason is thus restricted, and its competency
to supply an end for, or principle of, action is denied, we must
seek this end either in the feelings of pleasure and pain which
accompany both sensory and motor presentations,--perceptions, that
is to say, and actions,--or in the more complex, or apparently
more complex, emotions of the mind. And the latter may either be
themselves reducible to feelings of pleasure or pain accompanying
presentations directly pleasurable or painful, and thence transferred
by association to other presentations, or they may be regarded as
somehow motives to action which may be or ought to be followed on
their own account. The Individualistic Theory, therefore, is not
necessarily hedonistic. It admits of a twofold view of the "natural"
man: one which looks upon him as in essence a pleasure-seeking,
pain-avoiding animal; another which regards him as having a variety
of impulses, some of which are not directed to his own pleasure or
avoidance of pain.

[Sidenote: 1. Its theory of action]

[Sidenote: ambiguous,]

[Sidenote: referring to]

The former view--psychological hedonism, as it is called--claims
to be an exhaustive analysis of the motives of human conduct,
perfectly general indeed, but yet valid for every case of action.
It denies the possibility of a man acting from any other principle
than desire of pleasure or aversion from pain. The theory is, that
it is a psychological law that action is motived by pleasure and
pain, and that nothing else has motive-power over it. If, then, one
pleasure (or avoidance of pain) is chosen in preference to another,
it must be either by chance,--an alternative which has no ethical
significance--no significance, that is, for the guidance of voluntary
conduct,--or because the one course promises, or seems to promise,
the attainment of a greater balance of pleasure than the other, or
is actually at the time more pleasant than that other. Thus the
view that pleasure is the _only_ motive of human action is really
identical, for ethical purposes, with the theory loosely expressed
in the law that action follows the _greatest_ pleasure.[15] I say
"loosely expressed"; for the law as thus stated really admits of
three quite different interpretations, not always distinguished with
the precision which such subjects require.

[Sidenote: (_a_) actual consequences of action,]

[Sidenote: or (_b_) its expected consequences,]

[Sidenote: or (_c_) its present characteristics.]

(_a_) In the first place, the law might mean that action always
follows the course which, as a matter of fact, will in the long-run
bring the greatest balance of pleasure to the agent. It is evident
that there is no ground in psychology for maintaining this view. Yet
it is a fair interpretation of the "law" of psychological hedonism,
as commonly stated; and it is at least an admissible supposition
that this meaning of the phrase has not been without effect upon
the uses to which the law has been put by some of its upholders.
The second interpretation of the law--namely (_b_), that action is
always in the direction which seems to the agent most likely to
bring him the greatest balance of pleasure, whether it actually
brings it or not--is the sense in which it appears to have been most
commonly taken when expressed with any degree of accuracy. It is in
this sense that--in language which ascribes greater consistency to
men's conduct than it usually displays--"interest" is asserted by
the author of the 'Système de la nature' to be "the sole motive of
human action."[16] The same view is adopted by Bentham;[17] and both
James Mill and John Stuart Mill identify desire with pleasure, or an
"idea" of pleasure, in terms which are sufficiently sweeping, if not
very carefully weighed;[18] while the will is said to follow desire,
or only to pass out of its power when coming under the sway of
habit.[19] Still another meaning may, however, be given to the "law"
of psychological hedonism, according to which the doubtful reference
to the manifold pleasures and pains, contemplated as resulting from
an action, is got rid of, and (_c_) the agent is asserted always to
choose that action or forbearance which is actually most pleasant,
or least painful, to him at the time--taking account, of course,
of imaginative pleasures and pains, as well as of those which are
immediately connected with the senses. It is in this interpretation
of its law that psychological hedonism seems to be most capable of
defence, and in this sense it has been more than once stated and
defended.[20]

[Sidenote: 2. Ethical inferences from this theory,]

The ethics of the form of Naturalism which is now under examination
must be inferred from the "law" that human action follows the
greatest pleasure, in one or other of the above meanings which that
law admits of. The law is the datum or premiss from which we are
to advance to an ethical conclusion. The "right" is to be evolved
from the pleasurable; and the pleasurable, consequently, cannot be
made to depend upon the right. It is certainly true of the conduct
of most men, "that our prospect of pleasure resulting from any
course of conduct may largely depend on our conception of it as
right or otherwise."[21] But this presupposes that there is a right
independent of one's own pleasure, and therefore does not apply to
an ethics based on the simple theory of human nature put forward by
psychological hedonism.

[Sidenote: (_a_) in its first meaning,]

[Sidenote: (_b_)in its second meaning:]

[Sidenote: private ethics and legislation,]

[Sidenote: (_c_) in its third meaning.]

It is scarcely necessary to discuss the first alternative (_a_),
as no psychologist would seriously maintain it. A society composed
of men constituted in the way it supposes men to be constituted,
would be a collection of rational egoists, omniscient in all that
concerned the results of action, and each adopting unerringly at
every moment the course of conduct which would increase his own
pleasure the most. The conduct of any member of such a society
could only be modified when--and would always be modified when--the
modified conduct actually brought pleasurable results to the agent:
never so as to make him prefer the public good to his own. The
second alternative (_b_) admits of such modification taking place
only when it seems to the individual that this modified action will
produce a greater balance of pleasure or smaller balance of pain
than any other course of action. Under this theory an individual
might indeed prefer the public good or another man's good to his
own, but only through his being deceived as to the actual results of
his course of action. Ethics as determining an end for conduct is
put out of court; though the statesman or the educator may modify
the actions of others by providing appropriate motives. If the "two
sovereign masters, pain and pleasure," "determine what we shall do,"
it is hardly necessary for them also "to point out what we ought to
do."[22] The end is already given in the nature of action, though an
enlightened understanding will teach men how the greatest balance of
pleasure may be obtained. We can only get at a rule prescribing an
end by changing our point of view from the individual to the state.
It is best for the state that each individual should aim at the
common happiness; but, when we talk of this as a moral duty for the
individual, all we can mean is that the state will punish a breach
of it. In the words of Helvétius,[23] "pain and pleasure are the
bonds by which we can always unite personal interest to the interest
of the nation.... The sciences of morals and legislation can be
only deductions from this simple principle." According to Bentham's
psychology, a man is necessitated by his mental and physical nature
to pursue at every moment, not the greatest happiness of the greatest
number, but what seems to him his own greatest happiness. And what
the legislator has to do is, by judiciously imposed rewards and
punishments, especially the latter, to make it for the greatest
happiness of each to pursue the greatest happiness of all.[24] As
distinguished from this "art of legislation," "private ethics"
consists only of prudential rules prescribing the best means to an
end predetermined by nature as the only possible end of human action:
it "teaches how each man may dispose himself to pursue the course
most conducive to his own happiness."[25] The consequences to the
theory of action of the third alternative (_c_) are similar: it only
states the law with more appearance of psychological accuracy. If
a man always follows that course of action which will give him at
the time the greatest (real and imaginative) satisfaction, it is
impossible for us to infer from his nature an ethical law prescribing
some other end, without admitting a fundamental contradiction in
human nature; while to say that he ought to seek the end he always
does and cannot help seeking, is unnecessary and even unmeaning.
Modification of character may of course be still brought about,
since the kinds of action in which an individual takes pleasure
may be varied almost indefinitely. But the motive made use of in
this educative process must be personal pleasure; and the end the
legislator has in view in his work must be the same,[26] though it
is often quietly assumed that for him personal pleasure has become
identified with the wider interests of the community.

[Sidenote: Result of this ambiguity,]

[Sidenote: ethical hedonism.]

The different significations of which it admits show that the
psychological law that action follows the greatest pleasure is by no
means so clear as it may at first sight appear. Probably it is the
very ambiguity of the law that has made it appear to provide a basis
for an ethical system. When it is said that greatest pleasure is the
moral end of action, this "greatest pleasure" is looked upon as the
greatest possible balance of pleasurable over painful states for the
probable duration of life: on the egoistic theory, of the life of the
individual; on the utilitarian theory, of the aggregate lives of all
men or even of all sentient beings. But when it is said that greatest
pleasure is, as a matter of fact, always the motive of action, it is
obvious that "greatest pleasure" has changed its signification. For
if the same meaning were kept to, not only would the psychological
law as thus stated be openly at variance with facts, but its validity
would render the moral precept unnecessary. It is even unmeaning to
say that a man "ought" to do that which he always does and cannot
help doing.[27] On the other hand, if the double meaning of the
phrase had been clearly stated, we should at once have seen the
hiatus in the proof of egoistic hedonism--the gap between the present
(or apparent) pleasure for which one does act, and the greatest
pleasure of a lifetime for which one ought to act--as well as the
additional difficulty of passing from egoism to utilitarianism. If
greatest apparent pleasure--or greatest present pleasure--is by an
inexorable law of human nature always sought, how can it be shown
that we ought to sacrifice the apparent to the real--the present
pleasure that is small to the greater future pleasure? If the
individual necessarily pursues his own pleasure, how can we show that
he ought to subordinate it to the pleasures of the "greatest number"?

[Sidenote: 3. Transition from psychological to ethical hedonism.
Right action will imply]

[Sidenote: (_a_) correct estimate of consequences of action,]

[Sidenote: (_b_) and corresponding strength of feeling.]

It is a matter of fact, however, that the psychologists who maintain
that action follows the greatest pleasure--meaning by that, greatest
apparent or greatest present pleasure--have in their ethics made the
transition to an enlightened Egoism, or even to Utilitarianism. The
nature of the transition thus requires to be more clearly pointed
out. If the former interpretation of the law of psychological
hedonism could be accepted, and a man's motive for action were always
what seemed to him likely to bring him the greatest pleasure on the
whole, ethics--what Bentham calls private ethics--could be reduced
(as Bentham finally reduces it) to certain maxims of prudence. To
be fully acquainted with the sources of pleasure and pain, and to
estimate them correctly, would imply possession of the highest
(egoistic) morality. If men could be made to think rightly as to what
their greatest pleasure consisted in, then right action on their
part--that is to say, the pursuit of their greatest pleasure--would
(according to Bentham's psychology) follow as a matter of course.
Right conduct, however, is not so purely an affair of the intellect
as this would make it. Indeed, Bentham's psychological assumption
requires only to be plainly stated for its inconsistency with
the facts of human action to become apparent. The "video meliora
proboque, deteriora sequor" expresses too common an experience to be
so easily explained away. The impulses by which action is governed
are not always in accordance with what the intellect decides to
be best on a survey of the whole life and its varied chances. In
judging the consequences of action, a future good is compared with a
present, regardless of the mere difference of time by which they are
separated. But the springs which move the will are often at variance
with the decisions of the understanding; and many men are unable to
resist the strength of the impulse to act for the pleasure of the
moment, though they foresee that a greater future satisfaction would
follow from present self-denial.

It would seem, then, that the facts of experience are sufficient to
show that a man's conduct does not always follow the course which
he thinks likely to bring him the greatest pleasure on the whole.
But the view that a man always acts for what is most pleasant--or
least painful--at the time cannot be dismissed so easily. It is not
enough simply to point to the facts of human action in order to show
that this hypothesis is inconsistent with them. If we instanced the
self-restraint in which so many pass their lives from day to day, it
might perhaps be answered that there is a persistent idea of duty, or
love of reputation, or fear of social stigma, the repression of which
would be more painful than the restraint it puts upon other impulses.
Even the martyr who deliberately parts with life itself for the
sake of an ideal, may be said to choose death as the least painful
course open to him at the time. It should be borne in mind, however,
that Professor Bain, the most thorough psychologist of Bentham's
school, refuses to admit this line of defence for psychological
hedonism, and holds that, in actions such as those referred to,
men are really carried out of the circle of their self-regarding
desires.[28] But my present purpose is not to discuss the merits
of any such psychological theory, but rather to investigate its
ethical consequences. And for this purpose the question requires to
be put, how a passage is effected from psychological hedonism to an
egoistic--and even to a utilitarian--theory of ethics.

[Sidenote: The postulate that action can be rationalised]

[Sidenote: involves these conditions,]

If a man always acts for his greatest present pleasure, real and
imaginary, it seems a far step to say that he "ought" to act--or in
any way to expect that he will act--at each moment for the greatest
sum of pleasure attainable in the probable duration of his life.
But on reflection, this may turn out to follow if we postulate that
conduct can be rationalised. What is meant by this egoistic "ought"
may be said to be simply that to the eye of reason the pleasure of
any one moment cannot be regarded as more valuable than the equal
pleasure of any other moment, if it is equally certain; and that
therefore to act as if it were is to act unreasonably. Man fails in
acting up to reason in this sense, because his action is not motived
by reason, but directly by pleasure and pain; and not by a mere
estimate of pleasure and pain, but by pleasure and pain themselves.
The psychological hedonist must maintain that the estimates of future
pleasure and pain only become motives by being not merely recognised
(intellectually) but felt (emotionally)--that is, by themselves
becoming pleasurable or painful. If the Egoist calls any action
irrational, it cannot be because the motive which produced it was not
the greatest pleasure in consciousness at the time. It can only be on
the ground that the greatest pleasure in consciousness at the time
is likely to lead to a sacrifice of greater pleasure in the future;
and this must be due either to intellectual misapprehension or to
the imagined fruition of future pleasure not being strong enough to
outweigh the pleasure which comes from a present stimulus, and to the
imagined fruition of the more distant being weaker than that of the
less distant pleasure. It is owing to a defect of the imagination
on a man's part that even with complete information he does not act
"up to his lights"--irrational action being partly a consequence of
insufficient acquaintance with the normal results of conduct, partly
due to defective imagination. Were a man's imagination of future
pleasure and pain as strong as his experience of present pleasure and
pain, and did he correctly appreciate the results of his conduct,
then his action would, of psychological necessity, harmonise with the
precepts of egoistic hedonism.

[Sidenote: the latter of which]

[Sidenote: is inconsistent with the nature of voluntary action.]

Egoistic hedonism may therefore, in a certain sense, be said to be a
"reasonable" end of conduct on the theory of psychological hedonism;
it is the end which will be made his own by that ideally perfect man
whose intellect can clearly see the issues of conduct, and whose
imagination of the future causes of sensibility is so vivid that the
pleasure or pain got from anticipating them is as great as if they
were present, or only less lively in proportion as there is a risk of
their not being realised. Conversely it would seem that only that man
can act "reasonably" in whom imagination of pleasure (or of pain) is
already of equal strength with the actual experience of it. But, if
the "pleasures of the imagination" are as strong as those of sense or
of reality, the latter obviously become superfluous; and it follows
that the ideally perfect man is left without any motive to aim at the
real thing, since he can obtain as much pleasure by imagining it. The
cultured hedonist must, it would seem, be able to--

                    "Hold a fire in his hand
        By thinking on the frosty Caucasus,
        Or cloy the hungry edge of appetite
        By bare imagination of a feast."

So far as feeling or motive to action goes, no difference must exist
for him between reality and imagination. And thus, although we may
admit that, on this psychological basis, conduct when rationalised
agrees with that prescribed by egoistic hedonism, yet it can only be
rationalised by a development of the strength of the imagination,
which would make the feeling which it brings with it as strong as
that which accompanies a real object, and hence take away the motive
for the pursuit of the latter. The discrepancy between representation
and presentation which is necessary for the state of desire,[29]
is no longer present. Hedonism vindicates its rationality only on
conditions which imply the futility of action altogether. It is not
merely that the attainment of the hedonistic end in practical conduct
implies a strength of imagination of which no one is capable, but
the conditions of acting both rationally and hedonistically, are
conditions which would paralyse all activity.

[Sidenote: 4. Possible objections to preceding argument:]

The foregoing argument may perhaps be objected to on two grounds. On
the one hand, it may be said that it ignores the vast complexity of
human motive, and treats action as if it were a simple and abstract
thing. On the other hand, we may be reminded of the fact that, while
all men act for pleasure, the moral quality of their conduct does not
depend on this fact, but on the _kind_ of things in which they take
pleasure.

[Sidenote: (_a_) complexity of motive; but it is psychological
hedonism which ignores this.]

So far as the first objection is concerned, it seems to me that
the fault belongs to the psychological theory of human action, the
ethical consequences of which are under investigation. It is this
theory which asserts that, however interwoven the threads of impulse,
aversion, and habit may be, their most complex relations can be
reduced to the formula, "greatest pleasure, or least pain, prevails."
It is not necessary, indeed, that every action should be the
conscious pursuit of a pleasurable object already before the mind in
idea. But the theory, if consistently carried out, implies that the
action which follows in the line of a previously formed habit, does
so because the discomfort or pain of breaking through the habit would
be sufficient to counter-balance any satisfaction that might result.
The objection, therefore, of excessive simplicity or "abstractness,"
is one which cannot have greater force than when urged against the
theory of psychological hedonism.

[Sidenote: (_b_) difference in kind of pleasurable objects;]

[Sidenote: but this involves a reference to something else than
pleasure,]

[Sidenote: which psychological hedonism does not admit of.]

Further--and this is the second objection--the above analysis may
be considered by some not to have taken sufficient account of the
difference in the objects in which a human being can take pleasure,
and of the fact that the moral quality of men differs, not according
as they act for pleasure or not, but according to the kind of actions
and sufferances in which they find pleasure. There can be no doubt
of the importance of this distinction for questions of practical
morals. The man in whom "selfishness takes the shape of benevolence,"
as it did in Bentham, is infinitely better than the man in whom it
retains the form of selfishness. But the consideration is important
just because it goes on the implied assumption that the hedonistic
is not the chief aspect of conduct, and that there is a difference
between courses of action more fundamental than the pleasurable or
painful feeling attendant on them. If the principles on which the
objection is founded were consistently adhered to and followed out,
they would make not pleasure, but something else--that, namely,
by which pleasures differ from one another in kind--the ethical
standard. But if, in ultimate analysis, it is the pleasure felt or
expected that moves to action, it would seem that there is no way
in which the conclusion of the preceding argument can be avoided.
If pleasure is the motive, it must be _quâ_ pleasure--that is to
say, either the greatest apparent pleasure, or the greatest present
pleasure, is the motive. If difference of quality be admitted, we
are introducing a determining factor other than pleasure. Certain
kinds of pleasure may be better than others for the race or for the
state. But these differences must be reducible to terms of individual
pleasure admitting of purely quantitative comparisons, before they
become motives to action.[30] From the point of view of the whole,
we may say that one action leads to a greater sum of pleasure than
another. But, in judging the action of individuals, all that we can
say of it is, that to one man one class of actions gives pleasure,
to another another: each man is equally following the course of
action which either (_a_) will bring, or (_b_) seems to him likely
to bring, the greatest pleasure, or (_c_) is actually most pleasant
at the time. From the nature of the individual we can evolve no end
beyond egoistic hedonism. And even this end can only be made his
at each occurrence of action (assuming the first alternative (_a_)
to be incorrect) by enlightening his intellect so that (_b_) will
correspond with the actual greatest pleasure, or by also enlivening
his imagination of future pleasures and pains so that (_c_) will
correspond with it; and this, as has been shown, could only be
effected under conditions which are inconsistent with the principles
of human action.

FOOTNOTES:

[15] Meaning by "greatest pleasure," greatest balance of pleasure
over pain, and thus inclusive of the meaning "least pain." It is the
expression in terms of feeling of the statement sometimes preferred,
that "action follows the line of least resistance"--a statement to
which no exception can be taken, nor any importance allowed, till it
be translated into definite psychological language.

[16] "Ainsi lorsque nous disons que _l'intérêt est l'unique mobile
des actions humaines_, nous voulons indiquer par là que chaque
homme travaille à sa manière à son propre bonheur, qu'il place dans
quelqu'objet soit visible, soit caché, soit réel, soit imaginaire, et
que tout le système de sa conduite tend à l'obtenir."--Système de la
nature (1781), i. 268.

[17] "On the occasion of every act he exercises, every human being is
led to pursue that line of conduct which, according to his view of
the case taken by him at the moment, will be in the highest degree
contributory to his own greatest happiness."--Constitutional Code,
book i. § 2; Works, ix. 5. The continued existence of the species is,
Bentham thinks, a conclusive proof of this proposition.

[18] Thus, according to James Mill, "the terms 'idea of pleasure'
and 'desire' are but two names; the thing named, the state of
consciousness is one and the same. The word Desire is commonly used
to mark the idea of a pleasurable sensation when the future is
associated with it."--Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind,
J. S. Mill's edit., ii. 192; cf. Fragment on Mackintosh (1835), p.
389 f. To the same effect J. S. Mill says: "Desiring a thing and
finding it pleasant, aversion to it and thinking of it as painful,
are phenomena entirely inseparable, or rather two parts of the same
phenomenon; in strictness of language, two different modes of naming
the same psychological fact."--Utilitarianism, 7th ed., p. 58.

[19] "Will is the child of desire, and passes out of the dominion of
its parent only to come under that of habit."--Utilitarianism, p. 60.

[20] Thus Jonathan Edwards says: "When I say that the Will is as the
greatest apparent good, or (as I have explained it) that volition has
always for its object the thing which appears most agreeable, it must
be carefully observed, to avoid confusion and needless objection,
that I speak of the _direct_ and immediate object of the act of
volition, and not some object to which the act of will has only an
indirect and remote respect."--On the Freedom of the Will, part i. §
2; Works, i. 133. The matter is put still more clearly by the late
Alfred Barratt: "Action does not always follow knowledge. Of course
not: but the doctrine [Hedonism] does not require that it should; for
it says, not that we follow what _is_ our greatest possible pleasure,
or what we know or 'think' to be so, but what at the moment of action
is most desired."--Mind, vol. ii. 173; cf. Physical Ethics, p. 52 ff.
So Mr Stephen, Science of Ethics, p. 47: "It is more accurate to say
that my conduct is determined by the pleasantest judgment, than to
say that it is determined by my judgment of what is pleasantest." The
negative side of the same view was expressed by Locke in his doctrine
that action is moved by the most pressing uneasiness (Essay, II. xxi.
29, 31), and distinguished by him from the former view (b), that the
"greater visible good" is the motive (II. xxi. 35, 44).

[21] Sidgwick, Methods of Ethics, 3d ed., p. 40.

[22] Bentham, Principles of Morals and Legislation, chap. i., Works,
i. 1. With this statement may be compared the assertion of Helvétius:
"Il semble que, dans l'univers moral comme dans l'univers physique,
Dieu n'est mis qu'un seul principe dans tous ce qui a été.... Il
semble qu'il ait dit pareillement à l'homme: ... Je te mets sous la
garde du plaisir et de la douleur: l'un et l'autre veilleront à tes
pensées, à tes actions; engendreront tes passions, exciteront tes
aversions, tes amitiés, tes tendresses, tes fureurs; allumeront tes
désirs, tes craintes, tes espérances, te dévoileront des vérités; te
plongeront dans des erreurs; et après t'avoir fait enfanter mille
systèmes absurdes et différens de morale et de législation, te
decouvriront un jour les principes simples, au développement desquels
est attaché l'ordre et le bonheur du monde moral."--De l'esprit, III.
ix, Œuvres (ed. of 1818), i. 293.

[23] De l'homme, concl. gén., Œuvres, ii. 608.

[24] Cf. Système de la nature, i. 120: "La politique devrait être
l'art de régler les passions des hommes et de les diriger vers le
bien de la société."

[25] Bentham, _op. cit._, chap. xix. (xvii. in the reprint of 1879),
§ 20; Works, i. 148.

[26] Cf. Bentham, Works, ix. 5.

[27] Sidgwick, Methods of Ethics, I. iv. 1, 3d ed., p. 41; cf. Green,
Prolegomena to Ethics, p. 9: "To a being who is simply a result of
natural forces, an injunction to conform to their laws is unmeaning."

[28] Cf. The Emotions and the Will, 3d ed., p. 293 ff.

[29] Cf. Sully, Outlines of Psychology, p. 577.

[30] Cf. J. Grote, 'Utilitarian Philosophy,' p. 20, note: "One kind
of pleasure may be, systematically, to be preferred to another, but
it must be because the pleasures classified under it generally exceed
those under the other in intensity, or some other of the elements of
value."




