CHAPTER III.

Voyage of the two inhabitants of Sirius and Saturn.


Our two philosophers were just ready to take off into Saturn's
atmosphere with a very nice provision of mathematical instrument when
the ruler of Saturn, who had heard news of the departure, came in
tears to remonstrate. She was a pretty, petite brunette who was only
660 fathoms tall, but who compensated for this small size with many
other charms.

"Cruelty!" she cried, "after resisting you for 1,500 years, just when
I was beginning to come around, when I'd spent hardly a hundred[1]
years in your arms, you leave me to go on a voyage with a giant from
another world; go, you're only curious, you've never been in love: if
you were a true Saturnian, you would be faithful. Where are you
running off to? What do you want? Our five moons are less errant than
you, our ring less inconsistent. It's over, I will never love anyone
ever again."

The philosopher embraced her, cried with her, philosopher that he
was; and the woman, after swooning, went off to console herself with
the help of one of the dandies of the country.


[1] The 1773 edition is the first that reads "a hundred"; all the
earlier editions read: "two hundred."  B.


Our two explorers left all the same; they alighted first on the ring,
which they found to be fairly flat, as conjectured by an illustrious
inhabitant of our little sphere[2]; from there they went easily from
moon to moon. A comet passed by the last; they flew onto it with
their servants and their instruments. When they had traveled about
one hundred fifty million leagues, they met with the satellites of
Jupiter. They stopped at Jupiter and stayed for a week, during which
time they learned some very wonderful secrets that would have been
forthcoming in print if not for the inquisition, which found some of
the propositions to be a little harsh. But I have read the manuscript
in the library of the illustrious archbishop of...., who with a
generosity and goodness that is impossible to praise allowed me to
see his books. I promised him a long article in the first edition of
Moréri, and I will not forget his children, who give such a great
hope of perpetuating the race of their illustrious father.


[2] Huygens.  See volume XXVI, page 398.  B.


But let us now return to our travelers. Upon leaving Jupiter they
traversed a space of around one hundred million leagues and
approached the planet Mars, which, as we know, is five times smaller
than our own; they swung by two moons that cater to this planet but
have escaped the notice of our astronomers. I know very well that
Father Castel will write, perhaps even agreeably enough, against the
existence of these two moons; but I rely on those who reason by
analogy. These good philosophers know how unlikely it would be for
Mars, so far from the sun, to have gotten by with less than two
moons. Whatever the case may be, our explorers found it so small that
they feared not being able to land on it, and they passed it by like
two travelers disdainful of a bad village cabaret, pressing on
towards a neighboring city. But the Sirian and his companion soon
regretted it. They traveled a long time without finding anything.
Finally they perceived a small candle, it was earth; this was a
pitiful sight to those who had just left Jupiter. Nevertheless, from
fear of further regret, they resolved to touch down. Carried by the
tail of a comet, and finding an aurora borealis at the ready, they
started towards it, and arrived at Earth on the northern coast of the
Baltic sea, July 5, 1737, new style.




CHAPTER IV.

What happened on planet Earth.


After resting for some time they ate two mountains for lunch, which
their crew fixed up pretty nicely. Then they decided to get to know
the small country they were in. They went first from north to south.
The usual stride of the Sirian and his crew was around 30,000 feet.
The dwarf from Saturn, who clocked in at no more than a thousand
fathoms, trailed behind, breathing heavily. He had to make twelve
steps each time the other took a stride; imagine (if it is alright to
make such a comparison) a very small lapdog following a captain of
the guards of the Prussian king.

Since our strangers moved fairly rapidly, they circumnavigated the
globe in 36 hours. The sun, in truth, or rather the Earth, makes a
similar voyage in a day; but you have to imagine that the going is
much easier when one turns on one's axis instead of walking on one's
feet. So there they were, back where they started, after having seen
the nearly imperceptible pond we call _the Mediterranean_, and the
other little pool that, under the name _Ocean_, encircles the
molehill. The dwarf never got in over his knees, and the other hardly
wet his heels. On their way they did all they could to see whether
the planet was inhabited or not. They crouched, laid down, felt
around everywhere; but their eyes and their hands were not
proportionate to the little beings that crawl here, they could not
feel in the least any sensation that might lead them to suspect that
we and our associates, the other inhabitants of this planet, have the
honor of existing.

The dwarf, who was a bit hasty sometimes, decided straightaway that
the planet was uninhabited. His first reason was that he had not seen
anyone. Micromegas politely indicated that this logic was rather
flawed: "For," said he, "you do not see with your little eyes certain
stars of the 50th magnitude that I can perceive very distinctly. Do
you conclude that these stars do not exist?"

"But," said the dwarf, "I felt around a lot."

"But," answered the other, "you have pretty weak senses."

"But," replied the dwarf, "this planet is poorly constructed. It is
so irregular and has such a ridiculous shape! Everything here seems
to be in chaos: you see these little rivulets, none of which run in a
straight line, these pools of water that are neither round, nor
square, nor oval, nor regular by any measure; all these little pointy
specks scattered across the earth that grate on my feet? (This was in
reference to mountains.) Look at its shape again, how it is flat at
the poles, how it clumsily revolves around the sun in a way that
necessarily eliminates the climates of the poles? To tell the truth,
what really makes me think it is uninhabited is that it seems that no
one of good sense would want to stay."

"Well," said Micromegas, "maybe the inhabitants of this planet are
not of good sense! But in the end it looks like this may be for a
reason. Everything appears irregular to you here, you say, because
everything on Saturn and Jupiter is drawn in straight lines. This
might be the[1] reason that you are a bit puzzled here. Have I not
told you that I have continually noticed variety in my travels?"


[1] All the editions that precede those of Kehl read: "It might be
for this"  B.


The Saturnian responded to all these points. The dispute might never
have finished if it were not for Micromegas who, getting worked up,
had the good luck to break the thread of his diamond necklace. The
diamonds fell; they were pretty little carats of fairly irregular
size, of which the largest weighed four hundred pounds and the
smallest fifty. The dwarf recaptured some of them; bending down for a
better look, he perceived that these diamonds were cut with the help
of an excellent microscope. So he took out a small microscope of 160
feet in diameter and put it up to his eye; and Micromegas took up one
of 2,005 feet in diameter. They were excellent; but neither one of
them could see anything right away and had to adjust them. Finally
the Saturnian saw something elusive that moved in the shallow waters
of the Baltic sea; it was a whale. He carefully picked it up with his
little finger and, resting it on the nail of his thumb, showed it to
the Sirian, who began laughing for a second time at the ludicrously
small scale of the things on our planet. The Saturnian, persuaded
that our world was inhabited, figured very quickly that it was
inhabited only by whales; and as he was very good at reasoning, he
was determined to infer the origin and evolution of such a small
atom; whether it had ideas, a will, liberty. Micromegas was confused.
He examined the animal very patiently and found no reason to believe
that a soul was lodged in it. The two voyagers were therefore
inclined to believe that there is no spirit in our home, when with
the help of the microscope they perceived something as large as a
whale floating on the Baltic Sea. We know that a flock of
philosophers was at this time returning from the Arctic Circle, where
they had made some observations, which no one had dared make up to
then. The gazettes claimed that their vessel ran aground on the coast
of Bothnia, and that they were having a lot of difficulty setting
things straight; but the world never shows its cards. I am going to
tell how it really happened, artlessly and without bias; which is no
small thing for an historian.




