CHAPTER V.

Experiments and reasonings of the two voyagers.


Micromegas slowly reached his hand towards the place where the object
had appeared, extended two fingers, and withdrew them for fear of
being mistaken, then opened and closed them, and skillfully seized
the vessel that carried these fellows, putting it on his fingernail
without pressing it too hard for fear of crushing it.

"Here is a very different animal from the first," said the dwarf from
Saturn.

The Sirian put the so-called animal in the palm of his hand. The
passengers and the crew, who believed themselves to have been lifted
up by a hurricane, and who thought they were on some sort of boulder,
scurried around; the sailors took the barrels of wine, threw them
overboard onto Micromegas hand, and followed after. The geometers
took their quadrants, their sextants, two Lappland girls[1], and
descended onto the Sirian's fingers. They made so much fuss that he
finally felt something move, tickling his fingers. It was a steel-tipped
baton being pressed into his index finger. He judged, by this
tickling, that it had been ejected from some small animal that he was
holding; but he did not suspect anything else at first. The
microscope, which could barely distinguish a whale from a boat, could
not capture anything as elusive as a man. I do not claim to outrage
anyone's vanity, but I am obliged to ask that important men make an
observation here. Taking the size of a man to be about five feet, the
figure we strike on Earth is like that struck by an animal of about
six hundred thousandths[2] the height of a flea on a ball five feet
around. Imagine something that can hold the Earth in its hands, and
which has organs in proportion to ours--and it may very well be that
there are such things--conceive, I beg of you, what these things
would think of the battles that allow a vanquisher to take a village
only to lose it later.


[1] See the notes to the speech in verse, "On Moderation" (Volume
XII), and those of "Russia to Paris" (Volume XIV).  K.

[2] The edition that I take to be original reads "sixty
thousandths."  B.


I do not doubt that if ever some captain of some troop of imposing
grenadiers reads this work he will increase the size of the hats of
his troops by at least two imposing feet. But I warn him that it will
have been done in vain; that he and his will never grow any larger
than infinitely small.

What marvelous skill it must have taken for our philosopher from
Sirius to perceive the atoms I have just spoken of. When Leuwenhoek
and Hartsoëker tinkered with the first or thought they saw the grains
that make us up, they did not by any means make such an astonishing
discovery. What pleasure Micromegas felt at seeing these little
machines move, at examining all their scurrying, at following them in
their enterprises! how he cried out! with what joy he placed one of
his microscopes in the hands of his traveling companion!

"I see them," they said at the same time, "look how they are carrying
loads, stooping, getting up again." They spoke like that, hands
trembling from the pleasure of seeing such new objects, and from fear
of losing them. The Saturnian, passing from an excess of incredulity
to an excess of credulity, thought he saw them mating.

"Ah!" he said. "I have caught nature in the act"[1]. But he was
fooled by appearances, which happens only too often, whether one is
using a microscope or not.


[1] _j'ai pris la nature sur le fait_. A happy, good-natured turn
of phrase expressed by Fontenelle upon making some observations of
natural history.  K.




CHAPTER VI.

What happened to them among men.


Micromegas, a much better observer than his dwarf, clearly saw that
the atoms were speaking to each other, and pointed this out to his
companion, who, ashamed of being mistaken about them reproducing, did
not want to believe that such a species could communicate. He had the
gift of language as well as the Sirian. He could not hear the atoms
talk, and he supposed that they did not speak. Moreover, how could
these impossibly small beings have vocal organs, and what would they
have to say? To speak, one must think, more or less; but if they
think, they must therefore have the equivalent of a soul. But to
attribute the equivalent of a soul to this species seemed absurd to
him.

"But," said the Sirian, "you believed right away that they made love.
Do you believe that one can make love without thinking and without
uttering one word, or at least without making oneself heard? Do you
suppose as well that it is more difficult to produce an argument than
an infant? Both appear to be great mysteries to me."

"I do not dare believe or deny it," said the dwarf. "I have no more
opinions. We must try to examine these insects and reason after."

"That is very well said," echoed Micromegas, and he briskly took out
a pair of scissors with which he cut his fingernails, and from the
parings of his thumbnail he improvised a kind of speaking-trumpet,
like a vast funnel, and put the end up to his ear. The circumference
of the funnel enveloped the vessel and the entire crew. The weakest
voice entered into the circular fibers of the nails in such a way
that, thanks to his industriousness, the philosopher above could hear
the drone of our insects below perfectly. In a small number of hours
he was able to distinguish words, and finally to understand French.
The dwarf managed to do the same, though with more difficulty. The
voyagers' surprise redoubled each second. They heard the mites speak
fairly intelligently. This performance of nature's seemed
inexplicable to them. You may well believe that the Sirian and the
dwarf burned with impatience to converse with the atoms. The dwarf
feared that his thunderous voice, and assuredly Micromegas, would
deafen the mites without being understood. They had to diminish its
force. They placed toothpicks in their mouths, whose tapered ends
fell around the ship. The Sirian put the dwarf on his knees and the
ship with its crew on a fingernail. He lowered his head and spoke
softly. Finally, relying on these precautions and many others, he
began his speech like so:

"Invisible insects, that the hand of the Creator has caused to spring
up in the abyss of the infinitely small, I thank him for allowing me
to uncover these seemingly impenetrable secrets. Perhaps those at my
court would not deign to give you audience, but I mistrust no one,
and I offer you my protection."

If anyone has ever been surprised, it was the people who heard these
words. They could not figure out where they were coming from. The
chaplain of the vessel recited the exorcism prayers, the sailors
swore, and the philosophers of the vessel constructed systems; but no
matter what systems they came up with, they could not figure out who
was talking. The dwarf from Saturn, who had a softer voice than
Micromegas, told them in a few words what species they were dealing
with. He told them about the voyage from Saturn, brought them up to
speed on what Mr. Micromegas was, and after lamenting how small they
were, asked them if they had always been in this miserable state so
near nothingness, what they were doing on a globe that appeared to
belong to whales, whether they were happy, if they reproduced, if
they had a soul, and a hundred other questions of this nature.

A reasoner among the troop, more daring than the others, and shocked
that someone might doubt his soul, observed the interlocutor with
sight-vanes pointed at a quarter circle from two different stations,
and at the third spoke thusly: "You believe then, Sir, that because
you are a thousand fathoms tall from head to toe, that you are a--"

"A thousand fathoms!" cried the dwarf. "Good heavens! How could he
know my height? A thousand fathoms! You cannot mistake him for a
flea. This atom just measured me! He is a surveyor, he knows my size;
and I, who can only see him through a microscope, I still do not know
his!"

"Yes, I measured you," said the physician, "and I will measure your
large companion as well." The proposition was accepted, his
excellency laid down flat; for were he to stay upright his head would
have been among the clouds. Our philosophers planted a great shaft on
him, in a place that doctor Swift would have named, but that I will
restrain myself from calling by its name, out of respect for the
ladies. Next, by a series of triangles linked together, they
concluded that what they saw was in effect a young man of 120,000
feet[1].


[1]The edition I believe to be original reads, "a beautiful
young ... of 120,000 feet."  B.


So Micromegas delivered these words: "I see more than ever that one
must not judge anything by its apparent size. Oh God! you who have
given intelligence to substance that appears contemptible. The
infinitely small costs you as little as the infinitely large; and if
it is possible that there are such small beings as these, there may
just as well be a spirit bigger than those of the superb animals that
I have seen in the heavens, whose feet alone would cover this
planet."

One of the philosophers responded that he could certainly imagine
that there are intelligent beings much smaller than man. He
recounted, not every fabulous thing Virgil says about bees, but what
Swammerdam discovered, and what Réaumur has anatomized. He explained
finally that there are animals that are to bees what bees are to man,
what the Sirian himself was for the vast animals he had spoken of,
and what these large animals are to other substances before which
they looked like atoms. Little by little the conversation became
interesting, and Micromegas spoke thusly:




