CHAPTER VII.

_CONCLUSION._


_"The final and surest proof of the actuality and Divine origin of
revelation is its manifestation in individuals, as a healing,
sin-constraining power, diffusing everywhere light and life."_

  Christlieb.


_"The most important controversies are those which a man finds in his
own heart."_

  J. A. Bengel.


_"The Key to Scripture is the Person and Office of Messiah."_




CHAPTER VII.

_CONCLUSION._


At the close of his work our author attempts to console his readers
for having demolished their evangelical belief in the following
eloquent language:--

"In surrendering its miraculous element and its claims to supernatural
origin, therefore, _the religion of Jesus_ does not lose its virtue,
or the qualities which have made it a blessing to humanity. It
sacrifices none of that elevated character which has distinguished and
raised it above all human systems; it merely relinquishes a claim
which it has shared with all antecedent religions, and severs its
connection with ignorant superstition. It is too divine in its
morality to require the aid of miraculous attributes. No supernatural
halo can heighten its spiritual beauty, and no mysticism deepen its
holiness. In its perfect simplicity it is sublime, and in its
profound wisdom it is eternal" (p. 489).

This may be eloquently expressed, but it will not bear analysis. If
"the religion of Jesus" has an "_elevated character_," which has
"_distinguished and raised it above all human systems_," it must have
a superhuman "_elevated character_," and, if so, a supernatural
_character_, and, therefore, the religion of Jesus is a _supernatural
religion_. To take from the Bible all that is miraculous, and pretend
it would "_not lose its virtue_," or "_the qualities which have made
it a blessing to humanity_," is simply absurd. The teachings of
Christ, apart from His recognition of Abraham's faith in God having
spoken to him; of Moses, as divinely commissioned to give the law of
Sinai; and of David, to prophesy of Himself as the Messiah, is
inconceivable. It is not possible to strike out of the Bible all that
is supernatural and leave it intelligible. What would be left, far
from being "perfect simplicity and profound and eternal wisdom," would
be, for religious instruction, indeed, a blank.

Knowing what human nature is and has been in all ages, where, we may
ask, could such perfect and sublime morality have come from apart
from Divine interference? As Henry Rogers says in his recent work,
"The Superhuman Origin of the Bible inferred from itself," "_The Bible
is not such a book as man would have made if he could, or could have
made if he would._"

Even John Stuart Mill, in his book just published, describes Christ as
the "pattern of perfection for humanity;" and "a unique figure, not
more unlike all His precursors than all His followers, even those who
had the direct benefit of His personal teaching."

The late Dr. Priestley, the eminent Unitarian, said that the actual
resurrection of Jesus Christ is more authentically attested than any
other fact in history.[70]

  [70] See his work, "Matter and Spirit," p. 247.

The fact is, in short, just this: the whole Scripture testimony to the
work of man's redemption is, to the believer, explicit and harmonious,
while the emasculated and perverted creed of the moralist who rejects
the miraculous is sheer confusion and absurdity.

We appreciate the admonition of the apostle Paul, where he says: "Oh,
Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding profane
and vain babblings, and oppositions of science, so called, which,
some professing, have erred concerning the faith."

It is of importance to note that the writings which record the deaths
of some of the principal persons, such as John the Baptist, James the
Apostle, and Stephen, would, probably, have mentioned the decease of
others if they had died before the books were composed. Supposing they
originated at a later date, the writers would have had no motive for
omitting any such particulars. Surely, the Acts of the Apostles would
have told us of the death of Paul and Peter, Matthew and Barnabas, and
the other men whose doings it records. If we imagine the book a
fiction, then, we ask, where are the stories which apocryphal books
contain, such as the crucifixion of Peter, which would, certainly,
have been included? This must be accounted for before we set aside the
book as not history, but fiction.

This anonymous sceptical work has to encounter the damaging objection
that it enters a verdict before the case is complete. The judge, that
is, impartial criticism holding the balance evenly, may justly say,
How can the verdict be pronounced in the absence of witnesses of such
importance as the Acts of the Apostles and the epistles of Paul? The
final reflections at the conclusion of the second volume are
premature. Instead of it being "right not to delay a clear statement
of what the author believes to be the truth and its consequences," it
is the opposite; and we venture to predict that, when he has done his
worst, when he has made the most of the silence of primitive writers
whose works time has reduced to fragments; when he has fully exposed
the irrelevancy of many of the assertions of over-sanguine apologists
(such as Tischendorf and Canon Westcott); when he has magnified to the
utmost the difficulties inseparable from the investigation of matters
eighteen centuries distant, between which period in history and the
present time there have intervened revolutions in nations, invasions
of barbarians, cities burned, libraries destroyed, and all that is
conceivable of obliteration, falsification, fraud, and superstition,
in what are called the dark ages--his ability, learning, research, and
logic will not have convinced the majority of his readers that
Christianity is to be placed in the category of the world's religious
delusions and impostures. His complete work will be fully replied to
by critics of his own calibre and acumen, and the highest honour it
will ultimately attain will be to be relegated to the unenviable
position in literature in which are placed Spinoza, Hume, Baur,
Strauss, Rénan, Mill, and all those able doubters who have boldly but
unsuccessfully assailed the truth as it is in Jesus.

I close with the remark that the Bible is regarded by the Evangelical
Protestant Nonconformists from an independent point of view. The
authority of the councils of the Popish Church is nothing to them. The
decision of the Council of Laodicea, A.D. 364, furnishes evidence of
the Holy Scriptures being, in the main, what we esteem them to be; but
we do not recognise its authority.

We are in a position to welcome any light which any critic can throw
upon the records of Divine revelation, and can be grateful for any
laborious research which separates the gold from the dross, and
selects the real coin from the counterfeit. But it is undoubtedly true
that, as the religion of the Bible is a spiritual matter, it is best
discerned by those whose hearts are open to receive it.

"If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it
be of God."[71] "He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness
in himself."[72] "Filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom
and spiritual understanding."[73]

  [71] John vii. 17.

  [72] 1 John v. 10.

  [73] Col. i. 9.

On the assumption that man is not a spiritual being, the investigation
of what the Bible teaches is not likely to be successful. The most
prominent statements will be foolishness. The primary fact that God is
a Spirit will not be apprehended, and all analogous doctrines deemed
the outgrowth of superstition. It is the vainest of all inquiries from
such a foregone conclusion. Man is not placed at such a point of
observation in the universe as to be competent to conduct a
theological investigation, based on a negative hypothesis, regarding
the essential proposition of all religious truth. Among the
indispensable requisites in the pursuit of such knowledge, are, the
receptive disposition, the listening attitude, the becoming humility,
the consciousness of a tendency to go wrong, and of dependence on the
Divine illumination of the Holy Spirit. "Blind unbelief is sure to
err." The inquirer who does not lay aside pride and self-sufficiency
is not in a condition to take the first step. If intellectual power,
acuteness of perception, and the logical faculty, could ensure the
successful pursuit of spiritual truth, we may suppose that Satan's
knowledge would convince him of the folly of his opposition to the
Divine authority. That which intervenes betwixt the Almighty Creator
and the fallen angel intercepts the vision of the depraved human soul.
Only "the pure in heart can see God." The blindness is not removable
until, as in the case of Saul of Tarsus, those conditions are complied
with which are implied in the statement, "Behold he prayeth." His soul
is humbled, his eyes are opened, and he gets nearer to the truth. "The
Lord is nigh unto them who call upon him."[74]

  [74] Psa. cxlv. 18.

The summary of what I have endeavoured to make plain to you respecting
the book is briefly this:--

1. That it chiefly consists of German scepticism made plain to English
readers; of a recast of the exploded fallacies of Hume; and an
unsuccessful attempt to eliminate the miraculous from the Gospels.

2. That the assumption that there are in the Bible Satanic miracles,
thus putting Jewish superstition on a level with revealed truth, is
reasoning on false premises.

3. That the miracles of the Bible do not admit of their being
accommodated to the laws of nature, to satisfy the scientific and
philosophical theologians.

4. That the objection to the testimony of the first disciples, on the
ground of their not being learned, scientific, and critical, has no
weight, especially as applied to Paul, whose education would enable
him to weigh the evidence of the eye-witnesses, which he would compare
with the revelation to himself; and thus he was in a position to know
the exact truth.

5. That the abstract argument against miracles not having sufficient
force to merit Mr. Arnold's endorsement, its further discussion was
not necessary, the first part of the book being sufficiently
neutralised.

6. That the argument from the silence of early Church writers is not
conclusive, because we have only fragments of their writings, and that
there was not the same need to refer to written records while
tradition was fresh.

7. That the objection to a quotation because it is not verbatim is
frivolous.

8. That the hypothesis that the original records of Christ's life,
which are not our Gospels, and are lost, did not contain any miracles,
is a German conjecture, which is totally unsupported and absolutely
incredible.

9. That the assumption of uniform and verbal inspiration is not an
essential of orthodox views, and that Christianity has been more
damaged by its friends than its enemies.

10. That the author's mode of presenting his facts is not to be relied
upon, any more than his conclusions.

11. That offensive epithets and unwarrantable boldness of assertion do
not strengthen his arguments; nor is eloquent language always sense.

12. That the question is not whether the Gospels establish the reality
of miracles, so that Christianity is false if they do not sufficiently
do so; but is the general evidence, resting on a great variety of
proofs, sufficient to prove it true?

13. That special pleading is found throughout the book.

14. That whatever information is wanting, as to the exact manner in
which the four Gospels were compiled--whatever probability there may
be that Matthew's is made up of materials from several other sources,
such as the lost "Gospel of the Hebrews," as well as from that
apostle's own record of what he heard and was eye-witness of--whatever
probability there may be that the Fourth Gospel is only the Apostle
John's to the extent of his having furnished the materials, which
Grecian, rather than Jewish, pens put into elegant language and
artistic form--it is undeniable that if John the son of Zebedee, the
apostle, wrote the Apocalypse, as our author proves he did, the fact
furnishes the strongest evidence, "clear, direct, and irrefragable,"
that he knew, being an eye-witness of the events of the Gospel
records, the Resurrection of Christ to be no "cunningly devised
fable," but the fact of facts, the truth of truths, the miracle of
miracles.

15. That the religion of the Bible being spiritual, its truths are
best discerned by those whose hearts are open to receive them.

The vast expanse of evangelical Christian evidence, shining around us
like the sky on a clear night, has its nebulæ which only faith's
telescope can reach; but there are stars and constellations which are
so conspicuous that no inquirer after truth can fail to see them. John
to the seven Churches, whose angels are seven stars, is as obvious as
the Pleiades; Paul and Barnabas, as of old, are Mercurius and Jupiter;
Abraham's descendants, still distinct from all other races, in all
lands, are prominent as Sirius; Pliny's letter to Trajan is radiant as
Arcturus; the martyr-story of the Catacombs and of history is as
demonstrative as Mars; while the institution to show forth the Lord's
death, by the breaking of bread on the Lord's day, glows like Venus.
These, requiring no telescope,

    "Confirm the tidings as they roll,
    And spread the truth from pole to pole."


UNWIN BROTHERS, THE GRESHAM PRESS, CHILWORTH AND LONDON.







