CHAPTER V.

_THE FOURTH GOSPEL._


_"Every trace has vanished of the great nameless one."_

  Baur.


_"The denial of the authenticity of John's Gospel is a source of far
greater difficulties than its acknowledgment."_

  Ritschl.


_"The doctrine of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the fundamental
doctrine of Christianity. Without it Christianity, as a theological
and as a philosophical system, cannot rank above Rabbinism and
Mahommedanism."_

  Bunsen.




CHAPTER V.

_THE FOURTH GOSPEL._


The evidence that to John the Apostle is to be ascribed the Fourth
Gospel, is worthy of the best attention we can bestow upon it. After
that apostle had been dead half a century, this book, as is
acknowledged by our author and all other critics, occupied a prominent
place among the manuscripts of the Christians, with the name of John,
as the author, attached; and the question now arises, after nearly
eighteen centuries of belief in its authorship and authority, is there
reasonable ground for doubting that it can be properly attributed to
the apostle who was the companion, disciple, and bosom friend of
Jesus? I think the question may be answered with confidence upon the
evidence within our reach.

In the first place, Irenæus believed it was the Gospel according to
John the Apostle; and who was Irenæus, that his belief in it should
be good evidence? He was not John's contemporary, but there was one
between John and Irenæus who was so intimate with both that the link
of evidence is fully to be relied upon, and that link is Polycarp.
Therefore, Irenæus, who was a hearer of Polycarp, can tell us
something about it. Now Polycarp was born in the time of Nero, so he
was for thirty-two years a contemporary of John's, and was his
disciple. And Irenæus says in a letter written to a person called
Florinus, and preserved by Eusebius: "When I was yet a youth, I saw
thee in Asia Minor, at Polycarp's house, where thou wert distinguished
at court, and obtained the regard of the bishop. I can more distinctly
recollect things which happened then than others more recent, for
events which happened in youth seem to grow with the mind, and to
become part of ourselves. So I can tell the place where the blessed
Polycarp used to sit and discourse, and his going out and coming in,
and the manner of his life, and his personal appearance, and his
discourses to the people, and how he related his intercourse _with
John_, and the rest who had seen the Lord; and how he rehearsed their
sayings, and what things there were which he had heard from them
about the Lord, and about His _miracles_, and about His doctrine; and
how Polycarp, having learned from the eye-witnesses of the Word of
Life, narrated all things agreeably with the Scriptures. And to these
things, by God's mercy bestowed on me at that time, I used diligently
to listen, writing the remembrance of them, not on paper, but in my
heart; and, by God's grace, I am always meditating affectionately upon
them."[56]

  [56] "Hist. Eccl." v. 20.

Now we may be certain that Polycarp would be likely to know the truth
of the matter, and Irenæus declares that "_John, the disciple of the
Lord who leaned on the bosom of the Lord at supper_, wrote the
Apocalypse."[57] So we have here reliable evidence that John wrote
both the Apocalypse and the book whose author leaned on our Lord's
bosom at supper. Not only this from Polycarp. There is extant "The
Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians," which Irenæus believed to be
genuine, and in it we find these words: "For whosoever doth not
confess Jesus Christ hath come in the flesh, is antichrist." I compare
this with the words in John's Epistle: "And every spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God,
and this is that spirit of antichrist." Our author says it is not a
verbatim quotation. I say it is a quotation, if not verbatim. It is
acknowledged that the author of the First Epistle of John and the
Fourth Gospel is the same, the ideas and style being so much alike.
"The two writings," says Rénan, "present the most complete identity of
style, the same peculiarities, the same favourite expressions."

  [57] Ibid. iv. 32.

It is impossible to doubt that Polycarp would have learned from John
himself whether he was the author of a Gospel; and if Irenæus had
never heard Polycarp allude to the Gospel as John's, he could not have
believed in it as he did, and have plainly stated that John wrote it
and the Apocalypse. There would have been in this case a justifiable
inference from "silence." If Polycarp in his teaching had never
alluded to John's Gospel, it would have been so strange that Irenæus
would have deemed it spurious altogether, and unworthy of the
estimation with which he regarded it; for it is one of the four
Gospels that he fancifully likens to the four corners of the earth,
the four principal winds, and the four wings of the Seraphim. It is to
be remembered that our author acknowledges Irenæus so regarded all
the four Gospels, for he alludes (p. 91) to "the arbitrary assumption
of exclusive originality and priority for the four Gospels" by
Irenæus, Tertullian, and Epiphanius. It is evident that this Fourth
Gospel could not have first appeared as late as A.D. 150, but must
have been in existence long before; and on the testimony of Irenæus,
through Polycarp, from John himself, its authenticity may be
considered established.

The evidence from the work of Hippolytus, entitled, "The Refutation of
all Heresies," that Basilides quoted from the Fourth Gospel, our
author dismisses in one paragraph (p. 371), having fully referred to
the testimony from that writer in treating of the Synoptics. There
are, however, two very distinct passages which cannot be objected to
as quotations, and the attempt to get rid of them by the substitution
of the plural pronoun "they" for the singular one "he," in the text of
Hippolytus, is an utter failure. The first is from John i. 9, "The
true Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world;" and
the words in "The Refutation," by Hippolytus, are, "And this, he says,
is that which has been stated in the Gospels, 'He was the true Light
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world.'" The other is,
"Mine hour is not yet come," agreeing with John ii. 4. The discovery
of the work, "The Refutation of all Heresies," in the year 1841, at
Mount Athos, by the erudite Minoides Mynas, a Greek, in the employ of
the French Government, was important as bearing on this question, for
it proves that the Fourth Gospel was in existence thirty years earlier
than the Tübingen criticism asserted. Our author's want of
appreciation of the evidence found in Hippolytus is one of the weakest
points in his book.

Is the Fourth Gospel quoted by Justin Martyr? Our author says, No! I
say, Yes! to the question. In his Dialogue with Tryphon (p. 316) occur
the words, "I am not the Christ, but the voice of one crying," which
is evidently from that Gospel, for we know of no other which makes
John the Baptist say the same. He says "the evangelical work of which
Justin made use was obviously different from our Gospels, and the
evident conclusion to which any impartial mind must arrive is, that
there is not only not the slightest ground for affirming that Justin
quoted the passage (as above) from the Fourth Gospel, from which he so
fundamentally differs, but every reason on the contrary to believe
that he derived it from a particular Gospel, in all probability the
Gospel according to the Hebrews" (p. 302). I remark, that the words,
"I am not the Christ, but the voice of one crying," could not be
quoted from the Gospel according to the Hebrews if that supposed
independent book did not contain them, and there is no evidence that
it did. On the contrary, our Gospel of Matthew, compiled, as we
suppose, partly from it, would have in that case had the words; and as
it has not, and as only John's Gospel has them, the inference is clear
that Justin had seen the latter, as well as the other Gospel or
Gospels from which the earlier part of the sentence is taken. The
whole of Justin's sentence is as follows: "For John sat by the Jordan
and preached the baptism of repentance, wearing only a leathern girdle
and raiment of camel's hair, and eating nothing but locusts and wild
honey." Men supposed him to be the Christ, wherefore he cries to them,
"_I am not Christ_, but the voice of one crying (or preaching). For he
cometh who is greater than I, whose shoes I am not meet to bear."

We find in the second "Apology" (p. 94) these words: "Christ said,
'Except ye be born again ye may not enter into the kingdom of
heaven;" and in the very same line is continued the reference to the
conversation with Nicodemus, in these words: "But that it is
impossible for those who have been once born to enter into their
mother's womb, is plain to all." I scarce need remind you how the
statement of Christ and the question of Nicodemus are as close
together in the Fourth Gospel. The passage there is, "Except a man be
born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God. Nicodemus saith unto
him, How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter the second
time into his mother's womb and be born?" The two sentences, coming
together in both, leaves no doubt that Justin used the Fourth Gospel,
for there is nothing like them in any of the other Gospels.

It is something to have from Justin Martyr the evidence that Jesus
taught Nicodemus that a man cannot see the kingdom of God without
being born of the Holy Ghost. If Justin quoted from an earlier Gospel,
it is against our author's non-superhuman theory; and if from our
Gospels, it is equally so. But, supposing that he could prove that
Justin did not quote, that would _not_ prove that the books were not
in existence. Paul's Epistles, 1 Thessalonians, Galatians, 1
Corinthians, and Romans, all written not later than the year 58, are
they quoted, as we might suppose they would be, by Justin? We know
nothing as to the extent of his library. He might have had copies of
all these Gospels and Epistles, or none at hand to quote verbatim
from. Was there a concordance, to help a writer to be exact, after the
modern demand?

The internal evidence of the Fourth Gospel is, perhaps, not so
appreciable by our author as the external, on account of his foregone
conclusion that the superhuman is incredible. But as "there is no
feasible explanation of the Divine origin of Christianity without
acknowledging the Divine mission of Jesus," so is there no possible
explanation of the Fourth Gospel without a recognition of the
evangelical doctrine of the triune in the Divine Nature--the threefold
manifestation of the one God. Exclude from the Fourth Gospel the idea
of the Holy Spirit having inspired John to write it, and there
naturally follows the attempt to exclude the book from its historical
and authoritative position. It has a perfectly harmonious place in the
superhuman means by which spiritual truth is exhibited and enforced
for the benefit of mankind, but that place is an advanced one. It was
the last of inspired utterances, and it presupposes the development
that it supplements, and which it designs to promote. The Holy Spirit,
"the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that Great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant," to make us "perfect in every good work to do His will,"
must be recognised and duly honoured if the Bible is to be understood
and Christianity successfully exhibited and defended. Let us turn to
the book. It opens with allusions to the dignity of Christ the Messiah
which no philosophy known in Alexandria had a conception of. Philo and
his Platonic school discoursed of the Logos; but their doctrine is
distinct from that of this Gospel. Justin takes up their idea, as our
author shows (p. 278), and draws a distinction between the Logos and
Jesus, describing Jesus Christ as being made flesh by the power of the
Logos; for Justin says,--"Through the power of the Word, according to
the will of God the Father and Lord of all, he was born a man of a
virgin."[58] Philo says,[59]--"The Logos of God is above all things in
the word, and is the most ancient and most universal of all things
_created_." I do not deny that Justin got ideas of the Logos from the
Old Testament and from the writings of Philo, as shown by our author,
but I submit that he confused their doctrine with the more developed
truth of the New Testament. "It is certain," he says (p. 291), "that
both Justin and Philo, unlike the prelude to the Fourth Gospel, place
the Logos in a secondary position to God the Father, indicating a less
advanced stage in the doctrine. 'He calls the Word constantly the
first-born of all _created_ beings'" (p. 292). Our author says,--"We
do not propose in this work to enter fully into the history of the
Logos doctrine" (p. 280). Had he done so, he could not have shown that
the doctrine reached to the height of the apostolic conception. There
is no allusion to the Divinity of the Logos, as John and Paul assert;
and no reference to the unquestionable statement of Scripture that, in
the Word made flesh, we have a revelation of the mysterious triune
nature of Jehovah. A vague notion of it is found in many idolatrous
systems of religious worship, and its prevalence is an indication of
the truth which tradition, from primitive revelation, has handed
down; but the mystery, as Paul says, was hidden for ages and
generations, and was not made manifest until, in the fulness of time,
the scheme of Redemption was fully unfolded. The gospel is called by
Paul "the revelation of the mystery, which was kept secret since the
world began, but now is made manifest by a clear interpretation of the
scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the
everlasting God, made known to all nations for the obedience of
faith."[60] To concentrate the doctrine in the Fourth Gospel and
Paul's later epistles, and then repudiate the writings, is a mode of
sustaining the denial of it which is far from being successful. This
doctrine is evidently one of the essential elements of Christian
truth. As the bread which sustains our bodily life, so the bread of
the life of the soul, may be decomposed, but none of the elements must
be left out of it if it is to be of use. In the Old Testament we find
many passages which show the plurality in the Divine nature. The
doctrine, it is true, was not so revealed as to be conspicuous at the
time, for if it had been, it would have been misunderstood, and thus
tended to interfere with the schooling which the Jews were undergoing
to cure them of their proneness to idolatry; but with the New
Testament in our hand we see what, without it, would be still hidden
in obscurity. As we read the Fourth Gospel in the light of this
doctrine, how it harmonises with the "plan of salvation" which
believers in all evangelical Churches call Christianity! The book
professes to be written that men, believing in Jesus Christ, may have
eternal life; records the testimony of John the Baptist that Jesus was
the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world (i. 29); and
announces the important dogma that the supernatural influence of the
Holy Spirit is indispensable to overcome the unwillingness of the soul
of man to receive the truths of the Divine revelation. "No man can
come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him" (vi. 44).
"Except a man be born of the Spirit he cannot enter the kingdom of
God." It testifies to the Divine nature of Jesus in the most explicit
manner. "Therefore the Jews sought to kill him," because he said "God
was his Father, making himself equal with God" (v. 18). "That all men
should honour the Son, even as they honour the Father" (v. 23). "If ye
had known me, ye should have known my Father also" (viii. 19).
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am" (viii. 58).
"It is he (the Son of God) that talketh with thee. And he (the man who
had been blind) said, Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him" (ix.
38). "I and my Father are one" (x. 30). "For blasphemy" (we stone
thee), "and because thou, being a man, makest thyself God" (x. 36).
"Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection, and the life: he that
believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever
liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?" (xi.
25, 26). "Jesus said, Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is
glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify
him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him" (xiii. 32). "He
that hath seen me hath seen the Father" (xiv. 9).

  [58] "Apol." i. 46.

  [59] "Leg." iii. § 61.

  [60] Rom. xvi. 25, 26.

The doctrine of what we call (not having a better word) the
personality of the Holy Spirit is clearly indicated in such passages
as the following:--"I will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that _he_ may abide with you for ever; even the
Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth _him_
not, neither knoweth _him_: but ye know _him_; for _he_ dwelleth with
you" (xiv. 17). "But the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father
will send in my name, _he_ shall teach you all things, and bring all
things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you" (xiv.
26). "It is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not away,
the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send
_him_ unto you. And when _he_ is come, _he_ will reprove the world of
sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment" (xvi. 7). "When _he_, the
Spirit of truth, is come, _he_ will guide you into all truth: for _he_
shall not speak of _himself_; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall
_he_ speak: and _he_ will show you things to come" (xvi. 13). The
seventeenth chapter I will not refer to in part, but specify entire,
begging the reader to meditate on its marvellous comprehensiveness and
expressiveness.

Much of the teaching of Jesus would be so far above the comprehension
of the disciples when they heard it, that it would not be likely to be
impressed on their memory. The Holy Spirit was to be sent, to bring
all things to their remembrance; and it is only by this promise being
fulfilled that we can understand the inspired words of the Fourth
Gospel.

Could Jesus have said what He is described in this book to have said,
if God had not been with Him as He never was with any other man? If
such a question be pertinent, how utterly needless the further
question, Could the book have been written by the _nameless unknown
some one_ whom the hypothesis of its non-Johannine origin substitutes
as the author?

Whatever difference there is between the composition of the Fourth
Gospel and the Apocalyse, there is, at all events, a striking analogy
between the opening verses of the former and those in the latter,
where the faithful and true witness is referred to as "the beginning
of the creation of God,"[61] and as being set down with His Father
upon His throne. In the preface to each of the addresses to the seven
Churches Christ assumes the attributes and prerogatives of the Deity.
The prominence given to the mysterious doctrine of the Divinity of
Christ is as great in the one as the other.

  [61] Rev. iii. 14.

It is somewhat singular that from Rénan, who so utterly rejects the
miraculous, we should have such a decided opinion that it is
appropriately entitled the Gospel according to John. After saying, "I
dare not be sure that the Fourth Gospel has been entirely written by
a Galilean fisherman," he writes in his introduction to the "Life of
Jesus": "No one doubts that towards the year 150, the Fourth Gospel
did exist, and was attributed to John. Explicit texts from Justin,
Athenagoras, Tatian, Theophilus of Antioch, and Irenæus, show that
from thenceforth this Gospel mixed in every controversy, and served as
corner-stone for the development of the faith. Irenæus is explicit.
Now he came from the school of John, and between him and the apostle
there was only Polycarp. The part played by this Gospel in Gnosticism,
and especially in the system of Valentinus, in Montanism, and in the
quarrel of the Quartodecimans, is not less decisive. The school of
John was the most influential in the second century, and it is only by
regarding the origin of the Gospel as coincident with the rise of the
school, that the existence of the latter can be understood at all."

"The First Epistle, attributed to John, is certainly by the same
author as the Fourth Gospel. Now this Epistle is recognised as from
John by Polycarp, Papias, and Irenæus. But it is, above all, the
perusal of the Fourth Gospel itself which is calculated to give the
impression that John must have written it. The author always speaks
as an eye-witness. He wishes to pass for the Apostle John. If, then,
this work is not really by the apostle, we must admit a fraud of which
the author convicts himself. Now, although the ideas of the time
respecting literary honesty differed essentially from ours, there is
no example in the apostolic world of a falsehood of this kind.
Besides, not only does the author wish to pass for the apostle, but we
see clearly that he writes in the interest of this apostle."

As to the difference in language and style between it and the
Apocalypse, it is not altogether unusual for an author to produce
works which differ greatly from each other. An instance is mentioned
by the Rev. Kentish Bache, in his letter to Dr. Davidson. "William
Penn, within one and the same year (1668) wrote two different works,
entitled 'The Sandy Foundation Shaken,' and 'Innocency with her Open
Face.' The former pamphlet is circulated by the Unitarians as a tract
demolishing the doctrine of the Trinity, while the latter is an
earnest defence of that very doctrine; and yet Penn protests that his
belief had undergone no change" (p. 35).

One of the difficulties in the way of the reception of the Fourth
Gospel is the raising of Lazarus from the dead, which the Synoptics do
not record. A probable explanation is suggested by Grotius, who says,
as Lazarus was living when the Synoptics were written, and as "the
chief priests consulted that they might put him to death, because that
by reason of him many of the Jews went away and believed on
Jesus,"[62] the publication of the miracle would have exposed Lazarus
to more intense hostility, and endangered his life.

  [62] John xii. 10.

Our author makes the strange assertion that "the Fourth Gospel, by
whomsoever written--even if it could be traced to the Apostle
John--has no real historical value, being at best the glorified
recollections of an old man, written down half a century after the
events recorded" (p. 467). This bold assertion ignores the fact that
the impressions of early life are, as a rule, indelibly fixed on the
memory. Of no historical value, though written by John! Our author
knows perfectly well that such an event as the raising of Lazarus from
the dead could never fade from the memory of those who witnessed it.
Does he overlook, or suppress, the consideration that John's
recollection would be daily refreshed by the teaching of the
principles of a gospel which consisted of these events and discourses?
We can as well conceive of the Duke of Wellington having forgotten,
when he was eighty years old, the campaigns of the Peninsula and the
battle of Waterloo, as John forgetting the memorable transactions in
the life of his Master with which he was so closely identified.
Besides, we do not know that the materials for John's book had not
long before been noted down. It is not probable that he who wrote the
Apocalypse in the year 68 would put nothing into writing of the
memoirs until close upon the time when the book was published. Such is
not the mode of authorship now, and was not then. Supposing the
apostle to have died, leaving behind him unarranged materials,
including notes and memoranda made at various times, and that these
were, with fidelity, but with more scholarship than John possessed,
transcribed, edited, and made a book of, entitled "The Gospel
according to John," we have an explanation of the linguistic
difficulty which does not overstep the limits of reasonable
probability.

Well may Dr. Davidson acknowledge "it is not easy to account for the
early belief of its Johannine origin;" and that "if a disciple of
John wrote it, he had learned more than his master." It _would_ have
been "strange if such an author had continued unknown." If we reject
the Johannine origin, we have to believe that during the fifty years
between John's death and the time of the book's _general acceptance as
his_ there lived some one capable of writing it, of whom history and
tradition are silent. This is certainly a large matter for sceptical
credulity to swallow. How much easier to believe that the refinement
and beauty of composition, whose charm has captivated the world, is
the work of a Grecian disciple, who wrote under the superintendence,
if not dictation, of the apostle who only could have furnished the
materials at the time when it was written. At the close of the first
century all the other apostles were dead, and for its authorship we
cannot look beyond the circle which surrounded Jesus at the
instituting of that ever-abiding memorial of Him, "The Lord's Supper."

Among the anomalies of our author's hypothesis we have to think of the
apostles living in the first century, and attaining their reputation
as writers during the second. In the first century men appear, but
without their writings. In the second century the writings come to
light, but without the men. How unnatural, says Dr. Christlieb, is
this! Who can fail to see that the hypothesis is incredible?

"We invariably find that an age which is fertile in literary
productions is followed by a conservative period, in which the
productions of the foregoing period are collected and digested--first
the classical, then the post-classical. Does the second century, in
other respects, bear the impress of a productive classical period in
literature? On the contrary, its undoubted products breathe a spirit
which bears the same relation to the New Testament writings as does
the tenour of a post-classical age bear to that of the age preceding
it. Did these writings, especially the Fourth Gospel, belong to
'unknown' authors, they would be perfectly inexplicable phenomena as
compared with all the other products of that period. It has been well
said that it were no less absurd to ascribe the most inspiriting
writings of Luther to the spiritless period of the Thirty Years' War,
than to transfer the Gospel of John to the middle of the second
century."[63]

  [63] Dr. Christlieb, p. 541.

"Notwithstanding their warm Christian life, the writings of the second
century evince such a remarkable dearth of new ideas that one plainly
sees how, after the spiritual flood-tides of the first century, the
ebb had set in."[64]

  [64] Dr. Christlieb, p. 541.

"Compare, for instance, the clear and sober-minded spirit of the New
Testament epistles, or the quiet sublimity of the Gospel of John, with
the epistles of Ignatius, the enthusiasm of which degenerates into a
well-nigh fanatic desire for martyrdom; or with the Pastor of Hermas,
and the value ascribed by him to ascetic rigour; or with the epistles
by Clement of Rome, which tell the fable of the phœnix as a fact; or,
again, with the Epistle of Barnabas, which delights in insipid
allegories, and gives the most absurd typical interpretations of the
Old Testament, justifying Neander's remark, that here we encounter
quite another spirit than that of an apostolic man."[65]

  [65] Ibid. p. 541.

Our author produces such a mass of evidence from the early writers,
confirmatory of the truths of the Gospel, that his criticism tends to
opposite conclusions. Supposing he can prove that the canon of
Scripture is not _un_assailable, he has not accomplished much. It is
of more value to have confirmation of the facts and principles of
Divine truth, than to be assured that the authorship, construction,
compilation, or arrangement of the Scriptures, are just what the
Church of Rome authoritatively pronounced. Because we cannot
positively settle certain questions of little comparative importance,
are we to surrender our faith in essentials? Are we to let the
conjectures and queries of German cavillers, with their "Yea, hath God
said," destroy our cherished faith and hope? God forbid! It is not the
preservation or infallibility of the apostolic writings which makes
His incarnation, death, and resurrection, facts in the history of our
race. The facts make the history, not the history the facts. Europe
was saved from Oriental despotism by Leonidas at Thermopylæ, and the
valour and patriotism of the Greeks; by Charles Martel in the eighth
century; and again by Prince Eugene in the seventeenth century; but it
is not because history has truly or imperfectly recorded these facts
that we enjoy to this day the great benefits resulting to civilisation
from their heroism.

The truth of Christianity does not, at all events, rest on the
_quotations of the early Fathers_, and our author would have
accomplished but little had he proved that there were none found. In
the first ages of the Church, when the events were fresh, the voice
of the preacher was the channel which conveyed the saving gospel to
the souls of men, and there was not the same necessity for reference
to the written records as in after times. When a century had elapsed
after the death of Christ, then the records of the first disciples
became of importance. They then came into prominence, and were
abundantly quoted, as our author acknowledges. As time went on that
importance increased, and about three hundred years after the events
the Emperor Constantine ordered Eusebius to have fifty copies of the
Holy Scriptures fairly inscribed on parchment, the use whereof he
tells Eusebius he "knew to be absolutely necessary to the Church."
Eusebius gives us the emperor's entire letter. They were not so
absolutely necessary when most of the Fathers wrote whom our author
has referred to. _I_ do not want any written record to prove to me
that the Spaniards in the Peninsular War, seventy years ago, poisoned
the bread of the British troops. I lived in my youth with an old
Christian soldier and his wife who were in the campaign, and used to
amuse me with their experience of such facts, as we sat round the fire
on a winter's evening. Nor of the American War of Independence do the
people of the present generation depend entirely on writings or books
for the proof that it took place. Two lives reach from date to date,
and no evidence can be stronger than such.

Until we have better reason than our author has adduced for altering
our estimate of these sacred writings, so often assailed, but
maintaining serenely, century after century, their high pretensions as
a message from heaven to culture our moral and spiritual nature, and
guide us thither, we should be foolish, oh, how foolish! to question
their authority or neglect their guidance. Because we cannot be sure
that the Bible is in every detail the perfect transcript of Divine
revelation, we are to abandon the only solace that humanity possesses,
the only theory which accounts for the wickedness which, without its
teaching, is such an anomaly to all else in creation, the only bond
which binds society in brotherhood, and makes social existence capable
of including happiness here, or the hope of life hereafter. Better a
misunderstood revelation than none at all. Better a glimpse of
immortality, than the negation which is utter darkness, and makes the
issue of existence only death.




