CHAPTER II.

_THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS._


_"I consider the Gospels decidedly genuine, for they are penetrated by
the reflection of a majesty which proceeded from the Person of Christ;
and this is Divine, if ever Divinity appeared upon earth."_

  Goethe.




CHAPTER II.

_THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS_.

CLEMENT OF ROME--THE EPISTLE OF BARNABAS--THE PASTOR OF HERMAS.


The argument based on the investigation which is carried on in the
seven hundred pages of the second and third parts of our author's
work, is chiefly the negative one from "silence." He examines with
great minuteness the date, character, and authorship of all the four
Gospels, and refers to all the writings of the early Church for traces
of them; insisting upon the silence of those early writings as being
of as much importance as any "supposed allusions" to the Gospels found
in such authors as Justin Martyr, Clement of Rome, and others who
lived soon after the apostolic age; the result being, in our author's
opinion, unfavourable to the view entertained by orthodox believers.

I demur to his conclusions. I notice a want of fairness in some of his
quotations and in some of his translations, and a want of accuracy in
some of his statements, as well as defects in his reasoning, which I
have no doubt others will comment upon who may review the book. Some
of these defects will appear as I proceed.

When I find him saying, as he does, vol. ii. page 387, "We must,
however, carefully restrict ourselves to the limits of our inquiry,
and resist any temptation to enter upon an exhaustive discussion of
the problem presented by the Fourth Gospel from a more _general_
literary point of view," I expect to find difficulties, which of
course there are and must be, brought into prominence and carped at,
while the general evidence upon which Divine revelation is immovably
based is "carefully" avoided.

The second part, on the Synoptic Gospels, is a long investigation,
extending over five hundred pages, and dealing with three and twenty
works by separate non-biblical authors of the first and second
centuries; and its object is to disprove that they were written solely
by Matthew, Mark, and Luke, and to support the hypothesis that those
Gospels were not in existence until long after the times of the
apostles, and, therefore, that they furnish no evidence from
eye-witnesses of the miracles they record.

The third part deals with the Fourth Gospel in a similar manner, and
occupies more than two hundred pages. Our author's inquiry into the
reality of Divine revelation seems, at this point, to involve the
following questions: Does the extant literature of the close of the
first and the beginning of the second century quote from, or allude
to, the three Synoptic Gospels? And if this cannot be answered in the
affirmative, does such silence prove they were not then written; and,
if so, is the conclusion deducible that the miracles recorded are not
credible?

In the preliminary remarks with which he opens the second part, he
says: "When such writers, quoting largely from the Old Testament and
other sources, deal with subjects which would naturally be assisted by
references to our Gospels, and still more so by quoting such works as
authoritative, and yet we find that not only _they do not show any
knowledge of those Gospels_, but actually quote passages from unknown
sources, or sayings of Jesus derived from tradition, the inference
must be that our Gospels were either unknown, or not recognised as
works of any authority at the time." In reference to this sentence I
remark that many of the passages he specifies and examines are _not_
from _unknown sources_, but from the Gospels, because, if not strictly
verbatim, they are in the _sense_ identical, and almost identical in
the language; therefore such quotations are evidence that the Gospels
existed at the time. The insinuation that they are from tradition is
purely conjecture, and altogether improbable, because our Gospels
contain the passages. There is not the slightest reason for looking
away from our gospels, and imagining the quotations to be either from
unknown sources or tradition. This will appear as we proceed. I will
give in his own words the results of his examination of what he
designates "evidence for the Synoptic Gospels," and then follow him
step by step through the journey he takes into early Patristic Church
history.

He says (vol. ii. page 248): "We may now briefly sum up the results of
our examination of the evidence for the Synoptic Gospels. After having
exhausted the literature and the testimony bearing on the point, we
_have not found a single distinct trace of any of those Gospels during
the first century and a half after the death of Jesus_. Only once
during the whole of that period do we find any tradition even that any
one of our Evangelists composed a Gospel at all, and that tradition,
so far from favouring our Synoptics, is fatal to the claims of the
first and second. Papias, about the middle of the second century, on
the occasion to which we refer, records that Matthew composed the
Discourses of the Lord in the Hebrew tongue, a statement which
_totally excludes the claim of our Greek Gospel to apostolic origin_.
Mark, he said, wrote down from the casual preaching of Peter the
sayings and doings of Jesus, but without orderly arrangement, as he
was not himself a follower of the Master, and merely recorded what
fell from the apostle. This description likewise shows that our actual
Second Gospel could not in its present form have been the work of
Mark. There is no other reference during the period to any writing of
Matthew or Mark, and no mention at all of any work ascribed to Luke.
If it be considered that there is any connection between Marcion's
Gospel and our Third Synoptic, any evidence so derived is of an
unfavourable character for that Gospel, as it involves a charge
against it of being interpolated and debased by Jewish elements. Any
argument for the mere existence of our Synoptics, based upon their
supposed rejection by heretical leaders and sects, has the evitable
disadvantage that the very testimony which would show their existence
would oppose their authenticity. There is no evidence of their use by
heretical leaders, however, and no direct reference to them by any
writer, heretical or orthodox, whom we have examined. We need scarcely
add that no reason whatever has been shown for accepting the testimony
of these Gospels as sufficient to establish the reality of miracles
and of a direct Divine revelation." (Here he says, in a foot-note: "A
comparison of the contents of the three Synoptics would have confirmed
the conclusion, but this is not at present necessary, and we must
hasten on.") "It is not pretended that more than one of the Synoptic
Gospels was written by an eye-witness of the miraculous occurrences
reported; and whilst no evidence has been, or can be, produced even of
the historical accuracy of the narratives, no testimony as to the
correctness of the inferences from the external phenomena exists or is
now even conceivable. The discrepancy between the amount of evidence
required and that which is forthcoming, however, is greater than under
the circumstances could have been thought possible."

There is a plausibility, combined with an assumed conclusiveness, in
this summary, which may impose for a moment on those readers of his
book who are not conversant with the question under discussion. They
will be likely to have glanced at the foot-notes indicating the great
number of books referred to, and take it for granted that an author so
learned and painstaking would scarcely have asserted conclusions so
boldly without having found good reasons for them, which, before he
has done, he will adduce and make plain. It is evident, however, that
whatever his reasons may be as a whole, when his promised further
volume has been published, it is quite certain that, so far, his
argument from the silence of early writings, supposing he had
conducted it successfully, combined with his logic on the abstract
question of the credibility of miracles, is not sufficient to justify
his assertion that the testimony of the Gospels is insufficient to
establish the reality of miracles; because the Gospels might have
existed, although no trace of them can be found in the fragments
extant of books written during the few years between the composition
of the Gospels and the period when they were generally acknowledged as
authoritative, and read everywhere in the Christian assemblies on the
Lord's Day, that is, from about A.D. 100 to 150.

The reader will be unwise if he allow himself to be impressed by the
multiplicity of selected witnesses from a selected period, other
evidence being unappealed to. If a hundred of witnesses are, in a
court of justice, produced to swear to the identity of a man, the
impression is created that it cannot but be established. We have
lately seen how from being inevitable is such an outside verdict. The
special pleading of authorship, like that of the Queen's Bench,
startles and impresses for a moment; but after the investigation of
all the facts and circumstances of the case is complete, and the judge
has dissected the evidence, the sophistry is found not to have helped
the side which used it, but has tended to strengthen the other. I
remark, before following our author in his references to the witnesses
he has selected for cross-examination, it is not conceded to him the
right to draw a line where it best suits him in Church history, and
decide the case in the absence of the evidence of witnesses on the
outside of it. He draws such a line in specifying "_the first century
and a half after the death of Christ_." If the probable date of
Christ's birth be the third year before the commencement of the
Christian era, we have this line drawn at A.D. 180, at which point the
second generation of Christians had only just passed away, when direct
tradition had not lost its freshness. While men and women were living
who had heard from eye-witnesses of the events of Christ's life on
earth, the story of His advent, death, resurrection, and ascension,
the books recording the facts for future ages were in a less prominent
position in the Church than immediately afterwards. They were then
read in all the Churches, but commentaries on them and written
references to them were not very numerous; therefore what we can trace
of such before that time is comparatively scanty. But, immediately
afterwards, in the third and fourth generation of Christians, when
there were no men living who could say, My grandfather or my venerable
teacher told me so and so of Christ, and he saw Christ in Galilee
after His resurrection, when there were not less than five hundred of
His disciples assembled, and he was present when He ascended in a
cloud--while such persons were living, the testimony of a book was to
them of lesser weight and importance, for they could say that they had
the truth, not from the written words of a disciple, but from his own
lips. As Irenæus well remembered Polycarp, so might persons living
about the middle of the second century remember the teaching of the
Apostle John. The argument from "silence," applied to the early period
restricted to the year 180, is for this and other reasons far from
being conclusive, while the evidence furnished by such writings as
those of Irenæus, Tertullian, Clement of Alexandria, Theophilus of
Antioch, Tatian, Hippolytus, and Origen, who belong to the subsequent
years of the first and the opening of the second century, is much more
important than is indicated by our author. His investigation ignores
to a great extent the circumstantial evidence of this later period. He
says (vol. ii. p. 387) he "must be careful to restrict himself to the
limits of his inquiry," and to avoid the "more general literary point
of view," and he does so restrict himself. If a person really desires
to decipher an obscure antiquarian manuscript or inscription, he does
not say, I must carefully keep to this imperfectly-lighted room, and
not step into broad daylight.

Here is a specimen of the way he draws an inference. In arguing
against the authority of the four Gospels, he says, vol. ii. p. 457,
"No two of them agree even about so simple a matter of fact as the
inscription on the cross." Now the exact words, as given in each
Gospel, are as follows: Matthew gives the inscription in eight
words--"This is Jesus the King of the Jews;" Mark in five words--"The
King of the Jews;" Luke in seven words--"This is the King of the
Jews;" and John in eight words--"Jesus of Nazareth the King of the
Jews."

This needs no comment. Could anything be more natural than such slight
discrepancies? Would four shorthand reporters of the present day have
been more exact?

The first early writer he examines is Clement, Bishop of Rome, who,
towards the close of the first century, wrote an epistle to the
Corinthians. It is attached to the ancient copy of the Scriptures
known as the Codex Alexandrinus, written in the fifth century, and
preserved in the British Museum.

This writer's fame surpassed all others in the first century. His
first Epistle to the Corinthians, written in Greek, is deemed to be
genuine; but, says Dr. Mosheim, "it seems to have been corrupted and
interpolated."

Eusebius assures us it was received by all, and reverenced next to
the Holy Scriptures, and therefore publicly read in the Churches for
some ages, even till his time.[21]

  [21] "Cod." cxii. c. 38.

The epistle itself makes no mention of the author's name. It purports
to be addressed by "the Church of God which sojourns at Rome to the
Church of God sojourning at Corinth." But in the Codex Alexandrinus
the title of "The First Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians" is
added at the end. Internal evidence shows it was written after some
persecution of the Church, either that of Nero, A.D. 64-70, or
Domitian, at the end of the century. The epistle contains these
words:--

"Especially remembering the words of the Lord Jesus, which he spake
teaching gentleness and long-suffering. For thus he said, Be pitiful,
that ye may be pitied; forgive, that it may be forgiven you; as ye do,
so shall it be done to you; as ye give, so shall it be given to you;
as ye judge, so shall it be judged to you; as ye show kindness, shall
kindness be shown to you; with what measure ye mete, with the same it
shall be measured to you."

Our author himself shows that these precepts cannot be mere floating
tradition. He says such "seems impossible" (vol. i. p. 226). They are
evidently the words of Jesus taken from a written source, but he
contends that they are not a quotation from the Sermon on the Mount,
as recorded in the Gospels as we have them, but _from some other
Gospel_ which is not extant. He says: "When the great difference is
considered between the parallel passages in Matthew and Luke, and
still more between these and the passage in Mark, it is easy to
understand that that other Gospel may have contained a version
differing as much from them as they do from each other."

I remark, supposing that Clement had before him all three versions,
which differ from each other, what is more natural than that he should
give the sense without adhering to the exact words of any. Only an
inquirer who has a bias against Christianity would think of disputing
the quotation.

If Epiphanius "clearly wrote without having the Gospel of Luke before
him," as our author states on page 100, and if Tertullian "evidently
quotes that Gospel from memory," as he also says on the same page; why
should it be assumed as a matter of course that Clement had the
writings before him? He also may have quoted from memory.

There is something strangely marvellous about the disappearance of
these imaginary lost records of the Sermon on the Mount. We know that
in the year A.D. 139 Justin Martyr wrote that the "Memoirs of the
Apostles," called "Evangels" (gospels), were read after the prophets
every Lord's Day in the assembly of the Christians. Where were they
then? Were they identical with these memoirs called Gospels? Where
were they about the year A.D. 180, when Irenæus proves that four
Gospels were held in the highest esteem, and were read in all the
Churches; alluding to them as the four columns of the Church, and
comparing them to the four quarters of the world, the four principal
winds, and the four figures of the Cherubim? Where were they when he
says: "So well established _are our Gospels_, that even teachers of
error themselves bear testimony to them: even they rest their
objections on the foundations of the Gospels"?[22] This hypothesis of
our author is certainly going out of the way to find the reason for a
thing. It is to be remembered that what is evidenced by Irenæus, who
wrote about A.D. 180, and was the pupil of Polycarp, is highly
important. Dr. Mosheim says his five books against heresies, the only
writings of his extant, are a splendid monument of antiquity.[23] From
the evidence of Irenæus, it is clear that the four Gospels must have
been occupying a special and authoritative place in the Church some
time before the time he wrote his five books on heresies, about the
year 180. Tischendorf, who knows as much as any man about the
Scripture manuscripts, says: "It is a well-established fact that,
already between A.D. 150 and 200, not only were the Gospels translated
into Latin and Syriac, but also that their number was defined to be
only four, neither more nor less." The Syriac version of the New
Testament called the Peshito, a work of immense value, as the language
is almost identical with that spoken by Christ, a translation
admirably executed, "is generally assigned," says Tischendorf, "to the
end of the second century, though we have not any positive proof to
offer;" and "the Latin version had acquired before this period a
certain public authority." As the man who translated Irenæus's five
books from Greek into Latin follows the Italic version, and as
Tertullian, in the quotation which he makes from the Latin
translation of Irenæus copies that translator, Tischendorf justly
argues that some time must have elapsed between that date when the
translation is known to have been in existence, and the period when
they were first separated from other Church writings, and attained a
prominent and sacred character. Thus we get to the apostolic age for
the origin of all the four Gospels, and there seems to be no interval
of time sufficient to account for our author's primitive Gospels to
have disappeared, leaving no trace of their existence. It is
enormously more probable that the four Gospels alluded to by Irenæus
and Tertullian contained the records from which Clement quoted the
passage of the Sermon on the Mount, than that there were primitive
independent writings which were soon lost, obtaining no recognition
when the separate Gospel manuscripts became associated with the Old
Testament, and were read after them in the Christian assemblies. Our
author says the passage quoted by Clement, referring to the Sermon on
the Mount, is decidedly opposed to "the pretensions made on behalf of
the Synoptics." I do not quite know what "pretensions" he alludes to,
but I am not defending pretensions, either ecclesiastical or
non-ecclesiastical. It is not necessary, in the defence of the
Gospels, to assert that the four Evangelists whose names are attached
to them wrote every word; that they only contain records of what those
disciples were either eye-witnesses of, or, in the case of Mark and
Luke, heard Peter and Paul preach. The formulæ, "according to
Matthew," "according to Mark," "according to Luke," "according to
John," do not imply that, in the most ancient opinion, these recitals
were written from beginning to end by Matthew, Mark, Luke, and
John.[24] It is enough to know that the writings so far emanated from
those disciples as to justify the titles they bear, and their
reception by the early Church, as the true record of the important
transactions to which they refer. That reception of them was
sufficiently near to the date of their composition to preclude the
probability that the early Christian Church had not the means of
testing their genuineness or historical data, while their internal
evidence is such as to confirm their truthfulness and authority.

  [22] "Adv. Hær." iii. 11. 7.

  [23] They were written while Eleutherius was Bishop of Rome (A.D. 177
  to 193), as is evident from his Catalogue (Lib. iii. c. 3) of the
  Bishops of Rome, for Eleutherius is the last of the twelve he
  mentions, and was then in possession of that pastorate.

  [24] See Rénan, "Life of Jesus," p. 8, cheap edition.

"As to Luke," says Rénan, "doubt is scarcely possible. It is a regular
composition, founded on anterior documents, the work of one man, who
selects, prunes, and combines. The author is certainly the same as
that of the Acts of the Apostles. Now the author of the Acts is a
companion of Paul, a title which applies to Luke exactly. The name of
Lucus (contraction of Lucanus) being very rare, we need not fear one
of those homonyms which cause so many perplexities in questions of
criticism relative to the New Testament. It is beyond doubt that the
author of the Third Gospel and of the Acts was a man of the second
generation, and that is sufficient for our object. The date can be
determined by considerations drawn from the Gospel itself. The
twenty-first chapter, inseparable from the rest of the work, was
certainly written a short time after the destruction of Jerusalem. We
are here upon solid ground, for we are concerned with a work written
entirely by the same hand, and of the most perfect unity. If the
Gospel of Luke is dated, those of Matthew and Mark are dated also; for
it is certain that the Third Gospel is posterior to the first two, and
exhibits the character of a much more advanced composition."

"Every one drew largely on the Gospel tradition then current. The Acts
of the Apostles and the ancient Fathers quote many words of Jesus
which appear authentic, and are not found in the Gospels we possess.
The life of Jesus in the Synoptics rests upon two original
documents--first, the discourses of Jesus collected by Matthew;
second, the collection of anecdotes and personal reminiscences which
Mark wrote from the recollections of Peter. We may say that we have
these two documents still, mixed with accounts from another source, in
the two first Gospels, which bear, not without reason, the name of the
Gospel according to Matthew, and of the Gospel according to Mark. It
was when tradition became weakened, in the second half of the second
century, that the texts bearing the name of the apostles took a
decisive authority, and obtained the force of law."

I have selected these passages from Rénan's "Life of Jesus," as they
bear upon the view of the origin of the Gospels which may be
entertained with consistency by those who accept their authority,
without insisting upon any such pretensions as our author seems to
combat, and which are not necessary for their defence.

I object also to the case being tried upon an indictment which
includes a uniform, plenary, and verbal inspiration. Nor is it, I
submit, necessary to defend the view that the Old and New Testaments
include no words but what are of Divine authority.

I maintain that God has supernaturally revealed His character and His
will in the Bible, but I know not where the hard and fast line is
which separates the human from the superhuman in our versions of these
sacred documents, the general characteristic of which is that they are
inspired productions; that therein "holy men of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost."[25] "Not the words which man's wisdom
teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth."[26]

  [25] 2 Pet. i. 21.

  [26] 1 Cor. ii. 13.

"God at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the
fathers," and having subsequently spoken by His Son, authenticates His
message, which, we cannot doubt, the Holy Spirit inspired the apostles
to record, by a special inspiration, as He did in pre-Christian times.

It is human nature for man to pervert even his best of blessings. Jews
and Christians alike have done so. When we think of the translators of
the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek altering the prophetical dates, to
mislead as to the coming of Messiah, as was done in the Septuagint
Version; of the genealogy of Joseph being fitted into three periods of
fourteen generations each, to square with Jewish notions of numerical
precision and completeness; of the verse in John's first epistle (v.
7) inserted in the text to add strength to the theological phraseology
of a creed; and of the first verses of the eighth chapter of the
Fourth Gospel being left out in several of the most ancient MSS.,
evidently owing to some great authority, such as Eusebius (who was
ordered by Constantine to prepare copies of the Scriptures), having
suppressed them; we cannot but be suspicious that human infirmity and
meddlesomeness have, to some extent, interfered with the transmission
of the Divine oracles. The fountain is undoubtedly pure, but has not
the channel been polluted through which the Divine truths have been
transmitted?

We have next a reference to the "Epistle of Barnabas" and the "Pastor
of Hermas," both of which are attached to that ancient copy of the
Scriptures known as the Codex Sinaiticus, recently found by
Tischendorf, in a monastery in the desert of Sinai, and now preserved
at St. Petersburg. It is the most ancient MS. of the Scriptures we
can refer to, and is supposed to have been written in the fourth
century.

After the New Testament, in this valuable MS., is placed the epistle
ascribed to Barnabas. It is complete. It was written some time between
the year 70 and the close of the first century, and it contains these
words:--"_Let us therefore beware lest we should be found as it is
written, Many are called, few are chosen._" These words certainly
appear to be quoted from the twenty-second chapter of Matthew, but our
author says there is a similar passage in the apocryphal book of
Ezra--"_There be many created, but few shall be saved_," and he asks
us to believe it is quoted from the latter. As we have not the same
bias as he has, we decline, for obvious reasons, to do so, although he
points out that the verse in Matthew is not in the oldest codex.
Unfortunately the one in the British Museum is defective at that part,
but the verse appears in later MSS. He says, had the Epistle of
Barnabas been seriously regarded as a work of the apostle of that
name, it could scarcely have failed to attain canonical rank. If this
be our author's opinion, there was more discrimination used by the men
who decided what writings were admissible into the canon than he has
elsewhere given them credit for. The Epistle of Barnabas also contains
the following important passage:--

"_But when he selected his own apostles, who should preach his gospel,
who were sinners above all sin, in order that he might show that he
came not to call the righteous, but sinners, then he manifested
himself to be the Son of God._"

Our author says that the words "_he came not to call the righteous,
but sinners_," very probably a pious scribe added in the margin, and
they were afterwards included in the text of the epistle.

I remark that this is quite a gratuitous assumption. I see no
probability of anything of the kind, and I agree with Tischendorf, who
asks, "Could any one mistake the words being a quotation from Matt.
ix. 13?" But our author insinuates that this chapter should be
dissected, and the miraculous eliminated. He says the words of Jesus,
"They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick,"
"evidently belong to the oldest tradition of the Gospel;" and he gives
the opinion of Ewald, who ascribed them (ver. 1214), apart from the
remainder of the chapter, originally to the _collection of
discourses_[27] from which, with two intermediate books, he considers
our present Gospel of Matthew was composed.

  [27] Spruchsammlung.

These are the sort of conjectures upon which our author builds his
argument. The ninth chapter of Matthew is too full of the miraculous
to be accepted as a whole. It records how Jesus forgave sins, to the
sick gave health, to the blind sight, to the dumb speech, and to the
dead life; all of which is out of keeping with his bias and the German
rationalism with which he has such profound sympathy.

Tischendorf finds a further analogy between the Epistle of Barnabas
and the Gospel of Matthew in the words, "_David prophesied, The Lord
said unto my Lord, Sit at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy
footstool_;" and inquires, "Could Barnabas so write without the
supposition that his readers had Matt. xxii. 4 before them? and does
not such a supposition likewise infer the actual authority of
Matthew's Gospel?" Because the passage is in the Psalms, our author
ridicules Tischendorf's inference. It is, to say the least, quite as
probable that Barnabas quoted from the Gospel as from the Psalms, and
there is propriety in Tischendorf's opinion and inference.

In designating his argument "rabid" and "preposterous," our author
exposes himself to arrows winged with similar feathers. When he
unwarrantably pretends to _know_ that the earliest records of what
Jesus did and taught did not contain anything but what comports with
the German school of theology which he favours, and which he has done
his best to make familiar to English readers, without exposing himself
personally to the odium which attaches to such opinions in a Christian
community, he has no claim to indulgence from those who examine his
language and animadvert thereupon.

Considering that, according to his own showing, the belief was, at all
events, prevalent in the Christian Church in the middle of the second
century that these writings of the apostles were authentic, and that
he cannot account for their being so esteemed, so soon after the
events occurred to which they refer, as to be universally read in all
the Christian Churches; it is, to say the least, unbecoming in him to
exalt his conjectures into oracles. Other critics, quite as inquiring,
able, and learned, more modestly say, "_The subject presents a variety
of embarrassing circumstances, so that it is difficult to arrive at a
satisfactory conclusion_." He lays himself open to be classified with
those who "_rush in where angels fear to tread_." There is a close
analogy between those who say in their hearts there is no God, and
those who say He has never spoken; and we know what is said in the
Bible of the former.

I will give here a specimen of the way our author quotes to suit his
own argument, and you will see whether the epithet "_preposterous_" is
at all applicable to him.

In showing how much John was opposed to Paul on the question of
Gentile Christians observing Jewish rites, he says, "_Allusion is
undoubtedly made to Paul in the Epistle to the Churches_, in the
Apocalypse;" and, "_It is clear that Paul is referred to in the
address to the Church of Ephesus_." The first passage is Rev. ii. 2,
"_I know thy works and thy patience, ... and how thou hast tried them
which say they are apostles and are not, and hast found them false_;"
implying that John was so opposed to Paul as to deny his being an
apostle, which is grossly improbable.[28] But the full absurdity of
the idea is more manifest in the next quotation from Rev. ii. 14: "But
I have a few things against thee because thou hast there them that
hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a
stumbling-block before the children of Israel, to eat things
sacrificed unto idols," _&c._ It would not have answered his purpose
to finish the sentence, so he stops at the word "idols," and puts
"_&c._" When I mention that the words which are represented by the
"_&c._" are "_and to commit fornication_," you will agree with me,
that not only is the idea of John saying that Paul had taught the
Christians at Pergamos to sin in this respect the climax of absurdity,
but that an author who quotes so unfairly, and reasons so strangely,
is not to be implicitly trusted, nor his conclusions accepted. He has
adopted the erroneous notion of Baur, the late eminent Professor of
Theology at Tübingen, and other German writers, that the difference
between the Jewish and Christian converts, in reference to
circumcision and other Jewish observances, amounted to a party
contest, which caused Paul and Peter and James to be seriously at
variance. Now we know the facts of the temporary disagreement, and
they certainly do not justify such a conclusion. The hypothesis of
such a Pauline and a Petrine contest needs only to be brought into
contact with the letters of Paul, in which he refers frequently to the
Gentile Churches sending help to the Jewish church at Jerusalem, and
it is at once exploded. He tells the Galatians how it was arranged at
Jerusalem, after the matters in dispute had been discussed, that he
and Barnabas, receiving the right hand of fellowship, should go to the
heathen, and James, Peter, and John to the circumcision; only the
latter stipulated that the poor at Jerusalem were to be remembered,
which Paul says, "I was forward to do." And he instructs the
Corinthians in his first epistle as to their collections on the first
day of the week before he came, that their liberality might be ready
to send to the poor saints at Jerusalem. There is here the very
opposite of such extreme hostile and disgraceful party feeling as must
have existed if John could indulge in such language regarding Paul as
our author attributes to him. There were false men, such as Simon the
sorcerer; false apostles, such as Paul alludes to; and corrupters of
morals, such as the Nicolaitanes; so that there is not the slightest
necessity to think of Paul and his dispute about Jewish rites, to make
the words of the Apocalypse intelligible.

  [28] Paul was not living when John wrote the Apocalypse.

Clement's letter, written from Rome to the Corinthians, probably about
the year 94 or 95, supplies us with evidence as to the nature of the
difference between Peter and Paul, as well as proves the epistle to be
genuine. He says, "Do take up the writings of the blessed apostle.
What did he say to you in the beginning of the Gospel? Truly, by
Divine Inspiration, he gave you directions concerning himself and
Peter and Apollos, because even then ye were splitting into parties.
But your party spirit at that time had less evil in it, because it was
exercised in favour of apostles of eminent holiness, and of _one_ much
approved of by them. But now consider _who_ they are that have
subverted you. These are shameful things, brethren, very shameful,
that the ancient and flourishing Church of Corinth have quarrelled
with their pastors, from a weak partiality for one or two persons."

Clement contrasts the eminent holy Peter and Paul and Apollos with the
persons who were subverting them, and the latter were undoubtedly the
sort of false apostles that John alludes to in the Apocalypse. The
evidence of the Second Epistle of Peter is not to be set aside because
our author includes it among the questionable writings of the New
Testament; and Peter there speaks of Paul as "our beloved brother, who
according to the wisdom given him hath written unto you."[29] It is
not convenient for such critics to allow the letter to be genuine, on
account of this very passage. But there is ample proof, from internal
evidence, as shown by Dr. Macnight, Dr. Blackwell, and Dr. A. Clarke,
that it is a genuine letter. What a weak case he must have in hand who
has to resort to such means to defend it!

  [29] 2 Pet. iii. 15.

The foregone conclusion that miracles are incredible, hampers all the
investigations of these German scholars, and compels them to resort to
all sorts of conjectures and devices to account for things which, on
the basis of Evangelical views, are neither mysterious nor
inharmonious. If it be true of Germany that her ablest theologians are
now exploding such fallacies, the argument of our author is one, the
force of which is expended, a gun brought into the field of battle
when the fight is nearly over. It may do some damage, but cannot
affect materially the issue of the contest. The outspokenness of the
sceptics has roused the believers, and the result, we cannot doubt,
will be for the furtherance of the gospel.

"The natural and spiritual miracles of the sacred narrative are only
the notes of a higher harmony which resound throughout the discords of
earthly history. To our dull sense indeed they may seem disconnected,
but the more we listen the more we perceive a connected law of higher
euphony, now presaging, and finally bringing about the solution of all
dissonance into an eternal harmony. Surely then a believer may look
down with pity upon the spirit of the age and its declaration, that
the harmony of the Kosmos is destroyed by the miracles of the Bible."
(Beyschlag.)

The "Shepherd of Hermas" is next alluded to, but as it is not
pretended that it contains any quotation from, or reference to, any
passage of the Old or New Testament, it is simply a negative witness
in this case. It is found in the Codex Sinaiticus, after the Epistle
of Barnabas. The following is Mosheim's description of the work: "The
book entitled the 'Shepherd of Hermas' (so called because an angel is
the leading character in the drama) was composed in the second
century, by Hermas, the brother of Pius, the Roman bishop. The writer,
if he was indeed sane, deemed it proper to forge dialogues held with
God and angels, in order to insinuate what he regarded as salutary
truths more effectually into the minds of his readers. But his
celestial spirits talk more insipidly than our scavengers and
porters."

What a contrast between the writings of the New Testament and those
left out of the canon does such a book as this "Shepherd of Hermas"
exhibit! Bunsen thus alludes to it: "That good but dull novel which
Niebuhr used to say he pitied the Athenian Christians for being
obliged to hear read in their meetings." "From the very dawn of
Catholic literature, beginning with 'Hermas the Shepherd,' it had been
the object of the Christian writers to render the Greek and Roman
mind, by degrees, independent of the heathen philosophers, and to
create a Catholic literature and library, more particularly for the
use of children and catechumens."[30]

  [30] "Hippolytus and his Age," vol. i., 315.

Failing to distinguish between what was intended to be true, what was
meant to be fiction, and what was fraudulently spurious, theologians
have often been misled, and important doctrines have been thereby
perverted.




