CHAPTER IV.

_THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS--CONTINUED._


_"It remains a possibility that Christ actually was what He supposed
Himself to be."_

  John Stuart Mill.




CHAPTER IV.

_THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS--CONTINUED._

     BASILIDES--VALENTINUS--MARCION--TATIAN--DIONYSIUS OF
     CORINTH--MELITO OF SARDIS--CLAUDIUS
     APOLLINARIS--ATHENAGORAS--EPISTLE OF VIENNE AND
     LYONS--PTOLEMÆUS, HERACLEON, CELSUS--CANON OF MURATORI.


Our author says of Basilides, "He was founder of a system of
Gnosticism, who lived at Alexandria about the year 125. With the
exception of a very few brief fragments, none of his writings have
been preserved, and all our information regarding them is derived from
writers opposed to him. Eusebius states that Agrippa Castor, who had
written a refutation of the doctrines of Basilides, 'Says that he had
composed twenty-four books upon the gospel.' This is interpreted by
Tischendorf to imply that the work was a commentary upon our four
Gospels, a conclusion the audacity of which can scarcely be exceeded"
(p. 42). I remark that by "the gospel" would be meant the gospel
which was preached by the apostles, and Tischendorf is not far wrong
in supposing that the written records of it in the hands of the first
Christians was the subject of the commentary. Our author has certainly
not proved the contrary. He says: "We know that Basilides made use of
a Gospel, written by himself it is said, but certainly called after
his own name; ... but the fragments of that work which are extant are
of a character which precludes the possibility of the work being
considered a Gospel." Neander affirmed the Gospel of Basilides to be
the Gospel according to the Hebrews. I remark that that is not only
probable, but that the Gospel to the Hebrews may have been the Hebrew
translation of the Greek Gospel of Matthew, with its additions and
modifications, to suit the Jewish Nazarene sect, who, we know, had a
Hebrew text of their own, which they did not hesitate to alter and
adapt to their own views. Basilides, says our author, expressly states
that he received his knowledge of the truth from Glaucis, the
"interpreter of Peter," whose disciple he claimed to be. Basilides
also claimed to have received from a certain Matthias the report of
private discourses which he had heard from the Saviour for his
special instruction. Canon Westcott writes: "Since Basilides lived on
the verge of the apostolic times, it is not surprising that he made
use of other sources of Christian doctrine besides the canonical
books. The belief in Divine inspiration was still fresh and real."[38]
Our author says: "It is apparent, however, that Basilides, in basing
his doctrine on these apocryphal books as inspired, and upon
tradition, and in having a special Gospel called after his own name,
ignores the canonical Gospels, offers no evidence for their existence,
but proves that he did not recognise any such works as of authority."
I remark, the question is not their authority, but, Did they exist?
Basilides wrote a book, called it a Gospel, or commentary of the
Gospel, and made as much use as suited his heretical purpose of the
canonical records, of tradition, and of other books. This seems to be
what we can arrive at. Hippolytus, writing of the Basilideans and
describing their doctrines, uses the singular pronoun "he"--"he says,"
in a passage of which our author gives an unintelligible translation.
This pronoun is an inconvenient witness. Our author wants it to be
"they," in order that the disciples of Basilides living at a later
period, when the Gospels were generally recognised, may be meant, and
not Basilides, who lived A.D. 125. Hippolytus has a sentence of
Basilides, which our author translates as follows:--"Jesus, however,
was generated according to _these_, as we have already said. But when
the generation which has already been declared had taken place, all
things regarding the Saviour, according to _them_, occurred in a
similar way as they have been written in the Gospel." This means that
the things referring to the Incarnation were as _written_ in the
Gospel, not as preached, but as written; and if Basilides, as the
founder of the sect, is referred to, the statement testifies to the
existence of the Gospels in the year 125, and the doctrine of the
Incarnation being in them. But our author says the statement is not
made in connection with Basilides, but his followers; that it is made
about A.D. 225, by Hippolytus, and affords no proof that either
Basilides or his followers used the Gospels or admitted their
authority. "The exclusive use, by any one, of the Gospel according to
the Hebrews, for instance, would be perfectly consistent with the
statement" (p. 48). "No one who considers what is known of that
Gospel, or who thinks of the use made of it in the first half of the
second century by perfectly orthodox Fathers, before we hear anything
of our Gospels, can doubt this" (p. 48). I remark, that those who
adopt Tischendorf's view, that Matthew was written in Greek, and a
corrupted version in Hebrew, used in certain countries, will not have
to resort to any such explanation as our author suggests. His
examination in detail of the several quotations is important, because
it exhibits his want of appreciation of the evidence they afford. The
first passage Tischendorf points out is found in the "Stromata" of
Clement of Alexandria, and it is certainly from our Gospel of
Matthew,[39] however that work may have been compiled (for it is not
necessary to insist that no other records than Matthew's own are
included in the book which, we contend, was at very early date read in
the Churches, and is what we now have). "They say the Lord answered,
All men cannot receive this saying. For there are eunuchs who are
indeed from birth, but others from necessity."[40] Our author says
"this passage in its affinity to, and material variation from, our
First Gospel, might be quoted as evidence for the use of the Gospel
according to the Hebrews, but it is simply preposterous to point to it
as evidence for the use of Matthew. Apologists ... seem altogether to
ignore the history of the creation of written Gospels, and to forget
the very existence of the πολλοἱ of Luke." We value his
acknowledgment, and find no difficulty, notwithstanding the silence of
some apologists, in reconciling our belief in the four Gospels with
the facts or probabilities of what can be ascertained as to their
"creation." We allow that the word Luke uses (πολλοἱ) refers
to many, which is consistent with the idea that many committed to
writing what they knew, and that their records were embodied in the
Synoptic Gospels.

  [38] "On the Canon," p. 255.

  [39] See Matt. xix. 11, 12.

  [40] "Strom." iii. 1.

The next passage referred to by Tischendorf is one quoted by
Epiphanius: "And therefore he said, Cast not ye pearls before swine,
neither give that which is holy unto dogs."[41] "It is introduced in
the section of the work of Epiphanius directed against the
Basilideans. As in dealing with all these heresies there is continual
interchange of reference to the head and later followers, there is no
certainty who is referred to in these quotations, and in this
instance nothing to indicate that the passage is ascribed to Basilides
himself. His name is mentioned in the first line of the first chapter,
but not again until the fifth chapter" (p. 50).

  [41] "Hær." xxiv. 5.

I remark, it was the founder of the sect and not the followers who
wrote the book, and those who opposed the heresy would, although they
alluded to the sect, have regard to the founder when they referred to
the doctrines held, and quoted the written opinions which
distinguished the party on gospel matters. To make the matter as plain
as I can, I will suppose a case as an illustration of the point.
Supposing that in Pliny's letter to Trajan there were found these
words referring to the Christians: "They say, the rule which should be
observed in regard to an enemy is, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
persecute you"--would it be right to assert that the quotation is no
proof that Christ so taught, but His disciples, long afterwards? This
is something like what our author's objection, referring to the
pronouns "he" and "they" in Hippolytus, amounts to. "They" does not
mean "he" when thus used; and "he," when actually used in the first
line of the first chapter, and afterwards means, "they;" that is, "He
(Basilides) says," means "They (his followers at a later date) say."

The plural pronoun is used, indicating the sect, Basilides and his
followers. Therefore our author says there is uncertainty as to who he
is when used in the same sentence. He says "Hippolytus is giving an
epitome of the views of the school with nothing more definite than a
subjectless φησἱ (he says) to indicate who is referred to.
None of the quotations which we have considered are directly referred
to Basilides himself, but they are introduced by the utterly vague
expression, 'He says' (φησἱ), without any subject accompanying the
verb."

The suggestion (p. 51) that Hippolytus "consciously or unconsciously,
in the course of transfer to his pages, corrected the text," is very
unsatisfactory. An intelligent reader cannot fail to see how an
obvious inference is avoided, and how ingenuity is taxed to make words
square with foregone conclusions.

Tischendorf asks: "Who is there so sapient as to draw the line between
what the master alone says, and that which the disciples state,
without in the least repeating the master?" (p. 59) and our author
says, "Tischendorf solves the difficulty by referring everything
indiscriminately to the master" (p. 59). To say that Tischendorf does
this is reckless assertion.

When our author has to account for such a passage in Basilides as,
"The Holy Spirit shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest
shall overshadow thee," he says it _happens_ to agree with the words
in Luke i. 55; and resorts to his usual mode of avoiding the
acknowledgment that such a verbatim quotation is against his
hypothesis, by saying, "There is good reason for concluding that the
narrative to which it belongs was contained in other Gospels." The
following sentence is startling, and apt to mislead those who do not
take the trouble to be sure of his meaning. He says (p. 67): "Nothing,
however, can be clearer than the fact that this quotation, by whomsoever
made, is not taken from our Third Synoptic, inasmuch as there does not
exist a single MS. which contains such a passage." What does he mean?
We turn to Luke i. 35, and read: "The Holy _Ghost_ shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore
also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the
_Son of God_." Does he mean the whole passage is not in any MS? No: he
means the following, with the slight variation at the end, is not in
any MS. "The Holy _Spirit_ shall come upon thee, and the power of the
Highest shall overshadow thee, therefore the thing begotten of thee
shall be called _holy_." Only the words in italics are different in
the two passages, and the meaning is the same, the only difference
being that the latter does not include the words "the Son of God." The
remark that the quotation _happens_ to agree with the passage in Luke
i. 35, should not be unnoticed.

Happens! Mark the peculiar inappropriateness of the word. It indicates
our author's whereabouts, and is a beacon in the book to warn the
reader. Events transpire, and they _happen_ to agree with prophetic
visions which plainly foretold them! Reason being unequal to an
explanation, coincidence must be resorted to. Was it an accident that,
"at one particular point in history, and in one special individual,
the elements of a new religious development, which, _per se_, were
already extant, should have concentrated themselves in a new life?"
This, says Baur, is "the wonder in the history of the origin of
Christianity which no historical reflection can further analyse." Did
it _happen_ that the Messiah came as was predicted centuries before?

Did Paul _happen_ to have a vision just at the time when the whole
course of his life underwent a change, and from being a chief
persecutor of the faith he became a chief apostle--no less an apostle
than the most prominent among the Twelve? If the Saviour did not meet
him on the way to Damascus he could not be an apostle; and as he was
an honest man, and no impostor, could what _happened_ to him have been
other than what he asserted? Baur was in a great difficulty about the
matter, and said, "_No analysis, either psychological or didactic, can
clear up the mystery of that act in which God revealed His Son in
Paul._" Jeremiah prophesied that the Jews should return to their own
land after seventy years of exile, and they _happened_ to do so!

The artful way in which the evidence from the writings of Hippolytus
is disposed of is one of the most notable things in the book we are
reviewing. The reader's attention is taxed to keep up with the
sophistical argument, and our author finds it necessary to explain why
he has been forced to go at such a length into these questions, as to
risk "being very wearisome" to his readers (p. 73).

These remarks apply to a great extent to the examination of the
evidence of Valentinus, described as "another Gnostic leader, who,
about the year A.D. 140, came from Alexandria to Rome, and flourished
till about A.D. 160." "Very little remains of the writings of this
Gnostic, and we gain our only knowledge of them from a few quotations
in the works of Clement of Alexandria, and some doubtful fragments
preserved by others" (p. 56).

Marcion, the son of a bishop of Pontus, became a conspicuous heretic
in the second century, and there was a book called "Marcion's Gospel,"
which has long furnished a field for criticism. He was a Pauline
heretic, denouncing the Jewish party which insisted upon dragging
Jewish observances into Christianity. He went to Rome about A.D.
139-142, and taught there some twenty years. His opinions were widely
disseminated. His collection of apostolic writings, which is the
oldest of which we have any trace, includes (says our author) a single
Gospel and ten Epistles of Paul--viz., Galatians, Corinthians (2),
Romans, Thessalonians (2), Ephesians (in the superscription of which
there is, "to the Laodiceans)," Colossians, Philippians, and Philemon.

The Gospel of Marcion is not extant, but it is referred to by his
opponents, who affirmed that his evangelical work was an audaciously
mutilated version of Luke's Gospel. Our author gives a brief account
of the various opinions which have prevailed about the book during the
last hundred years, and considers the discussion upon it far from
closed. Is it a mutilation of Luke, or an independent work derived
from the same source as his, or is it a more primitive version of that
Gospel? Whence are the materials from which the portions of the text
extant are derived? Tertullian and Epiphanius denounced Marcion's
heresy. The former called him "impious and sacrilegious," which, our
author says, implies anything but fair and legitimate criticism. I
remark, Did he deserve the epithets? Would Paul, who tells the
Colossians to "beware lest any man spoil them through philosophy and
vain deceit, after the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the
world, and not after Christ," have been less emphatic in his
denunciations in such a case? Marcion was more Pauline than Petrine,
but would Paul have failed to censure in the strongest language such a
misrepresentation of Jehovah and the Old Testament economy as Marcion
disseminated?

Can our author's assertion be absolutely true that "Tertullian and
Epiphanius were only dogmatical, and not in the least critical"? How
could they be otherwise than to a certain extent critical? They were
not critics in the way of taking nothing for granted, after the modern
fashion; but they must have weighed, compared, and tested Marcion's
views while writing against them. "The spirit of the age," he says,
"was indeed so uncritical, that not even the canonical text could
awaken it into activity." This is a sentence which suggests that the
position in the Church of the canonical text was so evident, that to
question it was then unwarrantable, as, indeed, it has continued to be
to this day. The combined internal and external evidences harmonising
with the believer's consciousness, his necessities, and his
aspirations, were sufficient to preclude sceptical and captious
criticism.

The Christian contemporaries of Irenæus, Tertullian, and Epiphanius
were uncritical in that they did not doubt that the foundations of
their faith were sure. The gospel which had been preached to them,
which had changed the whole course of their lives, corresponded in its
main features with the four books which were held in estimation by
the Church at that time above all other writings; and they would not
be likely to wrangle about the title instead of cultivating the faith
they possessed. They could not, perhaps, prove by the rules of logic
that "God is, and is the rewarder of them that diligently seek him;"
that Christ is the brightness of the Father's glory, and the express
image of his Person; but they knew that He had said,--"Ye believe in
God believe also in me;" "In my Father's house are many mansions;"
and, "I go to prepare a place for you." "Be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee a crown of life." They lived in the consciousness
of these truths, and died (Bishop Pothinus, for instance) a martyr's
death rather than deny them.

There is this remark to be made in reference to the alleged uncritical
age of the Fathers. How is it that Marcion is seen to be so critical?
He is surely after the modern model. He who wrote the "Antithesis,"
and, as our author says, anticipated in some of his opinions those
held by many in our own time; he who wrote,--"If the God of the Old
Testament be good, prescient of the future, and able to avert evil,
why did he allow man, made in his own image, to be deceived by the
devil, and to fall from obedience of the law into sin and death?[42]
How came the devil, the origin of lying and deceit, to be made at
all?"[43] surely he is an instance of a man in that age possessing the
critical faculty. He has the boldness to question, and say,--"Yea,
hath God said?" "Anticipating the results of modern criticism," says
our author, "Marcion denies the applicability to Jesus of the
so-called Messianic prophecies" (p. 106).

  [42] Tertullian, "Adv. Marc." xi. 5, cf. 9.

  [43] Ibid. xi. 10.

If the research which is going on as to the Gospel of Marcion be
conducted in a proper manner, and from a proper motive, not from
antipathy to "parsons" and ecclesiastical assumptions, which was the
incentive of Strauss in attacking Christianity, good will come of it.
As Justin Martyr did not, as far as we know, suppose the book to be a
corrupted version of the Gospel according to Luke, Tertullian may have
been mistaken, and it may have been an independent work, one of the
many Luke refers to, the existence of which does not necessarily
invalidate the canonical ones. We may naturally suppose that events of
such marvellous speciality and importance as those which had "come to
pass" in those days among the Jews, would be more or less described
in letters and other writings by many persons who were eye-witnesses.
Such writings would be collected and read when the first Christians
assembled. The difference between the four canonical Gospels and other
manuscripts would consist in their being compiled by persons competent
to the task, who, like Ezra, were instruments Divinely influenced to
compile and "set forth in order a declaration of those things," for
the benefit of future ages and the religious instruction of the race.

The analysis of the text of Marcion by Hahn, Ritschl, Volkmar,
Helgenfeld, and others, who have examined and systemised the data of
the Fathers, is supposed to be sufficient to awaken in any inquirer
uncertainty, and stimulate conjecture (p. 101). I do not doubt it.
German hypercriticism is able, by a process of ratiocination, to
discredit any truth, even to persuade men that the Throne of the
universe is vacant, and that the only altar that man has the knowledge
to rear is one to the Unknown God; but

    "He sits on no precarious throne,
    Nor borrows leave to be."

They who believe in the inspiration by the Holy Ghost of the prophets
of the Old Testament see no difficulty in regard to the inspiration of
the writers of the New. If Isaiah and Jeremiah and Daniel had
supernatural communications made to them, in order that the Eternal
Creator might be manifested, why not Paul and John and Matthew? It is
the foregone conclusion, on the part of critics, that the miraculous
is impossible, which embarrasses their researches. One of John Stuart
Mill's last sentences is: "It remains a possibility that Christ
actually was what He supposed Himself to be." If this had occurred to
the great reasoner at the outset of his career instead of the close,
how much might the world have been advantaged!

Tatian is a witness whose evidence our author next tries to set aside.
He was an Assyrian by birth, a disciple of Justin Martyr at Rome, and
afterwards, having joined the sect of the Eucratites, a conspicuous
exponent of their austere and ascetic doctrines. The only one of his
writings extant is his Oration to the Greeks, written after Justin's
death, as it refers to that event, and it is generally dated A.D.
170-175. One point contested is Canon Westcott's affirmation that it
contains a "clear reference" to a parable recorded by Matthew:[44]
"The kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hidden in a field, which
a man found and hid, and for his joy he goeth and selleth all that he
hath and buyeth that field." And the supposed reference by Tatian is,
"For by means of a certain hidden treasure he has taken to himself all
that we possess, for which, while we are digging, we are indeed
covered with dust, but we succeed in making it our fixed
possession."[45]

  [44] Matt. xiii. 44.

  [45] "Orat. ad Gr." § 30.

There is certainly not much similarity between the two passages,
although Tatian may be well supposed to have had the parable in his
mind when he wrote. The more important question is, Did Tatian write
"A Harmony of Four Gospels," which recognises our four Evangelists?
Was his Diatessaron such a book, or was it the Gospel according to the
Hebrews? If the latter, what is the Gospel according to the Hebrews? I
say it is probable it is the corrupted Hebrew translation of the Greek
Gospel of Matthew, and this conjecture has more in its favour than our
author's hypothesis.

Dionysius of Corinth, Eusebius tells us, wrote seven epistles to
various Churches, and a letter to Chrysophora, "a most faithful
sister." Only a few short fragments exist, which are all from the
epistle to Soter, Bishop of Rome, whose date in that pastorate is A.D.
168-176. In these fragments we find the following words:--"For the
brethren having requested me to write epistles, I write them. And the
apostles of the devil have filled these with tares, both taking away
parts and adding others, for whom the woe is destined. It is not
surprising, then, if some have recklessly ventured to adulterate the
Scriptures of the Lord, when they have corrupted these, which are not
of such importance."[46] After quoting this passage, our author
reiterates his statement that "We have seen that there has not been a
trace of any New Testament Canon in the writings of the Fathers before
and during this age." Does he suppose his readers will have seen as he
sees, or rather refuse to see what is plain enough? He has his own
opinion, but he need not assume that he has convinced his readers that
he has proved what he alleges. He talks of Westcott's boldness, and of
his imagination running away with him, and that it is simply
preposterous to suppose that this passage refers to the New Testament.
I leave Canon Westcott to defend his own words, but I say it is not
preposterous to infer that when Dionysius speaks of the "Scriptures of
the Lord" he means Gospel writings, which are included in our New
Testament. If it be assumed that the defence of the authority of the
New Testament writings and of evangelical views is necessarily based
on the synodical authority of the early Church, there may be some
weight in his objections; but Christianity has a position independent
of ecclesiastical pretensions to infallibility, and the latter may be
overthrown without the great institution established by Divine mercy
for the recovery of humanity from sin and its consequences being in
the slightest degree damaged. Dr. Donaldson is quoted, who remarks:
"It is not easy to settle what this term, 'Scriptures of the Lord,'
is; but my own opinion is that it most probably refers to the Gospels,
as containing the sayings and doings of the Lord. It is not likely, as
Lardner supposes, that such a term would be applied to the whole of
the New Testament."[47] The word "Scripture," in Greek, Γραφἡ
(Graphé), in Latin, _Scriptura_, has, no doubt, a meaning
which denotes an inspired writing. It is used fifty-one times in the
New Testament in the same sense, for Christ and the authors of the
New Testament regarded the Old Testament as distinguished from all
other writings, as _the_ writing--the writing of God. By speaking of
their own books as Graphai, the apostles place them on a level with
the Old Testament, and thus assert their Divine character.[48]

  [46] Eusebius, "H. E." iv. 23.

  [47] "Hist. Christ. Lit. and Doct." ii. p. 217.

  [48] See Chr. Wordsworth, "On the Canon," p. 55. Lec. ii. and Ed.
  1851.

Dr. Davidson speaks of the New Testament writings being ranked as
"Holy Scripture" by Dionysius of Corinth, A.D. 170.

Our author asserts (p. 167) that "many works were regarded as inspired
by the Fathers besides those in our Canon," and mentions especially
the Gospel of Peter having been read at Rhossus. He says: "The fact
that Serapion, in the third century, allowed the Gospel of Peter to be
used in the Church of Rhossus shows the consideration in which it was
held, and the incompleteness of the canonical position of the New
Testament." Now, he ought to have quoted Serapion's own explanation,
which we have preserved by Eusebius. He says (in his treatise written
to confute what was false in the Gospel of Peter): "We receive Peter
and the other apostles even as Christ; but the writings falsely called
by their names, we, as competent critics, renounce, knowing that we
received not such things. For when I was with you I supposed that all
were agreed with the true faith; and, without reading the Gospel
called Peter's, which they brought forward, I said, If this is the
only thing that seems to cause you dissension, let it be read."
Serapion says he borrowed the book and read it, and found many things
agreeable to Christ's doctrine, but some discrepant additions.

Thus the reading of the Gospel of Peter at Rhossus cannot be instanced
as a proof that other Gospels besides the canonical ones were used as
inspired books, nor can any other be mentioned as having been thus
regarded, the Gospel according to the Hebrews not being apocryphal,
but a part of the New Testament, whether we take it to be, as our
author supposes, the basis of Matthew's Gospel, or, as we say, a
corrupted version of that apostle's Greek work. "To argue that because
one spurious Gospel was temporarily received among a few persons,
therefore there was no real canon of Scripture, and we cannot be sure
that any Gospel is genuine, shows about as much common sense and
logical acumen as would be displayed by a critic eighteen centuries
hence, who, discovering in one of our newspapers an account of the
conviction of a gang of coiners, should argue that because their base
half-crowns had got into circulation, and had passed current with some
persons who might have been expected to detect the fraud, therefore
there was no such thing as a legal currency of intrinsic value among
us; or if there were, still we did not know or care to inquire into
the genuineness of the coin which we accepted and passed."[49]

  [49] See Kentish Bache's "Letters to Dr. Davidson," p. 22.

Our author says (p. 16): "'The Pastor of Hermas,' which was read in
the churches, and nearly secured a permanent place in the Canon, was
quoted as inspired by Irenæus."[50]

  [50] "Adv. Hær." iv. 20, § 2; Euseb. "H. E." v. 8, and cf. iii. 3.

The word Irenæus uses is _Graphé_, which is sometimes translated, when
found in his works, _Scripture_, and at other times _writings_, as may
best suit the argument of a critic like Dr. Davidson, who does so
adapt the translation to suit his purpose.

Whatever erroneous notions might prevail as to apocryphal writings,
the discrimination of Serapion, in regard to the Gospel of Peter,
shows that such a work as the "Pastor of Hermas," in which, as
Mosheim says, the angels are made to "talk more insipidly than our
scavengers and porters," would not be put on a level with the books
whose internal evidence, as well as historical pretensions, placed
them in a much superior position. The contrast is too great for such
men as Irenæus and Tertullian, as well as Serapion, not to have
recognised the difference. The "gross forgeries" were too gross to be
at once accepted as genuine by the Fathers of the slight critical
faculty and the ready credulity of our author's argument.

Melito of Sardis, whose writings, it is generally agreed, belong to
A.D. 176, because the fragment extant has a phrase indicating that
Commodus had been admitted to share the Imperial Government with
Marcus Aurelius, is the next witness. He writes to Onesimus, "a
fellow-Christian who had urged him to make selections for him from the
Law and the Prophets concerning the Saviour and the faith generally,
and furthermore desired to learn the accurate account of the old
(Palaion) books." "Having gone to the East," Melito says, "and reached
the spot where each thing was preached and done, and having learned
accurately the books of the Old Testament, I have sent a list of
them." Dr. Westcott excites our author's ire because he says "that the
use of the word 'old' in this way implies that there must have been a
New Testament, and the form of language implies a familiar recognition
of its contents." This is "truly astonishing," says our author. I
remark, it is truly astonishing that any one should assert that the
use of the adjective "old" in this sentence does not plainly indicate
the existence of other books of a New Covenant or Testament. If the
Jewish Scriptures had been merely described as _old books_, we could
have understood the objection; but as the words occur, "_having
learned accurately the books of the Old Testament_," we must side with
Dr. Westcott, in spite of our author's astonishment.

Claudius Apollinaris, Eusebius says, was Bishop of Hierapolis, and
there is the fragment of a letter of Serapion, Bishop of Antioch,
which supports the statement, and in which Apollinaris is referred to
as the "most blessed." The date of his writings, in consequence of an
allusion to the Thundering Legion of the army of Marcus Aurelius, may
be fixed at about A.D. 174. None of them are extant. We have only two
brief fragments, in which the controversy respecting the observance of
the Christian Passover is alluded to. The following passage is
important: "There are some, however, who through ignorance raise
contentions regarding these matters in a way which should be pardoned,
for ignorance must not be pursued with accusation, but requires
instruction. And they say that the Lord, together with His disciples,
ate the lamb on the great day of unleavened bread, and they state that
Matthew says precisely what they have understood; hence their
understanding of it is at variance with the law, and according to them
the Gospels seem to contradict each other." Tischendorf and Westcott
naturally adduce this passage in support of the position of the four
canonical Gospels. Our author demurs, arguing that "there is such
exceedingly slight reason for attributing these fragments to Claudius
Apollinaris, and so many strong grounds for believing that he cannot
have written them, that they have no material value as evidence for
the antiquity of the Gospels" (p. 191).

Athenagoras wrote an apology, entitled "The Embassy of Athenagoras the
Athenian, a Philosopher and a Christian, concerning Christians, to the
Emperors Marcus Aurelius Antoninus and Lucius Aurelius Commodus,
Armeniaci Surmatici, and, above all, Philosophers;" and also a
"Treatise on the Resurrection of the Body." A passage from the former
occurs in the work of Methodius on the Resurrection, and is preserved
by Epiphanius and by Photius.

"For we have learnt not only not to render a blow, nor to go to law
with those who spoil and plunder us; but, to those who inflict a blow
on one side, also to present the other side of the head in return for
smiting; and to those who take away the coat, also to give besides the
cloke."[51]

  [51] "Leg. pro Christ." § 1.

Of this our author says: "No echo of the words of Matthew has lingered
in the ear of the writer, for he employs utterly different phraseology
throughout; and _nothing can be more certain than the fact_ that there
is not a linguistic trace in it of acquaintance with our Synoptics"
(p. 194).

The value of our author's conclusions may be measured by what he here
asserts. It seems to me that the reverse may be asserted. (1) That
words in Matthew _did_ "linger in the ear of the writer;" (2) that he
_does not_ "employ utterly different phraseology throughout;" and (3)
that many things "_can_ be more certain than the fact that there is
not a linguistic trace in it of acquaintance with our Synoptics."

The next passage which is referred to is as follows:--"What, then, are
those precepts in which we are instructed? I say unto you, Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, pray for them that persecute you;
that ye may be sons of your Father which is in the heavens, who maketh
his sun," &c.[52]

  [52] "Leg. pro Christ." § 11. See Matt. v. 44, 45.

There is also the following:--"For if ye love, them which love you,
and lend to them which lend to you, what reward shall ye have?"[53]

  [53] "Leg. pro. Christ." § 12. Comp. with Matt. v. 46.

Of this passage, our author says it is evident that it does not agree
with either of the Synoptics. "We have seen," says he, "the persistent
variation in the quotations from the Sermon on the Mount which occur
in Justin, and there is no part of the discourses of Jesus more
certain to have been preserved by living Christian tradition, or to
have been recorded in every form of Gospel. The differences in these
passages from our Synoptics present the same features as mark the
several versions of the same discourse in our First and Third Gospel,
and indicate a distinct source" (p. 195). I remark, every step our
author takes in this sort of criticism tends to the confirmation of
our Christian faith, which is not the Christianity of a creed or a
Church, but the belief in a Person. The more independent accounts of
His life and discourses which can be traced, the greater the proof of
His advent and mission. The Sermon on the Mount cannot be accounted
for apart from the superhuman. "Never man spake like this man." The
more it is quoted the more it is established as a sublime fact in
literature, which neither the Jewish race, nor the Augustan era, nor
indeed any other race or any other age, could have originated apart
from Divine intervention.

The Epistle of Vienne and Lyons, written from the Churches in those
towns to their brethren in Asia and Phrygia, about the year A.D. 177,
giving an account of the terrible persecution which had broken out, is
in part preserved by Eusebius. It contains words similar to those used
in regard to Zacharias and Elisabeth, where they are said to have
"walked in all the commandments and ordinances of God, blameless." And
it has also the words, "And himself having the Spirit more abundantly
than Zacharias," which compares with Luke i. 67: "And his father
Zacharias was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied." In
reference to these passages, our author's comment is as follows: "The
state of the case is, we find a coincidence, in a few words in
connection with Zacharias, between the Epistle and our Third Gospel;
but so far from the Gospel being in any way indicated as their source,
the words in question are, on the contrary, in association with a
reference to events unknown to our Gospels, but which were indubitably
chronicled elsewhere. It follows clearly, and few will venture to
doubt the fact, that the allusion in the Epistle is to a Gospel
different from ours, and not to our Third Synoptic at all" (p. 204).
The event unknown to our Gospels is the martyrdom of Zacharias, which
our Gospels make no mention of.

Ptolemæus and Heracleon, two Gnostic leaders, are next referred to. Of
the former, Epiphanius has preserved "The Epistle to Flora," addressed
to one of his disciples, which contains passages similar to sentences
found in Matthew xii. 25, xix. 8, 6, xv. 4-8, v. 38, 39.; but our
author objects that the Epistle "was in all probability written
towards the end of the second century, and therefore it does not come
within the scope of our inquiry;" and he goes into considerable detail
to justify this statement.

Celsus wrote a work entitled "True Doctrine," which is not extant,
and of which Origen wrote a refutation. Our author says "it refers to
incidents of Gospel history and quotes some sayings which have
parallels, with more or less of variation, in our Gospels;" but
"Celsus nowhere mentions the name of any Christian book, unless we
except the Book of Enoch, and he accuses Christians, not without
reason, of interpolating the Book of the Sibyl, whose authority he
states some of them acknowledged" (p. 236). He goes into the question
of the date, which he makes out to be probably not between A.D.
150-160, as Tischendorf suggests, but much later.

In the last fragment of early literature examined--the Canon of
Muratori--the Book of Luke is alluded to as "_the third Gospel_," and
our author says (p. 241) "the statement regarding the Third Gospel
_merely_ proves the existence of that Gospel at the time the fragment
was composed," and that "the inference" that there was a first and
second Gospel is a _mere_ conjecture. I remark that if the statement
does prove that Luke's Gospel existed at the time the fragment was
composed, we gratefully accept the acknowledgment; and as to the
adverbs "_mere_" and "_merely_," which qualify the noun "_conjecture_"
and verb "_proves_," when our author's third volume appears, if it
does not furnish more than "_mere conjecture_" that the first and
second preceded it, we will allow the adverbs properly applied, and
the logic perfect.

The sentences in which such words as _certainly_, _it is certain_, _it
is undeniable_, _there is no question_, _it is impossible to suppose_,
_it is obviously mere speculation_, &c., are used, where the reasoning
does not warrant them, are innumerable; and it is only after becoming
familiar with the special pleading which is characteristic of the work
throughout, that the unsophisticated reader escapes from the
bewilderment into which the evidences of Christianity seem to get
entangled. The author seems to have got the reader into a gloomy
cavern of criticism, and it is only after the eye has become
accustomed to the partial darkness that he can make out whether what
he is taken to see are real figures, images, or ghosts. When he has
got to the middle of the second volume, however, he begins to see the
light again, and breathe more freely. He sees a way right through the
cavern, and finds that the figures of this underground chamber of
horrors are all phantoms.

The "Examiner" justly says: "For our part we see no reason why the
Synoptic[54] Gospels may not have assumed their present form by the
end of the first century;[55] and we cannot think that our author's
German oracles have succeeded in establishing their dissimilarity from
the documents quoted by the Primitive Fathers. Justin Martyr's
references to the Sermon on the Mount, for instance, appear to us to
be actually derived from Matthew. If, however, as is contended, they
were taken from the lost "Gospel of the Hebrews," this merely proves
the substantial identity of the two. The question of Justin's
acquaintance with the Fourth Gospel is more difficult. We are
nevertheless disposed to resolve it in the affirmative."

  [54] The word Synoptics, applied to Matthew, Mark, and Luke's Gospels,
  indicates abridgment--the bringing of all parts under one view.--_See
  Dr. Hyde Clark's Dictionary_.

  [55] "Negative critics, as we have seen, have been compelled again to
  raise the age of the Gospels, and to place them in the apostolic age,
  between A.D. 50 and A.D. 100."--_Dr. Christlieb_, p. 541.

This is a sensible comment on our author's general argument.




