CHAPTER I.

_MIRACLES._


_"Seriously to raise this question, whether God can perform miracles,
would be impious if it were not absurd."_

  Rousseau.




CHAPTER I.


In the first part of the work the following topics are discussed by
the author:--"Miracles in relation to Christianity and the order of
nature--Reason in relation to the order of nature--The age of
miracles--The permanent stream of miraculous pretension--Miracles in
relation to ignorance and superstition."

In stating the main purpose of his inquiry, he says (p. 8):--"It is
obvious that the reality of miracles is the vital point in the
investigation which we have undertaken." "If the reality of miracles
cannot be established, Christianity loses the only evidence by which
its truth can be sufficiently attested."

He might have dispensed with his arguments against the views of those
who endeavour to bring the miracles of the Bible within the scope of
the laws of nature, and to modify them by explanatory interpretations
so as to satisfy the demands of scientific and philosophical
theologians.

Christianity admits of no such treatment. In its essence it is
superhuman, abnormal, phenomenal, supernatural, though not unnatural.
A series of facts divinely attested, a proclamation of mercy divinely
commissioned, a system of means divinely blessed, is the true
definition of the gospel.

Discussing the antecedent credibility of miracles, our author makes
much of the references in the Bible to the working of miracles by
Satanic as well as Divine agency. "If," says he, "miracles are
superhuman they are not super-Satanic." The answer to this obviously
is, that what was merely a superstitious notion of the Jews, and that
which is taught by Divine authority, are two very different things.
Where in the Bible do we find that God reveals His will by miracles
which are not the manifestations of His own power? Christ points to
the superhuman works that He was doing in His Father's name as
evidence of His mission; and when the Jews suggested that He cast out
devils by Beelzebub, He said, "If Satan cast out Satan he is divided
against himself: how shall his kingdom stand?"[3] The man born blind,
to whom sight was given, said, "If this man were not of God he could
do nothing;"[4] and he said it was "a marvellous thing" that the Jews
did not know _he_ was from God who had wrought the miracle.

  [3] Matt. xii. 26.

  [4] John ix. 33.

"Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews, said to Jesus, Rabbi, we know that
thou art a teacher come from God: for no man can do these miracles
that thou doest except God be with him."[5] "Some of the Pharisees
said, This man is not of God, because he keepeth not the sabbath day.
Others said, How can a man that is a sinner do such miracles?"[6]
"Some of the Jews said, Can a devil open the eyes of the blind?"[7]

  [5] Ibid. iii. 2.

  [6] Ibid. ix. 16.

  [7] Ibid. x. 21.

Our author's statement is certainly not supported by the passage
quoted from Deuteronomy xiii. 3, of which he says, "The false miracle
is here attributed to God Himself." The words of that passage are: "If
there arise among you a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and giveth
thee a sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass,
whereof he spake unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which
thou hast not known, and let us serve them: thou shalt not hearken
unto the words of that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams: for the
Lord your God proveth you, to know whether ye love the Lord your God
with all your heart and with all your soul. Ye shall walk after the
Lord your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his
voice, and ye shall serve him, and cleave unto him. And that prophet,
or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death; because he hath
spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God, which brought you out
of the land of Egypt, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, to
thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded thee to
walk in. So shalt thou put the evil away from the midst of thee." I
transcribe the whole passage, that its plain meaning may be seen, and
you may understand how much reliance is to be placed on our author
when he appears as a Bible commentator. Of course the prophet referred
to is one "pretending to the Divine inspiration and authority of the
prophetic office," and "the dreamer of dreams" one who pretends that
some deity has spoken to him in a dream.

If our author be a Biblical scholar, his scholarship is greatly at
fault in the passage he refers to in Ezekiel xiv. 9: "And if the
prophet be deceived when he hath spoken a thing, I the Lord have
deceived that prophet, and I will stretch out my hand upon him, and
will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel." According to the
Hebrew language, God is often said to _do_ a thing which He only
suffers or permits. How can God be understood to harden Pharaoh's
heart in any other sense? The character of God is too plainly
described in the Bible to leave any uncertainty on this point.

The passages quoted from the New Testament only _apparently_ support
his statement. He quotes Dr. Mansel in reference to them, and no doubt
his words truly apply where he says, "The supposed miracles are not
true miracles at all, _i.e._, are not the effects of Divine power, but
of human deception or some other agency." The existence and powers of
angels, good and bad, we know little about, because little is
revealed; but it is not the Bible but superstition which teaches that
the fallen spirits have more power than the faithful ones in the
affairs of this world, that Satan is more potent than Gabriel. If we
knew more about the origin of evil, this matter would probably be less
mysterious to our finite intelligence.

Our author describes (vol. i. page 47) what he supposes orthodox
Christianity includes; and among other strange assertions he says that
man was tempted into sin by Satan, "an all-powerful and persistent
enemy of God," thus making the fallen angel an _Almighty_ being.

This matter has an important bearing on the proper exhibition of
religious truth, for the more superstition is intermingled with it,
the more will unbelief be likely to be prevalent. On the one hand,
infidelity engenders superstition, and on the other, superstition
creates aversion to religion. I cannot but think that there is
something wrong in the way in which Christian men, in the pulpit and
elsewhere, often allude to the spirit of evil. He is represented in
Scripture as the "god of this world," but surely that is not to be
understood literally.

Jesus told the Jews that the devil was their father, as their deeds
being evil indicated, who was "a murderer from the beginning, and
abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he
speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own: for he is a liar, and the
father of it."[8] As, therefore, the devil is the father of lies, so
are we to understand he is the God of this world. Not in any other
sense. He is potent, but not omnipotent; knowing, but not omniscient;
has his representatives distributed among the scenes of sin and death
in our world, and himself goeth "to and fro in the earth,"[9] but he
is not omnipresent. It is Oriental demonology which teaches that two
equal principles--good and evil--are alike dominant, not "the truth as
it is in Jesus;" Persian superstition, Gnostical heresy, not Divine
revelation.

  [8] John viii. 44.

  [9] Job i. 7.

The frivolous use of words and matters connected with the spiritual
world and our eternal interests is greatly to be disapproved and
condemned; but surely the mention of Satan is not to be designated as
profane, as if God's holy name were taken in vain. To comment on what
are called profane oaths in such a way is not to enlighten the minds
of the vulgar, but to mystify and conceal the truth of Christianity.
It is one thing to believe that there is in existence the spiritual
being whose evil doings our Saviour's coming into our world
frustrates, whose power is great, whose emissaries are innumerable,
and whose baneful suggestions and influence the Holy Spirit alone can
withstand, and quite another thing to believe that Satan could give
miraculous attestation to a lie, as God did to the truth. If there are
some passages of Scripture that seem to favour this false view, it
behoves us to suspect, having regard to the whole tenour of Scripture
affecting the doctrine, that the correct interpretation has not been
arrived at.

The existence of Satan, and his influence, personal, and by the
legions who fell with him, are of course superhuman ideas, and in the
category of the miraculous; but there is a wide difference between the
most striking sign of his spiritual power and the Divine miracles
wrought to attest the truth. It is God "who alone doeth great
wonders."[10]

  [10] Psa. cxxxvi. 14.

"If this man were not of God he could do nothing."[11] "If I do not
the works of my Father, believe me not."[12]

  [11] John ix. 33.

  [12] Ibid x. 37.

"A miracle is a sign for our faith, to be apprehended in its Divine
intention, though it cannot be comprehended, because it is God's
especial work." When the magicians in the Court of Pharaoh saw the
miracles which Moses wrought, they said, "This is the finger of
God,"[13] which is, and intended to be, the inevitable inference.
They knew that all they could do was a sham, a pretence.

  [13] Exod. viii. 19.

Counterfeits are as prominent in the history of our race as any
feature that could be specified, and an imaginary devil is conspicuous
in the category of the spurious. If there had been no real one, the
counterfeit could scarcely have been conceived. He is the father of
lies, and how numerous his progeny! While all else is misrepresented,
parodied, travestied, burlesqued, falsified, belied, it would be
strange if he had escaped. From the Eternal Himself down to the most
insignificant thing that is worth a forgery, what a catalogue may in
an instant be specified! The Divine law with its ceremonial rites, and
the Church with its ordinances; prophets and apostles; gospels and
epistles; science and philosophy; history and biography; and,
assuredly, miracles; in short, all truth--stem, branch, twig, and
leaf--is more or less, and at one time or another, got up
artificially, and the spurious or adulterated article offered, in
competition with the genuine one, to human credulity. This, if it
makes absolute truth difficult to buy, renders the injunction to "sell
it not," when bought, true wisdom. It seems to be, and of course is,
absurd to doubt the genuineness of the currency of a nation because
spurious coins are met with, but I believe that more scepticism is
produced by the consideration of the many religious impostures in the
world than by any other influence. The inference is childish in the
ignorant and unphilosophical in the scholar, but it is often
unconsciously arrived at in many minds as a plain and easy solution of
the question which cannot be evaded--Is Divine revelation a reality?

Our author misrepresents Christianity, and uses the misrepresentation
as an argument against it, as, alas! is only too common. John Stuart
Mill actually says in his essay on Theism (p. 240) that "Christ is
never said to have declared any evidence of His mission (unless His
own interpretations of the prophecies be so considered) except
internal conviction." If Mr. Mill ever read the New Testament through,
he would have found where it is written, "Jesus answered and said unto
them, Go and show John again those things which ye do hear and see:
the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed,
the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel
preached to them. And blessed is he, whosoever is not offended in
me." And also the words, "But I have greater witness than that of
John: for the works which the Father hath given me to finish, the same
works that I do, bear witness of me, that the Father hath sent
me."[14] "The Jews came round about him and said, How long dost thou
make us to doubt? If thou be the Messiah, tell us plainly. Jesus
answered, I told you, and ye believed not: the works that I do in my
Father's name, they bear witness of me."[15] "Believe me for the very
works' sake."[16]

  [14] John v. 36.

  [15] Ibid x. 25.

  [16] Ibid xiv. 11.

How, in the face of such an authoritative statement why miracles were
wrought by Jesus, can our author assume that they were not intended to
be an appeal to reason, and to be tested by the intelligence and
common sense they appealed to? The miracles were wrought to convince
men that Jesus was the Messiah, and were adapted to that end. Our
author's picture of Divine revelation is very much a conception of his
own, fashioned from isolated portions of Scripture, pseudo-Judaism,
and ecclesiastical representations of Christianity.

He quotes Archbishop Trench, who, in defining the function of a
miracle, says,--"A miracle does not prove the truth of a doctrine or
the divine mission of him that brings it to pass;" and Dr. Arnold, who
says,--"It has always seemed to me that its substance is a most
essential part of its evidence, and that miracles wrought in favour of
what was foolish or wicked would only prove Manicheism:" which
passages of fallible commentators fail to express the distinction
between real miracles and spurious ones. But I ask, Why does he appeal
to what Dr. Trench and Dr. Arnold, or any other commentator says, when
he has before him our Saviour's own words? In arguing against
miracles, it is not competent for him to put his own construction upon
them in violation of the highest authority as to their purpose and
design. I understand his conclusions to be against Christianity--not
against what he is pleased to put in its place. It is in the Fourth
Gospel we find Christ's words, but that book is too important a part
of Divine revelation for any apologist to remain in the field of
discussion and continue the argument if his opponent,--whether he be
Mr. Mill or our author,--insists on assuming that on the Christian
side the question is an open one whether the Fourth Gospel is to be
accepted. The whole of the four Gospels as we have them were read in
all the Christian Churches on the three continents in the middle of
the second century, as our author well knows. He acknowledges that
Irenæus, who wrote about A.D. 180, compared the four Gospels to the
"four columns of the Church over the whole world;" and that in
writings of his which we have, and the genuineness of which no one
questions, there are hundreds of references to the Gospels, the fourth
included. There is no question as to this being the fact at that date.
It is the earlier date that the argument bears upon. The four Gospels
are held together by an inseparable bond in the archives of the
Church, and believers in them assert they will all four stand or fall
together. I can only suppose that it was because Mr. Mill ignored the
Fourth Gospel that he ignored the verses I have quoted.

If an advocate has a weak case in hand, to damage the character of the
witnesses is a well-known mode of proceeding; so our author asks who
are the men who, it is asserted, saw these amazing performances? What
were the intellectual conditions of the age when they occurred? "Did
the Jews at the time of Jesus possess such calmness of judgment and
sobriety of imagination as to inspire us with any confidence in
accounts of marvellous occurrences unwitnessed except by them, and
limited to their time, which contradict all knowledge and all
experience? Were their minds sufficiently enlightened and free from
superstition to warrant our attaching weight to their report of events
of such an astounding nature?" (Vol. i. p. 98.)

The reading of this sentence suggests a comparison between the age he
refers to and the century succeeding Harvey's discovery of the
circulation of the blood, during which our Royal College of Physicians
repudiated the discovery, some of the most eminent of the faculty
writing against it, and creating a prejudice against Harvey by which
his practice suffered considerably; and the scientific period when the
French Academy for a long time rejected the use of quinine,
vaccination, lightning-conductors, the steam-engine, &c.

To weaken the apostolic testimony, there is presented an elaborate
exhibition of the wide-spread belief among the Jews in sorcery,
dreams, portents, and numerous forms of superstition. In what age have
not these been prevalent? Are we free from them in this? If the Divine
communication had been postponed until now, and civilisation could
have attained to its present stage without its influence, would its
reception have been any different? Would the vested interests in
established usages and beliefs have raised no opposition? If there are
in this country, and in this day, thousands who believe, or pretend to
believe, that the priests who are ordained to forgive sins can really
do so, are we in a position to assume any great superiority over the
Jews, Greeks, and Romans of eighteen centuries ago? If the most
manifest and stupendous miracle were wrought to show men the folly of
drunkenness, lying, and other sins, would not the results be just the
same? Some would believe and testify, and others say that the sign,
not being of the precise sort to suit them, was not conclusive. There
must be a coming down from the cross, or something else, to satisfy
them. "If they believe not Moses and the prophets, neither would they
believe though one rose from the dead." The testimony of the first
disciples, it is said, is not satisfactory, because they were
uneducated, unscientific, uncritical. Mr. Mill says Paul was the only
exception in the first generation of Christians. I remark that
Matthew, in the position of a receiver of taxes for the Roman
government, though not learned, might be shrewd to detect imposture;
that Thomas was not too credulous; and that as for Paul, if he could not
judge of the value of the testimony of the hundreds of men and women
who told him, or could have told him, what they were eye-witnesses of,
what was his education worth, and what about the miracle in his own
case? Why should it be doubted that the vision to which he refers in
his unquestioned letter to the Galatians really occurred? He therein
tells them (with an asseveration that, in the presence of God, he was
not lying)[17] that he was taught the gospel he preached by the
revelation of Jesus Christ. Whatever may be said about the authority
of the Acts of the Apostles, which relates the particulars of Paul's
miraculous conversion so minutely, we have the evidence of it in
Paul's own letter. Of course he would compare what was revealed to him
with what the eye-witnesses could tell him; and if he could mistake a
sunstroke, a trance, or a state of ecstatic dreaming for a Divine
revelation, his character, judged of by his own writings, is verily
incomprehensible. There is no such other enigma in all history. In his
equally unquestioned letter to the Corinthians he tells them that he
received from the Lord the particulars of the institution of the
Lord's Supper. Of this memorable event Paul had ample opportunities of
comparing what was revealed to him with what the disciples who were
present could tell him; and he was in such intercourse with them, that
the circumstances were highly favourable for an educated man, such as
he was, arriving at the exact and absolute truth of the matter.

  [17] 1 Gal. i. 20.

Our author's view of the question is narrowed by his refusing to
acknowledge that mankind is morally depraved by sin.

How a man, with the wickedness of such a city as London daily forced
on his notice, and a knowledge of the history of the race in his
memory, could have penned such a sentence as the following, it is
difficult to conceive. "The whole theory of this abortive design of
creation, with such important efforts to amend it, is emphatically
contradicted by the _glorious perfection and invariability_ of the
order of nature." Can he not see that the degradation and wickedness
of humanity are in striking _contrast_ to the "glorious perfection and
invariability of the order of nature"? He is bound to give some reason
for this anomaly if he will not accept what revelation makes known to
us as the cause.

The abstract question as to the credibility of miracles Paul discussed
in the year 58 at Cæsarea, in the presence of Festus and Agrippa, when
he said, "Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you that
God should raise the dead?" and it has been dealt with so exhaustively
by Newton, Locke, Butler, Paley, Whateley, Olinthus Gregory, Wardlaw,
Alexander, and a host of other writers, that there is really little
more to be said. The "Fortnightly Review" remarks that the arguments
on both sides are so familiar, that it is not necessary to reproduce
the present author's mode of dealing with this part of the subject.
Matthew Arnold describes it as an attempt to refute Dr. Mozley's
Bampton Lecture on Miracles--"a solid reply to a solid treatise;" but
that to engage in an _à priori_ argument to prove that miracles are
impossible, against an adversary who argues, _à priori_, that they are
possible, is the vainest labour in the world. Now, as Mr. Arnold is as
much a disbeliever in miracles as our author, the worth of his
abstract argument may be taken at Mr. Arnold's estimate, and he says:
"The author of 'Supernatural Religion' asserts again and again that
miracles are contrary to complete induction, but no such law of nature
has been, or can be, established against the Christian miracles,
therefore _a complete induction there is not_."

If the miracle-disbelieving Matthew Arnold does not accept our
author's abstract argument, and since we find Mr. Mill designating
"_two points_" in Hume's celebrated attack as "weak" and "vulnerable,"
I need not linger over this part of the work. I may assume that it is
sufficiently neutralised by men on his own side of the question as
able and learned as himself.

But it is not only Mr. Mill and Mr. Arnold who have recently shown
that Hume's celebrated argument, which our author reproduces and
defends, is not sound. It is satisfactory to know that from Germany,
where so much sceptical criticism has been promulgated, comes now the
most complete and conclusive exposure of the whole anti-Christian
argument. For the proof of this assertion I refer to a work which has
just been translated into English, and issued by Messrs. T. and T.
Clark of Edinburgh, entitled "Modern Doubt and Christian Belief,"[18]
by Theodore Christlieb, D.D., University Preacher and Professor of
Theology at Bonn; a most able, learned, and exhaustive argument on the
whole question, equal to the demands of those who desire to know all
about it, and to whom I earnestly commend the book. He mentions that
the great majority of the representatives of the present scientific
German theology are considered to have essentially decided in favour
of the faith, not only on dogmatical, but also on exegetical and
speculative grounds (p. 289).

  [18] A series of apologetic lectures addressed to earnest seekers
  after truth.

This is in strong contrast to the assertion of our author (vol. i. p.
27), that "it may broadly be said that English divines alone, at the
present day, maintain the reality and supernatural character of such
phenomena;" and that "the great majority of modern German critics
reject the miraculous altogether, and consider the question as no
longer worthy of discussion."

For the benefit of those who may not have time to read Dr.
Christlieb's work, I will transcribe a few passages bearing on the
abstract argument we are discussing.

"Things moral and spiritual cannot be mathematically demonstrated. He
who said, 'My thoughts are not as your thoughts,' has introduced in
His words and actions a far higher logic than that whose principles
Aristotle laid down." (Preface, p. xi.)

"However much, in other respects, our opponents may differ, they all
agree in the denial of miracles, and unitedly storm this bulwark of
the Christian faith; and in its defence we have to combat them all at
once. But whence this unanimity? Because, with the truth of miracles,
the entire citadel of Christianity stands or falls. For its beginning
is a miracle, its Author is a miracle, its progress depends upon
miracles, and miracles will hereafter be its consummation" (p. 285).

"If the principle of miracles be set aside, then all the heights of
Christianity will be levelled with one stroke, and nought will remain
but a heap of ruins. If we banish the supernatural from the Bible,
there is nothing left us but the covers" (p. 286).

"The negation of miracles leads to the annihilation of all religion"
(p. 286).

"Many are averse to the miraculous through fear of superstition, and
they overlook the sharp discrimination of Scripture between belief and
superstition, between miraculous power and witchcraft. Whereas the
sorcerer pretends to make supernatural powers subservient to _his_
person, the prophet or apostle accounts himself only the instrument of
God. It is God who alone works. The Son Himself seeks through His
works not His own honour, but that of His Father.[19] Notice the
unobtrusiveness of miracles in the holy Scriptures, how Christ sharply
repels the vain curiosity and vulgar thirst of His age for wonders,
and His prohibition of their publication. Compare with these features
the sensational miracles of the Roman and Oriental Churches--images of
saints who sweat blood, nod the head, roll the eyes--or the
Whitsuntide marvels among the Greeks and Armenians at Jerusalem, when
the Holy Ghost lights up candles (but not hearts), and you will
confess that such feats of legerdemain jugglery betray, in their
external pomp and straining after effect, anything but a Divine
origin. A glance at the internal evidences of the truth in miracles,
at their moral and religious character, which reflects and serves not
only the power of God, but also His truth and holiness, and must prove
pre-eminently their Divine origin, will show that it is not a very
difficult task for any one to defend his belief in the biblical
miracles against the charge of superstition" (p. 297).

  [19] John viii. 50-54.

"Those foundation-stones for the denial of all miracles which were
laid by Spinoza and Hume, and on which the critics of the present day
still take a defiant stand, have crumbled away piecemeal before our
eyes. Spinoza's axiom, that the 'laws of nature are the only
realisation of the Divine will,' stands or falls with the pantheistic
conception of the Deity--a conception which is not only unworthy of
God and of man, but also contrary to reason. The Source of all freedom
is supposed to have no freedom, but to be immured in His own laws! And
to this Spinoza adds the conclusion: 'If anything could take place in
nature contrary to its laws, God would thereby contradict Himself.' We
have seen that just the converse is true, namely, that if God
performed no miracles, and left the world to itself, He would
contradict Himself; that He must perform miracles in order to maintain
the end for which the world was created, and to bring it to the
destiny which was originally intended. His miraculous action
contradicts not nature and its laws, but the unnatural, which has
entered the world through sin, and counteracts its destructive
consequences in order to restore the life of the world to holy order.
Only those who, like Spinoza, deny the reality of sin and its
destructive power, can question the necessity of the miraculous. The
present condition, not only of the human world, but also of nature,
gives such opinions the lie at every step" (p. 327).

"Hume, in like manner, bases his attack against the miraculous on a
series of false assumptions. First: 'Miracles are violations of the
laws of nature.' This is false, since miracles, far from violating,
serve to re-establish the already violated order of the world, and do
not injure the laws of nature. Second: 'But we learn from experience
that the laws of nature are never violated.' This is false, because we
ourselves immediately interfere with our higher will in the laws of
nature, and interrupt them without their being violated. Third: 'For
miracles we have the questionable testimony of a few persons.' This is
false, because the entire Scriptures are full of miracles, and the
historical testimony for them is unquestionable, since the appearance
of Israel and of the Christian Church is perfectly incomprehensible
without miracles. 'But,' he goes on, 'against them we have universal
experience; therefore this stronger testimony nullifies the weaker and
more questionable.' The pith of Hume's argument, then, is simply this:
Because, according to universal experience, no miracles now take
place, therefore none can ever have occurred. This proposition, in the
first place, involves a begging of the question, since it is not at
all certain that no miracles are performed now-a-days; and, second, it
ignores the fact that different periods are subject to different laws,
and with their varied wants may demand varied kinds of revelatory
action on the part of God. Certainly, the negro who should affirm that
there is no snow, because in his country, according to 'universal
experience,' it never snows, would be committing an absurdity. And no
less illegitimate is it to measure all time by the universal (?)
experience or non-experience of some particular period. Finally, Hume
goes on to demand, as a condition for the credibility of miracles,
that they must be attested by an adequate number of sufficiently
educated and honest persons, who could not be suspected of intentional
deception, and that they should be done in so frequented a spot that
the detection of the illusion would be inevitable. We shall see
further (in Lectures vi. and vii.) that these conditions were all
essentially fulfilled in the case of the New Testament miracles. And
yet, in spite of the evident weakness of Hume's argument, Strauss
would have us believe that Hume's 'Essay on Miracles' is so
universally convincing, that it may be said to have settled the
question ('Leben Jesu,' page 148). The author of the 'Life of Christ'
forgets to mention that Hume has long since been refuted in detail by
the earlier and later English apologists (_e. g._, by Campbell, Adams,
Hay, Price, Douglass, Paley, Whateley, Dwight, Alexander, Wardlaw, and
Pearson), to say nothing of the Germans; but then he knows that only a
very small proportion of his readers is aware of this fact" (p. 328).

"To these objections not even our most modern philosophers have been
able to add really new ones; and as against them all we may
confidently maintain the following truths as the result of our
investigation:--

"The possibility of the miraculous rests upon the uninterrupted
activity of a living God in the world.

"Its necessity arises, on the one hand, from the Divine end and aim
of the world; and on the other, from the disturbance introduced into
its development through sin.

"Therefore, although miracles are supernatural, they are not
unnatural. Far from violating the conditions of life, of nature, or of
humanity, they re-establish the life of the world which has already
been deranged, and initiate the higher order of things for which the
universe was created" (p. 328).

Of Baur, Dr. Christlieb writes:--

"Of all modern opponents of our old faith, the greatest is Dr.
Ferdinand Christian von Baur, Professor of Theology at Tübingen (died
December 2, 1860), one of the greatest, if not the greatest
theological scholar of this century; after Neander, the most notable
historian of the Church, not only in Germany but in the world; the
most indefatigable of investigators, especially as regards the history
of Primitive Christianity, in the elucidation of which he has deserved
well of theology. He stands a head and shoulders above all our modern
opponents of the miraculous.... If human power, human diligence, and
acuteness, could ever bring about the overthrow of our faith, this man
would have accomplished it. But our present theology is daily
becoming more convinced that he was incompetent to this task, and
that, in spite of all his unutterable exertions, he did not succeed in
proving the merely natural origin of Christianity. This is one of the
surest signs that the rock upon which our faith is founded is
absolutely indestructible"[20] (p. 505).

  [20] "The Tübingen school, which has somewhat modified the views of
  Baur, its founder, has at present its chief seats in Switzerland,
  France, and Holland."--_Dr. C._, p. 516.

I must not attempt to give the points of Dr. Christlieb's critique and
refutation of the Tübingen theory, but refer the reader to his
invaluable work.




