CHAPTER III.

_THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS--continued._

  The Epistles of Ignatius--One Version allowed to be genuine--The Epistle
  of Polycarp to the Philippians: its acceptance as genuine by
  Irenæus--Hegesippus--Fragments only preserved of his writings--The
  impossibility of knowing what was in the portions notextant--
  Papias--His evidence respecting Mark's Gospel--His assertion
  that Matthew wrote in Hebrew, and Tischendorf's opinion that he wrote
  in Greek--Justin Martyr--His reference to the Memoirs called
  Gospels--The Clementine Homilies--Important quotation from
  Matthew--Paul's Epistle to the Church at Laodicea--Construction of
  Matthew's Gospel--The Epistle to Diognetus                          75


CHAPTER IV.

_THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS--continued._

  Basilides--The Gospel to the Hebrews--Special pleading in regard to
  Hippolytus and the pronouns HE and THEY--Coincidence resorted
  to--Events HAPPEN to occur as predicted--Valentinus--Marcion, a critic
  of the modern sceptical sort--J. S. Mill--Tatian: his harmony of the
  four Gospels--Dionysius of Corinth--The word Scripture applied to the
  New Testament writings--The Gospel of Peter--Serapion's explanation
  why it was read at Rhossus--Melito of Sardis--The word _old_ applied
  to the Old Testament implying the existence of a New Testament--
  Claudius Apollinaris and his reference to the four Gospels--
  Athenagoras--Opposite opinions as to his quotation from Matthew--The
  Epistle of Vienne and Lyons--Ptolemæus and Heracleon--Celsus--The
  Canon of Muratori                                                   99


CHAPTER V.

_THE FOURTH GOSPEL._

  The evidence of Irenæus--Epistle of Polycarp to the Philippians
  genuine--"The Refutation of all Heresies" by Hippolytus--Justin
  Martyr--The internal evidence--Philo's philosophy--The doctrine of the
  triune nature of Jehovah--The Divinity of Christ--The Holy Spirit--The
  nameless, unknown author--Rénan's views in favour of the Johannine
  authorship--Linguistic difficulties--William Penn--The raising of
  Lazarus from the dead--John's memory--The Duke of Wellington--Mode of
  authorship--Men separated from their writings, and books without
  authors--The second century non-classical compared with the
  first--Facts make history, not history facts--The living voice rather
  than books the instrument for proclaiming the Gospel in the first
  century--The folly of ignoring Divine Revelation                   135


CHAPTER VI.

_CONTEMPORARY EVIDENCE._

  The Apostle John the author of the Apocalypse--Importance of the
  admission--The precise date of its composition--Its allegorical
  character--"Pilgrim's Progress" and "Paradise Lost and Regained"--The
  doctrines indicated in the Apocalypse--Rome the mystical Babylon--
  Nero Cæsar--The number of the beast--The Lord's day--Prominence
  of the allusion to the Lamb slain to take away sin--Paul's epistles
  identical in doctrine with the Apocalypse--Professor Owen--Quotation
  from "The Merchant of Venice"                                      163


CHAPTER VII.

_CONCLUSION._

  An eloquent sentence analysed--Henry Rogers--John Stuart Mill--
  Priestley--Paul's admonition to Timothy--The death of apostles
  not recorded in writings alleged to have been written long after their
  decease--Verdict pronounced before the case is complete--Authority of
  Church Councils--The religion of the Bible a spiritual matter,
  requiring spiritual discernment--Summary--Peroration               183




_INTRODUCTION_.




"_There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio, than are dreamt
of in your philosophy._"

  Shakespeare.


"_When we consider further that a gift, extremely precious, came to
us, which, though facilitated, was not necessitated, by what had gone
before, but was due, as far as appearances go, to the peculiar mental
and moral endowments of one man, and that man openly proclaimed that
it did not come from himself, but from God through him, then we are
entitled to say there is nothing so inherently or absolutely
incredible in this supposition as to preclude any one from hoping that
it may perhaps be true._"

  John Stuart Mill.




INTRODUCTION.


Nothing in these days is taken for granted. In science, philosophy,
politics, and religion, the foundations of belief are fearlessly
examined, and the facilities for the process are unprecedented.
Criticism has new and improved instruments, and they are extensively
used--often misused. It concerns us especially to know how far our
religious institutions are being affected.

Have devout men, during the three thousand years which history
chronicles, been under a delusion in believing that "there is a spirit
in man, and the Almighty giveth him understanding"?

Is popular Christianity "wide of the truth, and a disfigurement of the
truth," as an eminent writer the other day asserted? Such questions
float in our literature and find their way into our homes and our
sanctuaries.

Although no importance is to be attached to the reckless assertion
that the outworks of Evangelical Religion are in danger, and that the
very citadel itself is not impregnable, it is undoubtedly true that
its modern adversaries--reputable and otherwise--are bold, active, and
skilful, and there is need that its defenders should be alert and
vigilant. It will not do to rely altogether on the defensive lines and
tactics of our predecessors. Each generation has the stronghold
entrusted to its care, and new appliances are, from time to time,
required to resist novel as well as resuscitated modes of assault.

However certain be the ultimate triumph of His cause whose right it is
to reign, the rate of its progress depends upon the faithfulness and
heroism of His servants at their various posts of labour and conflict.

To change the figure. The mirror which reflects Divine truth has to be
preserved and kept bright by human instrumentality. Superstition, in
the murky atmosphere of sacerdotalism, clouds it; by false philosophy
it is liable to be dimmed; while crude science or unsound criticism,
removing the silver lining to make the glass more transparent, makes
it useless. He does well who is able to act as its conservator, and
in some measure cleanse the surface, that obscurity may be removed and
eternal truth discerned.

I am aware that, as a rule, it is not desirable that hostile
literature should be helped into notoriety, and that believers should
be troubled with exploded fallacies and disturbed by arguments against
the truth as it is in Jesus a hundred times answered.

As Robert Hall justly remarks:--"It is degrading to the dignity of a
revelation, established through a succession of ages by indubitable
proofs, to be adverting every moment to the hypothesis of its being an
imposture, and to be inviting every ignorant sophist to wrangle about
the title, when we should be cultivating the possession."

But there are exceptions to every rule, and as I am not addressing a
promiscuous audience, but the members of a society whose rule is to
discuss all subjects without limitation, I venture to think I am
justified in bringing under your notice a recent heterodox book which
is so well written as to be likely to mislead if it be not
neutralized. And the more so, if I can make the author not only answer
himself, but other writers whose anti-Christian arguments are not put
forth anonymously, but with the authority of well-known names and much
reputation in the world of letters and science.

Let me further premise that the Christian is occupying an exceptional
position when he descends to the neutral level of the sceptic to
discuss the internal evidences of Evangelical truth. His usual
privileged abode is more favourable for the survey than the lower
ground, for the light is brighter and the air clearer on the mountain
heights where he is wont to contemplate religious matters, than on the
plain where faith has no temple, and reason, ignoring Divine
influence, operates with the carnal instruments of a negative creed.
To appeal to the spiritual discernment of a disbeliever in Divine
illumination would be like expecting a man who is not of the mystical
craft of the Masonic brotherhood to use the signs (if such there be)
of a Freemason. Yet the argument in defence of the reality of Divine
revelation is not complete without a reference to that "Spirit of
Truth" which Jesus Christ promised to send "to testify of him," and to
"bring all things to the remembrance" of those disciples who were to
"bear witness, because they had been with him from the beginning."[1]

  [1] John xv. 26, 27.

A good cause may be injured by injudicious and feeble advocacy, but I
trust I am not presumptuously meddling with a theme which only an
erudite scholar and theologian should deal with. I beg you to bear in
mind, however, that if I or others fail in the contest for truth,
there still will remain the indubitable proofs of Divine revelation in
all their variety and superabundance.

Although the ability, scholarship, and research displayed in this
anti-Christian work are considerable, I doubt if it has really much in
it that is original. The author has only cleverly reproduced and
rearranged the anti-Christian arguments, chiefly German,[2] which are
to be found in the library of the British Museum.

  [2] "The works of Strauss, Baur, Schenkel, and Rénan are the great
  authorities for the negative criticism of the present day."--_Dr.
  Christlieb._

The "Examiner" says, in regard to three-fourths of the work, "It is
neither more nor less than a digest of recent German speculation on
the date and authorship of the Gospels; devoid of originality, and
infected with the verbosity and repetition of the authorities on which
it is based."

In the other notices of the work which have appeared so far, it has, I
think, been somewhat over-estimated.

The "Fortnightly Review" writes of it: "It is not too much to say of
the two volumes before us that they are by far the most decisive,
trenchant, and far-reaching of the direct contributions to theological
controversy that have been made in this generation."

The "Athenæum" says: "The book proceeds from a man of ability, a
scholar, and reasoner, who writes like an earnest seeker after truth,
and knows well all the German and Dutch books relating to the
criticism of the New Testament, as well as the English ones."

The "Westminster Review" asserts that "no more formidable assailant of
orthodoxy could well be imagined."

The "Spectator" designates it a "masterly but prejudiced examination
of the evidences for the antiquity of the Christian Scriptures."

"The Literary World" says: "This is, beyond all question, an important
book. The one grand pervading fault we find with it is its
partisanship. The writer plays the part of special pleader against
what he calls Ecclesiastical Christianity, and fails to represent
what could be said on the other side. It is a partisan production, a
piece of clever, ingenious, plausible, special pleading. The author
has got up his case with marvellous exclusiveness. He makes it an
absolute rule, so far as we perceive, to regard his opponents as
having no case at all."

The quarterly reviews, "Edinburgh," "Quarterly," and "British
Quarterly," have not yet pronounced an opinion on its merits.

My purpose is to show that the author of this anonymous work has not
been successful in accomplishing the two things he has attempted,
viz., to prove the _in_credibility of miracles by--

_First_, a recast of the often-exploded syllogistic fallacies of Hume;
and, _secondly_, by an elimination of the miraculous from the Gospels;
but that he has been successful, without intending it, in showing that
Supernatural Religion rests upon substantial contemporary evidence.

The work consists of three parts. The first is upon miracles, treating
the subject as an abstract question. The second, upon the Synoptic
Gospels (Matthew, Mark, and Luke). The third, upon the Fourth Gospel.
And there is a summary of the supposed results of the reasoning and
the investigation. The inference arrived at is premature, for as the
New Testament does not consist only of the four Gospels, but contains
other writings of equal importance, the argument is incomplete, and
the latter will have to be dealt with before our author can reasonably
expect any reader to entertain his anti-miraculous hypothesis. Another
volume is promised, but we may safely venture to anticipate that it
will prove no more formidable than the other great waves of scepticism
which have surged against, but have not undermined, the rock upon
which our faith is built.




