CHAPTER VI.

_CONTEMPORARY EVIDENCE._


_"Hoist with his own petard."_




CHAPTER VI.

_CONTEMPORARY EVIDENCE._


We now come to the question of contemporary evidence. Our author says
the testimony of the New Testament in favour of the miraculous is
inadequate because it is not contemporary. I have to endeavour to show
that he has himself proved it to be contemporary.

The "Spectator" describes him as virtually saying: It is as if you
tried to prove some unheard-of facts of the civil war in the time of
Charles I. by testimony not to be traced higher than the reign of
George III. I say we trace the testimony to one of Cromwell's own
officers, and our author's own criticism shall be shown to prove it.

I take one piece of evidence of his own which he has elaborately
presented. I compare it with proofs of the same kind from other
sources. I refer to the authorities specified, and I accept it and
endorse it. But I make a different use of it. He uses it to prove that
because John, the apostle, wrote the Apocalypse, he cannot have
written the Fourth Gospel. I use it to prove that because John wrote
the Apocalypse _the facts of the Gospel are by contemporary testimony
substantiated_; and I contend that this evidence--clear, direct, and
irrefragable--neutralises his main argument and the object of his
book, which is to invalidate supernatural religion and the reality of
Divine revelation.

He says (on page 392 of his second volume): "The external evidence
that the Apostle John wrote the Apocalypse is more ancient than that
for the authorship of any other book of the New Testament, excepting
some of the epistles of Paul. Justin Martyr affirms in the clearest
and most positive manner the apostolic origin of the work. He speaks
to Tryphon of a certain man whose name was John, one of the apostles
of Christ, who prophesied, by a revelation made to him, of the
Millennium and subsequent general resurrection. The genuineness of
this testimony is not called in question by any one."

"As another most important point we may mention that there is probably
not another work of the New Testament the precise date of the
composition of which, within a very few weeks, can be so positively
affirmed. No result of criticism rests upon a more secure basis, and
is now more universally accepted by all competent critics than the
fact that the Apocalypse was written A.D. 68, 69. The writer
distinctly and repeatedly mentions his name. 'The revelation of Jesus
Christ ... unto his servant John. John to the seven Churches which are
in Asia;' and he states that the work was written in the island of
Patmos, where he was 'on account of the word of God and the testimony
of Jesus'" (p. 395).

"It is clear that the writer counted fully upon being generally known
under the simple designation of John; and when we consider the
unmistakable terms of authority with which he addresses the seven
Churches, it is scarcely possible to deny that the writer either was
the apostle, or, distinctly desired to assume his personality" (p.
397).

"The whole description (of the New Jerusalem) is a mere allegory of
the strongest Jewish dogmatic character, and it is of singular value
for the purpose of identifying the author" (p. 399).

"There is no internal evidence whatever against the supposition that
the 'John' who announces himself as the author of the Apocalypse was
the apostle. On the contrary, the tone of authority adopted
throughout, and evident certainty that his identity would everywhere
be recognised, denote a position in the Church which no other person
of the name of John could possibly have held at the time when the
Apocalypse was written. The external evidence, therefore, which
indicates that Apostle John as the author is quite in harmony with the
internal testimony of the book itself" (p. 402).

I have quoted sufficient to show that our author, whose object is to
discredit the Fourth Gospel, elaborately and successfully proves that
John the Apostle wrote the Apocalypse.

There is other testimony to prove this, easily got at, besides what
our author supplies.

Sir Isaac Newton long ago fixed upon the year 68 as the date.

Dr. Davidson says: "We should despair of proving the authenticity of
any New Testament book by the help of ancient witnesses, if that of
the Apocalypse be rejected."

In the present quarter's "Edinburgh Review" (October 1874) there is a
remarkable confirmation of the importance I am attaching to the
Apocalypse as a book written by the Apostle John during the nine
months' reign of the Emperor Galba, that is, between May 1, 68, and
January 15, 69. The writer of the article, which is a review of
Rénan's "Antichrist," says: "The arguments which support the
assignment of A.D. 68 as the date of its composition are absolutely
irresistible." And he adds: "Here we have a book the date of which is
positively ascertained, and the writer almost certainly known, while
its contents are of a prophetic character, and lay claim (in a marked
manner) to inspiration, yet are so peculiarly historical in their
character, and deal with a period of history so perfectly well known
down to its minutest details, that it can be checked and verified at
every turn. Might we not almost say that we have here (as in the Book
of Daniel) a _gauge_ by which to measure inspiration, a _sample_ by
which to understand prophecy, a _key_ for a full comprehension of what
Holy Scripture is and means?"

The Apocalypse is, as our author describes it, an ecstatic and
dogmatic allegory. What it is besides, which the believer in Divine
inspiration would include in the definition, is out of the range of
such a critic's comprehension, and he would not be likely to attach
much importance to the words, "Write the things which thou hast seen,
and the things which are, and the _things which shall be hereafter_."
But he seems to have overlooked how much essential evangelical
doctrine it expresses, and how much it is imbued with its spirit; that
it testifies to the resurrection of Christ and the atonement. Although
it _is_ an allegory, its author could no more have written it, if he
had known nothing of those doctrines, than Bunyan could have written
"The Pilgrim's Progress," or Milton "Paradise Lost" and "Regained." By
proving John to be the author of this "highly dogmatic treatise," as
he calls the Apocalypse, he takes us to the essence of the dogmas.
They must have either been in existence before John wrote it, or he
invented them, for they are certainly there.

He seems unconsciously to have furnished the very contemporary
evidence which such critics as himself pretend _not_ to have found,
and profess they require, before they can accept the miracles and
evangelical doctrines of the gospel.

He allows that Matthew was an _eye-witness_, but denies that he wrote
of _miracles_. He allows that Paul wrote of _miracles_, but he was
_not_ an _eye-witness_.

Now John both saw them and wrote of them, for he was the son of
Zebedee, and he wrote the Apocalypse. This being proved, we have in
it, from him, as an eye-witness of the miracles of Jesus, evidence
which confirms the Gospels. The vision is from Him "_who liveth and
was dead; the first begotten of the dead, who cometh with clouds_,"
and to one who was "_in the spirit on the Lord's day_."

It as evidently presupposes the miraculous facts of the Gospels, and
is supplementary to them, as certainly as it presupposes the
prophecies of the Old Testament, and supplements the predictions of
Daniel.

The allegory of "a Lamb as it had been slain," which is prominent in
the vision, is unmistakable. No critic could be so perverse as to deny
that this plainly indicates that Jesus Christ rose from the dead, and
that His death is referred to as a sacrifice for sin in fulfilment of
the ancient types and sacrificial rites; nor can it be doubted that
the same is in harmony with the gospel which Paul preached and wrote
about in his absolutely unquestionable epistles, to which alone we
refer, avoiding, for obvious reasons, allusion to the Acts of the
Apostles, as our author seems to ignore that book altogether.

Let us turn to the sublime words of this Apocalypse, proved to have
been written by John the Apostle, and as we read, imagine, if we can,
that the author himself, and the Christians of the seven Churches of
Asia and elsewhere, knew nothing of the miraculous facts of the
Gospels and the doctrine of the atonement with which they are
inseparably connected; and imagine, if we can, that they were both
added, according to our author's hypothesis, to the original and lost
Gospels a century later. It is entitled "The Revelation of Jesus
Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his servants things
which must _shortly come to pass_."

Among such things--"shortly to come to pass"--affecting the Church, we
cannot be wrong in understanding the attack upon Jerusalem by the
Romans to be included. If so, the saying of the angel--"Rise and
measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship
therein," implies that Jerusalem was still standing when the book was
written. Also, among the things shortly to come to pass, must be
understood the impending judgments on Rome (the mystical Babylon) for
the terrible and bloody persecution which had lately happened; for
Rome is evidently referred to in the seventeenth chapter, where we
read: "Upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the
great; and I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints and of
the martyrs of Jesus." We are left in no uncertainty as to the
interpretation of this chapter, for it is given us in the last verse,
where we are told--"And the woman which thou sawest is that great city
which reigneth over the kings of the earth." "The seven heads are
seven mountains on which the woman sitteth. _And there are seven
kings, five are fallen, and one is, and the other is_ not yet come."
It is all but certain that the kings referred to are--1 Augustus, 2
Tiberius, 3 Caligula, 4 Claudius, 5 Nero, and the 6th, "_which now
is_," Galba, who reigned nine months, from 1st May, 68, till 15th
January, 69; the 7th, to come next, being Otho, who, when he cometh,
must continue a short space. It was but "a short space," for on the
20th of April in the same year Vespasian ascended the throne. The
beast which was to appear next is undoubtedly Nero; for though he was
dead, Tacitus tells us there was a wide-spread rumour, which created
great alarm, that the report of his having committed suicide, when the
senate had denounced him, was false. He is said to have been
personified by a slave, who took up his abode in an island not far
from Patmos. When we think of the Roman coins of that date having on
them the words "Nero Cæsar," the Hebrew letters for which are
identical with the "six hundred threescore and six," the number of the
beast, which "he that hath understanding is to count," we cannot avoid
the conclusion that Nero, under the symbol of a beast, is referred to.

If this be the correct interpretation, there is no uncertainty about
the date and authorship of the book.

The preface or title closes with the words, "Blessed is he that
readeth, and they that hear, the words of this prophecy, and keep
those things which are written therein; for _the time is at hand_."
And then the book opens with an apostolic salutation to the Churches,
and a fervent ascription of praise to Jehovah, and to the risen and
exalted Messiah and Redeemer.

"John to the seven Churches which are in Asia (Churches planted by
Paul years before): Grace unto you, and peace, from him which is, and
which was, and which is to come; and from Jesus Christ, the faithful
witness, the first begotten from the dead, and the prince of the kings
of the earth. Unto him who loved us, and washed us from our sins in
his own blood, and hath made us kings and priests unto God and his
Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and ever."

"I John, who also am your brother, and companion in tribulation, and
in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the isle that is
called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus
Christ." "I was in the spirit on the Lord's day." (To be "in the
spirit on the Lord's day" is in harmony with evangelical Christianity,
and quite meaningless apart from it. The first day of the week is,
undoubtedly, called the Lord's day, because on that day He rose from
the dead; and bread has been broken and wine drunk on that day, in
obedience to His commands, and in remembrance of His death, ever since
the day of Pentecost.)

"I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for
evermore, and have the keys of hades and of death."

"The Lion of the tribe of Juda, the Root of David, hath prevailed to
open the book, and to loose the seals thereof."

"And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne ... a Lamb as it
had been slain; and they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to
take the book, and open the seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and
hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue,
and people, and nation."

"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches," &c.

"Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth
upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever."

"These are they that came out of great tribulation, and washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb."

"And every creature which is in heaven, and on the earth, and under
the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard
I saying, Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him that
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever."

There is nothing in the Fourth Gospel, nor in any other part of
Scripture, that more emphatically proclaims the Godhead of Jesus
Christ than this worship of Him by the whole host of heaven. The
whole creation, as twice described in the second commandment, fall
down and worship Him. It is identical with the language Paul uses in
his letter to the Philippians: "Wherefore God also hath highly exalted
him, and given him a name that is above every name, that in the name
of Jesus _every knee should bow_, of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth; and every tongue should confess
that Jesus Christ _is Lord_, to the glory of God the Father."

This sort of language pervades the whole book. The allegory of a Lamb
slain to wash away sin by the shedding of His blood occurs a score
times.

It is not possible to read it and believe what our author insinuates.
He wants some proof that the four Gospels are not religious romances
written long after the events occurred which they record. I point out
that the author has the proof in his own argument that John wrote the
Apocalypse, and that the evidence therein given to the miracles is not
affected by any uncertainty whether the Gospels were produced by
eye-witnesses, or constructed on second-hand evidence, by such
disciples as Mark and Luke.

No criticism ever questions that Paul preached a miraculous gospel,
or ever doubts the genuineness of certain of his epistles in which the
doctrines are fully stated.

There are, at least, four which have never been questioned--viz., the
First of Thessalonians, written about the year 50; the Epistle to the
Galatians, A.D. 52; the First of Corinthians, A.D. 57; and the one to
the Romans, A.D. 58; and in all those letters the miracles and
doctrines are referred to which, years before, when he first went
forth to preach, were the themes of his ministry. His insight into
spiritual matters increased as he grew older, as his later writings
indicate; but from first to last it was the same gospel.

He writes to the Corinthians in the year 57, to remind them of the
gospel he had preached unto them. He says, "I delivered unto you first
of all that which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins,
according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he rose
again the third day, according to the Scriptures; and that he was seen
of Peter, then of the twelve; after that he was seen of five hundred
brethren at once, of whom the greater part remain unto this present,
but some are fallen asleep. After that he was seen of me also, as of
one born out of due time." Now as Paul's written version of the
gospel at this time was in the main identical with John's, we get from
the evidence that John wrote the Apocalypse a very definite
conclusion.

It has been absurdly suggested by John Stuart Mill, and others,[66]
that Paul originated the dogmatic doctrines of Christianity. Now we
know that Paul, in the early years of his ministry, communicated with
James, Peter, and John, at Jerusalem, respecting that gospel which he
was preaching among the Gentiles; for he writes to that effect in his
unquestioned epistle to the Galatians, and tells them that when "those
three apostles, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was
given to him, they gave to him and Barnabas the right hand of
fellowship." Would John and Peter and James have done this if the
miraculous gospel Paul told them he was preaching was inconsistent
with their own knowledge of the circumstances and events in Christ's
life of which they were all eye-witnesses?

  [66] "Nothing can be more false than the fashionable notion of our day
  that Paul was the author of Christianity. The true founder of
  Christianity was Jesus."--_Rénan_ ("The Apostles," p. 3).

We have John writing a book before the destruction of Jerusalem, and
Paul an epistle before the reign of Nero, and they both bear testimony
to the fact that Jesus was the Messiah of Jewish prophecy, who
descended into our world to be its Saviour and Redeemer by the
sacrifice of His life on the cross--His miraculous resurrection from
the dead being the attestation of His atoning work, while His promise
to come again to earth in like manner as He was seen to go away, they
both relied upon with implicit confidence.

As early as the year 52 Paul writes from Corinth to the Thessalonians,
reminding them "how they turned from idols to serve the living and
true God, and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom He raised from the
dead, even Jesus, who delivered us from the wrath to come;"[67] and he
charges them by the Lord that this epistle be read in all the Churches
in Macedonia.[68] Its genuineness has never been questioned.

  [67] 1 Thess. i. 9.

  [68] Ibid. i. 27.

Thus it is quite certain that Paul, at the commencement and throughout
his ministry, preached the dogmatic doctrines of the Divinity of
Christ, the resurrection, the atonement, the depravity of human
nature, justification by faith, and the work of the Holy Spirit in
renewing and sanctifying the souls of men, which constituted the
Christianity of the first three centuries, and undoubtedly
emanated--not from the depths of Paul's moral consciousness, but from
the events, Divine utterances, and superhuman circumstances which were
the theme of the earliest Christian records.[69] The Apocalypse is
absolute proof as to how they originated, and that they were prevalent
when it was written.

  [69] Paul tells the Thessalonians he is thankful that they received
  what he preached as the word of God, not as the word of men.

This, I contend, is sound argument, and neutralises that of our
author. Other objections of cavillers have their appropriate answers.
They may say that the eye-witnesses might honestly believe and teach,
but were deceived. No one would, I think, say they were dishonest, and
invented the miracles. It may be said that a single eye-witness such
as John is insufficient. But if a jury has _one_ such, and all the
circumstantial evidence in the case supports his testimony, the
verdict is easily arrived at. A tree that is grafted usually yields
fruit after the process, not before; but we have here this tree of
Christianity proved to be fully developed in the year 68, and its
fruit described, and we are asked to believe that it was grafted to
bear its evangelical dogmas a century afterwards! The fact is that the
same apostle, who describes its fruit in the year 68, was present
when it was planted, and we know from his evidence that the tree
needed no grafting to produce such fruit.

This evidence, from a hostile critic of such ability and scholarship,
to the authenticity and authorship of the book of Revelation, is
surely of considerable value. As Professor Owen could, from a single
bone of a fossil animal, show what the whole was of which the bone
formed a part, so might be used this evidence that John wrote the
Apocalypse.

The Christian apologist may show our author his own argument, and
pointing out the word _Apocalypse_, exclaim, "I thank thee, Jew, for
teaching me that word!" _Thou art hoist with thine own petard!_




