CHAPTER III.

_THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS--CONTINUED._


_"I cannot dispense with miracles as historical explanations of
certain indubitable historical facts. I do not find that they make
rents in history, but by their aid alone am I able to get over its
gaping chasms."_

  _Rothe._




CHAPTER III.

_THE SYNOPTIC GOSPELS--CONTINUED._

     THE EPISTLES OF IGNATIUS--THE EPISTLE OF POLYCARP--JUSTIN
     MARTYR--HEGESIPPUS--PAPIAS--THE CLEMENTINES--THE EPISTLE TO
     DIOGNETUS.


Next our author examines quotations in "the Epistles of Ignatius,"
though he says they really appertain to a very much later period, for
they are "all pronounced, by a _large mass of critics, spurious
compositions_." He suffered martyrdom, it is said, on the 20th December,
A.D. 115, when he was condemned to be cast to wild beasts in the
amphitheatre, not at Rome, but at Antioch, in consequence of the
fanatical excitement produced by the earthquake which took place on
the thirteenth of that month.[31] If any of his fifteen letters, says
our author, could be accepted as genuine, the references to them
might be important. Dr. Mosheim says his whole epistles are extremely
dubious. The shorter of the two version of Ignatius is, however,
generally allowed to be genuine. Tischendorf says "its genuineness is
now generally admitted." In it we find, "What would a man be profited
if he should gain the whole world and lose his own soul?" which of
course is a quotation from Matt. xvi. 26.

  [31] While Trajan was on his Parthian expedition, and spent the winter
  at Antioch. (See Davidson's "Introduction to the New Testament," p.
  370.)

The next document mentioned is the Epistle of Polycarp to the
Philippians, who, Irenæus says, was in his youth a disciple of the
Apostle John. He was Bishop of Smyrna, and ended his life by
martyrdom, A.D. 167. Irenæus knew Polycarp personally. It is said that
the epistle was written before A.D. 120. Our author ascribes it to a
later date, and says that there are potent reasons for considering it
spurious. As, however, Irenæus, Polycarp's disciple, believed it to be
genuine, we shall take the liberty of differing from our author, and
of believing it to be so. The epistle contains the following:
"Remembering what the Lord said, teaching: Judge not, that ye be not
judged; forgive, and it shall be forgiven you; be pitiful, that ye may
be pitied; with what measure you mete it shall be measured to you
again; and that blessed are the poor, and those that are persecuted
for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of God." Also:
"Beseeching in our prayers the all-seeing God not to lead us into
temptation, as the Lord said, The spirit indeed is willing, but the
flesh is weak." Also: "If, therefore, we pray the Lord that he may
forgive us, we ought also ourselves to forgive."

Our author demurs to these being quotations from our Gospels, and says
they might have been from orally current accounts of the Sermon on the
Mount, or from many of the records of the teaching of Jesus in
circulation.

Hegisippus is the next early writer referred to. He made use of the
"Gospel according to the Hebrews." Jerome says (confirming Eusebius)
"that the Gospel according to the Hebrews is written in the Chaldaic
and Syriac (Syro-Chaldaic) language, but with Hebrew characters."

We have, says our author, direct intimation that Hegesippus made use
of the Gospel according to the Hebrews. "He was one of the
contemporaries of Justin--a Palestinian Jewish Christian. In order to
make himself thoroughly acquainted with the state of the Church, he
travelled widely, and came to Rome when Anicitus was bishop.
_Subsequently he wrote a work of historical memoirs in five books_,
and thus became the first ecclesiastical historian of Christianity.
This _work is lost_, but _portions have been preserved by Eusebius_,
and one other fragment is _also extant_." It must have been written
after the succession of Eleutherius to the Roman bishopric (A.D.
177-193), as that event is mentioned in the book.

"The testimony of Hegesippus is of _great value_, not only as a man
born near the primitive Christian tradition, but also as that of an
intelligent traveller amongst many Christian communities" (p. 430).

Hegesippus says, in the fifth book of his Memoirs, that "these words
('Good things prepared for the righteous neither eye hath seen nor ear
heard, nor have they entered into the heart of man,' from 1 Cor. ii.
9) are vainly spoken, and that those who say these things give the lie
to the Divine writings and to the Lord saying, 'Blessed are your eyes
that see, and your ears that hear,'" &c. This fragment is preserved by
Stephanus Gobarus, a learned monophysite of the sixth century.

"Nothing is more certain," says our author, "than the fact that, in
spite of the opportunities for collecting information afforded him by
his travels through so many Christian communities, for the express
purpose of such inquiry, Hegesippus _did not_ find any New Testament
Canon, or, that such a rule of faith did not exist in Rome in A.D. 160
and 170."

I ask, _How in the world can our author be certain of this, when only
portions of Hegesippus are extant?_ This applies generally to his
argument that the _silence_ of the early writers is of "as much
importance as their supposed allusions to the Gospels." Such a mode of
reasoning is aptly commented upon by the Rev. Kentish Bache, in his
letter to Dr. Davidson on the Fourth Gospel. He says: "When but small
portions of a work have been preserved to our use, it is no wonder
that these portions should make no mention of many circumstances
interesting and important, which the writer must certainly have known
and told of. If I tear a few leaves from the middle of my English
History book, I shall find on _them_ (the few leaves) no record of the
Norman Conquest or of the Battle of Waterloo. Would it thence be a
fair conclusion that these events are unhistorical and fictitious?"

Papias is next referred to. He was Bishop of Hierapolis, in Phrygia,
in the first half of the second century, and is said to have suffered
martyrdom under Marcus Aurelius, about A.D. 160-167. About the middle
of the second century he wrote a work in five books, called,
"Exposition of the Lord's Oracles," which is lost, excepting a few
fragments preserved by Eusebius and Irenæus. We have the preface to
his book, which states: "I shall not hesitate to set beside my
interpretations all that I rightly learnt from the Presbyters, and
rightly remembered, earnestly testifying to its truth. For I have not,
like the multitude, delighted in those who spoke much, but in those
who taught the truth; nor in those who recorded alien commandments,
but in those who recall those delivered by the Lord to faith, and
which come from truth itself. If it happened that any one came who had
followed the Presbyters, I inquired minutely after the words of the
Presbyters--what Andrew or what Peter said, or what Philip or what
Thomas or James, or what John or Matthew, or what any other of the
disciples of the Lord, and what Aristion and the Presbyter John, the
disciples of the Lord, say; for I held that what was to be derived
from books was not so profitable as that from the living and abiding
voice." "It is clear (says our author) from this that even if Papias
knew any of our Gospels, he attached little or no value to them, and
that he knew absolutely nothing of the Canonical Scriptures of the New
Testament" (p. 445).

I remark that it is far from clear that he attached no value to our
Gospels from anything he says in the fragments extant, and of course
we know nothing of those portions that are lost. We know that he was
making a book, consisting of what he could gather from tradition about
"the truth," "to set beside his interpretations" about the
"commandments delivered by the Lord to faith." There were Gospel
writings in circulation, and he was supplementing what they recorded.
There is positively no evidence to make us think that our present
Gospels were unknown to him. He does not, in the fragments we have,
mention Paul's writings, nor the Gospel of Luke, nor the Fourth
Gospel, but he does allude to a book by Matthew and another by Mark,
and Eusebius tells us that Papias makes use of passages taken from
Peter's first epistle and John's first epistle. So, on the whole, the
testimony of Papias, instead of being against is in favour of the
Synoptics, and also of the Fourth Gospel; for the silence inference
applies no more to it than it does to Paul and Luke's writings, and
the statement of Eusebius about John's Epistle is not to be set aside,
for if John wrote it, it will be allowed he wrote the Gospel. His
evidence respecting Mark is important, for the fragments contain a
statement that "Mark recorded what fell from Peter, writing
accurately, and taking especial care neither to omit nor to
misrepresent anything;" and Papias says that "Peter preached with a
view to the benefit of his hearers, and not to give a history of
Christ's discourses." Our author's inference is that it is some other
person of the name of Mark that is connected with the Second Gospel,
and not the Mark that Papias refers to. This is very far-fetched and
improbable, for the description tallies well with our Second Gospel,
and quite admits of the supposition that Mark had every opportunity of
obtaining from eye-witnesses the historical materials of his Gospel.
No one supposes that every statement in the book emanated from Peter's
discourses.

Papias is the only early writer that our author acknowledges furnishes
any evidence in favour of the Synoptic Gospels. He cannot deny that
he records that Matthew composed discourses of the Lord in the Hebrew
tongue, but he says "_that totally excludes the claim of our Greek
Gospel to apostolic origin_." The boldness of this assertion can only
be properly met by an equally explicit denial that it does anything of
the kind. If the translation be a faithful one from a Hebrew version,
it is of course entitled to the epithet apostolic if the original
possessed it. Our author must have some peculiar notions about verbal
inspiration if this be the rule he lays down. But he altogether
overlooks the supposition that Matthew's Gospel was not originally
written in Hebrew, notwithstanding this statement of Papias.

Tischendorf, in his book issued by the Tract Society, entitled, "When
were our Gospels Written?" maintains that the assertion of Papias
"rests on a misunderstanding," and he briefly states his reasons for
this view. He says: "This Hebrew text must have been lost very early,
for not one even of the very oldest Church fathers had ever seen or
used it." "There were two parties among the Judaisers--the one the
Nazarenes and the other the Ebionites. Each of these parties used a
gospel according to Matthew, the one party using a Greek and the other
party a Hebrew text. That they did not scruple to tamper with the
text, to suit their creed, is probable from their very sectarian
spirit. The text, as we have certain means of proving, rested upon our
received text of Matthew, with, however, occasional departures, to
suit their arbitrary views. When then it was reported, in later times,
that these Nazarenes, who were one of the earliest Christian sects,
possessed a Hebrew version of Matthew, what was more natural than that
some person or other, thus falling in with the pretensions of this
sect, should say that Matthew was originally written in Hebrew, and
that the Greek was only a version from it? How far these two texts
differed from each other no one cared to inquire; and with such
separatists who withdrew themselves to the shores of the Dead Sea, it
would not have been easy to have attempted it."

"Jerome, who knew Hebrew, as other Latin and Greek fathers did not,
obtained in the fourth century a copy of this Hebrew Gospel of the
Nazarenes, and at once asserted that he had found the original. But
when he looked more closely into the matter, he confined himself to
the statement that many supposed this Hebrew text was the original of
Matthew's Gospel. He translated it into Latin and Greek, and added a
few observations of his own on it. From these observations of Jerome,
as well as from other fragments, we must conclude that this notion of
Papias cannot be substantiated; but, on the contrary, this Hebrew has
been drawn from the Greek text, and disfigured moreover here and there
with certain arbitrary changes. The same is applicable to a Greek text
of the Hebrew Gospel in use among the Ebionites. This text, from the
fact that it was in Greek, was better known to the Church than the
Hebrew version of the Nazarenes; but it was always regarded, from the
earliest times, as only another text of Matthew's Gospel."

The references to Justin Martyr occupy nearly one hundred and fifty
pages of the work. He was one of the most learned and one of the
earliest writers of the Church not long after the apostles. His
conversion took place about the year 132, and his martyrdom, A.D. 165.

In his second "Apology," A.D. 139, and in his Dialogue with Tryphon
the Jew, are many quotations of passages found in the Gospels. He
quotes from all the four Evangelists, and our author's elaborate
attempt to prove the contrary is certainly not successful. His
objection, based on slight discrepancies in the words while the sense
is identical, is frivolous in the extreme. Supposing there were in
Justin's hands a primitive work which supplied the passages, and that
work was embodied in the canonical compilation, they can be truthfully
said to be quotations from the latter. The objection to his quotations
on the grounds that they are not verbatim, is neutralized by the fact
that neither are his quotations from the Old Testament always exact.

It has been shown that "if Justin did not quote from our Gospels,
there must have been in his hands, in the second century, a variety of
accounts of Christ's life, to which he, a leading Christian apologist,
attached the greatest importance; and yet, in the course of the few
following years, those accounts must have disappeared, and four
others, of which this eminent Christian apologist knew nothing, must
have taken their place. This would have been what Canon Westcott
justly calls a 'revolution,' for it would have, in a single
generation, entirely changed the records of the life of Christ
publicly used by the Christians."[32]

  [32] "Literary World," Oct. 23, 1874.

Justin quotes from a book entitled the "Memoirs," which he says "are
called Gospels," and our author tries to make out that the passage
quoted is an interpolation. It is not the only instance where the
"wish," and not the proof, "is father to the thought."

In Justin's work, the "Apology," occur the words, "And thou shalt call
his name Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins;" which
are found in the apocryphal Gospel of James, as said to the Virgin
Mary, while in Matthew's Gospel they are spoken to Joseph. It is urged
that Justin must, therefore, have quoted them from a lost Gospel; but
why should it be supposed so when they are in the apocryphal Gospel of
James, which, Origen says, was everywhere known about the end of the
second century, and which, there is good ground for believing, was
written in the early part of that century?

A few other passages in Justin's work, which are not found in our
Gospels, may be accounted for by supposing them to be quotations
either from lost Gospels, genuine or apocryphal, or tradition may have
supplied them. There is no certain inference to be arrived at.

Justin tells us in his first "Apology" (A.D. 139), that the memoirs of
the apostles called evangels were read _after the prophets_ every
_Lord's Day_ in the assemblies of the Christians.

This must have reference to the writings which alone, a few years
later, were universally known as the Four Gospels, or the Acts of the
Apostles.

The second volume of the work opens with an examination of "the
evidence furnished by the apocryphal religious romance generally known
by the name of 'The Clementines,'" which includes the Homilies, the
Recognitions, and a so-called Epitome--the Homilies and Recognitions
being, he says, "the one merely a version of the other," and the
Epitome a blending of the other two. As there are in the Clementine
Homilies upwards of a hundred quotations of expressions of Jesus, or
references to His history (not less than fifty passages from the
Sermon on the Mount), it is important to ascertain, if possible, when
they were written, and from what writings they quote. The date cannot
be determined. The range of probability is from the middle of the
second century. If much later, the inquiry does not amount to much,
because we know, from ample evidence, such as that of Irenæus, that
the Four Gospels as we have them were in existence, and read in the
Churches, in the middle of the second century. We presume, therefore,
our author takes an early date for granted, or he would not have
occupied forty pages in their examination.

The first quotation which, he says, agrees with a passage in our
Synoptics, occurs in the third Homily, p. 52: "And he cried, saying,
Come unto me all ye that are weary;" which agrees with Matt. xi. 28.
Because the quotation is not continued, but the following words are an
explanation of what "Come unto me," &c., means--"that is, who are
seeking truth, and not finding it,"--we are to deem it "evident that
so short and fragmentary a phrase cannot prove anything." I exclaim,
Indeed! Not in a book that contains a hundred references to the words
of Jesus! Not, considering that they are especially the words of
Jesus, that no one else so said to the weary, "Come unto me!" Most
readers will surely think the contrary should be inferred!

Among the quotations are words resembling the text of Matthew xxv.
26-30: "Thou wicked and slothful servant: thou oughtest to have put
out my money with the exchangers, and at my coming I should have
exacted mine own."[33] If this were the only reference to the Gospels
as we have them, the quotation is sufficiently near to make the
inference certain that such writings, in some shape, must have been in
existence when the Clementine Homilies were written. This our author
acknowledges, but he says (vol. ii. p. 17): "If the variations were
the exception among a mass of quotations perfectly agreeing with the
parallels in our Gospels, it might be exaggeration to base upon such
divergences a conclusion that they were derived from a different
source. The variations being the rule, instead of the exception,
these, _however slight_, become evidence of the use of a different
Gospel from ours."[34]

  [33] "Hom." iii. 61.

  [34] "The 'Recognitions of Clemens,' which differ little from
  Clementina, are the witty and agreeable productions of an Alexandrian
  Jew, well versed in philosophy, written in the third century."--_Dr.
  Mosheim._

I remark, supposing this be so, that the author of these Homilies had,
in the year 160, other Gospel manuscripts before him, it is not
pretended that our Gospels contain all that was known of the sayings
of Jesus, and all the events of His public ministry. We are told in
the Fourth Gospel: "There are also many other things which Jesus did,
the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even
the world itself could not contain the books that should be
written."[35] If the author of the Fourth Gospel did not include many
things which he knew had been previously written about, why should we
be surprised to find the authors of the Synoptic Gospels record only
portions?

  [35] John xx. 25.

We know that Paul wrote an epistle to the Church at Laodicea, which is
not preserved to us. We hold that Paul was as much an inspired writer
as any of the apostles, and instead of making all sorts of
difficulties about the books we have, we ought to be grateful that
they are extant. We read in Paul's Epistle to the Colossians, iv. 16:
"And when this epistle is read among you, cause that it be read also
in the Church of the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the epistle
from Laodicea."

I wonder whether our author has an objection to the genuineness of the
Epistle to the Colossians, because Epictetus, who was born at
Hierapolis about A.D. 50, which was within a few miles of Colosse and
Laodicea, and who would be likely to know, at that time, what was
there going on, does not refer to Paul and the Churches there?

But it is useless to disprove the assertion that there are no
quotations from the Gospels, for we are met at every turn with the
objection that those specified are probably quotations from the
numerous lost Gospels known to have been in circulation. He says: "The
great mass of intelligent critics are agreed that our Synoptics have
assumed their present form only after repeated modifications by
various editors of earlier evangelical works. The primitive Gospels
have entirely disappeared, supplanted by the later and more amplified
versions (p. 459). The first two Synoptics bear no author's name,
because they are not the work of any one man, but the collected
materials of many. The third only pretends to be a compilation for
private use, and the fourth bears no simple signature, because it is
neither the work of an apostle nor of an eye-witness of the events it
records" (p. 401). I remark, if Luke's Gospel does only pretend to be
for private use, does that affect its value? If Matthew wrote at all,
and our author acknowledges he did in Hebrew, his work would be likely
to be translated into Greek, either by himself or some one else, and
many copies circulated. Supposing the original in Hebrew to be lost,
it is not probable the Greek copies could be all collected from
various places, and all altered and supplemented. How could any one
do this? He might write and issue a new version, but he could _not_
suppress the original one unless all the existing copies were under
his own control. As we have a certain work preserved, and no other,
pretending to be Matthew's, it is highly probable that what Matthew
contributed to the Church is that Gospel. A fictitious one would be
less likely to be preserved than a real one, though we are asked to
believe the contrary. Our author suggests that if we had the original
writings we should find them minus the miracles, which is altogether
inconsistent with what he has said about the prevalence of miraculous
notions among the Jews at the time. At any rate, if the books in
circulation did not relate miracles, they would not be in harmony with
the gospel preached by Paul, and believed by the first Christians.
Supposing that there were, as Luke intimates, and as our author
asserts, many original writings, what more likely than that Matthew
should collect some of them, and embody them, with his own record, in
one book, under his own name? It is quite true that we meet with
references to apostolic writings under other titles than those in the
New Testament: we read of,--

"The Gospel according to the Hebrews."

"The Gospel according to the Egyptians."

"The Memoirs of the Apostles."

"The Gospel of Matthew in Hebrew."

"The Gospel of the Lord."

"The Discourses of Peter."

"The Collection of Discourses."

Although we do not know how these were embodied in our New Testament
Scriptures, it is probable that they were in some way included, or the
copies of the present Gospels may not all have uniformly borne the
same titles as we know them by. In our day it is not usual for an
author's name to appear in the body of his work, and often a
title-page gives more than one title.[36] How few persons can give the
exact title of the book known as "Butler's Analogy." The value of a
book does not depend essentially upon the person who wrote it. We do
not know who wrote the Book of Job, many of the Psalms, the Epistle to
the Hebrews, and other portions of the Bible, but it would be unwise
to reject their teaching on that account.

  [36] "The 'Recognitions' are conveyed to us by the ancients under
  different titles. They are sometimes styled 'St. Clemens's Acts,'
  'History Chronicle;' sometimes 'St. Peter's Acts,' 'Itinerary
  Periods,' 'Dialogues with Apion,' all which are unquestionably but
  different inscriptions, or it may be parcels, of the same book."--_Dr.
  Cave's_ "Apostalici," p. 58.

Our author says: "No reason whatever has been shown for accepting the
testimony of these Gospels as sufficient to establish the reality of
miracles" (p. 249). I remark, the question is, Do they show such
_in_sufficient testimony as to warrant the conclusion that the general
evidence based on a great variety of proofs is not to be accepted?

The Epistle to Diognetus is a short composition, which has been
ascribed to Justin Martyr, but its authorship is uncertain, and the
date of its composition. It is not quoted or mentioned by any ancient
writer. The two concluding chapters are supposed to have been written
by a different hand. To the first quarter of the second half to the
end of that century the date is variously assigned. It is written in
pure Greek, and is elegant in style. Bunsen, in his valuable book,
"Hippolytus and his Age," asserts that "the epistle is certainly the
work of a contemporary of Justin the Martyr;" that he believes he has
proved that the first part is a portion of the lost early Letter of
Marcion, of which Tertullian speaks; and that "the very beautiful and
justly admired second fragment, which in our editions of Justin's
works is given at the end of that Patristic gem, the Epistle to
Diognetus,"[37] does not belong to that letter, but is the conclusion
of the great work, in ten books, by Hippolytus, "The Refutation of all
Heresies." Our author, in the eighteen pages devoted to the Epistle to
Diognetus, says nothing of this, although it is both important and
interesting. He says the supposed allusions in the Fourth Gospel may
be all referable to Paul's epistles, that the date and author are
unknown, and that the letter is of no evidential value. His two brief
allusions to Bunsen's work show that the ignoring of that eminent
man's opinion was not unintentional; while the absence of any
reference to Bunsen's elaborate proof that Hippolytus wrote the
"Refutation," is also significant.

  [37] "Hippolytus and his Age," vol. i. 187.




