The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Reef, by Edith Wharton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Reef

Author: Edith Wharton

Posting Date: July 12, 2008 [EBook #283]
Release Date: June, 1995
[Last Updated: August 19, 2017]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE REEF ***




Produced by Gail Jahn, and John Hamm





THE REEF

by Edith Wharton





BOOK I




I


“Unexpected obstacle. Please don’t come till thirtieth. Anna.”

All the way from Charing Cross to Dover the train had hammered the words
of the telegram into George Darrow’s ears, ringing every change of irony
on its commonplace syllables: rattling them out like a discharge of
musketry, letting them, one by one, drip slowly and coldly into his
brain, or shaking, tossing, transposing them like the dice in some game
of the gods of malice; and now, as he emerged from his compartment at
the pier, and stood facing the wind-swept platform and the angry sea
beyond, they leapt out at him as if from the crest of the waves, stung
and blinded him with a fresh fury of derision.

“Unexpected obstacle. Please don’t come till thirtieth. Anna.”

She had put him off at the very last moment, and for the second time:
put him off with all her sweet reasonableness, and for one of her usual
“good” reasons--he was certain that this reason, like the other, (the
visit of her husband’s uncle’s widow) would be “good”! But it was that
very certainty which chilled him. The fact of her dealing so reasonably
with their case shed an ironic light on the idea that there had been any
exceptional warmth in the greeting she had given him after their twelve
years apart.

They had found each other again, in London, some three months
previously, at a dinner at the American Embassy, and when she had caught
sight of him her smile had been like a red rose pinned on her widow’s
mourning. He still felt the throb of surprise with which, among
the stereotyped faces of the season’s diners, he had come upon her
unexpected face, with the dark hair banded above grave eyes; eyes in
which he had recognized every little curve and shadow as he would have
recognized, after half a life-time, the details of a room he had played
in as a child. And as, in the plumed starred crowd, she had stood out
for him, slender, secluded and different, so he had felt, the instant
their glances met, that he as sharply detached himself for her. All that
and more her smile had said; had said not merely “I remember,” but “I
remember just what you remember”; almost, indeed, as though her memory
had aided his, her glance flung back on their recaptured moment its
morning brightness. Certainly, when their distracted Ambassadress--with
the cry: “Oh, you know Mrs. Leath? That’s perfect, for General Farnham
has failed me”--had waved them together for the march to the dining-room,
Darrow had felt a slight pressure of the arm on his, a pressure faintly
but unmistakably emphasizing the exclamation: “Isn’t it wonderful?--In
London--in the season--in a mob?”

Little enough, on the part of most women; but it was a sign of Mrs.
Leath’s quality that every movement, every syllable, told with her. Even
in the old days, as an intent grave-eyed girl, she had seldom misplaced
her light strokes; and Darrow, on meeting her again, had immediately
felt how much finer and surer an instrument of expression she had
become.

Their evening together had been a long confirmation of this feeling. She
had talked to him, shyly yet frankly, of what had happened to her during
the years when they had so strangely failed to meet. She had told him
of her marriage to Fraser Leath, and of her subsequent life in France,
where her husband’s mother, left a widow in his youth, had been
re-married to the Marquis de Chantelle, and where, partly in consequence
of this second union, the son had permanently settled himself. She had
spoken also, with an intense eagerness of affection, of her little girl
Effie, who was now nine years old, and, in a strain hardly less tender,
of Owen Leath, the charming clever young stepson whom her husband’s
death had left to her care...


A porter, stumbling against Darrow’s bags, roused him to the fact that
he still obstructed the platform, inert and encumbering as his luggage.

“Crossing, sir?”

Was he crossing? He really didn’t know; but for lack of any more
compelling impulse he followed the porter to the luggage van, singled
out his property, and turned to march behind it down the gang-way. As
the fierce wind shouldered him, building up a crystal wall against his
efforts, he felt anew the derision of his case.

“Nasty weather to cross, sir,” the porter threw back at him as they beat
their way down the narrow walk to the pier. Nasty weather, indeed; but
luckily, as it had turned out, there was no earthly reason why Darrow
should cross.

While he pushed on in the wake of his luggage his thoughts slipped back
into the old groove. He had once or twice run across the man whom Anna
Summers had preferred to him, and since he had met her again he had been
exercising his imagination on the picture of what her married life must
have been. Her husband had struck him as a characteristic specimen of
the kind of American as to whom one is not quite clear whether he
lives in Europe in order to cultivate an art, or cultivates an art as a
pretext for living in Europe. Mr. Leath’s art was water-colour painting,
but he practised it furtively, almost clandestinely, with the disdain of
a man of the world for anything bordering on the professional, while
he devoted himself more openly, and with religious seriousness, to the
collection of enamelled snuff-boxes. He was blond and well-dressed, with
the physical distinction that comes from having a straight figure, a
thin nose, and the habit of looking slightly disgusted--as who should
not, in a world where authentic snuff-boxes were growing daily harder to
find, and the market was flooded with flagrant forgeries?

Darrow had often wondered what possibilities of communion there could
have been between Mr. Leath and his wife. Now he concluded that there
had probably been none. Mrs. Leath’s words gave no hint of her husband’s
having failed to justify her choice; but her very reticence betrayed
her. She spoke of him with a kind of impersonal seriousness, as if he
had been a character in a novel or a figure in history; and what she
said sounded as though it had been learned by heart and slightly dulled
by repetition. This fact immensely increased Darrow’s impression that
his meeting with her had annihilated the intervening years. She, who was
always so elusive and inaccessible, had grown suddenly communicative and
kind: had opened the doors of her past, and tacitly left him to draw his
own conclusions. As a result, he had taken leave of her with the
sense that he was a being singled out and privileged, to whom she had
entrusted something precious to keep. It was her happiness in their
meeting that she had given him, had frankly left him to do with as he
willed; and the frankness of the gesture doubled the beauty of the gift.

Their next meeting had prolonged and deepened the impression. They had
found each other again, a few days later, in an old country house full
of books and pictures, in the soft landscape of southern England.
The presence of a large party, with all its aimless and agitated
displacements, had served only to isolate the pair and give them (at
least to the young man’s fancy) a deeper feeling of communion, and their
days there had been like some musical prelude, where the instruments,
breathing low, seem to hold back the waves of sound that press against
them.

Mrs. Leath, on this occasion, was no less kind than before; but she
contrived to make him understand that what was so inevitably coming was
not to come too soon. It was not that she showed any hesitation as to
the issue, but rather that she seemed to wish not to miss any stage in
the gradual reflowering of their intimacy.

Darrow, for his part, was content to wait if she wished it. He
remembered that once, in America, when she was a girl, and he had
gone to stay with her family in the country, she had been out when he
arrived, and her mother had told him to look for her in the garden. She
was not in the garden, but beyond it he had seen her approaching down a
long shady path. Without hastening her step she had smiled and signed to
him to wait; and charmed by the lights and shadows that played upon her
as she moved, and by the pleasure of watching her slow advance toward
him, he had obeyed her and stood still. And so she seemed now to be
walking to him down the years, the light and shade of old memories and
new hopes playing variously on her, and each step giving him the vision
of a different grace. She did not waver or turn aside; he knew she would
come straight to where he stood; but something in her eyes said “Wait”,
and again he obeyed and waited.

On the fourth day an unexpected event threw out his calculations.
Summoned to town by the arrival in England of her husband’s mother, she
left without giving Darrow the chance he had counted on, and he cursed
himself for a dilatory blunderer. Still, his disappointment was tempered
by the certainty of being with her again before she left for France;
and they did in fact see each other in London. There, however, the
atmosphere had changed with the conditions. He could not say that she
avoided him, or even that she was a shade less glad to see him; but
she was beset by family duties and, as he thought, a little too readily
resigned to them.

The Marquise de Chantelle, as Darrow soon perceived, had the same
mild formidableness as the late Mr. Leath: a sort of insistent
self-effacement before which every one about her gave way. It was
perhaps the shadow of this lady’s presence--pervasive even during her
actual brief eclipses--that subdued and silenced Mrs. Leath. The latter
was, moreover, preoccupied about her stepson, who, soon after receiving
his degree at Harvard, had been rescued from a stormy love-affair, and
finally, after some months of troubled drifting, had yielded to his
step-mother’s counsel and gone up to Oxford for a year of supplementary
study. Thither Mrs. Leath went once or twice to visit him, and her
remaining days were packed with family obligations: getting, as she
phrased it, “frocks and governesses” for her little girl, who had
been left in France, and having to devote the remaining hours to long
shopping expeditions with her mother-in-law. Nevertheless, during her
brief escapes from duty, Darrow had had time to feel her safe in the
custody of his devotion, set apart for some inevitable hour; and the
last evening, at the theatre, between the overshadowing Marquise and the
unsuspicious Owen, they had had an almost decisive exchange of words.

Now, in the rattle of the wind about his ears, Darrow continued to
hear the mocking echo of her message: “Unexpected obstacle.” In such an
existence as Mrs. Leath’s, at once so ordered and so exposed, he knew
how small a complication might assume the magnitude of an “obstacle;”
 yet, even allowing as impartially as his state of mind permitted for
the fact that, with her mother-in-law always, and her stepson
intermittently, under her roof, her lot involved a hundred small
accommodations generally foreign to the freedom of widowhood--even so,
he could not but think that the very ingenuity bred of such conditions
might have helped her to find a way out of them. No, her “reason”,
whatever it was, could, in this case, be nothing but a pretext; unless
he leaned to the less flattering alternative that any reason seemed good
enough for postponing him! Certainly, if her welcome had meant what he
imagined, she could not, for the second time within a few weeks,
have submitted so tamely to the disarrangement of their plans; a
disarrangement which--his official duties considered--might, for all she
knew, result in his not being able to go to her for months.

“Please don’t come till thirtieth.” The thirtieth--and it was now the
fifteenth! She flung back the fortnight on his hands as if he had been
an idler indifferent to dates, instead of an active young diplomatist
who, to respond to her call, had had to hew his way through a very
jungle of engagements! “Please don’t come till thirtieth.” That was all.
Not the shadow of an excuse or a regret; not even the perfunctory “have
written” with which it is usual to soften such blows. She didn’t want
him, and had taken the shortest way to tell him so. Even in his first
moment of exasperation it struck him as characteristic that she should
not have padded her postponement with a fib. Certainly her moral angles
were not draped!

“If I asked her to marry me, she’d have refused in the same language.
But thank heaven I haven’t!” he reflected.

These considerations, which had been with him every yard of the way from
London, reached a climax of irony as he was drawn into the crowd on the
pier. It did not soften his feelings to remember that, but for her lack
of forethought, he might, at this harsh end of the stormy May day, have
been sitting before his club fire in London instead of shivering in the
damp human herd on the pier. Admitting the sex’s traditional right to
change, she might at least have advised him of hers by telegraphing
directly to his rooms. But in spite of their exchange of letters she
had apparently failed to note his address, and a breathless emissary had
rushed from the Embassy to pitch her telegram into his compartment as
the train was moving from the station.

Yes, he had given her chance enough to learn where he lived; and this
minor proof of her indifference became, as he jammed his way through the
crowd, the main point of his grievance against her and of his derision
of himself. Half way down the pier the prod of an umbrella increased his
exasperation by rousing him to the fact that it was raining. Instantly
the narrow ledge became a battle-ground of thrusting, slanting, parrying
domes. The wind rose with the rain, and the harried wretches exposed to
this double assault wreaked on their neighbours the vengeance they could
not take on the elements.

Darrow, whose healthy enjoyment of life made him in general a good
traveller, tolerant of agglutinated humanity, felt himself obscurely
outraged by these promiscuous contacts. It was as though all the people
about him had taken his measure and known his plight; as though they
were contemptuously bumping and shoving him like the inconsiderable
thing he had become. “She doesn’t want you, doesn’t want you, doesn’t
want you,” their umbrellas and their elbows seemed to say.

He had rashly vowed, when the telegram was flung into his window: “At
any rate I won’t turn back”--as though it might cause the sender a
malicious joy to have him retrace his steps rather than keep on to
Paris! Now he perceived the absurdity of the vow, and thanked his stars
that he need not plunge, to no purpose, into the fury of waves outside
the harbour.

With this thought in his mind he turned back to look for his porter;
but the contiguity of dripping umbrellas made signalling impossible and,
perceiving that he had lost sight of the man, he scrambled up again to
the platform. As he reached it, a descending umbrella caught him in the
collar-bone; and the next moment, bent sideways by the wind, it turned
inside out and soared up, kite-wise, at the end of a helpless female
arm.

Darrow caught the umbrella, lowered its inverted ribs, and looked up at
the face it exposed to him.

“Wait a minute,” he said; “you can’t stay here.”

As he spoke, a surge of the crowd drove the owner of the umbrella
abruptly down on him. Darrow steadied her with extended arms, and
regaining her footing she cried out: “Oh, dear, oh, dear! It’s in
ribbons!”

Her lifted face, fresh and flushed in the driving rain, woke in him
a memory of having seen it at a distant time and in a vaguely
unsympathetic setting; but it was no moment to follow up such clues, and
the face was obviously one to make its way on its own merits.

Its possessor had dropped her bag and bundles to clutch at the tattered
umbrella. “I bought it only yesterday at the Stores; and--yes--it’s
utterly done for!” she lamented.

Darrow smiled at the intensity of her distress. It was food for the
moralist that, side by side with such catastrophes as his, human nature
was still agitating itself over its microscopic woes!

“Here’s mine if you want it!” he shouted back at her through the
shouting of the gale.

The offer caused the young lady to look at him more intently. “Why,
it’s Mr. Darrow!” she exclaimed; and then, all radiant recognition: “Oh,
thank you! We’ll share it, if you will.”

She knew him, then; and he knew her; but how and where had they met? He
put aside the problem for subsequent solution, and drawing her into a
more sheltered corner, bade her wait till he could find his porter.

When, a few minutes later, he came back with his recovered property,
and the news that the boat would not leave till the tide had turned, she
showed no concern.

“Not for two hours? How lucky--then I can find my trunk!”

Ordinarily Darrow would have felt little disposed to involve himself
in the adventure of a young female who had lost her trunk; but at the
moment he was glad of any pretext for activity. Even should he decide to
take the next up train from Dover he still had a yawning hour to fill;
and the obvious remedy was to devote it to the loveliness in distress
under his umbrella.

“You’ve lost a trunk? Let me see if I can find it.”

It pleased him that she did not return the conventional “Oh, WOULD you?”
 Instead, she corrected him with a laugh--“Not a trunk, but my trunk; I’ve
no other--” and then added briskly: “You’d better first see to getting
your own things on the boat.”

This made him answer, as if to give substance to his plans by discussing
them: “I don’t actually know that I’m going over.”

“Not going over?”

“Well ... perhaps not by this boat.” Again he felt a stealing indecision.
“I may probably have to go back to London. I’m--I’m waiting ... expecting
a letter...(She’ll think me a defaulter,” he reflected.) “But meanwhile
there’s plenty of time to find your trunk.”

He picked up his companion’s bundles, and offered her an arm which
enabled her to press her slight person more closely under his umbrella;
and as, thus linked, they beat their way back to the platform, pulled
together and apart like marionettes on the wires of the wind, he
continued to wonder where he could have seen her. He had immediately
classed her as a compatriot; her small nose, her clear tints, a kind
of sketchy delicacy in her face, as though she had been brightly but
lightly washed in with water-colour, all confirmed the evidence of her
high sweet voice and of her quick incessant gestures. She was clearly an
American, but with the loose native quality strained through a closer
woof of manners: the composite product of an enquiring and adaptable
race. All this, however, did not help him to fit a name to her, for just
such instances were perpetually pouring through the London Embassy, and
the etched and angular American was becoming rarer than the fluid type.

More puzzling than the fact of his being unable to identify her was
the persistent sense connecting her with something uncomfortable and
distasteful. So pleasant a vision as that gleaming up at him between
wet brown hair and wet brown boa should have evoked only associations as
pleasing; but each effort to fit her image into his past resulted in the
same memories of boredom and a vague discomfort...




II


“Don’t you remember me now--at Mrs. Murrett’s?” She threw the question at
Darrow across a table of the quiet coffee-room to which, after a vainly
prolonged quest for her trunk, he had suggested taking her for a cup of
tea.

In this musty retreat she had removed her dripping hat, hung it on the
fender to dry, and stretched herself on tiptoe in front of the round
eagle-crowned mirror, above the mantel vases of dyed immortelles, while
she ran her fingers comb-wise through her hair. The gesture had acted on
Darrow’s numb feelings as the glow of the fire acted on his circulation;
and when he had asked: “Aren’t your feet wet, too?” and, after
frank inspection of a stout-shod sole, she had answered cheerfully:
“No--luckily I had on my new boots,” he began to feel that human
intercourse would still be tolerable if it were always as free from
formality.

The removal of his companion’s hat, besides provoking this reflection,
gave him his first full sight of her face; and this was so
favourable that the name she now pronounced fell on him with a quite
disproportionate shock of dismay.

“Oh, Mrs. Murrett’s--was it THERE?”

He remembered her now, of course: remembered her as one of the shadowy
sidling presences in the background of that awful house in Chelsea, one
of the dumb appendages of the shrieking unescapable Mrs. Murrett, into
whose talons he had fallen in the course of his head-long pursuit of
Lady Ulrica Crispin. Oh, the taste of stale follies! How insipid it was,
yet how it clung!

“I used to pass you on the stairs,” she reminded him.

Yes: he had seen her slip by--he recalled it now--as he dashed up to
the drawing-room in quest of Lady Ulrica. The thought made him steal a
longer look. How could such a face have been merged in the Murrett
mob? Its fugitive slanting lines, that lent themselves to all manner of
tender tilts and foreshortenings, had the freakish grace of some young
head of the Italian comedy. The hair stood up from her forehead in a
boyish elf-lock, and its colour matched her auburn eyes flecked with
black, and the little brown spot on her cheek, between the ear that was
meant to have a rose behind it and the chin that should have rested on
a ruff. When she smiled, the left corner of her mouth went up a little
higher than the right; and her smile began in her eyes and ran down to
her lips in two lines of light. He had dashed past that to reach Lady
Ulrica Crispin!

“But of course you wouldn’t remember me,” she was saying. “My name is
Viner--Sophy Viner.”

Not remember her? But of course he DID! He was genuinely sure of it now.
“You’re Mrs. Murrett’s niece,” he declared.

She shook her head. “No; not even that. Only her reader.”

“Her reader? Do you mean to say she ever reads?”

Miss Viner enjoyed his wonder. “Dear, no! But I wrote notes, and made up
the visiting-book, and walked the dogs, and saw bores for her.”

Darrow groaned. “That must have been rather bad!”

“Yes; but nothing like as bad as being her niece.”

“That I can well believe. I’m glad to hear,” he added, “that you put it
all in the past tense.”

She seemed to droop a little at the allusion; then she lifted her chin
with a jerk of defiance. “Yes. All is at an end between us. We’ve just
parted in tears--but not in silence!”

“Just parted? Do you mean to say you’ve been there all this time?”

“Ever since you used to come there to see Lady Ulrica? Does it seem to
you so awfully long ago?”

The unexpectedness of the thrust--as well as its doubtful taste--chilled
his growing enjoyment of her chatter. He had really been getting to
like her--had recovered, under the candid approval of her eye, his
usual sense of being a personable young man, with all the privileges
pertaining to the state, instead of the anonymous rag of humanity he
had felt himself in the crowd on the pier. It annoyed him, at that
particular moment, to be reminded that naturalness is not always
consonant with taste.

She seemed to guess his thought. “You don’t like my saying that you came
for Lady Ulrica?” she asked, leaning over the table to pour herself a
second cup of tea.

He liked her quickness, at any rate. “It’s better,” he laughed, “than
your thinking I came for Mrs. Murrett!”

“Oh, we never thought anybody came for Mrs. Murrett! It was always for
something else: the music, or the cook--when there was a good one--or
the other people; generally ONE of the other people.”

“I see.”

She was amusing, and that, in his present mood, was more to his purpose
than the exact shade of her taste. It was odd, too, to discover suddenly
that the blurred tapestry of Mrs. Murrett’s background had all the while
been alive and full of eyes. Now, with a pair of them looking into his,
he was conscious of a queer reversal of perspective.

“Who were the ‘we’? Were you a cloud of witnesses?”

“There were a good many of us.” She smiled. “Let me see--who was there
in your time? Mrs. Bolt--and Mademoiselle--and Professor Didymus and
the Polish Countess. Don’t you remember the Polish Countess? She
crystal-gazed, and played accompaniments, and Mrs. Murrett chucked her
because Mrs. Didymus accused her of hypnotizing the Professor. But of
course you don’t remember. We were all invisible to you; but we could
see. And we all used to wonder about you----”

Again Darrow felt a redness in the temples. “What about me?”

“Well--whether it was you or she who...”

He winced, but hid his disapproval. It made the time pass to listen to
her.

“And what, if one may ask, was your conclusion?”

“Well, Mrs. Bolt and Mademoiselle and the Countess naturally thought it
was SHE; but Professor Didymus and Jimmy Brance--especially Jimmy----”

“Just a moment: who on earth is Jimmy Brance?”

She exclaimed in wonder: “You WERE absorbed--not to remember Jimmy
Brance! He must have been right about you, after all.” She let her
amused scrutiny dwell on him. “But how could you? She was false from
head to foot!”

“False----?” In spite of time and satiety, the male instinct of
ownership rose up and repudiated the charge.

Miss Viner caught his look and laughed. “Oh, I only meant externally!
You see, she often used to come to my room after tennis, or to touch
up in the evenings, when they were going on; and I assure you she took
apart like a puzzle. In fact I used to say to Jimmy--just to make him
wild--: ‘I’ll bet you anything you like there’s nothing wrong, because
I know she’d never dare un--’” She broke the word in two, and her quick
blush made her face like a shallow-petalled rose shading to the deeper
pink of the centre.

The situation was saved, for Darrow, by an abrupt rush of memories, and
he gave way to a mirth which she as frankly echoed. “Of course,” she
gasped through her laughter, “I only said it to tease Jimmy----”

Her amusement obscurely annoyed him. “Oh, you’re all alike!” he
exclaimed, moved by an unaccountable sense of disappointment.

She caught him up in a flash--she didn’t miss things! “You say that
because you think I’m spiteful and envious? Yes--I was envious of Lady
Ulrica...Oh, not on account of you or Jimmy Brance! Simply because
she had almost all the things I’ve always wanted: clothes and fun and
motors, and admiration and yachting and Paris--why, Paris alone would be
enough!--And how do you suppose a girl can see that sort of thing about
her day after day, and never wonder why some women, who don’t seem to
have any more right to it, have it all tumbled into their laps, while
others are writing dinner invitations, and straightening out accounts,
and copying visiting lists, and finishing golf-stockings, and matching
ribbons, and seeing that the dogs get their sulphur? One looks in one’s
glass, after all!”

She launched the closing words at him on a cry that lifted them above
the petulance of vanity; but his sense of her words was lost in the
surprise of her face. Under the flying clouds of her excitement it was
no longer a shallow flower-cup but a darkening gleaming mirror that
might give back strange depths of feeling. The girl had stuff in her--he
saw it; and she seemed to catch the perception in his eyes.

“That’s the kind of education I got at Mrs. Murrett’s--and I never had
any other,” she said with a shrug.

“Good Lord--were you there so long?”

“Five years. I stuck it out longer than any of the others.” She spoke as
though it were something to be proud of.

“Well, thank God you’re out of it now!”

Again a just perceptible shadow crossed her face. “Yes--I’m out of it
now fast enough.”

“And what--if I may ask--are you doing next?”

She brooded a moment behind drooped lids; then, with a touch of hauteur:
“I’m going to Paris: to study for the stage.”

“The stage?” Darrow stared at her, dismayed. All his confused
contradictory impressions assumed a new aspect at this announcement; and
to hide his surprise he added lightly: “Ah--then you will have Paris,
after all!”

“Hardly Lady Ulrica’s Paris. It s not likely to be roses, roses all the
way.”

“It’s not, indeed.” Real compassion prompted him to continue: “Have you
any--any influence you can count on?”

She gave a somewhat flippant little laugh. “None but my own. I’ve never
had any other to count on.”

He passed over the obvious reply. “But have you any idea how the
profession is over-crowded? I know I’m trite----”

“I’ve a very clear idea. But I couldn’t go on as I was.”

“Of course not. But since, as you say, you’d stuck it out longer than
any of the others, couldn’t you at least have held on till you were sure
of some kind of an opening?”

She made no reply for a moment; then she turned a listless glance to the
rain-beaten window. “Oughtn’t we be starting?” she asked, with a lofty
assumption of indifference that might have been Lady Ulrica’s.

Darrow, surprised by the change, but accepting her rebuff as a phase of
what he guessed to be a confused and tormented mood, rose from his seat
and lifted her jacket from the chair-back on which she had hung it to
dry. As he held it toward her she looked up at him quickly.

“The truth is, we quarrelled,” she broke out, “and I left last night
without my dinner--and without my salary.”

“Ah--” he groaned, with a sharp perception of all the sordid dangers
that might attend such a break with Mrs. Murrett.

“And without a character!” she added, as she slipped her arms into the
jacket. “And without a trunk, as it appears--but didn’t you say that,
before going, there’d be time for another look at the station?”

There was time for another look at the station; but the look again
resulted in disappointment, since her trunk was nowhere to be found in
the huge heap disgorged by the newly-arrived London express. The fact
caused Miss Viner a moment’s perturbation; but she promptly adjusted
herself to the necessity of proceeding on her journey, and her decision
confirmed Darrow’s vague resolve to go to Paris instead of retracing his
way to London.

Miss Viner seemed cheered at the prospect of his company, and sustained
by his offer to telegraph to Charing Cross for the missing trunk; and
he left her to wait in the fly while he hastened back to the telegraph
office. The enquiry despatched, he was turning away from the desk when
another thought struck him and he went back and indited a message to his
servant in London: “If any letters with French post-mark received since
departure forward immediately to Terminus Hotel Gare du Nord Paris.”

Then he rejoined Miss Viner, and they drove off through the rain to the
pier.




III


Almost as soon as the train left Calais her head had dropped back into
the corner, and she had fallen asleep.

Sitting opposite, in the compartment from which he had contrived to have
other travellers excluded, Darrow looked at her curiously. He had never
seen a face that changed so quickly. A moment since it had danced like
a field of daisies in a summer breeze; now, under the pallid oscillating
light of the lamp overhead, it wore the hard stamp of experience, as of
a soft thing chilled into shape before its curves had rounded: and it
moved him to see that care already stole upon her when she slept.

The story she had imparted to him in the wheezing shaking cabin, and at
the Calais buffet--where he had insisted on offering her the dinner
she had missed at Mrs. Murrett’s--had given a distincter outline to
her figure. From the moment of entering the New York boarding-school to
which a preoccupied guardian had hastily consigned her after the death
of her parents, she had found herself alone in a busy and indifferent
world. Her youthful history might, in fact, have been summed up in
the statement that everybody had been too busy to look after her. Her
guardian, a drudge in a big banking house, was absorbed by “the office”;
the guardian’s wife, by her health and her religion; and an elder
sister, Laura, married, unmarried, remarried, and pursuing, through all
these alternating phases, some vaguely “artistic” ideal on which the
guardian and his wife looked askance, had (as Darrow conjectured) taken
their disapproval as a pretext for not troubling herself about
poor Sophy, to whom--perhaps for this reason--she had remained the
incarnation of remote romantic possibilities.

In the course of time a sudden “stroke” of the guardian’s had thrown his
personal affairs into a state of confusion from which--after his widely
lamented death--it became evident that it would not be possible to
extricate his ward’s inheritance. No one deplored this more sincerely
than his widow, who saw in it one more proof of her husband’s life
having been sacrificed to the innumerable duties imposed on him, and who
could hardly--but for the counsels of religion--have brought herself to
pardon the young girl for her indirect share in hastening his end. Sophy
did not resent this point of view. She was really much sorrier for her
guardian’s death than for the loss of her insignificant fortune. The
latter had represented only the means of holding her in bondage, and
its disappearance was the occasion of her immediate plunge into the
wide bright sea of life surrounding the island--of her captivity. She had
first landed--thanks to the intervention of the ladies who had directed
her education--in a Fifth Avenue school-room where, for a few months,
she acted as a buffer between three autocratic infants and their
bodyguard of nurses and teachers. The too-pressing attentions of their
father’s valet had caused her to fly this sheltered spot, against the
express advice of her educational superiors, who implied that, in their
own case, refinement and self-respect had always sufficed to keep the
most ungovernable passions at bay. The experience of the guardian’s
widow having been precisely similar, and the deplorable precedent of
Laura’s career being present to all their minds, none of these ladies
felt any obligation to intervene farther in Sophy’s affairs; and she was
accordingly left to her own resources.

A schoolmate from the Rocky Mountains, who was taking her father and
mother to Europe, had suggested Sophy’s accompanying them, and “going
round” with her while her progenitors, in the care of the courier,
nursed their ailments at a fashionable bath. Darrow gathered that the
“going round” with Mamie Hoke was a varied and diverting process; but
this relatively brilliant phase of Sophy’s career was cut short by
the elopement of the inconsiderate Mamie with a “matinee idol” who had
followed her from New York, and by the precipitate return of her parents
to negotiate for the repurchase of their child.

It was then--after an interval of repose with compassionate but
impecunious American friends in Paris--that Miss Viner had been drawn
into the turbid current of Mrs. Murrett’s career. The impecunious
compatriots had found Mrs. Murrett for her, and it was partly on
their account (because they were such dears, and so unconscious, poor
confiding things, of what they were letting her in for) that Sophy had
stuck it out so long in the dreadful house in Chelsea. The Farlows, she
explained to Darrow, were the best friends she had ever had (and the
only ones who had ever “been decent” about Laura, whom they had seen
once, and intensely admired); but even after twenty years of Paris they
were the most incorrigibly inexperienced angels, and quite persuaded
that Mrs. Murrett was a woman of great intellectual eminence, and the
house at Chelsea “the last of the salons”--Darrow knew what she meant?
And she hadn’t liked to undeceive them, knowing that to do so would be
virtually to throw herself back on their hands, and feeling, moreover,
after her previous experiences, the urgent need of gaining, at any cost,
a name for stability; besides which--she threw it off with a slight
laugh--no other chance, in all these years, had happened to come to her.

She had brushed in this outline of her career with light rapid strokes,
and in a tone of fatalism oddly untinged by bitterness. Darrow perceived
that she classified people according to their greater or less “luck” in
life, but she appeared to harbour no resentment against the undefined
power which dispensed the gift in such unequal measure. Things came
one’s way or they didn’t; and meanwhile one could only look on, and make
the most of small compensations, such as watching “the show” at Mrs.
Murrett’s, and talking over the Lady Ulricas and other footlight
figures. And at any moment, of course, a turn of the kaleidoscope might
suddenly toss a bright spangle into the grey pattern of one’s days.

This light-hearted philosophy was not without charm to a young man
accustomed to more traditional views. George Darrow had had a fairly
varied experience of feminine types, but the women he had frequented had
either been pronouncedly “ladies” or they had not. Grateful to both for
ministering to the more complex masculine nature, and disposed to
assume that they had been evolved, if not designed, to that end, he
had instinctively kept the two groups apart in his mind, avoiding that
intermediate society which attempts to conciliate both theories of life.
“Bohemianism” seemed to him a cheaper convention than the other two, and
he liked, above all, people who went as far as they could in their own
line--liked his “ladies” and their rivals to be equally unashamed of
showing for exactly what they were. He had not indeed--the fact of Lady
Ulrica was there to remind him--been without his experience of a third
type; but that experience had left him with a contemptuous distaste for
the woman who uses the privileges of one class to shelter the customs of
another.

As to young girls, he had never thought much about them since his early
love for the girl who had become Mrs. Leath. That episode seemed, as
he looked back on it, to bear no more relation to reality than a pale
decorative design to the confused richness of a summer landscape. He
no longer understood the violent impulses and dreamy pauses of his own
young heart, or the inscrutable abandonments and reluctances of hers. He
had known a moment of anguish at losing her--the mad plunge of youthful
instincts against the barrier of fate; but the first wave of stronger
sensation had swept away all but the outline of their story, and the
memory of Anna Summers had made the image of the young girl sacred, but
the class uninteresting.

Such generalisations belonged, however, to an earlier stage of his
experience. The more he saw of life the more incalculable he found
it; and he had learned to yield to his impressions without feeling
the youthful need of relating them to others. It was the girl in the
opposite seat who had roused in him the dormant habit of comparison.
She was distinguished from the daughters of wealth by her avowed
acquaintance with the real business of living, a familiarity as
different as possible from their theoretical proficiency; yet it seemed
to Darrow that her experience had made her free without hardness and
self-assured without assertiveness.


The rush into Amiens, and the flash of the station lights into their
compartment, broke Miss Viner’s sleep, and without changing her position
she lifted her lids and looked at Darrow. There was neither surprise nor
bewilderment in the look. She seemed instantly conscious, not so much
of where she was, as of the fact that she was with him; and that fact
seemed enough to reassure her. She did not even turn her head to look
out; her eyes continued to rest on him with a vague smile which appeared
to light her face from within, while her lips kept their sleepy droop.

Shouts and the hurried tread of travellers came to them through the
confusing cross-lights of the platform. A head appeared at the window,
and Darrow threw himself forward to defend their solitude; but the
intruder was only a train hand going his round of inspection. He passed
on, and the lights and cries of the station dropped away, merged in a
wider haze and a hollower resonance, as the train gathered itself up
with a long shake and rolled out again into the darkness.

Miss Viner’s head sank back against the cushion, pushing out a dusky
wave of hair above her forehead. The swaying of the train loosened a
lock over her ear, and she shook it back with a movement like a boy’s,
while her gaze still rested on her companion.

“You’re not too tired?”

She shook her head with a smile.

“We shall be in before midnight. We’re very nearly on time.” He verified
the statement by holding up his watch to the lamp.

She nodded dreamily. “It’s all right. I telegraphed Mrs. Farlow that
they mustn’t think of coming to the station; but they’ll have told the
concierge to look out for me.”

“You’ll let me drive you there?”

She nodded again, and her eyes closed. It was very pleasant to Darrow
that she made no effort to talk or to dissemble her sleepiness. He sat
watching her till the upper lashes met and mingled with the lower,
and their blent shadow lay on her cheek; then he stood up and drew the
curtain over the lamp, drowning the compartment in a bluish twilight.

As he sank back into his seat he thought how differently Anna
Summers--or even Anna Leath--would have behaved. She would not have
talked too much; she would not have been either restless or embarrassed;
but her adaptability, her appropriateness, would not have been
nature but “tact.” The oddness of the situation would have made sleep
impossible, or, if weariness had overcome her for a moment, she would
have waked with a start, wondering where she was, and how she had come
there, and if her hair were tidy; and nothing short of hairpins and a
glass would have restored her self-possession...

The reflection set him wondering whether the “sheltered” girl’s
bringing-up might not unfit her for all subsequent contact with life.
How much nearer to it had Mrs. Leath been brought by marriage and
motherhood, and the passage of fourteen years? What were all her
reticences and evasions but the result of the deadening process of
forming a “lady”? The freshness he had marvelled at was like the
unnatural whiteness of flowers forced in the dark.

As he looked back at their few days together he saw that their
intercourse had been marked, on her part, by the same hesitations and
reserves which had chilled their earlier intimacy. Once more they had
had their hour together and she had wasted it. As in her girlhood, her
eyes had made promises which her lips were afraid to keep. She was still
afraid of life, of its ruthlessness, its danger and mystery. She was
still the petted little girl who cannot be left alone in the dark...His
memory flew back to their youthful story, and long-forgotten details
took shape before him. How frail and faint the picture was! They seemed,
he and she, like the ghostly lovers of the Grecian Urn, forever pursuing
without ever clasping each other. To this day he did not quite know
what had parted them: the break had been as fortuitous as the fluttering
apart of two seed-vessels on a wave of summer air...

The very slightness, vagueness, of the memory gave it an added
poignancy. He felt the mystic pang of the parent for a child which
has just breathed and died. Why had it happened thus, when the least
shifting of influences might have made it all so different? If she had
been given to him then he would have put warmth in her veins and light
in her eyes: would have made her a woman through and through. Musing
thus, he had the sense of waste that is the bitterest harvest of
experience. A love like his might have given her the divine gift of
self-renewal; and now he saw her fated to wane into old age repeating
the same gestures, echoing the words she had always heard, and
perhaps never guessing that, just outside her glazed and curtained
consciousness, life rolled away, a vast blackness starred with lights,
like the night landscape beyond the windows of the train.

The engine lowered its speed for the passage through a sleeping station.
In the light of the platform lamp Darrow looked across at his companion.
Her head had dropped toward one shoulder, and her lips were just far
enough apart for the reflection of the upper one to deepen the colour
of the other. The jolting of the train had again shaken loose the lock
above her ear. It danced on her cheek like the flit of a brown wing over
flowers, and Darrow felt an intense desire to lean forward and put it
back behind her ear.




IV


As their motor-cab, on the way from the Gare du Nord, turned into the
central glitter of the Boulevard, Darrow had bent over to point out an
incandescent threshold.

“There!”

Above the doorway, an arch of flame flashed out the name of a great
actress, whose closing performances in a play of unusual originality
had been the theme of long articles in the Paris papers which Darrow had
tossed into their compartment at Calais.

“That’s what you must see before you’re twenty-four hours older!”

The girl followed his gesture eagerly. She was all awake and alive now,
as if the heady rumours of the streets, with their long effervescences
of light, had passed into her veins like wine.

“Cerdine? Is that where she acts?” She put her head out of the window,
straining back for a glimpse of the sacred threshold. As they flew past
it she sank into her seat with a satisfied sigh.

“It’s delicious enough just to KNOW she’s there! I’ve never seen her,
you know. When I was here with Mamie Hoke we never went anywhere but to
the music halls, because she couldn’t understand any French; and when
I came back afterward to the Farlows’ I was dead broke, and couldn’t
afford the play, and neither could they; so the only chance we had was
when friends of theirs invited us--and once it was to see a tragedy by
a Roumanian lady, and the other time it was for ‘L’Ami Fritz’ at the
Francais.”

Darrow laughed. “You must do better than that now. ‘Le Vertige’ is a
fine thing, and Cerdine gets some wonderful effects out of it. You
must come with me tomorrow evening to see it--with your friends, of
course.--That is,” he added, “if there’s any sort of chance of getting
seats.”

The flash of a street lamp lit up her radiant face. “Oh, will you really
take us? What fun to think that it’s tomorrow already!”

It was wonderfully pleasant to be able to give such pleasure. Darrow was
not rich, but it was almost impossible for him to picture the state of
persons with tastes and perceptions like his own, to whom an evening at
the theatre was an unattainable indulgence. There floated through his
mind an answer of Mrs. Leath’s to his enquiry whether she had seen the
play in question. “No. I meant to, of course, but one is so overwhelmed
with things in Paris. And then I’m rather sick of Cerdine--one is always
being dragged to see her.”

That, among the people he frequented, was the usual attitude toward such
opportunities. There were too many, they were a nuisance, one had to
defend one’s self! He even remembered wondering, at the moment,
whether to a really fine taste the exceptional thing could ever become
indifferent through habit; whether the appetite for beauty was so soon
dulled that it could be kept alive only by privation. Here, at any rate,
was a fine chance to experiment with such a hunger: he almost wished he
might stay on in Paris long enough to take the measure of Miss Viner’s
receptivity.

She was still dwelling on his promise, “It’s too beautiful of you! Oh,
don’t you THINK you’ll be able to get seats?” And then, after a pause of
brimming appreciation: “I wonder if you’ll think me horrid?--but it may
be my only chance; and if you can’t get places for us all, wouldn’t you
perhaps just take ME? After all, the Farlows may have seen it!”

He had not, of course, thought her horrid, but only the more engaging,
for being so natural, and so unashamed of showing the frank greed of her
famished youth. “Oh, you shall go somehow!” he had gaily promised her;
and she had dropped back with a sigh of pleasure as their cab passed
into the dimly-lit streets of the Farlows’ quarter beyond the Seine...


This little passage came back to him the next morning, as he opened his
hotel window on the early roar of the Northern Terminus.

The girl was there, in the room next to him. That had been the first
point in his waking consciousness. The second was a sense of relief at
the obligation imposed on him by this unexpected turn of everts. To
wake to the necessity of action, to postpone perforce the fruitless
contemplation of his private grievance, was cause enough for gratitude,
even if the small adventure in which he found himself involved had not,
on its own merits, roused an instinctive curiosity to see it through.

When he and his companion, the night before, had reached the Farlows’
door in the rue de la Chaise, it was only to find, after repeated
assaults on its panels, that the Farlows were no longer there. They
had moved away the week before, not only from their apartment but from
Paris; and Miss Viner’s breach with Mrs. Murrett had been too sudden to
permit her letter and telegram to overtake them. Both communications,
no doubt, still reposed in a pigeon-hole of the loge; but its custodian,
when drawn from his lair, sulkily declined to let Miss Viner verify the
fact, and only flung out, in return for Darrow’s bribe, the statement
that the Americans had gone to Joigny.

To pursue them there at that hour was manifestly impossible, and Miss
Viner, disturbed but not disconcerted by this new obstacle, had quite
simply acceded to Darrow’s suggestion that she should return for what
remained of the night to the hotel where he had sent his luggage.

The drive back through the dark hush before dawn, with the nocturnal
blaze of the Boulevard fading around them like the false lights of
a magician’s palace, had so played on her impressionability that she
seemed to give no farther thought to her own predicament. Darrow noticed
that she did not feel the beauty and mystery of the spectacle as much
as its pressure of human significance, all its hidden implications
of emotion and adventure. As they passed the shadowy colonnade of the
Francais, remote and temple-like in the paling lights, he felt a clutch
on his arm, and heard the cry: “There are things THERE that I want so
desperately to see!” and all the way back to the hotel she continued to
question him, with shrewd precision and an artless thirst for detail,
about the theatrical life of Paris. He was struck afresh, as he
listened, by the way in which her naturalness eased the situation of
constraint, leaving to it only a pleasant savour of good fellowship. It
was the kind of episode that one might, in advance, have characterized
as “awkward”, yet that was proving, in the event, as much outside such
definitions as a sunrise stroll with a dryad in a dew-drenched forest;
and Darrow reflected that mankind would never have needed to invent tact
if it had not first invented social complications.

It had been understood, with his good-night to Miss Viner, that the next
morning he was to look up the Joigny trains, and see her safely to
the station; but, while he breakfasted and waited for a time-table, he
recalled again her cry of joy at the prospect of seeing Cerdine. It was
certainly a pity, since that most elusive and incalculable of artists
was leaving the next week for South America, to miss what might be a
last sight of her in her greatest part; and Darrow, having dressed and
made the requisite excerpts from the time-table, decided to carry the
result of his deliberations to his neighbour’s door.

It instantly opened at his knock, and she came forth looking as if she
had been plunged into some sparkling element which had curled up all her
drooping tendrils and wrapped her in a shimmer of fresh leaves.

“Well, what do you think of me?” she cried; and with a hand at her waist
she spun about as if to show off some miracle of Parisian dress-making.

“I think the missing trunk has come--and that it was worth waiting for!”

“You DO like my dress?”

“I adore it! I always adore new dresses--why, you don’t mean to say it’s
NOT a new one?”

She laughed out her triumph.

“No, no, no! My trunk hasn’t come, and this is only my old rag of
yesterday--but I never knew the trick to fail!” And, as he stared: “You
see,” she joyously explained, “I’ve always had to dress in all kinds of
dreary left-overs, and sometimes, when everybody else was smart and
new, it used to make me awfully miserable. So one day, when Mrs. Murrett
dragged me down unexpectedly to fill a place at dinner, I suddenly
thought I’d try spinning around like that, and say to every one: ‘WELL,
WHAT DO YOU THINK OF ME?’ And, do you know, they were all taken in,
including Mrs. Murrett, who didn’t recognize my old turned and dyed
rags, and told me afterward it was awfully bad form to dress as if I
were somebody that people would expect to know! And ever since, whenever
I’ve particularly wanted to look nice, I’ve just asked people what they
thought of my new frock; and they’re always, always taken in!”

She dramatized her explanation so vividly that Darrow felt as if his
point were gained.

“Ah, but this confirms your vocation--of course,” he cried, “you must
see Cerdine!” and, seeing her face fall at this reminder of the change
in her prospects, he hastened to set forth his plan. As he did so, he
saw how easy it was to explain things to her. She would either accept
his suggestion, or she would not: but at least she would waste no time
in protestations and objections, or any vain sacrifice to the idols of
conformity. The conviction that one could, on any given point, almost
predicate this of her, gave him the sense of having advanced far enough
in her intimacy to urge his arguments against a hasty pursuit of her
friends.

Yes, it would certainly be foolish--she at once agreed--in the case
of such dear indefinite angels as the Farlows, to dash off after them
without more positive proof that they were established at Joigny, and
so established that they could take her in. She owned it was but too
probable that they had gone there to “cut down”, and might be doing so
in quarters too contracted to receive her; and it would be unfair, on
that chance, to impose herself on them unannounced. The simplest way of
getting farther light on the question would be to go back to the rue de
la Chaise, where, at that more conversable hour, the concierge might be
less chary of detail; and she could decide on her next step in the light
of such facts as he imparted.

Point by point, she fell in with the suggestion, recognizing, in the
light of their unexplained flight, that the Farlows might indeed be in a
situation on which one could not too rashly intrude. Her concern for her
friends seemed to have effaced all thought of herself, and this little
indication of character gave Darrow a quite disproportionate pleasure.
She agreed that it would be well to go at once to the rue de la Chaise,
but met his proposal that they should drive by the declaration that it
was a “waste” not to walk in Paris; so they set off on foot through the
cheerful tumult of the streets.

The walk was long enough for him to learn many things about her. The
storm of the previous night had cleared the air, and Paris shone in
morning beauty under a sky that was all broad wet washes of white and
blue; but Darrow again noticed that her visual sensitiveness was less
keen than her feeling for what he was sure the good Farlows--whom he
already seemed to know--would have called “the human interest.” She
seemed hardly conscious of sensations of form and colour, or of any
imaginative suggestion, and the spectacle before them--always, in
its scenic splendour, so moving to her companion--broke up, under her
scrutiny, into a thousand minor points: the things in the shops, the
types of character and manner of occupation shown in the passing faces,
the street signs, the names of the hotels they passed, the motley
brightness of the flower-carts, the identity of the churches and public
buildings that caught her eye. But what she liked best, he divined, was
the mere fact of being free to walk abroad in the bright air, her
tongue rattling on as it pleased, while her feet kept time to the mighty
orchestration of the city’s sounds. Her delight in the fresh air, in
the freedom, light and sparkle of the morning, gave him a sudden insight
into her stifled past; nor was it indifferent to him to perceive
how much his presence evidently added to her enjoyment. If only as a
sympathetic ear, he guessed what he must be worth to her. The girl
had been dying for some one to talk to, some one before whom she could
unfold and shake out to the light her poor little shut-away emotions.
Years of repression were revealed in her sudden burst of confidence; and
the pity she inspired made Darrow long to fill her few free hours to the
brim.

She had the gift of rapid definition, and his questions as to the life
she had led with the Farlows, during the interregnum between the Hoke
and Murrett eras, called up before him a queer little corner of Parisian
existence. The Farlows themselves--he a painter, she a “magazine
writer”--rose before him in all their incorruptible simplicity: an
elderly New England couple, with vague yearnings for enfranchisement,
who lived in Paris as if it were a Massachusetts suburb, and dwelt
hopefully on the “higher side” of the Gallic nature. With equal
vividness she set before him the component figures of the circle from
which Mrs. Farlow drew the “Inner Glimpses of French Life” appearing
over her name in a leading New England journal: the Roumanian lady who
had sent them tickets for her tragedy, an elderly French gentleman
who, on the strength of a week’s stay at Folkestone, translated English
fiction for the provincial press, a lady from Wichita, Kansas, who
advocated free love and the abolition of the corset, a clergyman’s
widow from Torquay who had written an “English Ladies’ Guide to Foreign
Galleries” and a Russian sculptor who lived on nuts and was “almost
certainly” an anarchist. It was this nucleus, and its outer ring
of musical, architectural and other American students, which posed
successively to Mrs. Farlow’s versatile fancy as a centre of “University
Life”, a “Salon of the Faubourg St. Germain”, a group of Parisian
“Intellectuals” or a “Cross-section of Montmartre”; but even her faculty
for extracting from it the most varied literary effects had not sufficed
to create a permanent demand for the “Inner Glimpses”, and there
were days when--Mr. Farlow’s landscapes being equally unmarketable--a
temporary withdrawal to the country (subsequently utilized as “Peeps
into Chateau Life”) became necessary to the courageous couple.

Five years of Mrs. Murrett’s world, while increasing Sophy’s tenderness
for the Farlows, had left her with few illusions as to their power of
advancing her fortunes; and she did not conceal from Darrow that
her theatrical projects were of the vaguest. They hung mainly on the
problematical good-will of an ancient comedienne, with whom Mrs. Farlow
had a slight acquaintance (extensively utilized in “Stars of the French
Footlights” and “Behind the Scenes at the Francais”), and who had once,
with signs of approval, heard Miss Viner recite the Nuit de Mai.

“But of course I know how much that’s worth,” the girl broke off, with
one of her flashes of shrewdness. “And besides, it isn’t likely that a
poor old fossil like Mme. Dolle could get anybody to listen to her now,
even if she really thought I had talent. But she might introduce me to
people; or at least give me a few tips. If I could manage to earn enough
to pay for lessons I’d go straight to some of the big people and work
with them. I’m rather hoping the Farlows may find me a chance of that
kind--an engagement with some American family in Paris who would want to
be ‘gone round’ with like the Hokes, and who’d leave me time enough to
study.”

In the rue de la Chaise they learned little except the exact address
of the Farlows, and the fact that they had sub-let their flat before
leaving. This information obtained, Darrow proposed to Miss Viner that
they should stroll along the quays to a little restaurant looking out on
the Seine, and there, over the plat du jour, consider the next step
to be taken. The long walk had given her cheeks a glow indicative of
wholesome hunger, and she made no difficulty about satisfying it in
Darrow’s company. Regaining the river they walked on in the direction
of Notre Dame, delayed now and again by the young man’s irresistible
tendency to linger over the bookstalls, and by his ever-fresh response
to the shifting beauties of the scene. For two years his eyes had been
subdued to the atmospheric effects of London, to the mysterious fusion
of darkly-piled city and low-lying bituminous sky; and the transparency
of the French air, which left the green gardens and silvery stones so
classically clear yet so softly harmonized, struck him as having a kind
of conscious intelligence. Every line of the architecture, every arch
of the bridges, the very sweep of the strong bright river between them,
while contributing to this effect, sent forth each a separate appeal
to some sensitive memory; so that, for Darrow, a walk through the Paris
streets was always like the unrolling of a vast tapestry from which
countless stored fragrances were shaken out.

It was a proof of the richness and multiplicity of the spectacle that
it served, without incongruity, for so different a purpose as the
background of Miss Viner’s enjoyment. As a mere drop-scene for her
personal adventure it was just as much in its place as in the evocation
of great perspectives of feeling. For her, as he again perceived when
they were seated at their table in a low window above the Seine, Paris
was “Paris” by virtue of all its entertaining details, its endless
ingenuities of pleasantness. Where else, for instance, could one
find the dear little dishes of hors d’oeuvre, the symmetrically-laid
anchovies and radishes, the thin golden shells of butter, or the wood
strawberries and brown jars of cream that gave to their repast the last
refinement of rusticity? Hadn’t he noticed, she asked, that cooking
always expressed the national character, and that French food was
clever and amusing just because the people were? And in private houses,
everywhere, how the dishes always resembled the talk--how the very
same platitudes seemed to go into people’s mouths and come out of them?
Couldn’t he see just what kind of menu it would make, if a fairy waved a
wand and suddenly turned the conversation at a London dinner into joints
and puddings? She always thought it a good sign when people liked Irish
stew; it meant that they enjoyed changes and surprises, and taking life
as it came; and such a beautiful Parisian version of the dish as the
navarin that was just being set before them was like the very best kind
of talk--the kind when one could never tell before-hand just what was
going to be said!

Darrow, as he watched her enjoyment of their innocent feast, wondered if
her vividness and vivacity were signs of her calling. She was the kind
of girl in whom certain people would instantly have recognized the
histrionic gift. But experience had led him to think that, except at the
creative moment, the divine flame burns low in its possessors. The one
or two really intelligent actresses he had known had struck him, in
conversation, as either bovine or primitively “jolly”. He had a notion
that, save in the mind of genius, the creative process absorbs too
much of the whole stuff of being to leave much surplus for personal
expression; and the girl before him, with her changing face and flexible
fancies, seemed destined to work in life itself rather than in any of
its counterfeits.

The coffee and liqueurs were already on the table when her mind suddenly
sprang back to the Farlows. She jumped up with one of her subversive
movements and declared that she must telegraph at once. Darrow called
for writing materials and room was made at her elbow for the parched
ink-bottle and saturated blotter of the Parisian restaurant; but the
mere sight of these jaded implements seemed to paralyze Miss Viner’s
faculties. She hung over the telegraph-form with anxiously-drawn brow,
the tip of the pen-handle pressed against her lip; and at length she
raised her troubled eyes to Darrow’s.

“I simply can’t think how to say it.”

“What--that you’re staying over to see Cerdine?”

“But AM I--am I, really?” The joy of it flamed over her face.

Darrow looked at his watch. “You could hardly get an answer to your
telegram in time to take a train to Joigny this afternoon, even if you
found your friends could have you.”

She mused for a moment, tapping her lip with the pen. “But I must let
them know I’m here. I must find out as soon as possible if they CAN,
have me.” She laid the pen down despairingly. “I never COULD write a
telegram!” she sighed.

“Try a letter, then and tell them you’ll arrive tomorrow.”

This suggestion produced immediate relief, and she gave an energetic dab
at the ink-bottle; but after another interval of uncertain scratching
she paused again. “Oh, it’s fearful! I don’t know what on earth to say. I
wouldn’t for the world have them know how beastly Mrs. Murrett’s been.”

Darrow did not think it necessary to answer. It was no business of his,
after all. He lit a cigar and leaned back in his seat, letting his eyes
take their fill of indolent pleasure. In the throes of invention she
had pushed back her hat, loosening the stray lock which had invited his
touch the night before. After looking at it for a while he stood up and
wandered to the window.

Behind him he heard her pen scrape on.

“I don’t want to worry them--I’m so certain they’ve got bothers of their
own.” The faltering scratches ceased again. “I wish I weren’t such an
idiot about writing: all the words get frightened and scurry away when
I try to catch them.” He glanced back at her with a smile as she bent
above her task like a school-girl struggling with a “composition.” Her
flushed cheek and frowning brow showed that her difficulty was genuine
and not an artless device to draw him to her side. She was really
powerless to put her thoughts in writing, and the inability seemed
characteristic of her quick impressionable mind, and of the incessant
come-and-go of her sensations. He thought of Anna Leath’s letters, or
rather of the few he had received, years ago, from the girl who had been
Anna Summers. He saw the slender firm strokes of the pen, recalled the
clear structure of the phrases, and, by an abrupt association of ideas,
remembered that, at that very hour, just such a document might be
awaiting him at the hotel.

What if it were there, indeed, and had brought him a complete
explanation of her telegram? The revulsion of feeling produced by this
thought made him look at the girl with sudden impatience. She struck him
as positively stupid, and he wondered how he could have wasted half his
day with her, when all the while Mrs. Leath’s letter might be lying on
his table. At that moment, if he could have chosen, he would have left
his companion on the spot; but he had her on his hands, and must accept
the consequences.

Some odd intuition seemed to make her conscious of his change of mood,
for she sprang from her seat, crumpling the letter in her hand.

“I’m too stupid; but I won’t keep you any longer. I’ll go back to the
hotel and write there.”

Her colour deepened, and for the first time, as their eyes met, he
noticed a faint embarrassment in hers. Could it be that his nearness
was, after all, the cause of her confusion? The thought turned his vague
impatience with her into a definite resentment toward himself. There was
really no excuse for his having blundered into such an adventure. Why
had he not shipped the girl off to Joigny by the evening train, instead
of urging her to delay, and using Cerdine as a pretext? Paris was full
of people he knew, and his annoyance was increased by the thought that
some friend of Mrs. Leath’s might see him at the play, and report his
presence there with a suspiciously good-looking companion. The idea was
distinctly disagreeable: he did not want the woman he adored to think he
could forget her for a moment. And by this time he had fully persuaded
himself that a letter from her was awaiting him, and had even gone so
far as to imagine that its contents might annul the writer’s telegraphed
injunction, and call him to her side at once...




V


At the porter’s desk a brief “Pas de lettres” fell destructively on the
fabric of these hopes. Mrs. Leath had not written--she had not taken the
trouble to explain her telegram. Darrow turned away with a sharp pang
of humiliation. Her frugal silence mocked his prodigality of hopes and
fears. He had put his question to the porter once before, on returning
to the hotel after luncheon; and now, coming back again in the late
afternoon, he was met by the same denial. The second post was in, and
had brought him nothing.

A glance at his watch showed that he had barely time to dress before
taking Miss Viner out to dine; but as he turned to the lift a new
thought struck him, and hurrying back into the hall he dashed off
another telegram to his servant: “Have you forwarded any letter with
French postmark today? Telegraph answer Terminus.”

Some kind of reply would be certain to reach him on his return from the
theatre, and he would then know definitely whether Mrs. Leath meant
to write or not. He hastened up to his room and dressed with a lighter
heart.

Miss Viner’s vagrant trunk had finally found its way to its owner;
and, clad in such modest splendour as it furnished, she shone at Darrow
across their restaurant table. In the reaction of his wounded vanity he
found her prettier and more interesting than before. Her dress, sloping
away from the throat, showed the graceful set of her head on its slender
neck, and the wide brim of her hat arched above her hair like a dusky
halo. Pleasure danced in her eyes and on her lips, and as she shone on
him between the candle-shades Darrow felt that he should not be at all
sorry to be seen with her in public. He even sent a careless glance
about him in the vague hope that it might fall on an acquaintance.

At the theatre her vivacity sank into a breathless hush, and she sat
intent in her corner of their baignoire, with the gaze of a neophyte
about to be initiated into the sacred mysteries. Darrow placed himself
behind her, that he might catch her profile between himself and the
stage. He was touched by the youthful seriousness of her expression. In
spite of the experiences she must have had, and of the twenty-four
years to which she owned, she struck him as intrinsically young; and he
wondered how so evanescent a quality could have been preserved in the
desiccating Murrett air. As the play progressed he noticed that her
immobility was traversed by swift flashes of perception. She was not
missing anything, and her intensity of attention when Cerdine was on the
stage drew an anxious line between her brows.

After the first act she remained for a few minutes rapt and motionless;
then she turned to her companion with a quick patter of questions. He
gathered from them that she had been less interested in following
the general drift of the play than in observing the details of its
interpretation. Every gesture and inflection of the great actress’s
had been marked and analyzed; and Darrow felt a secret gratification in
being appealed to as an authority on the histrionic art. His interest in
it had hitherto been merely that of the cultivated young man curious of
all forms of artistic expression; but in reply to her questions he found
things to say about it which evidently struck his listener as impressive
and original, and with which he himself was not, on the whole,
dissatisfied. Miss Viner was much more concerned to hear his views
than to express her own, and the deference with which she received his
comments called from him more ideas about the theatre than he had ever
supposed himself to possess.

With the second act she began to give more attention to the development
of the play, though her interest was excited rather by what she called
“the story” than by the conflict of character producing it. Oddly
combined with her sharp apprehension of things theatrical, her knowledge
of technical “dodges” and green-room precedents, her glibness about
“lines” and “curtains”, was the primitive simplicity of her attitude
toward the tale itself, as toward something that was “really happening”
 and at which one assisted as at a street-accident or a quarrel overheard
in the next room. She wanted to know if Darrow thought the lovers
“really would” be involved in the catastrophe that threatened them,
and when he reminded her that his predictions were disqualified by his
having already seen the play, she exclaimed: “Oh, then, please don’t
tell me what’s going to happen!” and the next moment was questioning
him about Cerdine’s theatrical situation and her private history. On the
latter point some of her enquiries were of a kind that it is not in
the habit of young girls to make, or even to know how to make; but her
apparent unconsciousness of the fact seemed rather to reflect on her
past associates than on herself.

When the second act was over, Darrow suggested their taking a turn
in the foyer; and seated on one of its cramped red velvet sofas they
watched the crowd surge up and down in a glare of lights and gilding.
Then, as she complained of the heat, he led her through the press to the
congested cafe at the foot of the stairs, where orangeades were thrust
at them between the shoulders of packed consommateurs and Darrow,
lighting a cigarette while she sucked her straw, knew the primitive
complacency of the man at whose companion other men stare.

On a corner of their table lay a smeared copy of a theatrical journal.
It caught Sophy’s eye and after poring over the page she looked up with
an excited exclamation.

“They’re giving Oedipe tomorrow afternoon at the Francais! I suppose
you’ve seen it heaps and heaps of times?”

He smiled back at her. “You must see it too. We’ll go tomorrow.”

She sighed at his suggestion, but without discarding it. “How can I? The
last train for Joigny leaves at four.”

“But you don’t know yet that your friends will want you.”

“I shall know tomorrow early. I asked Mrs. Farlow to telegraph as soon
as she got my letter.” A twinge of compunction shot through Darrow. Her
words recalled to him that on their return to the hotel after luncheon
she had given him her letter to post, and that he had never thought of
it again. No doubt it was still in the pocket of the coat he had taken
off when he dressed for dinner. In his perturbation he pushed back his
chair, and the movement made her look up at him.

“What’s the matter?”

“Nothing. Only--you know I don’t fancy that letter can have caught this
afternoon’s post.”

“Not caught it? Why not?”

“Why, I’m afraid it will have been too late.” He bent his head to light
another cigarette.

She struck her hands together with a gesture which, to his amusement, he
noticed she had caught from Cerdine.

“Oh, dear, I hadn’t thought of that! But surely it will reach them in
the morning?”

“Some time in the morning, I suppose. You know the French provincial
post is never in a hurry. I don’t believe your letter would have been
delivered this evening in any case.” As this idea occurred to him he
felt himself almost absolved.

“Perhaps, then, I ought to have telegraphed?”

“I’ll telegraph for you in the morning if you say so.”

The bell announcing the close of the entr’-acte shrilled through the
cafe, and she sprang to her feet.

“Oh, come, come! We mustn’t miss it!”

Instantly forgetful of the Farlows, she slipped her arm through his and
turned to push her way back to the theatre.

As soon as the curtain went up she as promptly forgot her companion.
Watching her from the corner to which he had returned, Darrow saw that
great waves of sensation were beating deliciously against her brain. It
was as though every starved sensibility were throwing out feelers to the
mounting tide; as though everything she was seeing, hearing, imagining,
rushed in to fill the void of all she had always been denied.

Darrow, as he observed her, again felt a detached enjoyment in her
pleasure. She was an extraordinary conductor of sensation: she seemed to
transmit it physically, in emanations that set the blood dancing in his
veins. He had not often had the opportunity of studying the effects of a
perfectly fresh impression on so responsive a temperament, and he felt a
fleeting desire to make its chords vibrate for his own amusement.

At the end of the next act she discovered with dismay that in their
transit to the cafe she had lost the beautiful pictured programme he
had bought for her. She wanted to go back and hunt for it, but Darrow
assured her that he would have no trouble in getting her another. When
he went out in quest of it she followed him protestingly to the door of
the box, and he saw that she was distressed at the thought of his having
to spend an additional franc for her. This frugality smote Darrow by its
contrast to her natural bright profusion; and again he felt the desire
to right so clumsy an injustice.

When he returned to the box she was still standing in the doorway,
and he noticed that his were not the only eyes attracted to her. Then
another impression sharply diverted his attention. Above the fagged
faces of the Parisian crowd he had caught the fresh fair countenance
of Owen Leath signalling a joyful recognition. The young man, slim and
eager, had detached himself from two companions of his own type, and
was seeking to push through the press to his step-mother’s friend. The
encounter, to Darrow, could hardly have been more inopportune; it woke
in him a confusion of feelings of which only the uppermost was allayed
by seeing Sophy Viner, as if instinctively warned, melt back into the
shadow of their box.

A minute later Owen Leath was at his side. “I was sure it was you! Such
luck to run across you! Won’t you come off with us to supper after it’s
over? Montmartre, or wherever else you please. Those two chaps over
there are friends of mine, at the Beaux Arts; both of them rather good
fellows--and we’d be so glad----”

For half a second Darrow read in his hospitable eye the termination “if
you’d bring the lady too”; then it deflected into: “We’d all be so glad
if you’d come.”

Darrow, excusing himself with thanks, lingered on for a few minutes’
chat, in which every word, and every tone of his companion’s voice, was
like a sharp light flashed into aching eyes. He was glad when the bell
called the audience to their seats, and young Leath left him with the
friendly question: “We’ll see you at Givre later on?”

When he rejoined Miss Viner, Darrow’s first care was to find out, by a
rapid inspection of the house, whether Owen Leath’s seat had given him a
view of their box. But the young man was not visible from it, and Darrow
concluded that he had been recognized in the corridor and not at his
companion’s side. He scarcely knew why it seemed to him so important
that this point should be settled; certainly his sense of reassurance
was less due to regard for Miss Viner than to the persistent vision of
grave offended eyes...

During the drive back to the hotel this vision was persistently kept
before him by the thought that the evening post might have brought a
letter from Mrs. Leath. Even if no letter had yet come, his servant
might have telegraphed to say that one was on its way; and at the
thought his interest in the girl at his side again cooled to the
fraternal, the almost fatherly. She was no more to him, after all, than
an appealing young creature to whom it was mildly agreeable to have
offered an evening’s diversion; and when, as they rolled into the
illuminated court of the hotel, she turned with a quick movement which
brought her happy face close to his, he leaned away, affecting to be
absorbed in opening the door of the cab.

At the desk the night porter, after a vain search through the
pigeon-holes, was disposed to think that a letter or telegram had in
fact been sent up for the gentleman; and Darrow, at the announcement,
could hardly wait to ascend to his room. Upstairs, he and his companion
had the long dimly-lit corridor to themselves, and Sophy paused on her
threshold, gathering up in one hand the pale folds of her cloak, while
she held the other out to Darrow.

“If the telegram comes early I shall be off by the first train; so I
suppose this is good-bye,” she said, her eyes dimmed by a little shadow
of regret.

Darrow, with a renewed start of contrition, perceived that he had again
forgotten her letter; and as their hands met he vowed to himself that
the moment she had left him he would dash down stairs to post it.

“Oh, I’ll see you in the morning, of course!”

A tremor of pleasure crossed her face as he stood before her, smiling a
little uncertainly.

“At any rate,” she said, “I want to thank you now for my good day.”

He felt in her hand the same tremor he had seen in her face. “But it’s
YOU, on the contrary--” he began, lifting the hand to his lips.

As he dropped it, and their eyes met, something passed through hers that
was like a light carried rapidly behind a curtained window.

“Good night; you must be awfully tired,” he said with a friendly
abruptness, turning away without even waiting to see her pass into her
room. He unlocked his door, and stumbling over the threshold groped in
the darkness for the electric button. The light showed him a telegram on
the table, and he forgot everything else as he caught it up.

“No letter from France,” the message read.

It fell from Darrow’s hand to the floor, and he dropped into a chair
by the table and sat gazing at the dingy drab and olive pattern of
the carpet. She had not written, then; she had not written, and it
was manifest now that she did not mean to write. If she had had any
intention of explaining her telegram she would certainly, within
twenty-four hours, have followed it up by a letter. But she evidently
did not intend to explain it, and her silence could mean only that she
had no explanation to give, or else that she was too indifferent to be
aware that one was needed.

Darrow, face to face with these alternatives, felt a recrudescence of
boyish misery. It was no longer his hurt vanity that cried out. He told
himself that he could have borne an equal amount of pain, if only it had
left Mrs. Leath’s image untouched; but he could not bear to think of her
as trivial or insincere. The thought was so intolerable that he felt a
blind desire to punish some one else for the pain it caused him.

As he sat moodily staring at the carpet its silly intricacies melted
into a blur from which the eyes of Mrs. Leath again looked out at him.
He saw the fine sweep of her brows, and the deep look beneath them as
she had turned from him on their last evening in London. “This will be
good-bye, then,” she had said; and it occurred to him that her parting
phrase had been the same as Sophy Viner’s.

At the thought he jumped to his feet and took down from its hook the
coat in which he had left Miss Viner’s letter. The clock marked the
third quarter after midnight, and he knew it would make no difference
if he went down to the post-box now or early the next morning; but he
wanted to clear his conscience, and having found the letter he went to
the door.

A sound in the next room made him pause. He had become conscious again
that, a few feet off, on the other side of a thin partition, a small
keen flame of life was quivering and agitating the air. Sophy’s face
came back to him insistently. It was as vivid now as Mrs. Leath’s had
been a moment earlier. He recalled with a faint smile of retrospective
pleasure the girl’s enjoyment of her evening, and the innumerable fine
feelers of sensation she had thrown out to its impressions.

It gave him a curiously close sense of her presence to think that at
that moment she was living over her enjoyment as intensely as he was
living over his unhappiness. His own case was irremediable, but it was
easy enough to give her a few more hours of pleasure. And did she not
perhaps secretly expect it of him? After all, if she had been very
anxious to join her friends she would have telegraphed them on reaching
Paris, instead of writing. He wondered now that he had not been struck
at the moment by so artless a device to gain more time. The fact of her
having practised it did not make him think less well of her; it merely
strengthened the impulse to use his opportunity. She was starving, poor
child, for a little amusement, a little personal life--why not give
her the chance of another day in Paris? If he did so, should he not be
merely falling in with her own hopes?

At the thought his sympathy for her revived. She became of absorbing
interest to him as an escape from himself and an object about which his
thwarted activities could cluster. He felt less drearily alone because
of her being there, on the other side of the door, and in his gratitude
to her for giving him this relief he began, with indolent amusement, to
plan new ways of detaining her. He dropped back into his chair, lit a
cigar, and smiled a little at the image of her smiling face. He tried to
imagine what incident of the day she was likely to be recalling at that
particular moment, and what part he probably played in it. That it
was not a small part he was certain, and the knowledge was undeniably
pleasant.

Now and then a sound from her room brought before him more vividly
the reality of the situation and the strangeness of the vast swarming
solitude in which he and she were momentarily isolated, amid long lines
of rooms each holding its separate secret. The nearness of all these
other mysteries enclosing theirs gave Darrow a more intimate sense of
the girl’s presence, and through the fumes of his cigar his imagination
continued to follow her to and fro, traced the curve of her slim young
arms as she raised them to undo her hair, pictured the sliding down of
her dress to the waist and then to the knees, and the whiteness of her
feet as she slipped across the floor to bed...

He stood up and shook himself with a yawn, throwing away the end of
his cigar. His glance, in following it, lit on the telegram which had
dropped to the floor. The sounds in the next room had ceased, and once
more he felt alone and unhappy.

Opening the window, he folded his arms on the sill and looked out on the
vast light-spangled mass of the city, and then up at the dark sky, in
which the morning planet stood.




VI


At the Theatre Francais, the next afternoon, Darrow yawned and fidgeted
in his seat.

The day was warm, the theatre crowded and airless, and the performance,
it seemed to him, intolerably bad. He stole a glance at his companion,
wondering if she shared his feelings. Her rapt profile betrayed no
unrest, but politeness might have caused her to feign an interest that
she did not feel. He leaned back impatiently, stifling another yawn,
and trying to fix his attention on the stage. Great things were going
forward there, and he was not insensible to the stern beauties of the
ancient drama. But the interpretation of the play seemed to him as
airless and lifeless as the atmosphere of the theatre. The players were
the same whom he had often applauded in those very parts, and perhaps
that fact added to the impression of staleness and conventionality
produced by their performance. Surely it was time to infuse new blood
into the veins of the moribund art. He had the impression that the
ghosts of actors were giving a spectral performance on the shores of
Styx.

Certainly it was not the most profitable way for a young man with a
pretty companion to pass the golden hours of a spring afternoon. The
freshness of the face at his side, reflecting the freshness of the
season, suggested dapplings of sunlight through new leaves, the sound of
a brook in the grass, the ripple of tree-shadows over breezy meadows...

When at length the fateful march of the cothurns was stayed by the
single pause in the play, and Darrow had led Miss Viner out on the
balcony overhanging the square before the theatre, he turned to see if
she shared his feelings. But the rapturous look she gave him checked the
depreciation on his lips.

“Oh, why did you bring me out here? One ought to creep away and sit in
the dark till it begins again!”

“Is THAT the way they made you feel?”

“Didn’t they _YOU?_...As if the gods were there all the while, just behind
them, pulling the strings?” Her hands were pressed against the railing,
her face shining and darkening under the wing-beats of successive
impressions.

Darrow smiled in enjoyment of her pleasure. After all, he had felt all
that, long ago; perhaps it was his own fault, rather than that of the
actors, that the poetry of the play seemed to have evaporated...But no,
he had been right in judging the performance to be dull and stale:
it was simply his companion’s inexperience, her lack of occasions to
compare and estimate, that made her think it brilliant.

“I was afraid you were bored and wanted to come away.”

“BORED?” She made a little aggrieved grimace. “You mean you thought me
too ignorant and stupid to appreciate it?”

“No; not that.” The hand nearest him still lay on the railing of the
balcony, and he covered it for a moment with his. As he did so he saw
the colour rise and tremble in her cheek.

“Tell me just what you think,” he said, bending his head a little, and
only half-aware of his words.

She did not turn her face to his, but began to talk rapidly, trying
to convey something of what she felt. But she was evidently unused to
analyzing her aesthetic emotions, and the tumultuous rush of the drama
seemed to have left her in a state of panting wonder, as though it had
been a storm or some other natural cataclysm. She had no literary or
historic associations to which to attach her impressions: her education
had evidently not comprised a course in Greek literature. But she felt
what would probably have been unperceived by many a young lady who had
taken a first in classics: the ineluctable fatality of the tale, the
dread sway in it of the same mysterious “luck” which pulled the threads
of her own small destiny. It was not literature to her, it was fact: as
actual, as near by, as what was happening to her at the moment and what
the next hour held in store. Seen in this light, the play regained for
Darrow its supreme and poignant reality. He pierced to the heart of
its significance through all the artificial accretions with which his
theories of art and the conventions of the stage had clothed it, and saw
it as he had never seen it: as life.

After this there could be no question of flight, and he took her back to
the theatre, content to receive his own sensations through the medium of
hers. But with the continuation of the play, and the oppression of the
heavy air, his attention again began to wander, straying back over the
incidents of the morning.

He had been with Sophy Viner all day, and he was surprised to find
how quickly the time had gone. She had hardly attempted, as the hours
passed, to conceal her satisfaction on finding that no telegram came
from the Farlows. “They’ll have written,” she had simply said; and her
mind had at once flown on to the golden prospect of an afternoon at the
theatre. The intervening hours had been disposed of in a stroll through
the lively streets, and a repast, luxuriously lingered over, under
the chestnut-boughs of a restaurant in the Champs Elysees. Everything
entertained and interested her, and Darrow remarked, with an amused
detachment, that she was not insensible to the impression her charms
produced. Yet there was no hard edge of vanity in her sense of her
prettiness: she seemed simply to be aware of it as a note in the general
harmony, and to enjoy sounding the note as a singer enjoys singing.

After luncheon, as they sat over their coffee, she had again asked
an immense number of questions and delivered herself of a remarkable
variety of opinions. Her questions testified to a wholesome and
comprehensive human curiosity, and her comments showed, like her
face and her whole attitude, an odd mingling of precocious wisdom and
disarming ignorance. When she talked to him about “life”--the word was
often on her lips--she seemed to him like a child playing with a tiger’s
cub; and he said to himself that some day the child would grow up--and
so would the tiger. Meanwhile, such expertness qualified by such candour
made it impossible to guess the extent of her personal experience, or
to estimate its effect on her character. She might be any one of a dozen
definable types, or she might--more disconcertingly to her companion and
more perilously to herself--be a shifting and uncrystallized mixture of
them all.

Her talk, as usual, had promptly reverted to the stage. She was eager
to learn about every form of dramatic expression which the metropolis
of things theatrical had to offer, and her curiosity ranged from the
official temples of the art to its less hallowed haunts. Her searching
enquiries about a play whose production, on one of the latter scenes,
had provoked a considerable amount of scandal, led Darrow to throw out
laughingly: “To see THAT you’ll have to wait till you’re married!” and
his answer had sent her off at a tangent.

“Oh, I never mean to marry,” she had rejoined in a tone of youthful
finality.

“I seem to have heard that before!”

“Yes; from girls who’ve only got to choose!” Her eyes had grown suddenly
almost old. “I’d like you to see the only men who’ve ever wanted to
marry me! One was the doctor on the steamer, when I came abroad with the
Hokes: he’d been cashiered from the navy for drunkenness. The other was
a deaf widower with three grown-up daughters, who kept a clock-shop in
Bayswater!--Besides,” she rambled on, “I’m not so sure that I believe
in marriage. You see I’m all for self-development and the chance to live
one’s life. I’m awfully modern, you know.”

It was just when she proclaimed herself most awfully modern that she
struck him as most helplessly backward; yet the moment after, without
any bravado, or apparent desire to assume an attitude, she would
propound some social axiom which could have been gathered only in the
bitter soil of experience.

All these things came back to him as he sat beside her in the theatre
and watched her ingenuous absorption. It was on “the story” that her
mind was fixed, and in life also, he suspected, it would always be “the
story”, rather than its remoter imaginative issues, that would hold her.
He did not believe there were ever any echoes in her soul...

There was no question, however, that what she felt was felt with
intensity: to the actual, the immediate, she spread vibrating strings.
When the play was over, and they came out once more into the sunlight,
Darrow looked down at her with a smile.

“Well?” he asked.

She made no answer. Her dark gaze seemed to rest on him without seeing
him. Her cheeks and lips were pale, and the loose hair under her
hat-brim clung to her forehead in damp rings. She looked like a young
priestess still dazed by the fumes of the cavern.

“You poor child--it’s been almost too much for you!”

She shook her head with a vague smile.

“Come,” he went on, putting his hand on her arm, “let’s jump into a taxi
and get some air and sunshine. Look, there are hours of daylight left;
and see what a night it’s going to be!”

He pointed over their heads, to where a white moon hung in the misty
blue above the roofs of the rue de Rivoli.

She made no answer, and he signed to a motor-cab, calling out to the
driver: “To the Bois!”

As the carriage turned toward the Tuileries she roused herself. “I must
go first to the hotel. There may be a message--at any rate I must decide
on something.”

Darrow saw that the reality of the situation had suddenly forced itself
upon her. “I MUST decide on something,” she repeated.

He would have liked to postpone the return, to persuade her to drive
directly to the Bois for dinner. It would have been easy enough to
remind her that she could not start for Joigny that evening, and that
therefore it was of no moment whether she received the Farlows’ answer
then or a few hours later; but for some reason he hesitated to use this
argument, which had come so naturally to him the day before. After all,
he knew she would find nothing at the hotel--so what did it matter if
they went there?

The porter, interrogated, was not sure. He himself had received nothing
for the lady, but in his absence his subordinate might have sent a
letter upstairs.

Darrow and Sophy mounted together in the lift, and the young man, while
she went into her room, unlocked his own door and glanced at the empty
table. For him at least no message had come; and on her threshold, a
moment later, she met him with the expected: “No--there’s nothing!”

He feigned an unregretful surprise. “So much the better! And now, shall
we drive out somewhere? Or would you rather take a boat to Bellevue?
Have you ever dined there, on the terrace, by moonlight? It’s not at all
bad. And there’s no earthly use in sitting here waiting.”

She stood before him in perplexity.

“But when I wrote yesterday I asked them to telegraph. I suppose they’re
horribly hard up, the poor dears, and they thought a letter would do
as well as a telegram.” The colour had risen to her face. “That’s why I
wrote instead of telegraphing; I haven’t a penny to spare myself!”

Nothing she could have said could have filled her listener with a deeper
contrition. He felt the red in his own face as he recalled the motive
with which he had credited her in his midnight musings. But that motive,
after all, had simply been trumped up to justify his own disloyalty: he
had never really believed in it. The reflection deepened his confusion,
and he would have liked to take her hand in his and confess the
injustice he had done her.

She may have interpreted his change of colour as an involuntary protest
at being initiated into such shabby details, for she went on with a
laugh: “I suppose you can hardly understand what it means to have to
stop and think whether one can afford a telegram? But I’ve always had to
consider such things. And I mustn’t stay here any longer now--I must try
to get a night train for Joigny. Even if the Farlows can’t take me in,
I can go to the hotel: it will cost less than staying here.” She paused
again and then exclaimed: “I ought to have thought of that sooner; I
ought to have telegraphed yesterday! But I was sure I should hear from
them today; and I wanted--oh, I DID so awfully want to stay!” She threw
a troubled look at Darrow. “Do you happen to remember,” she asked, “what
time it was when you posted my letter?”




VII


Darrow was still standing on her threshold. As she put the question he
entered the room and closed the door behind him.

His heart was beating a little faster than usual and he had no clear
idea of what he was about to do or say, beyond the definite conviction
that, whatever passing impulse of expiation moved him, he would not be
fool enough to tell her that he had not sent her letter. He knew that
most wrongdoing works, on the whole, less mischief than its useless
confession; and this was clearly a case where a passing folly might be
turned, by avowal, into a serious offense.

“I’m so sorry--so sorry; but you must let me help you...You will let me
help you?” he said.

He took her hands and pressed them together between his, counting on a
friendly touch to help out the insufficiency of words. He felt her yield
slightly to his clasp, and hurried on without giving her time to answer.

“Isn’t it a pity to spoil our good time together by regretting anything
you might have done to prevent our having it?”

She drew back, freeing her hands. Her face, losing its look of appealing
confidence, was suddenly sharpened by distrust.

“You didn’t forget to post my letter?”

Darrow stood before her, constrained and ashamed, and ever more keenly
aware that the betrayal of his distress must be a greater offense than
its concealment.

“What an insinuation!” he cried, throwing out his hands with a laugh.

Her face instantly melted to laughter. “Well, then--I WON’T be sorry; I
won’t regret anything except that our good time is over!”

The words were so unexpected that they routed all his resolves. If she
had gone on doubting him he could probably have gone on deceiving her;
but her unhesitating acceptance of his word made him hate the part he
was playing. At the same moment a doubt shot up its serpent-head in his
own bosom. Was it not he rather than she who was childishly trustful?
Was she not almost too ready to take his word, and dismiss once for all
the tiresome question of the letter? Considering what her experiences
must have been, such trustfulness seemed open to suspicion. But the
moment his eyes fell on her he was ashamed of the thought, and knew it
for what it really was: another pretext to lessen his own delinquency.

“Why should our good time be over?” he asked. “Why shouldn’t it last a
little longer?”

She looked up, her lips parted in surprise; but before she could speak
he went on: “I want you to stay with me--I want you, just for a few
days, to have all the things you’ve never had. It’s not always May
and Paris--why not make the most of them now? You know me--we’re not
strangers--why shouldn’t you treat me like a friend?”

While he spoke she had drawn away a little, but her hand still lay in
his. She was pale, and her eyes were fixed on him in a gaze in which
there was neither distrust or resentment, but only an ingenuous wonder.
He was extraordinarily touched by her expression.

“Oh, do! You must. Listen: to prove that I’m sincere I’ll tell
you...I’ll tell you I didn’t post your letter...I didn’t post it because
I wanted so much to give you a few good hours ... and because I couldn’t
bear to have you go.”

He had the feeling that the words were being uttered in spite of him by
some malicious witness of the scene, and yet that he was not sorry to
have them spoken.

The girl had listened to him in silence. She remained motionless for a
moment after he had ceased to speak; then she snatched away her hand.

“You didn’t post my letter? You kept it back on purpose? And you tell
me so NOW, to prove to me that I’d better put myself under your
protection?” She burst into a laugh that had in it all the piercing
echoes of her Murrett past, and her face, at the same moment, underwent
the same change, shrinking into a small malevolent white mask in which
the eyes burned black. “Thank you--thank you most awfully for
telling me! And for all your other kind intentions! The plan’s
delightful--really quite delightful, and I’m extremely flattered and
obliged.”

She dropped into a seat beside her dressing-table, resting her chin on
her lifted hands, and laughing out at him under the elf-lock which had
shaken itself down over her eyes.

Her outburst did not offend the young man; its immediate effect was that
of allaying his agitation. The theatrical touch in her manner made his
offense seem more venial than he had thought it a moment before.

He drew up a chair and sat down beside her. “After all,” he said, in a
tone of good-humoured protest, “I needn’t have told you I’d kept back
your letter; and my telling you seems rather strong proof that I hadn’t
any very nefarious designs on you.”

She met this with a shrug, but he did not give her time to answer. “My
designs,” he continued with a smile, “were not nefarious. I saw you’d
been through a bad time with Mrs. Murrett, and that there didn’t seem
to be much fun ahead for you; and I didn’t see--and I don’t yet see--the
harm of trying to give you a few hours of amusement between a depressing
past and a not particularly cheerful future.” He paused again, and then
went on, in the same tone of friendly reasonableness: “The mistake I
made was not to tell you this at once--not to ask you straight out to
give me a day or two, and let me try to make you forget all the things
that are troubling you. I was a fool not to see that if I’d put it to
you in that way you’d have accepted or refused, as you chose; but that
at least you wouldn’t have mistaken my intentions.--Intentions!” He
stood up, walked the length of the room, and turned back to where she
still sat motionless, her elbows propped on the dressing-table, her chin
on her hands. “What rubbish we talk about intentions! The truth is I
hadn’t any: I just liked being with you. Perhaps you don’t know how
extraordinarily one can like being with you...I was depressed and adrift
myself; and you made me forget my bothers; and when I found you were
going--and going back to dreariness, as I was--I didn’t see why we
shouldn’t have a few hours together first; so I left your letter in my
pocket.”

He saw her face melt as she listened, and suddenly she unclasped her
hands and leaned to him.

“But are YOU unhappy too? Oh, I never understood--I never dreamed it! I
thought you’d always had everything in the world you wanted!”

Darrow broke into a laugh at this ingenuous picture of his state. He
was ashamed of trying to better his case by an appeal to her pity, and
annoyed with himself for alluding to a subject he would rather have
kept out of his thoughts. But her look of sympathy had disarmed him; his
heart was bitter and distracted; she was near him, her eyes were shining
with compassion--he bent over her and kissed her hand.

“Forgive me--do forgive me,” he said.

She stood up with a smiling head-shake. “Oh, it’s not so often that
people try to give me any pleasure--much less two whole days of it!
I sha’n’t forget how kind you’ve been. I shall have plenty of time to
remember. But this IS good-bye, you know. I must telegraph at once to
say I’m coming.”

“To say you’re coming? Then I’m not forgiven?”

“Oh, you’re forgiven--if that’s any comfort.”

“It’s not, the very least, if your way of proving it is to go away!”

She hung her head in meditation. “But I can’t stay.--How CAN I stay?”
 she broke out, as if arguing with some unseen monitor.

“Why can’t you? No one knows you’re here...No one need ever know.”

She looked up, and their eyes exchanged meanings for a rapid minute. Her
gaze was as clear as a boy’s. “Oh, it’s not THAT,” she exclaimed,
almost impatiently; “it’s not people I’m afraid of! They’ve never put
themselves out for me--why on earth should I care about them?”

He liked her directness as he had never liked it before. “Well, then,
what is it? Not ME, I hope?”

“No, not you: I like you. It’s the money! With me that’s always the root
of the matter. I could never yet afford a treat in my life!”

“Is _THAT_ all?” He laughed, relieved by her naturalness. “Look here;
since we re talking as man to man--can’t you trust me about that too?”

“Trust you? How do you mean? You’d better not trust ME!” she laughed
back sharply. “I might never be able to pay up!”

His gesture brushed aside the allusion. “Money may be the root of the
matter; it can’t be the whole of it, between friends. Don’t you think
one friend may accept a small service from another without looking too
far ahead or weighing too many chances? The question turns entirely on
what you think of me. If you like me well enough to be willing to take
a few days’ holiday with me, just for the pleasure of the thing, and the
pleasure you’ll be giving me, let’s shake hands on it. If you don’t like
me well enough we’ll shake hands too; only I shall be sorry,” he ended.

“Oh, but I shall be sorry too!” Her face, as she lifted it to his,
looked so small and young that Darrow felt a fugitive twinge of
compunction, instantly effaced by the excitement of pursuit.

“Well, then?” He stood looking down on her, his eyes persuading her.
He was now intensely aware that his nearness was having an effect which
made it less and less necessary for him to choose his words, and he went
on, more mindful of the inflections of his voice than of what he was
actually saying: “Why on earth should we say good-bye if we’re both
sorry to? Won’t you tell me your reason? It’s not a bit like you to let
anything stand in the way of your saying just what you feel. You mustn’t
mind offending me, you know!”

She hung before him like a leaf on the meeting of cross-currents, that
the next ripple may sweep forward or whirl back. Then she flung up
her head with the odd boyish movement habitual to her in moments of
excitement. “What I feel? Do you want to know what I feel? That you’re
giving me the only chance I’ve ever had!”

She turned about on her heel and, dropping into the nearest chair, sank
forward, her face hidden against the dressing-table.

Under the folds of her thin summer dress the modelling of her back and
of her lifted arms, and the slight hollow between her shoulder-blades,
recalled the faint curves of a terra-cotta statuette, some young image
of grace hardly more than sketched in the clay. Darrow, as he stood
looking at her, reflected that her character, for all its seeming
firmness, its flashing edges of “opinion”, was probably no less
immature. He had not expected her to yield so suddenly to his
suggestion, or to confess her yielding in that way. At first he was
slightly disconcerted; then he saw how her attitude simplified his own.
Her behaviour had all the indecision and awkwardness of inexperience. It
showed that she was a child after all; and all he could do--all he had
ever meant to do--was to give her a child’s holiday to look back to.

For a moment he fancied she was crying; but the next she was on her feet
and had swept round on him a face she must have turned away only to hide
the first rush of her pleasure.

For a while they shone on each other without speaking; then she sprang
to him and held out both hands.

“Is it true? Is it really true? Is it really going to happen to ME?”

He felt like answering: “You’re the very creature to whom it was bound
to happen”; but the words had a double sense that made him wince, and
instead he caught her proffered hands and stood looking at her across
the length of her arms, without attempting to bend them or to draw
her closer. He wanted her to know how her words had moved him; but his
thoughts were blurred by the rush of the same emotion that possessed
her, and his own words came with an effort.

He ended by giving her back a laugh as frank as her own, and declaring,
as he dropped her hands: “All that and more too--you’ll see!”




VIII


All day, since the late reluctant dawn, the rain had come down in
torrents. It streamed against Darrow’s high-perched windows, reduced
their vast prospect of roofs and chimneys to a black oily huddle, and
filled the room with the drab twilight of an underground aquarium.

The streams descended with the regularity of a third day’s rain, when
trimming and shuffling are over, and the weather has settled down to do
its worst. There were no variations of rhythm, no lyrical ups and downs:
the grey lines streaking the panes were as dense and uniform as a page
of unparagraphed narrative.

George Darrow had drawn his armchair to the fire. The time-table he
had been studying lay on the floor, and he sat staring with dull
acquiescence into the boundless blur of rain, which affected him like a
vast projection of his own state of mind. Then his eyes travelled slowly
about the room.

It was exactly ten days since his hurried unpacking had strewn it with
the contents of his portmanteaux. His brushes and razors were spread out
on the blotched marble of the chest of drawers. A stack of newspapers
had accumulated on the centre table under the “electrolier”, and half a
dozen paper novels lay on the mantelpiece among cigar-cases and toilet
bottles; but these traces of his passage had made no mark on the
featureless dulness of the room, its look of being the makeshift setting
of innumerable transient collocations. There was something sardonic,
almost sinister, in its appearance of having deliberately “made up” for
its anonymous part, all in noncommittal drabs and browns, with a
carpet and paper that nobody would remember, and chairs and tables as
impersonal as railway porters.

Darrow picked up the time-table and tossed it on to the table. Then he
rose to his feet, lit a cigar and went to the window. Through the rain
he could just discover the face of a clock in a tall building beyond the
railway roofs. He pulled out his watch, compared the two time-pieces,
and started the hands of his with such a rush that they flew past the
hour and he had to make them repeat the circuit more deliberately. He
felt a quite disproportionate irritation at the trifling blunder. When
he had corrected it he went back to his chair and threw himself down,
leaning back his head against his hands. Presently his cigar went out,
and he got up, hunted for the matches, lit it again and returned to his
seat.

The room was getting on his nerves. During the first few days, while
the skies were clear, he had not noticed it, or had felt for it only the
contemptuous indifference of the traveller toward a provisional shelter.
But now that he was leaving it, was looking at it for the last time,
it seemed to have taken complete possession of his mind, to be soaking
itself into him like an ugly indelible blot. Every detail pressed itself
on his notice with the familiarity of an accidental confidant: whichever
way he turned, he felt the nudge of a transient intimacy...

The one fixed point in his immediate future was that his leave was over
and that he must be back at his post in London the next morning. Within
twenty-four hours he would again be in a daylight world of recognized
activities, himself a busy, responsible, relatively necessary factor in
the big whirring social and official machine. That fixed obligation
was the fact he could think of with the least discomfort, yet for some
unaccountable reason it was the one on which he found it most difficult
to fix his thoughts. Whenever he did so, the room jerked him back into
the circle of its insistent associations. It was extraordinary with what
a microscopic minuteness of loathing he hated it all: the grimy carpet
and wallpaper, the black marble mantel-piece, the clock with a gilt
allegory under a dusty bell, the high-bolstered brown-counterpaned bed,
the framed card of printed rules under the electric light switch, and
the door of communication with the next room. He hated the door most of
all...

At the outset, he had felt no special sense of responsibility. He was
satisfied that he had struck the right note, and convinced of his power
of sustaining it. The whole incident had somehow seemed, in spite of its
vulgar setting and its inevitable prosaic propinquities, to be enacting
itself in some unmapped region outside the pale of the usual. It was not
like anything that had ever happened to him before, or in which he had
ever pictured himself as likely to be involved; but that, at first, had
seemed no argument against his fitness to deal with it.

Perhaps but for the three days’ rain he might have got away without a
doubt as to his adequacy. The rain had made all the difference. It had
thrown the whole picture out of perspective, blotted out the mystery
of the remoter planes and the enchantment of the middle distance, and
thrust into prominence every commonplace fact of the foreground. It was
the kind of situation that was not helped by being thought over; and
by the perversity of circumstance he had been forced into the unwilling
contemplation of its every aspect...

His cigar had gone out again, and he threw it into the fire and vaguely
meditated getting up to find another. But the mere act of leaving his
chair seemed to call for a greater exertion of the will than he was
capable of, and he leaned his head back with closed eyes and listened to
the drumming of the rain.

A different noise aroused him. It was the opening and closing of
the door leading from the corridor into the adjoining room. He sat
motionless, without opening his eyes; but now another sight forced
itself under his lowered lids. It was the precise photographic picture
of that other room. Everything in it rose before him and pressed itself
upon his vision with the same acuity of distinctness as the objects
surrounding him. A step sounded on the floor, and he knew which way the
step was directed, what pieces of furniture it had to skirt, where it
would probably pause, and what was likely to arrest it. He heard another
sound, and recognized it as that of a wet umbrella placed in the black
marble jamb of the chimney-piece, against the hearth. He caught the
creak of a hinge, and instantly differentiated it as that of the
wardrobe against the opposite wall. Then he heard the mouse-like squeal
of a reluctant drawer, and knew it was the upper one in the chest of
drawers beside the bed: the clatter which followed was caused by the
mahogany toilet-glass jumping on its loosened pivots...

The step crossed the floor again. It was strange how much better he knew
it than the person to whom it belonged! Now it was drawing near the door
of communication between the two rooms. He opened his eyes and looked.
The step had ceased and for a moment there was silence. Then he heard
a low knock. He made no response, and after an interval he saw that
the door handle was being tentatively turned. He closed his eyes once
more...

The door opened, and the step was in the room, coming cautiously toward
him. He kept his eyes shut, relaxing his body to feign sleep. There
was another pause, then a wavering soft advance, the rustle of a dress
behind his chair, the warmth of two hands pressed for a moment on his
lids. The palms of the hands had the lingering scent of some stuff that
he had bought on the Boulevard...He looked up and saw a letter falling
over his shoulder to his knee...

“Did I disturb you? I’m so sorry! They gave me this just now when I came
in.”

The letter, before he could catch it, had slipped between his knees to
the floor. It lay there, address upward, at his feet, and while he sat
staring down at the strong slender characters on the blue-gray envelope
an arm reached out from behind to pick it up.

“Oh, don’t--DON’T” broke from him, and he bent over and caught the arm.
The face above it was close to his.

“Don’t what?”

----“take the trouble,” he stammered.

He dropped the arm and stooped down. His grasp closed over the letter,
he fingered its thickness and weight and calculated the number of sheets
it must contain.

Suddenly he felt the pressure of the hand on his shoulder, and became
aware that the face was still leaning over him, and that in a moment he
would have to look up and kiss it...

He bent forward first and threw the unopened letter into the middle of
the fire.




