LETTER II.

I look upon Chivalry, as on some mighty river, which the fablings of
the poets have made immortal. It may have sprung up amidst rude rocks,
and blind deserts. But the noise and rapidity of its course, the extent
of country it adorns, and the towns and palaces it ennobles, may lead a
traveller out of his way, and invite him to take a view of those dark
caverns,

                              unde supernè
    Plurimus Eridani per sylvam volvitur amnis.

I enter, without more words, on the subject I began to open to you in
my last letter.

The old inhabitants of these North-West parts of _Europe_ were
extremely given to the love and exercise of arms. The feats of
CHARLEMAGNE and our ARTHUR, in particular, were so famous as in later
times, when books of Chivalry were composed, to afford a principal
subject to the writers of them[44].

But CHIVALRY, properly so called, and under the idea of “a distinct
military order, conferred in the way of investiture, and accompanied
with the solemnity of an oath and other ceremonies, as described in the
old historians and romancers,” was of later date, and seems to have
sprung immediately out of the FEUDAL CONSTITUTION.

The first and most sensible effect of this constitution, which brought
about so mighty a change in the policies of _Europe_, was the erection
of a prodigious number of petty tyrannies. For, though the great barons
were closely tied to the service of their Prince by the conditions of
their tenure, yet the power which was given them by it over their own
numerous vassals was so great, that, in effect, they all set up for
themselves; affected an independency; and were, in truth, a sort of
absolute Sovereigns, at least with regard to one another. Hence, their
mutual aims and interests often interfering, the feudal state was, in a
good degree, a state of war: the feudal chiefs were in frequent enmity
with each other: the several combinations of feudal tenants were so
many separate armies under their head or chief: and their castles were
so many fortresses, as well as palaces, of these puny princes.

In this state of things one sees, that all imaginable encouragement was
to be given to the use of arms, under every different form of attack
and defence, according as the safety of these different communities, or
the ambition of their leaders, might require. And this condition of the
times, I suppose, gave rise to that military institution, which we know
by the name of CHIVALRY.

Further, there being little or no security to be had amidst so many
restless spirits and the clashing views of a neighbouring numerous and
independent nobility, the military discipline of their followers, even
in the intervals of peace, was not to be relaxed, and their ardour
suffered to grow cool, by a total disuse of martial exercises. And
hence the proper origin of JUSTS and TURNAMENTS; those images of war,
which were kept up in the castles of the barons, and, by an useful
policy, converted into the amusement of the knights, when their arms
were employed on no serious occasion.

I call this the _proper origin_ of Justs and Turnaments; for the date
of them is carried no higher, as far as I can find, even in _France_
(where unquestionably they made their first appearance) than the
year 1066; which was not till after the introduction of the feudal
government into that country. Soon after, indeed, we find them in
_England_ and in _Germany_; but not till the feudal policy had spread
itself in those parts, and had prepared the way for them.

You see, then, my notion is, that Chivalry was no absurd and freakish
institution, but the natural and even sober effect of the feudal
policy; whose turbulent genius breathed nothing but war, and was fierce
and military even in its amusements.

I leave you to revolve this idea in your own mind. You will find, I
believe, a reasonable foundation for it in the history of the feudal
times, and in the spirit of the feudal government.


LETTER III.

If the conjecture, I advanced, of the rise of Chivalry, from the
circumstances of the feudal government, be thought reasonable, it will
not be difficult to account for the several CHARACTERISTICS of this
singular profession.

I. “The passion for arms; the spirit of enterprize; the honour of
knighthood; the rewards of valour; the splendour of equipages;” in
short, every thing that raises our ideas of the prowess, gallantry, and
magnificence of these sons of MARS, is naturally and easily explained
on this supposition.

Ambition, interest, glory, all concurred, under such circumstances, to
produce these effects. The feudal principles could terminate in nothing
else. And when, by the necessary operation of that policy, this turn
was given to the thoughts and passions of men, use and fashion would do
the rest; and carry them to all the excesses of military fanaticism,
which are painted so strongly, but scarcely exaggerated, in the old
Romances.

II. “Their romantic ideas of justice; their passion for adventures;
their eagerness to run to the succour of the distressed; and the pride
they took in redressing wrongs, and removing grievances;” all these
distinguishing characters of genuine Chivalry are explained on the
same principle. For, the feudal state being a state of war, or rather
of almost perpetual violence, rapine, and plunder, it was unavoidable
that, in their constant skirmishes, stratagems, and surprizes, numbers
of the tenants or followers of one Baron should be seized upon and
carried away by the followers of another: and the interest, each had
to protect his own, would of course introduce the point of honour, in
attempting by all means to retaliate on the enemy, and especially to
rescue the captive sufferers out of the hands of their oppressors.

It would be meritorious, in the highest degree, to fly to their
assistance, when they knew where they were to be come at; or to seek
them out with diligence, when they did not. This last _feudal_ service
soon introduced, what may be truly called _romantic_, the _going in
quest of adventures_; which at first, no doubt, was confined to those
of their own party, but afterwards, by the habit of acting on this
principle, would be extended much further. So that in process of time,
we find the Knights errant, as they were now properly styled, wandering
the world over in search of occasions on which to exercise their
generous and disinterested valour, indifferently to friends and enemies
in distress;

    Ecco quei, che le charte empion di sogni,
    LANCILOTTO, TRISTANO, e gli altri erranti.

III. “The courtesy, affability, and gallantry, for which these
adventurers were so famous, are but the natural effects and
consequences of their situation.”

For the castles of the Barons were, as I said, the courts of these
little sovereigns, as well as their fortresses; and the resort of
their vassals thither in honour of their chiefs, and for their own
proper security, would make that civility and politeness, which is seen
in courts and insensibly prevails there, a predominant part in the
character of these assemblies.

This is the poet’s own account of

          ——court and royal citadel,
    The great school-maistresse of all Courtesy.
                            B. III. C. vi. s. 1.

And again, more largely in B. VI. C. i. s. 1.

    Of Court it seems men Courtesie do call,
      For that it there most useth to abound;
    And well beseemeth that in Princes hall
      That Virtue should be plentifully found,
      Which of all goodly manners is the ground
    And root of civil conversation:
      Right so in _faery court_ it did resound,
    Where courteous knights and ladies most did won
    Of all on earth, and made a matchless paragon.

For _Faery Court_ means the _reign of Chivalry_; which, it seems, had
undergone a fatal revolution before the age of MILTON, who tells us
that _Courtesy_

        ——is sooner found in lonely sheds
    With smoaky rafters, than in tap’stry halls
    And courts of princes, where it first was nam’d,
    And yet is most pretended.
                                               MASK.

Further, the free commerce of the ladies, in those knots and circles of
the great, would operate so far on the sturdiest knights, as to give
birth to the attentions of gallantry. But this gallantry would take a
refined turn, not only from the necessity there was of maintaining the
strict form of decorum, amidst a promiscuous conversation under the
eye of the Prince and in his own family; but also from the inflamed
sense they must needs have of the frequent outrages committed, by their
neighbouring clans of adversaries, on the honour of the sex, when by
chance of war they had fallen into their hands. Violations of chastity
being the most atrocious crimes they had to charge on their enemies,
they would pride themselves in the merit of being its protectors: and
as this virtue was, of all others, the fairest and strongest claim of
the sex itself to such protection, it is no wonder that the notions of
it were, in time, carried to so platonic an elevation.

Thus, again, the great master of Chivalry himself, on this subject,

    It hath been thro’ all ages ever seen,
      That, with the praise of arms and chivalry,
    The prize of beauty still hath joined been;
      And that for reason’s special privity:
    For either doth on other much rely;
      For HE mee seems most fit the fair to serve,
    That can her best defend from villainy;
      And SHE most fit his service doth deserve,
    That fairest is, and from her faith will never swerve.
                                     SPENSER, B. IV. C. v.

Not but the foundation of this refined gallantry was laid in the
ancient manners of the _German_ nations. CÆSAR tells us how far they
carried their practice of chastity, which he seems willing to account
for on political principles. However that be, their consideration of
the sex was prodigious, as we see in the history of their irruptions
into the Empire; where among all their ravages and devastations of
other sorts, we find they generally abstained from offering any
violence to the honour of the women.

IV. It only remains to account for that “character of Religion,” which
was so deeply imprinted on the minds of all knights, and was essential
to their institution. We are even told, that _the love of God and of
the ladies_ went hand in hand, in the duties and ritual of Chivalry.

Two reasons may be assigned for this singularity:

First, the superstition of the times, in which Chivalry arose; which
was so great, that no institution of a public nature could have found
credit in the world, that was not consecrated by the churchmen, and
closely interwoven with religion.

Secondly, the condition of the Christian states; which had been
harassed by long wars, and had but just recovered a breathing-time from
the brutal ravages of the _Saracen_ armies. The remembrance of what
they had lately suffered from these grand enemies of the faith, made it
natural, and even necessary, to engage a new military order on the side
of religion.

And how warmly this principle, _a zeal for the faith_, was acted upon
by the professors of Chivalry, and how deeply it entered into their
ideas of the military character, we see from the term so constantly
used by the old Romancers, of RECREANT [_i. e._ Apostate] Knight; by
which they meant to express, with the utmost force, their disdain of
a dastard or vanquished knight. For, many of this order falling into
the hands of the _Saracens_, such of them as had not imbibed the full
spirit of their profession, were induced to renounce their faith, in
order to regain their liberty. These men, as sinning against the great
fundamental laws of Chivalry, they branded with this name; a name of
complicated reproach, which implied a want of the two most essential
qualities of a Knight, COURAGE and FAITH.

Hence too, the reason appears why the _Spaniards_, of all the
Europeans, were furthest gone in every characteristic madness of true
chivalry. To all the other considerations, here mentioned, their
fanaticism in every way was especially instigated and kept alive by the
memory and neighbourhood of their old infidel invaders.

And thus we seem to have a fair account of that PROWESS, GENEROSITY,
GALLANTRY, and RELIGION, which were the peculiar and vaunted
characteristics of the purer ages of Chivalry.

Such was the state of things in the Western world, when the Crusades
to the Holy Land were set on foot. Whence we see how well prepared the
minds of men were for engaging in that enterprize. Every object, that
had entered into the views of the institutors of Chivalry, and had been
followed by its professors, was now at hand, to inflame the military
and religious ardor of the knights, to the utmost. And here, in fact,
we find the strongest and boldest features of their genuine character:
_daring_ to madness, in enterprises of hazard: burning with zeal for
the delivery of the _oppressed_; and, which was deemed the height of
_religious_ merit, for the rescue of the holy city out of the hands of
infidels; and, lastly, exalting their honour of _chastity_ so high as
to profess celibacy; as they constantly did, in the several orders of
knighthood created on that extravagant occasion.


