VII

BATTLE TACTICS


Sun the Master said:--

For the most part, military procedure is as follows:--

The general receives orders from his lord; assembles and settles
harmony among the forces, and takes the field.

There is nothing more difficult than Battle Tactics. Their difficulty
lies in the calculation of time and distance, and the reversal of
misfortune.

To make the enemy take a circuitous route by a show of gain, and then,
whilst starting after him, to arrive before him, is to be a master of
the art of manoeuvre.

The operations of an army may reap advantage; the wrangles of a
multitude are fraught with peril.

Employing our whole force at one time in order to gain advantage over
the enemy, we may not have time enough to gain our object. If we push
on with a portion of the force only, the transport is lost. Discarding
helmet and armour; stopping neither day nor night; marching double
distance; doing double work; and finally contending with the enemy at
a distance of a hundred leagues: results in the loss of the general.
Since the strong men arrive first, and the tired drop in rear, only
one-tenth of the forces is available.

A forced march of fifty leagues to secure an advantage may result in
failure to the leader of the vanguard, for only half his men will
arrive.

After a forced march of thirty leagues to secure an advantage, only
two-thirds of the army will be available.

Further, a lack of ammunition, of supplies, or of stores, may lead to
disaster.

The ruler who is ignorant of the designs of neighbouring princes,
cannot treat with them.

He who is ignorant of mountain and forest, defile and marsh, cannot
lead an army.

He who does not employ a guide, cannot gain advantage from the ground.

Disguise your movements; await a favourable opportunity; divide or
unite according to circumstance.

Let your attack be swift as the wind; your march calm like the
forest;[12] your occupation devastating as fire. In defence, as a
mountain rest firm; like darkness impenetrable to the enemy. Let your
movements be swift as the lightning.

Let as many as possible take part in the plunder: distribute the profit
from the captured territory.

So he who understands the crooked and the straight way conquers.

These are the methods of Battle Tactics.

According to the ancient books on war, the drum and bell are used,
because the voice does not carry; the flag is used to assist the
sight. The use of bell, drum, banner and flag is to attract the united
attention of eye and ear.

When all are united, the strong are not left to go forward alone,
the cowardly are not free to retreat unrestricted. In this way can a
multitude be used.

Therefore in night fighting, beacons and drums are largely used; in day
fighting, a great number of banners and flags and the enemy's eyes and
ears are confounded.

We thus awe his army, and defeat his general's ambition.

In the morning the spirits are keen; at midday there is a laziness; in
the evening a desire to return. Wherefore, he who uses his soldiers
well, avoids the time when the spirits are keen; but attacks the enemy
when he is languid or seeking his camp.

Thus should the nature of energy be turned to account.

To oppose confusion with order, clamour with quiet, is to have the
heart under control.

To await an enemy from a distance, to oppose hunger with satiety, rest
with fatigue, is the way to husband strength.

Do not attack where lines of banners wave, nor the serried ranks of
battle spread, but patiently await your time.

Do not attack an enemy on high ground, nor one who has high ground at
his back. Do not pursue an enemy who is imitating flight; do not attack
a spirited enemy.

If the enemy offer an allurement, do not take it.

Do not interfere with an enemy who has struck camp, and is about to
retire. When surrounding an enemy, allow him an outlet. Do not press a
desperate enemy.

These are the methods of employing troops.




