II

ESTIMATION OF THE ENEMY


And Lord Wen said to Wu:--

"Chin threatens us on the west; Chu surrounds us on the south; Chao
presses us in the north; Chi watches us in the east; Yen stops our
rear, and Han is posted in our front. Thus, the armies of six nations
encompass us on every side, and our condition is very unpropitious.
Canst thou relieve my anxiety?"

Wu answered and said:--

"The path of safety of a state lies first of all in vigilance. Now my
Lord has already taken warning, wherefore misfortunes are yet distant.

"Let me state the habits of these six countries. The forces of Chi are
weighty but without solidity; the soldiers of Chin are scattered, and
fight each of his own accord: the army of Chu is well ordered, but
cannot endure: the soldiers of Yen defend well, but are without dash:
the armies of the three Chins are well governed, but cannot be used.

"The nature of Chi is stubborn and the country rich, but prince and
officials are proud and luxurious, and neglectful of the common people;
government is loose and rewards not impartial; in one camp there are
two minds; the front is heavy, but the rear is light. Therefore it is
ponderous without stability. To attack it, the force must be divided
into three parts, and, by threatening it on three sides, its front can
be broken.

"The nature of Chin is strong, the country rugged, and the government
firm; rewards and punishments just, the people indomitable, and all
have the fighting spirit; wherefore, when separated, each fights of his
own accord.

"To defeat this people, they must first be tempted by gain to leave
their cause, so that the soldiers, greedy of profit, desert their
general: then, taking advantage of their disobedience, their scattered
forces can be chased, ambushes laid, favourable opportunities taken,
and their general captured.

"The nature of Chu is weak, its territory wide, the government weak,
and the people exhausted; the troops are well ordered but of short
endurance.

"The way to defeat them is to assault their camp, throw it into
confusion and crush their spirit, advance softly, and retire quickly;
tire them out, avoid a serious encounter, and they may be defeated.

"The nature of Yen is straightforward; its people are cautious, loving
courage and righteousness, and without guile; wherefore they defend but
are not daring.

"The way to defeat them is to draw close and press them; tease them and
pass to a distance; move quickly, and appear in the rear, thus causing
bewilderment to their officers and fear in their ranks. Our chariots
and horsemen will act with circumspection and avoid encounter. Thus
their general can be captured.

"The three Chins are the middle kingdom: their nature is peaceful
and their rule just. Their people are tired of war; their troops are
trained, but their leaders are despised; pay is small, and the soldiers
lack the spirit of sacrifice, thus they are well governed but cannot be
used.

"The way to defeat them is to threaten them from afar. If a multitude
attack--defend; if they retreat--pursue, and tire them out.

"In every army there are mighty warriors with strength to lift the
Censer, swifter of foot than the war horse; who can take the enemy's
standard, or slay his general. If such men be selected, and set apart,
cared for and honoured, they are the life of the army.

"Those who use the five arms[20] with skill, who are clever, strong and
quick, and careless of the enemy, should be given rank and decoration,
and used to decide the victory. Their parents and families should be
cared for, encouraged by rewards, and kept in fear of punishment. These
men consolidate the battle array; their presence causes endurance.

"If these men be well selected, double their number can be defeated."

And Lord Wen said:--

"It is good!"

Wu the Master said:--

"In the estimation of the enemy there are eight cases when, without
consulting the oracles, he may be attacked.

"First, an enemy who, in great wind and cold, has risen early, started
forth across ice and rivers, and braved stress and hardships.

"Second, an enemy who, in the height of summer, and in great heat, has
risen early, has travelled incessantly, is hungry and without water,
and is striving to reach a distance.

"Third, an enemy who has been encamped long in one place, who is
without provisions, when the farmers are vexed and indignant, who
has suffered frequent calamities, and whose officers are unable to
establish confidence.

"Fourth, when the enemy's funds are exhausted, fuel and fodder scarce;
when the heavens have been overcast by long continued rain; when there
is the desire to loot, but no place to loot withal.

"Fifth, when their numbers are few; when water is scarce; when men and
horses are scourged by pestilence, and from no quarter is succour at
hand.

"Sixth, when night falls, and the way is yet far; when officers and men
are worn out and fearful, weary and without food, and have laid aside
their armour and are resting.

"Seventh, when the general's authority is weak, the officials false,
and the soldiers unsettled; when their army has been alarmed, and no
help is forthcoming.

"Eighth, when the battle formation is not yet fixed, or camp pitched;
when climbing a hill, or passing through a difficult place; when half
is hidden and half exposed.

"An enemy in these situations may be smitten without hesitation.

"There are six enemies, that, without consulting oracles, should be
avoided.

"First, wide and vast territories, and a large and rich population.

"Second, where the officials care for the people, and bestow bountiful
favours and rewards.

"Third, where rewards are well deserved, punishment accurately
apportioned, and operations undertaken only when the time is fitting.

"Fourth, where merit is recognised and given rank, wise men appointed,
and ability employed.

"Fifth, where the troops are many and their weapons excellent.

"Sixth, when help is at hand on every side, or from a powerful ally.

"For, if the enemy excel in the foregoing, he must be avoided without
hesitation. As it is written, if it be judged good, advance; if it be
known to be difficult, retreat."

And Lord Wen asked and said:--

"I desire to know how the interior of the enemy can be known from his
outer appearance; the form of his camp by observing his advance, and
how victory may be determined?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"If the coming of the enemy be reckless like roaring waters, his
banners and pennons disordered, and horses and men frequently looking
behind, then ten can be struck with one. Panic will certainly seize
them.

"Before the various princes have assembled, before harmony has been
established between lord and lieges, before ditches have been dug, or
regulations established, and the army is alarmed; wishing to advance,
but unable; wishing to retreat, but unable: then the force can strike
twice their numbers, and in a hundred fights there is no fear of
retreat."

Lord Wen asked:--

"How can the enemy be certainly defeated?"

Wu answered and said:--

"Make certain of the enemy's real condition and quickly strike his
weak point; strike an enemy who has just arrived from afar, before his
ranks are arranged; or one who has eaten and has not completed his
dispositions; or an enemy who is hurrying about, or is busily occupied;
or has not made favourable use of the ground, or has let pass the
opportunity; or one who has come a long distance, and those in rear are
late and have not rested.

"Strike an enemy who is half across waters; or who is on a difficult
or narrow road; or whose flags and banners are in confusion; or who is
frequently changing position; or whose general is not in accord with
the soldiers; or who is fearful.

"All such should be assaulted by the picked men; and the remainder of
the army should be divided, and follow after them. They may be attacked
at once without hesitation."




