IV

QUALITIES OF THE GENERAL


Wu the Master said:--

"The leader of the army is one who is master of both arms and letters.
He who is both brave and tender can be entrusted with troops.

"In the popular estimation of generals, courage alone is regarded;
nevertheless, courage is but one of the qualifications of the leader.
Courage is heedless in encounter; and rash encounter, which is ignorant
of the consequences, cannot be called good.

"There are five matters which leaders must carefully consider.

"First, reason; second, preparation; third, determination; fourth,
vigilance; fifth, simplicity.

"With reason, a multitude can be controlled like a small number.

"Preparedness sees an enemy outside the gate.

"Determination before the enemy has no thought of life.

"Even after a victory, vigilance behaves as before the first encounter.

"Simplicity ensures few regulations, and preserves order.

"When the leader receives his orders, he forthwith departs. Not until
the enemy has been vanquished does he speak of return. This is the duty
of the general.

"Wherefore, from the day of departure of the army, the general seeks
glory in death, and dreams not of return in dishonour."

Wu the Master said:--

"In war there are four important influences.

"First, spirit; second, ground; third, opportunity; fourth, force.

"The military value of the nation's forces--of one hundred times ten
thousand fighting men--depends upon the personality of one man alone;
this is called the influence of spirit.

"When the road is steep and narrow, when there are famous mountains and
fastnesses where ten men can defend and one thousand cannot pass them
by; such is the influence of ground.

"When spies have been skilfully sown, and mounted men pass to and from
the enemy's camp, so that his masses are divided, his sovereign and
ministers vexed with each other, and superiors and inferiors mutually
censorious; this is the moment of opportunity.

"When the linch-pins are secure, the oars and sweeps ready for use in
the boats, the armed men trained for war, and the horses exercised, we
have what is called the influence of force.

"He who understands these four matters has the qualifications of a
general. Furthermore, dignity, virtue, benevolence, courage, are needed
to lead the troops, to calm the multitude, to put fear in the enemy,
to remove doubts. When orders are issued, the subordinates do not defy
them. Wheresoever the army is, that place the enemy avoids. If these
four virtues be present, the country is strong; if they be not present,
the country is overthrown.

"Of such is the good general."

Wu the Master said:--

"The use of drums and bells is to attract the ear; of flags, standards,
and banners to strike the eye; of laws and penalties to put fear in the
heart.

"To attract the ear the sound must be clear; to strike the eye the
colours must be bright. The heart is awed by punishment, therefore
punishment must be strict.

"If these three matters be not ordered, the state may, peradventure,
be preserved, but defeat by the enemy is certain. Therefore, as it has
been said (if these three things be present), there is no departing
from the commands of the general; when he orders, there is no going
back from death."

Wu the Master said:--

"The secret of war is, first, to know who is the enemy's general, and
to judge his ability. If our plans depend on his dispositions, then
success will be achieved without toil.

"If their general be stupid, and heedlessly trustful, he may be enticed
by fraud; if he be avaricious and careless of his fame, he may be
bribed with gifts. If he make unconsidered movements without plan, he
should be tired out and placed in difficulties. If the superiors be
wealthy and proud, and the inferiors avaricious and resentful, they
should be set against each other. An enemy that is undetermined, now
advancing and then retreating, whose soldiers have nought wherein to
put their trust, should be alarmed, and put to flight.

"When an enemy thinks lightly of the general, and desires to return
home, the easy roads should be blocked, and the difficult and narrow
roads opened; await their coming and capture them.

"If their advance be easy and retreat difficult, await their coming and
then advance against them.

"If their advance be difficult and retreat easy, then press and strike
them.

"An army that is camped in marshy ground, where there are no
water-courses, and long and frequent rains, should be inundated.

"An army that is camped in wild marshes, covered with dark and
overhanging grass and brambles, and swept by frequent high winds,
should be overthrown by fire.

"An army that has halted long without moving; whose general and
soldiers have grown careless, and neglect precautions, should be
approached by stealth, and taken by surprise."

Lord Wen asked, saying:--

"If the two armies be facing each other, and the name of the enemy's
general unknown, in what manner can we discover it?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"A brave man of low degree, lightly but well equipped, should be
employed. He should think only of flight and naught of advantage. Then,
if he observe the enemy's pursuit, if there be first a halt and then
an advance, order is established. If we retreat and the enemy pursue,
but pretend not to be able to overtake us, see an advantage but pretend
not to be aware of it, then their general may be called a wise general,
and conflict with him must be avoided. If their army be full of uproar;
their banners and standards disordered, their soldiers going about
or remaining of their own accord, some in line, others in column; if
such an enemy be eager to pursue, and see an advantage which they are
desperate to seize, then their general is a fool: even if there be a
host, they may be taken."




