
Nore: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/bookofwarmilitar00caltiala


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Changes made are listed at the end of the text.




THE BOOK OF WAR

The Military Classic of the Far East

Translated from the Chinese by

CAPTAIN E. F. CALTHROP, R.F.A.







London
John Murray, Albemarle St., W.
1908




CONTENTS


                                           PAGE

          INTRODUCTION                        7


          THE ARTICLES OF SUNTZU

       I. PRELIMINARY RECKONING              17

      II. OPERATIONS OF WAR                  20

     III. THE ATTACK BY STRATAGEM            24

      IV. THE ORDER OF BATTLE                28

       V. THE SPIRIT OF THE TROOPS           31

      VI. EMPTINESS AND STRENGTH             34

     VII. BATTLE TACTICS                     40

    VIII. THE NINE CHANGES                   44

      IX. MOVEMENT OF TROOPS                 47

       X. GROUND                             53

      XI. NINE GROUNDS                       58

     XII. ASSAULT BY FIRE                    67

    XIII. THE EMPLOYMENT OF SPIES            70


          THE SAYINGS OF WUTZU

          INTRODUCTION                       75

       I. THE GOVERNMENT OF A COUNTRY        77

      II. ESTIMATION OF THE ENEMY            85

     III. CONTROL OF THE ARMY                93

      IV. QUALITIES OF THE GENERAL          101

       V. SUITING THE OCCASION              108

      VI. ENCOURAGEMENT OF THE TROOPS       116




THE BOOK OF WAR




INTRODUCTION


I

Written in the fifth century B.C., Suntzu and Wutzu still remain the
most celebrated works on war in the literature of China. While the
chariot has gone, and weapons have changed, these ancient masters have
held their own, since they deal chiefly with the fundamental principles
of war, with the influence of politics and human nature on military
operations; and they show in a most striking way how unchanging these
principles are.

When these books were written, China was a conglomerate of
principalities in continual ferment. Personal ambition and intrigue,
and not the wishes of the people, were the main factors in these wars.
Patriotism, or a popular cause, could not, therefore, be relied on
to maintain the _moral_ of the levies. Instead of these, what may be
called the force of despair is pointed out as the most powerful agent
in giving cohesion and energy to an army. The general is urged to
take a vigorous offensive; and to act at a distance from his base,
where defeat means disaster, and where desertion is minimised owing to
the distance from home. He should, in fact, burn his boats before an
action, or, in Chinese phrase, act as one who removes the ladder from
under those mounted upon the roof.

On the other hand, every care must be taken not to render the enemy
desperate; and, as an instance of this, Sun observes that an opponent
should on no account be completely surrounded. A loop-hole of escape
weakens the resolution of the general and the energy of his troops.

It is interesting to notice that _moral_, or the spirit of the troops,
is thus considered a determining factor in war. The Chinese are
perhaps unusually affected by climatic conditions. As is well known,
the umbrella was part of a soldier's equipment; and for the same
reasons, the sunny side of high ground is recommended as most suitable
for defence, tactical considerations permitting.

The large number of bannermen in the Chinese army was out of all
proportion to the service of standards in providing rallying points.
The chief use of banners was to maintain the spirit of the troops.
A forest of banners, held erect, gave a feeling of liveliness and
security to the ranks, in the same way as a military band, and when Sun
remarks that the march of an army should be calm like the forest, he is
using a simile that is not inappropriate.

Probably owing to the fact that the profession of arms has never been
highly regarded in China, we find that the ruler of the state did not
usually take the field, but employed a professional to command the
army--one of the masters of war who wandered from state to state at
that time with the secrets of victory to impart to the highest bidder.
The question of political interference with the general in the field
naturally arises under these conditions. The two sages point out, that
to unite the nation under firm and just government is the business of
the ruler and necessary to victory; but that the general is the best
judge of the questions that arise on a distant field, and that all
interference with him causes delay and disaster.

War meaning ravage, it was essential that the operations should be
conducted in the enemy's territory. Once there, however, a vigorous
offensive is no longer advised. "At first behave with the discretion of
a maiden" is the counsel of Sun. The enemy must be induced to take the
initiative, and when he is worn out by marching, or makes a false move,
"then," says the master, "dart in like a rabbit."

Unlike the tactics of the Japanese, in whom the spirit of attack
burns so strongly, those of Suntzu and Wutzu are essentially of
the offensive-defensive order--manoeuvre before fighting, and
non-committal until the enemy has shown his hand. The business of the
general is to avoid encounter in battle until the enemy is no longer
capable of offering a successful resistance.

The masters do not make, however, the mistake of advocating a passive
defensive. Suntzu lays down that the division of the forces which this
strategy involves, is to be everywhere weak, rendering the army liable
to be taken in detail by the concentrated forces of the enemy. It is
rather the defence which avoids battle by mobility and manoeuvre,
induces the enemy by stratagem to divide his forces, or act in
conformity with our wishes, and then falls upon him.

With regard to the tactics of the battlefield, the pitched battle,
or, in other words, the frontal attack, is considered unworthy of the
skilful general. The plan of attack should consist, broadly speaking,
in the division of the army into two forces. The enemy is "attracted
and engaged by one force, and defeated with the other;" and here we
have the containing or secondary attack, and the main or reserve force
which decides the battle of to-day--a most striking instance of the
continuity of military principles.

Considerable space is devoted to the influence of ground on war. The
passage of defiles and rivers is still conducted in the same way. The
many large rivers of China naturally affected military operations; and,
among other axioms, it is laid down that the passage of a river should
not be disputed, as the enemy will probably give up the attempt, and
make the passage untouched at some other point, but that he should
be attacked when half his force is across the stream. Again, an army
should not encamp on a river below the enemy, as it is thereby liable
to be inundated, or to have its water poisoned; or the enemy may come
down stream and make a sudden attack.

While both writers were professional soldiers, they show a fine
disinterestedness by repeatedly pointing out that even successful
war brings evil in its train. Wu remarks that "few are those who have
gained power on earth by many victories," and he is insistent that war
should not be undertaken until a careful comparison of the two sides
shows that victory is certain; and he adds, "The army which conquers
makes certain of victory and then attacks, while the army that is
defeated fights in the hope of success."

Hence the importance they assign to intelligence of the enemy, and to
the spy; and as the sages dealt with war between members of the same
race, the work of spies was greatly facilitated. The spy was treated
with great honour by his countrymen, and the fact that many of the
national heroes of China were spies, shows that the part that they
played was not forgotten. They frequently toiled for years, and rose
to high rank in the enemy's service; and thus, by wrong counsel and by
spreading mistrust in his ranks, they became a two-edged sword in the
hands of the general. "Wonderful, indeed, is their power," exclaims
Sun; but he also reminds us that their management is the most difficult
and delicate duty of the general.


II

Sun and Wu are perhaps held in even greater reverence in Japan than
in China, where war is looked upon as a troublesome phase in national
life, and victory in battle is not considered the greatest achievement
of a state. Far otherwise is it in Japan; and successive generations
of her soldiers have been brought up on Sun and Wu. Like other arts,
mystery was formerly supposed to surround the art of war, a belief that
was encouraged by the strategist; and for a considerable time, the few
copies of this book, that were brought over from China to Japan, were
jealously guarded by their possessors. Later, as they became known, an
army of Japanese commentators arose--for Chinese literature is thought
compressed, to be unfolded in the mind of the reader.

To-day Sun and Wu have given way to the scientific works of European
writers, but their sayings have become proverbs, and their influence
undoubtedly helped the Japanese to victory in the late war. Belief
in the importance of a knowledge of the enemy and his resources, of
preparation and training, had grown out of a long study of these
ancient masters; and since it was the vital importance of a successful
issue to the Japanese which, after all, fired their resolution and
carried them through, they proved the sage's words that it is the
energy, born of despair, that wins the victory.


III

Little is known of the life of either master. They were in no sense
patriots but professional strategists, continually changing their
employer. Chinese history tells a famous story about Sun. A certain
ruler asked Sun to give a practical demonstration of his principles in
the neighbourhood of the palace, and entrusted him with the women of
the court for this purpose. During the operations, the leader of one of
the sides did not obey the master's instructions, and her execution was
ordered. She happened to be the king's favourite wife, but Sun pointed
out that the king's wish that her life should be spared was a case of
political interference with the general in the field; and the sentence
was carried out.

Wu is represented as a person of low moral character. On two separate
occasions, for fear of giving rise to suspicion, he killed one of his
wives who belonged to a state with which his employer at the time was
at war; and, graver still in the eyes of the Chinese historian, he was
not present at the death-bed of his mother.

                                                               E. F. C.


NOTE.

The translator is indebted to Major J. C. Somerville for his kind help
and criticism.




THE ARTICLES OF SUNTZU




I

PRELIMINARY RECKONING


The words of Sun the Master:--

To all nations War is a great matter. Upon the army death or life
depend: it is the means of the existence or destruction _of the State_.

Therefore it must be diligently studied.

Now, in war, besides stratagem and the situation, there are five
indispensable matters. The first is called The Way;[1] the second,
Heaven; the third, Earth; the fourth, the Leader; the fifth, Law.

The _Way_ or the proper conduct of man. If the ruling authority be
upright, the people are united: fearless of danger, their lives are at
the service of their Lord.

_Heaven._ Yin and Yang;[2] heat and cold; time and season.

_Earth._ Distance; nature; extent; strategic position.

The _Leader_. Intelligence; truth; benevolence; courage and strictness.

_Law._ Partition and ordering of troops.

These things must be known by the leader: to know them is to conquer;
to know them not is to be defeated.

Further, with regard to these and the following seven matters, the
condition of the enemy must be compared with our own.

The seven matters are:--

The virtue of the prince; the ability of the general; natural
advantages; the discipline of the armies; the strength of the soldiers;
training of the soldiers; justice both in reward and punishment.

Knowing these things, I can foretell the victor.

If a general under me fight according to my plans, he always conquers,
and I continue to employ him; if he differ from my plans, he will be
defeated and dismissed from my service.

Wherefore, with regard to the foregoing, considering that with us
lies the advantage, and the generals agreeing, we create a situation
which promises victory; but as the moment and method cannot be fixed
beforehand, the plan must be modified according to circumstances.

War is a thing of pretence: therefore, when capable of action, we
pretend disability; when near to the enemy, we pretend to be far; when
far away, we pretend to be near.

Allure the enemy by giving him a small advantage. Confuse and capture
him. If there be defects, give an appearance of perfection, and awe the
enemy. Pretend to be strong, and so cause the enemy to avoid you. Make
him angry, and confuse his plans. Pretend to be inferior, and cause him
to despise you. If he have superabundance of strength, tire him out;
if united, make divisions in his camp. Attack weak points, and appear
in unexpected places.

These are the secrets of the successful strategist, therefore they must
not be made known beforehand.

At the reckoning in the Sanctuary before fighting, victory is to the
side that excels _in the foregoing matters_. They that have many of
these will conquer; they that have few will not conquer; hopeless,
indeed, are they that have none.

If the condition of both sides with regard to these matters be known, I
can foretell the victor.




