V

SUITING THE OCCASION


Lord Wen asked and said:--

"If strong chariots, good horses, strong and valiant soldiers suddenly
meet the enemy, and are thrown into confusion, and ranks broken, what
should be done?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"In general, the method of fighting is to effect order in daylight by
means of flags and banners, pennons and batons; at night by gongs and
drums, whistles and flutes. If a signal be made to the left, the troops
move to the left; if to the right, they move to the right. Advance is
made at the sound of the drum; halt at the sound of the gong; one blast
of the whistle is for advance, two for the rally. If those who disobey
be cut down, the forces are subject to authority. If officers and
soldiers carry out orders, a superior enemy cannot exist; no position
is impregnable in the attack."

Lord Wen asked and said:--

"What is to be done if the enemy be many and we be few?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"Avoid such an enemy on open ground, and meet him in the narrow way;
for, as it is written, if 1 is to stand against 1,000, there is naught
better than a pass; if 10 are to hold against 100, there is nothing
better than a steep place; if 1,000 are to strike 10,000, there is
nothing better than a difficult place. If a small force, with beat
of gong and drum, suddenly arise in a narrow way, even a host will
be upset. Wherefore it is written: 'He who has a multitude seeks the
plain, and he who has few seeks the narrow way.'"

And Lord Wen asked and said:--

"A mighty host, strong and courageous, which is on the defence with a
mountain behind, a precipice between, high ground on the right, and
a river on the left, with deep moats, and high walls, and which has
artillery; whose retreat is like the removal of a mountain, advance
like the hurricane, and whose supplies are in abundance, is an enemy
against whom long defence is difficult. In effect, what should be done
in such a case?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"This indeed is a great question, whose issue depends, not upon the
might of chariot and horse, but upon the schemes of a wise man.

"Let 1,000 chariots and 10,000 horse, well equipped and with foot-men
added to them, be divided into five armies, and a road allotted to each
army.

"Then if there be five armies, and each army take a different road, the
enemy will be puzzled, and know not in what quarter to be prepared. If
the enemy's defence be strong and united, send envoys quickly to him
to discover his intention. If he listen to our advices, he will strike
camp and withdraw. But, if he listen not to our advice, but strikes
down the messenger, and burns his papers, then divide and attack
from five quarters. If victorious, do not pursue; if defeated, flee
to a distance. If feigning retreat, proceed slowly, and, if the enemy
approach, strike swiftly.

"One army will hold the enemy in front, with another cut his rear,
two more with gags in their mouths[21] will attack his weak point,
whether on the right or on the left. If five armies thus make alternate
onslaughts, success is certain.

"This is the way to strike strength."

And Lord Wen asked and said:--

"If the enemy draw near and encompass us, and we would retreat, but
there is no way, and in our multitude there is fear, what should be
done?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"In such a case, if we be many and they be few, divide and fall upon
them; if the enemy be many and we be few, use stratagem and act
according to opportunity; and if opportunities be untiringly seized,
even if the enemy be many, he will be reduced to subjection."

Lord Wen asked and said:--

"If, in a narrow valley with steep places on either side, the enemy be
met, and they are many and we are few, what should be done?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"If they be met among hills, woods, in deep mountains, or wide fens,
advance quickly, retire swiftly, and hesitate not. If the enemy be
suddenly met among high mountains or deep valleys, be the first to
strike the drum and fall upon them. Let bow and cross bow advance;
shoot and capture; observe the state of their ranks; and, if there be
confusion, do not hesitate to strike."

Lord Wen asked and said:--

"If the enemy be suddenly met in a narrow place with high mountains on
either side, and advance and retreat are alike impossible, what should
be done in such a case?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"This is called War in valleys where numbers are of no avail. The
ablest officers should be collected, and set against the enemy. Men
light of foot and well armed should be placed in front; the chariots
divided; the horsemen drawn up, and placed in ambush on four sides,
with many leagues between, and without showing their weapons. Then,
the enemy will certainly make his defence firm, and neither advance
or retreat. Whereupon, the standards will be raised, and the ranks of
banners shown, the mountains left, and camp pitched in the plain.

"The enemy will then be fearful, and should be challenged by chariot
and horse, and allowed no rest.

"This is the method of fighting in valleys."

And Lord Wen asked and said:--

"If the enemy be met in a marsh where the water is out, so that the
wheels of the chariots sink in, and the shafts be covered, and the
chariots and horsemen overcome by the waters, when there are no boats
or oars, and it is impossible either to advance or retreat, what should
be done in such a case?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"This is called water fighting. Chariots and horsemen cannot be used,
and they must be put for a time on one side. Go up to the top of a high
place, and look out to the four quarters. Then the state of the waters
will certainly be seen; their extent, and the deep places and shallows
fully ascertained. Then, by stratagem, the enemy may be defeated.

"If the enemy should cross the waters he should be engaged when half
over."

And Lord Wen asked and said:--

"If there has been long continued rain so that the horses sink, and the
chariots cannot move; if the enemy appear from four quarters, and the
forces are frightened, what is the course in such a case?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"When wet and overcast, the chariots should halt; when fine and dry,
they should arise. Seek height, and avoid low places; drive the strong
chariots, and choose well the road on which to advance or halt. If the
enemy suddenly arise, immediately pursue them."

Lord Wen asked and said:--

"If our fields and pastures be suddenly pillaged, and our oxen and
sheep taken, what should be done?"

And Wu answered and said:--

"Lawless enemies that arise are to be feared; defend well and do not
reply. When, at sunset, they seek to withdraw, they will certainly
be overladen and fearful. Striving to return quickly to their homes,
connection will be lost. Then if they be pursued and attacked, they can
be overthrown."

Wu the Master said:--

"The way of attacking the enemy and investing his castle is as
follows:--

"When the outlying buildings have been taken, and the assaulting
parties enter the innermost sanctuary, make use of the enemy's
officials, and take charge of their weapons. Let the army on no account
fell trees or enter dwellings, cut the crops, slay the six domestic
animals, or burn the barns; and show the people that there is no cruel
desire. Those who wish to surrender, should be received and freed from
anxiety."




