VIII

THE NINE CHANGES


Sun the Master said:--

In general, the procedure of war is:--the Leader, having received
orders from his lord, assembles the armies.

Do not camp on marshy or low-lying ground; enter into friendly
relations with neighbouring states; do not linger in a far country;
use stratagem in mountainous and wooded country; on death ground, fight.

There are always roads that must be avoided; forces that must not be
attacked; castles that must not be besieged; ground that must not be
chosen for encounter; orders from the lord that must not be obeyed.

The general who knows the Nine Changes understands the use of troops;
on the contrary, he who does not understand them, can make no use of
his topographical knowledge.

In the management of armies, if the art of the Nine Changes be
understood, a knowledge of the Five Advantages is of no avail.

The wise man considers well both advantage and disadvantage. He sees a
way out of adversity, and on the day of victory to danger is not blind.

In reducing an enemy to submission, inflict all possible damage upon
him; make him undertake useless adventures; also make neighbouring
rulers move as you would desire them by tempting them with gain.

Wherefore in the conduct of war do not depend on the enemy's not
coming, but rely on your own preparations; do not count on the enemy
not attacking your fortress, but leave nothing undefended.

Generals must be on their guard against these five dangerous faults:--

Blind impetuosity, which leads to death.

Over-cautiousness, which leads to capture.

Quick temper, which brings insult.

A too rigid propriety, which invites disgrace.

Over-regard for the troops, which causes inconvenience.

These five faults in the leader are disastrous in war. The overthrow of
the army and the slaughter of the general arise from them. Therefore
they must be carefully considered.




IX

MOVEMENT OF TROOPS


Sun the Master said:--

Touching the disposal of troops and observation of the enemy in
relation to mountain warfare:--

Cross mountains and camp in valleys, selecting positions of safety.

Place the army on high ground, and avoid an enemy in high places.

In relation to water:--

After crossing waters, pass on immediately to a distance. When the
enemy is crossing a stream, do not meet and engage him in the waters,
but strike when half his force has passed over. Do not advance on an
enemy near water, but place the army on high ground, and in safety.

Do not fight when the enemy is between the army and the source of the
river.

With regard to marshes:--

Cross salty marshes quickly; do not linger near them.

If by chance compelled to fight in the neighbourhood of a marsh, seek a
place where there is water and grass, and trees in plenty in the rear.

In open country place the army in a convenient place with rising ground
in the right rear; so that while in front lies death, behind there is
safety.

Such is war in flat country.

Huangti, by observing these things, gained the victory over four
Princes.

As a rule, the soldiers prefer high ground to low. They prefer sunny
places to those the sun does not reach.

If the health of the troops be considered, and they are encamped on
high and sunny ground, diseases will be avoided, and victory made
certain.

If there be rising ground, encamp on its sunny side and in front of
it; for thereby the soldiers are benefited, and the ground used to our
advantage.

If, owing to rains in the upper reaches, the river become turbulent, do
not cross until the waters have quieted.

Steep and impassable valleys; well-like places; confined places;
tangled impenetrable ground; swamps and bogs; narrow passages with
pitfalls:--quickly pass from these, and approach them not. Cause the
enemy to approach near to them, but keep yourself from these places;
face them, so that the enemy has them in his rear.

If there be near to the army, precipices, ponds, meres, reeds and
rushes, or thick forests and trees, search them thoroughly. These are
places where the enemy is likely to be in ambush.

When the enemy is close, but quiet, he is strong in reliance on natural
defences.

If the enemy challenge to fight from afar, he wishes you to advance.

If the enemy be encamped in open country, it is with some special
object in view.

Movement among the trees shows that the enemy is advancing. Broken
branches and trodden grass, as of the passing of a large host, must be
regarded with suspicion.

The rising of birds shows an ambush.

Startled beasts show that the enemy is stealthily approaching from
several sides.

High, straight spurts of dust betoken that chariots are coming.

Long, low masses of dust show the coming of infantry.

Here and there, thin and high columns of dust are signs that firewood
and fodder are being collected.

Small clouds of dust moving to and fro are signs that the enemy is
preparing to encamp for a short time.

Busy preparations and smooth words show that the enemy is about to
advance to attack.

Big words, and the spurring forward of horsemen, are signs that the
enemy is about to retire.

An advance of the light chariots to the flanks of the camp is a sign
that the enemy is coming forth to fight.

Without consultation, suddenly to desire an armistice, is a mark of
ulterior design.

The passing to and fro of messengers, and the forming up of troops,
show that the enemy has some movement on foot.

An advance, followed by sudden retirement, is a lure to attack.

When the enemy use their weapons to rest upon, they are hungry.

If the drawers of water drink at the river, the enemy is suffering from
thirst.

Disregard of booty that lies ready at hand is a sign of exhaustion.

The clustering of birds round a position shows that it is unoccupied.

Voices calling in the night betoken alarm.

Disorder in the army is a sign that the general is disregarded.

A changing about of flags and banners is a sign that the army is
unsettled.

If the officers be angry, it is because the soldiers are tired, _and
slow to obey_.

The killing of horses for food shows that the enemy is short of
provisions.

When the cooking-pots are hung up on the wall and the soldiers turn
not in again, the enemy is at an end of his resources.

Exceeding graciousness and familiarity on the part of the general show
that he has lost the confidence of the soldiers.

Frequent rewards show that discipline is at an end.

Frequent punishments are a sign that the general is in difficulties.

The general who first blusters, and then is obsequious, is without
perception.

He who offers apologies and hostages is anxious for a truce.

When both sides, eager for a fight, face each other for a considerable
time, neither advancing nor retiring, the occasion requires the utmost
vigilance and circumspection.

Numbers are no certain mark of strength.

Even if incapable of a headlong assault, if the forces be united, and
the enemy's condition ascertained, victory is possible.

He who without taking thought makes light of the enemy is certain to be
captured.

If a general who is strange to the troops punish them, they cease to
obey him. If they are not obedient, they cannot be usefully employed.

If the troops know the general, but are not affected by his punishments,
they are useless.

By humane treatment we obtain obedience; authority brings uniformity.
Thus we obtain victory.

If the people have been trained in obedience from the beginning, they
respect their leader's commands.

If the people be not early trained to obedience, they do not respect
their leader's commands.

Orders are always obeyed, if general and soldiers are in sympathy.




