VI

EMPTINESS AND STRENGTH


Sun the Master said:--

To be the first in the field, and there to await the enemy, is to
husband strength.

To be late, and hurrying to advance to meet the foe, is exhausting.

The good fighter contrives to make the enemy approach; he does not
allow himself to be beguiled by the enemy.

By offering an apparent advantage, he induces the enemy to take up a
position that will cause his defeat; he plants obstructions to dissuade
him from acting in such a way as to threaten his own dispositions.

If the enemy be at rest in comfortable quarters, harass him; if he be
living in plenty, cut off his supplies; if sitting composedly awaiting
attack, cause him to move.

This may be done by appearing where the enemy is not, and assaulting
unexpected points.

If we go where the enemy is not, we may go a thousand leagues without
exhaustion.

If we attack those positions which the enemy has not defended, we
invariably take them: but on the defence we must be strong, even where
we are not likely to be attacked.

Against those skilful in attack, the enemy does not know where to
defend: against those skilful in defence, the enemy does not know where
to attack.

Now the secrets of the art of offence are not to be easily apprehended,
as a certain shape or noise can be understood, of the senses; but when
these secrets are once learnt, the enemy is mastered.

We attack, and the enemy cannot resist, because we attack his
insufficiency; we retire, and the enemy cannot pursue, because we
retire too quickly.

Again, when we are anxious to fight, but the enemy is serenely secure
behind high walls and deep moats; we attack some such other place that
he must certainly come out to relieve.

When we do not want to fight, we occupy an unfortified line; and
prevent the enemy from attacking by keeping him in suspense.

By making feints, and causing the enemy to be uncertain as to our
movements, we unite, whilst he must divide.

We become one body; the enemy being separated into ten parts. We
attack the divided ten with the united one. We are many, the enemy is
few, and in superiority of numbers there is economy of strength.

The place selected for attack must be kept secret. If the enemy know
not where he will be attacked, he must prepare in every quarter, and so
be everywhere weak.

If the enemy strengthen his front, he must weaken his rear; if he
strengthen his right, his left is weakened; and if he strengthen his
left, his right is weakened.

Everywhere to make preparations, is to be everywhere weak. The enemy is
weakened by his extended preparations, and we gain in strength.

Having decided on the place and day of attack, though the enemy be a
hundred leagues away, we can defeat him.

If the ground and occasion be not known, the front cannot help the
rear; the left cannot support the right, nor the right the left, nor
the rear the front. For on occasion, the parts of the army are two
score leagues apart, while a distance of four or five leagues is
comparatively close.

The soldiers of Wu[10] are less than the soldiers of Yueh; but as
superiority in numbers does not of necessity bring victory, I say,
then, that we may obtain the victory.

If the enemy be many in number, prevent him from taking advantage of
his superiority, and ascertain his plan of operations. Provoke the
enemy and discover the state of his troops; feint and discover the
strength of his position. Flap the wings, and unmask his sufficiency or
insufficiency. By constant feints and excursions, we may produce on the
enemy an impression of intangibility, which neither spies nor art can
dispel.

The general makes his plans in accordance with the dispositions of
the enemy, and puts his hosts in motion; but the multitude cannot
appreciate the general's intention; they see the signs of victory, but
they cannot discover the means.

If a victory be gained by a certain stratagem, do not repeat it. Vary
the stratagem according to circumstances.

An army may be likened to water.

Water leaves dry the high places, and seeks the hollows. An army turns
from strength and attacks emptiness.

The flow of water is regulated by the shape of the ground; victory is
gained by acting in accordance with the state of the enemy.

The shape of water is indeterminate; likewise the spirit of war is not
fixed.

The leader who changes his tactics in accordance with his adversary,
and thereby controls the issue, may be called the God of war.

Among the five elements[11] there is no settled precedence; the four
seasons come and go; the days are long and short; and the moon waxes
and wanes. _So in war there is no fixity._




