IV

THE ORDER OF BATTLE


Sun the Master said:--

The ancient masters of war first made their armies invincible, then
waited until the adversary could with certainty be defeated.

The causes of defeat come from within; victory is born in the enemy's
camp.

Skilful soldiers make defeat impossible, and further render the enemy
incapable of victory.

But, as it is written, the conditions necessary for victory may be
present, but they cannot always be obtained.

If victory be unattainable, we stand on the defensive; if victory be
sure, we attack.

Deficiency compels defence; super-abundance permits attack.

The skilful in defence crouch, hidden in the deepest shades; the
skilful in attack push to the topmost heaven.[5]

If these precepts be observed, victory is certain.

A victory, even if popularly proclaimed as such by the common folk, may
not be a true success. To win in fight, and for the kingdom to say,
"Well done," does not mark the summit of attainment. To lift an autumn
fleece[6] is no proof of strength; the eyes that only see the sun and
moon are not the eagle's; to hear the thunder is no great thing.

As has been said aforetime, the able warrior gains the victory without
desperate and bloody engagements, and wins thereby no reputation for
wisdom or brave deeds. To fight is to win, for he attacks only when the
enemy has sown the seeds of defeat.

Moreover, the skilful soldier in a secure position does not let pass
the moment when the enemy should be attacked.

The army that conquers makes certain of victory, and then seeks battle.

The army destined to defeat, fights, trusting that chance may bring
success to its arms.

The skilful leader is steadfast in the "Way"; upholds the Law, and
thereby controls the issue.

Touching the laws of war, it is said: first, the rule; second, the
measure; third, the tables; fourth, the scales; fifth, the foretelling
of victory.

For the rule is the survey of land; the measure tells the amount of
that land's produce; the tables its population; from the scales their
weight or quality is made known; and then can we calculate victory or
defeat.

The army that conquers as against the army destined to defeat, is as a
beam against a feather in the scales. The attack of conquering forces
is as the outburst of long-pent-up waters into sunken valleys.

Such are the orders of battle.




V

THE SPIRIT OF THE TROOPS


Sun the Master said:--

The control of large numbers is possible, and like unto that of small
numbers, if we subdivide them.

By means of drum, bell and flag,[7] the direction of large forces in
battle is possible, and like unto the direction of small forces.

By the skilful interchange of normal and abnormal manoeuvres are the
armies certainly preserved from defeat.

The enemy is crushed, like the fall of a grindstone upon an egg, by
knowledge of his strength and weakness, and by the employment of truth
and artifice.

Moreover, in battle the enemy is engaged with the normal and defeated
by the abnormal force.[8]

The abnormal force, skilfully handled, is like the heaven and earth,
eternal; as the tides and the flow of rivers, unceasing; like the sun
and moon, for ever interchanging; coming and passing, as the seasons.

There are five notes; but by combinations, innumerable harmonies are
produced. There are but five colours; but if we mix them, the shades
are infinite. There are five tastes, but if we mix them there are more
flavours than the palate can distinguish.[9]

In war there are but two forces, the normal and the abnormal; but they
are capable of infinite variation. Their mutual interchange is like a
wheel, having neither beginning or end. They are a mystery that none
can penetrate.

As the rush of rock-shouldering torrents, so is the spirit of the
troops.

Like the well-judged flight of the falcon, in a flash crushing its
quarry, so should the stroke be timed.

Wherefore the spirit of the good fighter is terrifying, his occasions
sudden; like the stretched cross-bow, whose string is released at the
touch of the trigger.

In the maze and tumult of the battle, there is no confusion; in the
thick of action the battle array is impenetrable.

If discipline be perfect, disorder can be simulated; if truly bold, we
can feign fear; if really strong, we can feign weakness.

We simulate disorder by subdivision; fear, by spirit; weakness, by
battle formation.

We set the enemy in motion by adopting different formations to which he
must conform.

If we offer the enemy a point of advantage, he will certainly take it:
we give him an advantage, set him in motion and then fall upon him.

Wherefore the good fighter seeks victory from spirit, and does not
depend entirely upon the skill of his men. He is careful in his choice,
and leaves the rest to battle force; yet, when an opening or advantage
shows, he pushes it to its limits.

As a log or rock which, motionless on flat ground, yet moves with
ever-increasing force when set on an incline, so await the opportunity,
and so act when the opportunity arrives.

If the general be skilful, the spirit of his troops is as the impetus
of a round stone rolled from the top of a high mountain.




