I

THE GOVERNMENT OF A COUNTRY


And Wu the Master said:--

The mighty rulers of old first trained their retainers, and then
extended their regard to their outlying feudatories.

There are four discords:--

Discord in the state: then never make war.

Discord in the army: then do not strike camp.

Discord in the camp: then do not advance to attack.

Discord in the battle array: then seek not to decide the issue.

Therefore, wise rulers who would employ their subjects in great
endeavours, should first establish harmony among them.

Lend not a ready ear to human counsellors, but lay the matter before
the altar; seek inside the turtle,[19] and consider well the time and
season. Then, if all be well, commit ourselves to the undertaking.

If the people know that their lord is careful of their lives, and
laments their death beyond all else; then, in the time of danger, the
soldiers advance, and, advancing, find glory in death; and in survival
after retreat, dishonour.

The Master said:--

The Way must follow the only true path: righteousness lies at the root
of achievement and merit.

The object of stratagem is to avoid loss and gain advantage.

The object of government is to guard enterprise and to preserve the
state.

If conduct depart from the Way, and the undertaking accord not with
righteousness, then disaster befalls the mighty.

Therefore, wise men maintain order by keeping in the Way, and governing
with righteousness; they move with discretion, and with benevolence
they make the people amenable.

If these four virtues be practised, there is prosperity; if they be
neglected, there is decay.

For, when Lord Tang of Cheng defeated Lord Chieh, the people of Hsia
rejoiced, and when Wu of Chou defeated Lord Chou, the people of
Yin were not discomfited. And this was because it was ordained by
Providence and human desire.

The Master said:--

In the government of a country and command of an army, the inculcation
of propriety, stimulation of righteousness, and the promotion of a
sense of shame are required.

When men possess a sense of shame, they will attack with resolution
when in strength, and when few in number defend to the last.

But while victory is easy in attack, it is difficult in defence.

Now, of the fighting races below heaven; those who gained five
victories have been worn out; those who have won four victories have
been impoverished; three victories have given dominion; two victories
have founded a kingdom; and upon one victory an empire has been
established.

For those who have gained power on earth by many victories are few; and
those who have lost it, many.

The Master said:--

The causes of war are five:--

First, ambition; second, profit; third, overburdened hate; fourth,
internal disorder; fifth, famine.

Again, the natures of war are five:--

First, a righteous war; second, a war of might; third, a war of
revenge; fourth, a war of tyranny; fifth, an unrighteous war.

The prevention of tyranny and the restoration of order is just; to
strike in reliance on numbers is oppression; to raise the standard for
reasons of anger is a war of revenge; to quit propriety, and seize
advantage is tyranny; when the state is disordered and the people worn
out, to harbour designs, and set a multitude in motion, is a war of
unrighteousness.

There is a way of overcoming each of these five.

Righteousness is overcome by propriety; might by humanity; revenge by
words; tyranny by deception; unrighteousness by strategy.

Lord Wen asked and said:--

"I would know the way to control an army, to measure men, and make the
country strong."

Wu answered and said:--

"The enlightened rulers of antiquity respected propriety between
sovereign and people; established etiquette between high and low;
settled officials and citizens in close accord; gave instruction in
accordance with custom; selected men of ability, and thereby provided
against what should come to pass.

"In ancient times, Prince Huan of Chi assembled 50,000 men at arms, and
became chief among the princes; Prince Wen of Chin put 40,000 mighty
men in the van, and gained his ambition; Prince Mu of Chin gathered
together 30,000 invincibles, and subdued his neighbouring foes.
Wherefore, the princes of powerful states must consider their people,
and assemble the valiant and spirited men by companies.

"Those who delight to attack, and to display their valour and fealty
should be formed in companies.

"Those skilful in scaling heights, or covering long distances, and who
are quick and light of foot must be collected in companies.

"Retainers who have lost their rank, and who are desirous of displaying
their prowess before their superiors should be gathered into companies.

"Those who have abandoned a castle, or deserted their trust, and are
desirous of atoning for their misconduct, should be collected and
formed into companies.

"These five bodies form the flower of the army. With 3,000 of such
troops, if they issue from within, an encompassing enemy can be burst
asunder; if they enter from without, a castle can be overthrown."

Lord Wen asked and said:--

"I desire to know how to fix the battle array, render defence secure,
and attack with certainty of victory."

Wu answered and said:--

"To see with the eye is better than ready words. Yet, I say, if the
wise men be put in authority and the ignorant in low places, then the
army is already arranged.

"If the people be free from anxiety about their estates, and love their
officials, then defence is already secure.

"If all the lieges be proud of their lord, and think ill of neighbouring
states, then is the battle already won."

The Lord Wen once assembled a number of his subjects to discuss affairs
of state: and none could equal him in wisdom, and when he left the
council chamber his face was pleased.

Then Wu advanced and said:--

In ancient times, Lord Chuang of Chu once consulted with his lieges,
and none were like unto him in wisdom; and when the Lord left the
council chamber his countenance was troubled. Then the Duke Shen asked
and said: "Why is my Lord troubled?" And he answered: "I have heard
that the world is never without sages, and that in every country there
are wise men; that good advisers are the foundation of an empire; and
friends of dominion. Now, if I, lacking wisdom, have no equal among
the multitude of my officers, dangerous indeed is the state of Chu. It
grieves me that whereas Prince Chuang of Chu was troubled in a like
case my Lord should be pleased."

And hearing this Lord Wen was inwardly troubled.




