XII

ASSAULT BY FIRE


Sun the Master said:--

There are five ways of attack by fire:

The first is called barrack burning; the second, commissariat burning;
the third, equipment burning; the fourth, store burning; the fifth, the
company burning.

The moment for the fire assault must be suitable. Further, appliances
must always be kept at hand.

There is a time and day proper for the setting and carrying out of the
fire assault; namely: such time as the weather is dry; and a day when
the moon is in the quarters of the stars Chi, Pi, I, Chen: for these
are days of wind.

Regard well the developments that will certainly arise from the fire,
and act upon them. When fire breaks out inside the enemy's camp, thrust
upon him with all speed from without; but if his soldiers be quiet,
wait, and do not attack.

When the fire is at its height, attack or not, as opportunity may arise.

If the opportunity be favourable, set fire to the enemy's camp, and do
not wait for it to break out from within.

When fire breaks out on the windward side, do not attack from the
leeward.

Wind that rises in the day lasts long. Wind that rises in the night
time quickly passes away.

The peculiarities of the five burnings must be known, and the calendar
studied, and, if the attack is to be assisted, the fire must be
unquenchable.

If water is to assist the attack, the flood must be overwhelming.

Water may isolate or divide the enemy; fire may consume his camp; but
unless victory or possession be obtained, the enemy quickly recovers,
and misfortunes arise. The war drags on, and money is spent.

Let the enlightened lord consider well; and the good general keep the
main object in view. If no advantage is to be gained thereby, do not
move; without prospect of victory, do not use the soldiers; do not
fight unless the state be in danger.

War should not be undertaken because the lord is in a moment of
passion. The general must not fight because there is anger in his heart.

Do not make war unless victory may be gained thereby; if there be
prospect of victory, move; if there be no prospect, do not move.

For passion may change to gladness, anger passes away; but a country,
once overturned, cannot be restored; the dead cannot be brought to life.

Wherefore it is written, the enlightened lord is circumspect, and
the good general takes heed; then is the state secure, and the army
victorious in battle.




XIII

THE EMPLOYMENT OF SPIES


Sun the Master said:--

Calling 100,000 men to arms, and transporting them a hundred leagues,
is such an undertaking that in one day 1,000 taels of the citizens' and
nobles' money are spent; commotions arise within and without the state;
carriers fall down exhausted on the line of march of the army; and the
occupations of 700,000[14] homes are upset.

Again, for years the armies may face each other; yet the issue may
depend on a single day's victory.

Wherefore, by grudging slight expense in titles and salaries to spies,
to remain in ignorance of the enemy's circumstances, is to be without
humanity. Such a person is no general; he is no assistance to his lord;
he is no master of victory.

The enlightened ruler and the wise general who act, win, and are
distinguished beyond the common, are informed beforehand.

This knowledge is not to be got by calling on gods and demons; nor does
it come of past experience nor calculation. It is through men that
knowledge of the enemy is gained.

Now the five kinds of spies are these: village spies, inner spies,
converted spies, death spies, living spies.

If these five means be employed simultaneously, none can discover
their working. This is called the Mysterious Thread: it is the Lord's
Treasure.

Village spies are such people of the country as give information.

Inner spies are those of the enemy's officials employed by us.

Converted spies are those of the enemy's spies in our pay.

Death[15] spies are sent to misinform the enemy, and to spread false
reports through our spies already in the enemy's lines.

Living spies[16] return to report.

In connection with the armies, spies should be treated with the
greatest kindness; and in dealing out reward, they should receive the
most generous treatment. All matters relating to spies are secret.

Without infinite capacity in the general, the employment of spies is
impossible. Their treatment requires benevolence and uprightness.
Except they be observed with the closest attention, the truth will not
be obtained from them.

Wonderful indeed is the power of spies.

There is no occasion when they cannot be used.

If a secret matter be spoken of before the time is ripe, the spy who
told the matter, and the man who repeated the same, should be put to
death.

If desirous of attacking an army; of besieging a fortress; or of
killing a certain person; first of all, learn the names of the general
in charge; of his right-hand[17] men; of those who introduce visitors
to the Presence; of the gate keeper and the sentries. Then set the
spies to watch them.

Seek out the enemy's spies who come to spy on us; give them money;
cause them to be lodged and cared for; and convert them to the service.
Through them we are enabled to obtain spies among the enemy's villagers
and officials.

By means of the converted spy, we can construct a false story for the
death spy to carry to the enemy.

It is through the converted spy that we are able to use the five
varieties, to their utmost advantage; therefore he must be liberally
treated.

In ancient times the rise to power of the province of Yin was due
to Ichih, who was sent to the country of Hsia. Likewise during the
foundation of the state of Chu, Luya lived among the people of Shang.

Wherefore, intelligent rulers and wise generals use the cleverest men
as spies, and invariably acquire great merit. The spy is a necessity to
the army. Upon him the movement of the army depends.




THE SAYINGS OF WUTZU




INTRODUCTION


Now Wu, albeit clothed in the raiment of a scholar, was a man skilled
in the art of war.

And Wen, Lord of Wei, came unto him and said:--

"I am a man of peace, caring not for military affairs."

And Wu said:--

"Your actions are witnesses of your mind; why do your words say not
what is in your heart?

"You do prepare and dress hides and leather through the four seasons,
ornamenting them with red lacquer and the figures of panthers and
elephants; which give not warmth in winter, neither in summer,
coolness. Moreover, you make halberds, 24[18] feet long, and pikes 12
feet long, and leather (covered) chariots so large as to fill up the
gateways, wheels with ornament, and naves capped with leather. Now,
these are neither beautiful to the eye nor light in the chase; I know
not for what use my lord makes these things.

"But, although provided with these instruments of war, if the leader be
not competent, a brooding hen might as well strike a badger, or a dog
with young challenge the tiger: the spirit of encounter may be present,
but there is no end but death.

"In ancient times, the Prince Chengsang cultivated virtue, and put away
military things, and his kingdom fell.

"The Prince Yuhu put his trust in numbers, and delighted in war and was
driven from the throne.

"Therefore the enlightened ruler should ponder over these things;
encourage learning and virtue in the kingdom, and be prepared against
war from without.

"To hesitate before the enemy is not a cause for righteousness; remorse
for the fallen is not true humanity."

And when Lord Wen heard these words, he himself spread a seat, and his
wife offered up a cup, and Wu was appointed general before the altar.

Now, in the defence of Hsihe against different states there were fought
seventy-six great fights, of which sixty-four were complete victories,
and the remainder undecided. And the kingdom grew and stretched 1,000
leagues on every side, which was all due to the virtue of Wu.




