CHAPTER III

EMPIRICAL HEDONISM--_Continued_


§ 1. Let, then, pleasure be defined as feeling which the sentient
individual at the time of feeling it implicitly or explicitly
apprehends to be desirable;--desirable, that is, when considered
merely as feeling, and not in respect of its objective conditions or
consequences, or of any facts that come directly within the cognisance
and judgment of others besides the sentient individual. And let it be
provisionally assumed that feelings generally can be compared from this
point of view, with sufficient definiteness for practical purposes,
and empirically known to be more or less pleasant in some definite
degree. Then the empirical-reflective method of Egoistic Hedonism will
be, to represent beforehand the different series of feelings that
our knowledge of physical and psychical causes leads us to expect
from the different lines of conduct that lie open to us; judge which
series, as thus represented, appears on the whole preferable, taking
all probabilities into account; and adopt the corresponding line of
conduct. It may be objected that the calculation is too complex for
practice; since any complete forecast of the future would involve a
vast number of contingencies of varying degrees of probability, and
to calculate the Hedonistic value of each of these chances of feeling
would be interminable. Still we may perhaps reduce the calculation
within manageable limits, without serious loss of accuracy, by
discarding all manifestly imprudent conduct, and neglecting the less
probable and less important contingencies; as we do in some of the
arts that have more definite ends, such as strategy and medicine. For
if the general in ordering a march, or the physician in recommending
a change of abode, took into consideration all the circumstances that
were at all relevant to the end sought, their calculations would
become impracticable; accordingly they confine themselves to the most
important; and we may deal similarly with the Hedonistic art of life.

There are, however, objections urged against the Hedonistic method
which go much deeper; and by some writers are pressed to the extreme
of rejecting the method altogether. A careful examination of these
objections seems to be the most convenient way of obtaining a clear
view, both of the method itself and of the results that may reasonably
be expected from it.

I should, however, point out that we are now only concerned with what
may be called _intrinsic_ objections to Egoistic Hedonism; arguments,
that is, against the possibility of obtaining by it the results at
which it aims. We are not now to consider whether it is reasonable for
an individual to take his own happiness as his ultimate end; or how far
the rules of action deduced from the adoption of this end, and from the
actual conditions of the individual’s existence, will coincide with
current opinions as to what is right. These questions, according to the
plan of my work, are postponed for future consideration:[108] our sole
concern at present is with objections tending to show the intrinsic
impracticability of Hedonism as a rational method.

We are met, in the first place, by an objection which, if valid at
all, must be admitted to be decisive. It has been affirmed[109] by
Green that “pleasure as feeling, in distinction from its conditions
that are not feelings, cannot be conceived.” If so, Rational Hedonism
would certainly be impossible: but the proposition seems equally
opposed to common sense, and to the universal assumption of empirical
psychologists; who, in investigating elaborately and systematically
the conditions, mental and physical, of pleasure and pain, necessarily
assume that these feelings can be distinguished in thought from their
“conditions which are not feelings.” I also find that the writer
himself from whom I have quoted, in a later treatise,[110] conducts
long arguments respecting pleasure which are only intelligible if the
distinction between pleasure and its conditions is thoroughly grasped
and steadily contemplated. Indeed he carries a distinction of this
kind to an extreme point of subtlety; as he requires us to distinguish
the “self-satisfaction sought in all desire that amounts to will” from
the “pleasure” that “there is in all self-satisfaction if attained”:
whereas other moralists regard self-satisfaction as a species of
pleasure.[111] To maintain that we can distinguish pleasure from
self-satisfaction, and cannot distinguish it from its conditions, seems
to me too violent a paradox to need refutation. It is possible that
Green may only mean that pleasure cannot be thought to exist apart from
conditions which are not feelings, and that it necessarily varies with
any variation in its conditions. The statement thus interpreted I do
not deny: but it is quite irrelevant to the question whether pleasure
can be _estimated_ separately from its conditions, or whether pleasures
received under different conditions can be quantitatively compared.
I cannot have the pleasure of witnessing a tragedy or the pleasure
of witnessing a farce, without having along with either a complex of
innumerable thoughts and images, very diverse in quality in the two
cases: but this does not prevent me from deciding confidently whether
the tragedy or the farce will afford me most pleasure on the whole.

I pass to another objection made by the same writer to the Hedonistic
conception of the supreme end of action as “the greatest possible
sum of pleasures.” (It should be “the greatest possible surplus of
pleasure over pain”: but the difference is unimportant for the present
argument.) The phrase, he says, is “intrinsically unmeaning”: but his
justification for this statement appears to be different in different
treatises. At first he boldly affirmed that “pleasant feelings are not
quantities that can be added,”[112] apparently because “each is over
before the other begins.” The latter statement, however, is equally
true of the parts of time: but it would be obviously absurd to say that
hours, days, years are “not quantities that can be added.” Possibly
this consideration occurred to Green before writing the _Prolegomena
to Ethics_: at any rate in the latter treatise he admits that states
“of pleasant feeling” can be added together in “thought,” only denying
that they can be added “in enjoyment or imagination of enjoyment.”[113]
But this concedes all that is required for the Hedonistic valuation
of future feelings; no Hedonist ever supposed that the happiness he
aims at making as great as possible was something to be enjoyed all
at once, or ever wanted to imagine it as so enjoyed. And unless the
transiency of pleasure diminishes its pleasantness--a point which I
will presently consider--I cannot see that the possibility of realising
the Hedonistic end is at all affected by the necessity of realising
it in successive parts. Green, in another passage,[114] appears to
lay down that “an end” which is “to serve the purpose of a criterion”
must “enable us to distinguish actions that bring men nearer to it
from those which do not.” This, however, would only be the case if by
an “end” is necessarily meant a goal or consummation, which, after
gradually drawing nearer to it, we reach all at once: but this is not,
I conceive, the sense in which the word is ordinarily understood by
ethical writers: and certainly all that I mean by it is an object of
rational aim--whether attained in successive parts or not--which is
not sought as a means to the attainment of any ulterior object, but
for itself. And so long as any one’s prospective balance of pleasure
over pain admits of being made greater or less by immediate action in
one way or another,[115] there seems no reason why ‘Maximum Happiness’
should not provide as serviceable a criterion of conduct as any
‘chief good’ capable of being possessed all at once, or in some way
independent of the condition of time.

§ 2. If, however, it be maintained, that the consciousness of the
transiency of pleasure either makes it less pleasant at the time or
causes a subsequent pain, and that the deliberate and systematic
pursuit of pleasure tends to intensify this consciousness; the
proposition, if borne out by experience, would certainly constitute
a relevant objection to the method of Egoistic Hedonism. And this
view would seem to be in the mind of the writer above quoted (though
it is nowhere clearly put forward): since he affirms that it is
“impossible that self-satisfaction should be found in any succession
of pleasures”;[116] as self-satisfaction being “satisfaction for a
self that abides and contemplates itself as abiding” must be at least
relatively permanent:[117] and it is, I suppose, implied that the
disappointment of the Hedonist, who fails to find self-satisfaction
where he seeks for it, is attended with pain or loss of pleasure.[118]
If this be so, and if the self-satisfaction thus missed can be obtained
by the resolute adoption of some other principle of action, it would
certainly seem that the systematic pursuit of pleasure is in some
danger of defeating itself: it is therefore important to consider
carefully how far this is really the case.

So far as my own experience goes, it does not appear to me that the
mere transiency of pleasures is a serious source of discontent, so
long as one has a fair prospect of having as valuable pleasures in
the future as in the past--or even so long as the life before one has
any substantial amount of pleasure to offer. But I do not doubt that
an important element of happiness, for all or most men, is derived
from the consciousness of possessing “relatively permanent” sources
of pleasure--whether external, as wealth, social position, family,
friends; or internal, as knowledge, culture, strong and lively interest
in the wellbeing of fairly prosperous persons or institutions. This,
however, does not, in my opinion, constitute an objection to Hedonism:
it rather seems obvious, from the hedonistic point of view, that “as
soon as intelligence discovers that there are fixed objects, permanent
sources of pleasure, and large groups of enduring interests, which
yield a variety of recurring enjoyments, the rational will, preferring
the greater to the less, will unfailingly devote its energies to the
pursuit of these.”[119] It may be replied that if these permanent
sources of pleasure are consciously sought merely as a means to the
hedonistic end, they will not afford the happiness for which they
are sought. With this I to some extent agree; but I think that if
the normal complexity of our impulses be duly taken into account,
this statement will be found not to militate against the adoption of
Hedonism, but merely to signalise a danger against which the Hedonist
has to guard. In a previous chapter[120] I have, after Butler, laid
stress on the difference between impulses that are, strictly speaking,
directed towards pleasure, and ‘extra-regarding’ impulses which do not
aim at pleasure,--though much, perhaps most, of our pleasure consists
in the gratification of these latter, and therefore depends upon
their existence. I there argued that in many cases the two kinds of
impulse are so far incompatible that they do not easily coexist in the
same moment of consciousness. I added, however, that in the ordinary
condition of our activity the incompatibility is only momentary, and
does not prevent a real harmony from being attained by a sort of
alternating rhythm of the two impulses in consciousness. Still it
seems undeniable that this harmony is liable to be disturbed; and that
while on the one hand individuals may and do sacrifice their greatest
apparent happiness to the gratification of some imperious particular
desire, so, on the other hand, self-love is liable to engross the mind
to a degree incompatible with a healthy and vigorous outflow of those
‘disinterested’ impulses towards particular objects, the pre-existence
of which is necessary to the attainment, in any high degree, of the
happiness at which self-love aims. I should not, however, infer from
this that the pursuit of pleasure is necessarily self-defeating
and futile; but merely that the principle of Egoistic Hedonism,
when applied with a due knowledge of the laws of human nature, is
practically self-limiting; _i.e._ that a rational method of attaining
the end at which it aims requires that we should to some extent put
it out of sight and not directly aim at it. I have before spoken of
this conclusion as the ‘Fundamental Paradox of Egoistic Hedonism’;
but though it presents itself as a paradox, there does not seem to
be any difficulty in its practical realisation, when once the danger
indicated is clearly seen. For it is an experience only too common
among men, in whatever pursuit they may be engaged, that they let the
original object and goal of their efforts pass out of view, and come
to regard the means to this end as ends in themselves: so that they
at last even sacrifice the original end to the attainment of what is
only secondarily and derivatively desirable. And if it be thus easy and
common to forget the end in the means overmuch, there seems no reason
why it should be difficult to do it to the extent that Rational Egoism
prescribes: and, in fact, it seems to be continually done by ordinary
persons in the case of amusements and pastimes of all kinds.

It is true that, as our desires cannot ordinarily be produced by an
effort of will--though they can to some extent be repressed by it--if
we started with no impulse except the desire of pleasure, it might
seem difficult to execute the practical paradox of attaining pleasure
by aiming at something else. Yet even in this hypothetical case the
difficulty is less than it appears. For the reaction of our activities
upon our emotional nature is such that we may commonly bring ourselves
to take an interest in any end by concentrating our efforts upon its
attainment. So that, even supposing a man to begin with absolute
indifference to everything except his own pleasure, it does not follow
that if he were convinced that the possession of other desires and
impulses were necessary to the attainment of the greatest possible
pleasure, he could not succeed in producing these. But this supposition
is never actually realised. Every man, when he commences the task of
systematising his conduct, whether on egoistic principles or any other,
is conscious of a number of different impulses and tendencies within
him, other than the mere desire for pleasure, which urge his will in
particular directions, to the attainment of particular results: so that
he has only to place himself under certain external influences, and
these desires and impulses will begin to operate without any effort of
will.

It is sometimes thought, however, that there is an important class of
refined and elevated impulses with which the supremacy of self-love is
in a peculiar way incompatible, such as the love of virtue, or personal
affection, or the religious impulse to love and obey God. But at any
rate in the common view of these impulses, this difficulty does not
seem to be recognised. None of the school of moralists that followed
Shaftesbury in contending that it is a man’s true interest to foster
in himself strictly disinterested social affections, has noted any
inherent incompatibility between the existence of these affections and
the supremacy of rational self-love. And similarly Christian preachers
who have commended the religious life as really the happiest, have not
thought genuine religion irreconcilable with the conviction that each
man’s own happiness is his most near and intimate concern.

Other persons, however, seem to carry the religious consciousness
and the feeling of human affection to a higher stage of refinement,
at which a stricter disinterestedness is exacted. They maintain
that the essence of either feeling, in its best form, is absolute
self-renunciation and self-sacrifice. And certainly these seem
incompatible with self-love, however cautiously self-limiting. A man
cannot both wish to secure his own happiness and be willing to lose it.
And yet how if willingness to lose it is the true means of securing
it? Can self-love not merely reduce indirectly its prominence in
consciousness, but directly and unreservedly annihilate itself?

This emotional feat does not seem to me possible: and therefore I
must admit that a man who embraces the principle of Rational Egoism
cuts himself off from the special pleasure that attends this absolute
sacrifice and abnegation of self. But however exquisite this may be,
the pitch of emotional exaltation and refinement necessary to attain it
is comparatively so rare, that it is scarcely included in men’s common
estimate of happiness. I do not therefore think that an important
objection to Rational Egoism can be based upon its incompatibility
with this particular consciousness: nor that the common experience
of mankind really sustains the view that the desire of one’s own
happiness, if accepted as supreme and regulative, inevitably defeats
its own aim through the consequent diminution and desiccation of the
impulses and emotional capacities necessary to the attainment of
happiness in a high degree; though it certainly shows a serious and
subtle danger in this direction.

§ 3. There is, however, another way in which the habit of mind
necessarily resulting from the continual practice of hedonistic
comparison is sometimes thought to be unfavourable to the attainment
of the hedonistic end: from a supposed incompatibility between the
habit of reflectively observing and examining pleasure, and the
capacity for experiencing pleasure in normal fulness and intensity.
And it certainly seems important to consider what effect the continual
attention to our pleasures, in order to observe their different
degrees, is likely to have on these feelings themselves. The inquiry
at first sight seems to lead to irreconcilable contradiction in our
view of pleasure. For if pleasure only exists as it is felt, the more
conscious we are of it, the more pleasure we have: and it would seem
that the more our attention is directed towards it, the more fully we
shall be conscious of it. On the other hand Hamilton’s statement that
“knowledge and feeling” (cognition and pleasure or pain) are always
“in a certain inverse proportion to each other,” corresponds _prima
facie_ to our common experience: for the purely cognitive element of
consciousness seems to be neither pleasurable nor painful, so that the
more our consciousness is occupied with cognition, the less room there
seems to be for feeling.

This view, however, rests on the assumption that the total intensity
of our consciousness is a constant quantity; so that when one element
of it positively increases, the rest must positively--as well as
relatively--diminish. And it does not appear to me that experience
gives us any valid ground for making this general assumption: it rather
seems that at certain times in our life intellect and feeling are
simultaneously feeble; so that the same mental excitement may intensify
both simultaneously.

Still it seems to be a fact that any very powerful feeling, reaching to
the full intensity of which our consciousness is normally capable, is
commonly diminished by a contemporaneous stroke of cognitive effort:
hence it is a general difficulty in the way of exact observation of
our emotions that the object cognised seems to shrink and dwindle in
proportion as the cognitive regard grows keen and eager. How then
are we to reconcile this with the proposition first laid down, that
pleasure only exists as we are conscious of it? The answer seems to
be that the mere consciousness of a present feeling--apart from any
distinct representative elements--cannot diminish the feeling of which
it is an indispensable and inseparable condition: but in introspective
cognition we go beyond the present feeling, comparing and classifying
it with remembered or imagined feelings; and the effort of representing
and comparing these other feelings tends to decrease the mere
presentative consciousness of the actual pleasure.

I conclude, then, that there is a real danger of diminishing pleasure
by the attempt to observe and estimate it. But the danger seems only to
arise in the case of very intense pleasures, and only if the attempt is
made at the moment of actual enjoyment; and since the most delightful
periods of life have frequently recurring intervals of nearly neutral
feeling, in which the pleasures immediately past may be compared and
estimated without any such detriment, I do not regard the objection
founded on this danger as particularly important.

§ 4. More serious, in my opinion, are the objections urged against the
possibility of performing, with definite and trustworthy results, the
comprehensive and methodical comparison of pleasures and pains which
the adoption of the Hedonistic standard involves. I cannot indeed
doubt that men habitually compare pleasures and pains in respect
of their intensity: that (_e.g._) when we pass from one state of
consciousness to another, or when in any way we are led to recall a
state long past, we often unhesitatingly declare the present state
to be more or less pleasant than the past: or that we declare some
pleasant experiences to have been ‘worth,’ and others ‘not worth,’ the
trouble it took to obtain them, or the pain that followed them. But,
granting this, it may still be maintained (1) that this comparison as
ordinarily made is both occasional and very rough, and that it can
never be extended as systematic Hedonism requires, nor applied, with
any accuracy, to all possible states however differing in quality; and
(2) that as commonly practised it is liable to illusion, of which we
can never measure the precise amount, while we are continually forced
to recognise its existence. This illusion was even urged by Plato as
a ground for distrusting the apparent affirmation of consciousness
in respect of _present_ pleasure. Plato thought that the apparent
intensity of the coarser bodily pleasures was illusory; because these
states of consciousness, being preceded by pain, were really only
states of relief from pain, and so properly neutral, neither pleasant
nor painful--examples of what I have called the hedonistic zero--only
appearing pleasant from contrast with the preceding pain.

To this, however, it has been answered, that in estimating pleasure
there is no conceivable appeal from the immediate decision of
consciousness: that here the Phenomenal is the Real--there is no other
real that we can distinguish from it. And this seems to me true, in so
far as we are concerned only with the present state. But then--apart
from the difficulty just noticed of observing a pleasure while it is
felt without thereby diminishing it--it is obvious that in any estimate
of its intensity we are necessarily comparing it with some other state.
And this latter must generally be a representation, not an actual
feeling: for though we can sometimes experience two or perhaps more
pleasures at once, we are rarely in such cases able to compare them
satisfactorily: for either the causes of the two mutually interfere, so
that neither reaches its normal degree of intensity; or, more often,
the two blend into one state of pleasant consciousness the elements of
which we cannot estimate separately. But if it is therefore inevitable
that one term at least in our comparison should be an imagined
pleasure, we see that there is a possibility of error in any such
comparison; for the imagined feeling may not adequately represent the
pleasantness of the corresponding actual feeling. And in the egoistic
comparison, the validity of which we are now discussing, the objects
primarily to be compared are all represented elements of consciousness:
for we are desiring to choose between two or more possible courses of
conduct, and therefore to forecast future feelings.

Let us then examine more closely the manner in which this comparison is
ordinarily performed, that we may see what positive grounds we have for
mistrusting it.

In estimating for practical purposes the value of different pleasures
open to us, we commonly trust most to our prospective imagination:
we project ourselves into the future, and imagine what such and
such a pleasure will amount to under hypothetical conditions. This
imagination, so far as it involves conscious inference, seems to be
chiefly determined by our own experience of past pleasures, which are
usually recalled generically, or in large aggregates, though sometimes
particular instances of important single pleasures occur to us as
definitely remembered: but partly, too, we are influenced by the
experience of others sympathetically appropriated: and here again we
sometimes definitely refer to particular experiences which have been
communicated to us by individuals, and sometimes to the traditional
generalisations which are thought to represent the common experience of
mankind.

Now it does not seem that such a process as this is likely to be free
from error: and, indeed, no one pretends that it is. In fact there is
scarcely any point upon which moralisers have dwelt with more emphasis
than this, that man’s forecast of pleasure is continually erroneous.
Each of us frequently recognises his own mistakes: and each still more
often attributes to others errors unseen by themselves, arising either
from misinterpretation of their own experience, or from ignorance or
neglect of that of others.

How then are these errors to be eliminated? The obvious answer is that
we must substitute for the instinctive, largely implicit, inference
just described a more scientific process of reasoning: by deducing
the probable degree of our future pleasure or pain in any given
circumstances from inductive generalisations based on a sufficient
number of careful observations of our own and others’ experience. We
have then to ask, first, how far can each of us estimate accurately his
own past experience of pleasures and pains? secondly, how far can this
knowledge of the past enable him to forecast, with any certainty, the
greatest happiness within his reach in the future? thirdly, how far can
he appropriate, for the purposes of such forecasts, the past experience
of others?

As regards the first of these questions, it must be remembered that
it is not sufficient to know generally that we derive pleasures and
pains from such and such sources; we require to know approximately
the positive or negative degree of each feeling; unless we can form
some quantitative estimate of them, it is futile to try to attain our
_greatest possible_ happiness--at least by an empirical method. We
have therefore to compare quantitatively each pleasure as it occurs,
or as recalled in imagination, with other imagined pleasures: and the
question is, how far such comparisons can be regarded as trustworthy.

Now for my own part, when I reflect on my pleasures and pains, and
endeavour to compare them in respect of intensity, it is only to
a very limited extent that I can obtain clear and definite results
from such comparisons, even taking each separately in its simplest
form:--whether the comparison is made at the moment of experiencing
one of the pleasures, or between two states of consciousness recalled
in imagination. This is true even when I compare feelings of the same
kind: and the vagueness and uncertainty increases, in proportion as
the feelings differ in kind. Let us begin with sensual gratifications,
which are thought to be especially definite and palpable. Suppose I
am enjoying a good dinner: if I ask myself whether one kind of dish
or wine gives me more pleasure than another, sometimes I can decide,
but very often not. So if I reflect upon two modes of bodily exercise
that I may have taken: if one has been in a marked degree agreeable or
tedious, I take note of it naturally; but it is not natural to me to go
further than this in judging of their pleasurableness or painfulness,
and the attempt to do so does not seem to lead to any clear
affirmation. And similarly of intellectual exercises and states of
consciousness predominantly emotional: even when the causes and quality
of the feelings compared are similar, it is only when the differences
in pleasantness are great, that hedonistic comparison seems to yield
any definite result. But when I try to arrange in a scale pleasures
differing in kind; to compare (_e.g._) labour with rest, excitement
with tranquillity, intellectual exercise with emotional effusion, the
pleasure of scientific apprehension with that of beneficent action, the
delight of social expansion with the delight of æsthetic reception; my
judgment wavers and fluctuates far more, and in the majority of cases
I cannot give any confident decision. And if this is the case with
what Bentham calls ‘pure’--_i.e._ painless--pleasures, it is still
more true of those even commoner states of consciousness, where a
certain amount of pain or discomfort is mixed with pleasure, although
the latter preponderates. If it is hard to say which of two different
states of contentment was the greater pleasure, it seems still harder
to compare a state of placid satisfaction with one of eager but hopeful
suspense, or with triumphant conquest of painful obstacles. And perhaps
it is still more difficult to compare pure pleasures with pure pains,
and to say how much of the one kind of feeling we consider to be
exactly balanced by a given amount of the other when they do not occur
simultaneously: while an estimate of simultaneous feelings is, as we
have seen, generally unsatisfactory from the mutual interference of
their respective causes.

§ 5. But again, if these judgments are not clear and definite, still
less are they consistent. I do not now mean that one man’s estimate
of the value of any kind of pleasures differs from another’s: for we
have assumed each sentient individual to be the final judge of the
pleasantness and painfulness of his own feelings, and therefore this
kind of discrepancy does not affect the validity of the judgments,
and creates no difficulty until any one tries to appropriate the
experience of others. But I mean that each individual’s judgment of
the comparative value of his own pleasures is apt to be different at
different times, though it relates to the same past experiences; and
that this variation is a legitimate ground for distrusting the validity
of any particular comparison.

The causes of this variation seem to be partly due to the nature of
the represented feeling, and partly to the general state of the mind
at the time of making the representation. To begin with the former: we
find that different kinds of past pleasures and pains do not equally
admit of being revived in imagination. Thus, generally speaking, our
more emotional and more representative pains are more easily revived
than the more sensational and presentative: for example, it is at this
moment much more easy for me to imagine the discomfort of expectancy
which preceded a past sea-sickness than the pain of the actual nausea:
although I infer--from the recollection of judgments passed at the
time--that the former pain was trifling compared with the latter. To
this cause it seems due that past hardships, toils, and anxieties often
appear pleasurable when we look back upon them, after some interval;
for the excitement, the heightened sense of life that accompanied the
painful struggle, would have been pleasurable if taken by itself; and
it is this that we recall rather than the pain. In estimating pleasures
the other cause of variation is more conspicuous; we are conscious of
changes occasional or periodic in our estimate of them, depending upon
changes in our mental or bodily condition. _E.g._ it is a matter of
common remark with respect to the gratifications of appetite that we
cannot estimate them adequately in the state of satiety, and that we
are apt to exaggerate them in the state of desire. (I do not deny that
intensity of antecedent desire intensifies the pleasure of fruition; so
that this pleasure not only _appears_, as Plato thought, but actually
is greater owing to the strength of the desire that has preceded. Still
it is a matter of common experience that pleasures which have been
intensely desired are often found to disappoint expectation.)

There seem to be no special states of aversion, determined by bodily
causes, and related to certain pains as our appetites to their
correspondent pleasures; but most persons are liable to be thrown by
the prospect of certain pains into the state of passionate aversion
which we call fear, and to be thereby led to estimate such pains as
worse than they would be judged to be in a calmer mood.

Further, when feeling any kind of pain or uneasiness we seem liable
to underrate pain of a very dissimilar kind: thus in danger we value
repose, overlooking its _ennui_, while the tedium of security makes
us imagine the mingled excitement of past danger as almost purely
pleasurable. And again when we are absorbed in any particular pleasant
activity, the pleasures attending dissimilar activities are apt to be
contemned: they appear coarse or thin, as the case may be: and this
constitutes a fundamental objection to noting the exact degree of
a pleasure at the time of experiencing it. The eager desire, which
often seems an indispensable element of the whole state of pleasurable
activity, generally involves a similar bias: indeed any strong
excitement, in which our thought is concentrated on a single result or
group of results--whether it be the excitement of aversion, fear, hope,
or suspense--tends to make us inappreciative of alien pleasures and
pains alike. And, speaking more generally, we cannot imagine as very
intense a pleasure of a kind that at the time of imagining it we are
incapable of experiencing: as (_e.g._) the pleasures of intellectual
or bodily exercise at the close of a wearying day; or any emotional
pleasure when our susceptibility to the special emotion is temporarily
exhausted. On the other hand, it is not easy to guard against error, as
philosophers have often thought, by making our estimate in a cool and
passionless state. For there are many pleasures which require precedent
desire, and even enthusiasm and highly wrought excitement, in order to
be experienced in their full intensity; and it is not likely that we
should appreciate these adequately in a state of perfect tranquillity.

§ 6. These considerations make clearer the extent of the assumptions
of Empirical Quantitative Hedonism, stated in the preceding chapter:
viz. (1) that our pleasures and pains have each a definite degree, and
(2) that this degree is empirically cognisable. Firstly, if pleasure
only exists as it is felt, the belief that every pleasure and pain
has a definite intensive quantity or degree must remain an _a priori_
assumption, incapable of positive empirical verification. For the
pleasure can only have the degree as compared with other feelings, of
the same or some different kind; but, generally speaking, since this
comparison can only be made in imagination, it can only yield the
hypothetical result that if certain feelings could be felt together,
precisely as they have been felt separately, one would be found more
desirable than the other in some definite ratio. If, then, we are asked
what ground we have for regarding this imaginary result as a valid
representation of reality, we cannot say more than that the belief
in its general validity is irresistibly suggested in reflection on
experience, and remains at any rate uncontradicted by experience.

But secondly, granting that each of our pleasures and pains has
really a definite degree of pleasantness or painfulness, the question
still remains whether we have any means of accurately measuring
these degrees. Is there any reason to suppose that the mind is ever
in such a state as to be a perfectly neutral and colourless medium
for imagining all kinds of pleasures? Experience certainly shows us
the frequent occurrence of moods in which we have an apparent bias
for or against a particular kind of feeling. Is it not probable that
there is always some bias of this kind? that we are always more in
tune for some pleasures, more sensitive to some pains, than we are to
others? It must, I think, be admitted that the exact cognition of the
place of each kind of feeling in a scale of desirability, measured
positively and negatively from a zero of perfect indifference, is at
best an ideal to which we can never tell how closely we approximate.
Still in the variations of our judgment and the disappointment of our
expectations we have experience of errors of which we can trace the
causes and allow for them, at least roughly; correcting in thought
the defects of imagination. And since what we require for practical
guidance is to estimate not individual past experiences, but the value
of a kind of pleasure or pain, as obtained under certain circumstances
or conditions; we can to some extent diminish the chance of error
in this estimate by making a number of observations and imaginative
comparisons, at different times and in different moods. In so far
as these agree we may legitimately feel an increased confidence in
the result: and in so far as they differ, we can at least reduce our
possible error by striking an average of the different estimates. It
will be evident, however, that such a method as this cannot be expected
to yield more than a rough approximation to the supposed truth.

§ 7. We must conclude then that our estimate of the hedonistic value
of any past pleasure or pain, is liable to an amount of error which
we cannot calculate exactly; because the represented pleasantness of
different feelings fluctuates and varies indefinitely with changes in
the actual condition of the representing mind. We have now to observe
that, for similar reasons, even supposing we could adequately allow
for, and so exclude, this source of error in our comparison of past
pleasures, it is liable to intrude again in arguing from the past to
the future. For our capacity for particular pleasures may be about
to change, or may have actually changed since the experiences that
form the data of our calculation. We may have reached the point of
satiety in respect of some of our past pleasures, or otherwise lost our
susceptibility to them, owing to latent changes in our constitution: or
we may have increased our susceptibility to pains inevitably connected
with them: or altered conditions of life may have generated in us new
desires and aversions, and given relative importance to new sources of
happiness. Or any or all of these changes may be expected to occur,
before the completion of the course of conduct upon which we are now
deciding. The most careful estimate of a girl’s pleasures (supposing
a girl gifted with the abnormal habit of reflection that would be
necessary) would not much profit a young woman: and the hedonistic
calculations of youth require modification as we advance in years.

It may be said, however, that no one, in making such a forecast, can
or does rely entirely on his own experience: when endeavouring to
estimate the probable effect upon his happiness of new circumstances
and influences, untried rules of conduct and fashions of life, he
always argues partly from the experience of others. This is, I
think, generally true: but by including inferences from other men’s
experience we inevitably introduce a new possibility of error; for
such inference proceeds on the assumption of a similarity of nature
among human beings, which is never exactly true, while we can never
exactly know how much it falls short of the truth; though we have
sufficient evidence of the striking differences between the feelings
produced in different men by similar causes, to convince us that the
assumption would in many cases be wholly misleading. On this ground
Plato’s reason for claiming that the life of the Philosopher has more
pleasure than that of the Sensualist is palpably inadequate. The
philosopher, he argues, has tried both kinds of pleasure, sensual as
well as intellectual, and prefers the delights of philosophic life;
the sensualist ought therefore to trust his decision and follow his
example. But who can tell that the philosopher’s constitution is
not such as to render the enjoyments of the senses, in his case,
comparatively feeble? while on the other hand the sensualist’s mind
may not be able to attain more than a thin shadow of the philosopher’s
delight. And so, generally speaking, if we are to be guided by
another’s experience, we require to be convinced not only that he
is generally accurate in observing, analysing, and comparing his
sensations, but also that his relative susceptibility to the different
kinds of pleasure and pain in question coincides with our own. If he
is unpractised in introspective observation, it is possible that he
may mistake even the external conditions of his own happiness; and so
the communication of his experience may be altogether misleading. But
however accurately he has analysed and determined the causes of his
feelings, that similar causes would produce similar effects in us must
always be uncertain. And the uncertainty is increased indefinitely if
our adviser has to recall in memory out of a distant past some of the
pleasures or pains to be compared. Thus in the ever-renewed controversy
between Age and Youth, wisdom is not after all so clearly on the side
of maturer counsels as it seems to be at first sight. When a youth is
warned by his senior to abstain from some pleasure, on the ground of
prudence, because it is not worth the possible pleasures that must
be sacrificed for it and the future pains that it will entail; it is
difficult for him to know how far the elder man can recall--even if he
could once feel--the full rapture of the delight that he is asking the
younger to renounce.

And further, this source of error besets us in a more extended and
more subtle manner than has yet been noticed. For our sympathetic
apprehension of alien experiences of pleasure and pain has been so
continually exercised, in so many ways, during the whole of our life,
both by actual observation and oral communication with other human
beings, and through books and other modes of symbolic suggestion; that
it is impossible to say how far it has unconsciously blended with our
own experience, so as to colour and modify it when represented in
memory. Thus we may easily overlook the discrepancy between our own
experience and that of others, in respect of the importance of certain
sources of pleasure and pain, if no sudden and striking disappointment
of expectations forces it on our notice. Only with considerable care
and attention can sympathetic persons separate their own real likes and
dislikes from those of their associates: and we can never tell whether
this separation has been completely effected.

But again: the practical inference from the past to the future is
further complicated by the fact that we can alter ourselves. For it
may be that our past experience has been greatly affected by our being
not properly attuned to certain pleasures, as (_e.g._) those of art,
or study, or muscular exercise, or society, or beneficent action;
or not duly hardened against certain sources of pain, such as toil,
or anxiety, or abstinence from luxuries: and there may be within
our power some process of training or hardening ourselves which may
profoundly modify our susceptibilities. And this consideration is
especially important,--and at the same time especially difficult to
deal with,--when we attempt to appropriate the experience of another.
For we may find that he estimates highly pleasures which we not only
have never experienced at all, but cannot possibly experience without
a considerable alteration of our nature. For example, the pleasures of
the religious life, the raptures of prayer and praise and the devotion
of the soul to God, are commonly thought to require Conversion or
complete change of nature before they can be experienced. And in the
same way the sacrifice of sensual inclination to duty is disagreeable
to the non-moral man when he at first attempts it, but affords to the
truly virtuous man a deep and strong delight. And similarly almost all
the more refined intellectual and emotional pleasures require training
and culture in order to be enjoyed; and since this training does not
always succeed in producing any considerable degree of susceptibility,
it may always be a matter of doubt for one from whom it would require
the sacrifice of other pleasures, whether such sacrifice is worth
making.

The foregoing considerations must, I think, seriously reduce our
confidence in what I have called the Empirical-reflective method
of Egoistic Hedonism. I do not conclude that we should reject it
altogether: I am conscious that, in spite of all the difficulties that
I have urged, I continue to make comparisons between pleasures and
pains with practical reliance on their results. But I conclude that
it would be at least highly desirable, with a view to the systematic
direction of conduct, to control and supplement the results of such
comparisons by the assistance of some other method: if we can find any
on which we see reason to rely.

FOOTNOTES:

[108] See chap. v. of this Book, chap. xiv. of Book iii., and the
concluding chapter of the treatise.

[109] See Green’s Introduction to vol. ii. of Hume’s _Treatise on Human
Nature_, § 7. The statement is substantially repeated in the same
writer’s _Prolegomena to Ethics_.

[110] _Prolegomena to Ethics_, § 158.

[111] _E.g._ Butler, _Sermon_ xi. says, “Every man hath a desire for
his own happiness ... the object [desired] is our own happiness,
enjoyment, satisfaction.”

[112] Introduction to Hume, _l.c._

[113] _Prolegomena to Ethics_, § 221.

[114] _Ibid._ § 359.

[115] This Green in several passages seems expressly to admit _e.g._
(§ 332) he says that certain measures “needed in order to supply
conditions favourable to good character, tend also to make life more
pleasant on the whole”: and, elsewhere, that “it is easy to show that
an overbalance of pain would result to those capable of being affected
by it” from the neglect of certain duties.

[116] _Prolegomena to Ethics_, § 176.

[117] _Op. cit._ § 232.

[118] I cannot state this positively, because--as I have said--Green
expressly distinguishes self-satisfaction from pleasure, and does not
expressly affirm that its absence is attended by pain.

[119] Sully, _Pessimism_, chap. xi. p. 282.

[120] Book i. chap. iv.




