BOOK II

EGOISTIC HEDONISM




CHAPTER I

THE PRINCIPLE AND METHOD OF EGOISM


§ 1. The object of the present Book is to examine the method of
determining reasonable conduct which has been already defined in
outline under the name of Egoism: taking this term as equivalent to
Egoistic Hedonism, and as implying the adoption of his own greatest
happiness as the ultimate end of each individual’s actions. It may be
doubted whether this ought to be included among received “methods of
_Ethics_”; since there are strong grounds for holding that a system
of morality, satisfactory to the moral consciousness of mankind in
general, cannot be constructed on the basis of simple Egoism. In
subsequent chapters[96] I shall carefully discuss these reasons: at
present it seems sufficient to point to the wide acceptance of the
principle that it is reasonable for a man to act in the manner most
conducive to his own happiness. We find it expressly admitted by
leading representatives both of Intuitionism and of that Universalistic
Hedonism to which I propose to restrict the name of Utilitarianism.
I have already noticed that Bentham, although he puts forward the
greatest happiness of the greatest number as the “true standard of
right and wrong,” yet regards it as “right and proper” that each
individual should aim at his own greatest happiness. And Butler is
equally prepared to grant “that our ideas of happiness and misery
are of all our ideas the nearest and most important to us ... that,
though virtue or moral rectitude does indeed consist in affection to
and pursuit of what is right and good as such; yet, when we sit down
in a cool hour, we can neither justify to ourselves this or any other
pursuit till we are convinced that it will be for our happiness, or at
least not contrary to it.”[97]

And even Clarke[98]--notwithstanding the emphatic terms in which he has
maintained that “Virtue truly deserves to be chosen for its own sake
and Vice to be avoided”--yet admits that it is “not truly reasonable
that men by adhering to Virtue should part with their lives, if thereby
they eternally deprived themselves of all possibility of receiving any
advantage from that adherence.”

And, generally, in the ages of Christian faith, it has been obvious
and natural to hold that the realisation of virtue is essentially an
enlightened and far-seeing pursuit of Happiness for the agent. Nor
has this doctrine been held only by persons of a cold and calculating
turn of mind: we find it urged with emphasis by so chivalrous and
high-minded a preacher as Bishop Berkeley. No doubt this is only one
side or element of the Christian view: the opposite doctrine, that an
action done from motives of self-interest is not properly virtuous,
has continually asserted itself as either openly conflicting or in
some manner reconciled with the former. Still the former, though less
refined and elevated, seems to have been the commoner view. Indeed,
it is hardly going too far to say that common sense assumes that
‘interested’ actions, tending to promote the agent’s happiness, are
_prima facie_ reasonable: and that the _onus probandi_ lies with those
who maintain that disinterested conduct, as such, is reasonable.

But, as has been before said, in the common notions of ‘interest,’
‘happiness,’ etc., there is a certain amount of vagueness and
ambiguity: so that in order to fit these terms for the purposes
of scientific discussion, we must, while retaining the main part
of their signification, endeavour to make it more precise. In my
judgment this result is attained if by ‘greatest possible Happiness’
we understand the greatest attainable surplus of pleasure over pain;
the two terms being used, with equally comprehensive meanings, to
include respectively all kinds of agreeable and disagreeable feelings.
Further, if this quantitative definition of the end be accepted,
consistency requires that pleasures should be sought in proportion
to their pleasantness; and therefore the less pleasant consciousness
must not be preferred to the more pleasant, on the ground of any other
qualities that it may possess. The distinctions of _quality_ that Mill
and others urge may still be admitted as grounds of preference, but
only in so far as they can be resolved into distinctions of quantity.
This is the type to which the practical reasoning that is commonly
called ‘Egoistic’ tends to conform, when we rigorously exclude all
ambiguities and inconsistencies: and it is only in this more precise
form that it seems worth while to subject such reasoning to a detailed
examination. We must therefore understand by an Egoist a man who when
two or more courses of action are open to him, ascertains as accurately
as he can the amounts of pleasure and pain that are likely to result
from each, and chooses the one which he thinks will yield him the
greatest surplus of pleasure over pain.

§ 2. It must, however, be pointed out that the adoption of the
fundamental _principle_ of Egoism, as just explained, by no means
necessarily implies the ordinary empirical method of seeking one’s own
pleasure or happiness. A man may aim at the greatest happiness within
his reach, and yet not attempt to ascertain empirically what amount
of pleasure and pain is likely to attend any given course of action;
believing that he has some surer, deductive method for determining
the conduct which will make him most happy in the long-run. He may
believe this on grounds of Positive Religion, because God has promised
happiness as a reward for obedience to certain definite commands: or
on grounds of Natural Religion, because God being just and benevolent
must have so ordered the world that Happiness will in the long-run be
distributed in proportion to Virtue. It is (_e.g._) by a combination of
both these arguments that Paley connects the Universalistic Hedonism
that he adopts as a method for determining duties, with the Egoism
which seems to him self-evident as a fundamental principle of rational
conduct. Or again, a man may connect virtue with happiness by a process
of _a priori_ reasoning, purely ethical; as Aristotle seems to do by
the assumption that the ‘best’ activity will be always attended by
the greatest pleasure as its inseparable concomitant; ‘best’ being
determined by a reference to moral intuition, or to the common moral
opinions of men generally, or of well-bred and well-educated men. Or
the deduction by which Maximum Pleasure is inferred to be the result of
a particular kind of action may be psychological or physiological: we
may have some general theory as to the connexion of pleasure with some
other physical or psychical fact, according to which we can deduce the
amount of pleasure that will attend any particular kind of behaviour:
as (_e.g._) it is widely held that a perfectly healthy and harmonious
exercise of our different bodily and mental functions is the course of
life most conducive to pleasure in the long-run. In this latter case,
though accepting unreservedly the Hedonistic principle, we shall not be
called upon to estimate and compare particular pleasures, but rather to
define the notions of ‘perfect health’ and ‘harmony of functions’ and
consider how these ends may be attained. Still those who advocate such
deductive methods commonly appeal to ordinary experience, at least as
supplying confirmation or verification; and admit that the pleasantness
and painfulness of pleasures and pains are only directly known to the
individual who experiences them. It would seem, therefore, that--at
any rate--the obvious method of Egoistic Hedonism is that which we may
call Empirical-reflective: and it is this I conceive that is commonly
used in egoistic deliberation. It will be well, therefore, to examine
this method in the first instance; to ascertain clearly the assumptions
which it involves, and estimate the exactness of its results.

FOOTNOTES:

[96] See chap. iii. § 2, and chap. v. of this Book.

[97] Butler, Serm. xi.

[98] _Boyle Lectures_ (1705). Prop. i. p. 116.




