CHAPTER II

THE PROOF OF UTILITARIANISM


In Book ii., where we discussed the method of Egoistic Hedonism, we did
not take occasion to examine any proof of its first principle: and in
the case of Universalistic Hedonism also, what primarily concerns us is
not how its principle is to be proved to those who do not accept it,
but what consequences are logically involved in its acceptance. At the
same time it is important to observe that the principle of aiming at
universal happiness is more generally felt to require some proof, or
at least (as Mill puts it) some “considerations determining the mind
to accept it,” than the principle of aiming at one’s own happiness.
From the point of view, indeed, of abstract philosophy, I do not see
why the Egoistic principle should pass unchallenged any more than the
Universalistic. I do not see why the axiom of Prudence should not be
questioned, when it conflicts with present inclination, on a ground
similar to that on which Egoists refuse to admit the axiom of Rational
Benevolence. If the Utilitarian has to answer the question, ‘Why should
I sacrifice my own happiness for the greater happiness of another?’ it
must surely be admissible to ask the Egoist, ‘Why should I sacrifice a
present pleasure for a greater one in the future? Why should I concern
myself about my own future feelings any more than about the feelings
of other persons?’ It undoubtedly seems to Common Sense paradoxical to
ask for a reason why one should seek one’s own happiness on the whole;
but I do not see how the demand can be repudiated as absurd by those
who adopt the views of the extreme empirical school of psychologists,
although those views are commonly supposed to have a close affinity
with Egoistic Hedonism. Grant that the Ego is merely a system of
coherent phenomena, that the permanent identical ‘I’ is not a fact
but a fiction, as Hume and his followers maintain; why, then, should
one part of the series of feelings into which the Ego is resolved be
concerned with another part of the same series, any more than with any
other series?

However, I will not press this question now; since I admit that
Common Sense does not think it worth while to supply the individual
with reasons for seeking his own interest.[318] Reasons for doing his
duty--according to the commonly accepted standard of duty--are not held
to be equally superfluous: indeed we find that utilitarian reasons
are continually given for one or other of the commonly received rules
of morality. Still the fact that certain rules are commonly received
as binding, though it does not establish their self-evidence, renders
it generally unnecessary to prove their authority to the Common Sense
that receives them: while for the same reason a Utilitarian who claims
to supersede them by a higher principle is naturally challenged, by
Intuitionists no less than by Egoists, to demonstrate the legitimacy
of his claim. To this challenge some Utilitarians would reply by
saying that it is impossible to “prove” a first principle; and this
is of course true, if by proof we mean a process which exhibits the
principle in question as an inference from premises upon which it
remains dependent for its certainty; for these premises, and not the
inference drawn from them, would then be the real first principles.
Nay, if Utilitarianism is to be _proved_ to a man who already holds
some other moral principles,--whether he be an Intuitional moralist,
who regards as final the principles of Truth, Justice, Obedience to
authority, Purity, etc., or an Egoist who regards his own interest as
the ultimately reasonable end of his conduct,--it would seem that the
process must be one which establishes a conclusion actually _superior_
in validity to the premises from which it starts. For the Utilitarian
prescriptions of duty are _prima facie_ in conflict, at certain points
and under certain circumstances, both with rules which the Intuitionist
regards as self-evident, and with the dictates of Rational Egoism; so
that Utilitarianism, if accepted at all, must be accepted as overruling
Intuitionism and Egoism. At the same time, if the other principles
are not throughout taken as valid, the so-called proof does not seem
to be addressed to the Intuitionist or Egoist at all. How shall we
deal with this dilemma? How is such a process--clearly different from
ordinary proof--possible or conceivable? Yet there certainly seems to
be a general demand for it. Perhaps we may say that what is needed is
a line of argument which on the one hand allows the validity, to a
certain extent, of the maxims already accepted, and on the other hand
shows them to be not absolutely valid, but needing to be controlled and
completed by some more comprehensive principle.

Such a line of argument, addressed to Egoism, was given in chap. xiii.
of the foregoing book. It should be observed that the applicability
of this argument depends on the manner in which the Egoistic first
principle is formulated. If the Egoist strictly confines himself
to stating his conviction that he ought to take his own happiness
or pleasure as his ultimate end, there seems no opening for any
line of reasoning to lead him to Universalistic Hedonism as a first
principle;[319] it cannot be proved that the difference between his
own happiness and another’s happiness is not _for him_ all-important.
In this case all that the Utilitarian can do is to effect as far as
possible a reconciliation between the two principles, by expounding to
the Egoist the _sanctions_ of rules deduced from the Universalistic
principle,--_i.e._ by pointing out the pleasures and pains that may
be expected to accrue to the Egoist himself from the observation and
violation respectively of such rules. It is obvious that such an
exposition has no tendency to make him accept the greatest happiness of
the greatest number as his ultimate end; but only as a means to the end
of his own happiness. It is therefore totally different from a _proof_
(as above explained) of Universalistic Hedonism. When, however, the
Egoist puts forward, implicitly or explicitly, the proposition that his
happiness or pleasure is Good, not only _for him_ but from the point
of view of the Universe,--as (_e.g._) by saying that ‘nature designed
him to seek his own happiness,’--it then becomes relevant to point out
to him that _his_ happiness cannot be a more important part of Good,
taken universally, than the equal happiness of any other person. And
thus, starting with his own principle, he may be brought to accept
Universal happiness or pleasure as that which is absolutely and without
qualification Good or Desirable: as an end, therefore, to which the
action of a reasonable agent as such ought to be directed.

This, it will be remembered, is the reasoning[320] that I used in chap.
xiii. of the preceding book in exhibiting the principle of Rational
Benevolence as one of the few Intuitions which stand the test of
rigorous criticism. It should be observed, however, that as addressed
to the Intuitionist, this reasoning only shows the Utilitarian first
principle to be _one_ moral axiom: it does not prove that it is
_sole_ or _supreme_. The premises with which the Intuitionist starts
commonly include other formulæ held as independent and self-evident.
Utilitarianism has therefore to exhibit itself in the twofold relation
above described, at once negative and positive, to these formulæ.
The Utilitarian must, in the first place, endeavour to show to the
Intuitionist that the principles of Truth, Justice,[2] etc. have only a
dependent and subordinate validity: arguing either that the principle
is really only affirmed by Common Sense as a general rule admitting
of exceptions and qualifications, as in the case of Truth, and that
we require some further principle for systematising these exceptions
and qualifications; or that the fundamental notion is vague and needs
further determination, as in the case of Justice;[321] and further,
that the different rules are liable to conflict with each other, and
that we require some higher principle to decide the issue thus raised;
and again, that the rules are differently formulated by different
persons, and that these differences admit of no Intuitional solution,
while they show the vagueness and ambiguity of the common moral
notions to which the Intuitionist appeals.

This part of the argument I have perhaps sufficiently developed in the
preceding book. It remains to supplement this line of reasoning by
developing the positive relation that exists between Utilitarianism
and the Morality of Common Sense: by showing how Utilitarianism
sustains the general validity of the current moral judgments, and
thus supplements the defects which reflection finds in the intuitive
recognition of their stringency; and at the same time affords a
principle of synthesis, and a method for binding the unconnected and
occasionally conflicting principles of common moral reasoning into
a complete and harmonious system. If systematic reflection upon the
morality of Common Sense thus exhibits the Utilitarian principle
as that to which Common Sense naturally appeals for that further
development of its system which this same reflection shows to be
necessary, the proof of Utilitarianism seems as complete as it can
be made. And since, further--apart from the question of proof--it is
important in considering the method of Utilitarianism to determine
exactly its relation to the commonly received rules of morality, it
will be proper to examine this relation at some length in the following
chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[318] The relation of Egoistic to Universalistic Hedonism is further
examined in the concluding chapter.

[319] It is to be observed that he may be led to it in other ways than
that of argument: _i.e._ by appeals to his sympathies, or to his moral
or quasi-moral sentiments.

[320] I ought to remind the reader that the argument in chap. xiii.
only leads to the first principle of Utilitarianism, if it be admitted
that Happiness is the only thing ultimately and intrinsically Good or
Desirable. I afterwards in chap. xiv. endeavoured to bring Common Sense
to this admission.

[321] That is, so far as we mean by Justice anything more than the
simple negation of arbitrary inequality.




