
BY THE SAME AUTHOR.


 OUTLINES OF THE HISTORY OF ETHICS FOR ENGLISH READERS. Crown 8vo. 3s.
 6d.

 THE PRINCIPLES OF POLITICAL ECONOMY. Third Edition. 8vo. 14s. net.

 THE ELEMENTS OF POLITICS. 8vo. 14s. net.

 PHILOSOPHY: ITS SCOPE AND RELATIONS. 8vo. 6s. 6d. net.

 LECTURES ON THE ETHICS OF GREEN, SPENCER, AND MARTINEAU. 8vo. 8s. 6d.
 net.

 THE DEVELOPMENT OF EUROPEAN POLITY. 8vo. 10s. net.

 MISCELLANEOUS ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES. 8vo. 10s. net.

 LECTURES ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF KANT AND OTHER PHILOSOPHICAL LECTURES
 AND ESSAYS. 8vo. 10s. net.


 HENRY SIDGWICK: A Memoir. By A. S. and E. M. S. With Portraits. 8vo.
 12s. 6d. net.


MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD., LONDON.




THE METHODS OF ETHICS




Ἢ οὐ γελοῖον ἐπὶ μὲν ἄλλοις σμικροῦ ἀξίοις πᾶν ποιεῖν συντεινομένους,
ὅπως ὄτι ἀκριβέστατα καὶ καθαρώτατα ἕξει, τῶν δὲ μεγίστων μὴ μεγίστας
ἀξιοῦν εἶναι καὶ τὰς ἀκριβείας;--PLATO.




  THE
  METHODS OF ETHICS

  BY

  HENRY SIDGWICK

  SOMETIME KNIGHTBRIDGE PROFESSOR OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY IN THE
  UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE

  _SEVENTH EDITION_

  London
  MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED
  NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
  1907

  [_The Right of Translation is reserved._]




  _First Edition 1874._
  _Second Edition 1877._
  _Third Edition 1884._
  _Fourth Edition 1890._
  _Fifth Edition 1893._
  _Sixth Edition 1901._
  _Seventh Edition 1907._




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


In offering to the public a new book upon a subject so trite as Ethics,
it seems desirable to indicate clearly at the outset its plan and
purpose. Its distinctive characteristics may be first given negatively.
It is not, in the main, metaphysical or psychological: at the same time
it is not dogmatic or directly practical: it does not deal, except by
way of illustration, with the history of ethical thought: in a sense
it might be said to be not even critical, since it is only quite
incidentally that it offers any criticism of the systems of individual
moralists. It claims to be an examination, at once expository and
critical, of the different methods of obtaining reasoned convictions
as to what ought to be done which are to be found--either explicit
or implicit--in the moral consciousness of mankind generally: and
which, from time to time, have been developed, either singly or in
combination, by individual thinkers, and worked up into the systems now
historical.

I have avoided the inquiry into the Origin of the Moral Faculty--which
has perhaps occupied a disproportionate amount of the attention of
modern moralists--by the simple assumption (which seems to be made
implicitly in all ethical reasoning) that there is something[1] under
any given circumstances which it is right or reasonable to do, and that
this may be known. If it be admitted that we now have the faculty of
knowing this, it appears to me that the investigation of the historical
antecedents of this cognition, and of its relation to other elements
of the mind, no more properly belongs to Ethics than the corresponding
questions as to the cognition of Space belong to Geometry.[2] I make,
however, no further assumption as to the nature of the object of
ethical knowledge: and hence my treatise is not dogmatic: all the
different methods developed in it are expounded and criticised from a
neutral position, and as impartially as possible. And thus, though my
treatment of the subject is, in a sense, more practical than that of
many moralists, since I am occupied from first to last in considering
how conclusions are to be rationally reached in the familiar matter
of our common daily life and actual practice; still, my immediate
object--to invert Aristotle’s phrase--is not Practice but Knowledge.
I have thought that the predominance in the minds of moralists of a
desire to edify has impeded the real progress of ethical science:
and that this would be benefited by an application to it of the same
disinterested curiosity to which we chiefly owe the great discoveries
of physics. It is in this spirit that I have endeavoured to compose
the present work: and with this view I have desired to concentrate the
reader’s attention, from first to last, not on the practical results to
which our methods lead, but on the methods themselves. I have wished
to put aside temporarily the urgent need which we all feel of finding
and adopting the true method of determining what we ought to do; and to
consider simply what conclusions will be rationally reached if we start
with certain ethical premises, and with what degree of certainty and
precision.

I ought to mention that chapter iv. of Book i. has been reprinted (with
considerable modifications) from the _Contemporary Review_, in which
it originally appeared as an article on “Pleasure and Desire.” And I
cannot conclude without a tribute of thanks to my friend Mr. Venn, to
whose kindness in accepting the somewhat laborious task of reading and
criticising my work, both before and during its passage through the
press, I am indebted for several improvements in my exposition.




PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION


In preparing this work for the second edition, I have found it
desirable to make numerous alterations and additions. Indeed the extent
which these have reached is so considerable, that I have thought it
well to publish them in a separate form, for the use of purchasers
of my first edition. On one or two points I have to acknowledge a
certain change of view; which is partly at least due to criticism. For
instance, in chap. iv. of Book i. (on “Pleasure and Desire”), which has
been a good deal criticised by Prof. Bain and others, although I still
retain my former opinion on the psychological question at issue, I have
been led to take a different view of the relation of this question
to Ethics; and in fact § 1 of this chapter as it at present stands
directly contradicts the corresponding passage in the former edition.
So again, as regards the following chapter, on ‘Free-Will,’ though I
have not exactly found that the comments which it has called forth have
removed my difficulties in dealing with this time-honoured problem,
I have become convinced that I ought not to have crudely obtruded
these difficulties on the reader, while professedly excluding the
consideration of them from my subject. In the present edition therefore
I have carefully limited myself to explaining and justifying the view
that I take of the practical aspect of the question. I have further
been led, through study of the Theory of Evolution in its application
to practice, to attach somewhat more importance to this theory than I
had previously done; and also in several passages of Books iii. and iv.
to substitute ‘well-being’ for ‘happiness,’ in my exposition of that
implicit reference to some further end and standard which reflection on
the Morality of Common Sense continually brings into view. This latter
change however (as I explain in the concluding chapter of Book iii.) is
not ultimately found to have any practical effect. I have also modified
my view of ‘objective rightness,’ as the reader will see by comparing
Book i. chap. i. § 3 with the corresponding passage in the former
edition; but here again the alteration has no material importance.
In my exposition of the Utilitarian principle (Book iv. chap. i.) I
have shortened the cumbrous phrase ‘greatest happiness of the greatest
number’ by omitting--as its author ultimately advised--the last four
words. And finally, I have yielded as far as I could to the objections
that have been strongly urged against the concluding chapter of the
treatise. The main discussion therein contained still seems to me
indispensable to the completeness of the work; but I have endeavoured
to give the chapter a new aspect by altering its commencement, and
omitting most of the concluding paragraph.

The greater part, however, of the new matter in this edition is merely
explanatory and supplementary. I have endeavoured to give a fuller
and clearer account of my views on any points on which I either have
myself seen them to be ambiguously or inadequately expressed, or have
found by experience that they were liable to be misunderstood. Thus in
Book i. chap. ii. I have tried to furnish a rather more instructive
account than my first edition contained of the mutual relations of
Ethics and Politics. Again, even before the appearance of Mr. Leslie
Stephen’s interesting review in _Fraser_ (March 1875), I had seen the
desirability of explaining further my general view of the ‘Practical
Reason,’ and of the fundamental notion signified by the terms ‘right,’
‘ought,’ etc. With this object I have entirely rewritten chap. iii.
of Book i., and made considerable changes in chap. i. Elsewhere,
as in chaps. vi. and ix. of Book i., and chap. vi. of Book ii., I
have altered chiefly in order to make my expositions more clear and
symmetrical. This is partly the case with the considerable changes that
I have made in the first three chapters of Book iii.; but I have also
tried to obviate the objections brought by Professor Calderwood[3]
against the first of these chapters. The main part of this Book
(chaps. iv.-xii.) has been but slightly altered; but in chap. xiii. (on
‘Philosophical Intuitionism’), which has been suggestively criticised
by more than one writer, I have thought it expedient to give a more
direct statement of my own opinions; instead of confining myself (as
I did in the first edition) to comments on those of other moralists.
Chap. xiv. again has been considerably modified; chiefly in order to
introduce into it the substance of certain portions of an article
on ‘Hedonism and Ultimate Good,’ which I published in _Mind_ (No.
5). In Book iv. the changes (besides those above mentioned) have
been inconsiderable; and have been chiefly made in order to remove a
misconception which I shall presently notice, as to my general attitude
towards the three Methods which I am principally occupied in examining.

In revising my work, I have endeavoured to profit as much as possible
by all the criticisms on it that have been brought to my notice,
whether public or private.[4] I have frequently deferred to objections,
even when they appeared to me unsound, if I thought I could avoid
controversy by alterations to which I was myself indifferent. Where I
have been unable to make the changes required, I have usually replied,
in the text or the notes, to such criticisms as have appeared to me
plausible, or in any way instructive. In so doing, I have sometimes
referred by name to opponents, where I thought that, from their
recognised position as teachers of the subject, this would give a
distinct addition of interest to the discussion; but I have been
careful to omit such reference where experience has shown that it would
be likely to cause offence. The book is already more controversial
than I could wish; and I have therefore avoided encumbering it with
any polemics of purely personal interest. For this reason I have
generally left unnoticed such criticisms as have been due to mere
misapprehensions, against which I thought I could effectually
guard in the present edition. There is, however, one fundamental
misunderstanding, on which it seems desirable to say a few words.
I find that more than one critic has overlooked or disregarded the
account of the plan of my treatise, given in the original preface and
in § 5 of the introductory chapter: and has consequently supposed me
to be writing as an assailant of two of the methods which I chiefly
examine, and a defender of the third. Thus one of my reviewers seems
to regard Book iii. (on Intuitionism) as containing mere hostile
criticism from the outside: another has constructed an article on
the supposition that my principal object is the ‘suppression of
Egoism’: a third has gone to the length of a pamphlet under the
impression (apparently) that the ‘main argument’ of my treatise is
a demonstration of Universalistic Hedonism. I am concerned to have
caused so much misdirection of criticism: and I have carefully altered
in this edition the passages which I perceive to have contributed to
it. The morality that I examine in Book iii. is my own morality as
much as it is any man’s: it is, as I say, the ‘Morality of Common
Sense,’ which I only attempt to represent in so far as I share it; I
only place myself outside it either (1) temporarily, for the purpose
of impartial criticism, or (2) in so far as I am forced beyond it by
a practical consciousness of its incompleteness. I have certainly
criticised this morality unsparingly: but I conceive myself to have
exposed with equal unreserve the defects and difficulties of the
hedonistic method (cf. especially chaps. iii., iv. of Book ii., and
chap. v. of Book iv.). And as regards the two hedonistic principles, I
do not hold the reasonableness of aiming at happiness generally with
any stronger conviction than I do that of aiming at one’s own. It was
no part of my plan to call special attention to this “Dualism of the
Practical Reason” as I have elsewhere called it: but I am surprised
at the extent to which my view has perplexed even those of my critics
who have understood it. I had imagined that they would readily trace
it to the source from which I learnt it, Butler’s well-known Sermons.
I hold with Butler that “Reasonable Self-love and Conscience are
the two chief or superior principles in the nature of man,” each of
which we are under a “manifest obligation” to obey: and I do not (I
believe) differ materially from Butler in my view either of reasonable
self-love, or--theology apart--of its relation to conscience. Nor,
again, do I differ from him in regarding conscience as essentially a
function of the practical Reason: “moral precepts,” he says in the
_Analogy_ (Part II. chap. viii.), “are precepts the reason of which
we see.” My difference only begins when I ask myself, ‘What among the
precepts of our common conscience do we really see to be ultimately
reasonable?’ a question which Butler does not seem to have seriously
put, and to which, at any rate, he has given no satisfactory answer.
The answer that I found to it supplied the rational basis that I had
long perceived to be wanting to the Utilitarianism of Bentham, regarded
as an ethical doctrine: and thus enabled me to transcend the commonly
received antithesis between Intuitionists and Utilitarians.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] I did not mean to exclude the supposition that two or more
alternatives might under certain circumstances be equally right (1884).

[2] This statement now appears to me to require a slight modification
(1884).

[3] Cf. _Mind_, No. 2.

[4] Among unpublished criticisms I ought especially to mention the
valuable suggestions that I have received from Mr. Carveth Read; to
whose assistance in revising the present edition many of my corrections
are due.




PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION


In this third edition I have again made extensive alterations,
and introduced a considerable amount of new matter. Some of these
changes and additions are due to modifications of my own ethical or
psychological views; but I do not think that any of these are of great
importance in relation to the main subject of the treatise. And by far
the largest part of the new matter introduced has been written either
(1) to remove obscurities, ambiguities, and minor inconsistencies
in the exposition of my views which the criticisms[5] of others or
my own reflection have enabled me to discover; or (2) to treat as
fully as seemed desirable certain parts or aspects of the subject
which I had either passed over altogether or discussed too slightly
in my previous editions, and on which it now appears to me important
to explain my opinions, either for the greater completeness of my
treatise,--according to my own view of the subject,--or for its better
adaptation to the present state of ethical thought in England. The most
important changes of the first kind have been made in chaps. i. and
ix. of Book i., chaps, i.-iii. of Book ii., and chaps. i., xiii., and
xiv. of Book iii.: under the second head I may mention the discussions
of the relation of intellect to moral action in Book i. chap. iii., of
volition in Book i. chap. v., of the causes of pleasure and pain in
Book ii. chap. vi., of the notion of virtue in the morality of Common
Sense in Book iii. chap. ii., and of evolutional ethics in Book iv.
chap. iv. (chiefly).

I may add that all the important alterations and additions have been
published in a separate form, for the use of purchasers of my second
edition.

FOOTNOTE:

[5] I must here acknowledge the advantage that I have received from
the remarks and questions of my pupils, and from criticisms privately
communicated to me by others; among these latter I ought especially to
mention an instructive examination of my fundamental doctrines by the
Rev. Hastings Rashdall.




PREFACE TO THE FOURTH EDITION


The chief alterations in this fourth edition are the following. (1) I
have expanded the discussion on Free Will in Book i. chap. v. § 3, to
meet the criticisms of Mr. Fowler, in his _Principles of Morals_, and
Dr. Martineau, in his _Types of Ethical Theory_. (2) In consequence
of the publication of the last-mentioned work, I have rewritten
part of chap. xii. of Book iii., which deals with the Ethical view
maintained by Dr. Martineau. (3) I have expanded the argument in
Book iii. chap. xiv., to meet objections ably urged by Mr. Rashdall
in _Mind_ (April 1885). (4) I have somewhat altered the concluding
chapter, in consequence of an important criticism by Prof. v. Gizycki
(_Vierteljahrsschrift für Wissenschaftliche Philosophie_, Jahrg. iv.
Heft i.) which I had inadvertently overlooked in preparing the third
edition. Several pages of new matter have thus been introduced: for
which--I am glad to say--I have made room by shortening what seemed
prolix, omitting what seemed superfluous, and relegating digressions to
notes, in other parts of the work: so that the bulk of the whole is not
increased.

For the index which forms a new feature in the present edition I am
indebted to the kindness of Miss Jones of Girton College, the author of
_Elements of Logic as a Science of Propositions_.




PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION


Such criticisms of my Ethical opinions and reasonings as have come
under my notice, since the publication of the fourth edition of this
treatise, have chiefly related to my treatment of the question of
Free Will in Book i. chap. v., or to the hedonistic view of Ultimate
Good, maintained in Book iii. chap. iv. I have accordingly rewritten
certain parts of these two chapters, in the hope of making my arguments
more clear and convincing: in each case a slight change in view will
be apparent to a careful reader who compares the present with the
preceding edition: but in neither case does the change affect the
main substance of the argument. Alterations, in one or two cases not
inconsiderable, have been made in several other chapters, especially
Book i. chap. ii., and Book iii. chaps. i. and ii.: but they have
chiefly aimed at removing defects of exposition, and do not (I think)
in any case imply any material change of view.

My thanks are again due to Miss Jones, of Girton College, for reading
through the proofs of this edition and making most useful corrections
and suggestions: as well as for revising the index which she kindly
made for the fourth edition.




PREFACE TO THE SIXTH EDITION


The revision of _The Methods of Ethics_ for this edition was begun by
Professor Sidgwick and carried through by him up to p. 276, on which
the last of his corrections on the copy were made. The latter portion
of his revision was done under the pressure of severe illness, the
increase of which prevented him from continuing it beyond the point
mentioned; and by the calamity of his death the rest of the book
remains without the final touches which it might have received from his
hand. In accordance with his wish, I have seen pp. 277 to 509 through
the press unchanged--except for a few small alterations which he had
indicated, and the insertion on pp. 457-459 of the concluding passage
of Book iv. chapter iii.[6] Such alterations as were made by Professor
Sidgwick in this edition prior to p. 276 will be found chiefly in
chapters i.-v. and ix. of Book i., and chapters iii. and vi. of Book ii.

The Appendix on “The Kantian Conception of Free Will,” promised in note
1 on p. 58 of this edition, is substantially a reprint of a paper by
Professor Sidgwick under that heading which appeared in _Mind_, vol.
xiii. No. 51, and accurately covers the ground indicated in the note.

There is one further matter of importance. Among the MS. material
which Professor Sidgwick intended to be referred to, in preparing
this edition for the press, there occurs, as part of the MS. notes
for a lecture, a brief history of the development in his thought of
the ethical view which he has set forth in the _Methods of Ethics_.
This, though not in a finished condition, is in essentials complete
and coherent, and since it cannot fail to have peculiar value and
interest for students of the book, it has been decided to insert it
here. Such an arrangement seems to a certain extent in harmony with the
author’s own procedure in the Preface to the Second Edition; and in
this way while future students of the _Methods_ will have access to an
introductory account which both ethically and historically is of very
exceptional interest, no dislocation of the text will be involved.

In the account referred to Professor Sidgwick says:--

 “My first adhesion to a definite Ethical system was to the
 Utilitarianism of Mill: I found in this relief from the apparently
 external and arbitrary pressure of moral rules which I had been
 educated to obey, and which presented themselves to me as to some
 extent doubtful and confused; and sometimes, even when clear, as
 merely dogmatic, unreasoned, incoherent. My antagonism to this was
 intensified by the study of Whewell’s _Elements of Morality_ which
 was prescribed for the study of undergraduates in Trinity. It was
 from that book that I derived the impression--which long remained
 uneffaced--that Intuitional moralists were hopelessly loose (as
 compared to mathematicians) in their definitions and axioms.

 The two elements of Mill’s view which I am accustomed to distinguish
 as Psychological Hedonism [that each man does seek his own Happiness]
 and Ethical Hedonism [that each man ought to seek the general
 Happiness] both attracted me, and I did not at first perceive their
 incoherence.

 Psychological Hedonism--the law of universal
 pleasure-seeking--attracted me by its frank naturalness. Ethical
 Hedonism, as expounded by Mill, was morally inspiring by its dictate
 of readiness for absolute self-sacrifice. They appealed to different
 elements of my nature, but they brought these into apparent harmony:
 they both used the same words “pleasure,” “happiness,” and the
 persuasiveness of Mill’s exposition veiled for a time the profound
 discrepancy between the natural end of action--private happiness, and
 the end of duty--general happiness. Or if a doubt assailed me as to
 the coincidence of private and general happiness, I was inclined to
 hold that it ought to be cast to the winds by a generous resolution.

 But a sense grew upon me that this method of dealing with the conflict
 between Interest and Duty, though perhaps proper for practice
 could not be final for philosophy. For practical men who do not
 philosophise, the maxim of subordinating self-interest, as commonly
 conceived, to “altruistic” impulses and sentiments which they feel to
 be higher and nobler is, I doubt not, a commendable maxim; but it is
 surely the business of Ethical Philosophy to find and make explicit
 the rational ground of such action.

 I therefore set myself to examine methodically the relation of
 Interest and Duty.

 This involved a careful study of Egoistic Method, to get the relation
 of Interest and Duty clear. Let us suppose that my own Interest is
 paramount. What really is my Interest, how far can acts conducive
 to it be known, how far does the result correspond with Duty (or
 Wellbeing of Mankind)? This investigation led me to feel very
 strongly _this_ opposition, rather than that which Mill and the
 earlier Utilitarians felt between so-called Intuitions or Moral Sense
 Perceptions, and Hedonism, whether Epicurean or Utilitarian. Hence the
 arrangement of my book--ii., iii., iv. [Book ii. Egoism, Book iii.
 Intuitionism, Book iv. Utilitarianism].

 The result was that I concluded that no complete solution of the
 conflict between my happiness and the general happiness was possible
 on the basis of mundane experience. This [conclusion I] slowly and
 reluctantly accepted--cf. Book ii. chap. v., and last chapter of
 treatise [Book ii. chap. v. is on “Happiness and Duty,” and the
 concluding chapter is on “The Mutual Relations of the Three Methods”].
 This [was] most important to me.

 In consequence of this perception, moral choice of the general
 happiness or acquiescence in self-interest as ultimate, became
 practically necessary. But on what ground?

 I put aside Mill’s phrases that such sacrifice was “heroic”: that it
 was not “well” with me unless I was in a disposition to make it. I put
 to him in my mind the dilemma:--Either it is for my own happiness or
 it is not. If not, why [should I do it]?--It was no use to say that
 if I was a moral hero I should have formed a habit of willing actions
 beneficial to others which would remain in force, even with my own
 pleasure in the other scale. I knew that at any rate I was not the
 kind of moral hero who does this without reason; from _blind_ habit.
 Nor did I even wish to be that kind of hero: for it seemed to me that
 that kind of hero, however admirable, was certainly not a philosopher.
 I must somehow _see_ that it was right for me to sacrifice my
 happiness for the good of the whole of which I am a part.

 Thus, in spite of my early aversion to Intuitional Ethics, derived
 from the study of Whewell, and in spite of my attitude of discipleship
 to Mill, I was forced to recognise the need of a fundamental ethical
 intuition.

 The utilitarian method--which I had learnt from Mill--could not, it
 seemed to me, be made coherent and harmonious without this fundamental
 intuition.

 In this state of mind I read Kant’s Ethics again: I had before read
 it somewhat unintelligently, under the influence of Mill’s view
 as to its “grotesque failure.”[7] I now read it more receptively
 and was impressed with the truth and importance of its fundamental
 principle:--_Act from a principle or maxim that you can will to be
 a universal law_--cf. Book iii. chap. i. § 3 [of _The Methods of
 Ethics_]. It threw the “golden rule” of the gospel (“Do unto others as
 ye would that others should do unto you”) into a form that commended
 itself to my reason.

 Kant’s resting of morality on Freedom did not indeed commend itself to
 me,[8] though I did not at first see, what I now seem to see clearly,
 that it involves the fundamental confusion of using “freedom” in two
 distinct senses--“freedom” that is realised only when we do right,
 when reason triumphs over inclination, and “freedom” that is realised
 equally when we choose to do wrong, and which is apparently implied
 in the notion of ill-desert. What commended itself to me, in short,
 was Kant’s ethical principle rather than its metaphysical basis.
 This I briefly explain in Book iii. chap. i. § 3 [of _The Methods of
 Ethics_]. I shall go into it at more length when we come to Kant.

 That whatever is right for me must be right for all persons in similar
 circumstances--which was the form in which I accepted the Kantian
 maxim--seemed to me certainly fundamental, certainly true, and not
 without practical importance.

 But the fundamental principle seemed to me inadequate for the
 construction of a system of duties; and the more I reflected on it the
 more inadequate it appeared.

 On reflection it did not seem to me really to meet the difficulty
 which had led me from Mill to Kant: it did not settle finally the
 subordination of Self-interest to Duty.

 For the Rational Egoist--a man who had learnt from Hobbes that
 Self-preservation is the first law of Nature and Self-interest the
 only rational basis of social morality--and in fact, its actual basis,
 so far as it is effective--such a thinker might accept the Kantian
 principle and remain an Egoist.

 He might say, “I quite admit that when the painful necessity comes
 for another man to choose between his own happiness and the general
 happiness, he must as a reasonable being prefer his own, i.e. it is
 right for him to do this on my principle. No doubt, as I probably do
 not sympathise with him in particular any more than with other persons,
 I as a disengaged spectator should like him to sacrifice himself to
 the general good: but I do not expect him to do it, any more than I
 should do it myself in his place.”

 It did not seem to me that this reasoning could be effectively
 confuted. No doubt it was, from the point of view of the universe,
 reasonable to prefer the greater good to the lesser, even though the
 lesser good was the private happiness of the agent. Still, it seemed
 to me also undeniably reasonable for the individual to prefer his
 own. The rationality of self-regard seemed to me as undeniable as the
 rationality of self-sacrifice. I could not give up this conviction,
 though neither of my masters, neither Kant nor Mill, seemed willing to
 admit it: in different ways, each in his own way, they refused to admit
 it.

 I was, therefore, [if] I may so say, a disciple on the loose, in search
 of a master--or, if the term ‘master’ be too strong, at any rate I
 sought for sympathy and support, in the conviction which I had attained
 in spite of the opposite opinions of the thinkers from whom I had
 learnt most.

 It was at this point then that the influence of Butler came in. For
 the stage at which I had thus arrived in search of an ethical creed,
 at once led me to understand Butler, and to find the support and
 intellectual sympathy that I required in his view.

 I say to understand him, for hitherto I had misunderstood him,
 as I believe most people then misunderstood, and perhaps still
 misunderstand, him. He had been presented to me as an advocate of the
 authority of Conscience; and his argument, put summarily, seemed to be
 that because reflection on our impulses showed us Conscience claiming
 authority therefore we ought to obey it. Well, I had no doubt that
 my conscience claimed authority, though it was a more utilitarian
 conscience than Butler’s: for, through all this search for principles I
 still adhered for practical purposes to the doctrine I had learnt from
 Mill, _i.e._ I still held to the maxim of aiming at the general
 happiness as the supreme directive rule of conduct, and I thought I
 could answer the objections that Butler brought against this view
 (in the “Dissertation on Virtue” at the end of the _Analogy_). My
 difficulty was, as I have said, that this claim of conscience, whether
 utilitarian or not, had to be harmonised with the claim of Rational
 Self-love; and that I vaguely supposed Butler to avoid or override
 [the latter claim].

 But reading him at this stage with more care, I found in him, with
 pleasure and surprise, a view very similar to that which had developed
 itself in my own mind in struggling to assimilate Mill and Kant. I
 found he expressly admitted that “interest, my own happiness, is a
 manifest obligation,” and that “Reasonable Self-love” [is “one of the
 two chief or superior principles in the nature of man”]. That is, he
 recognised a “Dualism of the Governing Faculty”--or as I prefer to
 say “Dualism of the Practical Reason,” since the ‘authority’ on which
 Butler laid stress must present itself to my mind as the authority of
 reason, before I can admit it.

 Of this more presently: what I now wish to make clear is that it was
 on this side--if I may so say--that I entered into Butler’s system and
 came under the influence of his powerful and cautious intellect. But
 the effect of his influence carried me a further step away from Mill:
 for I was led by it to abandon the doctrine of Psychological Hedonism,
 and to recognise the existence of ‘disinterested’ or ‘extra-regarding’
 impulses to action, [impulses] not directed towards the agent’s
 pleasure [cf. chap. iv. of Book i. of _The Methods of Ethics_]. In fact
 as regards what I may call a Psychological basis of Ethics, I found
 myself much more in agreement with Butler than Mill.

 And this led me to reconsider my relation to Intuitional Ethics. The
 strength and vehemence of Butler’s condemnation of pure Utilitarianism,
 in so cautious a writer, naturally impressed me much. And I had myself
 become, as I had to admit to myself, an Intuitionist to a certain
 extent. For the supreme rule of aiming at the general happiness, as I
 had come to see, must rest on a fundamental moral intuition, if I was
 to recognise it as binding at all. And in reading the writings of the
 earlier English Intuitionists, More and Clarke, I found the axiom I
 required for my Utilitarianism [That a rational agent is bound to aim
 at Universal Happiness], in one form or another, holding a prominent
 place (cf. _History of Ethics_, pp. 172, 181).

 I had then, theoretically as well as practically, accepted this
 fundamental moral intuition; and there was also the Kantian principle,
 which I recognised as irresistibly valid, though not adequate to give
 complete guidance.--I was then an “intuitional” moralist to this
 extent: and if so, why not further? The orthodox moralists such as
 Whewell (then in vogue) said that there was a whole intelligible system
 of intuitions: but how were they to be learnt? I could not accept
 Butler’s view as to the sufficiency of a plain man’s conscience: for it
 appeared to me that plain men agreed rather verbally than really.

 In this state of mind I had to read Aristotle again; and a
 light seemed to dawn upon me as to the meaning and drift of his
 procedure--especially in Books ii., iii., iv. of the _Ethics_--(cf.
 _History of Ethics_, chap. ii. § 9, p. 58, read to end of section).

 What he gave us there was the Common Sense Morality of Greece,
 reduced to consistency by careful comparison: given not as something
 external to him but as what “we”--he and others--think, ascertained by
 reflection. And was not this really the Socratic induction, elicited by
 interrogation?

 Might I not imitate this: do the same for _our_ morality here and now,
 in the same manner of impartial reflection on current opinion?

 Indeed _ought_ I not to do this before deciding on the question whether
 I had or had not a system of moral intuitions? At any rate the result
 would be useful, whatever conclusion I came to.

 So this was the part of my book first written (Book iii., chaps.
 i.-xi.), and a certain imitation of Aristotle’s manner was very marked
 in it at first, and though I have tried to remove it where it seemed to
 me affected or pedantic, it still remains to some extent.

 But the result of the examination was to bring out with fresh force
 and vividness the difference between the maxims of Common Sense
 Morality (even the strongest and strictest, _e.g._ Veracity and
 Good Faith) and the intuitions which I had already attained, _i.e._
 the Kantian Principle (of which I now saw the only certain element
 in Justice--“treat similar cases similarly”--to be a particular
 application), and the Fundamental Principle of Utilitarianism. And this
 latter was in perfect harmony with the Kantian Principle. I certainly
 could will it to be a universal law that men should act in such a way
 as to promote universal happiness; in fact it was the only law that it
 was perfectly clear to me that I could thus decisively will, from a
 universal point of view.

 I was then a Utilitarian again, but on an Intuitional basis.

 But further, the reflection on Common Sense Morality which I had gone
 through, had continually brought home to me its character as a system
 of rules tending to the promotion of general happiness (cf. [_Methods
 of Ethics_] pp. 470, 471).

 Also the previous reflection on hedonistic method for Book ii. had
 shown me its weaknesses. What was then to be done? [The] conservative
 attitude [to be observed] towards Common Sense [is] given in chapter
 v. of Book iv.: “Adhere generally, deviate and attempt reform only
 in exceptional cases in which,--notwithstanding the roughness of
 hedonistic method,--the argument against Common Sense is decisive.”

 In this state of mind I published my book: I tried to say what I had
 found: that the opposition between Utilitarianism and Intuitionism was
 due to a misunderstanding. There was indeed a fundamental opposition
 between the individual’s interest and either morality, which I could
 not solve by any method I had yet found trustworthy, without the
 assumption of the moral government of the world: so far I agreed with
 both Butler and Kant.

 But I could find no real opposition between Intuitionism and
 Utilitarianism.... The Utilitarianism of Mill and Bentham seemed to me
 to want a basis: that basis could only be supplied by a fundamental
 intuition; on the other hand the best examination I could make of the
 Morality of Common Sense showed me no clear and self-evident principles
 except such as were perfectly consistent with Utilitarianism.

 Still, investigation of the Utilitarian method led me to see defects
 [in it]: the merely empirical examination of the consequences of
 actions is unsatisfactory; and being thus conscious of the practical
 imperfection in many cases of the guidance of the Utilitarian calculus,
 I remained anxious to treat with respect, and make use of, the guidance
 afforded by Common Sense in these cases, on the ground of the general
 presumption which evolution afforded that moral sentiments and opinions
 would point to conduct conducive to general happiness; though I
 could not admit this presumption as a ground for overruling a strong
 probability of the opposite, derived from utilitarian calculations.”

It only remains to mention that the Table of Contents and the Index
have been revised in accordance with the changes in the text.

  E. E. CONSTANCE JONES.

  GIRTON COLLEGE,
  CAMBRIDGE, _April 1901_.

FOOTNOTES:

[6] Cf. note on p. 457, and Prefatory Note to the Seventh Edition.

[7] Kant’s _Fundamental Principles_ (_Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der
Sitten_), §§ 1, 2. Mill, _Utilitarianism_, pp. 5, 6 [7th edition (large
print), 1879].

[8] Book i. chap. v. of _The Methods of Ethics_.




PREFATORY NOTE TO THE SEVENTH EDITION


This Edition is a reprint of the Sixth, the only changes (besides
correction of a few clerical errors) being an alteration of type in the
passage which occurs on p. 457 in the Sixth Edition and pp. 457-459
in this Edition, together with consequent changes (1) in paging and
indexing, (2) in the reference to the passage in question in the
reprinted Preface to the Sixth Edition, and (3) in the insertion of the
note on p. 457.

  E. E. C. J.

  _December 1906._




CONTENTS


 BOOK I


 CHAPTER I

 INTRODUCTION

 PAGES

 1. Ethics is a department of the Theory or Study of Practice.         1-2

 2. It is the study of what ought to be, so far as this depends upon
 the voluntary action of individuals.                                  2-4

 3. In deciding what they ought to do, men naturally proceed on
 different principles, and by different methods.                       4-6

 4. There are two _prima facie_ rational Ends, Excellence or
 Perfection and Happiness: of which the latter at least may be
 sought for oneself or universally. It is also commonly thought
 that certain Rules are prescribed without reference to ulterior
 consequences. The Methods corresponding to these different
 principles reduce themselves in the main to three, Egoism,
 Intuitionism, Utilitarianism.                                        6-11

 5. These methods we are to examine separately, abstracting them
 from ordinary thought, where we find them in confused combination,
 and developing them as precisely and consistently as possible.      11-14


 CHAPTER II

 ETHICS AND POLITICS

 1. In considering the relation between Ethics and Politics, we have
 to distinguish between Positive Law and Ideal Law.                  15-18

 2. But at any rate the primary object of Ethics is not to determine
 what ought to be done in an ideal society: it therefore does not
 necessarily require as a preliminary the theoretical construction
 of such a society.                                                  18-22


 CHAPTER III

 ETHICAL JUDGMENTS

 1. By ‘Reasonable’ conduct--whether morally or prudentially
 reasonable--we mean that of which we judge that it ‘ought’ to be
 done. Such a judgment cannot be legitimately interpreted as a
 judgment concerning facts, nor as referring exclusively to the
 _means_ to ulterior ends: in particular, the term ‘ought,’ as used
 in moral judgments, does not merely signify that the person judging
 feels a specific emotion:                                           23-28

 2. nor does it merely signify that the conduct in question is
 prescribed under penalties:                                         28-31

 3. The notion expressed by “ought,” in its strictest ethical use
 is too elementary to admit of formal definition, or of resolution
 into simpler notions; it is assumed to be objectively valid; and
 judgments in which it is used when they relate to the future
 conduct of the person judging, are accompanied by a special kind of
 impulse to action.                                                  31-35

 4. This ‘dictate of reason’ is also exemplified by merely
 prudential judgments; and by merely hypothetical imperatives.       35-38


 CHAPTER IV

 PLEASURE AND DESIRE

 1. The psychological doctrine, that the object of Desire is always
 Pleasure, is liable to collide with the view of Ethical judgments
 just given: and in any case deserves careful examination.           39-42

 2. If by “pleasure” is meant “agreeable feeling,” this doctrine
 is opposed to experience: for throughout the whole scale of our
 desires, from the highest to the lowest, we can distinguish
 impulses directed towards other ends than our own feelings from the
 desire of pleasure:                                                 42-51

 3. as is further shown by the occasional conflict between the two
 kinds of impulse.                                                   51-52

 4. Nor can the doctrine derive any real support from consideration
 either of the ‘unconscious’ or the ‘original’ aim of human action.  52-54

 Note                                                                54-56


 CHAPTER V

 FREE WILL

 1. The Kantian identification of ‘Free’ and ‘Rational’ action is
 misleading from the ambiguity of the term ‘freedom.’                57-59

 2. When, by definition and analysis of voluntary action, the issue
 in the Free Will Controversy has been made clear, it appears that
 the cumulative argument for Determinism is almost overwhelming:     59-65

 3. still it is impossible to me in acting not to regard myself as
 free to do what I judge to be reasonable. However the solution of
 the metaphysical question of Free Will is not important--Theology
 apart--for systematic Ethics generally:                             65-70

 4. it seems however to have a special relation to the notion of
 Justice:                                                            71-72

 5. The practical unimportance of the question of Free Will becomes
 more clear if we scrutinize closely the range of volitional effects.72-76


 CHAPTER VI

 ETHICAL PRINCIPLES AND METHODS

 1. The Methods indicated in chap. i. have a _prima facie_ claim to
 proceed on reasonable principles: other principles seem, in so far
 as they can be made precise, to reduce themselves to these:         77-80

 2. especially the principle of “living according to Nature.”        80-83

 3. In short, all varieties of Method may conveniently be classed
 under three heads: Intuitionism and the two kinds of Hedonism,
 Egoistic and Universalistic. The common confusion between the two
 latter is easily explained, but must be carefully guarded against.  83-87

 Note                                                                87-88


 CHAPTER VII

 EGOISM AND SELF-LOVE

 1. To get a clear idea of what is commonly known as Egoism, we must
 distinguish and exclude several possible meanings of the term:      89-93

 2. and define its end as the greatest attainable surplus of
 pleasure over pain for the agent,--pleasures being valued in
 proportion to their pleasantness.                                   93-95


 CHAPTER VIII

 INTUITIONISM

 1. I apply the term Intuitional--in the narrower of two legitimate
 senses--to distinguish a method in which the rightness of some
 kinds of action is assumed to be known without consideration of
 ulterior consequences.                                              96-98

 2. The common antithesis between Intuitive and Inductive is
 inexact, since this method does not necessarily proceed from the
 universal to the particular. We may distinguish Perceptional
 Intuitionism, according to which it is always the rightness of some
 particular action that is held to be immediately known:            98-100

 3. Dogmatic Intuitionism, in which the general rules of Common
 Sense are accepted as axiomatic:                                  100-101

 4. Philosophical Intuitionism, which attempts to find a deeper
 explanation for these current rules.                              101-103

 Note                                                              103-104


 CHAPTER IX

 GOOD

 1. Another important variety of Intuitionism is constituted by
 substituting for “right” the wider notion “good.”                 105-106

 2. The common judgment that a thing is “good” does not on
 reflection appear to be equivalent to a judgment that it is
 directly or indirectly pleasant.                                  106-109

 3. “Good” = “desirable” or “reasonably desired”: as applied to
 conduct, the term does not convey so definite a dictate as
 “right,” and it is not confined to the strictly voluntary.        109-113

 4. There are many other things commonly judged to be good: but
 reflection shows that nothing is ultimately good except some
 mode of human existence.                                          113-115


 BOOK II

 EGOISM


 CHAPTER I

 THE PRINCIPLE AND METHOD OF EGOISM

 1. The Principle of Egoistic Hedonism is the widely accepted
 proposition that the rational end of conduct for each individual
 is the Maximum of his own Happiness or Pleasure.                  119-121

 2. There are several methods of seeking this end: but we may take
 as primary that which proceeds by Empirical-reflective comparison
 of pleasures.                                                     121-122


 CHAPTER II

 EMPIRICAL HEDONISM

 1. In this method it is assumed that all pleasures sought and pains
 shunned are commensurable; and can be arranged in a certain scale
 of preferableness:                                                123-125

 2. pleasure being defined as “feeling apprehended as desirable by
 the sentient individual at the time of feeling it.”               125-130

 Note                                                                  130


 CHAPTER III

 EMPIRICAL HEDONISM (_continued_)

 1. To get a clearer view of this method, let us consider objections
 tending to show its inherent impracticability: as, first, that
 “pleasure as feeling cannot be conceived,” and that a “sum of
 pleasures is intrinsically unmeaning”:                            131-134

 2. that transient pleasures cannot satisfy; and that the
 predominance of self-love tends to defeat its own end:            134-138

 3. that the habit of introspectively comparing pleasures is
 unfavourable to pleasure:                                         138-140

 4. that any quantitative comparison of pleasures and pains is
 vague and uncertain, even in the case of our own past
 experiences:                                                      140-144

 5. that it also tends to be different at different times:
 especially through variations in the present state of the person
 performing the comparison:                                        144-146

 6. that, in fact, the supposed definite commensurability of
 pleasures is an unverifiable assumption:                          146-147

 7. that there is a similar liability to error in appropriating
 the experience of others; and in inferring future pleasures
 from past.                                                        147-150


 CHAPTER IV

 OBJECTIVE HEDONISM AND COMMON SENSE

 1. It may seem that the judgments of Common Sense respecting the
 Sources of Happiness offer a refuge from the uncertainties of
 Empirical Hedonism: but there are several fundamental defects in
 this refuge;                                                      151-153

 2. and these judgments when closely examined are found to be
 perplexingly inconsistent.                                        153-158

 3. Still we may derive from them a certain amount of practical
 guidance.                                                         158-161


 CHAPTER V

 HAPPINESS AND DUTY

 1. It has been thought possible to prove on empirical grounds that
 one’s greatest happiness is always attained by the performance of
 duty.                                                             162-163

 2. But no such complete coincidence seems to result from a
 consideration either of the Legal Sanctions of Duty:              163-166

 3. or of the Social Sanctions:                                    166-170

 4. or of the Internal Sanctions: even if we consider not merely
 isolated acts of duty, but a virtuous life as a whole.            170-175


 CHAPTER VI

 DEDUCTIVE HEDONISM

 1. Hedonistic Method must ultimately rest on facts of empirical
 observation: but it might become largely deductive, through
 scientific knowledge of the causes of pleasure and pain:          176-180

 2. but we have no practically available general theory of these
 causes, either psychophysical,                                    180-190

 3. or biological.                                                 190-192

 4. Nor can the principle of ‘increasing life,’ or that of ‘aiming
 at self-development,’ or that of ‘giving free play to impulse,’
 be so defined as to afford us any practical guidance to the end
 of Egoism, without falling back on the empirical comparison of
 pleasures and pains.                                              192-195


 BOOK III

 INTUITIONISM


 CHAPTER I

 INTUITIONISM

 1. The fundamental assumption of Intuitionism is that we have the
 power of seeing clearly what actions are in themselves right and
 reasonable.                                                       199-201

 2. Though many actions are commonly judged to be made better
 or worse through the presence of certain _motives_, our common
 judgments of right and wrong relate, strictly speaking, to
 _intentions_. One motive, indeed, the desire to do what is right
 as such, has been thought an essential condition to right conduct:
 but the Intuitional method should be treated as not involving this
 assumption.                                                       201-207

 3. It is certainly an essential condition that we should not
 believe the act to be wrong; and this implies that we should
 not believe it to be wrong for any similar person in similar
 circumstances: but this implication, though it may supply a
 valuable practical rule, cannot furnish a complete criterion of
 right conduct.                                                    207-210

 4. The _existence_ of apparent cognitions of right conduct,
 intuitively obtained, as distinct from their validity, will
 scarcely be questioned; and to establish their validity it is not
 needful to prove their ‘originality.’                             210-214

 5. Both particular and universal intuitions are found in our
 common moral thought: but it is for the latter that ultimate
 validity is ordinarily claimed by intuitional moralists. We must
 try, by reflecting on Common Sense, how far we can state these
 Moral Axioms with clearness and precision.                        214-216


 CHAPTER II

 VIRTUE AND DUTY

 1. Duties are Right acts, for the adequate performance of which a
 moral motive is at least occasionally necessary. Virtuous conduct
 includes the performance of duties as well as praiseworthy acts
 that are thought to go beyond strict duty, and that may even be
 beyond the power of some to perform.                              217-221

 2. Virtues as commonly recognised, are manifested primarily in
 volitions to produce particular right effects--which must at least
 be thought by the agent to be not wrong--: but for the
 completeness of some virtues the presence of certain emotions
 seems necessary.                                                  221-228

 3. It may be said that Moral Excellence, like Beauty, eludes
 definition: but if Ethical Science is to be constituted, we must
 obtain definite Moral Axioms.                                     228-230


 CHAPTER III

 THE INTELLECTUAL VIRTUES

 1. The common conception of Wisdom assumes a harmony of the ends of
 different ethical methods: all of which--and not one rather than
 another--the wise man is commonly thought to aim at and attain as
 far as circumstances admit.                                       231-233

 2. The Will is to some extent involved in forming wise decisions:
 but more clearly in acting on them--whatever we may call the
 Virtue thus manifested.                                           233-236

 3. Of minor intellectual excellences, some are not strictly
 Virtues: others are, such as Caution and Decision, being in
 part voluntary.                                                   236-237

 Note                                                                  237


 CHAPTER IV

 BENEVOLENCE

 1. The Maxim of Benevolence bids us to some extent _cultivate_
 affections, and confer happiness                                  238-241

 2. on sentient, chiefly human, beings; especially in certain
 circumstances and relations, in which affections--which are hardly
 virtues--prompt to kind services. Rules for the distribution of
 Kindness are needed,                                              241-246

 3. as claims may conflict; but clearly binding rules cannot be
 obtained from Common Sense in a definite form;                    246-247

 4. nor clear principles from which rules may be deduced; as is
 seen when we examine the duties to Kinsmen, as commonly
 conceived:                                                        247-250

 5. and the wider duties of Neighbourhood, Citizenship, Universal
 Benevolence; and the duties of cultivating Reverence and Loyalty: 250-254

 6. and those springing from the Conjugal relation:                254-256

 7. and those of Friendship:                                       256-259

 8. and those of Gratitude: and those to which we are prompted by
 Pity.                                                             259-263

 Note                                                                  263


 CHAPTER V

 JUSTICE

 1. Justice is especially difficult to define. The Just cannot
 be identified with the Legal, as laws may be unjust. Again, the
 Justice of laws does not consist merely in the absence of
 arbitrary inequality in framing or administering them.            264-268

 2. One element of Justice seems to consist in the fulfilment of (1)
 contracts and definite understandings, and (2) expectations arising
 naturally out of the established order of Society; but the duty of
 fulfilling these latter is somewhat indefinite:                   268-271

 3. and this social order may itself, from another point of view,
 be condemned as unjust; that is, as tried by the standard of Ideal
 Justice. What then is this Standard? We seem to find various
 degrees and forms of it.                                          271-274

 4. One view of Ideal Law states Freedom as its absolute End: but
 the attempt to construct a system of law on this principle
 involves us in insuperable difficulties.                          274-278

 5. Nor does the realisation of Freedom satisfy our common
 conception of Ideal Justice. The principle of this is rather
 ‘that Desert should be requited.’                                 278-283

 6. But the application of this principle is again very perplexing:
 whether we try to determine Good Desert (or the worth of
 services),                                                        283-290

 7. or Ill Desert, in order to realise Criminal Justice. There
 remains too the difficulty of reconciling Conservative and Ideal
 Justice.                                                          290-294


 CHAPTER VI

 LAWS AND PROMISES

 1. The duty of obeying Laws, though it may to a great extent be
 included under Justice, still requires a separate treatment. We
 can, however, obtain no _consensus_ for any precise definition
 of it.                                                            295-297

 2. For we are neither agreed as to what kind of government is
 ideally legitimate,                                               297-299

 3. nor as to the criterion of a traditionally legitimate
 government,                                                       299-301

 4. nor as to the proper limits of governmental authority.         301-303

 5. The duty of fulfilling a promise in the sense in which it
 was understood by both promiser and promisee is thought to be
 peculiarly stringent and certain                                  303-304

 6. (it being admitted that its obligation is relative to the
 promisee, and may be annulled by him, and that it cannot override
 strict prior obligations).                                        304-305

 7. But Common Sense seems to doubt how far a promise is binding
 when it has been obtained by force or fraud:                      305-306

 8. or when circumstances have materially altered since it was
 made--especially if it be a promise to the dead or absent,
 from which no release can be obtained, or if the performance
 of the promise will be harmful to the promisee, or inflict a
 disproportionate sacrifice on the promiser.                       306-308

 9. Other doubts arise when a promise has been misapprehended: and
 in the peculiar case where a prescribed form of words has been
 used.                                                             308-311


 CHAPTER VII

 CLASSIFICATION OF DUTIES. TRUTH

 1. I have not adopted the classification of duties into Social
 and Self-regarding: as it seems inappropriate to the Intuitional
 method, of which the characteristic is, that it lays down certain
 absolute and independent rules: such as the rule of Truth.        312-315

 2. But Common Sense after all scarcely seems to prescribe
 truth-speaking under all circumstances: nor to decide clearly
 whether the beliefs which we are bound to make true are those
 directly produced by our words or the immediate inferences from
 these.                                                            315-317

 3. It is said that the general allowance of Unveracity would be
 suicidal, as no one would believe the falsehood. But this argument,
 though forcible, is not decisive; for (1) this result may be in
 special circumstances desirable, or (2) we may have reason to
 expect that it will not occur.                                    317-319

 Note                                                                  319


 CHAPTER VIII

 OTHER SOCIAL DUTIES AND VIRTUES

 1. Common opinion sometimes condemns sweepingly malevolent feelings
 and volitions: but Reflective Common Sense seems to admit some as
 legitimate, determining the limits of this admission on
 utilitarian grounds.                                              320-324

 2. Other maxims of social duty seem clearly subordinate to
 those already discussed: as is illustrated by an examination of
 Liberality and other cognate notions.                             324-326


 CHAPTER IX

 SELF-REGARDING VIRTUES

 1. The general duty of seeking one’s own happiness is commonly
 recognised under the notion of Prudence.                          327-328

 2. This as specially applied to the control of bodily appetites is
 called Temperance: but under this notion a more rigid restraint is
 sometimes thought to be prescribed: though as to the principle of
 this there seems no agreement.                                    328-329

 3. Nor is it easy to give a clear definition of the maxim of
 Purity--but in fact common sense seems averse to attempt this.
 We must note, however, that suicide is commonly judged to be
 absolutely wrong.                                                 329-331


 CHAPTER X

 COURAGE, HUMILITY, ETC.

 1. The Duty of Courage is subordinate to those already discussed:
 and in drawing the line between the Excellence of Courage and
 the Fault of Foolhardiness we seem forced to have recourse to
 considerations of expediency.                                     332-334

 2. Similarly the maxim of Humility seems either clearly
 subordinate or not clearly determinate.                           334-336


 CHAPTER XI

 REVIEW OF THE MORALITY OF COMMON SENSE

 1. We have now to examine the moral maxims that have been defined,
 to ascertain whether they possess the characteristics of
 scientific intuitions.                                            337-338

 2. We require of an Axiom that it should be (1) stated in clear
 and precise terms, (2) really self-evident, (3) not conflicting
 with any other truth, (4) supported by an adequate ‘consensus of
 experts.’ These characteristics are not found in the moral maxims
 of Common Sense.                                                  338-343

 3. The maxims of Wisdom and Self-control are only self-evident in
 so far as they are tautological:                                  343-345

 4. nor can we state any clear, absolute, universally-admitted
 axioms for determining the duties of the Affections:              345-349

 5. and as for the group of principles that were extracted from
 the common notion of Justice, we cannot define each singly in a
 satisfactory manner, still less reconcile them:                   349-352

 6. and even the Duty of Good Faith, when we consider the numerous
 qualifications of it more or less doubtfully admitted by Common
 Sense, seems more like a subordinate rule than an independent
 First Principle. Still more is this the case with Veracity:       352-355

 7. similarly with other virtues: even the prohibition of Suicide,
 so far as rational, seems to rest ultimately on utilitarian
 grounds.                                                          355-357

 8. Even Purity when we force ourselves to examine it rigorously
 yields no clear independent principle.                            357-359

 9. The common moral maxims are adequate for practical guidance,
 but do not admit of being elevated into scientific axioms.        359-361


 CHAPTER XII

 MOTIVES OR SPRINGS OF ACTION AS SUBJECTS OF MORAL JUDGMENT

 1. It has been held by several moralists that the “Universal
 Conscience” judges primarily not of Rightness of acts, but of Rank
 of Motives.                                                       362-365

 2. If, however, we include the Moral Sentiments among these
 motives, this latter view involves all the difficulties and
 perplexities of the former, yet it is paradoxical to omit these
 sentiments.                                                       365-367

 3. But even if we leave these out, we still find very little
 agreement as to Rank of Motives: and there is a special difficulty
 arising from complexity of motive. Nor does Common Sense seem to
 hold that a “higher” motive--below the highest--is always to be
 preferred to a “lower.”                                           367-372


 CHAPTER XIII

 PHILOSOPHICAL INTUITIONISM

 1. The Philosopher, as such, attempts to penetrate beneath the
 surface of Common Sense to some deeper principles:                373-374

 2. but has too often presented to the world, as the result of his
 investigation, tautological propositions and vicious circles.     374-379

 3. Still there are certain abstract moral principles of real
 importance, intuitively known; though they are not sufficient by
 themselves to give complete practical guidance. Thus we can exhibit
 a self-evident element in the commonly recognised principles of
 Prudence, Justice, and Benevolence.                               379-384

 4. This is confirmed by a reference to Clarke’s and Kant’s
 systems:                                                          384-386

 5. and also to Utilitarianism: which needs for its basis a
 self-evident principle of Rational Benevolence; as is shown by
 a criticism of Mill’s “proof.”                                    386-389

 Note                                                              389-390


 CHAPTER XIV

 ULTIMATE GOOD

 1. The notion of Virtue, as commonly conceived, cannot without a
 logical circle be identified with the notion of Ultimate Good:    391-394

 2. nor is it in accordance with Common Sense to regard Subjective
 Rightness of Will, or other elements of Perfection, as
 constituting Ultimate Good.                                       394-395

 3. What is ultimately good or desirable must be Desirable
 Consciousness.                                                    395-397

 4. _i.e._ either simply Happiness, or certain objective relations
 of the Conscious Mind.                                            398-400

 5. When these alternatives are fairly presented, Common Sense
 seems disposed to choose the former: especially as we can now
 explain its instinctive disinclination to admit Pleasure as
 ultimate end: while the other alternative leaves us without a
 criterion for determining the comparative value of different
 elements of ‘Good.’                                               400-407


 BOOK IV

 UTILITARIANISM


 CHAPTER I

 THE MEANING OF UTILITARIANISM

 1. The ethical theory called Utilitarianism, or Universalistic
 Hedonism, is to be carefully distinguished from Egoistic Hedonism:
 and also from any psychological theory as to the nature and origin
 of the Moral Sentiments.                                          411-413

 2. The notion of ‘Greatest Happiness’ has been determined in Book
 ii. chap. i.: but the extent and manner of its application require
 to be further defined. Are we to include all Sentient Beings? and
 is it Total or Average Happiness that we seek to make a maximum?
 We also require a supplementary Principle for _Distribution_ of
 Happiness: the principle of Equality is _prima facie_ reasonable. 413-417


 CHAPTER II

 THE PROOF OF UTILITARIANISM

 Common Sense demands a Proof of the first Principle of this method,
 more clearly than in the case of Egoism and Intuitionism. Such
 a proof, addressed to the Egoistic Hedonist, was in fact given
 in Book iii. chap. xiii. § 3: it exhibited the essence of the
 Utilitarian Principle as a clear and certain moral Intuition. But
 it is also important to examine its relation to other received
 maxims.                                                           418-422


 CHAPTER III

 THE RELATION OF UTILITARIANISM TO THE MORALITY OF COMMON SENSE

 1. Taking as our basis Hume’s exhibition of the Virtues as
 Felicific qualities of character, we can trace a complex
 coincidence between Utilitarianism and Common Sense. It is
 not needful--nor does it even help the argument--to show this
 coincidence to be perfect and exact.                              423-426

 2. We may observe, first, that Dispositions may often be admired
 (as generally felicific) when the special acts that have resulted
 from them are infelicific. Again, the maxims of many virtues
 are found to contain an explicit or implicit reference to Duty
 conceived as already determinate. Passing over these to examine
 the more definite among common notions of Duty:                   426-430

 3. we observe, first, how the rules that prescribe the distribution
 of kindness in accordance with normal promptings of Family
 Affections, Friendship, Gratitude, and Pity have a firm Utilitarian
 basis: and how Utilitarianism is naturally referred to for an
 explanation of the difficulties that arise in attempting to define
 these rules.                                                      430-439

 4. A similar result is reached by an examination, singly and
 together, of the different elements into which we have analysed the
 common notion of Justice:                                         439-448

 5. and in the case of other virtues.                              448-450

 6. Purity has been thought an exception: but a careful examination
 of common opinions as to the regulation of sexual relations
 exhibits a peculiarly complex and delicate correspondence between
 moral sentiments and social utilities.                            450-453

 7. The hypothesis that the Moral Sense is ‘unconsciously
 Utilitarian’ also accounts for the actual differences in different
 codes of Duty and estimates of Virtue, either in the same age and
 country, or when we compare different ages and countries. It is not
 maintained that perception of rightness has always been consciously
 derived from perception of utility: a view which the evidence of
 history fails to support.                                         453-457

 On the Utilitarian view, the relation between Ethics and Politics
 is different for different parts of the legal code.               457-459


 CHAPTER IV

 THE METHOD OF UTILITARIANISM

 1. Ought a Utilitarian, then, to accept the Morality of Common
 Sense provisionally as a body of Utilitarian doctrine? Not quite;
 for even accepting the theory that the Moral Sense is derived from
 Sympathy, we can discern several causes that must have operated
 to produce a divergence between Common Sense and a perfectly
 Utilitarian code of morality.                                     460-467

 2. At the same time it seems idle to try to construct such a code
 in any other way than by taking Positive Morality as our basis.   467-471

 3. If General Happiness be the ultimate end, it is not reasonable
 to adopt “social health” or “efficiency” as the practically
 ultimate criterion of morality.                                   471-474


 CHAPTER V

 THE METHOD OF UTILITARIANISM (_continued_)

 1. It is, then, a Utilitarian’s duty at once to support generally,
 and to rectify in detail, the morality of Common Sense: and the
 method of pure empirical Hedonism seems to be the only one that he
 can at present use in the reasonings that finally determine the
 nature and extent of this rectification.                          475-480

 2. His innovations may be either negative and destructive, or
 positive and supplementary. There are certain important general
 reasons against an innovation of the former kind, which may, in
 any given case, easily outweigh the special arguments in its
 favour.                                                           480-484

 3. Generally, a Utilitarian in recommending, by example or precept,
 a deviation from an established rule of conduct, desires his
 innovation to be generally imitated. But in some cases he may
 neither expect nor desire such imitation; though cases of this
 kind are rare and difficult to determine.                         485-492

 4. There are no similar difficulties in the way of modifying the
 Ideal of Moral Excellence--as distinguished from the dictates of
 Moral Duty--in order to render it more perfectly felicific.       492-495


 CONCLUDING CHAPTER

 THE MUTUAL RELATIONS OF THE THREE METHODS

 1. It is not difficult to combine the Intuitional and Utilitarian
 methods into one; but can we reconcile Egoistic and Universalistic
 Hedonism?                                                         496-498

 2. In so far as the latter coincides with Common Sense, we have
 seen in Book ii. chap. v. that no complete reconciliation is
 possible, on the basis of experience.                             498-499

 3. Nor does a fuller consideration of Sympathy, as a specially
 Utilitarian sanction, lead us to modify this conclusion; in spite
 of the importance that is undoubtedly to be attached to
 sympathetic pleasures.                                            499-503

 4. The Religious Sanction, if we can show that it is actually
 attached to the Utilitarian Code, is of course adequate:          503-506

 5. but its existence cannot be demonstrated by ethical arguments
 alone. Still, without this or some similar assumption, a
 fundamental contradiction in Ethics cannot be avoided.            506-509


 APPENDIX ON KANT’S CONCEPTION OF FREE WILL                            511


 INDEX                                                                 517




BOOK I




