CHAPTER VI

DEDUCTIVE HEDONISM


§ 1. In the preceding chapter we have seen reason to conclude that,
while obedience to recognised rules of duty tends, under ordinary
circumstances, to promote the happiness of the agent, there are yet no
adequate empirical grounds for regarding the performance of duty as
a universal or infallible means to the attainment of this end. Even,
however, if it were otherwise, even if it were demonstrably reasonable
for the egoist to choose duty at all costs under all circumstances, the
systematic endeavour to realise this principle would not--according
to common notions of morality--solve or supersede the problem of
determining the right method for seeking happiness. For the received
moral code allows within limits the pursuit of our own happiness,
and even seems to regard it as morally prescribed;[131] and still
more emphatically inculcates the promotion of the happiness of other
individuals, with whom we are in various ways specially connected: so
that, under either head, the questions that we have before considered
as to the determination and measurement of the elements of happiness
would still require some kind of answer.

It remains to ask how far a scientific investigation of the causes of
pleasure and pain can assist us in dealing with this practical problem.

Now it is obvious that for deciding which of two courses of action
is preferable on hedonistic grounds, we require not only to measure
pains and pleasures of different kinds, but also to ascertain how they
may be produced or averted. In most important prudential decisions,
complex chains of consequences are foreseen as intervening between
the volition we are immediately to initiate and the feelings which
constitute the ultimate end of our efforts; and the degree of accuracy
with which we forecast each link of these chains obviously depends
upon our knowledge, implicit or explicit, of the relations of cause
and effect among various natural phenomena. But if we suppose the
different elements and immediate sources of happiness to have been
duly ascertained and valued, the investigation of the conditions
of production of each hardly belongs to a general treatise on the
method of ethics; but rather to some one or other of the special
arts subordinate to the general art of conduct. Of these subordinate
arts some have a more or less scientific basis, while others are in
a merely empirical stage; thus if we have decided how far health is
to be sought, it belongs to the systematic art of hygiene, based on
physiological science, to furnish a detailed plan of seeking it; so
far, on the other hand, as we aim at power or wealth or domestic
happiness, such instruction as the experience of others can give
will be chiefly obtained in an unsystematic form, either from advice
relative to our own special circumstances, or from accounts of success
and failure in analogous situations. In either case the exposition
of such special arts does not appear to come within the scope of the
present treatise; nor could it help us in dealing with the difficulties
of measuring pleasures and pains which we have considered in the
previous chapters.

It may, however, be thought that a knowledge of the causes of pleasure
and pain may carry us beyond the determination of the means of gaining
particular kinds of pleasure and avoiding particular kinds of pain; and
enable us to substitute some deductive method of evaluing the elements
of happiness for the empirical-reflective method of which we have seen
the defects.[132]

A hedonistic method, indeed, that would dispense altogether with direct
estimates of the pleasurable and painful consequences of actions is
almost as inconceivable as a method of astronomy that would dispense
with observations of the stars. It is, however, conceivable that by
induction from cases in which empirical measurement is easy we may
obtain generalisations that will give us more trustworthy guidance
than such measurement can do in complicated cases; we may be able to
ascertain some general psychical or physical concomitant or antecedent
of pleasure and pain, more easy to recognise, foresee, measure, and
produce or avert in such cases, than pleasure and pain themselves. I
am willing to hope that this refuge from the difficulties of Empirical
Hedonism may some time or other be open to us: but I cannot perceive
that it is at present available. There is at present, so far as I can
judge, no satisfactorily established general theory of the causes of
pleasure and pain; and such theories as have gained a certain degree of
acceptance, as partially true or probable, are manifestly not adapted
for the practical application that we here require.

The chief difficulty of finding a universally applicable theory of
the causes of pleasures and pains is easily explained. Pleasures
and pains may be assumed to have universally--like other psychical
facts--certain cerebral nerve-processes, specifically unknown, as
their inseparable concomitants: accordingly, we may seek their causes
either in antecedent physical or antecedent psychical facts. But in
one important class of cases the chief cognisable antecedents are
obviously of the former kind, while in another important class they
are obviously of the latter kind: the difficulty is to establish any
theory equally applicable to both classes, or to bring the results of
the two lines of inquiry under a single generalisation without palpably
unsupported hypotheses. In the case of pleasures and pains--especially
pains--connected with sensation the most important cognisable
antecedents are clearly physical. I do not deny that, when the pain
is foreseen, the attitude of mind in which it is met may materially
influence its magnitude: indeed, in the hypnotic condition of the
brain, the feeling of pain may be apparently altogether prevented by an
antecedent belief that it will not be felt. Still in the main, under
ordinary conditions, the pains of sensation--probably the intensest
in the experience of most persons--invade and interrupt our psychical
life from without; and it would be idle to look for the chief causes
of their intensity or quality among antecedent psychical facts. This
is not equally true of the most prominent pleasures of sense: since
antecedent desire, if not an absolutely indispensable condition of
such pleasures, seems at any rate necessary to their attaining a high
degree of intensity. Still the chief causes of these desires themselves
are clearly physical states and processes--not merely neural--in the
organism of the sentient individual: and this is also true of a more
indefinite kind of pleasure, which is an important element of ordinary
human happiness,--the “well-feeling” that accompanies and is a sign of
physical well-being.

On the other hand, when we investigate the causes of the pleasures and
pains that belong to intellectual exercises or the play of personal
affections,--or of the pleasures (and to some extent pains) that belong
to the contemplation of beauty (or its opposite) in art or nature,--no
physiological theory can carry us far, owing to our ignorance of the
neural processes that accompany or antecede these feelings.

This is my general conclusion: the grounds for which I propose to
illustrate and explain further in the present chapter. It would,
however, seem to be quite beyond my limits to attempt anything like an
exhaustive discussion of either psychological or physiological theories
of the causes of pleasure and pain. I shall confine myself to certain
leading generalisations, which seem to have a special interest for
students of ethics; either because ethical motives have had a share in
causing their acceptance; or because--though inadequately grounded as
general theories--they appear to have a partial and limited value for
practical guidance.

§ 2. Let us begin by considering a theory, primarily psychological,
which has at least the merit of antiquity--as it is admittedly
derived from Aristotle,[133]--and is, in some form or other, still
current.[134] It is that expressed by Sir W. Hamilton[135] in the
following propositions: “Pleasure is the reflex of the spontaneous
and unimpeded exertion of a power of whose energy we are conscious:
pain, a reflex of the overstrained or repressed exertion of such a
power.” The phrases suggest _active_ as ordinarily distinguished from
_passive_ states; but Hamilton explains that “energy” and similar terms
“are to be understood to denote indifferently all the processes of our
higher and lower life of which we are conscious,”--on the ground that
consciousness itself implies more than a mere passivity of the subject.
I think, however, that the theory is evidently framed primarily to
suit the pleasures and pains that belong to the intellectual life
as such, and is only applied by a somewhat violent straining to an
important class among the pleasures and pains that belong to man’s
animal life. For Hamilton explains his terms (_a_) “spontaneous” and
(_b_) “unimpeded” to imply respectively (_a_) absence of “forcible
repression” or “forcible stimulation” of the power exercised, and (_b_)
absence of checks or hindrances on the part of the object about which
it is conversant. But these terms seem to have no clear psychical
import in application to organic sensations of the kind ordinarily
called passive. _E.g._ the feelings and vague representations of bodily
processes which constitute the consciousness of a toothache are as free
from conscious repression or stimulation as those which constitute
the consciousness that accompanies a warm bath:--except so far as
the mere presence of pain implies constraint, since we experience it
unwillingly, and the mere presence of pleasure implies the opposite:
but in this sense constraint and its opposite are characteristics of
the effects to be explained, and cannot therefore be regarded as their
causes.

Indeed, the ethical interest and value of the theory appears to me
to lie in its very one-sidedness. It tends to correct a vulgar error
in the estimate of pleasure, by directing attention strongly to the
importance of a class of pleasures which ordinary pleasure-seeking
probably undervalues,--the pleasures that specially belong to a life
filled with strenuous activity, whether purely intellectual, or
practical and partly physical.[136] In the same way it effectively
dispels the popular inadvertence of regarding labour as normally
painful because some labour is so, and because the pleasures connected
with relief from toil--the pleasures of repose and play--are in
the experience of most persons more striking than the pleasures of
strenuous activity. At the same time, even if we limit the theory
to the pleasures and pains immediately connected with voluntary
activity--intellectual or physical--it seems to me devoid not only
of definite guidance, but also of adequate theoretical precision.
For it seems to imply that the exercise of our powers is always made
less pleasant by the presence of impediments; but this is obviously
not true either of mainly intellectual or mainly physical activities.
Some obstacles undeniably increase pleasure by drawing out force and
skill to overcome them, as is clearly shown in the case of games and
sports: and even if we understand pain-causing impediments to be only
such hindrances as repress and diminish action, I do not find that the
theory is supported by experience, except so far as the repression
causes the specific discomfort of unsatisfied desire. _E.g._ I find
entertainment rather than discomfort in trying to make out objects in a
dim light, or the meaning of a speech in a strange language, provided
that failure does not interfere with the attainment of any end to which
I attach importance. It is a fundamental defect in Hamilton’s theory,
even in its more limited application, that it ignores the teleological
character of normal human activity.

This defect is avoided in a modification of the theory that a recent
writer has adopted. “The antithesis,” says Mr. Stout,[137] “between
pleasure and pain is coincident with the antithesis between free
and impeded progress towards an end. Unimpeded progress is pleasant
in proportion to the intensity and complexity of mental excitement.
An activity which is ... thwarted and retarded ... is painful in
proportion to its intensity and complexity and to the degree of
the hindrance.” Mr. Stout admits the difficulty of applying this
principle of explanation to the pleasures and pains of sense:[138]
and--unlike Hamilton--he expressly recognises that “a struggle with
difficulties which is not too prolonged or too intense may enhance the
pleasure of success out of all proportion to its own painfulness.”
But this qualification seems to render the propositions first laid
down unimportant from our present practical point of view, whatever
may be their theoretical value. I think, too, that the importance of
antecedent desire, as a condition of the pleasures and pains attendant
on voluntary activities, should be more expressly recognised. When
desire is strong, hopeful effort to overcome difficulties in the
way of fruition tends to be proportionally pleasurable--apart from
actual success--while disappointment or the fear of disappointment
similarly tends to be painful: but when desire is not strong, the
shock of thwarted activity and unfulfilled expectation may be rather
agreeable than otherwise. Thus, suppose I take a walk for pleasure,
intending to reach a neighbouring village, and find an unexpected
flood crossing my road; if I have no strong motive for arriving at the
village, the surprise and consequent change in the plan of my walk
will probably be on the whole a pleasurable incident.

The importance of eager desire as a condition of pleasure is noteworthy
from an ethical point of view: as it gives the psychological
basis for the familiar precept to repress--with a view to private
happiness--desires for ends that are either unattainable or
incompatible with the course of life which prudence marks out; and for
the somewhat less trite maxim of encouraging and developing desires
that prompt in the same direction as rational choice.

Suppose now we drop the dubious term “unimpeded”--retaining Hamilton’s
idea of “overstrained or repressed exertion” as the condition of
pain--and at the same time passing to a physical point of view,
mean by “activity” the activity of an _organ_. We thus reach
what is substantially Mr. Spencer’s doctrine, that pains are the
psychical concomitants of excessive or deficient actions of organs,
while pleasures are the concomitants of medium activities.[139] In
considering this theory it will be convenient to take pains and
pleasures separately: as it is obviously based primarily on experiences
of pain rather than of pleasure,--especially of the pains of sense to
which Hamilton’s theory seemed palpably inapplicable. Instances are
abundant in which pain is obviously caused by excessive stimulation of
nerves. Thus when we gradually increase the intensity of sensible heat,
pressure, muscular effort, we encounter pain at a certain point of the
increase; “deafening” sounds are highly disagreeable; and to confront
a tropical sun with unprotected eyeballs would soon become torture.
Some pains, again, as Spencer points out, arise from the excessive
actions of organs whose normal actions yield no feelings: as when the
digestive apparatus is overtaxed. Still in none of these cases does
it seem clear that pain supervenes through a mere intensification _in
degree_ of the action of the organ in question; and not rather through
some change in the kind of action--some inchoate disintegration or
disorganisation. And this latter cause--rather than mere quantity of
stimulation--is strongly suggested by a consideration of the pains due
to wounds and diseases, and even of the transient digestive discomforts
which arise from an improper kind rather than an improper quantity
of food. And a similar explanation seems to me most probable in the
case of pains which, according to Mr. Spencer, arise from “deficient”
action. He speaks of these as “discomforts or cravings”; but, as I
have before pointed out,[140] bodily appetites and other desires may
be strongly-felt impulses to action without being appreciably painful:
and, in my experience, when they become decidedly painful, some
disturbance tending to derangement may be presumed either in the organ
primarily concerned or in the organism as a whole. Thus hunger, in my
experience, may be extremely keen without being appreciably painful:
and when I find it painful, experience leads me to expect a temporarily
reduced power of assimilation, indicating some disorganisation in the
digestive apparatus.[141]

In any case, empirical evidence supports “excessive action” of an organ
as a cause of pain far more clearly than “deficient action.” Indeed a
consideration of this evidence has led some psychologists to adopt the
generalisation[142] that there is no quality of sensation absolutely
pleasant or unpleasant, but that every kind of sensation as it grows in
intensity begins at a certain point to be pleasurable, and continues
such up to a certain further point at which it passes rapidly through
indifference into pain. My own experience, however, fails to support
this generalisation. I agree with Gurney[143] that “of many tastes and
odours the faintest possible suggestion is disagreeable”; while other
feelings resulting from stimulation of sense-organs appear to remain
highly pleasurable at the highest degree of stimulation which the
actual conditions of physical life appear to allow.

However this may be, whether we conceive the nervous action of which
pain is an immediate consequent or concomitant as merely excessive in
quantity, or in some way discordant or disorganised in quality, it
is obvious that neither explanation can furnish us with any important
practical guidance: since we have no general means of ascertaining,
independently of our experience of pain itself, what nervous actions
are excessive or disorganised: and the cases where we have such means
do not present any practical problems which the theory enables us to
solve. No one doubts that wounds and diseases are to be avoided under
all ordinary circumstances: and in the exceptional circumstances in
which we may be moved to choose them as the least of several evils, the
exactest knowledge of their precise operation in causing pain is not
likely to assist our choice.

It may be said, however,--turning from pain to pleasure,--that the
generalisation which we have been considering at any rate gives us a
psychophysical basis for the ancient maxim of “avoiding excess” in
the pursuit of pleasure. But we have to observe that the practical
need of this maxim is largely due to the qualifications which the
psychophysical generalisation requires to make it true. Thus it is
especially needed in the important cases in which over-stimulation is
followed by pain not at once but after an interval of varying length.
_E.g._ alcoholic drinking, to many, remains pleasurable at the time up
to the point of excess at which the brain can no longer perform its
functions: it is “next morning” that the pain comes, or perhaps--in the
case of “well-seasoned” topers--not till after many years of habitual
excess. It should be noted also that it is not always the organ of
which the exercise gives pleasure that also, through over-exercise,
causes the pain of excess. Thus when we are tempted to eat too much,
the seductive pleasure is mainly due to the nerves of taste which are
not overtaxed; the pains come from the organs of digestion, whose
faint, vague pleasures alone would hardly tempt the voluptuary to
excess. In the case of dangerous mental excitements the penalty on
excess is usually still more indirect.

On the whole, granting that pleasure like virtue resides somewhere
in the mean, it must be admitted that this proposition gives no
practical directions for attaining it. For first, granting that both
excessive and deficient activities of organs cause pain, the question
still remains--as Spencer himself says--What determines in any case
the lower and the higher limits within which action is pleasurable?
Spencer’s answer to this question I will consider presently. But
there is a question no less obvious to which he does not expressly
advert, viz. why among the normal activities of our physical organs,
that have counterparts in consciousness, some only are pleasurable in
any appreciable degree, while many if not most are nearly or quite
indifferent. It seems undeniable (_e.g._) that while tastes and
smells are mostly either agreeable or disagreeable, most sensations
of touch and many of sight and sound are not appreciably[144] either;
and that, in the daily routine of healthy life, eating and drinking
are ordinarily pleasant, while dressing and undressing, walking and
muscular movements generally are practically indifferent.

It does not seem that an adequate explanation can be found in the
operation of habit.[145] It is no doubt true that actions through
frequent uniform repetition tend to become automatic and lose their
conscious counterparts, and hedonic indifference certainly seems in
some cases to be a stage through which such actions pass on the way
to unconsciousness. Thus even a business walk in a strange town is
normally pleasant through the novelty of the sights: but a similar walk
in the town where one lives is ordinarily indifferent, or nearly so;
while if one’s attention is strongly absorbed by the business, it may
be performed to a great extent unconsciously. On the other hand, the
operations of habit often have the opposite effect of making activities
pleasant which were at first indifferent or even disagreeable: as in
the case of acquired tastes, physical or intellectual. Indeed such
experiences have long been--I think, quite legitimately--used by
moralists as an encouragement to irksome duties, on the ground that
their irksomeness will be transient, through the operation of habit,
while the gain of their performance will be permanent. Mr. Spencer,
indeed, regards such experiences as so important that he ventures to
base on them the prediction that “pleasure will eventually accompany
every mode of action demanded by social conditions.” This, however,
seems unduly optimistic, in view not only of the first-mentioned
tendency of habit to hedonic indifference, but also of a third tendency
to render actions, at first indifferent or even pleasant, gradually
more irksome. Thus our intellect gradually wearies of monotonous
activities, and the _ennui_ may sometimes become intense: so again the
relish of a kind of diet at first agreeable may turn through monotony
into disgust.

Some quite different explanation must therefore be sought for the
varying degrees in which pleasure accompanies normal activities. Can
we find this in a suggestion of Mr. Spencer’s, developed by Mr. Grant
Allen,[146] that the pleasurableness of normal organic activities
depends on their _intermittence_, and that “the amount of pleasure
is probably ... in the inverse ratio of the natural frequency of
excitation” of the nerve-fibres involved? This theory certainly
finds some support in the fact that the sensual pleasures generally
recognised as greatest are those attending the activities of organs
which are normally left unexercised for considerable intervals.
Still, there are many facts that it does not explain--_e.g._ the
great differences in the pleasures obtainable at any given time by
different stimulations of the same sense; the phenomenon expressed in
the proverbial phrase “L’appétit vient en mangeant”; and the fact that
the exercise of the visual organs after apparently dreamless sleep does
not give appreciably keener pleasure than it does at ordinary times. It
would seem that we must seek for some special cause of the pleasurable
effect of intermittence in certain cases. And this cannot be merely
the greater intensity of the nervous action that takes place when
long-unexercised and well-nourished nerve-centres are stimulated: for
why, if that were the explanation, should the normal consciousness of
full nervous activity, gradually attained--as when we are in full swing
of energetic unwearied work of a routine kind--be often nearly or quite
indifferent?

Among the various competing hypotheses offered at this point of our
inquiry--no one of which, I believe, has attained anything like general
acceptance as covering the whole ground--I select for discussion one
that has special ethical interest.

According to this hypothesis,[147] the organic process accompanied
by pleasure is to be conceived as a “restoration of equilibrium”
after “disturbance”: so that the absence of appreciable pleasure in
the case of certain normal activities is explained by the absence of
antecedent disturbance. This view is obviously applicable to certain
classes of pleasures which, though by no means rare are incidental
in a normal life:--the pleasure of relief after physical pain, or
after the strain of great anxiety, and the pleasure of repose after
unusual exertions, intellectual or muscular. But when we attempt to
apply it to sensational pleasures generally, the indefiniteness of
the notion of “equilibrium,” as applied to the processes of a living
organism, becomes manifest. For our physical life consists of a series
of changes, for the most part periodically recurrent with slight
modification after short intervals: and it is difficult to see why we
should attach the idea of “disturbance” or “restoration of equilibrium”
to any one among these normal processes rather than any other:--_e.g._
it is difficult to see why the condition of having expended energy
should be regarded as a departure from equilibrium any more than the
condition of having just taken in nutriment. In fact, to render the
hypothesis we are considering at all applicable to normal pleasures
of sense, we have to pass from the physiological to the psychological
point of view, and take note of the psychical state of _desire_, as
a consciously _unrestful_ condition, of which the essence is a felt
impulse to pass out of this state towards the attainment of the desired
object. Our hypothesis, then, may take this unrestful consciousness as
a sign of what, from a physiological point of view, is “disturbance of
equilibrium,” and similarly, the satisfaction of desire may be taken to
be, physiologically, a restoration of equilibrium. On this assumption,
the theory becomes undeniably applicable to those gratifications of
sensual appetite which form the most prominent element of the pleasures
of sense, as popularly conceived.

Now we have already noted that by a wide-spread confusion of thought,
desire has often been regarded as a species of pain. Accordingly, the
theory that we are considering was originally prompted by the ethical
motive of depreciating the vulgarly overvalued pleasures of satisfied
bodily appetite, by laying stress on their inseparable connexion
with antecedent pain. The depreciation, however, fails so far as the
appetite which is a necessary antecedent condition of the pleasure
is--though an unrestful state--not appreciably painful.[148]

In any case, admitting the physical counterpart of conscious desire
to be a ‘disturbance of equilibrium,’ or an effect and sign of such
disturbance, the theory seems open to obvious objections, if it is
extended to cover the whole range of the pleasures of sense. For
conscious desire is certainly not a necessary condition of experiencing
the simple pleasures of the special senses: normally no sense of
want has preceded the experience of pleasant sights, sounds, odours,
flavours, or of the more important pleasures, more complex in their
psychical conditions, which we call æsthetic. No doubt in special cases
antecedent privation may produce a conscious want of these latter
pleasures which may increase their intensity when they are at length
attained: or even without any felt privation, the prospect of enjoying
such pleasures may produce a keen desire for the enjoyment, which may
be regarded as a “disturbance of equilibrium” no less plausibly than
a bodily appetite. But it would be quite unwarrantable therefore to
suppose a similar disturbance, though unfelt, in the ordinary cases
where pleasures of this kind are experienced without any antecedent
consciousness of desire or want.

I have perhaps said enough to support my general conclusion that
psychophysical speculation as to the causes of pleasure and pain does
not at present afford a basis for a deductive method of practical
Hedonism. But, before passing from this topic, I may remark that the
difficulties in the way of any such theory seem especially great in
the case of the complex pleasures which we distinguish as “æsthetic.”
All would agree that æsthetic gratification, when at all high, depends
on a subtle harmony of different elements in a complex state of
consciousness; and that the pleasure resulting from such harmonious
combination is indefinitely greater than the sum of the simpler
pleasures which the uncombined elements would yield. But even those
who estimate most highly the success that has so far been attained
in discovering the conditions of this harmony, in the case of any
particular art, would admit that mere conformity to the conditions
thus ascertained cannot secure the production of æsthetic pleasure
in any considerable degree. However subtly we state in general terms
the objective relations of elements in a delightful work of art, on
which its delight seems to depend, we must always feel that it would
be possible to produce out of similar elements a work corresponding to
our general description which would give no delight at all; the touch
that gives delight depends upon an instinct for which no deductive
reasoning can supply a substitute. This is true, even without taking
into account the wide divergences that we actually find in the æsthetic
sensibilities of individuals: still less, therefore, is it needful to
argue that, from the point of view of an individual seeking his own
greatest happiness, none but a mainly inductive and empirical method of
estimating æsthetic pleasures can be made available.

§ 3. I now pass to consider a theory which may be distinguished from
those discussed in the preceding section as being biological rather
than psychophysical: since it directs attention not to the actual
present characteristics of the organic states or changes of which
pleasures and pains are the concomitants or immediate consequents,
but to their relations to the life of the organism as a whole. I mean
the theory that “pains are the correlatives of actions injurious to
the organism, while pleasures are the correlatives of acts conducive
to its welfare.” Mr. Spencer, from whom the above propositions are
quoted,[149] subsequently explains “injurious” and “conducive to
welfare” to mean respectively “tending to decrease or loss of life,”
and “tending to continuance or increase of life”: but in his deduction
by which the above conclusion is summarily established, “injurious”
and “beneficial” are used as equivalent simply to “destructive” and
“preservative” of organic life: and it will be more convenient to take
the terms first in this simpler signification.

Mr. Spencer’s argument is as follows:--

 “If we substitute for the word Pleasure the equivalent phrase--a
 feeling which we seek to bring into consciousness and retain there;
 and if we substitute for the word Pain the equivalent phrase--a
 feeling which we seek to get out of consciousness and to keep out;
 we see at once that, if the states of consciousness which a creature
 endeavours to maintain are the correlatives of injurious actions,
 and if the states of consciousness which it endeavours to expel are
 the correlatives of beneficial actions, it must quickly disappear
 through persistence in the injurious and avoidance of the beneficial.
 In other words, those races of beings only can have survived in
 which, on the average, agreeable or desired feelings went along with
 activities conducive to the maintenance of life, while disagreeable
 and habitually-avoided feelings went along with activities directly or
 indirectly destructive of life; and there must ever have been, other
 things equal, the most numerous and long-continued survivals among
 races in which these adjustments of feelings to actions were the best,
 tending ever to bring about perfect adjustment.”

Now I am not concerned to deny the value of this summary deduction
for certain purposes. But it can easily be shown to be inadequate to
afford a basis for a deductive method of seeking maximum happiness for
the individual, by substituting Preservation for Pleasure as the end
directly aimed at. In the first place, Mr. Spencer only affirms the
conclusion to be true, as he rather vaguely says, “on the average”: and
it is obvious that though the tendency to find injurious acts pleasant
or preservative acts painful must be a disadvantage to any species
of animal in the struggle for existence, it may--if existing only
to a limited extent--be outweighed by other advantages, so that the
organism in which it exists may survive in spite of it. This, I say,
is obvious _a priori_: and common experience, as Mr. Spencer admits,
shows “in many conspicuous ways” that this has been actually the case
with civilised man during the whole period of history that we know:
owing to the changes caused by the course of civilisation, “there has
arisen and must long continue a deep and involved derangement of the
natural connexions between pleasures and beneficial actions and between
pains and detrimental actions.” This seems to be in itself a sufficient
objection to founding a deductive method of Hedonism on Mr. Spencer’s
general conclusion. It is, indeed, notorious that civilised men take
pleasure in various forms of unhealthy conduct and find conformity to
the rules of health irksome; and it is also important to note that they
may be, and actually are, susceptible of keen pleasure from acts and
processes that have no material tendency to preserve life. Nor is there
any difficulty in explaining this on the “evolution hypothesis”; since
we cannot argue _a priori_ from this hypothesis that the development
of the nervous system in human beings may not bring with it intense
susceptibilities to pleasure from non-preservative processes, if only
the preservation of the individuals in whom such susceptibilities
are developed is otherwise adequately provided for. Now this latter
supposition is obviously realised in the case of persons of leisure
in civilised society; whose needs of food, clothing, shelter, etc.,
are abundantly supplied through the complex social habit which we call
the institution of private property: and I know no empirical ground
for supposing that a cultivated man tends, in consequence of the keen
and varied pleasure which he seeks and enjoys, to live longer than a
man who goes through a comparatively dull round of monotonous routine
activity, interspersed by slightly pleasurable intervals of repose and
play.

§ 4. If, however, the individual is not likely to obtain a maximum
of Pleasure by aiming merely at Preservation, it remains to consider
whether “quantity of life” will serve any better. Now it is of course
true that so far as nervous action is attended by consciousness
pleasurable in quality, the more there is of it, the happier we shall
be. But even if we assume that the more intense and full life is “on
the average” the happier, it by no means follows that we shall gain
_maximum_ pleasure by aiming merely at intensity of consciousness:
for we experience intense pains even more indubitably than intense
pleasures, and in those “full tides of soul,” in which we seem to
be most alive, painful consciousness may be mixed in almost any
proportion. And further we often experience excitement nearly or quite
neutral in quality (_i.e._ not distinctly pleasurable or painful),
which reaches a great pitch of intensity, as in the case of laborious
struggles with difficulties, and perplexing conflicts of which the
issue is doubtful.

It may, however, be replied that “quantity of life” must be taken to
imply not merely intensity of consciousness, but multiplicity and
variety--a harmonious and many-sided development of human nature. And
experience certainly seems to support the view that men lose happiness
by allowing some of their faculties or capacities to be withered
and dwarfed for want of exercise, and thus not leaving themselves
sufficient variety of feelings or activities: especially as regards
the bodily organs, it will be agreed that the due exercise of most, if
not all, is indispensable to the health of the organism; and further,
that the health maintained by this balance of functions is a more
important source of the individual’s happiness than the unhealthy
over-exercise of any one organ can be. Still, it would appear that the
harmony of functions necessary to health is a very elastic one, and
admits of a very wide margin of variation, as far as the organs under
voluntary control are concerned. A man (_e.g._) who exercises his brain
alone will probably be ill in consequence: but he may exercise his
brain much and his legs little, or _vice versa_, without any morbid
results. And, in the same way, we cannot lay down the proposition, that
a varied and many-sided life is the happiest, with as much precision
as would be necessary if it were to be accepted as a basis for
deductive Hedonism. For it seems to be also largely true, on the other
side, that the more we come to exercise any faculty with sustained
and prolonged concentration, the more pleasure we derive from such
exercise, up to the point at which it becomes wearisome, or turns into
a semi-mechanical routine which renders consciousness dull and languid.
It is, no doubt, important for our happiness that we should keep
within this limit: but we cannot fix it precisely in any particular
case without special experience: especially as there seems always to
be a certain amount of weariness and tedium which must be resisted and
overcome, if we would bring our faculties into full play, and obtain
the full enjoyment of our labour. And similarly in respect of passive
emotional consciousness: if too much sameness of feeling results in
languor, too much variety inevitably involves shallowness. The point
where concentration ought to stop, and where dissipation begins, varies
from man to man, and must, it would seem, be decided by the specific
experience of individuals.

There is, however, another and simpler way in which the maxim
of ‘giving free development to one’s nature’ may be understood:
_i.e._ in the sense of yielding to spontaneous impulses, instead of
endeavouring to govern these by elaborate forecasts of consequences:
a scientific justification for this course being found in the theory
that spontaneous or instinctive impulses really represent the effects
of previous experiences of pleasure and pain on the organism in which
they appear, or its ancestors. On this ground, it has been maintained
that in complicated problems of conduct, experience will “enable
the constitution to estimate the respective amounts of pleasure and
pain consequent upon each alternative,” where it is “impossible for
the intellect” to do this: and “will further cause the organism
instinctively to shun that course which produces on the whole most
suffering.”[150] That there is an important element of truth in this
contention I would not deny. But any broad conclusion that non-rational
inclination is a better guide than reason to the individual’s happiness
would be quite unwarranted by anything that we know or can plausibly
conjecture respecting biological evolution. For--overlooking the effect
of natural selection to foster impulses tending to the preservation
of the race rather than the pleasure of the individual, and granting
that every sentient organism tends to adapt itself to its environment,
in such a manner as to acquire instincts of some value in guiding
it to pleasure and away from pain--it by no means follows that in
the human organism one particular kind of adaptation, that which
proceeds by unconscious modification of instinct, is to be preferred
to that other kind of adaptation which is brought about by conscious
comparison and inference. It rather seems clear, that this proposition
can only be justified by a comparison of the consequences of yielding
to instinctive impulses with the consequences of controlling them by
calculations of resulting pleasure and pain. But it will hardly be
maintained that in the majority of clear instances where non-rational
impulse conflicts with rational forecast, a subsequent calculation of
consequences appears to justify the former; the assertion would be in
too flagrant conflict with the common sense and common experience of
mankind. Hence, however true it may be that in certain cases instinct
is on the whole a safer guide than prudential calculation, it would
still seem that we can only ascertain these cases by careful reflection
on experience: we cannot determine the limits to which prudential
calculation may prudently be carried, except by this very calculation
itself.

We seem, then, forced to conclude that there is no scientific short-cut
to the ascertainment of the right means to the individual’s happiness:
every attempt to find a ‘high priori road’ to this goal brings us back
inevitably to the empirical method. For instead of a clear principle
universally valid, we only get at best a vague and general rule, based
on considerations which it is important not to overlook, but the
relative value of which we can only estimate by careful observation
and comparison of individual experience. Whatever uncertainty besets
these processes must necessarily extend to all our reasonings about
happiness. I have no wish to exaggerate these uncertainties, feeling
that we must all continue to seek happiness for ourselves and for
others, in whatever obscurity we may have to grope after it: but there
is nothing gained by underrating them, and it is idle to argue as if
they did not exist.

FOOTNOTES:

[131] “It should seem that a due concern about our own interest or
happiness, and a reasonable endeavour to secure and promote it, ... is
virtue, and the contrary behaviour faulty and blamable.” Butler (in the
Dissertation _Of the Nature of Virtue_ appended to the _Analogy_).

[132] This view is suggested by Mr. Herbert Spencer’s statement--in
a letter to J. S. Mill, published in Mr. Bain’s _Mental and Moral
Science_; and partially reprinted in Mr. Spencer’s _Data of Ethics_,
chap. iv. § 21--that “it is the business of moral science to deduce,
from the laws of life and the conditions of existence, what kinds
of actions necessarily tend to produce happiness, and what kinds to
produce unhappiness,” and that when it has done this, “its deductions
are to be recognised as laws of conduct; and are to be conformed to
irrespective of a direct estimate of happiness or misery.” I ought,
however, to say that Mr. Spencer has made it clear in his latest
treatise that the only cogent deductions of this kind which he
conceives to be possible relate to the behaviour not of men here and
now, but of ideal men living in an ideal society, and living under
conditions so unlike those of actual humanity that all their actions
produce “pleasure unalloyed with pain anywhere” (_Data of Ethics_, §
101). The laws of conduct in this Utopia constitute, in Mr. Spencer’s
view, the subject-matter of “Absolute Ethics”; which he distinguishes
from the “Relative Ethics” that concerns itself with the conduct
of the imperfect men who live under the present imperfect social
conditions, and of which the method is, as he admits, to a great
extent “necessarily empirical” (_Data of Ethics_, § 108). How far
such a system as Mr. Spencer calls Absolute Ethics can be rationally
constructed, and how far its construction would be practically useful,
I shall consider in a later part of this treatise (Book iv. chap. iv.),
when I come to deal with the method of Universalistic Hedonism: at
present I am only concerned with the question how far any deductive
Ethics is capable of furnishing practical guidance to an individual
seeking his own greatest happiness here and now.

[133] Aristotle’s theory is, briefly, that every normal
sense-perception or rational activity has its correspondent pleasure,
and that the most perfect is the most pleasant: the most perfect in the
case of any faculty being the exercise of the faculty in good condition
on the best object. The pleasure follows the activity immediately,
giving it a kind of finish, “like the bloom of youth.” Pleasures
vary in kind, as the activities that constitute life vary: the best
pleasures are those of the philosophic life.

[134] See Bouillier, _Du plaisir et de la douleur_, chap. iii.; L.
Dumont, _Théorie scientifique de la sensibilité_, chap. iii.; as well
as Stout, _Analytic Psychology_, chap. xii.--to which I refer later.

[135] _Lectures on Metaphysics_, vol. ii. Lect. xlii.

[136] In Aristotle’s exposition of this theory--which with him is only
a theory of pleasure--the ethical motive of exhibiting the philosophic
life as preferable to that of the sensualist, in respect of the
pleasures it affords, is quite unmistakable.

[137] _Analytic Psychology_, chap. xii. 2.

[138] The physiological theory which Mr. Stout puts forward, as at once
correspondent and supplementary to his psychological generalisation,
will be noticed later.

[139] _Psychology_, chap. ix. § 128.

[140] Book i. chap. iv.

[141] It may be added that in the case of emotional pains and
pleasures, the notion of _quantitative_ difference between the cerebral
nerve-processes, antecedent respectively to the one and the other,
seems altogether unwarrantable: the pains of shame, disappointed
ambition, wounded love, do not appear to be distinguishable from the
pleasures of fame, success, reciprocated affection, by any difference
of intensity in the impressions or ideas accompanied by the pleasures
and pains respectively.

[142] See Wundt, _Grundzüge der physiologischen Psychologie_, chap. x.

[143] _Power of Sound_, chap. i. § 2.

[144] I say “appreciably” because the controverted psychological
question whether there are any _strictly_ neutral or indifferent
modifications of consciousness seems to me unimportant from a practical
point of view. See Sully, _Human Mind_, chap. xiii. § 2.

[145] See Stout, _Analytic Psychology_, _l.c._

[146] _Physiological Æsthetics_, chap. ii.

[147] See Stout, _Analytic Psychology_, chap. xii. § 4.

[148] See Book i. chap. iv. _Note_.

[149] _Principles of Psychology_, § 125, and _Data of Ethics_, § 33.

[150] The quotations are from Mr. Spencer’s _Social Statics_, chap.
iv.: but I should explain that in the passage quoted Mr. Spencer is not
writing from the point of view of Egoistic Hedonism.




