CHAPTER II

EMPIRICAL HEDONISM


§ 1. The first and most fundamental assumption, involved not only in
the empirical method of Egoistic Hedonism, but in the very conception
of ‘Greatest Happiness’ as an end of action, is the commensurability of
Pleasures and Pains. By this I mean that we must assume the pleasures
sought and the pains shunned to have determinate quantitative relations
to each other; for otherwise they cannot be conceived as possible
elements of a total which we are to seek to make as great as possible.
It is not absolutely necessary to exclude the supposition that there
are some kinds of pleasure so much more pleasant than others, that the
smallest conceivable amount of the former would outweigh the greatest
conceivable amount of the latter; since, if this were ascertained to
be the case, the only result would be that any hedonistic calculation
involving pleasures of the former class might be simplified by
treating those of the latter class as practically non-existent.[99]
I think, however, that in all ordinary prudential reasoning, at any
rate, the assumption is implicitly made that all the pleasures and
pains that man can experience bear a finite ratio to each other in
respect of pleasantness and its opposite. So far as this ratio can be
made definite the Intensity of a pleasure (or pain) can be balanced
against its Duration:[100] for if we conceive one pleasure (or pain),
finite in duration, to be intensively greater than another in some
definite ratio, it seems to be implied in this conception that the
latter if continuously increased in extent--without change in its
intensity--would at a certain point just balance the former in amount.

If pleasures, then, can be arranged in a scale, as greater or less
in some finite degree; we are led to the assumption of a hedonistic
zero, or perfectly neutral feeling, as a point from which the positive
quantity of pleasures may be measured. And this latter assumption
emerges still more clearly when we consider the comparison and
balancing of pleasures with pains, which Hedonism necessarily involves.
For pain must be reckoned as the negative quantity of pleasure, to
be balanced against and subtracted from the positive in estimating
happiness on the whole; we must therefore conceive, as at least ideally
possible, a point of transition in consciousness at which we pass
from the positive to the negative. It is not absolutely necessary to
assume that this strictly indifferent or neutral feeling ever actually
occurs. Still experience seems to show that a state at any rate very
nearly approximating to it is even common: and we certainly experience
continual transitions from pleasure to pain and _vice versa_, and thus
(unless we conceive all such transitions to be abrupt) we must exist at
least momentarily in this neutral state.

In what I have just said, I have by implication denied the paradox
of Epicurus[101] that the state of painlessness is equivalent to
the highest possible pleasure; so that if we can obtain absolute
freedom from pain, the goal of Hedonism is reached, after which
we may vary, but cannot increase, our pleasure. This doctrine is
opposed to common sense and common experience. But it would, I think,
be equally erroneous, on the other hand, to regard this neutral
feeling--hedonistic zero, as I have called it--as the normal condition
of our consciousness, out of which we occasionally sink into pain, and
occasionally rise into pleasure. Nature has not been so niggardly to
man as this: so long as health is retained, and pain and irksome toil
banished, the mere performance of the ordinary habitual functions of
life is, according to my experience, a frequent source of moderate
pleasures, alternating rapidly with states nearly or quite indifferent.
Thus we may venture to say that the ‘apathy’ which so large a
proportion of Greek moralists in the post-Aristotelian period regarded
as the ideal state of existence, was not really conceived by them as
“without one pleasure and without one pain”; but rather as a state of
placid intellectual contemplation, which in philosophic minds might
easily reach a high degree of pleasure.

§ 2. We have yet to give to the notions of pleasure and pain the
precision required for quantitative comparison. In dealing with this
point, and in the rest of the hedonistic discussion, it will be
convenient for the most part to speak of pleasure only, assuming that
pain may be regarded as the negative quantity of pleasure, and that
accordingly any statements made with respect to pleasure may be at once
applied, by obvious changes of phrase, to pain.

The equivalent phrase for Pleasure, according to Mr. Spencer,[102]
is “a feeling which we seek to bring into consciousness and retain
there”; and similarly, Mr. Bain says that “pleasure and pain, in the
actual or real experience, are to be held as identical with motive
power.” But--granting that pleasures normally excite desire--it still
does not seem to me that I judge pleasures to be greater and less
exactly in proportion as they stimulate the will to actions tending
to sustain them. Of course neither Mr. Bain nor Mr. Spencer must be
understood to lay down that all pleasures when actually felt actually
stimulate to exertion of some kind; since this is obviously not true of
the pleasures of repose, a warm bath, etc. The stimulus must in such
cases be understood to be latent and potential; only becoming actual
when action is required to prevent the cessation or diminution of the
pleasure. Thus a man enjoying rest after fatigue is vaguely conscious
of a strong clinging to his actual condition, and of a latent readiness
to resist any impulse to change it. Further, the stimulus of moderate
pleasures and pains may become unfelt through habitual repression.
For instance, in a habitually temperate man the stimulus to prolong
the pleasure of eating or drinking usually ceases before the pleasure
ceases: it is only occasionally that he feels the need of controlling
an impulse to eat or drink up to the point of satiety. So again, a
protracted pain of moderate intensity and free from alarm--such as a
dull prolonged toothache--seems sometimes to lose its felt stimulus to
action without losing its character as pain. Here again the stimulus
may be properly conceived as latent: since if asked whether we should
like to get rid of even a mild toothache, we should certainly answer
yes.

But even if we confine our attention to cases where the stimulus is
palpable and strong, Mr. Bain’s identification of “pleasure and pain”
with motive power does not appear to me to accord exactly with our
common empirical judgments. He himself contrasts the “disproportionate
strain of active powers in one direction,” to which “any sudden and
great delight may give rise,” with the “proper frame of mind under
delight,” which is “to inspire no endeavours except what the charm
of the moment justifies.”[103] And he elsewhere explains that “our
pleasurable emotions are all liable to detain the mind unduly,” through
the “atmosphere of excitement” with which they are surrounded, carrying
the mind “beyond the estimate of pleasure and pain, to the state
named ‘passion,’” in which a man is not “moved solely by the strict
value of the pleasure,” but also by “the engrossing power of the
excitement.”[104] It is true that in such cases Mr. Bain seems to hold
that these “disturbances and anomalies of the will _scarcely_ begin
to tell in the actual feeling,”[105] but it seems to me clear that
exciting pleasures are liable to exercise, even when actually felt, a
volitional stimulus out of proportion to their intensity as pleasures;
and Mr. Bain himself seems to recognise this in a passage where he
says that “acute pleasures and pains stimulate the will perhaps more
strongly than an equivalent stimulation of the massive kind.”[106] I
also find that some feelings which stimulate strongly to their own
removal are either not painful at all or only slightly painful:--_e.g._
ordinarily the sensation of being tickled. If this be so, it is
obviously inexact to define pleasure, _for purposes of measurement_,
as the kind of feeling that we seek to retain in consciousness. Shall
we then say that there is a measurable quality of feeling expressed by
the word “pleasure,” which is independent of its relation to volition,
and strictly undefinable from its simplicity?--like the quality of
feeling expressed by “sweet,” of which also we are conscious in varying
degrees of intensity. This seems to be the view of some writers: but,
for my own part, when I reflect on the notion of pleasure,--using the
term in the comprehensive sense which I have adopted, to include the
most refined and subtle intellectual and emotional gratifications, no
less than the coarser and more definite sensual enjoyments,--the only
common quality that I can find in the feelings so designated seems to
be that relation to desire and volition expressed by the general term
“desirable,” in the sense previously explained. I propose therefore
to define Pleasure--when we are considering its “strict value”
for purposes of quantitative comparison--as a feeling which, when
experienced by intelligent beings, is at least implicitly apprehended
as desirable or--in cases of comparison--preferable.

Here, however, a new question comes into view. When I stated in the
preceding chapter, as a fundamental assumption of Hedonism, that it is
reasonable to prefer pleasures in proportion to their intensity, and
not to allow this ground of preference to be outweighed by any merely
qualitative difference, I implied that the preference of pleasures on
grounds of quality as opposed to quantity--as ‘higher’ or ‘nobler’--is
actually possible: and indeed such non-hedonistic preference is
commonly thought to be of frequent occurrence. But if we take the
definition of pleasure just given--that it is the kind of feeling
which we apprehend to be desirable or preferable--it seems to be a
contradiction in terms to say that the less pleasant feeling can ever
be thought preferable to the more pleasant.

This contradiction may be avoided as follows. It will be generally
admitted that the pleasantness of a feeling is only directly cognisable
by the individual who feels it at the time of feeling it. Thus,
though (as I shall presently argue), in so far as any estimate of
pleasantness involves comparison with feelings only represented in
idea, it is liable to be erroneous through imperfections in the
representation--still, no one is in a position to controvert the
preference of the sentient individual, so far as the quality of the
present feeling alone is concerned. When, however, we judge of the
preferable quality (as ‘elevation’ or ‘refinement’) of a state of
consciousness as distinct from its pleasantness,[107] we seem to appeal
to some common standard which others can apply as well as the sentient
individual. Hence I should conclude that when one kind of pleasure is
judged to be qualitatively superior to another, although less pleasant,
it is not really the feeling itself that is preferred, but something in
the mental or physical conditions or relations under which it arises,
regarded as cognisable objects of our common thought. For certainly
if I in thought distinguish any feeling from all its conditions and
concomitants--and also from all its effects on the subsequent feelings
of the same individual or of others--and contemplate it merely as the
transient feeling of a single subject; it seems to me impossible to
find in it any other preferable quality than that which we call its
pleasantness, the degree of which is only cognisable directly by the
sentient individual.

It should be observed that if this definition of pleasure be accepted,
and if, as before proposed, ‘Ultimate Good’ be taken as equivalent
to ‘what is ultimately desirable,’ the fundamental proposition of
ethical Hedonism has chiefly a negative significance; for the statement
that ‘Pleasure is the Ultimate Good’ will only mean that nothing is
ultimately desirable except desirable feeling, apprehended as desirable
by the sentient individual at the time of feeling it. This being so, it
may be urged against the definition that it could not be accepted by
a moralist of stoical turn, who while recognising pleasure as a fact
refused to recognise it as in any degree ultimately desirable. But I
think such a moralist ought to admit an implied judgment that a feeling
is _per se_ desirable to be inseparably connected with its recognition
as pleasure; while holding that sound philosophy shows the illusoriness
of such judgments. This, in fact, seems to have been substantially the
view of the Stoic school.

However this may be, I conceive that the preference which pure Hedonism
regards as ultimately rational, should be defined as the preference of
feeling valued merely as feeling, according to the estimate implicitly
or explicitly made by the sentient individual at the time of feeling
it; without any regard to the conditions and relations under which
it arises. Accordingly we may state as the fundamental assumption of
what I have called Quantitative Hedonism,--implied in the adoption of
“greatest surplus of pleasure over pain” as the ultimate end,--that
all pleasures and pains, estimated merely as feelings, have for the
sentient individual cognisable degrees of desirability, positive or
negative; observing further, that the empirical method of Hedonism can
only be applied so far as we assume that these degrees of desirability
are definitely given in experience.

There is one more assumption of a fundamental kind, which is not
perhaps involved in the acceptance of the Hedonistic calculus
considered as purely theoretical, but is certainly implied if it be
put forward as a practical method for determining right conduct: the
assumption, namely, that we can by foresight and calculation increase
our pleasures and decrease our pains. It may perhaps be thought
pedantic to state it formally: and in fact no one will deny that the
conditions upon which our pleasures and pains depend are to some
extent cognisable by us and within our own control. But, as we shall
see, it has been maintained that the practice of Hedonistic observation
and calculation has an inevitable tendency to decrease our pleasures
generally, or the most important of them: so that it becomes a question
whether we can gain our greatest happiness by seeking it, or at any
rate by trying to seek it with scientific exactness.

 NOTE.--It is sometimes thought to be a necessary assumption of
 Hedonists that a surplus of pleasure over pain is actually attainable
 by human beings: a proposition which an extreme pessimist would deny.
 But the conclusion that life is always on the whole painful would not
 prove it to be unreasonable for a man to aim ultimately at minimising
 pain, if this is still admitted to be possible; though it would, no
 doubt, render immediate suicide, by some painless process, the only
 reasonable course for a perfect egoist--unless he looked forward to
 another life.

FOOTNOTES:

[99] We find it sometimes asserted by persons of enthusiastic and
passionate temperament, that there are feelings so exquisitely
delightful, that one moment of their rapture is preferable to an
eternity of agreeable consciousness of an inferior kind. These
assertions, however, are perhaps consciously hyperbolical, and not
intended to be taken as scientific statements: but in the case of
pain, it has been deliberately maintained by a thoughtful and subtle
writer, with a view to important practical conclusions, that “torture”
so extreme as to be “incommensurable with moderate pain” is an actual
fact of experience. (See “A Chapter in the Ethics of Pain,” by the late
Edmund Gurney, in a volume of essays entitled _Tertium Quid_.) This
doctrine, however, does not correspond to my own experience; nor does
it appear to me to be supported by the common sense of mankind:--at
least I do not find, in the practical forethought of persons noted for
caution, any recognition of the danger of agony such that, in order to
avoid the smallest extra risk of it, the greatest conceivable amount of
moderate pain should reasonably be incurred.

[100] Bentham gives four qualities of any pleasure or pain (taken
singly) as important for purposes of Hedonistic calculation: (1)
Intensity, (2) Duration, (3) Certainty, (4) Proximity. If we assume
(as above argued) that Intensity must be commensurable with Duration,
the influence of the other qualities on the comparative value of
pleasures and pains is not difficult to determine: for we are
accustomed to estimate the value of chances numerically, and by this
method we can tell exactly (in so far as the degree of uncertainty
can be exactly determined) how much the doubtfulness of a pleasure
detracts from its value: and _proximity_ is a property which it is
reasonable to disregard except in so far as it diminishes uncertainty.
For my feelings a year hence should be just as important to me as my
feelings next minute, if only I could make an equally sure forecast of
them. Indeed this equal and impartial concern for all parts of one’s
conscious life is perhaps the most prominent element in the common
notion of the _rational_--as opposed to the merely _impulsive_--pursuit
of pleasure.

[101] Cf. Cic. _de Fin._ Book i. chap. xi. § 38.

[102] _Principles of Psychology_, Part ii. chap. ix. § 125.

[103] _The Emotions and the Will_, 3rd Edition, p. 392.

[104] _Mental and Moral Science_, Book iv. chap. iv. § 4.

[105] _Ibid._ Book iv. chap. v. § 4.

[106] _Ibid._ Book iii. chap. i. § 8.

[107] It was before observed that by saying that one pleasure is
superior in _quality_ to another we may mean that it is preferable
when considered merely as pleasant: in which case difference in kind
resolves itself into difference in degree.




