BOOK IV

UTILITARIANISM




CHAPTER I

THE MEANING OF UTILITARIANISM


§ 1. The term Utilitarianism is, at the present day, in common use,
and is supposed to designate a doctrine or method with which we are
all familiar. But on closer examination, it appears to be applied to
several distinct theories, having no necessary connexion with one
another, and not even referring to the same subject-matter. It will
be well, therefore, to define, as carefully as possible, the doctrine
that is to be denoted by the term in the present Book: at the same time
distinguishing this from other doctrines to which usage would allow
the name to be applied, and indicating, so far as seems necessary, its
relation to these.

By Utilitarianism is here meant the ethical theory, that the conduct
which, under any given circumstances, is objectively right, is that
which will produce the greatest amount of happiness on the whole; that
is, taking into account all whose happiness is affected by the conduct.
It would tend to clearness if we might call this principle, and the
method based upon it, by some such name as “Universalistic Hedonism”:
and I have therefore sometimes ventured to use this term, in spite of
its cumbrousness.

The first doctrine from which it seems necessary to distinguish this,
is the Egoistic Hedonism expounded and discussed in Book ii. of this
treatise. The difference, however, between the propositions (1) that
each ought to seek his own happiness, and (2) that each ought to seek
the happiness of all, is so obvious and glaring, that instead of
dwelling upon it we seem rather called upon to explain how the two
ever came to be confounded, or in any way included under one notion.
This question and the general relation between the two doctrines were
briefly discussed in a former chapter.[313] Among other points it was
there noticed that the confusion between these two ethical theories was
partly assisted by the confusion with both of the psychological theory
that in voluntary actions every agent does, universally or normally,
seek his own individual happiness or pleasure. Now there seems to be no
_necessary_ connexion between this latter proposition and any ethical
theory: but in so far as there is a natural tendency to pass from
psychological to ethical Hedonism, the transition must be--at least
primarily--to the Egoistic phase of the latter. For clearly, from the
fact that every one actually does seek his own happiness we cannot
conclude, as an immediate and obvious inference, that he ought to seek
the happiness of other people.[314]

Nor, again, is Utilitarianism, as an ethical doctrine, necessarily
connected with the psychological theory that the moral sentiments are
derived, by “association of ideas” or otherwise, from experiences of
the non-moral pleasures and pains resulting to the agent or to others
from different kinds of conduct. An Intuitionist might accept this
theory, so far as it is capable of scientific proof, and still hold
that these moral sentiments, being found in our present consciousness
as independent impulses, ought to possess the authority that they
seem to claim over the more primary desires and aversions from which
they have sprung: and an Egoist on the other hand might fully admit
the altruistic element of the derivation, and still hold that these
and all other impulses (including even Universal Benevolence) are
properly under the rule of Rational Self-love: and that it is really
only reasonable to gratify them in so far as we may expect to find our
private happiness in such gratification. In short, what is often called
the “utilitarian” theory of the origin of the moral sentiments cannot
by itself provide a proof of the ethical doctrine to which I in this
treatise restrict the term Utilitarianism. I shall, however, hereafter
try to show that this psychological theory has an important though
subordinate place in the establishment of Ethical Utilitarianism.[315]

Finally, the doctrine that Universal Happiness is the ultimate
_standard_ must not be understood to imply that Universal Benevolence
is the only right or always best _motive_ of action. For, as we have
before observed, it is not necessary that the end which gives the
criterion of rightness should always be the end at which we consciously
aim: and if experience shows that the general happiness will be more
satisfactorily attained if men frequently act from other motives than
pure universal philanthropy, it is obvious that these other motives are
reasonably to be preferred on Utilitarian principles.

§ 2. Let us now examine the principle itself somewhat closer. I
have already attempted (Book ii. chap. i.) to render the notion of
Greatest Happiness as clear and definite as possible; and the results
there obtained are of course as applicable to the discussion of
Universalistic as to that of Egoistic Hedonism. We shall understand,
then, that by Greatest Happiness is meant the greatest possible surplus
of pleasure over pain, the pain being conceived as balanced against an
equal amount of pleasure, so that the two contrasted amounts annihilate
each other for purposes of ethical calculation. And of course, here
as before, the assumption is involved that all pleasures included in
our calculation are capable of being compared quantitatively with one
another and with all pains; that every such feeling has a certain
intensive quantity, positive or negative (or, perhaps, zero), in
respect of its desirableness, and that this quantity may be to some
extent known: so that each may be at least roughly weighed in ideal
scales against any other. This assumption is involved in the very
notion of Maximum Happiness; as the attempt to make ‘as great as
possible’ a sum of elements not quantitatively commensurable would be a
mathematical absurdity. Therefore whatever weight is to be attached to
the objections brought against this assumption (which was discussed in
chap. iii. of Book ii.) must of course tell against the present method.

We have next to consider who the “all” are, whose happiness is to be
taken into account. Are we to extend our concern to all the beings
capable of pleasure and pain whose feelings are affected by our
conduct? or are we to confine our view to human happiness? The former
view is the one adopted by Bentham and Mill, and (I believe) by the
Utilitarian school generally: and is obviously most in accordance with
the universality that is characteristic of their principle. It is the
Good _Universal_, interpreted and defined as ‘happiness’ or ‘pleasure,’
at which a Utilitarian considers it his duty to aim: and it seems
arbitrary and unreasonable to exclude from the end, as so conceived,
any pleasure of any sentient being.

It may be said that by giving this extension to the notion, we
considerably increase the scientific difficulties of the hedonistic
comparison, which have already been pointed out (Book ii. chap. iii.):
for if it be difficult to compare the pleasures and pains of other men
accurately with our own, a comparison of either with the pleasures and
pains of brutes is obviously still more obscure. Still, the difficulty
is at least not greater for Utilitarians than it is for any other
moralists who recoil from the paradox of disregarding altogether the
pleasures and pains of brutes. But even if we limit our attention to
human beings, the extent of the subjects of happiness is not yet quite
determinate. In the first place, it may be asked, How far we are to
consider the interests of posterity when they seem to conflict with
those of existing human beings? It seems, however, clear that the
time at which a man exists cannot affect the value of his happiness
from a universal point of view; and that the interests of posterity
must concern a Utilitarian as much as those of his contemporaries,
except in so far as the effect of his actions on posterity--and
even the existence of human beings to be affected--must necessarily
be more uncertain. But a further question arises when we consider
that we can to some extent influence the number of future human (or
sentient) beings. We have to ask how, on Utilitarian principles, this
influence is to be exercised. Here I shall assume that, for human
beings generally, life on the average yields a positive balance of
pleasure over pain. This has been denied by thoughtful persons: but
the denial seems to me clearly opposed to the common experience
of mankind, as expressed in their commonly accepted principles of
action. The great majority of men, in the great majority of conditions
under which human life is lived, certainly act as if death were one
of the worst of evils, for themselves and for those whom they love:
and the administration of criminal justice proceeds on a similar
assumption.[316]

Assuming, then, that the average happiness of human beings is a
positive quantity, it seems clear that, supposing the average happiness
enjoyed remains undiminished, Utilitarianism directs us to make the
number enjoying it as great as possible. But if we foresee as possible
that an increase in numbers will be accompanied by a decrease in
average happiness or _vice versa_, a point arises which has not only
never been formally noticed, but which seems to have been substantially
overlooked by many Utilitarians. For if we take Utilitarianism to
prescribe, as the ultimate end of action, happiness on the whole, and
not any individual’s happiness, unless considered as an element of the
whole, it would follow that, if the additional population enjoy on the
whole positive happiness, we ought to weigh the amount of happiness
gained by the extra number against the amount lost by the remainder.
So that, strictly conceived, the point up to which, on Utilitarian
principles, population ought to be encouraged to increase, is not that
at which average happiness is the greatest possible,--as appears to be
often assumed by political economists of the school of Malthus--but
that at which the product formed by multiplying the number of persons
living into the amount of average happiness reaches its maximum.

It may be well here to make a remark which has a wide application in
Utilitarian discussion. The conclusion just given wears a certain air
of absurdity to the view of Common Sense; because its show of exactness
is grotesquely incongruous with our consciousness of the inevitable
inexactness of all such calculations in actual practice. But, that
our practical Utilitarian reasonings must necessarily be rough, is
no reason for not making them as accurate as the case admits; and we
shall be more likely to succeed in this if we keep before our mind
as distinctly as possible the strict type of the calculation that
we should have to make, if all the relevant considerations could be
estimated with mathematical precision.

There is one more point that remains to be noticed. It is evident that
there may be many different ways of distributing the same quantum
of happiness among the same number of persons; in order, therefore,
that the Utilitarian criterion of right conduct may be as complete as
possible, we ought to know which of these ways is to be preferred.
This question is often ignored in expositions of Utilitarianism. It
has perhaps seemed somewhat idle, as suggesting a purely abstract and
theoretical perplexity, that could have no practical exemplification;
and no doubt, if all the consequences of actions were capable of
being estimated and summed up with mathematical precision, we should
probably never find the excess of pleasure over pain exactly equal
in the case of two competing alternatives of conduct. But the very
indefiniteness of all hedonistic calculations, which was sufficiently
shown in Book ii., renders it by no means unlikely that there may be no
_cognisable_ difference between the quantities of happiness involved
in two sets of consequences respectively; the more rough our estimates
necessarily are, the less likely we shall be to come to any clear
decision between two apparently balanced alternatives. In all such
cases, therefore, it becomes practically important to ask whether any
mode of distributing a given quantum of happiness is better than any
other. Now the Utilitarian formula seems to supply no answer to this
question: at least we have to supplement the principle of seeking the
greatest happiness on the whole by some principle of Just or Right
distribution of this happiness. The principle which most Utilitarians
have either tacitly or expressly adopted is that of pure equality--as
given in Bentham’s formula, “everybody to count for one, and nobody for
more than one.” And this principle seems the only one which does not
need a special justification; for, as we saw, it must be reasonable to
treat any one man in the same way as any other, if there be no reason
apparent for treating him differently.[317]

FOOTNOTES:

[313] Book i. chap. vi. It may be worth while to notice, that in Mill’s
well-known treatise on Utilitarianism this confusion, though expressly
deprecated, is to some extent encouraged by the author’s treatment of
the subject.

[314] I have already criticised (Book iii. chap. xiii.) the mode in
which Mill attempts to exhibit this inference.

[315] Cf. _post_, chap. iv.

[316] Those who held the opposite opinion appear generally to assume
that the appetites and desires which are the mainspring of ordinary
human action are in themselves painful: a view entirely contrary
to my own experience, and, I believe, to the common experience of
mankind. See chap. iv. § 2 of Book i. So far as their argument is not
a development of this psychological error, any plausibility it has
seems to me to be obtained by dwelling onesidedly on the annoyances
and disappointments undoubtedly incident to normal human life, and on
the exceptional sufferings of small minorities of the human race, or
perhaps of most men during small portions of their lives.

The reader who wishes to see the paradoxical results of pessimistic
utilitarianism seriously worked out by a thoughtful and suggestive
writer, may refer to Professor Macmillan’s book on the _Promotion
of General Happiness_ (Swan Sonnenschein and Co. 1890). The author
considers that “the philosophical world is pretty equally divided
between optimists and pessimists,” and his own judgment on the question
at issue between the two schools appears to be held in suspense.

[317] It should be observed that the question here is as to the
distribution of _Happiness_, not the _means of happiness_. If more
happiness on the whole is produced by giving the same means of
happiness to B rather than to A, it is an obvious and incontrovertible
deduction from the Utilitarian principle that it ought to be given to
B, whatever inequality in the distribution of the _means_ of happiness
this may involve.




