CHAPTER VII

EGOISM AND SELF-LOVE


§ 1. In the preceding chapters I have used the term “Egoism,” as it
is most commonly used, to denote a system which prescribes actions
as means to the end of the individual’s happiness or pleasure. The
ruling motive in such a system is commonly said to be “self-love.” But
both terms admit of other interpretations, which it will be well to
distinguish and set aside before proceeding further.

For example, the term “egoistic” is ordinarily and not improperly
applied to the basis on which Hobbes attempted to construct morality;
and on which alone, as he held, the social order could firmly rest, and
escape the storms and convulsions with which it seemed to be menaced
from the vagaries of the unenlightened conscience. But it is not
strictly the end of Egoism as I have defined it--greatest attainable
pleasure for the individual--but rather “self-preservation,” which
determines the first of those precepts of rational egoism which Hobbes
calls “Laws of Nature,” viz., “Seek peace and ensue it.” And in the
development of his system we often find that it is Preservation rather
than Pleasure, or perhaps a compromise between the two,[78] that is
taken as the ultimate end and standard of right conduct.

Again, in Spinoza’s view the principle of rational action is
necessarily egoistic, and is (as with Hobbes) the impulse of
self-preservation. The individual mind, says Spinoza, like everything
else, strives so far as it is able to continue in its state of being:
indeed this effort is its very essence. It is true that the object of
this impulse cannot be separated from pleasure or joy; because pleasure
or joy is “a passion in which the soul passes to higher perfection.”
Still it is not at Pleasure that the impulse primarily aims, but at the
mind’s Perfection or Reality: as we should now say, at Self-realisation
or Self-development. Of this, according to Spinoza, the highest form
consists in a clear comprehension of all things in their necessary
order as modifications of the one Divine Being, and that willing
acceptance of all which springs from this comprehension. In this
state the mind is purely active, without any admixture of passion or
passivity: and thus its essential nature is realised or actualised to
the greatest possible degree.

We perceive that this is the notion of Self-realisation as defined not
only _by_ but _for_ a philosopher: and that it would mean something
quite different in the case of a man of action--such, for example, as
the reflective dramatist of Germany introduces exclaiming:

                      Ich kann mich nicht
    Wie so ein Wortheld, so ein Tugend-Schwätzer
    An meinem Willen wärmen, und Gedanken ...
    Wenn ich nicht wirke mehr, bin ich vernichtet.[79]

The artist, again, often contemplates his production of the beautiful
as a realisation of self: and moralists of a certain turn of mind, in
all ages, have similarly regarded the sacrifice of inclination to duty
as the highest form of Self-development; and held that true self-love
prompts us always to obey the commands issued by the governing
principle--Reason or Conscience--within us, as in such obedience,
however painful, we shall be realising our truest self.

We see, in short, that the term Egoism, so far as it merely implies
that reference is made to self in laying down first principles of
conduct, does not really indicate in any way the substance of such
principles. For all our impulses, high and low, sensual and moral
alike, are so far similarly related to self, that--except when two
or more impulses come into conscious conflict--we tend to identify
ourselves with each as it arises. Thus self-consciousness may be
prominent in yielding to any impulse: and egoism, in so far as it
merely implies such prominence, is a common form applicable to all
principles of action.

It may be said, however, that we do not, properly speaking, ‘develop’
or ‘realise’ self by yielding to the impulse which happens to be
predominant in us; but by exercising, each in its due place and proper
degree, all the different faculties, capacities, and propensities, of
which our nature is made up. But here there is an important ambiguity.
What do we mean by ‘due proportion and proper degree’? These terms
may imply an ideal, into conformity with which the individual mind
has to be trained, by restraining some of its natural impulses and
strengthening others, and developing its higher faculties rather
than its lower: or they may merely refer to the original combination
and proportion of tendencies in the character with which each is
born; to this, it may be meant, we ought to adapt as far as possible
the circumstances in which we place ourselves and the functions
which we choose to exercise, in order that we may “be ourselves,”
“live our own life,” etc. According to the former interpretation
rational Self-development is merely another term for the pursuit of
Perfection for oneself: while in the latter sense it hardly appears
that Self-development (when clearly distinguished) is really put
forward as an absolute end, but rather as a means to happiness; for
supposing a man to have inherited propensities clearly tending to
his own unhappiness, no one would recommend him to develop these as
fully as possible, instead of modifying or subduing them in some way.
Whether actually the best way of seeking happiness is to give free
play to one’s nature, we will hereafter consider in the course of our
examination of Hedonism.

On the whole, then, I conclude that the notion of Self-realisation
is to be avoided in a treatise on ethical method, on account of its
indefiniteness: and for a similar reason we must discard a common
account of Egoism which describes its ultimate end as the ‘good’ of
the individual; for the term ‘good’ may cover all possible views of
the ultimate end of rational conduct. Indeed it may be said that
Egoism in this sense was assumed in the whole ethical controversy of
ancient Greece; that is, it was assumed on all sides that a rational
individual[80] would make the pursuit of his own good his supreme
aim: the controverted question was whether this Good was rightly
conceived as Pleasure or Virtue, or any _tertium quid_. Nor is the
ambiguity removed if we follow Aristotle in confining our attention to
the Good attainable in human life, and call this Well-being
(Εὐδαιμονία). For we may still argue with the Stoics, that virtuous or
excellent activities and not pleasures are the elements of which true
human Well-being is composed. Indeed Aristotle himself adopts this
view, so far as to determine the details of Well-being accordingly:
though he does not, with the Stoics, regard the pursuit of Virtue and
that of Pleasure as competing alternatives, holding rather that the
“best pleasure” is an inseparable concomitant of the most excellent
action. Even the English term Happiness is not free from a similar
ambiguity.[81] It seems, indeed, to be commonly used in Bentham’s way
as convertible with Pleasure,--or rather as denoting that of which the
constituents are pleasures;--and it is in this sense that I think it
most convenient to use it. Sometimes, however, in ordinary discourse,
the term is rather employed to denote a particular kind of agreeable
consciousness, which is distinguished from and even contrasted with
definite specific pleasures--such as the gratifications of sensual
appetite or other keen and vehement desires--as being at once calmer
and more indefinite: we may characterise it as the feeling which
accompanies the normal activity of a “healthy mind in a healthy body,”
and of which specific pleasures seem to be rather stimulants than
elements. Sometimes, again--though, I think, with a more manifest
divergence from common usage--“happiness” or “true happiness” is
understood in a definitely non-hedonistic sense, as denoting results
other than agreeable feelings of any kind.[82]

§ 2. To be clear, then, we must particularise as the object of
Self-love, and End of the method which I have distinguished as Egoistic
Hedonism, Pleasure, taken in its widest sense, as including every
species of “delight,” “enjoyment,” or “satisfaction”; except so far
as any particular species may be excluded by its incompatibility with
some greater pleasures, or as necessarily involving concomitant or
subsequent pains. It is thus that Self-love seems to be understood
by Butler[83] and other English moralists after him; as a desire
of one’s own pleasure generally, and of the greatest amount of it
obtainable, from whatever source it may be obtained. In fact, it
is upon this generality and comprehensiveness that the ‘authority’
and ‘reasonableness’ attributed to Self-love in Butler’s system are
founded. For satisfaction or pleasure of some kind results from
gratifying any impulse; thus when antagonistic impulses compete for
the determination of the Will, we are prompted by the desire for
pleasure in general to compare the pleasures which we foresee will
respectively attend the gratification of either impulse, and when we
have ascertained which set of pleasures is the greatest, Self-love
or the desire for pleasure in general reinforces the corresponding
impulse. It is thus called into play whenever impulses conflict, and
is therefore naturally regulative and directive (as Butler argues) of
other springs of action. On this view, so far as Self-love operates,
we merely consider the _amount_ of pleasure or satisfaction: to use
Bentham’s illustration, “quantity of pleasure being equal, push-pin is
as good as poetry.”

This position, however, seems to many offensively paradoxical; and
J. S. Mill[84] in his development of Bentham’s doctrine thought it
desirable to abandon it and to take into account differences in quality
among pleasures as well as differences in degree. Now here we may
observe, first, that it is quite consistent with the view quoted as
Bentham’s to describe some kinds of pleasure as inferior in quality to
others, if by ‘a pleasure’ we mean (as is often meant) a whole state of
consciousness which is only partly pleasurable; and still more if we
take into view subsequent states. For many pleasures are not free from
pain even while enjoyed; and many more have painful consequences. Such
pleasures are, in Bentham’s phrase, “impure”: and as the pain has to be
set off as a drawback in valuing the pleasure, it is in accordance with
strictly quantitative measurement of pleasure to call them inferior
in kind. And again, we must be careful not to confound intensity of
_pleasure_ with intensity of _sensation_: as a pleasant feeling may be
strong and absorbing, and yet not so pleasant as another that is more
subtle and delicate. With these explanations, it seems to me that in
order to work out consistently the method that takes pleasure as the
sole ultimate end of rational conduct, Bentham’s proposition must be
accepted, and all _qualitative_ comparison of pleasures must really
resolve itself into quantitative. For all pleasures are understood
to be so called because they have a common property of pleasantness,
and may therefore be compared in respect of this common property. If,
then, what we are seeking is pleasure as such, and pleasure alone, we
must evidently always prefer the more pleasant pleasure to the less
pleasant: no other choice seems reasonable, unless we are aiming at
something besides pleasure. And often when we say that one kind of
pleasure is better than another--as (_e.g._) that the pleasures of
reciprocated affection are superior in quality to the pleasures of
gratified appetite--we mean that they are more pleasant. No doubt we
may mean something else: we may mean, for instance, that they are
nobler and more elevated, although less pleasant. But then we are
clearly introducing a non-hedonistic ground of preference: and if this
is done, the method adopted is a perplexing mixture of Intuitionism and
Hedonism.

To sum up: Egoism, if we merely understand by it a method that aims
at Self-realisation, seems to be a form into which almost any ethical
system may be thrown, without modifying its essential characteristics.
And even when further defined Egoistic Hedonism, it is still
imperfectly distinguishable from Intuitionism if quality of pleasures
is admitted as a consideration distinct from and overruling quantity.
There remains then Pure or Quantitative Egoistic Hedonism, which, as
a method essentially distinct from all others and widely maintained
to be rational, seems to deserve a detailed examination. According to
this the rational agent regards quantity of consequent pleasure and
pain to himself as alone important in choosing between alternatives of
action; and seeks always the greatest attainable surplus of pleasure
over pain--which, without violation of usage, we may designate as
his ‘greatest happiness.’ It seems to be this view and attitude of
mind which is most commonly intended by the vaguer terms ‘egoism,’
‘egoistic’: and therefore I shall allow myself to use these terms in
this more precise signification.

FOOTNOTES:

[78] Thus the end for which an individual is supposed to renounce the
unlimited rights of the State of Nature is said (_Leviathan_, chap.
xiv.) to be “nothing else but the security of a man’s person in this
life, and the means of preserving life so as not to be weary of it.”

[79] Schiller’s _Wallenstein_.

[80] I shall afterwards try to explain how it comes about that, in
modern thought, the proposition ‘My own Good is my only reasonable
ultimate end’ is not a mere tautology, even though we define ‘Good’ as
that at which it is ultimately reasonable to aim. Cf. _post_, chap. ix.
and Book iii. chaps. xiii. xiv.

[81] Aristotle’s selection of εὐδαιμονία to denote what he
elsewhere calls “Human” or “Practicable” good, and the fact that,
after all, we have no better rendering for εὐδαιμονία than
“Happiness” or “Felicity,” has caused no little misunderstanding of his
system. Thus when Stewart (_Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers_,
Book ii. chap. ii.) says that “by many of the best of the ancient
moralists ... the whole of ethics was reduced to this question ... What
is most conducive on the whole to our happiness?” the remark, if not
exactly false, is certain to mislead his readers; since by Stewart,
as by most English writers, “Happiness” is definitely conceived as
consisting of “Pleasures” or “Enjoyments.”

[82] Thus Green (_Prolegomena to Ethics_, Book iii. chap. iv. § 228)
says, “It is the realisation of those objects in which we are mainly
interested, _not the succession of enjoyments which we shall experience
in realising them_, that forms the definite content of our idea of
true happiness, so far as it has such content at all.” Cf. also § 238.
It is more remarkable to find J. S. Mill (_Utilitarianism_, chap.
iv.) declaring that “money”--no less than “power” or “fame”--comes by
association of ideas to be “a part of happiness,” an “ingredient in
the individual’s conception of happiness.” But this seems to be a mere
looseness of phraseology, venial in a treatise aiming at a popular
style; since Mill has expressly said that “by happiness is intended
pleasure and the absence of pain,” and he cannot mean that money is
either the one or the other. In fact he uses in the same passage--as
an alternative phrase for “parts of happiness”--the phrases “sources
of happiness” and “sources of pleasure”: and his real meaning is more
precisely expressed by these latter terms. That is, the distinction
which he is really concerned to emphasise is that between the state
of mind in which money is valued solely as a means of buying other
things, and the state of mind--such as the miser’s--in which the mere
consciousness of possessing it gives pleasure, apart from any idea of
spending it.

[83] See Sermon XI. “... the cool principle of self-love or general
desire of our own happiness.”

[84] _Utilitarianism_, chap. ii.




