CHAPTER V

FREE WILL


§ 1. In the preceding chapters I have treated first of rational,
and secondly of disinterested action, without introducing the vexed
question of the Freedom of the Will. The difficulties connected
with this question have been proved by long dialectical experience
to be so great, that I am anxious to confine them within as strict
limits as I can, and keep as much of my subject as possible free from
their perturbing influence. And it appears to me that we have no
psychological warrant for identifying Disinterested with either “Free”
or “Rational” action; while to identify Rational and Free action is
at least misleading, and tends to obscure the real issue raised in
the Free Will controversy. In the last chapter I have tried to show
that action strictly disinterested, that is, disregardful of foreseen
balance of pleasure to ourselves, is found in the most instinctive
as well as in the most deliberate and self-conscious region of our
volitional experience. And rational action, as I conceive it, remains
rational, however completely the rationality of any individual’s
conduct may be determined by causes antecedent or external to his own
volition: so that the conception of acting rationally, as explained in
the last chapter but one, is not bound up with the notion of acting
‘freely,’ as maintained by Libertarians generally against Determinists.
I say “Libertarians generally,” because in the statements made by
disciples of Kant as to the connexion of Freedom and Rationality,
there appears to me to be a confusion between two meanings of the term
Freedom, which require to be carefully distinguished in any discussion
of Free Will. When a disciple of Kant[54] says that a man “is a free
agent in so far as he acts under the guidance of reason,” the statement
easily wins assent from ordinary readers; since, as Whewell says, we
ordinarily “consider our Reason as being ourselves rather than our
desires and affections. We speak of Desire, Love, Anger, as mastering
_us_, or of _ourselves_ as controlling them. If we decide to prefer
some remote and abstract good to immediate pleasures, or to conform to
a rule which brings us present pain (which decision implies exercise
of Reason), we more particularly consider such acts as our _own_
acts.”[55] I do not, therefore, object on the score of usage to this
application of the term “free” to denote voluntary actions in which
the seductive solicitations of appetite or passion are successfully
resisted: and I am sensible of the gain in effectiveness of moral
persuasion which is obtained by thus enlisting the powerful sentiment
of Liberty on the side of Reason and Morality. But it is clear that if
we say that a man is a “free” agent in so far as he acts rationally,
we cannot also say--in the same sense--that it is by his own “free”
choice that he acts irrationally, when he does so act; and it is this
latter proposition which Libertarians generally have been concerned to
maintain. They have thought it of fundamental importance to show the
‘Freedom’ of the moral agent, on account of the connexion that they
have held to exist between Freedom and Moral Responsibility: and it is
obvious that the Freedom thus connected with Responsibility is not the
Freedom that is only manifested or realised in rational action, but
the Freedom to choose between right and wrong which is manifested or
realised equally in either choice. Now it is implied in the Christian
consciousness of “wilful sin” that men do deliberately and knowingly
choose to act irrationally. They do not merely prefer self-interest to
duty (for here is rather a conflict of claims to rationality than clear
irrationality); but (_e.g._) sensual indulgence to health, revenge to
reputation, etc., though they know that such preference is opposed to
their true interests no less than to their duty.[56] Hence it does
not really correspond to our experience as a whole to represent the
conflict between Reason and passion as a conflict between ‘ourselves’
on the one hand and a force of nature on the other. We may say, if
we like, that when we yield to passion, we become ‘the slaves of our
desires and appetites’: but we must at the same time admit that our
slavery is self-chosen. Can we say, then, of the wilful wrongdoer that
his wrong choice was ‘free,’ in the sense that he might have chosen
rightly, not merely if the antecedents of his volition, external
and internal, had been different, but supposing these antecedents
unchanged? This, I conceive, is the substantial issue raised in the
Free Will controversy; which I now propose briefly to consider: since
it is widely believed to be of great Ethical importance.

§ 2. We may conveniently begin by defining more exactly the notion
of Voluntary action, to which, according to all methods of Ethics
alike, the predicates ‘right’ and ‘what ought to be done’--in the
strictest ethical sense--are exclusively applicable. In the first
place, Voluntary action is distinguished as ‘conscious’ from actions
or movements of the human organism which are ‘unconscious’ or
‘mechanical.’ The person whose organism performs such movements only
becomes aware of them, if at all, after they have been performed;
accordingly they are not imputed to him as a person, or judged to be
morally wrong or imprudent; though they may sometimes be judged to be
good or bad in respect of their consequences, with the implication
that they ought to be encouraged or checked as far as this can be done
indirectly by conscious effort.

So again, in the case of conscious actions, the agent is not regarded
as morally culpable, except in an indirect way, for entirely unforeseen
effects of his voluntary actions. No doubt when a man’s action has
caused some unforeseen harm, the popular moral judgment often blames
him for carelessness; but it would be generally admitted by reflective
persons that in such cases strictly moral blame only attaches to the
agent in an indirect way, in so far as his carelessness is the result
of some wilful neglect of duty. Thus the proper immediate objects of
moral approval or disapproval would seem to be always the results of
a man’s volitions so far as they were intended--_i.e._ represented in
thought as certain or probable[57] consequences of his volitions:--or,
more strictly, the volitions themselves in which such results were so
intended, since we do not consider that a man is relieved from moral
blame because his wrong intention remains unrealised through external
causes.

This view seems at first sight to differ from the common opinion
that the morality of acts depends on their ‘motives’; if by motives
are understood the desires that we feel for some of the foreseen
consequences of our acts. But I do not think that those who hold this
opinion would deny that we are blameworthy for any prohibited result
which we foresaw in willing, whether it was the object of desire or
not. No doubt it is commonly held that acts, similar as regards their
foreseen results, may be ‘better’ or ‘worse’[58] through the presence
of certain desires or aversions. Still so far as these feelings are
not altogether under the control of the will, the judgment of ‘right’
and ‘wrong’--in the strictest sense of these terms--seems to be not
properly applicable to the feelings themselves, but rather to the
exertion or omission of voluntary effort to check bad motives and
encourage good ones, or to the conscious adoption of an object of
desire as an end to be aimed at--which is a species of volition.

We may conclude then that judgments of right and wrong relate properly
to volitions accompanied with intention--whether the intended
consequences be external, or some effects produced on the agent’s own
feelings or character. This excludes from the scope of such judgments
those conscious actions which are not intentional, strictly speaking;
as when sudden strong feelings of pleasure and pain cause movements
which we are aware of making, but which are not preceded by any
representation in idea either of the movements themselves or of their
effects. For such actions, sometimes distinguished as ‘instinctive,’
we are only held to be responsible indirectly so far as any bad
consequences of them might have been prevented by voluntary efforts to
form habits of more complete self-control.

We have to observe further that our common moral judgments recognise an
important distinction between _impulsive_ and _deliberate_ wrongdoing,
condemning the latter more strongly than the former. The line between
the two cannot be sharply drawn: but we may define ‘impulsive’ actions
as those where the connexion between the feeling that prompts and the
action prompted is so simple and immediate that, though intention
is distinctly present, the consciousness of personal choice of the
intended result is evanescent. In deliberate volitions there is always
a conscious selection of the result as one of two or more practical
alternatives.

In the case, then, of such volitions as are pre-eminently the objects
of moral condemnation and approbation, the psychical fact ‘volition’
seems to include--besides intention, or representation of the results
of action--also the consciousness of self as choosing, resolving,
determining these results. And the question which I understand to be at
issue in the Free Will controversy may be stated thus: Is the self to
which I refer my deliberate volitions a self of strictly determinate
moral qualities, a definite character partly inherited, partly formed
by my past actions and feelings, and by any physical influences that
it may have unconsciously received; so that my voluntary action, for
good or for evil, is at any moment completely caused by the determinate
qualities of this character, together with my circumstances, or the
external influences acting on me at the moment--including under this
latter term my present bodily conditions?--or is there always a
possibility of my choosing to act in the manner that I now judge to be
reasonable and right, whatever my previous actions and experiences may
have been?

In the above questions a materialist would substitute ‘brain and
nervous system’ for ‘character,’ and thereby obtain a clearer notion;
but I have avoided using terms which suggest materialistic assumptions,
because Determinism by no means involves Materialism. For the present
purpose the difference is unimportant. The substantial dispute relates
to the completeness of the causal dependence of any volition upon the
state of things at the preceding instant, whether we specify these as
‘character and circumstances,’ or ‘brain and environing forces.’[59]

On the Determinist side there is a cumulative argument of great force.
The belief that events are determinately related to the state of things
immediately preceding them is now held by all competent thinkers in
respect of all kinds of occurrences except human volitions. It has
steadily grown both intensively and extensively, both in clearness and
certainty of conviction and in universality of application, as the
human mind has developed and human experience has been systematised and
enlarged. Step by step in successive departments of fact conflicting
modes of thought have receded and faded, until at length they have
vanished everywhere, except from this mysterious citadel of Will.
Everywhere else the belief is so firmly established that some declare
its opposite to be inconceivable: others even maintain that it
always was so. Every scientific procedure assumes it: each success
of science confirms it. And not only are we finding ever new proof
that events are cognisably determined, but also that the different
modes of determination of different kinds of events are fundamentally
identical and mutually dependent: and naturally, with the increasing
conviction of the essential unity of the cognisable universe, increases
the indisposition to allow the exceptional character claimed by
Libertarians for the department of human action.

Again, when we fix our attention on human action, we observe that
the portion of it which is originated unconsciously is admittedly
determined by physical causes: and we find that no clear line can be
drawn between acts of this kind and those which are conscious and
voluntary. Not only are many acts of the former class entirely similar
to those of the latter, except in being unconscious: but we remark
further that actions which we habitually perform continually pass from
the conscious class into the--wholly or partly--unconscious: and the
further we investigate, the more the conclusion is forced upon us,
that there is no kind of action originated by conscious volition which
cannot also, under certain circumstances, be originated unconsciously.
Again, when we look closely at our conscious acts, we find that in
respect of such of them as I have characterised as ‘impulsive’--acts
done suddenly under the stimulus of a momentary sensation or
emotion--our consciousness can hardly be said to suggest that they are
not completely determined by the strength of the stimulus and the state
of our previously determined temperament and character at the time of
its operation: and here again, as was before observed, it is difficult
to draw a line clearly separating these actions from those in which the
apparent consciousness of ‘free choice’ becomes distinct.

Further, we always explain[60] the voluntary action of all men except
ourselves on the principle of causation by character and circumstances.
Indeed otherwise social life would be impossible: for the life of man
in society involves daily a mass of minute forecasts of the actions of
other men, founded on experience of mankind generally, or of particular
classes of men, or of individuals; who are thus necessarily regarded
as things having determinate properties, causes whose effects are
calculable. We infer generally the future actions of those whom we know
from their past actions; and if our forecast turns out in any case to
be erroneous, we do not attribute the discrepancy to the disturbing
influence of Free Will, but to our incomplete acquaintance with their
character and motives. And passing from individuals to communities,
whether we believe in a “social science” or not, we all admit and take
part in discussions of social phenomena in which the same principle
is assumed: and however we may differ as to particular theories, we
never doubt the validity of the assumption: and if we find anything
inexplicable in history, past or present, it never occurs to us to
attribute it to an extensive exercise of free will in a particular
direction. Nay, even as regards our own actions, however ‘free’ we feel
ourselves at any moment, however unconstrained by present motives and
circumstances and unfettered by the result of what we have previously
been and felt, our volitional choice may appear: still, when it is once
well past, and we survey it in the series of our actions, its relations
of causation and resemblance to other parts of our life appear, and
we naturally explain it as an effect of our nature, education, and
circumstances. Nay we even apply the same conceptions to our future
action, and the more, in proportion as our moral sentiments are
developed: for with our sense of duty generally increases our sense of
the duty of moral culture, and our desire of self-improvement: and the
possibility of moral self-culture depends on the assumption that by a
present volition we can determine to some extent our actions in the
more or less remote future. No doubt we habitually take at the same
time the opposite, Libertarian, view as to our future: we believe, for
example, that we are perfectly able to resist henceforward temptations
to which we have continually yielded in the past. But it should be
observed that this belief is (as moralists of all schools admit and
even urge) _at any rate to a great extent_ illusory and misleading.
Though Libertarians contend that it is _possible_ for us at any moment
to act in a manner opposed to our acquired tendencies and previous
customs,--still, they and Determinists alike teach that it is much less
easy than men commonly imagine to break the subtle unfelt trammels of
habit.

§ 3. Against the formidable array of cumulative evidence offered
for Determinism there is to be set the immediate affirmation of
consciousness in the moment of deliberate action. Certainly when I have
a distinct consciousness of choosing between alternatives of conduct,
one of which I conceive as right or reasonable, I find it impossible
not to think that I can now choose to do what I so conceive,--supposing
that there is no obstacle to my doing it other than the condition of
my desires and voluntary habits,--however strong may be my inclination
to act unreasonably, and however uniformly I may have yielded to such
inclinations in the past.[61] I recognise that each concession to
vicious desire makes the difficulty of resisting it greater when the
desire recurs: but the difficulty always seems to remain separated
from impossibility by an impassable gulf. I do not deny that the
experience of mankind includes cases in which certain impulses--such as
aversion to death or extreme pain, or morbid appetite for alcohol or
opium--have reached a point of intensity at which they have been felt
as irresistibly overmastering voluntary choice. I think we commonly
judge that when this point is reached the individual ceases to be
morally responsible for the act done under such overmastering impulse:
but at any rate the moral problem thus presented is very exceptional;
in ordinary cases of yielding to temptation this consciousness of
the irresistibility of impulse does not come in. Ordinarily, however
strong may be the rush of appetite or anger that comes over me, it does
not present itself as irresistible; and, if I deliberate at such a
moment, I cannot regard the mere force of the impulse as a reason for
doing what I otherwise judge to be unreasonable. I can suppose that my
conviction of free choice _may_ be illusory: that if I knew my own
nature I _might_ see it to be predetermined that, being so constituted
and in such circumstances, I should act on the occasion in question
contrary to my rational judgment. But I cannot conceive myself seeing
this, without at the same time conceiving my whole conception of what
I now call “my” action fundamentally altered: I cannot conceive that
if I contemplated the actions of my organism in this light I should
refer them to my “self”--_i.e._ to the mind so contemplating--in the
sense in which I now refer them. In this conflict of arguments, it is
not surprising that the theoretical question as to the Freedom of the
Will is still differently decided by thinkers of repute; and I do not
myself wish at present to pronounce any decision on it. But I think it
possible and useful to show that the ethical importance of deciding
it one way or another is liable to be exaggerated; and that any one
who will consider the matter soberly and carefully will find this
importance to be of a strictly limited kind.

It is chiefly on the Libertarian side that I find a tendency to the
exaggeration of which I have just spoken. Some Libertarian writers
maintain that the conception of the Freedom of the Will, alien as it
may be to positive science, is yet quite indispensable to Ethics and
Jurisprudence; since in judging that I “ought” to do anything I imply
that I “can” do it, and similarly in praising or blaming the actions
of others I imply that they “could” have acted otherwise. If a man’s
actions are mere links in a chain of causation which, as we trace
it back, ultimately carries us to events anterior to his personal
existence, he cannot, it is said, really have either merit or demerit;
and if he has not merit or demerit, it is repugnant to the common moral
sense of mankind to reward or punish--even to praise or blame--him.
In considering this argument, it will be convenient--for clearness of
discussion--to assume in the first instance that there is no doubt
or conflict in our view of what it is right to do, except such as
may be caused by the present question. It will also be convenient to
separate the discussion of the importance of Free Will in relation to
moral action generally from the special question of its importance in
relation to punishing and rewarding; since, in the latter species of
action, what chiefly claims attention is not the present Freedom of
the agent, but the past Freedom of the person now acted on.

As regards action generally, the Determinist allows that a man is only
morally bound to do what is “in his power”; but he explains “in his
power” to mean that the result in question will be produced if the
man choose to produce it. And this is, I think, the sense in which
the proposition “what I ought to do I can do” is commonly accepted:
it means “can do if I choose,” not “can choose to do.” Still the
question remains “_Can_ I choose to do what in ordinary thought I
judge to be right to do?” Here my own view is that--within the limits
above explained--I inevitably conceive that I _can_ choose; however,
I can suppose myself to regard this conception as illusory, and to
judge, inferring the future from the past, that I certainly shall not
choose, and accordingly that such choice is not really possible to
me. This being supposed, it seems to me undeniable that this judgment
will exclude or weaken the operation of the moral motive in the case
of the act contemplated: I either shall not judge it reasonable to
choose to do what I should otherwise so judge, or if I do pass the
judgment, I shall also judge the conception of duty applied in it to be
illusory, no less than the conception of Freedom. So far I concede the
Libertarian contention as to the demoralising effect of Determinism, if
held with a real force of conviction. But I think the cases are rare in
which it is even on Determinist principles legitimate to conclude it to
be certain--and not merely highly probable--that I shall deliberately
choose to do what I judge to be unwise.[62] Ordinarily the legitimate
inference from a man’s past experience, and from his general knowledge
of human nature, would not go beyond a very strong probability that he
would choose to do wrong: and a mere probability--however strong--that
I shall not will to do right cannot be regarded by me in deliberation
as a reason for not willing:[63] while it certainly supplies a rational
ground for willing strongly--just as a strong probability of any other
evil supplies a rational ground for special exertions to avoid it.
Indeed, I do not see why a Libertarian should not--equally with a
Determinist--accept as valid, and find it instructive to contemplate,
the considerations that render it probable that he will _not_ choose
to do right in any particular circumstances. In all ordinary cases,
therefore, it does not seem to me relevant to ethical deliberation to
determine the metaphysical validity of my consciousness of freedom to
choose whatever I may conclude to be reasonable, unless the affirmation
or negation of the Freedom of the Will somehow modifies my view of what
it would be reasonable to choose to do if I could so choose.

I do not think that any such modification of view can be maintained, as
regards the ultimate ends of rational action which, in chap. i., I took
as being commonly accepted. If Happiness, whether private or general,
be taken as the ultimate end of action on a Libertarian view, the
adoption of a Determinist view affords no ground for rejecting it: and
if Excellence is in itself admirable and desirable, it surely remains
equally so whether any individual’s approximation to it is entirely
determined by inherited nature and external influences or not:--except
so far as the notion of Excellence includes that of Free Will. Now Free
Will is obviously not included in our common ideal of physical and
intellectual perfection: and it seems to me also not to be included
in the common notions of the excellences of character which we call
virtues: the manifestations of courage, temperance, and justice do not
become less admirable because we can trace their antecedents in a happy
balance of inherited dispositions developed by a careful education.[64]

Can, then, the affirmation or negation of Free Will affect our view of
the fittest means for the attainment of either end? In considering this
we have to distinguish between the case of a connexion between means
and end believed to exist on empirical or other scientific grounds, and
the case where the belief in such connexion is an inference from the
belief in a moral government of the world. According to the received
view of the moral government of the world, the performance of Duty
is the best means of attaining the agent’s happiness largely through
its expected consequences in another world, in which virtue will be
rewarded and vice punished by God: if, then, the belief in the moral
government of the world and a future life for men is held to depend
on the assumption of Free Will, this latter becomes obviously of
fundamental ethical importance: not, indeed, in determining a man’s
Duty, but in reconciling it with his Interest. This, I think, is
the main element of truth in the view that the denial of Free Will
removes motives to the performance of Duty: and I admit the validity
of the contention, so far as (1) the course of action conducive to an
individual’s Interest would be thought to diverge from his Duty, apart
from theological considerations, and (2) in the theological reasoning
that removes this divergence Free Will is an indispensable assumption.
The former point will be examined in a subsequent chapter;[65] the
latter it hardly falls within the scope of this treatise to discuss.[66]

If we confine our attention to such connexion between means and ends
as is scientifically cognisable, it does not appear that an act now
deliberated on can be less or more a means to any ulterior end, because
it is predetermined. It may, however, be urged that in considering how
we ought to act in any case, we have to take into account the probable
future actions of others, and also of ourselves; and that with regard
to these it is necessary to decide the question of Free Will, in order
that we may know whether the future is capable of being predicted from
the past. But here, again, it seems to me that no definite practical
consequences would logically follow from this decision. For however far
we may go in admitting Free Will as a cause, the actual operation of
which may falsify the most scientific forecasts of human action, still
since it is _ex hypothesi_ an absolutely unknown cause, our recognition
of it cannot lead us to modify any such forecasts: at most, it can only
affect our reliance on them.

We may illustrate this by an imaginary extreme case. Suppose we were
somehow convinced that all the planets were endowed with Free Will,
and that they only maintained their periodic motions by the continual
exercise of free choice, in resistance to strong centrifugal or
centripetal inclinations. Our general confidence in the future of the
solar system might reasonably be impaired, though it is not easy to say
how much;[67] but the details of our astronomical calculations would
be clearly unaffected: the free wills could in no way be taken as an
element in the reckoning. And the case would be similar, I suppose, in
the forecast of human conduct, if psychology and sociology should ever
become exact sciences. At present, however, they are so far from being
such that this additional element of uncertainty can hardly have even
any emotional effect.

To sum up: we may say that, in so far as we reason to any definite
conclusions as to what the future actions of ourselves or others
will be, we must consider them as determined by unvarying laws: if
they are not completely so determined our reasoning is _pro tanto_
liable to error: but no other is open to us. While on the other
hand, when we are endeavouring to ascertain (on any principles) what
choice it is reasonable to make between two alternatives of present
conduct, Determinist conceptions are as irrelevant as they are in
the former case inevitable. And from neither point of view does it
seem practically important, for the general regulation of conduct, to
decide the metaphysical question at issue in the Free-will Controversy:
unless--passing from Ethics into Theology--we rest the reconciliation
of Duty and Interest on a theological argument that requires the
assumption of Free Will.

§ 4. So far I have been arguing that the adoption of Determinism
will not--except in certain exceptional circumstances or on certain
theological assumptions--reasonably modify a man’s view of what it
is right for him to do or his reasons for doing it. It may, however,
be said that--granting the reasons for right action to remain
unaltered--still the motives that prompt to it will be weakened; since
a man will not feel _remorse_ for his actions, if he regards them as
necessary results of causes anterior to his personal existence. I admit
that so far as the sentiment of remorse implies self-blame irremovably
fixed on the self blamed, it must tend to vanish from the mind of a
convinced Determinist. Still I do not see why the imagination of a
Determinist should not be as vivid, his sympathy as keen, his love of
goodness as strong as a Libertarian’s: and I therefore see no reason
why dislike for his own shortcomings and for the mischievous qualities
of his character which have caused bad actions in the past should not
be as effective a spring of moral improvement as the sentiment of
remorse would be. For it appears to me that men in general take at
least as much pains to cure defects in their circumstances, organic
defects, and defects of intellect--which cause them no remorse--as they
do to cure moral defects; so far as they consider the former to be no
less mischievous and no less removable than the latter.

This leads me to the consideration of the effect of Determinist
doctrines on the allotment of punishment and reward. For it must be
admitted, I think, that the common retributive view of punishment,
and the ordinary notions of “merit,” “demerit,” and “responsibility,”
also involve the assumption of Free Will: if the wrong act, and the
bad qualities of character manifested in it, are conceived as the
necessary effects of causes antecedent or external to the existence of
the agent, the moral responsibility--in the ordinary sense--for the
mischief caused by them can no longer rest on him. At the same time,
the Determinist can give to the terms “ill-desert” and “responsibility”
a signification which is not only clear and definite, but, from an
utilitarian point of view, the only suitable meaning. In this view,
if I affirm that A is responsible for a harmful act, I mean that it
is right to punish him for it; primarily, in order that the fear of
punishment may prevent him and others from committing similar acts
in future. The difference between these two views of punishment is
theoretically very wide. I shall, however, when I come to examine
in detail the current conception of Justice,[68] endeavour to show
that this admission can hardly have any practical effect; since it is
practically impossible to be guided, either in remunerating services
or in punishing mischievous acts, by any other considerations than
those which the Determinist interpretation of desert would include.
For instance, the treatment of legal punishment as deterrent and
reformatory rather than retributive seems to be forced upon us by the
practical exigences of social order and wellbeing--quite apart from
any Determinist philosophy.[69] Moreover, as I shall hereafter show,
if the retributive view of Punishment be strictly taken--abstracting
completely from the preventive view--it brings our conception of
Justice into conflict with Benevolence, as punishment presents itself
as a purely useless evil. Similarly, as regards the sentiments which
prompt to the expression of moral praise and blame--I admit that in
the mind of a convinced Determinist, the desire to encourage good and
prevent bad conduct must take the place of a desire to requite the one
or the other: but again I see no reason why the Determinist species of
moral sentiments should not be as effective in promoting virtue and
social wellbeing as the Libertarian species.

§ 5. It is, however, of obvious practical importance to ascertain how
far the power of the will (whether metaphysically free or not) actually
extends: for this defines the range within which ethical judgments are
in the strictest sense applicable. This inquiry is quite independent of
the question of metaphysical freedom; we might state it in Determinist
terms as an inquiry into the range of effects which it would be
possible to cause by human volition, provided that adequate motives are
not wanting. These effects seem to be mainly of three kinds: first,
changes in the external world consequent upon muscular contractions;
secondly, changes in the train of ideas and feelings that constitutes
our conscious life; and thirdly, changes in the tendencies to act
hereafter in certain ways under certain circumstances.

I. The most obvious and prominent part of the sphere of volitional
causation is constituted by such events as can be produced by muscular
contractions. As regards these, it is sometimes said that it is
properly the muscular contraction that we will, and not the more
remote effects; for these require the concurrence of other causes, and
therefore we can never be absolutely certain that they will follow.
But no more is it certain, strictly speaking, that the muscular
contraction will follow, since our limb may be paralysed, etc. The
immediate consequent of the volition is some molecular change in the
motor nerves. Since, however, we are not conscious in willing of our
motor nerves and their changes,--nor indeed commonly of the muscular
contractions that follow them,--it seems a misuse of terms to describe
either as the normal ‘object’ of the mind in willing: since it is
almost always some more remote effect which we consciously will and
intend. Still of almost all effects of our will on the external world
some contraction of our muscles is an indispensable antecedent; and
when that is over our part in the causation is completed.

II. We can control to some extent our thoughts and feelings. It would
seem, indeed, that an important part of what we commonly call ‘control
of feeling’ comes under the head just discussed. Our control over
our muscles enables us to keep down the expression of the feeling
and to resist its promptings to action: and as the giving free vent
to a feeling tends, generally speaking, to sustain and prolong it,
this muscular control amounts to a certain power over the emotion.
But there is not the same connexion between our muscular system and
our thoughts: and yet experience shows that most men (though some, no
doubt, much more than others) can voluntarily determine the direction
of their thoughts, and pursue at will a given line of meditation. In
such cases, what is effected by the effort of will seems to be the
concentration of our consciousness on a part of its content, so that
this part grows more vivid and clear, while the rest tends to become
obscure and ultimately to vanish. Frequently this voluntary exertion is
only needed to initiate a train of ideas, which is afterwards continued
without effort: as in recalling a series of past events or going
through a familiar train of reasoning. By such concentration we can
free ourselves of many thoughts and feelings upon which we do not wish
to dwell: but our power to do this is very limited, and if the feeling
be strong and its cause persistent, it requires a very unusual effort
of will to banish it thus.

III. The effect of volition, however, to which I especially wish to
direct the reader’s attention is the alteration in men’s tendencies
to future action which must be assumed to be a consequence of general
resolutions as to future conduct, so far as they are effective. Even
a resolution to do a particular act--if it is worth while to make it,
as experience shows it to be--must be supposed to produce a change
of this kind in the person who makes it: it must somehow modify his
present tendencies to act in a certain way on a foreseen future
occasion. But it is in making general resolutions for future conduct
that it is of most practical importance for us to know what is within
the power of the will. Let us take an example. A man has been in the
habit of drinking too much brandy nightly: one morning he resolves
that he will do so no more. In making this resolve he acts under the
belief that by a present volition he can so far alter his habitual
tendency to indulgence in brandy, that some hours hence he will resist
the full force of his habitual craving for the stimulant. Now whether
this belief is well or ill founded is a different question from that
usually discussed between Determinists and Libertarians: at the same
time the two questions are liable to be confused. It is sometimes
vaguely thought that a belief in Free Will requires us to maintain that
at any moment we can alter our habits to any extent by a sufficiently
strong exertion. And no doubt most commonly when we make such efforts,
we believe at the moment that they will be completely effectual: we
will to do something hours or days hence with the same confidence with
which we will to do something immediately. But on reflection, no one, I
think, will maintain that in such cases the future act appears to be
in his power in the same sense as a choice of alternatives that takes
effect immediately. Not only does continual experience show us that
such resolutions as to the future have a limited and too frequently an
inadequate effect: but the common belief is really inconsistent with
the very doctrine of Free Will that is thought to justify it: for if
by a present volition I can fully determine an action that is to take
place some hours hence, when the time comes to do that act I shall
find myself no longer free. We must therefore accept the conclusion
that each such resolve has only a limited effect: and that we cannot
know when making it how far this effect will exhibit itself in the
performance of the act resolved upon. At the same time it can hardly
be denied that such resolves sometimes succeed in breaking old habits:
and even when they fail to do this, they often substitute a painful
struggle for smooth and easy indulgence. Hence it is reasonable to
suppose that they always produce some effect in this direction; whether
they operate by causing new motives to present themselves on the side
of reason, when the time of inner conflict arrives; or whether they
directly weaken the impulsive force of habit in the same manner as an
actual breach of custom does, though in an inferior degree.[70]

If this account of the range of volition be accepted, it will, I
trust, dispel any lingering doubts which the argument of the preceding
section, as to the practical unimportance of the Free Will controversy,
may have left in the reader’s mind. For it may have been vaguely
thought that while on the Determinist theory it would be wrong, in
certain cases, to perform a single act of virtue if we had no ground
for believing that we should hereafter duly follow it up; on the
assumption of Freedom we should boldly do always what would be best
if consistently followed up, being conscious that such consistency is
in our power. But the supposed difference vanishes, if it be admitted
that by any effort of resolution at the present moment we can only
produce a certain limited effect upon our tendencies to action at some
future time, and that immediate consciousness cannot tell us that this
effect will be adequate to the occasion, nor indeed how great it will
really prove to be. For the most extreme Libertarian must then allow
that before pledging ourselves to any future course of action we ought
to estimate carefully, from our experience of ourselves and general
knowledge of human nature, what the probability is of our keeping
present resolutions in the circumstances in which we are likely to
be placed. It is no doubt morally most important that we should not
tranquilly acquiesce in any weakness or want of self-control: but the
fact remains that such weakness is not curable by a single volition:
and whatever we can do towards curing it by any effort of will at any
moment, is as clearly enjoined by reason on the Determinist theory as
it is on the Libertarian. On neither theory is it reasonable that we
should deceive ourselves as to the extent of our weakness, or ignore it
in the forecast of our conduct, or suppose it more easily remediable
than it really is.

FOOTNOTES:

[54] I have thought it expedient to exclude the Kantian conception
of Free Will from the scope of the discussion in this chapter,
partly on account of the confusion mentioned in the text; partly
because it depends on the conception of a causality not subject to
time-conditions, which appears to me altogether untenable, while it
does not fall within the plan of the present treatise to discuss it.
But considering the widespread influence of Kantian theory on current
ethical thought, I have thought it desirable to give a brief discussion
of his conception of Free Will in an Appendix (I.).

[55] _Elements of Morality_, Book i. chap. ii. At the same time, it is
also true--as I afterwards say--that we sometimes identify ourselves
with passion or appetite in conscious conflict with reason: and then
the rule of reason is apt to appear an external constraint, and
obedience to it a servitude, if not a slavery.

[56] The difficulty which Socrates and the Socratic schools had in
conceiving a man to choose deliberately what he knows to be bad for
him--a difficulty which drives Aristotle into real Determinism in his
account of purposed action, even while he is expressly maintaining the
“voluntariness” and “responsibility” of vice--seems to be much reduced
for the modern mind by the distinction between moral and prudential
judgments, and the _prima facie_ conflict between ‘interest’ and
‘duty.’ Being thus familiar with the conception of deliberate choice
consciously opposed _either_ to interest _or_ to duty, we can without
much difficulty conceive of such choice in conscious opposition to
both. See chap. ix. § 3, of this Book.

[57] It is most convenient to regard “intention” as including not only
such results of volition as the agent _desired_ to realise, but also
any that, without desiring, he foresaw as certain or probable. The
question how far we are responsible for all the foreseen consequences
of our acts, or, in the case of acts prescribed by definite moral
rules, only for their results within a certain range, will be
considered when we come to examine the Intuitional Method.

[58] In a subsequent chapter (chap. ix. of this Book) I shall examine
more fully the relation of the antithesis ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ to
the vaguer and wider antithesis ‘good’ and ‘bad,’ in our practical
reasonings.

[59] It is not uncommon for Determinists to conceive of each volition
as connected by uniform laws with our past state of consciousness. But
any uniformities we might trace among a man’s past consciousnesses,
even if we knew them all, would yet give us very imperfect guidance as
to his future action: as there would be left out of account--

(1) All inborn tendencies and susceptibilities, as yet latent or
incompletely exhibited;

(2) All past physical influences, of which the effects had not been
perfectly represented in consciousness.

[60] I do not mean that this is the only view that we take of the
conduct of others: I hold (as will presently appear) that in judging of
their conduct morally, we ordinarily apply the conception of Free Will.
But we do not ordinarily regard it as one kind of causation, limiting
and counteracting the other kind.

[61] It is not the possibility of merely indeterminate choice, of an
“arbitrary freak of unmotived willing,” with which we are concerned
from an ethical point of view, but the possibility of choosing between
rational and irrational motives.

[62] I think that in most cases when a man yields to temptation,
judging that it is “no use trying to resist,” he judges in
semi-conscious self-sophistication, due to the influence of appetite
or passion disturbing the process of reasoning. I do not doubt that
this self-sophistication is likely to take a Determinist form in the
mind of one who has adopted Determinism as a speculative opinion: but
I see no reason for thinking that a Libertarian is not in equal danger
of self-sophistication, though in his case it will take a different
form. _E.g._ where a Determinist would reason “I certainly shall take
my usual glass of brandy to-night, so there is no use resolving not to
take it,” the Libertarian’s reasoning would be “I mean to leave off
that brandy, but it will be just as easy to leave it off to-morrow
as to-day; I will therefore have one more glass, and leave it off
to-morrow.”

[63] There is, however, a special case in which this probability may
be indirectly a reason for not resolving to do what would otherwise be
best; _i.e._ where this resolution would only be right if followed by
subsequent resolutions. The problem thus presented is considered later,
pp. 75, 76.

[64] I should admit, indeed, that the ordinary notion of merit becomes
inapplicable (see pp. 71, 72). But I do not see that Perfection becomes
less an End to be aimed at, because we cease to regard its attainment
as meritorious. The inapplicability of the notion of ‘merit’ to Divine
action has never been felt to detract from the Perfection of the Divine
Nature.

[65] See Book ii. chap. v. and the concluding chapter of the treatise.

[66] I ought, however, to point out that an important section of
theologians who have held the belief in the moral government of the
world in its intensest form have been Determinists.

[67] In order to determine this we should require first to settle
another disputed question, as to the general reasonableness of our
expectation that the future will resemble the past.

[68] See Book iii. chap. v.

[69] Thus we find it necessary to punish negligence, when its effects
were very grave, even when we cannot trace it to wilful disregard of
duty; and to punish rebellion and assassination none the less although
we know that they were prompted by a sincere desire to serve God or to
benefit mankind.

[70] It should be observed that the same kind of change is sometimes
brought about, without volition, by a powerful emotional shock, due
to extraneous causes: and hence it might be inferred that in all
cases it is a powerful impression of an emotional kind that produces
the effect; and that the will is only concerned in concentrating our
attention on the benefits to be gained or evils to be avoided by the
change of habit, and so intensifying the impression of these. But
though this kind of voluntary contemplation is a useful auxiliary to
good resolutions, it does not seem to be this effort of will that
constitutes the resolution: we can clearly distinguish the two. Hence
this third effect of volition cannot be resolved into the second, but
must be stated separately.




