CHAPTER IV

OBJECTIVE HEDONISM AND COMMON SENSE


§ 1. Before we examine those methods of seeking one’s own happiness
which are more remote from the empirical, it will be well to consider
how far we may reasonably avoid the difficulties and uncertainties of
the method of reflective comparison, by relying on the current opinions
and accepted estimates of the value of different objects commonly
sought as sources of pleasure.

It certainly seems more natural to men, at least in the main plan and
ordering of their lives, to seek and consciously estimate the objective
conditions and sources of happiness, rather than happiness itself;
and it may plausibly be said that by relying on such estimates of
objects we avoid the difficulties that beset the introspective method
of comparing feelings: and that the common opinions as to the value of
different sources of pleasure express the net result of the combined
experience of mankind from generation to generation: in which the
divergences due to the limitations of each individual’s experience, and
to the differently tinged moods in which different estimates have been
taken, have balanced and neutralised each other and so disappeared.

I do not wish to undervalue the guidance of common sense in our pursuit
of happiness. I think, however, that when we consider these common
opinions as premises for the deductions of systematic egoism, they must
be admitted to be open to the following grave objections.

In the first place, Common Sense gives us only, at the best, an
estimate true for an average or typical human being: and, as we have
already seen, it is probable that any particular individual will be
more or less divergent from this type. In any case, therefore, each
person will have to correct the estimate of common opinion by the
results of his own experience in order to obtain from it trustworthy
guidance for his own conduct: and this process of correction, it
would seem, must be involved in all the difficulties from which we
are trying to escape. But, secondly, the experience of the mass of
mankind is confined within limits too narrow for its results to be of
much avail in the present inquiry. The majority of human beings spend
most of their time in labouring to avert starvation and severe bodily
discomfort: and the brief leisure that remains to them, after supplying
the bodily needs of food, sleep, etc., is spent in ways determined
rather by impulse, routine, and habit, than by a deliberate estimate of
probable pleasure. It would seem, then, that the common sense to which
we have here to refer can only be that of a minority of comparatively
rich and leisured persons.

But again, we cannot tell that the mass of mankind, or any section of
the mass, is not generally and normally under the influence of some
of the causes of mal-observation previously noticed. We avoid the
“idols of the cave” by trusting Common Sense, but what is to guard us
against the “idols of the tribe”? Moreover, the common estimate of
different sources of happiness seems to involve all the confusion of
ideas and points of view, which in defining the empirical method of
Hedonism we have taken some pains to eliminate. In the first place it
does not distinguish between objects of natural desire and sources
of experienced pleasure. Now we have seen (Book i. chap. iv.) that
these two are not exactly coincident--indeed we find numerous examples
of men who continue not only to feel but to indulge desires, the
gratification of which they know by ample experience to be attended
with more pain than pleasure. And therefore the current estimate of
the desirability of objects of pursuit cannot be taken to express
simply men’s experience of pleasure and pain: for men are apt to think
desirable what they strongly desire, whether or not they have found it
conducive to happiness on the whole: and so the common opinion will
tend to represent a compromise between the average force of desires and
the average experience of the consequences of gratifying them.

We must allow again for the intermingling of moral with purely
hedonistic preferences in the estimate of common sense. For even when
men definitely expect greater happiness from the course of conduct
which they choose than from any other, it is often because they think
it the right, or more excellent, or more noble course; making, more
or less unconsciously, the assumption (which we shall presently have
to consider) that the morally best action will prove to be also the
most conducive to the agent’s happiness. And a similar assumption
seems to be made--without adequate warrant--as regards merely æsthetic
preferences.

Again, the introduction of the moral and æsthetic points of view
suggests the following doubt:--Are we to be guided by the preferences
which men avow, or by those which their actions would lead us to infer?
On the one hand, we cannot doubt that men often, from weakness of
character, fail to seek what they sincerely believe will give them most
pleasure in the long-run: on the other hand, as a genuine preference
for virtuous or refined pleasure is a mark of genuine virtue or refined
taste, men who do not really feel such preference are unconsciously or
consciously influenced by a desire to gain credit for it, and their
express estimate of pleasures is thus modified and coloured.

§ 2. But, even if we had no doubt on general grounds that Common Sense
would prove our best guide in the pursuit of happiness, we should still
be perplexed by finding its utterances on this topic very deficient in
clearness and consistency. I do not merely mean that they are different
in different ages and countries--that we might explain as due to
variations in the general conditions of human life--: but that serious
conflicts and ambiguities are found if we consider only the current
common sense of our own age and country. We can make a list of sources
of happiness apparently recommended by an overwhelming _consensus_ of
current opinion: as health, wealth, friendship and family affections,
fame and social position, power, interesting and congenial occupation
and amusement,--including the gratification, in some form, of the love
of knowledge, and of those refined, partly sensual, partly emotional,
susceptibilities which we call æsthetic.[121] But if we inquire
into the relative value of these objects of common pursuit, we seem
to get no clear answer from Common Sense--unless, perhaps, it would
be generally agreed that health ought to be paramount to all other
secondary ends: though even on this point we could not infer general
agreement from observation of the actual conduct of mankind. Nay,
even as regards the positive estimate of these sources of happiness,
we find on closer examination that the supposed _consensus_ is much
less clear than it seemed at first. Not only are there numerous and
important bodies of dissidents from the current opinions: but the very
same majority, the same Common Sense of Mankind that maintains these
opinions, is found in a singular and unexpected manner to welcome and
approve the paradoxes of these dissidents. Men show a really startling
readiness to admit that the estimates of happiness which guide them in
their ordinary habits and pursuits are erroneous and illusory; and that
from time to time the veil is, as it were, lifted, and the error and
illusion made manifest.

For, first, men seem to attach great value to the ample gratification
of bodily appetites and needs: the wealthier part of mankind spend
a considerable amount of money and forethought upon the means of
satisfying these in a luxurious manner: and though they do not often
deliberately sacrifice health to this gratification--common sense
condemns that as irrational--still one may say that they are habitually
courageous in pressing forward to the very verge of this imprudence.

And yet the same people are fond of saying that “hunger is the best
sauce,” and that “temperance and labour will make plain food more
delightful than the most exquisite products of the culinary art.” And
they often argue with perfect sincerity that the rich have really no
advantage, or scarcely any advantage, over the comparatively poor, in
respect of these pleasures; for habit soon renders the more luxurious
provision for the satisfaction of their acquired needs no more pleasant
to the rich than the appeasing of his more primitive appetites is
to the poor man. And the same argument is often extended to all the
material comforts that wealth can purchase. It is often contended that
habit at once renders us indifferent to these while they are enjoyed,
and yet unable to dispense with them without annoyance: so that the
pleasures of the merely animal life are no greater to the rich than to
the poor, but only more insecure. And from this there is but a short
step to the conclusion, that wealth, in the pursuit of which most men
agree in concentrating their efforts, and on the attainment of which
all congratulate each other,--wealth, for which so many risk their
health, shorten their lives, reduce their enjoyments of domestic life,
and sacrifice the more refined pleasures of curiosity and art,--is
really a very doubtful gain, in the majority of cases; because the
cares and anxieties which it entails balance, for most men, the slight
advantage of the luxuries which it purchases.[122]

And similarly, although social rank and status is, in England, an
object of passionate pursuit, yet it is continually said, with general
approval, that it is of no intrinsic value as a means of happiness;
that though the process of ascending from a lower grade to a higher
is perhaps generally agreeable, and the process of descending from a
higher to a lower certainly painful, yet permanent existence on the
loftier level is no more pleasant than on the humbler; that happiness
is to be found as easily in a cottage as in a palace (if not, indeed,
more easily in the cottage): and so forth.

Still more trite are the commonplaces as to the emptiness and vanity
of the satisfaction to be derived from Fame and Reputation. The case
of posthumous fame, indeed, is a striking instance of the general
proposition before laid down, that the commonly accepted ends of action
are determined partly by the average force of desires that are not
directed towards pleasure, nor conformed to experiences of pleasure.
For posthumous fame seems to rank pretty high among the objects that
common opinion regards as good or desirable for the individual:
and the pursuit of it is not ordinarily stigmatised as contrary to
prudence, even if it leads a man to sacrifice other important sources
of happiness to a result of which he never expects to be actually
conscious. Yet the slightest reflection shows such a pursuit to be
_prima facie_ irrational,[123] from an egoistic point of view; and
every moraliser has found this an obvious and popular topic. The actual
consciousness of present fame is no doubt very delightful to most
persons: still the moraliser does not find it difficult to maintain
that even this is attended with such counterbalancing disadvantages as
render its hedonistic value very doubtful.

Again, the current estimate of the desirability of Power is tolerably
high, and perhaps the more closely and analytically we examine the
actual motives of men, the more widespread and predominant its pursuit
will appear: for many men seem to seek wealth, knowledge, even
reputation, as a means to the attainment of power, rather than for
their own sakes or with a view to other pleasures. And yet men assent
willingly when they are told that the pursuit of power, as of fame,
is prompted by a vain ambition, never satisfied, but only rendered
more uneasy by such success as is possible for it: that the anxieties
which attend not only the pursuit but the possession of power, and the
jealousies and dangers inseparable from the latter, far outweigh its
pleasures.

Society of some sort no one can deny to be necessary to human
happiness: but still the kind and degree of social intercourse which
is actually sought by the more wealthy and leisured portion of the
community, with no little expenditure of time, trouble, and means, is
often declared to yield a most thin and meagre result of pleasure.

We find, no doubt, great agreement among modern moralisers as to the
importance of the exercise of the domestic affections as a means of
happiness: and this certainly seems to have a prominent place in the
plan of life of the majority of mankind. And yet it may fairly be
doubted whether men in general do value domestic life very highly,
apart from the gratification of sexual passion. Certainly whenever
any part of civilised society is in such a state that men can freely
indulge this passion and at the same time avoid the burden of a
family, without any serious fear of social disapprobation, celibacy
tends to become common: it has even become so common as to excite
the grave anxiety of legislators. And though such conduct has always
been disapproved by common sense, it seems to be rather condemned as
anti-social than as imprudent.

Thus our examination shows great instability and uncertainty in the
most decisive judgments of common sense; since, as I have said, bodily
comfort and luxury, wealth, fame, power, society are the objects which
common opinion seems most clearly and confidently to recommend as
sources of pleasure. For though the pleasures derived from Art and the
contemplation of the beautiful in Nature, and those of curiosity and
the exercise of the intellect generally, are highly praised, it is
difficult to formulate a “common opinion” in respect of them, since the
high estimates often set upon them seem to express the real experience
of only small minorities. And though these have persuaded the mass
of mankind, or that portion of it which is possessed of leisure, to
let Culture be regarded as an important source of happiness; they can
scarcely be said to have produced any generally accepted opinion as to
its importance in comparison with the other sources before mentioned,
the pleasures of which are more genuinely appreciated by the majority;
still less as to the relative value of different elements of this
culture.

But even supposing the _consensus_, in respect of sources of happiness,
were far more complete and clear than impartial reflection seems to
show, its value would still be considerably impaired by the dissent of
important minorities, which we have not yet noticed. For example, many
religious persons regard all mundane pleasures as mean and trifling;
so full of vanity and emptiness that the eager pursuit of them is
only possible through ever-renewed illusion, leading to ever-repeated
disappointment. And this view is shared by not a few reflective persons
who have no religious bias: as is evident from the numerous adherents
that Pessimism has won in recent times. Indeed a somewhat similar
judgment, on the value of the ordinary objects of human pursuit, has
been passed by many philosophers who have not been pessimists: and
when we consider that it is the philosopher’s especial business to
reflect with care and precision on the facts of consciousness, we
shall hesitate, in any dispute between philosophers and the mass of
mankind, to let our conclusion be determined by merely counting heads.
On the other hand, as has been already observed, the philosopher’s
susceptibilities and capacities of feeling do not fairly represent
those of humanity in general: and hence if he ventures to erect the
results of his individual experience into a universal standard, he is
likely to overrate some pleasures and underrate others. Perhaps the
most convincing illustrations of this are furnished by thinkers not
of the idealist or transcendental type, but professed Hedonists, such
as Epicurus and Hobbes. We cannot accept as fair expressions of the
ordinary experience of the human race either Epicurus’s identification
of painlessness with the highest degree of pleasure, or Hobbes’s
asseveration that the gratifications of curiosity “far exceed in
intensity all carnal delights.” Thus we seem to be in this dilemma:
the mass of mankind, to whose common opinion we are naturally referred
for catholically authoritative beliefs respecting the conditions of
happiness, are deficient in the faculty or the habit of observing and
recording their experience: and usually, in proportion as a man is, by
nature and practice, a better observer, the phenomena that he has to
observe are more and more divergent from the ordinary type.

§ 3. On the whole, it must, I think, be admitted that the Hedonistic
method cannot be freed from inexactness and uncertainty by appealing
to the judgments of common sense respecting the sources of happiness.
At the same time I would not exaggerate the difficulty of combining
these into a tolerably coherent body of probable doctrine, not
useless for practical guidance. For first, it must be observed, that
it is only occasionally and to a limited extent that these commonly
commended sources of happiness come into competition with one
another and are presented as alternatives. For example, the pursuit
of wealth often leads also to power (besides the power that lies in
wealth) and to reputation: and again, these objects of desire can
usually be best attained--as far as it is in our power to attain
them at all--by employment which in itself gives the pleasure that
normally attends energetic exercise of one’s best faculties: and this
congenial employment is not incompatible with adequate exercise of
the affections, social and domestic; nor with cultivated amusement
(which must always be carefully limited in amount if it is to be
really amusing). And no one doubts that to carry either employment
or amusement to a degree that injures health involves generally a
sacrifice of happiness, no less than over-indulgence in sensual
gratifications.

And as for the philosophical or quasi-philosophical paradoxes as to
the illusoriness of sensual enjoyments, wealth, power, fame, etc., we
may explain the widespread acceptance which these find by admitting
a certain general tendency to exaggeration in the common estimates
of such objects of desire, which from time to time causes a reaction
and an equally excessive temporary depreciation of them. As we saw
(chap. iii.) it is natural for men to value too highly the absent
pleasures for which they hope and long: power and fame, for example,
are certainly attended with anxieties and disgusts which are not
foreseen when they are represented in longing imagination: yet it may
still be true that they bring to most men a clear balance of happiness
on the whole. It seems clear, again, that luxury adds _less_ to the
ordinary enjoyment of life than most men struggling with penury
suppose: there are special delights attending the hard-earned meal,
and the rarely-recurring amusement, which must be weighed against the
profuser pleasures that the rich can command: so that we may fairly
conclude that increase of happiness is very far from keeping pace
with increase of wealth. On the other hand, when we take into account
all the pleasures of Culture, Power, Fame, and Beneficence, and still
more the security that wealth gives against the pains of privation
and the anxieties of penury--for the owner himself and those whom
he loves--we can hardly doubt that increase of wealth brings on the
average _some_ increase of happiness: at least until a man reaches an
income beyond that of the great majority in any actual community. Thus
on the whole it would seem to be a reasonable conclusion that, while
it is extravagant to affirm that happiness is “equally distributed
through all ranks and callings,” it is yet _more_ equally distributed
than the aspect of men’s external circumstances would lead us to infer:
especially considering the importance of the pleasures that attend the
exercise of the affections. Again, common sense is quite prepared to
recognise that there are persons of peculiar temperament to whom the
ordinary pleasures of life are really quite trifling in comparison with
more refined enjoyments: and also that men generally are liable to
fall, for certain periods, under the sway of absorbing impulses, which
take them out of the range within which the judgments of common sense
are even broadly and generally valid. No one (_e.g._) expects a lover
to care much for anything except the enjoyments of love; nor considers
that an enthusiast sacrifices happiness in making everything give way
to his hobby.

In fact we may say that common sense scarcely claims to provide more
than rather indefinite general rules, which no prudent man should
neglect without giving himself a reason for doing so. Such reasons
may either be drawn from one’s knowledge of some peculiarities in
one’s nature, or from the experience of others whom one has ground
for believing to be more like oneself than the average of mankind
are. Still, as we saw, there is considerable risk of error in thus
appropriating the special experience of other individuals: and, in
short, it does not appear that by any process of this kind,--either
by appealing to the common opinion of the many, or to that of
cultivated persons, or to that of those whom we judge most to resemble
ourselves,--we can hope to solve with precision or certainty the
problems of egoistic conduct.

The question then remains, whether any general theory can be attained
of the causes of pleasure and pain so certain and practically
applicable that we may by its aid rise above the ambiguities and
inconsistencies of common or sectarian opinion, no less than the
shortcomings of the empirical-reflective method, and establish the
Hedonistic art of life on a thoroughly scientific basis. To the
consideration of this question I shall proceed in the last chapter of
this book: but before entering upon it, I wish to examine carefully
a common belief as to the means of attaining happiness which--though
it hardly claims to rest upon a scientific basis--is yet generally
conceived by those who hold it to have a higher degree of certainty
than most of the current opinions that we have been examining. This
is the belief that a man will attain the greatest happiness open
to him by the performance of his Duty as commonly recognised and
prescribed--except so far as he may deviate from this standard in
obedience to a truer conception of the conduct by which universal good
is to be realised or promoted.[124] The special importance of this
opinion to a writer on Morals renders it desirable to reserve our
discussion of it for a separate chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[121] The consideration of the importance of Morality as a source of
happiness is reserved for the next chapter.

[122] It is striking to find the author of the _Wealth of Nations_, the
founder of a long line of plutologists who are commonly believed to
exalt the material means of happiness above all other, declaring that
“wealth and greatness are mere trinkets of frivolous utility,” and that
“in ease of body and peace of mind, all the different ranks of life are
nearly upon a level, and the beggar who suns himself by the side of the
highway possesses that security which kings are fighting for.” Adam
Smith, _Moral Sentiments_, Part iv. chap. i.

[123] No doubt such a pursuit may be justified to self-love by dwelling
on the pleasures of hope and anticipation which attend it. But this is
obviously an after-thought. It is not for the sake of these originally
that posthumous fame is sought by him whom it spurs

    “To scorn delights and live laborious days.”


[124] In the following chapter I have not entered into any particular
consideration of the case in which the individual’s conscience is
definitely in conflict with the general moral consciousness of his
age and country: because, though it is commonly held to be a man’s
duty always to obey the dictates of his own conscience, even at the
risk of error, it can hardly be said to be a current opinion that he
will always attain the greatest happiness open to him by conforming to
the dictates of his conscience even when it conflicts with received
morality.




