CHAPTER III

ETHICAL JUDGMENTS


§ 1. In the first chapter I spoke of actions that we judge to be right
and what ought to be done as being “reasonable,” or “rational,” and
similarly of ultimate ends as “prescribed by Reason”: and I contrasted
the motive to action supplied by the recognition of such reasonableness
with “non-rational” desires and inclinations. This manner of speaking
is employed by writers of different schools, and seems in accordance
with the common view and language on the subject. For we commonly think
that wrong conduct is essentially irrational, and can be shown to be so
by argument; and though we do not conceive that it is by reason alone
that men are influenced to act rightly, we still hold that appeals to
the reason are an essential part of all moral persuasion, and that
part which concerns the moralist or moral philosopher as distinct from
the preacher or moral rhetorician. On the other hand it is widely
maintained that, as Hume says, “Reason, meaning the judgment of truth
and falsehood, can never of itself be any motive to the Will”; and
that the motive to action is in all cases some Non-rational Desire,
including under this term the impulses to action given by present
pleasure and pain. It seems desirable to examine with some care the
grounds of this contention before we proceed any further.

Let us begin by defining the issue raised as clearly as possible. Every
one, I suppose, has had experience of what is meant by the conflict of
non-rational or irrational desires with reason: most of us (_e.g._)
occasionally feel bodily appetite prompting us to indulgences which
we judge to be imprudent, and anger prompting us to acts which we
disapprove as unjust or unkind. It is when this conflict occurs that
the desires are said to be irrational, as impelling us to volitions
opposed to our deliberate judgments; sometimes we yield to such
seductive impulses, and sometimes not; and it is perhaps when we do
_not_ yield that the impulsive force of such irrational desires is most
definitely felt, as we have to exert in resisting them a voluntary
effort somewhat analogous to that involved in any muscular exertion.
Often, again,--since we are not always thinking either of our duty
or of our interest,--desires of this kind take effect in voluntary
actions without our having judged such actions to be either right
or wrong, either prudent or imprudent; as (_e.g._) when an ordinary
healthy man eats his dinner. In such cases it seems most appropriate
to call the desires “non-rational” rather than “irrational.” Neither
term is intended to imply that the desires spoken of--or at least the
more important of them--are not normally accompanied by intellectual
processes. It is true that some impulses to action seem to take
effect, as we say “blindly” or “instinctively,” without any definite
consciousness either of the end at which the action is aimed, or of
the means by which the end is to be attained: but this, I conceive, is
only the case with impulses that do not occupy consciousness for an
appreciable time, and ordinarily do not require any but very familiar
and habitual actions for the attainment of their proximate ends. In
all other cases--that is, in the case of the actions with which we
are chiefly concerned in ethical discussion--the result aimed at, and
some part at least of the means by which it is to be realised, are
more or less distinctly represented in consciousness, previous to the
volition that initiates the movements tending to its realisation.
Hence the resultant forces of what I call “non-rational” desires,
and the volitions to which they prompt, are continually modified by
intellectual processes in two distinct ways; first by new perceptions
or representations of means conducive to the desired ends, and secondly
by new presentations or representations of facts actually existing
or in prospect--especially more or less probable consequences of
contemplated actions--which rouse new impulses of desire and aversion.

The question, then, is whether the account just given of the influence
of the intellect on desire and volition is not exhaustive; and whether
the experience which is commonly described as a “conflict of desire
with reason” is not more properly conceived as merely a conflict among
desires and aversions; the sole function of reason being to bring
before the mind ideas of actual or possible facts, which modify in the
manner above described the resultant force of our various impulses.

I hold that this is not the case; that the ordinary moral or prudential
judgments which, in the case of all or most minds, have some--though
often an inadequate--influence on volition, cannot legitimately be
interpreted as judgments respecting the present or future existence
of human feelings or any facts of the sensible world; the fundamental
notion represented by the word “ought” or “right,”[28] which such
judgments contain expressly or by implication, being essentially
different from all notions representing facts of physical or psychical
experience. The question is one on which appeal must ultimately be
made to the reflection of individuals on their practical judgments
and reasonings: and in making this appeal it seems most convenient
to begin by showing the inadequacy of all attempts to explain the
practical judgments or propositions in which this fundamental notion
is introduced, without recognising its unique character as above
negatively defined. There is an element of truth in such explanations,
in so far as they bring into view feelings which undoubtedly accompany
moral or prudential judgments, and which ordinarily have more or less
effect in determining the will to actions judged to be right; but so
far as they profess to be interpretations of what such judgments mean,
they appear to me to fail altogether.

In considering this question it is important to take separately the
two species of judgments which I have distinguished as “moral” and
“prudential.” Both kinds might, indeed, be termed “moral” in a wider
sense; and, as we saw, it is a strongly supported opinion that all
valid moral rules have ultimately a prudential basis. But in ordinary
thought we clearly distinguish cognitions or judgments of duty from
cognitions or judgments as to what “is right” or “ought to be done” in
view of the agent’s private interest or happiness: and the depth of the
distinction will not, I think, be diminished by the closer examination
of these judgments on which we are now to enter.

This very distinction, however, suggests an interpretation of the
notion of rightness which denies its peculiar significance in moral
judgments. It is urged that “rightness” is properly an attribute of
means, not of ends: so that the attribution of it merely implies
that the act judged right is the fittest or only fit means to the
realisation of some end understood if not expressly stated: and
similarly that the affirmation that anything ‘ought to be done’ is
always made with at least tacit reference to some ulterior end. And I
grant that this is a legitimate interpretation, in respect of a part of
the use of either term in ordinary discourse. But it seems clear (1)
that certain kinds of actions--under the names of Justice, Veracity,
Good Faith, etc.--are commonly held to be right unconditionally,
without regard to ulterior results: and (2) that we similarly regard
as “right” the adoption of certain ends--such as the common good
of society, or general happiness. In either of these cases the
interpretation above suggested seems clearly inadmissible.[29]

We have therefore to find a meaning for “right” or “what ought to be”
other than the notion of fitness to some ulterior end. Here we are met
by the suggestion that the judgments or propositions which we commonly
call moral--in the narrower sense--really affirm no more than the
existence of a specific emotion in the mind of the person who utters
them; that when I say ‘Truth ought to be spoken’ or ‘Truthspeaking is
right,’ I mean no more than that the idea of truthspeaking excites in
my mind a feeling of approbation or satisfaction. And probably some
degree of such emotion, commonly distinguished as ‘moral sentiment,’
ordinarily accompanies moral judgments on real cases. But it is absurd
to say that a mere statement of my approbation of truth-speaking is
properly given in the proposition ‘Truth ought to be spoken’; otherwise
the fact of another man’s disapprobation might equally be expressed
by saying ‘Truth ought not to be spoken’; and thus we should have two
coexistent facts stated in two mutually contradictory propositions.
This is so obvious, that we must suppose that those who hold the view
which I am combating do not really intend to deny it: but rather to
maintain that this subjective fact of my approbation is all that
there is any _ground_ for stating, or perhaps that it is all that any
reasonable person is prepared on reflection to affirm. And no doubt
there is a large class of statements, in form objective, which yet
we are not commonly prepared to maintain as more than subjective if
their validity is questioned. If I say that ‘the air is sweet,’ or
‘the food disagreeable,’ it would not be exactly true to say that
I mean no more than that I like the one or dislike the other: but
if my statement is challenged, I shall probably content myself with
affirming the existence of such feelings in my own mind. But there
appears to me to be a fundamental difference between this case and
that of moral feelings. The peculiar emotion of moral approbation is,
in my experience, inseparably bound up with the conviction, implicit
or explicit, that the conduct approved is ‘really’ right--_i.e._
that it cannot, without error, be disapproved by any other mind. If
I give up this conviction because others do not share it, or for any
other reason, I may no doubt still retain a sentiment prompting to
the conduct in question, or--what is perhaps more common--a sentiment
of repugnance to the opposite conduct: but this sentiment will no
longer have the special quality of ‘moral sentiment’ strictly so
called. This difference between the two is often overlooked in ethical
discussion: but any experience of a change in moral opinion produced by
argument may afford an illustration of it. Suppose (_e.g._) that any
one habitually influenced by the sentiment of Veracity is convinced
that under certain peculiar circumstances in which he finds himself,
speaking truth is not right but wrong. He will probably still feel a
repugnance against violating the rule of truthspeaking: but it will be
a feeling quite different in kind and degree from that which prompted
him to veracity as a department of virtuous action. We might perhaps
call the one a ‘moral’ and the other a ‘quasi-moral’ sentiment.

The argument just given holds equally against the view that approbation
or disapprobation is not the mere liking or aversion of an individual
for certain kinds of conduct, but this complicated by a sympathetic
representation of similar likings or aversions felt by other human
beings. No doubt such sympathy is a normal concomitant of moral
emotion, and when the former is absent there is much greater difficulty
in maintaining the latter: this, however, is partly because our moral
beliefs commonly agree with those of other members of our society, and
on this agreement depends to an important extent our confidence in the
truth of these beliefs.[30] But if, as in the case just supposed, we
are really led by argument to a new moral belief, opposed not only to
our own habitual sentiment but also to that of the society in which
we live, we have a crucial experiment proving the existence in us of
moral sentiments as I have defined them, colliding with the represented
sympathies of our fellow-men no less than with our own mere likings
and aversions. And even if we imagine the sympathies opposed to our
convictions extended until they include those of the whole human race,
against whom we imagine ourselves to stand as _Athanasius contra
mundum_; still, so long as our conviction of duty is firm, the emotion
which we call moral stands out in imagination quite distinct from the
complex sympathy opposed to it, however much we extend, complicate and
intensify the latter.

§ 2. So far, then, from being prepared to admit that the proposition
‘X ought to be done’ _merely_ expresses the existence of a certain
sentiment in myself or others, I find it strictly impossible so to
regard my own moral judgments without eliminating from the concomitant
sentiment the peculiar quality signified by the term ‘moral.’ There is,
however, another interpretation of ‘ought,’ in which the likings and
aversions that men in general feel for certain kinds of conduct are
considered not as sympathetically represented in the emotion of the
person judging, and thus constituting the moral element in it, but as
causes of pain to the person of whom ‘ought’ or ‘duty’ is predicated.
On this view, when we say that a man ‘ought’ to do anything, or that it
is his ‘duty’ to do it, we mean that he is bound under penalties to do
it; the particular penalty considered being the pain that will accrue
to him directly or indirectly from the dislike of his fellow-creatures.

I think that this interpretation expresses a part of the meaning
with which the words ‘ought’ and ‘duty’ are used in ordinary thought
and discourse. For we commonly use the term ‘moral obligation’ as
equivalent to ‘duty’ and expressing what is implied in the verb
‘ought,’ thus suggesting an analogy between this notion and that of
legal obligation; and in the case of positive law we cannot refuse
to recognise the connexion of ‘obligation’ and ‘punishment’: a law
cannot be properly said to be actually established in a society if it
is habitually violated with impunity. But a more careful reflection on
the relation of Law to Morality, as ordinarily conceived, seems to show
that this interpretation of ‘ought’--though it cannot be excluded--must
be distinguished from the special ethical use of the term. For the
ideal distinction taken in common thought between legal and merely
moral rules seems to lie in just this connexion of the former but not
the latter with punishment: we think that there are some things which a
man ought to be compelled to do, or forbear, and others which he ought
to do or forbear without compulsion, and that the former alone fall
properly within the sphere of law. No doubt we also think that in many
cases where the compulsion of law is undesirable, the fear of moral
censure and its consequences supplies a normally useful constraint on
the will of any individual. But it is evident that what we mean when we
say that a man is “morally though not legally bound” to do a thing is
not merely that he “will be punished by public opinion if he does not”;
for we often join these two statements, clearly distinguishing their
import: and further (since public opinion is known to be eminently
fallible) there are many things which we judge men ‘ought’ to do,
while perfectly aware that they will incur no serious social penalties
for omitting them. In such cases, indeed, it would be commonly said
that social disapprobation ‘ought’ to follow on immoral conduct; and
in this very assertion it is clear that the term ‘ought’ cannot mean
that social penalties are to be feared by those who do not disapprove.
Again, all or most men in whom the moral consciousness is strongly
developed find themselves from time to time in conflict with the
commonly received morality of the society to which they belong: and
thus--as was before said--have a crucial experience proving that duty
does not mean _to them_ what other men will disapprove of them for not
doing.

At the same time I admit, as indeed I have already suggested in § 3
of chap. i., that we not unfrequently pass judgments resembling moral
judgments in form, and not distinguished from them in ordinary thought,
in cases where the obligation affirmed is found, on reflection, to
depend on the existence of current opinions and sentiments as such.
The members of modern civilised societies are under the sway of a code
of Public Opinion, enforced by social penalties, which no reflective
person obeying it identifies with the moral code, or regards as
unconditionally binding: indeed the code is manifestly fluctuating and
variable, different at the same time in different classes, professions,
social circles, of the same political community. Such a code always
supports to a considerable extent the commonly received code of
morality: and most reflective persons think it generally reasonable
to conform to the dictates of public opinion--to the code of Honour,
we may say, in graver matters, or the rules of Politeness or Good
Breeding in lighter matters--wherever these dictates do not positively
conflict with morality; such conformity being maintained either on
grounds of private interest, or because it is thought conducive to
general happiness or wellbeing to keep as much as possible in harmony
with one’s fellow-men. Hence in the ordinary thought of unreflective
persons the duties imposed by social opinion are often undistinguished
from moral duties: and indeed this indistinctness is almost inherent
in the common meaning of many terms. For instance, if we say that a
man has been ‘dishonoured’ by a cowardly act, it is not quite clear
whether we mean that he has incurred contempt, or that he has deserved
it, or both: as becomes evident when we take a case in which the Code
of Honour comes into conflict with Morality. If (_e.g._) a man were
to incur social ostracism anywhere for refusing a duel on religious
grounds, some would say that he was ‘dishonoured,’ though he had
acted rightly, others that there could be no real dishonour in a
virtuous act. A similar ambiguity seems to lurk in the common notion
of ‘improper’ or ‘incorrect’ behaviour. Still in all such cases the
ambiguity becomes evident on reflection: and when discovered, merely
serves to illustrate further the distinction between the notion
of ‘right conduct,’ ‘duty,’ what we ‘ought’ or are under ‘moral
obligation’ to do--when these terms are used in a strictly ethical
sense--and conduct that is merely conformed to the standard of current
opinion.

There is, however, another way of interpreting ‘ought’ as connoting
penalties, which is somewhat less easy to meet by a crucial
psychological experiment. The moral imperative may be taken to be a
law of God, to the breach of which Divine penalties are annexed; and
these, no doubt, in a Christian society, are commonly conceived to be
adequate and universally applicable. Still, it can hardly be said that
this belief is shared by all the persons whose conduct is influenced
by independent moral convictions, occasionally unsupported either by
the law or the public opinion of their community. And even in the case
of many of those who believe fully in the moral government of the
world, the judgment “I ought to do this” cannot be identified with
the judgment “God will punish me if I do not”; since the conviction
that the former proposition is true is distinctly recognised as an
important part of the grounds for believing the latter. Again, when
Christians speak--as they commonly do--of the ‘justice’ (or other moral
attributes) of God, as exhibited in punishing sinners and rewarding the
righteous, they obviously imply not merely that God _will_ thus punish
and reward, but that it is ‘right’[31] for Him to do so: which, of
course, cannot be taken to mean that He is ‘bound under penalties.’

§ 3. It seems then that the notion of ‘ought’ or ‘moral obligation’ as
used in our common moral judgments, does not merely import (1) that
there exists in the mind of the person judging a specific emotion
(whether complicated or not by sympathetic representation of similar
emotions in other minds); nor (2) that certain rules of conduct are
supported by penalties which will follow on their violation (whether
such penalties result from the general liking or aversion felt for
the conduct prescribed or forbidden, or from some other source). What
then, it may be asked, does it import? What definition can we give
of ‘ought,’ ‘right,’ and other terms expressing the same fundamental
notion? To this I should answer that the notion which these terms
have in common is too elementary to admit of any formal definition.
In so saying, I do not mean to imply that it belongs to the “original
constitution of the mind”; _i.e._ that its presence in consciousness
is not the result of a process of development. I do not doubt that the
whole fabric of human thought--including the conceptions that present
themselves as most simple and elementary--has been developed, through
a gradual process of psychical change, out of some lower life in which
thought, properly speaking, had no place. But it is not therefore to be
inferred, as regards this or any other notion, that it has not really
the simplicity which it appears to have when we now reflect upon it.
It is sometimes assumed that if we can show how thoughts have grown
up--if we can point to the psychical antecedents of which they are the
natural consequents--we may conclude that the thoughts in question are
really compounds containing their antecedents as latent elements. But
I know no justification for this transference of the conceptions of
chemistry to psychology;[32] I know no reason for considering psychical
antecedents as really constitutive of their psychical consequents, in
spite of the apparent dissimilarity between the two. In default of such
reasons, a psychologist must accept as elementary what introspection
carefully performed declares to be so; and, using this criterion, I
find that the notion we have been examining, as it now exists in our
thought, cannot be resolved into any more simple notions: it can only
be made clearer by determining as precisely as possible its relation
to other notions with which it is connected in ordinary thought,
especially to those with which it is liable to be confounded.

In performing this process it is important to note and distinguish
two different implications with which the word “ought” is used; in
the narrowest ethical sense what we judge ‘ought to be’ done, is
always thought capable of being brought about by the volition of any
individual to whom the judgment applies. I cannot conceive that I
‘ought’ to do anything which at the same time I judge that I cannot do.
In a wider sense, however,--which cannot conveniently be discarded--I
sometimes judge that I ‘ought’ to know what a wiser man would know,
or feel as a better man would feel, in my place, though I may know
that I could not directly produce in myself such knowledge or feeling
by any effort of will. In this case the word merely implies an ideal
or pattern which I ‘ought’--in the stricter sense--to seek to imitate
as far as possible. And this wider sense seems to be that in which
the word is normally used in the precepts of Art generally, and in
political judgments: when I judge that the laws and constitution of my
country ‘ought to be’ other than they are, I do not of course imply
that my own or any other individual’s single volition can directly
bring about the change.[33] In either case, however, I imply that what
ought to be is a possible object of knowledge: _i.e._ that what I judge
ought to be must, unless I am in error, be similarly judged by all
rational beings who judge truly of the matter.

In referring such judgments to the ‘Reason,’ I do not mean here to
prejudge the question whether valid moral judgments are normally
attained by a process of reasoning from universal principles or axioms,
or by direct intuition of the particular duties of individuals.
It is not uncommonly held that the moral faculty deals primarily
with individual cases as they arise, applying directly to each case
the general notion of duty, and deciding intuitively what ought
to be done by this person in these particular circumstances. And
I admit that on this view the apprehension of moral truth is more
analogous to Sense-perception than to Rational Intuition (as commonly
understood):[34] and hence the term Moral Sense might seem more
appropriate. But the term Sense suggests a capacity for feelings
which may vary from _A_ to _B_ without either being in error, rather
than a faculty of cognition:[35] and it appears to me fundamentally
important to avoid this suggestion. I have therefore thought it better
to use the term Reason with the explanation above given, to denote the
faculty of moral cognition:[36] adding, as a further justification of
this use, that even when a moral judgment relates primarily to some
particular action we commonly regard it as applicable to any other
action belonging to a certain definable class: so that the moral truth
apprehended is implicitly conceived to be intrinsically universal,
though particular in our first apprehension of it.

Further, when I speak of the cognition or judgment that ‘X ought to
be done’--in the stricter ethical sense of the term ought[37]--as a
‘dictate’ or ‘precept’ of reason to the persons to whom it relates, I
imply that in rational beings as such this cognition gives an impulse
or motive to action: though in human beings, of course, this is only
one motive among others which are liable to conflict with it, and is
not always--perhaps not usually--a predominant motive. In fact, this
possible conflict of motives seems to be connoted by the term ‘dictate’
or ‘imperative,’ which describes the relation of Reason to mere
inclinations or non-rational impulses by comparing it to the relation
between the will of a superior and the wills of his subordinates. This
conflict seems also to be implied in the terms ‘ought,’ ‘duty,’ ‘moral
obligation,’ as used in ordinary moral discourse: and hence these terms
cannot be applied to the actions of rational beings to whom we cannot
attribute impulses conflicting with reason. We may, however, say of
such beings that their actions are ‘reasonable,’ or (in an absolute
sense) ‘right.’

§ 4. I am aware that some persons will be disposed to answer all the
preceding argument by a simple denial that they can find in their
consciousness any such unconditional or categorical imperative as I
have been trying to exhibit. If this is really the final result of
self-examination in any case, there is no more to be said. I, at least,
do not know how to impart the notion of moral obligation to any one
who is entirely devoid of it. I think, however, that many of those who
give this denial only mean to deny that they have any consciousness of
moral obligation to actions without reference to their consequences;
and would not really deny that they recognise some universal end or
ends--whether it be the general happiness, or well-being otherwise
understood--as that at which it is ultimately reasonable to aim,
subordinating to its attainment the gratification of any personal
desires that may conflict with this aim. But in this view, as I have
before said, the unconditional imperative plainly comes in as regards
the end, which is--explicitly or implicitly--recognised as an end at
which all men ‘ought’ to aim; and it can hardly be denied that the
recognition of an end as ultimately reasonable involves the recognition
of an obligation to do such acts as most conduce to the end. The
obligation is not indeed “unconditional,” but it does not depend on the
existence of any non-rational desires or aversions. And nothing that
has been said in the preceding section is intended as an argument in
favour of Intuitionism, as against Utilitarianism or any other method
that treats moral rules as relative to General Good or Well-being.
For instance, nothing that I have said is inconsistent with the view
that Truthspeaking is only valuable as a means to the preservation of
society: only if it be admitted that it _is_ valuable on this ground I
should say that it is implied that the preservation of society--or some
further end to which this preservation, again, is a means--must be
valuable _per se_, and therefore something at which a rational being,
as such, ought to aim. If it be granted that we need not look beyond
the preservation of society, the primary ‘dictate of reason’ in this
case would be ‘that society _ought_ to be preserved’: but reason would
also dictate that truth ought to be spoken, so far as truthspeaking
is recognised as the indispensable or fittest means to this end: and
the notion “ought” as used in either dictate is that which I have been
trying to make clear.

So again, even those who hold that moral rules are only obligatory
because it is the individual’s interest to conform to them--thus
regarding them as a particular species of prudential rules--do not
thereby get rid of the ‘dictate of reason,’ so far as they recognise
private interest or happiness as an end at which it is ultimately
reasonable to aim. The conflict of Practical Reason with irrational
desire remains an indubitable fact of our conscious experience, even if
practical reason is interpreted to mean merely self-regarding Prudence.
It is, indeed, maintained by Kant and others that it cannot properly
be said to be a man’s duty to promote his own happiness; since “what
every one inevitably wills cannot be brought under the notion of duty.”
But even granting[38] it to be in some sense true that a man’s volition
is always directed to the attainment of his own happiness, it does not
follow that a man always does what he believes will be conducive to his
own _greatest_ happiness. As Butler urges, it is a matter of common
experience that men indulge appetite or passion even when, in their own
view, the indulgence is as clearly opposed to what they conceive to be
their interest as it is to what they conceive to be their duty. Thus
the notion ‘ought’--as expressing the relation of rational judgment
to non-rational impulses--will find a place in the practical rules of
any egoistic system, no less than in the rules of ordinary morality,
understood as prescribing duty without reference to the agent’s
interest.

Here, however, it may be held that Egoism does not properly regard
the agent’s own greatest happiness as what he “ought” to aim at: but
only as the ultimate end for the realisation of which he has, on
the whole, a predominant desire; which may be temporarily overcome
by particular passions and appetites, but ordinarily regains its
predominance when these transient impulses have spent their force. I
quite recognise that this is a view widely taken of egoistic action,
and I propose to consider it in a subsequent chapter.[39] But even
if we discard the belief, that any end of action is unconditionally
or “categorically” prescribed by reason, the notion ‘ought’ as above
explained is not thereby eliminated from our practical reasonings: it
still remains in the “hypothetical imperative” which prescribes the
fittest means to any end that we may have determined to aim at. When
(_e.g._) a physician says, “If you wish to be healthy you ought to
rise early,” this is not the same thing as saying “early rising is
an indispensable condition of the attainment of health.” This latter
proposition expresses the relation of physiological facts on which
the former is founded; but it is not merely this relation of facts
that the word ‘ought’ imports: it also implies the unreasonableness of
adopting an end and refusing to adopt the means indispensable to its
attainment. It may perhaps be argued that this is not only unreasonable
but impossible: since adoption of an end means the preponderance of a
desire for it, and if aversion to the indispensable means causes them
not to be adopted although recognised as indispensable, the desire for
the end is _not_ preponderant and it ceases to be adopted. But this
view is due, in my opinion, to a defective psychological analysis.
According to my observation of consciousness, the adoption of an end
as paramount--either absolutely or within certain limits--is quite a
distinct psychical phenomenon from desire: it is a kind of volition,
though it is, of course, specifically different from a volition
initiating a particular immediate action. As a species intermediate
between the two, we may place resolutions to act in a certain way at
some future time: we continually make such resolutions, and sometimes
when the time comes for carrying them out, we do in fact act otherwise
under the influence of passion or mere habit, without consciously
cancelling our previous resolve. This inconsistency of will our
practical reason condemns as irrational, even apart from any judgment
of approbation or disapprobation on either volition considered by
itself. There is a similar inconsistency between the adoption of an
end and a general refusal to take whatever means we may see to be
indispensable to its attainment: and if, when the time comes, we do not
take such means while yet we do not consciously retract our adoption
of the end, it can hardly be denied that we ‘ought’ in consistency to
act otherwise than we do. And such a contradiction as I have described,
between a general resolution and a particular volition, is surely a
matter of common experience.

FOOTNOTES:

[28] The difference between the significations of the two words is
discussed later.

[29] As, for instance, when Bentham explains (_Principles of Morals
and Legislation_, chap. i. § i. note) that his fundamental principle
“states the greatest happiness of all those whose interest is in
question as being the right and proper end of human action,” we cannot
understand him really to _mean_ by the word “right” “conducive to the
general happiness,” though his language in other passages of the same
chapter (§§ ix. and x.) would seem to imply this; for the proposition
that it is conducive to general happiness to take general happiness as
an end of action, though not exactly a tautology, can hardly serve as
the fundamental principle of a moral system.

[30] See Book iii. chap. xi. § 1.

[31] ‘Ought’ is here inapplicable, for a reason presently explained.

[32] In Chemistry we regard the antecedents (elements) as still
existing in and constituting the consequent (compound) because the
latter is exactly similar to the former in weight, and because we can
generally cause this compound to disappear and obtain the elements in
its place. But we find nothing at all like this in the growth of mental
phenomena: the psychical consequent is in no respect exactly similar
to its antecedents, nor can it be resolved into them. I should explain
that I am not here arguing the question whether the _validity_ of moral
judgments is affected by a discovery of their psychical antecedents.
This question I reserve for subsequent discussion. See Book iii. chap.
i. § 4.

[33] I do not even imply that any combination of individuals could
completely realise the state of political relations which I conceive
‘ought to’ exist. My conception would be futile if it had no relation
to practice: but it may merely delineate a pattern to which no more
than an approximation is practically possible.

[34] We do not commonly say that particular physical facts are
apprehended by the Reason: we consider this faculty to be conversant
in its discursive operation with the relation of judgments or
propositions: and the intuitive reason (which is here rather in
question) we restrict to the apprehension of universal truths, such as
the axioms of Logic and Mathematics.

[35] By cognition I always mean what some would rather call “apparent
cognition”--that is, I do not mean to affirm the _validity_ of the
cognition, but only its existence as a psychical fact, and its claim to
be valid.

[36] A further justification for this extended use of the term Reason
will be suggested in a subsequent chapter of this Book (chap. viii. §
3).

[37] This is the sense in which the term will always be used in the
present treatise, except where the context makes it quite clear that
only the wider meaning--that of the political ‘ought’--is applicable.

[38] As will be seen from the next chapter, I do not grant this.

[39] Chap. ix. of this Book.




