CHAPTER XIV

ULTIMATE GOOD


§ 1. At the outset of this treatise[300] I noticed that there are
two forms in which the object of ethical inquiry is considered; it
is sometimes regarded as a Rule or Rules of Conduct, ‘the Right,’
sometimes as an end or ends, ‘the Good.’ I pointed out that in the
moral consciousness of modern Europe the two notions are _prima facie_
distinct; since while it is commonly thought that the obligation
to obey moral rules is absolute, it is not commonly held that the
whole Good of man lies in such obedience; this view, we may say,
is--vaguely and respectfully but unmistakably--repudiated as a Stoical
paradox. The ultimate Good or Wellbeing of man is rather regarded as
an ulterior result, the connexion of which with his Right Conduct
is indeed commonly held to be certain, but is frequently conceived
as supernatural, and so beyond the range of independent ethical
speculation. But now, if the conclusions of the preceding chapters are
to be trusted, it would seem that the practical determination of Right
Conduct depends on the determination of Ultimate Good. For we have
seen (_a_) that most of the commonly received maxims of Duty--even of
those which at first sight appear absolute and independent--are found
when closely examined to contain an implicit subordination to the more
general principles of Prudence and Benevolence: and (_b_) that no
principles except these, and the formal principle of Justice or Equity
can be admitted as at once intuitively clear and certain; while, again,
these principles themselves, so far as they are self-evident, may be
stated as precepts to seek (1) one’s own good on the whole, repressing
all seductive impulses prompting to undue preference of particular
goods, and (2) others’ good no less than one’s own, repressing any
undue preference for one individual over another. Thus we are brought
round again to the old question with which ethical speculation in
Europe began, ‘What is the Ultimate Good for man?’--though not in the
egoistic form in which the old question was raised. When, however, we
examine the controversies to which this question originally led, we
see that the investigation which has brought us round to it has tended
definitely to exclude one of the answers which early moral reflection
was disposed to give to it. For to say that ‘General Good’ consists
solely in general Virtue,--if we mean by Virtue conformity to such
prescriptions and prohibitions as make up the main part of the morality
of Common Sense--would obviously involve us in a logical circle; since
we have seen that the exact determination of these prescriptions and
prohibitions must depend on the definition of this General Good.

Nor, I conceive, can this argument be evaded by adopting the view of
what I have called ‘Æsthetic Intuitionism’ and regarding Virtues as
excellences of conduct clearly discernible by trained insight, although
their nature does not admit of being stated in definite formulæ. For
our notions of special virtues do not really become more independent
by becoming more indefinite: they still contain, though perhaps more
latently, the same reference to ‘Good’ or ‘Wellbeing’ as an ultimate
standard. This appears clearly when we consider any virtue in relation
to the cognate vice--or at least _non-virtue_--into which it tends to
pass over when pushed to an extreme, or exhibited under inappropriate
conditions. For example, Common Sense may seem to regard Liberality,
Frugality, Courage, Placability, as intrinsically desirable: but
when we consider their relation respectively to Profusion, Meanness,
Foolhardiness, Weakness, we find that Common Sense draws the line
in each case not by immediate intuition, but by reference either to
some definite maxim of duty, or to the general notion of ‘Good’ or
Wellbeing: and similarly when we ask at what point Candour, Generosity,
Humility cease to be virtues by becoming ‘excessive.’ Other qualities
commonly admired, such as Energy, Zeal, Self-control, Thoughtfulness,
are obviously regarded as virtues only when they are directed to
good ends. In short, the only so-called Virtues which can be thought
to be essentially and always such, and incapable of excess, are such
qualities as Wisdom, Universal Benevolence, and (in a sense) Justice;
of which the notions manifestly involve this notion of Good, supposed
already determinate. Wisdom is insight into Good and the means to
Good; Benevolence is exhibited in the purposive actions called “doing
Good”: Justice (when regarded as essentially and always a Virtue) lies
in distributing Good (or evil) impartially according to right rules.
If then we are asked what is this Good which it is excellent to know,
to bestow on others, to distribute impartially, it would be obviously
absurd to reply that it is just this knowledge, these beneficent
purposes, this impartial distribution.

Nor, again, can I perceive that this difficulty is in any way met by
regarding Virtue as a quality of “character” rather than of “conduct,”
and expressing the moral law in the form, “Be this,” instead of the
form “Do this.”[301] From a practical point of view, indeed, I fully
recognise the importance of urging that men should aim at an ideal
of character, and consider action in its effects on character. But I
cannot infer from this that character and its elements--faculties,
habits, or dispositions of any kind--are the constituents of Ultimate
Good. It seems to me that the opposite is implied in the very
conception of a faculty or disposition; it can only be defined as a
tendency to act or feel in a certain way under certain conditions; and
such a tendency appears to me clearly not valuable in itself but for
the acts and feelings in which it takes effect, or for the ulterior
consequences of these,--which consequences, again, cannot be regarded
as Ultimate Good, so long as they are merely conceived as modifications
of faculties, dispositions, etc. When, therefore, I say that effects
on character are important, it is a summary way of saying that by the
laws of our mental constitution the present act or feeling is a cause
tending to modify importantly our acts and feelings in the indefinite
future: the comparatively permanent result supposed to be produced
in the mind or soul, being a tendency that will show itself in an
indefinite number of particular acts and feelings, may easily be more
important, in relation to the ultimate end, than a single act or the
transient feeling of a single moment: but its comparative permanence
appears to me no ground for regarding it as itself a constituent of
ultimate good.

§ 2. So far, however, I have been speaking only of particular virtues,
as exhibited in conduct judged to be objectively right: and it may be
argued that this is too external a view of the Virtue that claims to
constitute Ultimate Good. It may be said that the difficulty that I
have been urging vanishes if we penetrate beyond the particular virtues
to the root and essence of virtue in general,--the determination of
the will to do whatever is judged to be right and to aim at realising
whatever is judged to be best--; since this subjective rightness or
goodness of will, being independent of knowledge of what is objectively
right or good, is independent of that presupposition of Good as already
known and determined, which we have seen to be implied in the common
conceptions of virtue as manifested in outward acts. I admit that if
subjective rightness or goodness of Will is affirmed to be the Ultimate
Good, the affirmation does not exactly involve the logical difficulty
that I have been urging. None the less is it fundamentally opposed to
Common Sense; since the very notion of subjective rightness or goodness
of will implies an objective standard, which it directs us to seek, but
does not profess to supply. It would be a palpable and violent paradox
to set before the right-seeking mind no end except this right-seeking
itself, and to affirm this to be the sole Ultimate Good, denying
that any effects of right volition can be in themselves good, except
the subjective rightness of future volitions, whether of self or of
others. It is true that no rule can be recognised, by any reasonable
individual, as more authoritative than the rule of doing what he judges
to be right; for, in deliberating with a view to my own immediate
action, I cannot distinguish between doing what is objectively right,
and realising my own subjective conception of rightness. But we are
continually forced to make the distinction as regards the actions
of others and to judge that conduct may be objectively wrong though
subjectively right: and we continually judge conduct to be objectively
wrong because it tends to cause pain and loss of happiness to
others,--apart from any effect on the subjective rightness of their
volitions. It is as so judging that we commonly recognise the mischief
and danger of fanaticism:--meaning by a fanatic a man who resolutely
and unswervingly carries out his own conception of rightness, when it
is a plainly mistaken conception.

The same result may be reached even without supposing so palpable a
divorce between subjective and objective rightness of volition as
is implied in the notion of fanaticism. As I have already pointed
out,[302] though the ‘dictates of Reason’ are always to be obeyed, it
does not follow that ‘the dictation of Reason’--the predominance of
consciously moral over non-moral motives--is to be promoted without
limits; and indeed Common Sense appears to hold that some things
are likely to be better done, if they are done from other motives
than conscious obedience to practical Reason or Conscience. It thus
becomes a practical question how far the dictation of Reason, the
predominance of moral choice and moral effort in human life, is a
result to be aimed at: and the admission of this question implies that
conscious rightness of volition is not the sole ultimate good. On the
whole, then, we may conclude that neither (1) subjective rightness or
goodness of volition, as distinct from objective, nor (2) virtuous
character, except as manifested or realised in virtuous conduct, can be
regarded as constituting Ultimate Good: while, again, we are precluded
from identifying Ultimate Good with virtuous conduct, because our
conceptions of virtuous conduct, under the different heads or aspects
denoted by the names of the particular virtues, have been found to
presuppose the prior determination of the notion of Good--that Good
which virtuous conduct is conceived as producing or promoting or
rightly distributing.

And what has been said of Virtue, seems to me still more manifestly
true of the other talents, gifts, and graces which make up the common
notion of human excellence or Perfection. However immediately the
excellent quality of such gifts and skills may be recognised and
admired, reflection shows that they are only valuable on account of
the good or desirable conscious life in which they are or will be
actualised, or which will be somehow promoted by their exercise.

§ 3. Shall we then say that Ultimate Good is Good or Desirable
conscious or sentient Life--of which Virtuous action is one element,
but not the sole constituent? This seems in harmony with Common Sense;
and the fact that particular virtues and talents and gifts are largely
valued as means to ulterior good does not necessarily prevent us from
regarding their exercise as also an element of Ultimate Good: just as
the fact that physical action, nutrition, and repose, duly proportioned
and combined, are means to the maintenance of our animal life, does
not prevent us from regarding them as indispensable elements of such
life. Still it seems difficult to conceive any kind of activity or
process as both means and end, from precisely the same point of view
and in respect of precisely the same quality: and in both the cases
above mentioned it is, I think, easy to distinguish the aspect in
which the activities or processes in question are to be regarded as
means from that in which they are to be regarded as in themselves
good or desirable. Let us examine this first in the case of the
physical processes. It is in their purely physical aspect, as complex
processes of corporeal change, that they are means to the maintenance
of life: but so long as we confine our attention to their corporeal
aspect,--regarding them merely as complex movements of certain
particles of organised matter--it seems impossible to attribute to
these movements, considered in themselves, either goodness or badness.
I cannot conceive it to be an ultimate end of rational action to secure
that these complex movements should be of one kind rather than another,
or that they should be continued for a longer rather than a shorter
period. In short, if a certain quality of human Life is that which is
ultimately desirable, it must belong to human Life regarded on its
psychical side, or, briefly, Consciousness.

But again: it is not all life regarded on its psychical side which we
can judge to be ultimately desirable: since psychical life as known to
us includes pain as well as pleasure, and so far as it is painful it
is not desirable. I cannot therefore accept a view of the wellbeing or
welfare of human beings--as of other living things--which is suggested
by current zoological conceptions and apparently maintained with more
or less definiteness by influential writers; according to which, when
we attribute goodness or badness to the manner of existence of any
living organism, we should be understood to attribute to it a tendency
either (1) to self-preservation, or (2) to the preservation of the
community or race to which it belongs--so that what “Wellbeing” adds
to mere “Being” is just promise of future being. It appears to me that
this doctrine needs only to be distinctly contemplated in order to be
rejected. If all life were as little desirable as some portions of
it have been, in my own experience and in that (I believe) of all or
most men, I should judge all tendency to the preservation of it to be
unmitigatedly bad. Actually, no doubt, as we generally hold that human
life, even as now lived, has on the average, a balance of happiness,
we regard what is preservative of life as generally good, and what is
destructive of life as bad: and I quite admit that a most fundamentally
important part of the function of morality consists in maintaining such
habits and sentiments as are necessary to the continued existence,
in full numbers, of a society of human beings under their actual
conditions of life. But this is not because the mere existence of human
organisms, even if prolonged to eternity, appears to me in any way
desirable; it is only assumed to be so because it is supposed to be
accompanied by Consciousness on the whole desirable; it is therefore
this Desirable Consciousness which we must regard as ultimate Good.

In the same way, so far as we judge virtuous activity to be a part of
Ultimate Good, it is, I conceive, because the consciousness attending
it is judged to be in itself desirable for the virtuous agent; though
at the same time this consideration does not adequately represent the
importance of Virtue to human wellbeing, since we have to consider
its value as a means as well as its value as an end. We may make the
distinction clearer by considering whether Virtuous life would remain
on the whole good for the virtuous agent, if we suppose it combined
with extreme pain. The affirmative answer to this question was strongly
supported in Greek philosophical discussion: but it is a paradox from
which a modern thinker would recoil: he would hardly venture to assert
that the portion of life spent by a martyr in tortures was in itself
desirable,--though it might be his duty to suffer the pain with a view
to the good of others, and even his interest to suffer it with a view
to his own ultimate happiness.

§ 4. If then Ultimate Good can only be conceived as Desirable
Consciousness--including the Consciousness of Virtue as a part but only
as a part--are we to identify this notion with Happiness or Pleasure,
and say with the Utilitarians that General Good is general happiness?
Many would at this point of the discussion regard this conclusion as
inevitable: to say that all other things called good are only means to
the end of making conscious life better or more desirable, seems to
them the same as saying that they are means to the end of happiness.
But very important distinctions remain to be considered. According to
the view taken in a previous chapter,[303] in affirming Ultimate Good
to be Happiness or Pleasure, we imply (1) that nothing is desirable
except desirable feelings, and (2) that the desirability of each
feeling is only directly cognisable by the sentient individual at the
time of feeling it, and that therefore this particular judgment of the
sentient individual must be taken as final[304] on the question how far
each element of feeling has the quality of Ultimate Good. Now no one, I
conceive, would estimate in any other way the desirability of feeling
considered merely as feeling: but it may be urged that our conscious
experience includes besides Feelings, Cognitions and Volitions, and
that the desirability of these must be taken into account, and is not
to be estimated by the standard above stated. I think, however, that
when we reflect on a cognition as a transient fact of an individual’s
psychical experience,--distinguishing it on the one hand from the
feeling that normally accompanies it, and on the other hand from that
relation of the knowing mind to the object known which is implied
in the term “true” or “valid cognition”[305]--it is seen to be an
element of consciousness quite neutral in respect of desirability:
and the same may be said of Volitions, when we abstract from their
concomitant feelings, and their relation to an objective norm or ideal,
as well as from all their consequences. It is no doubt true that in
ordinary thought certain states of consciousness--such as Cognition
of Truth, Contemplation of Beauty, Volition to realise Freedom or
Virtue--are sometimes judged to be preferable on other grounds than
their pleasantness: but the general explanation of this seems to be
(as was suggested in Book ii. chap. ii. § 2) that what in such cases
we really prefer is not the present consciousness itself, but either
effects on future consciousness more or less distinctly foreseen, or
else something in the objective relations of the conscious being, not
strictly included in his present consciousness.

The second of these alternatives may perhaps be made clearer by some
illustrations. A man may prefer the mental state of apprehending truth
to the state of half-reliance on generally accredited fictions,[306]
while recognising that the former state may be more painful than
the latter, and independently of any effect which he expects either
state to have upon his subsequent consciousness. Here, on my view,
the real object of preference is not the consciousness of knowing
truth, considered merely as consciousness,--the element of pleasure
or satisfaction in this being more than outweighed by the concomitant
pain,--but the relation between the mind and something else, which, as
the very notion of ‘truth’ implies, is whatever it is independently of
our cognition of it, and which I therefore call objective. This may
become more clear if we imagine ourselves learning afterwards that
what we took for truth is not really such: for in this case we should
certainly feel that our preference had been mistaken; whereas if our
choice had really been between two elements of transient consciousness,
its reasonableness could not be affected by any subsequent discovery.

Similarly, a man may prefer freedom and penury to a life of luxurious
servitude, not because the pleasant consciousness of being free
outweighs in prospect all the comforts and securities that the
other life would afford, but because he has a predominant aversion
to that relation between his will and the will of another which we
call slavery: or, again, a philosopher may choose what he conceives
as ‘inner freedom’--the consistent self-determination of the
will--rather than the gratifications of appetite; though recognising
that the latter are more desirable, considered merely as transient
feelings. In either case, he will be led to regard his preference
as mistaken, if he be afterwards persuaded that his conception of
Freedom or self-determination was illusory; that we are all slaves of
circumstances, destiny, etc.

So again, the preference of conformity to Virtue, or contemplation
of Beauty, to a state of consciousness recognised as more pleasant
seems to depend on a belief that one’s conception of Virtue or Beauty
corresponds to an ideal to some extent objective and valid for all
minds. Apart from any consideration of future consequences, we should
generally agree that a man who sacrificed happiness to an erroneous
conception of Virtue or Beauty made a mistaken choice.

Still, it may be said that this is merely a question of definition:
that we may take ‘conscious life’ in a wide sense, so as to include
the objective relations of the conscious being implied in our notions
of Virtue, Truth, Beauty, Freedom; and that from this point of view
we may regard cognition of Truth, contemplation of Beauty, Free or
Virtuous action, as in some measure preferable alternatives to Pleasure
or Happiness--even though we admit that Happiness must be included
as a part of Ultimate Good. In this case the principle of Rational
Benevolence, which was stated in the last chapter as an indubitable
intuition of the practical Reason, would not direct us to the pursuit
of universal happiness alone, but of these “ideal goods” as well, as
ends ultimately desirable for mankind generally.

§ 5. I think, however, that this view ought not to commend itself to
the sober judgment of reflective persons. In order to show this, I
must ask the reader to use the same twofold procedure that I before
requested him to employ in considering the absolute and independent
validity of common moral precepts. I appeal firstly to his intuitive
judgment after due consideration of the question when fairly placed
before it: and secondly to a comprehensive comparison of the ordinary
judgments of mankind. As regards the first argument, to me at least
it seems clear after reflection that these objective relations of
the conscious subject, when distinguished from the consciousness
accompanying and resulting from them, are not ultimately and
intrinsically desirable; any more than material or other objects
are, when considered apart from any relation to conscious existence.
Admitting that we have actual experience of such preferences as have
just been described, of which the ultimate object is something that
is not merely consciousness: it still seems to me that when (to use
Butler’s phrase) we “sit down in a cool hour,” we can only justify to
ourselves the importance that we attach to any of these objects by
considering its conduciveness, in one way or another, to the happiness
of sentient beings.

The second argument, that refers to the common sense of mankind,
obviously cannot be made completely cogent; since, as above stated,
several cultivated persons do habitually judge that knowledge, art,
etc.--not to speak of Virtue--are ends independently of the pleasure
derived from them. But we may urge not only that all these elements
of “ideal good” are productive of pleasure in various ways; but also
that they seem to obtain the commendation of Common Sense, roughly
speaking, in proportion to the degree of this productiveness. This
seems obviously true of Beauty; and will hardly be denied in respect
of any kind of social ideal: it is paradoxical to maintain that any
degree of Freedom, or any form of social order, would still be commonly
regarded as desirable even if we were certain that it had no tendency
to promote the general happiness. The case of Knowledge is rather more
complex; but certainly Common Sense is most impressed with the value
of knowledge, when its ‘fruitfulness’ has been demonstrated. It is,
however, aware that experience has frequently shown how knowledge, long
fruitless, may become unexpectedly fruitful, and how light may be shed
on one part of the field of knowledge from another apparently remote:
and even if any particular branch of scientific pursuit could be shown
to be devoid of even this indirect utility, it would still deserve some
respect on utilitarian grounds; both as furnishing to the inquirer
the refined and innocent pleasures of curiosity, and because the
intellectual disposition which it exhibits and sustains is likely on
the whole to produce fruitful knowledge. Still in cases approximating
to this last, Common Sense is somewhat disposed to complain of the
misdirection of valuable effort; so that the meed of honour commonly
paid to Science seems to be graduated, though perhaps unconsciously,
by a tolerably exact utilitarian scale. Certainly the moment the
legitimacy of any branch of scientific inquiry is seriously disputed,
as in the recent case of vivisection, the controversy on both sides is
generally conducted on an avowedly utilitarian basis.

The case of Virtue requires special consideration: since the
encouragement in each other of virtuous impulses and dispositions is a
main aim of men’s ordinary moral discourse; so that even to raise the
question whether this encouragement can go too far has a paradoxical
air. Still, our experience includes rare and exceptional cases in which
the concentration of effort on the cultivation of virtue has seemed to
have effects adverse to general happiness, through being intensified
to the point of moral fanaticism, and so involving a neglect of other
conditions of happiness. If, then, we admit as actual or possible
such ‘infelicific’ effects of the cultivation of Virtue, I think we
shall also generally admit that, in the case supposed, conduciveness
to general happiness should be the criterion for deciding how far the
cultivation of Virtue should be carried.

At the same time it must be allowed that we find in Common Sense an
aversion to admit Happiness (when explained to mean a sum of pleasures)
to be the sole ultimate end and standard of right conduct. But this, I
think, can be fully accounted for by the following considerations.

I. The term Pleasure is not commonly used so as to include clearly
_all_ kinds of consciousness which we desire to retain or reproduce:
in ordinary usage it suggests too prominently the coarser and commoner
kinds of such feelings; and it is difficult even for those who are
trying to use it scientifically to free their minds altogether from the
associations of ordinary usage, and to mean by Pleasure only Desirable
Consciousness or Feeling of whatever kind. Again, our knowledge of
human life continually suggests to us instances of pleasures which will
inevitably involve as concomitant or consequent either a greater amount
of pain or a loss of more important pleasures: and we naturally shrink
from including even hypothetically in our conception of ultimate good
these--in Bentham’s phrase--“impure” pleasures; especially since we
have, in many cases, moral or æsthetic instincts warning us against
such pleasures.

II. We have seen[307] that many important pleasures can only be felt on
condition of our experiencing desires for other things than pleasure.
Thus the very acceptance of Pleasure as the ultimate end of conduct
involves the practical rule that it is not always to be made the
conscious end. Hence, even if we are considering merely the good of
one human being taken alone, excluding from our view all effects of
his conduct on others, still the reluctance of Common Sense to regard
pleasure as the sole thing ultimately desirable may be justified by
the consideration that human beings tend to be less happy if they are
exclusively occupied with the desire of personal happiness. _E.g._ (as
was before shown) we shall miss the valuable pleasures which attend the
exercise of the benevolent affections if we do not experience genuinely
disinterested impulses to procure happiness for others (which are, in
fact, implied in the notion of ‘benevolent affections’).

III. But again, I hold, as was expounded in the preceding chapter,
that disinterested benevolence is not only thus generally in harmony
with rational Self-love, but also in another sense and independently
rational: that is, Reason shows me that if my happiness is desirable
and a good, the equal happiness of any other person must be equally
desirable. Now, when Happiness is spoken of as the sole ultimate good
of man, the idea most commonly suggested is that each individual is to
seek his own happiness at the expense (if necessary) or, at any rate,
to the neglect of that of others: and this offends both our sympathetic
and our rational regard for others’ happiness. It is, in fact, rather
the end of Egoistic than of Universalistic Hedonism, to which Common
Sense feels an aversion. And certainly one’s individual happiness is,
in many respects, an unsatisfactory mark for one’s supreme aim, apart
from any direct collision into which the exclusive pursuit of it may
bring us with rational or sympathetic Benevolence. It does not possess
the characteristics which, as Aristotle says, we “divine” to belong
to Ultimate Good: being (so far, at least, as it can be empirically
foreseen) so narrow and limited, of such necessarily brief duration,
and so shifting and insecure while it lasts. But Universal Happiness,
desirable consciousness or feeling for the innumerable multitude of
sentient beings, present and to come, seems an End that satisfies
our imagination by its vastness, and sustains our resolution by its
comparative security.

It may, however, be said that if we require the individual to sacrifice
his own happiness to the greater happiness of others on the ground
that it is reasonable to do so, we really assign to the individual a
different ultimate end from that which we lay down as the ultimate
Good of the universe of sentient beings: since we direct him to take,
as ultimate, Happiness for the Universe, but Conformity to Reason
for himself. I admit the substantial truth of this statement, though
I should avoid the language as tending to obscure the distinction
before explained between “obeying the dictates” and “promoting the
dictation” of reason. But granting the alleged difference, I do not
see that it constitutes an argument against the view here maintained,
since the individual is essentially and fundamentally different from
the larger whole--the universe of sentient beings--of which he is
conscious of being a part; just because he has a known relation to
similar parts of the same whole, while the whole itself has no such
relation. I accordingly see no inconsistency in holding that while
it _would_ be reasonable for the aggregate of sentient beings, if it
could act collectively, to aim at its own happiness only as an ultimate
end--and would be reasonable for any individual to do the same, if he
were the only sentient being in the universe--it may yet be _actually_
reasonable for an individual to sacrifice his own Good or happiness for
the greater happiness of others.[308]

At the same time I admit that, in the earlier age of ethical thought
which Greek philosophy represents, men sometimes judged an act to be
‘good’ _for the agent_, even while recognising that its consequences
would be on the whole painful to him,--as (_e.g._) a heroic exchange
of a life full of happiness for a painful death at the call of duty.
I attribute this partly to a confusion of thought between what it
is reasonable for an individual to desire, when he considers his
own existence alone, and what he must recognise as reasonably to be
desired, when he takes the point of view of a larger whole: partly,
again, to a faith deeply rooted in the moral consciousness of mankind,
that there cannot be really and ultimately any conflict between the
two kinds of reasonableness.[309] But when ‘Reasonable Self-love’ has
been clearly distinguished from Conscience, as it is by Butler and
his followers, we find it is naturally understood to mean desire for
one’s own Happiness: so that in fact the interpretation of ‘one’s own
good,’ which was almost peculiar in ancient thought to the Cyrenaic
and Epicurean heresies, is adopted by some of the most orthodox of
modern moralists. Indeed it often does not seem to have occurred to
these latter that this notion can have any other interpretation.[310]
If, then, when any one hypothetically concentrates his attention on
himself, Good is naturally and almost inevitably conceived to be
Pleasure, we may reasonably conclude that the Good of any number of
similar beings, whatever their mutual relations may be, cannot be
essentially different in quality.

IV. But lastly, from the universal point of view no less than from
that of the individual, it seems true that Happiness is likely to be
better attained if the extent to which we set ourselves consciously to
aim at it be carefully restricted. And this not only because action is
likely to be more effective if our effort is temporarily concentrated
on the realisation of more limited ends--though this is no doubt an
important reason:--but also because the fullest development of happy
life for each individual seems to require that he should have other
external objects of interest besides the happiness of other conscious
beings. And thus we may conclude that the pursuit of the ideal objects
before mentioned, Virtue, Truth, Freedom, Beauty, etc., _for their
own sakes_, is indirectly and secondarily, though not primarily and
absolutely, rational; on account not only of the happiness that will
result from their attainment, but also of that which springs from their
disinterested pursuit. While yet if we ask for a final criterion of
the comparative value of the different objects of men’s enthusiastic
pursuit, and of the limits within which each may legitimately engross
the attention of mankind, we shall none the less conceive it to depend
upon the degree in which they respectively conduce to Happiness.

If, however, this view be rejected, it remains to consider whether we
can frame any other coherent account of Ultimate Good. If we are not
to systematise human activities by taking Universal Happiness as their
common end, on what other principles are we to systematise them? It
should be observed that these principles must not only enable us to
compare among themselves the values of the different non-hedonistic
ends which we have been considering, but must also provide a common
standard for comparing these values with that of Happiness; unless we
are prepared to adopt the paradoxical position of rejecting happiness
as absolutely valueless. For we have a practical need of determining
not only whether we should pursue Truth rather than Beauty, or
Freedom or some ideal constitution of society rather than either, or
perhaps desert all of these for the life of worship and religious
contemplation; but also how far we should follow any of these lines of
endeavour, when we foresee among its consequences the pains of human
or other sentient beings, or even the loss of pleasures that might
otherwise have been enjoyed by them.[311]

I have failed to find--and am unable to construct--any systematic
answer to this question that appears to me deserving of serious
consideration: and hence I am finally led to the conclusion (which
at the close of the last chapter seemed to be premature) that the
Intuitional method rigorously applied yields as its final result the
doctrine of pure Universalistic Hedonism,[312]--which it is convenient
to denote by the single word, Utilitarianism.

FOOTNOTES:

[300] See Book i. chap. i. § 2.

[301] Cf. Stephen, _Science of Ethics_, chap. iv. § 16.

[302] Chap. xi. § 3; see also chap. xii. § 3.

[303] Book ii. chap. ii.

[304] Final, that is, so far as the quality of the present feeling
is concerned. I have pointed out that so far as any estimate of the
desirability or pleasantness of a feeling involves comparison with
feelings only represented in idea, it is liable to be erroneous through
imperfections in the representation.

[305] The term “cognition” without qualification more often implies
what is signified by “true” or “valid”: but for the present purpose it
is necessary to eliminate this implication.

[306] Cf. Lecky, _History of European Morals_, pp. 52 _seqq._

[307] Book i. chap. iv.; cf. Book ii. chap. iii.

[308] I ought at the same time to say that I hold it no less reasonable
for an individual to take his own happiness as his ultimate end. This
“Dualism of the Practical Reason” will be further discussed in the
concluding chapter of the treatise.

[309] We may illustrate this double explanation by a reference to some
of Plato’s Dialogues, such as the _Gorgias_, where the ethical argument
has a singularly mixed effect on the mind. Partly, it seems to us more
or less dexterous sophistry, playing on a confusion of thought latent
in the common notion of good: partly a noble and stirring expression of
a profound moral faith.

[310] Cf. Stewart, _Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers_, Book
ii. chap. i.

[311] The controversy on vivisection, to which I referred just now,
affords a good illustration of the need that I am pointing out. I
do not observe that any one in this controversy has ventured on the
paradox that the pain of sentient beings is not _per se_ to be avoided.

[312] I have before noticed (Book ii. chap. iii. p. 134) the
metaphysical objection taken by certain writers to the view that
Happiness is Ultimate Good; on the ground that Happiness (= sum
of pleasures) can only be realised in successive parts, whereas a
“Chief Good” must be “something of which some being can be conceived
in possession”--something, that is, which he can have all at once.
On considering this objection it seemed to me that, in so far as
it is even plausible, its plausibility depends on the exact form
of the notion ‘a Chief Good’ (or ‘Summum Bonum’), which is perhaps
inappropriate as applied to Happiness. I have therefore in this chapter
used the notion of ‘Ultimate Good’: as I can see no shadow of reason
for affirming that that which is Good or Desirable _per se_, and not
as a means to some further end, must _necessarily_ be capable of being
possessed all at once. I can understand that a man may aspire after a
Good of this latter kind: but so long as Time is a necessary form of
human existence, it can hardly be surprising that human good should be
subject to the condition of being realised in successive parts.




