CHAPTER IX

GOOD


§ 1. We have hitherto spoken of the quality of conduct discerned by
our moral faculty as ‘rightness,’ which is the term commonly used by
English moralists. We have regarded this term, and its equivalents in
ordinary use, as implying the existence of a dictate or imperative of
reason, which prescribes certain actions either unconditionally, or
with reference to some ulterior end.

It is, however, possible to take a view of virtuous action in which,
though the validity of moral intuitions is not disputed, this notion
of rule or dictate is at any rate only latent or implicit, the moral
ideal being presented as attractive rather than imperative. Such a view
seems to be taken when the action to which we are morally prompted,
or the quality of character manifested in it, is judged to be ‘good’
in itself (and not merely as a means to some ulterior Good). This,
as was before noticed, was the fundamental ethical conception in
the Greek schools of Moral Philosophy generally; including even the
Stoics, though their system, from the prominence that it gives to the
conception of Natural Law, forms a transitional link between ancient
and modern ethics. And this historical illustration may serve to
exhibit one important result of substituting the idea of ‘goodness’ for
that of ‘rightness’ of conduct, which at first sight might be thought
a merely verbal change. For the chief characteristics of ancient
ethical controversy as distinguished from modern may be traced to the
employment of a generic notion instead of a specific one in expressing
the common moral judgments on actions. Virtue or Right action is
commonly regarded as only a species of the Good: and so, on this view
of the moral intuition, the first question that offers itself, when we
endeavour to systematise conduct, is how to determine the relation of
this species of good to the rest of the genus. It was on this question
that the Greek thinkers argued, from first to last. Their speculations
can scarcely be understood by us unless with a certain effort we throw
the quasi-jural notions of modern ethics aside, and ask (as they did)
not “What is Duty and what is its ground?” but “Which of the objects
that men think good is truly Good or the Highest Good?” or, in the more
specialised form of the question which the moral intuition introduces,
“What is the relation of the kind of Good we call Virtue, the qualities
of conduct and character which men commend and admire, to other good
things?”

This, then, is the first difference to be noticed between the two
forms of the intuitive judgment. In the recognition of conduct as
‘right’ is involved an authoritative prescription to do it: but when we
have judged conduct to be good, it is not yet clear that we ought to
prefer this kind of good to all other good things: some standard for
estimating the relative values of different ‘goods’ has still to be
sought.

I propose, then, to examine the import of the notion ‘Good’ in the
whole range of its application;--premising that, as it is for the
constituents of Ultimate Good that we require a standard of comparison,
we are not directly concerned with anything that is clearly only good
as a means to the attainment of some ulterior end. If, indeed, we had
only this latter case to consider, it would be plausible to interpret
‘good’ without reference to human desire or choice, as meaning merely
‘fit’ or ‘adapted’ for the production of certain effects--a good horse
for riding, a good gun for shooting, etc. But as we apply the notion
also to ultimate ends, we must seek a meaning for it which will cover
both applications.

§ 2. There is, however, a simple interpretation of the term--which is
widely maintained to be the true one--according to which everything
which we judge to be good is implicitly conceived as a means to
the end of pleasure, even when we do not make in our judgment any
explicit reference to this or any other ulterior end. On this view,
any comparison of things in respect of their ‘goodness’ would seem
to be really a comparison of them as sources of pleasure; so that any
attempt to systematise our intuitions of goodness, whether in conduct
and character or in other things, must reasonably lead us straight to
Hedonism. And no doubt, if we consider the application of the term,
outside the sphere of character and conduct, to things that are not
definitely regarded as means to the attainment of some ulterior object
of desire, we find a close correspondence between our apprehension
of pleasure derived from an object, and our recognition that the
object is in itself ‘good.’ The good things of life are things which
give pleasure, whether sensual or emotional: as good dinners, wines,
poems, pictures, music: and this gives a _prima facie_ support to the
interpretation of ‘good’ as equivalent to ‘pleasant.’ I think, however,
that if we reflect on the application of the term to the cases most
analogous to that of conduct--_i.e._ to what we may call ‘objects of
taste’--we shall find that this interpretation of it has not clearly
the support of common sense. In the first place, allowing that the
judgment that any object is good of its kind is closely connected with
the apprehension of pleasure derived from it, we must observe that
it is generally to a specific kind of pleasure that the affirmation
of goodness corresponds; and that if the object happens to give us
pleasure of a different kind, we do not therefore call it good--at
least without qualification. For instance, we should not call a wine
good solely because it was very wholesome; nor a poem on account of
its moral lessons. And hence when we come to consider the meaning of
the term ‘good’ as applied to conduct, there is no reason, so far,
to suppose that it has any reference or correspondence to _all_ the
pleasures that may result from the conduct. Rather the perception
of goodness or virtue in actions would seem to be analogous to the
perception of beauty[91] in material things: which is normally
accompanied with a specific pleasure which we call ‘æsthetic,’ but
has often no discoverable relation to the general usefulness or
agreeableness of the thing discerned to be beautiful: indeed, we often
recognise this kind of excellence in things hurtful and dangerous.

But further: as regards æsthetic pleasures, and the sources of such
pleasures that we commonly judge to be good, it is the received opinion
that some persons have more and others less ‘good taste’: and it is
only the judgment of persons of good taste that we recognise as valid
in respect of the real goodness of the things enjoyed. We think that of
his own pleasure each individual is the final judge, and there is no
appeal from his decision,--at least so far as he is comparing pleasures
within his actual experience; but the affirmation of goodness in any
object involves the assumption of a universally valid standard, which,
as we believe, the judgment of persons to whom we attribute good taste
approximately represents. And it seems clear that the term ‘good’ as
applied to ‘taste’ does not mean ‘pleasant’; it merely imports the
conformity of the æsthetic judgment so characterised to the supposed
ideal, deviation from which implies error and defect. Nor does it
appear to be always the person of best taste who derives the greatest
enjoyment from any kind of good and pleasant things. We are familiar
with the fact that connoisseurs of wines, pictures, etc., often retain
their intellectual faculty of appraising the merits of the objects
which they criticise, and deciding on their respective places in the
scale of excellence, even when their susceptibilities to pleasure
from these objects are comparatively blunted and exhausted. And more
generally we see that freshness and fulness of feeling by no means go
along with taste and judgment: and that a person who possesses the
former may derive more pleasure from inferior objects than another may
from the best.

To sum up: the general admission that things which are called ‘good’
are productive of pleasure, and that the former quality is inseparable
in thought from the latter, does not involve the inference that the
common estimates of the goodness of conduct may be fairly taken as
estimates of the amount of pleasure resulting from it. For (1) analogy
would lead us to conclude that the attribution of goodness, in the case
of conduct as of objects of taste generally, may correspond not to all
the pleasure that is caused by the conduct, but to a specific pleasure,
in this case the contemplative satisfaction which the conduct causes to
a disinterested spectator: and (2) it may not excite even this specific
pleasure generally in proportion to its goodness, but only (at most) in
persons of good moral taste: and even in their case we can distinguish
the intellectual apprehension of goodness--which involves the
conception of an ideal objective standard--from the pleasurable emotion
which commonly accompanies it; and may suppose the latter element of
consciousness diminished almost indefinitely.

Finally, when we pass from the _adjective_ to the _substantive_
‘good,’ it is at once evident that this latter cannot be understood as
equivalent to ‘pleasure’ or ‘happiness’ by any persons who affirm--as
a significant proposition and not as a mere tautology--that the
Pleasure or Happiness of human beings is their Good or Ultimate
Good. Such affirmation, which would, I think, be ordinarily made by
Hedonists, obviously implies that the _meaning_ of the two terms is
different, however closely their denotation may coincide. And it does
not seem that any fundamental difference of meaning is implied by the
grammatical variation from adjective to substantive.

§ 3. What then can we state as the general meaning of the term ‘good’?
Shall we say--with Hobbes, and many since Hobbes--that ‘whatsoever
is the object of any man’s Desire, that it is which he for his part
calleth Good, and the object of his aversion, Evil’? To simplify the
discussion, we will consider only what a man desires for itself--not
as a means to an ulterior result,--and for himself--not benevolently
for others: his own Good[92] and ultimate Good. We have first to meet
the obvious objection that a man often desires what he knows is on the
whole bad for him: the pleasure of drinking champagne which is sure
to disagree with him, the gratification of revenge when he knows that
his true interest lies in reconciliation. The answer is that in such
cases the desired result is accompanied or followed by other effects
which when they come excite aversion stronger than the desire for the
desired effect: but that these bad effects, though fore-_seen_ are not
fore-_felt_: the representation of them does not adequately modify
the predominant direction of desire as a present fact. But, granting
this, and fixing attention solely on the result desired, apart from
its concomitants and consequences--it would still seem that what is
desired at any time is, as such, merely apparent Good, which may not
be found good when fruition comes, or at any rate not so good as it
appeared. It may turn out a ‘Dead Sea apple,’ mere dust and ashes in
the eating: more often, fruition will partly correspond to expectation,
but may still fall short of it in a marked degree. And sometimes--even
while yielding to the desire--we are aware of the illusoriness of this
expectation of ‘good’ which the desire carries with it. I conclude,
therefore, that if we are to conceive of the elements of ultimate
Good as capable of quantitative comparison--as we do when we speak of
preferring a ‘greater’ good to a ‘lesser,’--we cannot identify the
object of desire with ‘good’ simply, or ‘true good,’ but only with
‘apparent good.’

But further: a prudent man is accustomed to suppress, with more or less
success, desires for what he regards as out of his power to attain
by voluntary action--as fine weather, perfect health, great wealth
or fame, etc.; but any success he may have in diminishing the actual
intensity of such desires has no effect in leading him to judge the
objects desired less ‘good.’

It would seem then, that if we interpret the notion ‘good’ in relation
to ‘desire,’ we must identify it not with the actually _desired_, but
rather with the _desirable_:--meaning by ‘desirable’ not necessarily
‘what _ought_ to be desired’ but what would be desired, with strength
proportioned to the degree of desirability, if it were judged
attainable by voluntary action, supposing the desirer to possess a
perfect forecast, emotional as well as intellectual, of the state of
attainment or fruition.

It still remains possible that the choice of any particular good, thus
defined as an object of pursuit, may be on the whole bad, on account
of its concomitants and consequences; even though the particular
result when attained is not found other than it was imagined in the
condition of previous desire. If, therefore, in seeking a definition
of ‘ultimate Good’ we mean ‘good on the whole,’ we have--following the
line of thought of the preceding paragraph--to express its relation to
Desire differently. In the first place we have to limit our view to
desire which becomes practical in volition; as I may still regard as
desirable results which I judge it on the whole imprudent to aim at.
But, even with this limitation, the relation of my ‘good on the whole’
to my desire is very complicated. For it is not even sufficient to say
that my Good on the whole is what I should actually desire and seek if
all the consequences of seeking it could be foreknown and adequately
realised by me in imagination at the time of making my choice. No doubt
an equal regard for all the moments of our conscious experience--so
far, at least, as the mere difference of their position in time is
concerned--is an essential characteristic of rational conduct. But the
mere fact, that a man does not afterwards feel for the consequences of
an action aversion strong enough to cause him to regret it, cannot be
accepted as a complete proof that he has acted for his ‘good on the
whole.’ Indeed, we commonly reckon it among the worst consequences
of some kinds of conduct that they alter men’s tendencies to desire,
and make them desire their lesser good more than their greater: and
we think it all the worse for a man--even in this world--if he is
never roused out of such a condition and lives till death the life of
a contented pig, when he might have been something better. To avoid
this objection, it would have to be said that a man’s future good on
the whole is what he would now desire and seek on the whole if all
the consequences of all the different lines of conduct open to him
were accurately foreseen and adequately realised in imagination at the
present point of time.

This hypothetical composition of impulsive forces involves so
elaborate and complex a conception, that it is somewhat paradoxical
to say that this is what we commonly _mean_ when we talk of a man’s
‘good on the whole.’ Still, I cannot deny that this hypothetical
object of a resultant desire supplies an intelligible and admissible
interpretation of the terms ‘good’ (substantive) and ‘desirable,’
as giving philosophical precision to the vaguer meaning with which
they are used in ordinary discourse: and it would seem that a calm
comprehensive desire for ‘good’ conceived somewhat in this way, though
more vaguely, is normally produced by intellectual comparison and
experience in a reflective mind. The notion of ‘Good’ thus attained
has an ideal element: it is something that _is_ not always actually
desired and aimed at by human beings: but the ideal element is entirely
interpretable in terms of _fact_, actual or hypothetical, and does not
introduce any judgment of value, fundamentally distinct from judgments
relating to existence;--still less any ‘dictate of Reason.’[93]

It seems to me, however, more in accordance with common sense to
recognise--as Butler does--that the calm desire for my ‘good on the
whole’ is _authoritative_; and therefore carries with it implicitly
a rational dictate to aim at this end, if in any case a conflicting
desire urges the will in an opposite direction. Still we may keep the
notion of ‘dictate’ or ‘imperative’ merely implicit and latent,--as it
seems to be in ordinary judgments as to ‘my good’ and its opposite--by
interpreting ‘ultimate good on the whole for me’ to mean what I should
practically desire if my desires were in harmony with reason, assuming
my own existence alone to be considered. On this view, “ultimate good
on the whole,” unqualified by reference to a particular subject, must
be taken to mean what as a rational being I should desire and seek to
realise, assuming myself to have an equal concern for _all_ existence.
When conduct is judged to be ‘good’ or ‘desirable’ in itself,
independently of its consequences, it is, I conceive, this latter point
of view that is taken. Such a judgment differs, as I have said, from
the judgment that conduct is ‘right,’ in so far as it does not involve
a definite precept to perform it; since it still leaves it an open
question whether this particular kind of good is the greatest good that
we can under the circumstances obtain. It differs further, as we may
now observe, in so far as good or excellent actions are not implied to
be in our power in the same strict sense as ‘right’ actions--any more
than any other good things: and in fact there are many excellences
of behaviour which we cannot attain by any effort of will, at least
directly and at the moment: hence we often feel that the recognition
of goodness in the conduct of others does not carry with it a clear
precept to do likewise, but rather

                  the vague desire
    That stirs an imitative will.

In so far as this is the case Goodness of Conduct becomes an ulterior
end, the attainment of which lies outside and beyond the range of
immediate volition.

§ 4. It remains to consider by what standard the value of conduct or
character,[94] thus intuitively judged to be good in itself, is to be
co-ordinated and compared with that of other good things. I shall not
now attempt to establish such a standard; but a little reflection may
enable us to limit considerably the range of comparison for which it
is required. For I think that if we consider carefully such permanent
results as are commonly judged to be good, other than qualities of
human beings, we can find nothing that, on reflection, appears to
possess this quality of goodness out of relation to human existence, or
at least to some consciousness or feeling.[95]

For example, we commonly judge some inanimate objects, scenes, etc. to
be good as possessing beauty, and others bad from ugliness: still no
one would consider it rational to aim at the production of beauty in
external nature, apart from any possible contemplation of it by human
beings. In fact when beauty is maintained to be objective, it is not
commonly meant that it exists as beauty out of relation to any mind
whatsoever: but only that there is some standard of beauty valid for
all minds.

It may, however, be said that beauty and other results commonly judged
to be good, though we do not conceive them to exist out of relation to
human beings (or at least minds of some kind), are yet so far separable
as ends from the human beings on whom their existence depends, that
their realisation may conceivably come into competition with the
perfection or happiness of these beings. Thus, though beautiful
things cannot be thought worth producing except as possible objects
of contemplation, still a man may devote himself to their production
without any consideration of the persons who are to contemplate them.
Similarly knowledge is a good which cannot exist except in minds; and
yet one may be more interested in the development of knowledge than in
its possession by any particular minds; and may take the former as an
ultimate end without regarding the latter.

Still, as soon as the alternatives are clearly apprehended, it will, I
think, be generally held that beauty, knowledge, and other ideal goods,
as well as all external material things, are only reasonably to be
sought by men in so far as they conduce either (1) to Happiness or (2)
to the Perfection or Excellence of human existence. I say “human,” for
though most utilitarians consider the pleasure (and freedom from pain)
of the inferior animals to be included in the Happiness which they take
as the right and proper end of conduct, no one seems to contend that we
ought to aim at perfecting brutes, except as a means to our ends, or
at least as objects of scientific or æsthetic contemplation for us.
Nor, again, can we include, as a practical end, the existence of beings
above the human. We certainly apply the idea of Good to the Divine
Existence, just as we do to His work, and indeed in a pre-eminent
manner: and when it is said that “we should do all things to the glory
of God,” it may seem to be implied that the existence of God is made
better by our glorifying Him. Still this inference when explicitly
drawn appears somewhat impious; and theologians generally recoil from
it, and refrain from using the notion of a possible addition to the
Goodness of the Divine Existence as a ground of human duty. Nor can the
influence of our actions on other extra-human intelligences besides the
Divine be at present made matter of scientific discussion.

I shall therefore confidently lay down, that if there be any Good other
than Happiness to be sought by man, as an ultimate practical end, it
can only be the Goodness, Perfection, or Excellence of Human Existence.
How far this notion includes more than Virtue, what its precise
relation to Pleasure is, and to what method we shall be logically led
if we accept it as fundamental, are questions which we shall more
conveniently discuss after the detailed examination of these two other
notions, Pleasure and Virtue, in which we shall be engaged in the two
following Books.

FOOTNOTES:

[91] It is, however, necessary to distinguish between the ideas of
_Moral Goodness_ and _Beauty_ as applied to human actions: although
there is much affinity between them, and they have frequently been
identified, especially by the Greek thinkers. No doubt both the ideas
themselves and the corresponding pleasurable emotions, arising on the
contemplation of conduct, are often indistinguishable: a noble action
affects us like a scene, a picture, or a strain of music: and the
delineation of human virtue is an important part of the means which
the artist has at his disposal for producing his peculiar effects.
Still, on looking closer, we see not only that there is much good
conduct which is not beautiful, or at least does not sensibly impress
us as such; but even that certain kinds of crime and wickedness have
a splendour and sublimity of their own. For example, such a career as
Cæsar Borgia’s, as Renan says, is “beau comme une tempête, comme un
abîme.” It is true, I think, that in all such cases the beauty depends
upon the exhibition in the criminal’s conduct of striking gifts and
excellences mingled with the wickedness: but it does not seem that we
can abstract the latter without impairing the æsthetic effect. And
hence I conceive, we have to distinguish the sense of beauty in conduct
from the sense of moral goodness.

[92] It would seem that, according to the common view of ‘good,’ there
are occasions in which an individual’s sacrifice of his own good on
the whole, according to the most rational conception of it that he
can form, would apparently realise greater good for others. Whether,
indeed, such a sacrifice is ever really required, and whether, if so,
it is truly reasonable for the individual to sacrifice his own good
on the whole, are among the profoundest questions of ethics: and I
shall carefully consider them in subsequent chapters (especially Book
iii. chap. xiv.). I here only desire to avoid any prejudgment of these
questions in my definition of ‘my own good.’

[93] As before said (chap. iii. § 4), so far as my ‘good on the whole’
is adopted as an end of action, the notion of ‘ought’--implying a
dictate or imperative of Reason--becomes applicable to the necessary or
fittest means to the attainment of the adopted end.

[94] Character is only known to us through its manifestation in
conduct; and I conceive that in our common recognition of Virtue as
having value in itself, we do not ordinarily distinguish character from
conduct: we do not raise the question whether character is to be valued
for the sake of the conduct in which it is manifested, or conduct for
the sake of the character that it exhibits and develops. How this
question should be answered when it is raised will be more conveniently
considered at a later stage of the discussion. See Book iii. chap. ii.
§ 2, and chap. xiv. § 1.

[95] No doubt there is a point of view, sometimes adopted with great
earnestness, from which the whole universe and not merely a certain
condition of rational or sentient beings is contemplated as ‘very
good’: just as the Creator in Genesis is described as contemplating it.
But such a view can scarcely be developed into a method of Ethics. For
practical purposes, we require to conceive some parts of the universe
as at least less good than they might be. And we do not seem to have
any ground for drawing such a distinction between different portions of
the non-sentient universe, considered in themselves and out of relation
to conscious or sentient beings.




