CHAPTER V

THE METHOD OF UTILITARIANISM--_Continued_


§ 1. If, then, we are to regard the morality of Common Sense as a
machinery of rules, habits, and sentiments, roughly and generally but
not precisely or completely adapted to the production of the greatest
possible happiness for sentient beings generally; and if, on the other
hand, we have to accept it as the actually established machinery for
attaining this end, which we cannot replace at once by any other, but
can only gradually modify; it remains to consider the practical effects
of the complex and balanced relation in which a scientific Utilitarian
thus seems to stand to the Positive Morality of his age and country.

Generally speaking, he will clearly conform to it, and endeavour
to promote its development in others. For, though the imperfection
that we find in all the actual conditions of human existence--we may
even say in the universe at large as judged from a human point of
view--is ultimately found even in Morality itself, in so far as this
is contemplated as Positive; still, practically, we are much less
concerned with correcting and improving than we are with realising and
enforcing it. The Utilitarian must repudiate altogether that temper
of rebellion against the established morality, as something purely
external and conventional, into which the reflective mind is always
apt to fall when it is first convinced that the established rules
are not intrinsically reasonable. He must, of course, also repudiate
as superstitious that awe of it as an absolute or Divine Code which
Intuitional moralists inculcate.[364] Still, he will naturally
contemplate it with reverence and wonder, as a marvellous product of
nature, the result of long centuries of growth, showing in many parts
the same fine adaptation of means to complex exigencies as the most
elaborate structures of physical organisms exhibit: he will handle
it with respectful delicacy as a mechanism, constructed of the fluid
element of opinions and dispositions, by the indispensable aid of which
the actual _quantum_ of human happiness is continually being produced;
a mechanism which no ‘politicians or philosophers’ could create, yet
without which the harder and coarser machinery of Positive Law could
not be permanently maintained, and the life of man would become--as
Hobbes forcibly expresses it--“solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and
short.”

Still, as this actual moral order is admittedly imperfect, it will
be the Utilitarian’s duty to aid in improving it; just as the most
orderly, law-abiding member of a modern civilised society includes
the reform of laws in his conception of political duty. We have
therefore to consider by what method he will ascertain the particular
modifications of positive morality which it would be practically
expedient to attempt to introduce, at any given time and place. Here
our investigation seems, after all, to leave Empirical Hedonism as
the only method ordinarily applicable for the ultimate decision of
such problems--at least until the science of Sociology shall have been
really constructed. I do not mean that the rudiments of Sociological
knowledge which we now possess are of no practical value: for certainly
changes in morality might be suggested--and have actually been proposed
by persons seriously concerned to benefit their fellow-creatures--which
even our present imperfect knowledge would lead us to regard as
dangerous to the very existence of the social organism. But such
changes for the most part involve changes in positive law as well:
since most of the rules of which the observance is fundamentally
important for the preservation of an organised community are either
directly or indirectly maintained by legal sanctions: and it would
be going too far beyond the line which, in my view, separates ethics
from politics, to discuss changes of this kind in the present book.
The rules with which we have primarily to deal, in considering the
utilitarian method of determining private duty, are rules supported by
merely moral sanctions; and the question of maintaining or modifying
such rules concerns, for the most part, the well-being rather than the
very existence of human society. The consideration of this question,
therefore, from a utilitarian point of view, resolves itself into a
comparison between the total amounts of pleasure and pain that may
be expected to result respectively from maintaining any given rule
as at present established, and from endeavouring to introduce that
which is proposed in its stead. That this comparison must generally
be of a rough and uncertain kind, we have already seen; and it is
highly important to bear this in mind; but yet we seem unable to
find any substitute for it. It is not meant, of course, that each
individual is left to his own unassisted judgment in dealing with
such questions: there is a mass of traditional experience, which each
individual imbibes orally or from books, as to the effects of conduct
upon happiness; but the great formulæ in which this experience is
transmitted are, for the most part, so indefinite, the proper range
of their application so uncertain, and the observation and induction
on which they are founded so uncritical, that they stand in continual
need of further empirical verification; especially as regards their
applicability to any particular case.

It is perhaps not surprising that some thinkers[365] of the Utilitarian
school should consider that the task of hedonistic calculation which
is thus set before the utilitarian moralist is too extensive: and
should propose to simplify it by marking off a “large sphere of
individual option and self-guidance,” to which “ethical dictation”
does not apply. I should quite admit that it is clearly expedient to
draw a dividing line of this kind: but it appears to me that there
is no simple general method of drawing it; that it can only be drawn
by careful utilitarian calculation applied with varying results to
the various relations and circumstances of human life. To attempt the
required division by means of any such general formula as that ‘the
individual is not responsible to society for that part of his conduct
which concerns himself alone and others only with their free and
undeceived consent’[366] seems to me practically futile: since, owing
to the complex enlacements of interest and sympathy that connect the
members of a civilised community, almost any material loss of happiness
by any one individual is likely to affect some others without their
consent to some not inconsiderable extent. And I do not see how it is
from a utilitarian point of view justifiable to say broadly with J.
S. Mill that such secondary injury to others, if merely “constructive
or presumptive,” is to be disregarded in view of the advantages of
allowing free development to individuality; for if the injury feared is
great, and the presumption that it will occur is shown by experience
to be strong, the definite risk of evil from the withdrawal of the
moral sanction must, I conceive, outweigh the indefinite possibility
of loss through the repression of individuality in one particular
direction.[367] But further: even supposing that we could mark off
the “sphere of individual option and self-guidance” by some simple
and sweeping formula, still within this sphere the individual, if he
wishes to guide himself reasonably on utilitarian principles, must take
some account of all important effects of his actions on the happiness
of others; and if he does this methodically, he must, I conceive,
use the empirical method which we have examined in Book ii. And--to
prevent any undue alarm at this prospect--we may observe that every
sensible man is commonly supposed to determine at least a large part
of his conduct by what is substantially this method; it is assumed
that, within the limits which morality lays down, he will try to get
as much happiness as he can for himself and for other human beings,
according to the relations in which they stand to him, by combining in
some way his own experience with that of other men as to the felicific
and infelicific effects of actions. And it is actually in this way that
each man usually deliberates (_e.g._) what profession to choose for
himself, or what mode of education for his children, whether to aim
at marriage or remain single, whether to settle in town or country,
in England or abroad, etc. No doubt there are, as we saw,[368] other
ends besides Happiness, such as Knowledge, Beauty, etc., commonly
recognised as unquestionably desirable, and therefore largely pursued
without consideration of ulterior consequences: but when the pursuit of
any of these ends involves an apparent sacrifice of happiness in other
ways, the practical question whether under these circumstances such
pursuit ought to be maintained or abandoned seems always decided by an
application, however rough, of the method of pure empirical Hedonism.

And in saying that this must be the method of the Utilitarian moralist,
I only mean that no other can normally be applied in reducing to a
common measure the diverse elements of the problems with which he
has to deal. Of course, in determining the nature and importance
of each of these diverse considerations, the utilitarian art of
morality will lay various sciences under contribution. Thus, for
example, it will learn from Political Economy what effects a general
censure of usurers, or the ordinary commendation of liberality in
almsgiving, is likely to have on the wealth of the community; it will
learn from the physiologist the probable consequences to health of a
general abstinence from alcoholic liquors or any other restraint on
appetite proposed in the name of Temperance; it will learn from the
experts in any science how far knowledge is likely to be promoted by
investigations offensive to any prevalent moral or religious sentiment.
But how far the increase of wealth or of knowledge, or even the
improvement of health, should under any circumstances be subordinated
to other considerations, I know no scientific method of determining
other than that of empirical Hedonism. Nor, as I have said, does it
seem to me that any other method has ever been applied or sought by the
common sense of mankind, for regulating the pursuit of what our older
moralists called ‘Natural Good,’--_i.e._ of all that is intrinsically
desirable _except_ Virtue or Morality, within the limits fixed by the
latter; the Utilitarian here only performs somewhat more consistently
and systematically than ordinary men the reasoning processes which
are commonly admitted to be appropriate to the questions that this
pursuit raises. His distinctive characteristic, as a Utilitarian, is
that he has to apply the same method to the criticism and correction of
the limiting morality itself. The particulars of this criticism will
obviously vary almost indefinitely with the variations in human nature
and circumstances: I here only propose to discuss the general points of
view which a Utilitarian critic must take, in order that no important
class of relevant considerations may be omitted.

§ 2. Let us first recall the distinction previously noticed[369]
between duty as commonly conceived,--that to which a man is bound
or obliged--, and praiseworthy or excellent conduct; since, in
considering the relation of Utilitarianism to the moral judgments
of Common Sense, it will be convenient to begin with the former
element of current morality, as the more important and indispensable;
_i.e._ with the _ensemble_ of rules imposed by common opinion in any
society, which form a kind of unwritten legislation, supplementary
to Law proper, and enforced by the penalties of social disfavour and
contempt. This legislation, as it does not emanate from a definite
body of persons acting in a corporate capacity, cannot be altered
by any formal deliberations and resolutions of the persons on whose
_consensus_ it rests; any change in it must therefore result from
the private action of individuals, whether determined by Utilitarian
considerations or otherwise. As we shall presently see, the practical
Utilitarian problem is liable to be complicated by the conflict and
divergence which is found to some extent in all societies between the
moral opinions of different sections of the community: but it will
be convenient to confine our attention in the first instance to the
case of rules of duty clearly supported by ‘common consent.’ Let us
suppose then that after considering the consequences of any such rule,
a Utilitarian comes to the conclusion that a different rule would be
more conducive to the general happiness, if similarly established in
a society remaining in other respects the same as at present--or in
one slightly different (in so far as our forecast of social changes
can be made sufficiently clear to furnish any basis for practice). And
first we will suppose that this new rule differs from the old one not
only positively but negatively; that it does not merely go beyond and
include it, but actually conflicts with it. Before he can decide that
it is right for him (_i.e._ conducive to the general happiness) to
support the new rule against the old, by example and precept, he ought
to estimate the force of certain disadvantages necessarily attendant
upon such innovations, which may conveniently be arranged under the
following heads.

In the first place, as his own happiness and that of others connected
with him form a part of the universal end at which he aims, he must
consider the importance to himself and them of the penalties of social
disapprobation which he will incur: taking into account, besides
the immediate pain of this disapprobation, its indirect effect in
diminishing his power of serving society and promoting the general
happiness in other ways. The prospect of such pain and loss is, of
course, not decisive against the innovation; since it must to some
extent be regarded as the regular price that has to be paid for the
advantage of this kind of reform in current morality. But here, as in
many Utilitarian calculations, everything depends on the quantity of
the effects produced; which in the case supposed may vary very much,
from slight distrust and disfavour to severe condemnation and social
exclusion. It often seems that by attempting change prematurely an
innovator may incur the severest form of the moral penalty, whereas if
he had waited a few years he would have been let off with the mildest.
For the hold which a moral rule has over the general mind commonly
begins to decay from the time that it is seen to be opposed to the
calculations of expediency: and it may be better for the community as
well as for the individual that it should not be openly attacked, until
this process of decay has reached a certain point.

It is, however, of more importance to point out certain general reasons
for doubting whether an apparent improvement will really have a
beneficial effect on others. It is possible that the new rule, though
it would be more felicific than the old one, if it could get itself
equally established, may be not so likely to be adopted, or if adopted,
not so likely to be obeyed, by the mass of the community in which it is
proposed to innovate. It may be too subtle and refined, or too complex
and elaborate: it may require a greater intellectual development, or
a higher degree of self-control, than is to be found in an average
member of the community, or an exceptional quality or balance of
feelings. Nor can it be said in reply, that by the hypothesis the
innovator’s example must be good to whatever extent it operates, since
_pro tanto_ it tends to substitute a better rule for a worse. For
experience seems to show that an example of this kind is more likely
to be potent negatively than positively; that here, as elsewhere in
human affairs, it is easier to pull down than to build up; easier to
weaken or destroy the restraining force that a moral rule, habitually
and generally obeyed, has over men’s minds, than to substitute for it a
new restraining habit, not similarly sustained by tradition and custom.
Hence the effect of an example intrinsically good may be on the whole
bad, because its destructive operation proves to be more vigorous than
its constructive. And again, such destructive effect must be considered
not only in respect of the particular rule violated, but of all other
rules. For just as the breaking of any positive law has an inevitable
tendency to encourage lawlessness generally, so the violation of any
generally recognised moral rule seems to give a certain aid to the
forces that are always tending towards moral anarchy in any society.

Nor must we neglect the reaction which any breach with customary
morality will have on the agent’s own mind. For the regulative habits
and sentiments which each man has received by inheritance or training
constitute an important force impelling his will, in the main, to
conduct such as his reason would dictate; a natural auxiliary, as it
were, to Reason in its conflict with seductive passions and appetites;
and it may be practically dangerous to impair the strength of these
auxiliaries. On the other hand, it would seem that the habit of acting
rationally is the best of all habits, and that it ought to be the aim
of a reasonable being to bring all his impulses and sentiments into
more and more perfect harmony with Reason. And indeed when a man has
earnestly accepted any moral principle, those of his pre-existing
regulative habits and sentiments that are not in harmony with this
principle tend naturally to decay and disappear; and it would perhaps
be scarcely worth while to take them into account, except for the
support that they derive from the sympathy of others.

But this last is a consideration of great importance. For the moral
impulses of each individual commonly draw a large part of their
effective force from the sympathy of other human beings. I do
not merely mean that the pleasures and pains which each derives
sympathetically from the moral likings and aversions of others are
important as motives to felicific conduct no less than as elements of
the individual’s happiness: I mean further that the direct sympathetic
echo in each man of the judgments and sentiments of others concerning
conduct sustains his own similar judgments and sentiments. Through this
twofold operation of sympathy it becomes practically much easier for
most men to conform to a moral rule established in the society to which
they belong than to one made by themselves. And any act by which a man
weakens the effect on himself of this general moral sympathy tends _pro
tanto_ to make the performance of duty more difficult for him. On the
other hand, we have to take into account--besides the intrinsic gain
of the particular change--the general advantage of offering to mankind
a striking example of consistent Utilitarianism; since, in this case
as in others, a man gives a stronger proof of genuine conviction by
conduct in opposition to public opinion than he can by conformity.
In order, however, that this effect may be produced, it is almost
necessary that the non-conformity should not promote the innovator’s
personal convenience; for in that case it will almost certainly be
attributed to egoistic motives, however plausible the Utilitarian
deduction of its rightness may seem.

The exact force of these various considerations will differ
indefinitely in different cases; and it does not seem profitable to
attempt any general estimate of them: but on the whole, it would
seem that the general arguments which we have noticed constitute
an important rational check upon such Utilitarian innovations on
Common-Sense morality as are of the negative or destructive kind.

If now we consider such innovations as are merely positive and
supplementary, and consist in adding a new rule to those already
established by Common Sense; it will appear that there is really no
collision of methods, so far as the Utilitarian’s own observance of
the new rule is concerned. For, as every such rule is, _ex hypothesi_,
believed by him to be conducive to the common good, he is merely giving
a special and stricter interpretation to the general duty of Universal
Benevolence, where Common Sense leaves it loose and indeterminate.
Hence the restraining considerations above enumerated do not apply
to this case. And whatever it is right for him to do himself, it is
obviously right for him to approve and recommend to other persons in
similar circumstances. But it is a different question whether he ought
to seek to impose his new rule on others, by express condemnation of
all who are not prepared to adopt it; as this involves not only the
immediate evil of the annoyance given to others, but also the further
danger of weakening the general good effect of his moral example,
through the reaction provoked by this aggressive attitude. On this
point his decision will largely depend on the prospect, as far as
he can estimate it, that his innovation will meet with support and
sympathy from others.

It should be observed, however, that a great part of the reform in
popular morality, which a consistent Utilitarian will try to introduce,
will probably lie not so much in establishing new rules (whether
conflicting with the old or merely supplementary) as in enforcing
old ones. For there is always a considerable part of morality in the
condition of receiving formal respect and acceptance, while yet it is
not really sustained by any effective force of public opinion: and the
difference between the moralities of any two societies is often more
strikingly exhibited in the different emphasis attached to various
portions of the moral code in each, than in disagreement as to the
rules which the code should include. In the case we are considering,
it is chiefly conduct which shows a want of comprehensive sympathy or
of public spirit, to which the Utilitarian will desire to attach a
severer condemnation than is at present directed against it. There is
much conduct of this sort, of which the immediate effect is to give
obvious pleasure to individuals, while the far greater amount of harm
that it more remotely and indirectly causes is but dimly recognised by
Common Sense. Such conduct, therefore, even when it is allowed to be
wrong, is very mildly treated by common opinion; especially when it is
prompted by some impulse not self-regarding. Still, in all such cases,
we do not require the promulgation of any new moral doctrine, but
merely a bracing and sharpening of the moral sentiments of society, to
bring them into harmony with the greater comprehensiveness of view and
the more impartial concern for human happiness which characterise the
Utilitarian system.

§ 3. We have hitherto supposed that the innovator is endeavouring
to introduce a new rule of conduct, not for himself only, but for
others also, as more conducive to the general happiness than the
rule recognised by Common Sense. It may perhaps be thought that this
is not the issue most commonly raised between Utilitarianism and
Common Sense: but rather whether exceptions should be allowed to
rules which both sides accept as generally valid. For no one doubts
that it is, _generally speaking_, conducive to the common happiness
that men should be veracious, faithful to promises, obedient to
law, disposed to satisfy the normal expectations of others, having
their malevolent impulses and their sensual appetites under strict
control: but it is thought that an exclusive regard to pleasurable and
painful consequences would frequently admit exceptions to rules which
Common Sense imposes as absolute. It should, however, be observed
that the admission of an exception on general grounds is merely the
establishment of a more complex and delicate rule, instead of one that
is broader and simpler; for if it is conducive to the general good
that such an exception be admitted in one case, it will be equally
so in all similar cases. Suppose (_e.g._) that a Utilitarian thinks
it on general grounds right to answer falsely a question as to the
manner in which he has voted at a political election where the voting
is by secret ballot. His reasons will probably be that the Utilitarian
prohibition of falsehood is based on (1) the harm done by misleading
particular individuals, and (2) the tendency of false statements to
diminish the mutual confidence that men ought to have in each other’s
assertions: and that in this exceptional case it is (1) expedient that
the questioner should be misled; while (2), in so far as the falsehood
tends to produce a general distrust of all assertions as to the manner
in which a man has voted, it only furthers the end for which voting
has been made secret. It is evident, that if these reasons are valid
for any person, they are valid for all persons; in fact, that they
establish the expediency of a new general rule in respect of truth
and falsehood, more complicated than the old one; a rule which the
Utilitarian, as such, should desire to be universally obeyed.

There are, of course, some kinds of moral innovation which, from
the nature of the case, are not likely to occur frequently; as
where Utilitarian reasoning leads a man to take part in a political
revolution, or to support a public measure in opposition to what Common
Sense regards as Justice or Good Faith. Still, in such cases a rational
Utilitarian will usually proceed on general principles, which he would
desire all persons in similar circumstances to carry into effect.

We have, however, to consider another kind of exceptions, differing
fundamentally from this, which Utilitarianism seems to admit; where
the agent does not think it expedient that the rule on which he
himself acts should be universally adopted, and yet maintains that his
individual act is right, as producing a greater balance of pleasure
over pain than any other conduct open to him would produce.

Now we cannot fairly argue that, because a large aggregate of acts
would cause more harm than good, therefore any single act of the kind
will produce this effect. It may even be a straining of language to
say that it has a _tendency_ to produce it: no one (_e.g._) would
say that because an army walking over a bridge would break it down,
therefore the crossing of a single traveller has a tendency to
destroy it. And just as a prudent physician in giving rules of diet
recommends an occasional deviation from them, as more conducive to the
health of the body than absolute regularity; so there may be rules
of social behaviour of which the general observance is necessary
to the well-being of the community, while yet a certain amount of
non-observance is rather advantageous than otherwise.

Here, however, we seem brought into conflict with Kant’s fundamental
principle, that a right action must be one of which the agent
could “will the maxim to be law universal.”[370] But, as was
before[371] noticed in the particular case of veracity, we must
admit an application of this principle, which importantly modifies
its practical force: we must admit the case where the belief that
the action in question will not be widely imitated is an essential
qualification of the maxim which the Kantian principle is applied
to test. For this principle,--at least so far as I have accepted it
as self-evident--means no more than that an act, if right for any
individual, must be right on general grounds, and therefore for some
_class_ of persons; it therefore cannot prevent us from defining this
class by the above-mentioned characteristic of believing that the act
will remain an exceptional one. Of course if this belief turns out
to be erroneous, serious harm may possibly result; but this is no
more than may be said of many other Utilitarian deductions. Nor is
it difficult to find instances of conduct which Common Sense holds
to be legitimate solely on the ground that we have no fear of its
being too widely imitated. Take, for example, the case of Celibacy.
A universal refusal to propagate the human species would be the
greatest of conceivable crimes from a Utilitarian point of view;--that
is, according to the commonly accepted belief in the superiority of
human happiness to that of other animals;--and hence the principle in
question, applied without the qualification above given, would make
it a crime in any one to choose celibacy as the state most conducive
to his own happiness. But Common Sense (in the present age at least)
regards such preference as within the limits of right conduct; because
there is no fear that population will not be sufficiently kept up, as
in fact the tendency to propagate is thought to exist rather in excess
than otherwise.

In this case it is a non-moral impulse on the average strength of
which we think we may reckon: but there does not appear to be any
formal or universal reason why the same procedure should not be applied
by Utilitarians to an actually existing moral sentiment. The result
would be a discrepancy of a peculiar kind between Utilitarianism and
Common-Sense morality; as the very firmness with which the latter
is established would be the Utilitarian ground for relieving the
individual of its obligations. We are supposed to see that general
happiness will be enhanced (just as the excellence of a metrical
composition is) by a slight admixture of irregularity along with
a general observance of received rules; and hence to justify the
irregular conduct of a few individuals, on the ground that the supply
of regular conduct from other members of the community may reasonably
be expected to be adequate.

It does not seem to me that this reasoning can be shown to be
necessarily unsound, as applied to human society as at present
constituted: but the cases in which it could really be thought to be
applicable, by any one sincerely desirous of promoting the general
happiness, must certainly be rare. For it should be observed that
it makes a fundamental difference whether the sentiment in mankind
generally, on which we rely to sustain sufficiently a general rule
while admitting exceptions thereto, is moral or non-moral; because a
moral sentiment is inseparable from the conviction that the conduct to
which it prompts is objectively right--_i.e._ right whether or not it
is thought or felt to be so--for oneself and all similar persons in
similar circumstances; it cannot therefore coexist with approval of the
contrary conduct in any one case, unless this case is distinguished by
some material difference other than the mere non-existence in the agent
of the ordinary moral sentiment against his conduct. Thus, assuming
that general unveracity and general celibacy would both be evils of
the worst kind, we may still all regard it as legitimate for men in
general to remain celibate if they like, on account of the strength of
the natural sentiments prompting to marriage, because the existence
of these sentiments in ordinary human beings is not affected by the
universal recognition of the legitimacy of celibacy: but we cannot
similarly all regard it as legitimate for men to tell lies if they
like, however strong the actually existing sentiment against lying
may be, because as soon as this legitimacy is generally recognised
the sentiment must be expected to decay and vanish. If therefore we
were all enlightened Utilitarians, it would be impossible for any one
to justify himself in making false statements while admitting it to
be inexpedient for persons similarly conditioned to make them; as he
would have no ground for believing that persons similarly conditioned
would act differently from himself. The case, no doubt, is different in
society as actually constituted; it is conceivable that the practically
effective morality in such a society, resting on a basis independent
of utilitarian or any other reasonings, may not be materially affected
by the particular act or expressed opinion of a particular individual:
but the circumstances are, I conceive, very rare, in which a really
conscientious person could feel so sure of this as to conclude that
by approving a particular violation of a rule, of which the _general_
(though not _universal_) observance is plainly expedient, he will not
probably do harm on the whole. Especially as all the objections to
innovation, noticed in the previous section, apply with increased
force if the innovator does not even claim to be introducing a new and
better general rule.

It appears to me, therefore, that the cases in which practical doubts
are likely to arise, as to whether exceptions should be permitted from
ordinary rules on Utilitarian principles, will mostly be those which I
discussed in the first paragraph of this section: where the exceptions
are not claimed for a few individuals, on the mere ground of their
probable fewness, but either for persons generally under exceptional
circumstances, or for a class of persons defined by exceptional
qualities of intellect, temperament, or character. In such cases the
Utilitarian may have no doubt that in a community consisting generally
of enlightened Utilitarians, these grounds for exceptional ethical
treatment would be regarded as valid; still he may, as I have said,
doubt whether the more refined and complicated rule which recognises
such exceptions is adapted for the community in which he is actually
living; and whether the attempt to introduce it is not likely to do
more harm by weakening current morality than good by improving its
quality. Supposing such a doubt to arise, either in a case of this
kind, or in one of the rare cases discussed in the preceding paragraph,
it becomes necessary that the Utilitarian should consider carefully the
extent to which his advice or example are likely to influence persons
to whom they would be dangerous: and it is evident that the result
of this consideration may depend largely on the degree of publicity
which he gives to either advice or example. Thus, on Utilitarian
principles, it may be right to do and privately recommend, under
certain circumstances, what it would not be right to advocate openly;
it may be right to teach openly to one set of persons what it would
be wrong to teach to others; it may be conceivably right to do, if it
can be done with comparative secrecy, what it would be wrong to do in
the face of the world; and even, if perfect secrecy can be reasonably
expected, what it would be wrong to recommend by private advice or
example. These conclusions are all of a paradoxical character:[372]
there is no doubt that the moral consciousness of a plain man broadly
repudiates the general notion of an esoteric morality, differing from
that popularly taught; and it would be commonly agreed that an action
which would be bad if done openly is not rendered good by secrecy. We
may observe, however, that there are strong utilitarian reasons for
maintaining generally this latter common opinion; for it is obviously
advantageous, generally speaking, that acts which it is expedient to
repress by social disapprobation should become known, as otherwise the
disapprobation cannot operate; so that it seems inexpedient to support
by any moral encouragement the natural disposition of men in general
to conceal their wrong doings; besides that the concealment would in
most cases have importantly injurious effects on the agent’s habits of
veracity. Thus the Utilitarian conclusion, carefully stated, would seem
to be this; that the opinion that secrecy may render an action right
which would not otherwise be so should itself be kept comparatively
secret; and similarly it seems expedient that the doctrine that
esoteric morality is expedient should itself be kept esoteric. Or if
this concealment be difficult to maintain, it may be desirable that
Common Sense should repudiate the doctrines which it is expedient to
confine to an enlightened few. And thus a Utilitarian may reasonably
desire, on Utilitarian principles, that some of his conclusions should
be rejected by mankind generally; or even that the vulgar should
keep aloof from his system as a whole, in so far as the inevitable
indefiniteness and complexity of its calculations render it likely to
lead to bad results in their hands.

Of course, as I have said, in an ideal community of enlightened
Utilitarians this swarm of perplexities and paradoxes would vanish;
as in such a society no one can have any ground for believing that
other persons will act on moral principles different from those
which he adopts. And any enlightened Utilitarian must of course
desire this consummation; as all conflict of moral opinion must _pro
tanto_ be regarded as an evil, as tending to impair the force of
morality generally in its resistance to seductive impulses. Still
such conflict may be a necessary evil in the actual condition of
civilised communities, in which there are so many different degrees of
intellectual and moral development.

We have thus been led to the discussion of the question which we
reserved in the last section; viz. how Utilitarianism should deal
with the fact of divergent moral opinions held simultaneously by
different members of the same society. For it has become plain that
though two different kinds of conduct cannot both be right under the
same circumstances, two contradictory opinions as to the rightness of
conduct may possibly both be expedient; it may conduce most to the
general happiness that _A_ should do a certain act, and at the same
time that _B_, _C_, _D_ should blame it. The Utilitarian of course
cannot really join in the disapproval, but he may think it expedient
to leave it unshaken; and at the same time may think it right, if
placed in the supposed circumstances, to do the act that is generally
disapproved. And so generally it may be best on the whole that there
should be conflicting codes of morality in a given society at a
certain stage of its development. And, as I have already hinted, the
same general reasoning, from the probable origin of the moral sense
and its flexible adjustment to the varying conditions of human life,
which furnished a presumption that Common-Sense morality is roughly
coincident with the Utilitarian code proper for men as now constituted,
may be applied in favour of these divergent codes also: it may be said
that these, too, form part of the complex adjustment of man to his
circumstances, and that they are needed to supplement and qualify the
morality of Common Sense.

However paradoxical this doctrine may appear, we can find cases where
it seems to be implicitly accepted by Common Sense; or at least
where it is required to make Common Sense consistent with itself.
Let us consider, for example, the common moral judgments concerning
rebellions. It is commonly thought, on the one hand, that these abrupt
breaches of order are sometimes morally necessary; and, on the other
hand, that they ought always to be vigorously resisted, and in case
of failure punished by extreme penalties inflicted at least on the
ring-leaders; for otherwise they would be attempted under circumstances
where there was no sufficient justification for them: but it seems
evident that, in the actual condition of men’s moral sentiments, this
vigorous repression requires the support of a strong body of opinion
condemning the rebels as wrong, and not merely as mistaken in their
calculations of the chances of success. For similar reasons it may
possibly be expedient on the whole that certain special relaxations
of certain moral rules should continue to exist in certain professions
and sections of society, while at the same time they continue to be
disapproved by the rest of the society. The evils, however, which must
spring from this permanent conflict of opinion are so grave, that an
enlightened Utilitarian will probably in most cases attempt to remove
it; by either openly maintaining the need of a relaxation of the
ordinary moral rule under the special circumstances in question; or,
on the other hand, endeavouring to get the ordinary rule recognised
and enforced by all conscientious persons in that section of society
where its breach has become habitual. And of these two courses it seems
likely that he will in most cases adopt the latter; since such rules
are most commonly found on examination to have been relaxed rather for
the convenience of individuals, than in the interest of the community
at large.

§ 4. Finally, let us consider the general relation of Utilitarianism to
that part of common morality which extends beyond the range of strict
duty; that is, to the Ideal of character and conduct which in any
community at any given time is commonly admired and praised as the sum
of Excellences or Perfections. To begin, it must be allowed that this
distinction between Excellence and Strict Duty does not seem properly
admissible in Utilitarianism--except so far as some excellences are
only partially and indirectly within the control of the will, and we
require to distinguish the realisation of these in conduct from the
performance of Duty proper, which is always something that _can_ be
done at any moment. For a Utilitarian must hold that it is always wrong
for a man knowingly to do anything other than what he believes to be
most conducive to Universal Happiness. Still, it seems practically
expedient,--and therefore indirectly reasonable on Utilitarian
principles,--to retain, in judging even the strictly voluntary conduct
of others, the distinction between a part that is praiseworthy and
admirable and a part that is merely right: because it is natural to us
to compare any individual’s character or conduct, not with our highest
ideal--Utilitarian or otherwise--but with a certain average standard
and to admire what rises above the standard; and it seems ultimately
conducive to the general happiness that such natural sentiments of
admiration should be encouraged and developed. For human nature seems
to require the double stimulus of praise and blame from others, in
order to the best performance of duty that it can at present attain:
so that the ‘social sanction’ would be less effective if it became
purely penal. Indeed, since the pains of remorse and disapprobation
are in themselves to be avoided, it is plain that the Utilitarian
construction of a Jural morality is essentially self-limiting; that is,
it prescribes its own avoidance of any department of conduct in which
the addition that can be made to happiness through the enforcement of
rules sustained by social penalties appears doubtful or inconsiderable.
In such departments, however, the æsthetic phase of morality may still
reasonably find a place; we may properly admire and praise where it
would be inexpedient to judge and condemn. We may conclude, then,
that it is reasonable for a Utilitarian to praise any conduct more
felicific in its tendency than what an average man would do under the
given circumstances:--being aware of course that the limit down to
which praise worthiness extends must be relative to the particular
state of moral progress reached by mankind generally in his age and
country; and that it is desirable to make continual efforts to elevate
this standard. Similarly, the Utilitarian will praise the Dispositions
or permanent qualities of character of which felicific conduct is
conceived to be the result, and the Motives that are conceived to
prompt to it when it would be a clear gain to the general happiness
that these should become more frequent: and, as we have seen,[373] he
may without inconsistency admire the Disposition or Motive if it is
of a kind which it is generally desirable to encourage, even while he
disapproves of the conduct to which it has led in any particular case.

Passing now to compare the contents of the Utilitarian Ideal of
character with the virtues and other excellences recognised by Common
Sense, we may observe, first, that general coincidence between the
two on which Hume and others have insisted. No quality has ever been
praised as excellent by mankind generally which cannot be shown to have
some marked felicific effect, and to be within proper limits obviously
conducive to the general happiness. Still, it does not follow that
such qualities are always fostered and encouraged by society in the
proportion which a Utilitarian would desire: in fact, it is a common
observation to make, in contemplating the morality of societies other
than our own, that some useful qualities are unduly neglected, while
others are over-prized and even admired when they exist in such excess
as to become, on the whole, infelicific. The consistent Utilitarian
may therefore find it necessary to rectify the prevalent moral ideal
in important particulars. And here it scarcely seems that he will find
any such Utilitarian restrictions on innovation, as appeared to exist
in the case of commonly received rules of duty. For the Common-Sense
notions of the different excellences of conduct (considered as
extending beyond the range of strict duty) are generally so vague as to
offer at least no definite resistance to a Utilitarian interpretation
of their scope: by teaching and acting upon such an interpretation a
man is in no danger of being brought into infelicific discord with
Common Sense: especially since the ideal of moral excellence seems
to vary within the limits of the same community to a much greater
extent than the code of strict duty. For example, a man who in an age
when excessive asceticism is praised, sets an example of enjoying
harmless bodily pleasures, or who in circles where useless daring is
admired, prefers to exhibit and commend caution and discretion, at the
worst misses some praise that he might otherwise have earned, and is
thought a little dull or unaspiring: he does not come into any patent
conflict with common opinion. Perhaps we may say generally that an
enlightened Utilitarian is likely to lay less stress on the cultivation
of those negative virtues, tendencies to restrict and refrain, which
are prominent in the Common-Sense ideal of character; and to set more
value in comparison on those qualities of mind which are the direct
source of positive pleasure to the agent or to others--some of which
Common Sense scarcely recognises as excellences: still, he will not
carry this innovation to such a pitch as to incur general condemnation.
For no enlightened Utilitarian can ignore the fundamental importance
of the restrictive and repressive virtues, or think that they are
sufficiently developed in ordinary men at the present time, so that
they may properly be excluded from moral admiration; though he may hold
that they have been too prominent, to the neglect of other valuable
qualities, in the common conception of moral Perfection. Nay, we may
even venture to say that, under most circumstances, a man who earnestly
and successfully endeavours to realise the Utilitarian Ideal, however
he may deviate from the commonly-received type of a perfect character,
is likely to win sufficient recognition and praise from Common Sense.
For, whether it be true or not that the whole of morality has sprung
from the root of sympathy, it is certain that self-love and sympathy
combined are sufficiently strong in average men to dispose them to
grateful admiration of any exceptional efforts to promote the common
good, even though these efforts may take a somewhat novel form. To any
exhibition of more extended sympathy or more fervent public spirit
than is ordinarily shown, and any attempt to develop these equalities
in others, Common Sense is rarely unresponsive; provided, of course,
that these impulses are accompanied with adequate knowledge of actual
circumstances and insight into the relation of means to ends, and that
they do not run counter to any recognised rules of duty.[374] And
it seems to be principally in this direction that the recent spread
of Utilitarianism has positively modified the ideal of our society,
and is likely to modify it further in the future. Hence the stress
which Utilitarians are apt to lay on social and political activity
of all kinds, and the tendency which Utilitarian ethics have always
shown to pass over into politics. For one who values conduct in
proportion to its felicific consequences, will naturally set a higher
estimate on effective beneficence in public affairs than on the purest
manifestation of virtue in the details of private life: while on the
other hand an Intuitionist (though no doubt vaguely recognising that a
man ought to do all the good he can in public affairs) still commonly
holds that virtue may be as fully and as admirably exhibited on a small
as on a large scale. A sincere Utilitarian, therefore, is likely to be
an eager politician: but on what principles his political action ought
to be determined, it scarcely lies within the scope of this treatise to
investigate.

FOOTNOTES:

[364] I do not mean that this sentiment is in my view incompatible
with Utilitarianism; I mean that it must not attach itself to any
subordinate rules of conduct, but only to the supreme principle of
acting with impartial concern for all elements of general happiness.

[365] For example, Mr. Bain in _Mind_ (Jan. 1883, pp. 48, 49).

[366] This sentence is not an exact quotation, but a summary of
the doctrine set forth by J. S. Mill in his treatise _On Liberty_
(Introduction).

[367] See Mill _On Liberty_, chap. iv. It may be observed that Mill’s
doctrine is certainly opposed to common sense: since (_e.g._) it would
exclude from censure almost all forms of sexual immorality committed by
unmarried and independent adults.

[368] Cf. Book iii. chap. xiv.

[369] Cf. especially Book iii. chap. ii.

[370] Cf. Book iii. chap. i. and chap. xiii.

[371] Book iii. chap. vii. § 3.

[372] In particular cases, however, they seem to be admitted by Common
Sense to a certain extent. For example, it would be commonly thought
wrong to express in public speeches disturbing religious or political
opinions which may be legitimately published in books.

[373] Cf. chap. iii. § 2 of this Book.

[374] We have seen that a Utilitarian may sometimes have to override
these rules; but then the case falls under the head discussed in the
previous section.




CONCLUDING CHAPTER

THE MUTUAL RELATIONS OF THE THREE METHODS


§ 1. In the greater part of the treatise of which the final chapter
has now been reached, we have been employed in examining three methods
of determining right conduct, which are for the most part found more
or less vaguely combined in the practical reasonings of ordinary men,
but which it has been my aim to develop as separately as possible.
A complete synthesis of these different methods is not attempted in
the present work: at the same time it would hardly be satisfactory to
conclude the analysis of them without some discussion of their mutual
relations. Indeed we have already found it expedient to do this to a
considerable extent, in the course of our examination of the separate
methods. Thus, in the present and preceding Books we have directly
or indirectly gone through a pretty full examination of the mutual
relations of the Intuitional and Utilitarian methods. We have found
that the common antithesis between Intuitionists and Utilitarians must
be entirely discarded: since such abstract moral principles as we can
admit to be really self-evident are not only not incompatible with
a Utilitarian system, but even seem required to furnish a rational
basis for such a system. Thus we have seen that the essence of Justice
or Equity (in so far as it is clear and certain), is that different
individuals are not to be treated differently, except on grounds of
universal application; and that such grounds, again, are supplied by
the principle of Universal Benevolence, that sets before each man the
happiness of all others as an object of pursuit no less worthy than
his own; while other time-honoured virtues seem to be fitly explained
as special manifestations of impartial benevolence under various
circumstances of human life, or else as habits and dispositions
indispensable to the maintenance of prudent or beneficent behaviour
under the seductive force of various non-rational impulses. And
although there are other rules which our common moral sense when first
interrogated seems to enunciate as absolutely binding; it has appeared
that careful and systematic reflection on this very Common Sense, as
expressed in the habitual moral judgments of ordinary men, results in
exhibiting the real subordination of these rules to the fundamental
principles above given. Then, further, this method of systematising
particular virtues and duties receives very strong support from a
comparative study of the history of morality; as the variations in the
moral codes of different societies at different stages correspond, in a
great measure, to differences in the actual or believed tendencies of
certain kinds of conduct to promote the general happiness of different
portions of the human race: while, again, the most probable conjectures
as to the pre-historic condition and original derivation of the moral
faculty seem to be entirely in harmony with this view. No doubt, even
if this synthesis of methods be completely accepted, there will remain
some discrepancy in details between our particular moral sentiments
and unreasoned judgments on the one hand, and the apparent results of
special utilitarian calculations on the other; and we may often have
some practical difficulty in balancing the latter against the more
general utilitarian reasons for obeying the former: but there seems
to be no longer any theoretical perplexity as to the principles for
determining social duty.

It remains for us to consider the relation of the two species of
Hedonism which we have distinguished as Universalistic and Egoistic.
In chap. ii. of this Book we have discussed the rational process
(called by a stretch of language ‘proof’) by which one who holds it
reasonable to aim at his own greatest happiness may be determined to
take Universal Happiness instead, as his ultimate standard of right
conduct. We have seen, however, that the application of this process
requires that the Egoist should affirm, implicitly or explicitly, that
his own greatest happiness is not merely the rational ultimate end for
himself, but a part of Universal Good: and he may avoid the proof of
Utilitarianism by declining to affirm this. It would be contrary to
Common Sense to deny that the distinction between any one individual
and any other is real and fundamental, and that consequently “I” am
concerned with the quality of my existence as an individual in a sense,
fundamentally important, in which I am not concerned with the quality
of the existence of other individuals: and this being so, I do not
see how it can be proved that this distinction is not to be taken as
fundamental in determining the ultimate end of rational action for an
individual. And it may be observed that most Utilitarians, however
anxious they have been to convince men of the reasonableness of aiming
at happiness generally, have not commonly sought to attain this result
by any logical transition from the Egoistic to the Universalistic
principle. They have relied almost entirely on the Sanctions of
Utilitarian rules; that is, on the pleasures gained or pains avoided
by the individual conforming to them. Indeed, if an Egoist remains
impervious to what we have called Proof, the only way of rationally
inducing him to aim at the happiness of all, is to show him that his
own greatest happiness can be best attained by so doing. And further,
even if a man admits the self-evidence of the principle of Rational
Benevolence, he may still hold that his own happiness is an end which
it is irrational for him to sacrifice to any other; and that therefore
a harmony between the maxim of Prudence and the maxim of Rational
Benevolence must be somehow demonstrated, if morality is to be made
completely rational. This latter view, indeed (as I have before said),
appears to me, on the whole, the view of Common Sense: and it is that
which I myself hold. It thus becomes needful to examine how far and in
what way the required demonstration can be effected.

§ 2. Now, in so far as Utilitarian morality coincides with that
of Common Sense--as we have seen that it does in the main--this
investigation has been partly performed in chap. v. of Book ii. It
there appeared that while in any tolerable state of society the
performance of duties towards others and the exercise of social virtues
seem _generally_ likely to coincide with the attainment of the greatest
possible happiness in the long run for the virtuous agent, still the
_universality_ and _completeness_ of this coincidence are at least
incapable of empirical proof: and that, indeed, the more carefully
we analyse and estimate the different sanctions--Legal, Social, and
Conscientious--considered as operating under the actual conditions of
human life, the more difficult it seems to believe that they can be
always adequate to produce this coincidence. The natural effect of this
argument upon a convinced Utilitarian is merely to make him anxious to
alter the actual conditions of human life: and it would certainly be a
most valuable contribution to the actual happiness of mankind, if we
could so improve the adjustment of the machine of Law in any society,
and so stimulate and direct the common awards of praise and blame, and
so develop and train the moral sense of the members of the community,
as to render it clearly prudent for every individual to promote as much
as possible the general good. However, we are not now considering what
a consistent Utilitarian will try to effect for the future, but what
a consistent Egoist is to do in the present. And it must be admitted
that, as things are, whatever difference exists between Utilitarian
morality and that of Common Sense is of such a kind as to render the
coincidence with Egoism still more improbable in the case of the
former. For we have seen that Utilitarianism is more rigid than Common
Sense in exacting the sacrifice of the agent’s private interests where
they are incompatible with the greatest happiness of the greatest
number: and of course in so far as the Utilitarian’s principles bring
him into conflict with any of the commonly accepted rules of morality,
the whole force of the Social Sanction operates to deter him from what
he conceives to be his duty.

§ 3. There are, however, writers of the Utilitarian school[375] who
seem to maintain or imply, that by due contemplation of the paramount
importance of Sympathy as an element of human happiness we shall be led
to see the coincidence of the good of each with the good of all. In
opposing this view, I am as far as possible from any wish to depreciate
the value of sympathy as a source of happiness even to human beings as
at present constituted. Indeed I am of opinion that its pleasures and
pains really constitute a great part of that internal reward of social
virtue, and punishment of social misconduct, which in Book ii. chap.
v. I roughly set down as due to the moral sentiments. For, in fact,
though I can to some extent distinguish sympathetic from strictly moral
feelings in introspective analysis of my own consciousness, I cannot
say precisely in what proportion these two elements are combined. For
instance: I seem able to distinguish the “sense of the ignobility
of Egoism” of which I have before spoken--which, in my view, is the
normal emotional concomitant or expression of the moral intuition
that the Good of the whole is reasonably to be preferred to the Good
of a part--from the jar of sympathetic discomfort which attends the
conscious choice of my own pleasure at the expense of pain or loss to
others; but I find it impossible to determine what force the former
sentiment would have if actually separated from the latter, and I am
inclined to think that the two kinds of feeling are very variously
combined in different individuals. Perhaps, indeed, we may trace a
general law of variation in the relative proportion of these two
elements as exhibited in the development of the moral consciousness
both in the race and in individuals; for it seems that at a certain
stage of this development the mind is more susceptible to emotions
connected with abstract moral ideas and rules presented as absolute;
while after emerging from this stage and before entering it the
feelings that belong to personal relations are stronger.[376] Certainly
in a Utilitarian’s mind sympathy tends to become a prominent element
of all instinctive moral feelings that refer to social conduct; as in
his view the rational basis of the moral impulse must ultimately lie
in some pleasure won or pain saved for himself or for others; so that
he never has to sacrifice himself to an Impersonal Law, but always
for some being or beings with whom he has at least some degree of
fellow-feeling.

But besides admitting the actual importance of sympathetic pleasures
to the majority of mankind, I should go further and maintain that,
on empirical grounds alone, enlightened self-interest would direct
most men to foster and develop their sympathetic susceptibilities to
a greater extent than is now commonly attained. The effectiveness
of Butler’s famous argument against the vulgar antithesis between
Self-love and Benevolence is undeniable: and it seems scarcely
extravagant to say that, amid all the profuse waste of the means of
happiness which men commit, there is no imprudence more flagrant than
that of Selfishness in the ordinary sense of the term,--that excessive
concentration of attention on the individual’s own happiness which
renders it impossible for him to feel any strong interest in the
pleasures and pains of others. The perpetual prominence of self that
hence results tends to deprive all enjoyments of their keenness and
zest, and produce rapid satiety and _ennui_: the selfish man misses
the sense of elevation and enlargement given by wide interests; he
misses the more secure and serene satisfaction that attends continually
on activities directed towards ends more stable in prospect than an
individual’s happiness can be; he misses the peculiar rich sweetness,
depending upon a sort of complex reverberation of sympathy, which is
always found in services rendered to those whom we love and who are
grateful. He is made to feel in a thousand various ways, according to
the degree of refinement which his nature has attained, the discord
between the rhythms of his own life and of that larger life of which
his own is but an insignificant fraction.

But allowing[377] all this, it yet seems to me as certain as any
conclusion arrived at by hedonistic comparison can be, that the
utmost development of sympathy, intensive and extensive, which is now
possible to any but a very few exceptional persons, would not cause a
perfect coincidence between Utilitarian duty and self-interest. Here
it seems to me that what was said in Book ii. chap. v. § 4, to show
the insufficiency of the Conscientious Sanction, applies equally,
_mutatis mutandis_, to Sympathy. Suppose a man finds that a regard for
the general good--Utilitarian Duty--demands from him a sacrifice, or
extreme risk, of life. There are perhaps one or two human beings so
dear to him that the remainder of a life saved by sacrificing their
happiness to his own would be worthless to him from an egoistic point
of view. But it is doubtful whether many men, “sitting down in a cool
hour” to make the estimate, would affirm even this: and of course that
particular portion of the general happiness, for which one is called
upon to sacrifice one’s own, may easily be the happiness of persons
not especially dear to one. But again, from this normal limitation of
our keenest and strongest sympathy to a very small circle of human
beings, it results that the very development of sympathy may operate
to increase the weight thrown into the scale against Utilitarian duty.
There are very few persons, however strongly and widely sympathetic,
who are so constituted as to feel for the pleasures and pains of
mankind generally a degree of sympathy at all commensurate with their
concern for wife or children, or lover, or intimate friend: and if
any training of the affections is at present possible which would
materially alter this proportion in the general distribution of our
sympathy, it scarcely seems that such a training is to be recommended
as on the whole felicific.[378] And thus when Utilitarian Duty calls on
us to sacrifice not only our own pleasures but the happiness of those
we love to the general good, the very sanction on which Utilitarianism
most relies must act powerfully in opposition to its precepts.

But even apart from these exceptional cases--which are yet sufficient
to decide the abstract question--it seems that the course of conduct
by which a man would most fully reap the rewards of sympathy (so far
as they are empirically ascertainable) will often be very different
from that to which a sincere desire to promote the general happiness
would direct him. For the relief of distress and calamity is an
important part of Utilitarian duty: but as the state of the person
relieved is on the whole painful, it would appear that sympathy under
these circumstances must be a source of pain rather than pleasure, in
proportion to its intensity. It is probably true, as a general rule,
that in the relief of distress other elements of the complex pleasure
of benevolence decidedly outweigh this sympathetic pain:--for the
effusion of pity is itself pleasurable, and we commonly feel more
keenly that amelioration of the sufferer’s state which is due to our
exertions than we do his pain otherwise caused, and there is further
the pleasure that we derive from his gratitude, and the pleasure that
is the normal reflex of activity directed under a strong impulse
towards a permanently valued end. Still, when the distress is bitter
and continued, and such as we can only partially mitigate by all our
efforts, the philanthropist’s sympathetic discomfort must necessarily
be considerable; and the work of combating misery, though not devoid
of elevated happiness, will be much less happy on the whole than many
other forms of activity; while yet it may be to just this work that
Duty seems to summon us. Or again, a man may find that he can best
promote the general happiness by working in comparative solitude for
ends that he never hopes to see realised, or by working chiefly among
and for persons for whom he cannot feel much affection, or by doing
what must alienate or grieve those whom he loves best, or must make it
necessary for him to dispense with the most intimate of human ties. In
short, there seem to be numberless ways in which the dictates of that
Rational Benevolence, which as a Utilitarian he is bound absolutely
to obey, may conflict with that indulgence of kind affections which
Shaftesbury and his followers so persuasively exhibit as its own reward.

§ 4. It seems, then, that we must conclude, from the arguments given
in Book ii. chap. v., supplemented by the discussion in the preceding
section, that the inseparable connexion between Utilitarian Duty and
the greatest happiness of the individual who conforms to it cannot be
satisfactorily demonstrated on empirical grounds. Hence another section
of the Utilitarian school has preferred to throw the weight of Duty on
the Religious Sanction: and this procedure has been partly adopted
by some of those who have chiefly dwelt on sympathy as a motive. From
this point of view the Utilitarian Code is conceived as the Law of God,
who is to be regarded as having commanded men to promote the general
happiness, and as having announced an intention of rewarding those who
obey His commands and punishing the disobedient. It is clear that if we
feel convinced that an Omnipotent Being has, in whatever way, signified
such commands and announcements, a rational egoist can want no further
inducement to frame his life on Utilitarian principles. It only remains
to consider how this conviction is attained. This is commonly thought
to be either by supernatural Revelation, or by the natural exercise of
Reason, or in both ways. As regards the former it is to be observed
that--with a few exceptions--the moralists who hold that God has
disclosed His law either to special individuals in past ages who have
left a written record of what was revealed to them, or to a permanent
succession of persons appointed in a particular manner, or to religious
persons generally in some supernatural way, do not consider that it is
the Utilitarian Code that has thus been revealed, but rather the rules
of Common-Sense morality with some special modifications and additions.
Still, as Mill has urged, in so far as Utilitarianism is more rigorous
than Common Sense in exacting the sacrifice of the individual’s
happiness to that of mankind generally, it is strictly in accordance
with the most characteristic teaching of Christianity. It seems,
however, unnecessary to discuss the precise relation of different
Revelational Codes to Utilitarianism, as it would be going beyond our
province to investigate the grounds on which a Divine origin has been
attributed to them.

In so far, however, as a knowledge of God’s law is believed to be
attainable by the Reason, Ethics and Theology seem to be so closely
connected that we cannot sharply separate their provinces. For, as we
saw,[379] it has been widely maintained, that the relation of moral
rules to a Divine Lawgiver is implicitly cognised in the act of thought
by which we discern these rules to be binding. And no doubt the terms
(such as ‘moral obligation’), which we commonly use in speaking of
these rules, are naturally suggestive of Legal Sanctions and so of
a Sovereign by whom these are announced and enforced. Indeed many
thinkers since Locke have refused to admit any other meaning in the
terms Right, Duty, etc., except that of a rule imposed by a lawgiver.
This view, however, seems opposed to Common Sense; as may be, perhaps,
most easily shown[380] by pointing out that the Divine Lawgiver is
Himself conceived as a Moral Agent; _i.e._ as prescribing what is
right, and designing what is good. It is clear that in this conception
at least the notions ‘right’ and ‘good’ are used absolutely, without
any reference to a superior lawgiver; and that they are here used in a
sense not essentially different from that which they ordinarily bear
seems to be affirmed by the _consensus_ of religious persons. Still,
though Common Sense does not regard moral rules as being _merely_
the mandates of an Omnipotent Being who will reward and punish men
according as they obey or violate them; it certainly holds that this
is a true though partial view of them, and perhaps that it may be
intuitively apprehended. If then reflection leads us to conclude that
the particular moral principles of Common Sense are to be systematised
as subordinate to that pre-eminently certain and irrefragable intuition
which stands as the first principle of Utilitarianism; then, of course,
it will be the Utilitarian Code to which we shall believe the Divine
Sanctions to be attached.

Or, again, we may argue thus. If--as all theologians agree--we are to
conceive God as acting for some end, we must conceive that end to be
Universal Good, and, if Utilitarians are right, Universal Happiness:
and we cannot suppose that in a world morally governed it can be
prudent for any man to act in conscious opposition to what we believe
to be the Divine Design. Hence if in any case after calculating the
consequences of two alternatives of conduct we choose that which seems
likely to be less conducive to Happiness generally, we shall be acting
in a manner for which we cannot but expect to suffer.

To this it has been objected, that observation of the actual world
shows us that the happiness of sentient beings is so imperfectly
attained in it, and with so large an intermixture of pain and misery,
that we cannot really conceive Universal Happiness to be God’s end,
unless we admit that He is not Omnipotent. And no doubt the assertion
that God is omnipotent will require to be understood with some
limitation; but perhaps with no greater limitation than has always been
implicitly admitted by thoughtful theologians. For these seem always to
have allowed that some things are impossible to God: as, for example,
to change the past. And perhaps if our knowledge of the Universe were
complete, we might discern the _quantum_ of happiness ultimately
attained in it to be as great as could be attained without the
accomplishment of what we should then see to be just as inconceivable
and absurd as changing the past. This, however, is a view which it
belongs rather to the theologian to develop. I should rather urge that
there does not seem to be any other of the ordinary interpretations
of Good according to which it would appear to be more completely
realised in the actual universe. For the wonderful perfections of work
that we admire in the physical world are yet everywhere mingled with
imperfection, and subject to destruction and decay: and similarly in
the world of human conduct Virtue is at least as much balanced by Vice
as Happiness is by misery.[381] So that, if the ethical reasoning that
led us to interpret Ultimate Good as Happiness is sound, there seems no
argument from Natural Theology to set against it.

§ 5. If, then, we may assume the existence of such a Being, as God,
by the _consensus_ of theologians, is conceived to be, it seems that
Utilitarians may legitimately infer the existence of Divine sanctions
to the code of social duty as constructed on a Utilitarian basis; and
such sanctions would, of course, suffice to make it always every one’s
interest to promote universal happiness to the best of his knowledge.
It is, however, desirable, before we conclude, to examine carefully
the validity of this assumption, in so far as it is supported on
ethical grounds alone. For by the result of such an examination will
be determined, as we now see, the very important question whether
ethical science can be constructed on an independent basis; or whether
it is forced to borrow a fundamental and indispensable premiss from
Theology or some similar source.[382] In order fairly to perform this
examination, let us reflect upon the clearest and most certain of
our moral intuitions. I find that I undoubtedly seem to perceive, as
clearly and certainly as I see any axiom in Arithmetic or Geometry,
that it is ‘right’ and ‘reasonable’ for me to treat others as I should
think that I myself ought to be treated under similar conditions,
and to do what I believe to be ultimately conducive to universal
Good or Happiness. But I cannot find inseparably connected with this
conviction, and similarly attainable by mere reflective intuition,
any cognition that there actually is a Supreme Being who will
adequately[383] reward me for obeying these rules of duty, or punish
me for violating them.[384] Or,--omitting the strictly theological
element of the proposition,--I may say that I do not find in my moral
consciousness any intuition, claiming to be clear and certain, that
the performance of duty will be adequately rewarded and its violation
punished. I feel indeed a desire, apparently inseparable from the moral
sentiments, that this result may be realised not only in my own case
but universally; but the mere existence of the desire would not go
far to establish the probability of its fulfilment, considering the
large proportion of human desires that experience shows to be doomed
to disappointment. I also judge that in a certain sense this result
_ought_ to be realised: in this judgment, however, ‘ought’ is not used
in a strictly ethical meaning; it only expresses the vital need that
our Practical Reason feels of proving or postulating this connexion of
Virtue and self-interest, if it is to be made consistent with itself.
For the negation of the connexion must force us to admit an ultimate
and fundamental contradiction in our apparent intuitions of what is
Reasonable in conduct; and from this admission it would seem to follow
that the apparently intuitive operation of the Practical Reason,
manifested in these contradictory judgments, is after all illusory.

I do not mean that if we gave up the hope of attaining a practical
solution of this fundamental contradiction, through any legitimately
obtained conclusion or postulate as to the moral order of the world,
it would become reasonable for us to abandon morality altogether:
but it would seem necessary to abandon the idea of rationalising it
completely. We should doubtless still, not only from self-interest, but
also through sympathy and sentiments protective of social wellbeing,
imparted by education and sustained by communication with other men,
feel a desire for the general observance of rules conducive to general
happiness; and practical reason would still impel us decisively to
the performance of duty in the more ordinary cases in which what
is recognised as duty is in harmony with self-interest properly
understood. But in the rarer cases of a recognised conflict between
self-interest and duty, practical reason, being divided against itself,
would cease to be a motive on either side; the conflict would have to
be decided by the comparative preponderance of one or other of two
groups of non-rational impulses.

If then the reconciliation of duty and self-interest is to be
regarded as a hypothesis logically necessary to avoid a fundamental
contradiction in one chief department of our thought, it remains
to ask how far this necessity constitutes a sufficient reason for
accepting this hypothesis. This, however, is a profoundly difficult
and controverted question, the discussion of which belongs rather
to a treatise on General Philosophy than to a work on the Methods
of Ethics: as it could not be satisfactorily answered, without a
general examination of the criteria of true and false beliefs. Those
who hold that the edifice of physical science is really constructed
of conclusions logically inferred from self-evident premises, may
reasonably demand that any practical judgments claiming philosophic
certainty should be based on an equally firm foundation. If on the
other hand we find that in our supposed knowledge of the world of
nature propositions are commonly taken to be universally true, which
yet seem to rest on no other grounds than that we have a strong
disposition to accept them, and that they are indispensable to the
systematic coherence of our beliefs,--it will be more difficult to
reject a similarly supported assumption in ethics, without opening the
door to universal scepticism.

FOOTNOTES:

[375] See J. S. Mill’s treatise on Utilitarianism (chap. iii. passim):
where, however, the argument is not easy to follow, from a confusion
between three different objects of inquiry: (1) the actual effect of
sympathy in inducing conformity to the rules of Utilitarian ethics, (2)
the effect in this direction which it is likely to have in the future,
(3) the value of sympathetic pleasures and pains as estimated by an
enlightened Egoist. The first and third of these questions Mill did not
clearly separate, owing to his psychological doctrine that each one’s
own pleasure is the sole object of his desires. But if my refutation of
this doctrine (Book i. chap. iv. § 3) is valid, we have to distinguish
two ways in which sympathy operates: it generates sympathetic pleasures
and pains, which have to be taken into account in the calculations of
Egoistic Hedonism; but it also may cause impulses to altruistic action,
of which the force is quite out of proportion to the sympathetic
pleasure (or relief from pain) which such action seems likely to
secure to the agent. So that even if the average man ever should reach
such a pitch of sympathetic development, as never to feel prompted to
sacrifice the general good to his own, still this will not prove that
it is egoistically reasonable for him to behave in this way.

[376] I do not mean to imply that the process of change is merely
circular. In the earlier period sympathy is narrower, simpler, and
more presentative; in the later it is more extensive, complex, and
representative.

[377] I do not, however, think that we are justified in stating as
_universally_ true what has been admitted in the preceding paragraph.
Some few thoroughly selfish persons appear at least to be happier
than most of the unselfish; and there are other exceptional natures
whose chief happiness seems to be derived from activity, disinterested
indeed, but directed towards other ends than human happiness.

[378] See chap. iii. § 3 of this Book, pp. 432-33.

[379] See Book iii. chap. i. § 2: also Book iii. chap. ii. § 1.

[380] Cf. Book i. chap. iii. § 2.

[381] It may perhaps be said that this comparison has no force for
Libertarians, who consider the essence of Virtue to lie in free choice.
But to say that _any_ free choice is virtuous would be a paradox from
which most Libertarians--admitting that Evil may be freely chosen no
less than Good--would recoil. It must therefore be Free choice of good
that is conceived to realise the divine end: and if so, the arguments
for the utilitarian interpretation of Good--thus freely chosen--would
still be applicable _mutatis mutandis_: and if so, the arguments for
regarding rules of utilitarian duty as divinely sanctioned would be
similarly applicable.

[382] It is not necessary, if we are simply considering Ethics as a
possible independent science, to throw the fundamental premiss of
which we are now examining the validity into a Theistic form. Nor does
it seem always to have taken that form in the support which Positive
Religion has given to Morality. In the Buddhist creed this notion of
the rewards inseparably attaching to right conduct seems to have been
developed in a far more elaborate and systematic manner than it has in
any phase of Christianity. But, as conceived by enlightened Buddhists,
these rewards are not distributed by the volition of a Supreme Person,
but by the natural operation of an impersonal Law.

[383] It may be well to remind the reader that by ‘adequate’ is here
meant ‘sufficient to make it the agent’s interest to promote universal
good’; not necessarily ‘proportional to Desert.’

[384] I cannot fall back on the resource of thinking myself under a
moral necessity to regard all my duties _as if they_ were commandments
of God, although not entitled to hold speculatively that any such
Supreme Being really exists. I am so far from feeling bound to
believe for purposes of practice what I see no ground for holding as
a speculative truth, that I cannot even conceive the state of mind
which these words seem to describe, except as a momentary half-wilful
irrationality, committed in a violent access of philosophic despair.




APPENDIX

THE KANTIAN CONCEPTION OF FREE WILL


[_Reprinted, with some omissions, from_ MIND, 1888, _Vol. XIII., No.
51_.]

My aim is to show that, in different parts of Kant’s exposition of his
doctrine, two essentially different conceptions are expressed by the
same word freedom; while yet Kant does not appear to be conscious of
any variation in the meaning of the term.

[In the one sense, Freedom = Rationality, so that a man is free in
proportion as he acts in accordance with Reason.] I do not in the
least object to this use of the term Freedom, on account of its
deviation from ordinary usage. On the contrary, I think it has much
support in men’s natural expression of ordinary moral experience in
discourse. In the conflict that is continually going on in all of us,
between non-rational impulses and what we recognise as dictates of
practical reason, we are in the habit of identifying ourselves with
the latter rather than with the former: as Whewell says, “we speak of
Desire, Love, Anger, as mastering us, and of ourselves as controlling
them”--we continually call men “slaves” of appetite or passion, whereas
no one was ever called a slave of reason. If, therefore, the term
Freedom had not already been appropriated by moralists to another
meaning--if it were merely a question of taking it from ordinary
discourse and stamping it with greater precision for purposes of
ethical discussion--I should make no objection to the statement that
“a man is a free agent in proportion as he acts rationally.” But, what
English defenders of man’s free agency have generally been concerned
to maintain, is that “man has a freedom of _choice_ between good and
evil,” which is realised or manifested when he deliberately chooses
evil just as much as when he deliberately chooses good; and it is
clear that if we say that a man is a free agent in proportion as he
acts rationally, we cannot also say, in the same sense of the term,
that it is by his free choice that he acts irrationally when he does
so act. The notions of Freedom must be admitted to be fundamentally
different in the two statements: and though usage might fairly allow
the word Freedom to represent either notion, if only one or other of
the above-mentioned propositions were affirmed, to use it to represent
both, in affirming both propositions, is obviously inconvenient; and it
implies a confusion of thought so to use it, without pointing out the
difference of meaning.

If this be admitted, the next thing is to show that Kant does use the
term in this double way. In arguing this, it will be convenient to have
names for what we admit to be two distinct ideas. Accordingly, the kind
of freedom which I first mentioned--which a man is said to manifest
more in proportion as he acts more under the guidance of reason--shall
be referred to as ‘Good’ or ‘Rational Freedom,’ and the freedom that is
manifested in choosing between good and evil shall be called ‘Neutral’
or ‘Moral Freedom.’[385]

But before I proceed to the different passages of Kant’s exposition in
which ‘Good Freedom’ and ‘Neutral Freedom’ respectively occur, it seems
desirable to distinguish this latter from a wider notion with which
it may possibly be confounded, and which it would be clearly wrong to
attribute to Kant. I mean the “power of acting without a motive,” which
Reid and other writers, on what used to be called the Libertarian side,
have thought it necessary to claim. “If a man could not act without
a motive,” says Reid, “he could have no power”--that is, in Reid’s
meaning, no free agency--“at all.” This conception of Freedom--which
I may conveniently distinguish as ‘Capricious Freedom’--is, as I
said, certainly not Kantian: not only does he expressly repudiate it,
but nowhere--so far as I know--does he unconsciously introduce it.
Indeed it is incompatible with any and every part of his explanation
of human volition: the originality and interest of his defence of
Neutral Freedom--the power of choice between good and evil--lies in its
complete avoidance of Capricious Freedom or the power of acting without
a motive _in any particular volition_.

[This] distinction helps me to understand how [it is that] many
intelligent readers have failed to see in Kant’s exposition the two
Freedoms--Good or Rational Freedom and Neutral or Moral Freedom--which
I find in Kant. They have their view fixed on the difference between
Rational or Moral Freedom, which Kant maintains, and the Freedom
of Caprice, which he undoubtedly repudiates: and are thus led to
overlook with him the distinction between the Freedom that we realise
or manifest in proportion as we do right, and the Freedom that is
realised or manifested equally in choosing either right or wrong.
When we have once put completely out of view the Freedom of Caprice,
the power of acting without a motive, or against the strongest
motive when the competition is among merely natural or non-rational
desires or aversions,--when we have agreed to exclude this, and to
concentrate attention on the difference between Good Freedom and
Neutral Freedom--I venture to think that no one can avoid seeing each
member of this latter antithesis in Kant. It will be easily understood
that, as he does not himself distinguish the two conceptions, it is
naturally impossible for the most careful reader always to tell which
is to be understood; but there are many passages where his argument
unmistakably requires the one, and many other passages where it
unmistakably requires the other. Speaking broadly, I may say that,
wherever Kant has to connect the notion of Freedom with that of Moral
Responsibility or moral imputation, he, like all other moralists who
have maintained Free Will in this connexion, means (chiefly, but not
solely) Neutral Freedom--Freedom exhibited in choosing wrong as much
as in choosing right. Indeed, in such passages it is with the Freedom
of the wrong-chooser that he is primarily concerned: since it is the
wrong-chooser that he especially wishes to prevent from shifting his
responsibility on to causes beyond his control. On the other hand, when
what he has to prove is the possibility of disinterested obedience to
Law as such, without the intervention of sensible impulses, when he
seeks to exhibit the independence of Reason in influencing choice,
then in many though not all his statements he explicitly identifies
Freedom with this independence of Reason, and thus clearly implies the
proposition that a man is free in proportion as he acts rationally.

As an example of the first kind, I will take the passage towards
the close of chap. iii. of the “Analytic of Practical Reason,”[386]
where he treats, in its bearing on Moral Responsibility, his
peculiar metaphysical doctrine of a double kind of causation in
human actions. According to Kant, every such action, regarded as a
phenomenon determined in time, must be thought as a necessary result
of determining causes in antecedent time--otherwise its existence
would be inconceivable--but it may be also regarded in relation to the
agent considered as a thing-in-himself, as the “noümenon” of which the
action is a phenomenon: and the conception of Freedom may be applied
to the agent so considered in relation to his phenomena. For since his
existence as a noümenon is not subject to time-conditions, nothing in
this noümenal existence comes under the principle of determination
by antecedent causes: hence, as Kant says, “in this his existence
nothing is antecedent to the determination of his will, but every
action ... even the whole series of his existence as a sensible being,
is in the consciousness of his supersensible existence nothing but
the result of his causality as a noümenon.” This is the well-known
metaphysical solution of the difficulty of reconciling Free Will with
the Universality of physical causation: I am not now concerned to
criticise it,--my point is that if we accept this view of Freedom at
all, it must obviously be Neutral Freedom: it must express the relation
of a noümenon that manifests itself as a scoundrel to a series of
bad volitions, in which the moral law is violated, no less than the
relation of a noümenon that manifests itself as a saint to good or
rational volitions, in which the moral law or categorical imperative
is obeyed. And, as I before said, Kant in this passage--being
especially concerned to explain the possibility of moral imputation,
and justify the judicial sentences of conscience--especially takes as
his illustrations noümena that exhibit bad phenomena. The question he
expressly raises is “How a man who commits a theft” can “be called
quite free” at the moment of committing it? and answers that it is
in virtue of his “transcendental freedom” that “the rational being
can justly say of _every unlawful action_ that he performs that he
could very well have left it undone,” although as phenomenon it is
determined by antecedents, and so necessary; “for it, with all the
past which determines it, belongs to the one single phenomenon of
his character which he makes for himself, in consequence of which he
imputes to himself” the bad actions that result necessarily from his
bad character taken in conjunction with other causes. Hence, however he
may account for his error from bad habits which he has allowed to grow
on him, whatever art he may use to paint to himself an unlawful act he
remembers as something in which he was carried away by the stream of
physical necessity, this cannot protect him from self-reproach:--not
even if he have shown depravity so early that he may reasonably be
thought to have been born in a morally hopeless condition--he will
still be rightly judged, and will judge himself “just as responsible
as any other man”: since in relation to his noümenal self his life as
a whole, from first to last, is to be regarded as a single phenomenon
resulting from an absolutely free choice.

I need not labour this point further; it is evident that the
necessities of Kant’s metaphysical explanation of moral responsibility
make him express with peculiar emphasis and fulness the notion of what
I have called Neutral Freedom, a kind of causality manifested in bad
and irrational volitions no less than in the good and rational.

On the other hand, it is no less easy to find passages in which the
term Freedom seems to me most distinctly to stand for Good or Rational
Freedom. Indeed, such passages are, I think, more frequent than those
in which the other meaning is plainly required. Thus he tells us that
“a free will must find its principle of determination in the [moral]
‘Law,’”[387] and that “freedom, whose causality can be determined only
by the law, consists just in this, that it restricts all inclinations
by the condition of obedience to pure law.”[388] Whereas, in the
argument previously examined, his whole effort was to prove that
the noümenon or supersensible being, of which each volition is a
phenomenon, exercises “free causality” in unlawful acts, he tells us
elsewhere, in the same treatise, that the “supersensible nature” of
rational beings, who have also a “sensible nature,” is their “existence
according to laws which are independent of every empirical condition,
and therefore belong to the autonomy of pure [practical] reason.”[389]
Similarly, in an earlier work, he explains that “since the conception
of causality involves that of laws ... though freedom is not a property
of the will depending on physical laws, yet it is not for that reason
lawless; on the contrary, it must be a causality according to immutable
laws, but of a peculiar kind; otherwise, a free will would be a chimæra
(_Unding_).”[390] And this immutable law of the “free” or “autonomous”
will is, as he goes on to say, the fundamental principle of morality,
“so that a free will and a will subject to moral laws are one and the
same.”

I have quoted this last phrase, not because it clearly exhibits the
notion of Rational Freedom,--on the contrary, it rather shows how
easily this notion may be confounded with the other. A will subject to
its own moral laws _may_ mean a will that, so far as free, conforms
to these laws; but it also _may_ be conceived as capable of freely
disobeying these laws--exercising Neutral Freedom. But when Freedom
is said to be a “causality according to immutable laws” the ambiguity
is dispelled; for this evidently cannot mean merely a faculty of
laying down laws which may or may not be obeyed; it must mean that
the will, _quâ_ free, acts in accordance with these laws;--the human
being, doubtless, often acts contrary to them; but then, according to
this view, its choice in such actions is determined not “freely” but
“mechanically,” by “physical” and “empirical” springs of action.

If any further argument is necessary to show that Kantian “Freedom”
must sometimes be understood as Rational or Good Freedom, I may quote
one or two of the numerous passages in which Kant, either expressly or
by implication, identifies Will and Reason; for this identification
obviously excludes the possibility of Will’s choosing between Reason
and non-rational impulses. Thus in the _Grundlegung zur Metaphysik
der Sitten_,[391] he tells us that “as Reason is required to deduce
actions from laws, Will is nothing but pure practical reason”; and,
similarly, in the _Kritik der praktischen Vernunft_, he speaks of the
“objective reality of a pure Will or, _which is the same thing_, a pure
practical reason.”[392] Accordingly, whereas in some passages[393] the
“autonomy” which he identifies with “Freedom” is spoken of as “autonomy
of _will_,” in others we are told that the “moral law expresses
nothing else than autonomy of the pure practical _reason_: that is,
Freedom.”[394]

I think that I have now established the verbal ambiguity that I
undertook to bring home to Kant’s account of Free Will; I have shown
that in his exposition this fundamental term oscillates between
incompatible meanings. But it may, perhaps, be thought that the defect
thus pointed out can be cured by a merely verbal correction: that the
substance of Kant’s ethical doctrine may still be maintained, and may
still be connected with his metaphysical doctrine. It may still be held
that Reason dictates that we should at all times act from a maxim that
we can will to be a universal law, and that we should do this from pure
regard for reason and reason’s law, admitting that it is a law which we
are free to disobey; and it may still be held that the reality of this
moral freedom is to be reconciled with the universality of physical
causation by conceiving it as a relation between the agent’s noümenal
self--independent of time-conditions--and his character as manifested
in time; the only correction required being to avoid identifying
Freedom and Goodness or Rationality as attributes of agents or actions.

I should quite admit that the most important parts both of Kant’s
doctrine of morality, and of his doctrine of Freedom may be saved:--or
I should perhaps rather say that the latter may be left to conduct an
unequal struggle with the modern notions of heredity and evolution:
at any rate I admit that it is not fundamentally affected by my
present argument. But I think that a good deal more will have to go
from a corrected edition of Kantism than merely the “word” Freedom
in certain passages, if the confusion introduced by the ambiguity of
this word is to be eliminated in the manner that I have suggested. I
think that the whole topic of the “heteronomy” of the will, when it
yields to empirical or sensible impulses, will have to be abandoned or
profoundly modified. And I am afraid that most readers of Kant will
feel the loss to be serious; since nothing in Kant’s ethical writing
is more fascinating than the idea--which he expresses repeatedly in
various forms--that a man realises the aim of his true self when he
obeys the moral law, whereas, when he wrongly allows his action to
be determined by empirical or sensible stimuli, he becomes subject
to physical causation, to laws of a brute outer world. But if we
dismiss the identification of Freedom and Rationality, and accept
definitely and singly Kant’s other notion of Freedom as expressing the
relation of the human thing-in-itself to its phenomenon, I am afraid
that this spirit-stirring appeal to the sentiment of Liberty must be
dismissed as idle rhetoric. For the life of the saint must be as much
subject--in any particular portion of it--to the necessary laws of
physical causation as the life of the scoundrel: and the scoundrel must
exhibit and express his characteristic self-hood in his transcendental
choice of a bad life, as much as the saint does in his transcendental
choice of a good one. If, on the other hand, to avoid this result,
we take the other horn of the dilemma, and identify inner freedom
with rationality, than a more serious excision will be required. For,
along with ‘Neutral’ or ‘Moral’ Freedom, the whole Kantian view of the
relation of the noümenon to the empirical character will have to be
dropped, and with it must go the whole Kantian method of maintaining
moral responsibility and moral imputation: in fact, all that has made
Kant’s doctrine interesting and impressive to English advocates of Free
Will (in the ordinary sense), even when they have not been convinced of
its soundness.

FOOTNOTES:

[385] The terms ‘rational’ and ‘moral’ seem to me most appropriate
when I wish to suggest the affinity between the two notions: the terms
‘good’ and ‘neutral’ seem preferable when I wish to lay stress on the
difference.

[386] _Werke_, v. pp. 100-104 (Hartenstein).

[387] _Werke_, v. p. 30.

[388] _Ibid._ p. 83.

[389] _Ibid._ p. 46.

[390] _Werke_, iv. p. 294.

[391] _Werke_, iv. p. 260 (Hartenstein).

[392] _Werke_, v. p. 58. See an acute discussion of Kant’s perplexing
use of the term “Will” in Prof. Schurman’s _Kantian Ethics_, which has
anticipated me in the above quotations.

[393] _E.g._ _Werke_, iv. p. 296.

[394] _E.g._ _Werke_, v. p. 35.




INDEX


  ‘Absolute’ and ‘Relative’ Ethics, 18 note 2, 177 note 1

  ‘Act,’ meaning of, 200 note 3, 201, 202

  Action, ultimate end of, 3, 4, etc.;
    motive to, may be non-rational, 5;
    instinctive, 24, 61;
    deliberate, 24, 61;
    deliberate and impulsive, 61

  Acuteness, 236

  Æsthetic Intuitionism, 228, 392;
    implicit reference to Ultimate Good in, 392, 393

  Æsthetic sensibility, theories of, 189

  Affections, Duties of the, 345-349

  Affections, social and domestic, 138, 153, 156, 157, 433, 434

  ‘Altruism,’ 439

  ἀνδρεία, 456

  ‘Apathy’ as ideal of happiness, 125

  Aristotle, 59 note 1, 92, 92 note 2, 98-99, 99 note 1, 121-122,
        180, 180 note 1, 181 note 1, 215, 224, 231 note 1, 264 note 2,
        281, 375 note 1, 376, 403, 456

  Art, Definition of, 4

  ‘Art of conduct,’ 4

  Austin, 300 note 1

  Aversion, 42, 43, 46, 145

  Axioms, 215, 338-343, 379-389 _passim_;
    must (_a_) have the terms clear and precise, 338, 339;
    (_b_) be really self-evident, 339-341;
    (_c_) not conflict with any other accepted proposition, 341;
    (_d_) be supported by consensus of experts, 341, 342

  Axiom--of Justice or Equity, and Rational Benevolence, 387;
    of Prudence, the logical basis of Egoism, 386;
    of Rational Benevolence, the logical basis of Utilitarianism,
        387, 388;
    -s of Impartiality, 379-383, 496, 497


  Bacon, 338

  Bain, 43 note 2, Note 54-56, Note 87-88, 125, 126, 127, 477 note 1;
    (_The Emotions and the Will_) 54, 55 Note, 126 note 1;
    (_Mental and Moral Science_) 127 notes 1-3, 177 note 1

  Bastiat, 278 note 1

  Beauty, 114

  Benevolence, 238-263 _passim_, 391, 393;
    comprehensiveness and supremacy of, 238, 238 note 2;
    common maxim of, 238-239;
    axiom of, 382, 385, 387, 496;
    prescribes promotion of others’ Happiness rather than Perfection,
        240, 241;
    principles of its distribution, 241, 242, 261, 262, 263;
    and Justice, spheres of, 242, 243, 268;
    virtue of, 244, 253;
    duty of, 252, 253, 253 note 1, 258;
    Kant’s view of the duty of, 239, 240;
    intellectual _versus_ emotional excellence of, 244 note 1;
    conflicting claims to, 246;
    duties of, classified, 248;
    rational, cf. _Rational Benevolence_;
    Intuitional and Utilitarian notions of, reconciled, 430-431

  Benevolent--emotion, 239;
    disposition, 239

  Bentham, 10, 41, 41 note 1, 84, 85, 86, Note 87-88, 92, 94, 119,
        124 note 1, 143, 164, 203, 292, 364, 414, 417, 423 note 2, 424;
    (_Memoirs_) 10 notes 2 and 3,
    (_Deontology, Works_, Bowring’s edition) 87, 88 Note,
    (_Principles of Morals and Legislation_) 26 note 1,
    (_Constitutional Code_) 41 note 2

  Bequest, change of view respecting, 246, 247

  Berkeley, Bishop, 120

  Blackstone, _Introduction_, 302 note 1

  Bouillier, 180 note 2

  Butler, 7, 39, 44, 44 note 2, 81, 86, 93, 94, 119, 133 note 2, 136,
        172, 200, 222, 366, 366 note 3, 371, 372, 378, 386, 401, 405,
        501;
    (_Analogy_) 378;
    (_Dissertation Of the Nature of Virtue_) 86 note 2, 176 note 1,
        327 note 1;
    (_Sermons on Human Nature_) 7 note 1, 86 note 2, 93 note 2,
        120 note 1, 200 note 2, 323 note 1


  Candour, 355

  Cardinal Virtues, 375

  Carelessness, Culpability of, 60, 292

  Casuistry, 99

  Categorical Imperative, 7, 8, 15, 35, 36, 37, 209, 209 note 1

  Caution, 236, 236 note 1, 237

  Celibacy, 487, 488

  Charity (Philanthropy), 222, 239, 430, 431, 434

  Chastity and Purity, 223, 329-331, 329 note 2

  ‘Chief Good’ (Summum Bonum), 134, 407 note 1

  Chivalry, 326

  Chrysippus, 376

  Cicero, 376;
    _De Finibus_, 125 note 1

  Clarke, 86, 104, 120, 120 note 2, 384, 384 notes 3 and 4, 385;
    _Boyle Lectures_, 120 note 2, 385 notes 1 and 2

  Classification of Duties, 312-315

  ‘Cognition,’ use of, 34 note 2

  “Common good of all Rationals,” Cumberland’s ultimate end, 104, 423

  Common Morality, 215-216; (cf. _Morality of Common Sense_)

  Common Sense aversion to admit Happiness as sole ultimate Good,
        explanation of, 402-406

  Compassion, 262, 371

  Conditional prescriptions (Hypothetical Imperatives), 6, 7

  Conjugal relation, the duties relating to it, 254, 255, 256,
        255 notes 1 and 2, 347, 348, 348 note 1

  Conscience, popular view of, 99;
    jural view of, 100-101

  Conscience (Moral Faculty) and Benevolence, Butler’s view of the
        relation between, 86, 86 note 2;
    and Self-love, Butler’s view of relation between, 119, 120, 200,
        200 note 2, 327 note 1, 366

  Conscious Utilitarianism rather the adult than the germinal form
        of morality, 455-457

  Consciousness not normally without pleasure or pain, 125

  Consequences of actions, ulterior, 96, 97;
    may be judged desirable without reference to pleasure or pain, 97

  Contract, claims arising from, 269;
    and Freedom, 276, 276 note 1

  Courage, 332-334;
    defined, 332;
    Greek view of, 456;
    and Fortitude, are subordinate duties, 332, 333;
    Moral, 333 note 3;
    Virtue of, 313, 333, 334;
    and Foolhardiness, distinguished by Utilitarian considerations,
        334, 355

  Courtesy, 253

  Cudworth, 103 Note

  Culture, 157, etc.

  Cumberland, 86, 86 note 1, 104;
    and Utilitarianism, 423, 423 note 1

  Custom, alterations in, 247


  Decision, 236, 237

  Deductive Hedonism, 176-195

  Descartes, 338, 339

  Desert--Good, how determined, 284-290;
    Ill, how determined, 291-292;
    requital of, as principle of Ideal Justice, 280, 281, 283, 294, 349;
    and Freedom, 280, 287;
    and Right of Property, 280, 280 note 1;
    and Determinism, 284, 285;
    Utilitarian interpretation of, 284 note 1;
    and Free Will, 71, 72, 284, 291

  ‘Desirable,’ confusion in Mill’s use of, 388 note 2

  Desirable consciousness is either happiness or certain objective
        relations of the conscious mind, 398-400

  Desire, 43, 45-47;
    non-rational, 23-24;
    irrational, 23, 24;
    and Pleasure, relation between, 39-56 _passim_

  Determinism and Free Will, 57 _seq._;
    Aristotelian, 59 note 1;
    and Materialism, 62;
    arguments for, 62-65;
    argument against, 65, 66

  Determinist meaning of ‘desert,’ etc., 71, 72, 284 note 1

  Development as ethical aim, 90 _seq._, 192 _seq._, 473

  ‘Dictates,’ how used, 96 note 1

  δικαιοσύνη, two meanings of, 264 note 2

  ‘Disinterested action,’ 57

  Distribution, Principle of Equality a _prima facie_ reasonable
        Principle of, 417

  Divine penalties, 31

  ‘Doing good,’ ambiguity of, 239, 240

  Dualism of the Practical (or Moral) Reason, 200, 205, 206,
        366, 404, 404 note 1;
    need of harmonising, 507-509

  Dumont, 180 note 2

  ‘Duties to God’ and ‘duty to man,’ 218

  Duties, division of, into Self-regarding and Social, 163, 312, 313

  ‘Duties to oneself,’ 7

  ‘Duty’--meaning and use of, 78, 217, 218, 220 note 3, 239, 504-505;
    and ‘right conduct’ distinguished, 217

  Duty relativity of, 218, 219;
    and Happiness of agent, 36, 162-175 _passim_, 495 _seq._;
    implies conflict of impulses, 81;
    of self-preservation, 356;
    of promoting others’ happiness, Kant’s arguments for, 389-390;
    most of the received maxims of, involve reference to Ultimate
        Good, 391, 392


  ‘Egoism,’ 11, 80 note 1, 89 _seq._;
    ordinary use, and ambiguity of, 89;
    indefiniteness of, 95;
    and Greek ethical controversy, 91-92

  Egoism, cf. _Egoistic Hedonism_

  Egoism--meaning of, 120-121;
    and Self-love, 36, 89-95 _passim_;
    Principle and Method of, 119-122;
    precepts of, not clear and precise, 199-200;
    rationality of, 119-120, 199, 200 note 1;
    sense of ignobility of, 199-200, 200 note 1 (cf. 402 _seq._), 501;
    = Pure (or Quantitative) Egoistic Hedonism, 95;
    and Utilitarianism, relation between, 497 _seq._;
    and Utilitarian sanctions, 499-503

  ‘Egoist,’ meaning of, 121

  Egoistic End--and Positive Religion, 121;
    and Natural Religion, 121

  Egoistic Hedonism designated as Egoism or as Epicureanism, 11, 84, 95

  Egoistic Hedonism, 42, 119-121;
    End of, 93;
    Pure or Quantitative, defined, 95;
    Fundamental Principle of, 93, 120, 121;
    Empirical-reflective Method of, 121, 122, 131 _seq._;
    and Conscience, 161 note 1;
    Fundamental Paradox of, 48, 130, 136, 137, 173-174, 194

  Empirical Hedonism, 123-150;
    fundamental assumption of, 123, 131, 146;
    objections to, 460;
    Method of, takes advantage of traditional experience and of
        special knowledge, 477, 479

  Empirical Quantitative Hedonism, 146

  Empiricism, 104

  ‘End,’ ethical use of the term, 134

  End, Interdependence of Method and, 8, 83, 84;
    adoption of any, as paramount, a phenomenon distinct from Desire, 39

  Ends accepted as rational by Common Sense, 8, 9

  Energy, 237

  Epicureanism, 11, 84

  Epicurus, 158

  ‘Equal return,’ ambiguity of, 261 (cf. 288 _seq._)

  ‘Equality of Happiness,’ as Social End, 284 note 2

  Ethical--judgment, 23-38, 77;
    Principles and Methods, 77-88 _passim_;
    Method, three principal species of, 83 _seq._;
    controversy, ancient and modern, 105, 106, 392;
    Hedonism, fundamental proposition of, 129;
    and Psychological Hedonism, 40-42, 412, 412 note 1;
    and Physical Science, structure of, compared, 509

  Ethics--boundaries of, 1;
    Study or Science? 1, 2;
    forms of the problem of, 2, 3, 391;
    and man’s ‘True Good,’ 3;
    definition of, 4, 15;
    Absolute and Relative, 18 note 2, 177 note 1;
    and geometry, analogy between, 18-19;
    and astronomy, analogy between, 19;
    concerned with Duty under present conditions, 19;
    aim of, 40, 77;
    and Rational or Natural Theology, 504-506;
    mutual relations of the three Methods of, 496-509

  Ethics and Politics (cf. _Law_), 15-22 _passim_, 266, 457;
    distinguished from Positive sciences, 1, 2;
    Utilitarian, 457 (cf. 274, 298);
    in an ideal society, 18 _seq._

  εὐδαιμονία (= Well-being = the Good attainable in
        human life), 91, 92;
    misunderstanding of Aristotle’s use of, 92 note 2

  Excellence (cf. _Perfection_)

  ‘Excellence’ and ‘Perfection,’ 10 note 3

  Excellence beyond strict duty, Utilitarian attitude towards, 492, 493

  _Explanation_ essentially different from _Justification_, 2


  Fame, 9, 155, 157, 159, 368, (Posthumous) 156 note 1

  Feeling--preferableness of, other than pleasantness, dependent on
        objective relations of the feeling mind, 127, 128, 399;
    _quâ_ feeling, can only be judged by the person who feels, 128,
        129, 398

  Fidelity (cf. _Good Faith_), 258, 259

  Firmness, 235, 236

  Fitness and Desert, 350

  ‘Formal’ and ‘Material’ Rightness, 206-207, 206 note 1

  Fortitude defined, 332

  Free choice as virtuous, 504 note 1

  Freedom--sentiment of, 39;
    as absolute end of ideal law, 274 _seq._, 293, 297, 350-351;
    sphere of, must be limited, 275;
    ambiguity of, 275, 276, 293;
    and Contract, 276, 276 note 1;
    and Property, 276, 277;
    Civil and Constitutional, 298, 351

  Free Will--controversy, 57-76 _passim_, 59, 61-62, 65 note 1, 74, 75;
    conception of, applied (_a_) in judging the conduct of others,
        63 note 1, 66, 67, (_b_) in forecasting our own future, 64;
    partial illusoriness of the belief in, 64, 65;
    and Happiness, 68;
    and Perfection (or Excellence), 68, 68 note 2;
    and Moral government of the world, 69, 69 note 2, 70;
    and Determinism, practical unimportance of issue between, 67,
        68, 72-76, 285;
    and Justice, 71, 72, 284, 291;
    and Desert (or Merit), 68 note 2, 285, 291;
    and Duty, 78;
    (or Freedom of Will)--two senses of, 57-59;
    and Moral responsibility, 58;
    conception of, involved in ordinary meaning of ‘responsibility,’
        ‘desert,’ etc., 71;
    metaphysical--ethical import of, as regards (_a_) choice between
        rational and irrational alternatives, 67, 68, 70-71, (_b_) view
        of what is rational, 68, 69, (_c_) forecasts of future action,
        69, 70, 70 note 1

  Friendship and its duties, 257-259, 257 note 1, 437


  ‘General Good,’ 392

  Generosity, 219, 326

  Gentleness, 253, 321

  God’s Will--conformity to, 79;
    as ultimate reason for action, 79, 80

  ‘Golden Rule,’ the, unpreciseness of, 379-380

  ‘Good,’ 105-115 _passim_;
    indefiniteness of, 91-92;
    use and force of the term, 86 note 1, 105, 107 _seq._, 112, 113;
    and not ‘Right’ the fundamental notion in Greek ethics, 105;
    has not the same connotation as ‘pleasant,’ 107, 108, 109, 110;
    implies reference to an universally valid standard, 108-109, 114;
    adjective, and ‘Good’ substantive, 109;
    notion of, distinct from ‘Pleasure’ and ‘the Pleasant,’ and = ‘what
        ought to be desired,’ 109 _seq._

  Good, The, 3, 92, 106;
    (human) or Well-being, its relation to Happiness and to Duty, 3;
    (human) is either (_a_) Happiness or (_b_) Perfection or Excellence
        of human existence, 114, 115;
    the absolute and unconditional, in Kant’s view, 222;
    in English ethical thought, 423 note 1

  Good conduct, 106, 107, 112-113;
    standard of, needed, 113;
    Greek conception of, 107 note 1, 404-405, 405 note 1

  Good Faith, 224, 303-311 _passim_, 352-354, 355;
    stringency of the duty of, 304-305;
    obligation of, affected by (_a_) fraud or force, 305-306,
        306 note 1, (_b_) material change of circumstances, 306-308,
        (_c_) misapprehension, 309, (_d_) use of a prescribed formula,
        309, 310

  Good Taste, 108

  Good humour, 321

  Goodness, implies relation to consciousness or feeling, 113-114,
        113 note 2;
    (Moral) and Beauty, 107-108, 107 note 1, 228

  Government--by Consent of Subjects, 297, 351;
    Aristocratic and Democratic Principles of, 299;
    established, difficulty of identifying, 300, 301

  Governmental Authority, conflicting claims to, 296, 297, 299-301;
    ideal, 297-299

  Grant Allen, 187;
    _Physiological Æsthetics_, 187 note 1

  Gratitude, 259-261, 437-438;
    universalised, furnishes the principle ‘that desert ought to be
        requited,’ 279, 279 note 1, 280;
    Kant on, 223, 223 note 1

  ‘Greatest Happinesss,’ meaning of, 121, 413;
    Utilitarian notion of, its extent, 414;
    total and average, distinguished, 415, 416

  ‘Greatest Pleasure,’ explanation of, 44 note 3

  Greek ethical thought, the problem of, 106;
    tautological maxims of, 375-376

  Green, T. H., 132 _seq._, 134 note 3, 135 note 3;
    (_Introduction to Hume’s Treatise on Human Nature_) 132 note 2,
        133 note 3;
    (_Prolegomena to Ethics_) 93 note 1, 133 note 1, 134 notes 1 and 2,
        135 notes 1 and 2, 363 note 1

  Grote, J., _An Examination of the Utilitarian Philosophy_, 432 note 1

  Gurney, E., 123, 184; (_Tertium Quid_) 123 note 1;
    (_Power of Sound_) 184 note 1


  Hallam, 423 note 1

  Hamilton, 139, 180-182;
    (_Lectures on Metaphysics_) 180 note 3

  Happiness--as End, 7, 8, 78;
    and Duty, connexion between, 162-175 _passim_;
    and Duty, are they coincident? 162, 163, 165, 176;
    and Duty, Plato’s view of relation between, 171-172;
    and Virtue, 174-175, 459;
    and Virtue, connexion of, in Aristotle’s view, 121-122;
    determination and measurement of, an inevitable problem for
        Ethics, 176;
    production of, 176-177;
    relation of, to mental concentration and dissipation, 193;
    and Self-development, 192-193;
    rejection of, as end, leaves us unable to frame a coherent account
        of Ultimate Good, 406;
    an objection to, as Ultimate Good, considered, 407 note 1;
    principle of distribution of, required, 416, 417;
    universal, as divine end, 503-505;
    Christian view of, 120, 138;
    Sources of, 151 _seq._

  ‘Happiness,’ 41 note 1, 92, 92 note 2, 93 note 1;
    ambiguity of, 92;
    precise meaning of, 120

  Harm, 292, 293

  Harmony as cause of Pleasure, 189

  Health, 153, 154, 159

  ‘Hedonism,’ meaning of, 93

  Hedonism (Ethical), the two Methods of, are Universalistic and
        Egoistic, 11;
    connexion between the two Methods of, 84, 497 _seq._;
    objections to, stated and considered:--(_a_) that the calculation
        required by the Empirical-reflective method is too complex for
        practice, 131, 132;
    (_b_) that “pleasure as feeling cannot be conceived,” 132, 133;
    (_c_) that “a sum of pleasures is intrinsically unmeaning,”
        133, 134;
    (_d_) that transient pleasures are unsatisfying, 135;
    (_e_) that the pursuit of pleasure tends to defeat its own end,
        136 _seq._;
    (_f_) that the habit of introspective comparison of pleasures
        is unfavourable to pleasure, 138-140;
    (_g_) that any quantitative comparison of pleasures is vague and
        uncertain, 140-150;
    Deductive, 176-195 _passim_;
    deductive, Spencer’s view of, 177 note 1;
    Method of, must be empirical, 195;
    Empirical, method of, 460;
    and Intuitionism, 461;
    and Pessimism, 131 Note

  Hedonistic Zero (or neutral feeling), 124, 125

  Helvetius, 88

  Highest Good, the (cf. _The Good_ and _Ultimate Good_), 106

  Hobbes, 44 note 1, 56, 86, 89, 103, 109, 300 note 1, 423, 476;
    (_Leviathan_) 89 note 1

  Holmes, O. W., jun., _The Common Law_, 281 note 1

  Honour, Code of, 30, 31, 168, 340

  Hume, 23, 86, 104, 220, 384, 419, 423, 424, 423 notes 1 and 2,
        426, 440, 441, 493;
    (_Inquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals_) 44 note 2,
        220 note 2, 424

  Humility, 334-336 _passim_, 355, 356 note 1, 429

  Hunger, 45, 46

  Hutcheson, 44 note 2, 50, 86, 86 note 2, 104, 366;
    (_System of Moral Philosophy_) 366 note 1

  Hypothetical Imperatives imply an ulterior end, 6, 7, 37


  Ideal and Actual, relation between, 79;
    connected (_a_) in the conception of “God’s Will,” 79,
        (_b_) in the notion of “Nature,” 80-83

  Ideal--Government, no consensus as to what kind is legitimate,
        299 _seq._;
    and Traditional Authority, 296;
    Society, ethics of, how far useful, 22-24, 465

  “Idols of the Cave” and “Idols of the Tribe,” 152

  Impulse to do acts _quâ_ recognised as right (= Moral Motive), 77

  Impulses, extra-regarding and self-regarding may conflict, 51, 52, 136

  Indifference (Neutrality) of feeling, cf. _Hedonistic Zero_

  Individualistic--Ideal, 286-287;
    and Socialistic Ideals, 293, 294, 444-445

  Inequality, Reasonable, 268 _seq._

  Ingenuity, 236

  Intention, 60 note 1, 202, 202 note 1

  Interest, meaning of, 7, 120;
    ethical character of, in Butler’s view, 176 note 1

  ‘Internal acts,’ 204

  Instinctive impulses regarded as inherited experience, 193, 194

  Intrinsic value, how determined, 288, 289

  Intuition of rightness of acts, excludes consideration of (_a_)
        ulterior consequences, 96, 97, (_b_) “induction from experience”
        of pleasures, 97, 98 (cf. 102 note 1)

  Intuitional--Method, cf. _Intuitionism_;
    moralists, English, may be broadly classified as Dogmatic and
        Philosophical, 103, 104

  ‘Intuitional’--sense in which used, 96, 97, 98;
    wider and narrower senses of, 97, 102 note 1, 201

  Intuitionism, 3, 8, 17, 20, 96-104 _passim_, 199-216 _passim_;
    differences of its method due to two causes, 103;
    its method issues in Universalistic Hedonism (Utilitarianism),
        406-407;
    chronological development of the method of, in England, 103-104;
    and Utilitarianism, 85-86, 388-389, 423-457 _passim_, 496-497;
    Philosophical, 102-104, 373-389 _passim_;
    Perceptional, 98-100, 102;
    Dogmatic, 100-101 (cf. _Intuitionism_, _Intuitive Morality_,
        _Positive Morality_, _Morality of Common Sense_);
    Dogmatic, fundamental assumption of, 101, 200, 201;
    three phases of, 102, 103;
    a variety of, constituted by substituting for ‘right’ the notion
        ‘good,’ 105-107;
    Æsthetic, 228, 392;
    Jural or Rational, 228-229

  ‘Intuitive’ or ‘_a priori_’ Morality generally used to mean Dogmatic
        Intuitionism or Morality of Common Sense, 101-102

  Irrational choice--sometimes conscious and deliberate, 36, 37-38,
        41-42, 58, 59, 110;
    Socratic and Aristotelian view compared with modern view of,
        59 note 1


  Jural method of Ethics, 100-101

  Just claims--arising from contract, 269;
    arising from natural and normal expectations, 269, 270, 270 note 1

  ‘Justice,’ ‘justify,’ etc., uses of, 264 note 2, 270, 286, 442

  Justice, 20, 99, 264-294 _passim_, 349-352, 355, 440-448 _passim_;
    or Equity, essence of, 496;
    specially difficult to define, 264;
    intuitional view of the definition of, 264;
    involves notion of distribution, 265, 266, 268, 271;
    and Law, connexion between, 265, 266, 267 note 1;
    distinct from Order (or Law-observance), 265;
    and Equality, 266, 267, 267 note 1, 268, 268 note 1, 279,
        285 note 1;
    and taxation, 266, 266 note 1;
    Conservative and Ideal, 272-273, 273 note 1, 274, 293, 294;
    Ideal, 273, 274, 293, 294, 444, 445;
    Ideal, and Natural Eights, 274, 275;
    Ideal, and Freedom, 278, 279;
    Corrective, 281;
    Reparative, 281, 282, 281 note 1, 282 note 1, 293;
    Reparative and Retributive, distinguished, 282-283, 282 note 2;
    and Free Will, 71, 72, 284, 285;
    and ‘Equity’ or ‘Fairness,’ 285, 286;
    Hume’s treatment of, 440


  Kant, 6, 7, 11 note 1, 36, 58, 58 note 1, 209, 210, 210 note 1,
        222, 223, 239, 240, 315, 327 note 1, 366, 385, 386, 386 note 1,
        389-390 Note, 486, Appendix 510;
    (_Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten_) 209 note 1, 389-390 Note;
    (_Metaphysische Anfangsgründe der Tugendlehre_) 223 note 1,
        327 note 1, 366 note 3, 386 note 2, 389 Note;
    (_Kritik der reinen Vernunft_) 366 note 3

  Kant’s Fundamental Moral Rule or Categorical Imperative as criterion
        of rightness, 209-210, 209 note 1, 210 note 1, 339 note 1, 386,
        389 Note, 486

  Knowledge--as an End, 114, 399, 401;
    and Feeling (= Cognition and Pleasure or Pain), relation between,
        139, 140;
    and Feeling, Hamilton’s view of the relation between, 139


  _Laisser faire_ and economic production, 445 note 2

  Law, 295-303; and Morality, relation between, 29, 457;
    and Positive Morality, 164;
    Austin’s definition of, 300 note 1

  Laws--just, characteristics of, 266, 267, 271-272;
    that ought to be obeyed, are laid down by rightful authority, 296

  Law-observance (or Order), 295-303 _passim_, 352, 440, 441;
    and Good Faith, 295, 303;
    in regard to _mala prohibita_, 302 note 1

  Lecky, _History of European Morals_, 50 note 1, 399 note 1, 427 note 1

  Legal obligation and punishment, 29

  Liberality, 324-326, 325 note 1, 355

  Libertarian position, 58, 64-65, 66

  Liberty, Sentiment of, 58

  Locke, (_Essay_) 205, 280 note 1, 503;
    ethical view of, 205, 206

  Love, 50, 244, 245, 367, 368;
    common sense estimate of, 245, 258, 258 note 1

  Loyalty, 223, 244, 254


  Mackenzie, J. S., 47, 48

  Maine, Sir H., (_Ancient Law_) 461 note 2

  Malevolence--character of, as motive, 364;
    sometimes sweepingly condemned, 321, 324;
    sometimes partially approved on Utilitarian grounds, 322, 323, 324

  Malevolent affections natural and normal, 320, 321

  Marcus Aurelius, 376 note 1

  ‘Market value,’ 286 _seq._

  Marriage, Plato’s ideal of, 358-359 (cf. 348 note 1)

  Martineau, 366, 367, 369, 370, 371, 372;
    (_Types of Ethical Theory_) 367 note 1, 369 note 1

  Maxims--of Virtue, dependence or independence of, 313;
    of Justice, Prudence and Benevolence, self-evident element in,
        380-382

  ‘Maximum Happiness’ as criterion of conduct, 134

  Meanness, notion of, examined, 325, 326

  Meekness, 321

  Mercy, 321

  Merit, 68 note 2, 284 _seq._;
    (cf. _Desert_)

  Method of Ethics, definition of, 1;
    only one rational, 6, 12;
    more than one natural, 6

  _Methods of Ethics, The_, purpose of, 11-14, 78

  Mildness, 321

  Mill, J. S., 44, 85, 87, 94, 121, 177 note 1, 412 notes 1 and 2,
        414, 418, 440, 478, 504;
    (_Utilitarianism_) 93 note 1, 461 note 1, 499 note 1;
    (_On Liberty_) 478 notes 1 and 2

  _Mind_, 87 Note, 477 note 1

  Modern ethical thought quasi-jural in character, 106

  Moral Faculty--a function of Reason, 23-38 _passim_;
    why subject of ethical discussion, 4, 5;
    Utilitarian theory of origin of, 461, 462, 497

  Moral Judgment, 23-38;
    object of, 60, 61, 201-202, 202 note 1, 222, 362, 364;
    (or Practical) Reason, 33-34, 34 notes 1, 2, 3; 39, 40, 100 _seq._;
    Sense, 34;
    Reasoning, the most natural type of, 6, 12 _seq._, 102-103, 493-494;
    Sentiment, 26-28, 77;
    Sentiments, (_a_) difficulties of admitting or rejecting them as
        motives, 365-367, (_b_) theory of their derivation from
        experiences of pleasure and pain, 461, 462;
    and Quasi-moral Sentiments, 28, 173, 174;
    Motive, 77, 204 _seq._, 223;
    Motive, varying forms of:--(_a_) Reverence for Authority,
        (_b_) Religious Sentiment, (_c_) Self-respect,
        (_d_) sentiment of Freedom, (_e_) Admiration or Aspiration,
        39-40;
    instincts and crude Utilitarian reasonings--discrepancy between,
        466, 467;
    Intuitions, 211-216 _passim_;
    Intuitions, existence of, 211, 212, 337;
    Intuitions, connexion between (_a_) Existence and Origin of,
        211, 212, (_b_) Origin and Validity of, 34 note 1, 212-213,
        212 note 2, 214;
    Intuitions, Particular and General, 99-102, 214-216;
    Rules, imperative and indicative forms of, 101 note 1;
    Rules and Axioms, importance of, 229;
    Axioms, abstract but significant, 379-384, 505;
    Axioms, Kant’s view of, 385-386, 386 notes 1 and 2;
    Maxims, 337-361 _passim_;
    Maxims which _are_, and which are _not_, directly self-evident,
        distinction between, 383;
    Responsibility, 59-60;
    Obligation, 217;
    and non-moral excellence distinguished, 426, 427

  ‘Moral’ (in narrower sense) and ‘Prudential’ distinguished, 25-26

  Moral Courage, 333 note 3

  Moral Philosophy, some problems of modern, 374

  Morality--‘inductive’ and ‘intuitive,’ double ambiguity of antithesis
        between, 97-99;
    _a priori_ and _a posteriori_ (or inductive and intuitive), 97;
    and growth of Sympathy, 455-456, 455 note 1

  Morality of Common Sense (Intuitionism), 85, 102, 229, 263 Note,
        337-361 _passim_;
    and Positive Morality, 215;
    and Egoism, 498-499 (cf. _Happiness and Duty_);
    development of, not perfectly Utilitarian, 455-456;
    axiomatic character of its maxims questioned, 338, 342, 343;
    furnishes valuable practical rules but not ultimate axioms,
        360, 361;
    and Utilitarianism, 361 note 1, 423-457 _passim_, 461, 498, 499;
    first principles of, as “middle axioms” of Utilitarianism, 461;
    Mill’s view of, 461 note 1;
    not to be accepted by Utilitarianism without modification,
        461 _seq._, 467

  Motive meaning of, 202, 362, 363;
    and Intention, 202, 203, 203 note 1;
    -s, different views of Right, 204-207;
    and Desire, Green’s view of, 363 note 1;
    and Disposition, Utilitarian estimate of, 493, 494

  Motives to action, 23;
    as subjects of moral judgment, 362-372;
    as affecting morality of actions, 60-61, 224;
    regarded as _better_ and _worse_ rather than _good_ and
        _bad_, 363-364;
    ‘seductive,’ 364;
    (“Springs of action”) Dr. Martineau’s table of (369)
        ethically estimated, 371, 372;
    ‘higher’ not always to be preferred to ‘lower,’ 369, 370, 371;
    moral regulation of, 370


  Natural, The--Interpretation of, 80 _seq._;
    gives no definite practical criterion of right conduct, 82

  Natural--Selection, effect of, on impulses, 194;
    and normal claims, indefiniteness of, 270, 271, 272, 272 note 1;
    expectations, ambiguity of, 272, 273, 352;
    Rights--difficulty of determining, 298;
    Good, 477

  Nature--Life according to, 79 _seq._, 377, 378;
    conformity to, 80;
    Stoic use of, 377, 378 note 1;
    Butler’s use of, 378

  Neighbourhood and Nationality, duties of, 250, 251, 252

  Neutral excitements, 186 note 1 (cf. _Hedonistic Zero_)


  ‘Objective’ and ‘subjective,’ ethical application of, 207, 207 note 1,
        208 notes 1 and 2, 208, 209, 210, 344 note 2, 394, 395, 429, 430

  Objective Hedonism, meaning of, 151;
    and Common Sense, 151-161;
    advantages of, 151;
    defects of, 151 _seq._, 458, 459

  Objective relations of conscious mind, how far desirable, 400, 401

  Objectivity of Moral Judgment, 27, 33

  Order, cf. _Law-observance_

  Origin of Moral Intuitions, ethical importance of, 383, 384,
        384 note 1

  ‘Ought,’ 23-38 _passim_;
    relative and unconditional uses of, 6, 7, 39;
    implies reasonableness, 25;
    and ‘right’ imply the same notion, 1 note 1, 23, 25;
    does not refer to matters of fact, 25;
    implies objectivity, 27, 33;
    does not merely signify (_a_) appropriateness of means to ends,
        26, (_b_) an emotion of the person judging, 26-28, nor
        (_c_) bound under penalties, 29 _seq._;
    an elementary and irresolvable notion, 32-33;
    narrower and wider sense of, 33, 34, 34 note 4;
    carries with it an impulse to action, 34;
    implies possible conflict with reason (thus distinguishable from
        ‘right’), 34, 35, 217;
    determinist sense of, 78;
    loose meaning of, 508

  Owen, Robert, 291


  Pain--definition of, 42-43 note 1, 180, 191;
    the negative quantity of pleasure, 124, 125;
    physical concomitant of, 183 _seq._;
    Aristotle’s and Hamilton’s theory of, 180 _seq._, 180 note 1,
        181 note 1;
    Mr. Stout’s theory of, 182, 188, etc.;
    Mr. Spencer’s theory of, 183 _seq._;
    Grant Allen’s view of, 187;
    biological theory of, 190 _seq._

  Paley, 86, 121

  Parents and children, duties of, 243, 243 note 1, 248-250,
        248 note 1, 346, 347

  Patriotism, 223, 244, 245;
    duties of, 251, 252, 252 note 1

  ‘Perception,’ ethical use of, by Dugald Stewart, 103 Note

  Perfection or Excellence as End, 10, 11, 10 notes 3 and 4,
        20 note 1, 78, 114, 115;
    and Intuitionism, 11, 83, 84, 97;
    Kant’s treatment of, 386 note 2

  Perfectionists, view of, 97

  Philosophical Intuitionism, its relation to Common Sense Morality, 373

  φρόνησις, 231 note 1

  Pity or Compassion, 262

  Placability, 321

  Plato, (_Republic_) 21, 171, 172;
    140, 145, 148, 171, 172, 281, 345, 348 note 1, 358, 375 note 1, 376;
    (_Gorgias_) 405 note 1; 441

  Pleasure--definitions of, 42, 43, 43 note 1, 125, 127 _seq._,
        131, 190;
    ambiguities of, 43, 44, 93 _seq._;
    forecast of, must take account of moral or quasi-moral pleasures,
        40, 173;
    the less sometimes chosen in preference to the greater, 41, 42,
        42 note 1, 136;
    of Virtue, its ‘disinterestedness’ not abnormal, 50, 51;
    as aim of unconscious action, 52, 53;
    as ‘original’ aim of action, 53, 54;
    application of the term, 93;
    has only quantitative differences, 94, 95, 121;
    maximum, deductive methods of determining, 121, 122;
    rational as opposed to impulsive pursuit of, 124 note 1;
    ‘quality’ of, 94, 95, 121, 128-129, 128 note 1;
    as Feeling, conceivableness of, 132, 133;
    permanent sources of, 135, 136, 153;
    how estimated, 141 _seq._ (cf. 127, 128, 398);
    from others’ pain, various modes of, 321 note 1;
    and Appetite, identified by Hobbes, 44 note 1;
    and Desire, controversy as to relation between, 39-56;
    Aristotle’s and Hamilton’s theory of, 180 _seq._, 180 note 1,
        181 note 1;
    Mr. Stout’s theory of, 182, 188, etc.;
    Mr. Spencer’s theory of, 183 _seq._;
    Grant Allen’s view of, 187;
    biological theory of, 190 _seq._;
    and Desire, (_a_) Mill’s view of, 43-44, (_b_) Butler’s view of,
        44, (_c_) Bain’s view of, 54-56;
    effect of desire on estimate of, 144, 145;
    and Preservation, 190, etc.;
    (Hobbes’ view of) 89;
    and Perfection or Reality, (Self-development), Spinoza’s view
        of, 90;
    and ‘quantity of life,’ 192;
    ‘pure’ 143;
    of pursuit, 46 _seq._, 47 note 1, 55-56;
    of attainment, 47;
    of business, 49;
    intellectual and æsthetic, 107-108, 153, 157, 472;
    benevolent and sympathetic, 49, 50;
    of virtue, 153, 170, 171, 174, 175;
    -s, of the animal life, 154, 157, 159;
    of wealth and greatness, Adam Smith’s view of, 155 note 1--(cf.
        _Health_, _Wealth_, etc.);
    Stoic view of, 129;
    Green’s view of, 132 _seq._;
    Plato’s view of its illusoriness, 140;
    Spencer and Grant Allen’s ‘Intermittence’ theory of, 187

  Pleasures and Pains, Moral, 170 _seq._, 171 note 1;
    of Sympathy, 49, 50, 499-502, 499 note 1;
    scale of, involves assumption of a Hedonistic zero, 124, 125;
    commensurability of, 123-125, 124 note 1, 128 note 1, 131,
        132, 140-150;
    difficulties of a clear, definite and consistent evaluation of,
        140-150;
    incommensurable intensity of, doubtful, 123, 124;
    intensity of, commensurable with duration, 124;
    Bentham’s four dimensions of, 124 note 1;
    volitional efficacy of, 125-127;
    their relation to normal activities, 185, etc.;
    Aristotle’s and Hamilton’s theory of, 180 _seq._;
    Stout’s theory of, 182;
    Wundt’s theory of, 184;
    Spencer’s biological theory of, 190 _seq._

  Plutarch, 376

  Politeness (Good Breeding, Fashion, Etiquette), 253;
    Code of, 30, 340, 341

  Political order, Rousseau’s view of an ideally just, 298

  Politics--and Ethics, 15-22;
    definition of, 1 note 1, 15 (cf. Law)

  Positive Morality--and Morality of Common Sense, 215;
    relation of, to preservation and to happiness, 464, 465;
    alteration of, 164, 480

  Power, 156, 157, 159

  Practical efficacy and speculative truth, relation between, 507 note 1

  Practical Empirical Hedonism, an assumption of, 131

  Practical (or Moral) Judgment, 23 seq.

  Practical (or Moral) Reason, 23-38 _passim_;
    its relation to Interest and to non-rational and irrational
        desires, 36;
    and Nature, 81;
    a postulate of, 6, 12;
    Dualism of, 404 note 1, 366, 200, 205-206, 499, 507-509 (cf.
        _Happiness and Duty_)

  Praise, common sense award of, explained by utility, 428, 429

  Priestley, 88 Note

  Promise, 303-311 _passim_;
    conditions and meaning of, 304;
    conditions of bindingness of a, 311

  Proof of a first principle, how possible, 419, 420

  Proof--of Egoism may be demanded, 418, 419;
    of ordinary moral rules is often required and given, 419

  Proof of Utilitarianism, 418-422 _passim_;
    clear demand of common sense for, 418, 419;
    addressed to Egoism, 420, 421, 497-498;
    addressed to Intuitionism, twofold character of, 421, 422

  “Proof” of Utilitarian principle, Mill’s, 387, 388

  Property and Right of Bequest, 277

  Prudence (or Forethought), 7, 36, 96, 391;
    common sense view of, 327, 328;
    Kant’s and Butler’s views of, 327 note 1;
    self-evident maxim of impartiality educible from the rule of, 381;
    and Benevolence, subordination of other virtues to, 496-497

  ‘Prudential’ and ‘Moral,’ 25-26

  Psychological Hedonism, 40 _seq._;
    of Bentham, 85;
    ethical import of, 41, 205

  Public Opinion, Code of, 30

  Public and private virtue, Utilitarian and Intuitionist estimates
        of, 495

  Punishment, 281, 290 _seq._, 290 note 1, 291 note 1;
    preventive and retributory views of, 71-72

  Purity, 223, 329-331, 329 note 2, 357-359


  Quantitative Hedonism, 129

  Quasi-moral Sentiment, 27-28, 173-174

  Quasi-moral Sentiments and Rational Self-love, 173-174


  Rank of Motives, difficulties of estimating, 365-367, 369;
    conflicting estimates of, by moralists, 366;
    difficulty due to complexity of motive, 368

  Rational action, not to be identified with (_a_) disinterested or
        (_b_) free action, 57;
    Spinoza’s view of the principle of, 89-90

  Rational Benevolence, 96;
    may be self-limiting, 385;
    Kant’s treatment of, 385-386 Note, 389-390

  Rational Self-love (Rational Egoism, Prudence)--and Conscience,
        172, 200, 200 note 2, 366;
    and Rational Benevolence, 386 note 4, 498 _seq._

  Reason--and Ultimate Ends, 9, 77, 77 note 1;
    relation of, to Will and Desire, 23 _seq._;
    reference of moral judgments to, signifies merely their
        _objectivity_, 33;
    conflict with, implied in the terms _dictate_, _precept_,
        _imperative_, _ought_, _duty_, _moral obligation_, 34, 35;
    dictate or precept of, is a rule which may be deviated from, 41;
    dictates or imperatives of, 34, 36, 77;
    and the Divine Will, 79, 80;
    dictate of, implied by _right_, _rightness_, and their equivalents,
        105;
    and instinct, 193-195;
    may be self-limiting, 345;
    _dictates_ and _dictation_ of, 345, 395, 404

  Reason for doing what is seen to be right, why men demand a, 5-6

  Reasonableness of Self-love, Butler’s view of, 119, 120;
    Clarke’s view of, 120;
    Christian view of, 120;
    common sense view of, 120

  Rebellion, when justifiable?, 299, 300, 301, 352

  Reciprocity, principle of, 167, 168

  Religious deception, 316, 316 note 2

  Renan quoted, 108 note 1

  Reputation, 155

  Resentment, instinctive and deliberate, 322, 323;
    deliberate, Butler’s view of, 323 note 1, 371;
    universalised the principle of retributive (criminal) justice, 281;
    evaluation of, 449

  Resolutions, 37;
    general, may be contradicted by particular volitions, 37-38

  Respect, tokens of, 336, 336 note 1

  Reverence for Authority, 39

  ‘Right’--notion involved in, is unique, 25;
    and ‘good,’ 3, 4;
    and ‘ought,’ distinction between, 34, 35;
    conduct and ‘good’ conduct, 106, 113

  Right Conflict and Ultimate Good, 3

  Rights, 274, etc.

  Rightful authority, how known?, 296;
    what are its limits?, 301, 302

  Rousseau, 298;
    his political ideal, difficulty of realising, 298, 299

  ‘Rule of Equity,’ Clarke’s, 384-385

  ‘Rule of Love or Benevolence,’ Clarke’s, 385

  ‘Rules of Righteousness,’ Clarke’s, 384, 384 note 4, 385

  Rules prescribing actions as _good_ or _right_ open to Utilitarian
        interpretation, 430


  Sagacity, 236

  Sanctions, 164-175 _passim_, 498, 499, 500 _seq._, 502, 505, 507-508;
    conflict of, 164, 165;
    legal, and happiness, 165, 166, 165 note 1;
    social, and happiness, 166, 167;
    social, and extra-legal duty, 167, 168;
    internal, and happiness, 170, 170 note 1, 171, 171 note 1, 172,
        173, 501-502

  Scottish School of Ethical Thought, 104

  Self-control, 235-237, 331, 344, 345, 356

  Self-development (Self-realisation), indefiniteness of the notion,
        90, 91;
    as ethical aim, 192, 193;
    understood as = _yielding to instinctive impulses_, 193-194

  Self-evidence, difficulty of discerning real, 339, 340, 341

  Self-interest, 25, 26

  Self-love, ordinary use and ambiguity of, 89;
    and certain elevated impulses, 137-138;
    Butler’s view of, 93;
    and benevolence and affection, 138, 403, 502

  Self-preservation, 89

  Self-realisation, 80, 90, 95

  Self-regarding virtues, 327-331

  Self-sacrifice, 109 note 1, 138, 431, 432

  Self-satisfaction, Green’s view of, 133, 135, 135 note 3

  Selfishness, 499

  Services, comparative worth of, how determined, 286, 287;
    reward of, how determined, 290

  Shaftesbury, 86, 86 notes 1 and 2, 138, 423, 423 note 1, 433, 501

  Sidgwick, _Principles of Political Economy_, 267 note, 445 note 2,
        446 note 1

  Sincerity, 355

  Smith, Adam, 424, 461, (_Wealth of Nations, Theory of Moral
        Sentiments_) 155 note 1

  Social Contract, 17, 297-298, 303, 351

  Social rank and status, 153, 155

  Socialistic ideal, 289, 293-294

  Sociology--scope and subject of, 2;
    present condition of, 472, 473

  Socrates, 59 note 1, 98-99, 215, 231 note 1, 299

  Socratic Induction, 98-99

  Socratic principle of “Government by experts,” 299

  σοφία, σοφός, 231, 231 note 1

  Sources of Happiness, 135, 136, 153 _seq._;
    judgments of common sense respecting them, only roughly
        trustworthy, 158-160;
    common sense estimates of (_a_) at best are only true for
        ordinary persons, (_b_) are vitiated by mal-observation,
        (_c_) confuse between objects of natural desire and sources of
        experienced pleasure, 151, 152, (_d_) mix moral and æsthetic
        preferences with hedonistic, 153, (_e_) are found to be full
        of inconsistencies, 153-158

  Sovereign power, Hobbist and Austinian views of, 300 note 1

  Special moral codes, 30, 31, 168, 169, 340, 341

  Special need, duties arising out of, 261, 262

  Spencer, H., 125-126, 177 note 1, 183 _seq._, 194 note 1, 470,
        471, 470 notes 1 and 2, 473;
    (_Social Statics_), 18 note 2, 194 note 1;
    (_Data of Ethics_), 18 note 2, 177 note 1, 194 note 1, 470 note 1

  “Sphere of individual option” determined by Utilitarian calculation,
        477-479

  Spinoza, 90

  Stephen, Leslie, 319 Note, 471, 471 note 2, 472, 473;
    (_Science of Ethics_), 42 note 1, 471

  Stewart, Dugald, 454, 455;
    (_Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers_), 92 note 2, 454 note 1

  Stoic system, its place in the development of ethical thought, 106;
    ethics, circular reasonings of, 376, 377

  Stoicism, later compared with earlier, 376 note 1

  Stoics, 92, 105, 129

  Stout, G. F., 180 note 2, 182, 186;
    (_Analytic Psychology_), 182 note 1

  Subjective, cf. _Objective_

  _Suggestio falsi_, 317

  Suicide prohibited by Common Sense, 327, 331, 356

  Sully, _Pessimism_, 136 note 1, 186 note 1

  _Suppressio veri_, 317

  Sympathy--and Moral Sensibility, relation between, 170 note 1,
        500-501;
    with impulses prompting to action, 463, 463 note 2;
    limitations and perversions of, 464;
    twofold operation of, on moral impulses, 483;
    confusion in Mill’s view of, 499 note 1;
    and happiness of agent, 170 note 1, 499 note 1, 499-503

  Systematic Morality, explanation of indifference or hostility
        to, 99-100


  Tautological propositions offered as ethical axioms, 374 _seq._

  Temperance, 224, 328, 329, 344 note 1, 356

  Torquemada, 226 note 1

  ‘True Good,’ 3 (cf. _Good_, _Ultimate Good_)

  Truth, Cartesian Criterion of, 339


  Ultimate End, for the individual and for the whole, 404, 497-498

  Ultimate Good, My, 109 _seq._, 109 note 1, 497-498

  Ultimate Good, The (the Good), 3, 106 _seq._, 391-407 _passim_

  Ultimate reasonableness, different views of, implicit in ordinary
        thought, 6

  Ultimate reasons for conduct, 78, 79;
    differences in, correspond to different aspects of human
        existence, 78 (cf. 79)

  ‘Ultra-intuitional,’ 100

  ‘Unconscious Utilitarianism’ of Common Sense Morality, 453 _seq._,
        489, etc.

  Universal Happiness as standard and motive, 413

  Universalistic and Egoistic Hedonism, connexion between (_a_) in
        Bentham’s view, 87 Note;
    (_b_) in Paley’s view, 121

  Unveracity, common, 316 _seq._, 486

  Utilitarian--formula of distribution not really at variance with
        Common Sense, 432, 433;
    justification of special affections, 433, 434;
    ideal code, difficulties of constructing such, for present human
        beings, 467-470;
    rectification of Common Sense Morality must proceed by empirical
        method, 476-480;
    innovation, negative and destructive, probable effects of
        (_a_) on the agent, 481, 482-483, (_b_) on others, 482, 483;
    innovation, positive and supplementary, as affecting the agent
        and others, 483, 484;
    innovation in relation to degree of publicity and generality of
        acceptance, 489-490, 489 note 1;
    reform, consists largely in enforcing old rules, 484;
    exceptions to current morality (_a_) may generally be stated as
        fresh rules, 485, 489, (_b_) special and rare cases of, 486-487;
    Duty and Religious Sanction, 503-506;
    Sanction, 500 _seq._

  Utilitarianism, 8, 11, 119;
    (= Universalistic or Benthamite Hedonism), 84, 119, 411;
    Proof of, 418-422;
    Principle of, 87, (Mill’s view of) 387, 388;
    Method of, 460-495;
    meaning of, 411-417 _passim_;
    to be distinguished from (_a_) Egoistic Hedonism, 411, 412,
        (_b_) any psychogonical theory of the Moral Sentiments, 412-413;
    _motive_ and _standard_ of, to be discriminated, 413;
    contradictory objections to, 87;
    and Intuitionism, relation between, 85-86, 386 _seq._, 496-497;
    and Intuitionism, history of relation between, in English
        ethical thought, 86, 423, 424;
    and Egoism, relation between, 497, 498;
    and Egoism, harmony of, (_a_) not empirically demonstrable, 503,
        (_b_) required by Reason, 506;
    and Common Sense Morality, 8, 423-457 _passim_, 468, 469, 475,
        476, 480 _seq._, 498, 499;
    justifies the unequal distribution which Common Sense approves,
        432 _seq._;
    more rigid than Common Sense, 499, 504;
    function of, as arbiter to Common Sense, 454, 455;
    reasonable attitude of, to Common Sense Morality, 473-474, 475-476;
    aims at remedying imperfections of Common Sense Morality, 476;
    and Axiom of Benevolence, 387, 388, 496-497, 498;
    and Conjugal and Parental Duties, 435, 436;
    and Duties of Special Need, 436, 437;
    and Gratitude, 437, 438;
    and benevolent Duties, 435 _seq._;
    and Law-observance, 440, 441;
    and Impartiality, 441, 442, 447, 447 note 1;
    and Normal Expectations, 442-443;
    and Good Faith, 443, 444, 443 note 3;
    and Freedom, 444, 445;
    and distribution according to Desert, 445-447;
    and Justice, 440 _seq._, 447;
    and Veracity, 448, 449, 483;
    and Malevolence, 449;
    and Self-regarding virtues, 450;
    and Purity, 449-450;
    and Sympathy, 500 _seq._;
    and Christianity, 504

  ‘Utility,’ Hume’s and Bentham’s uses of, 423 note 2


  Veracity, 97, 224, 313, 314-319 _passim_, 355, 448, 449;
    and Good Faith, 303, 304, 313, 314

  Virtue (Moral Perfection or Excellence), 10, 14, 78, 106,
        219, 219 note 1, 220, 220 note 3, 221, 222, 226, 227;
    or Right Action, its relation to the Good, 106;
    and Happiness, 119, 120, 174-175, 461;
    Plato’s and Aristotle’s accounts of, 376;
    involves reference to an Ultimate Good which is not Virtue,
        393, 394, 395;
    and Duty, 217-230 _passim_;
    and emotion, 222-223, 226;
    voluntariness of, 220, 227;
    and motive, 223-224;
    and habit, 227;
    and moral effort, relation between, 224, 225, 429;
    intellectual conditions of, 225;
    is Knowledge, Socratic doctrine that, 227 note 1;
    felicific character of, 424, 425

  Virtues, intellectual, 231-237 _passim_;
    self-regarding, 327-331 _passim_

  Virtuous conduct, commonly regarded as disinterested, 77, 78

  Virtuous motives, admitted by some moralists, 365, 366;
    Dr. Martineau’s rejection of, 367

  Vivisection controversy, 402, 406 note 1

  Volition, analysis of, 61, 62;
    Determinist view of, 62 note 1;
    conception of, how far inevitably Libertarian, 67, 71;
    causes muscular contractions, 73;
    affects thought and feeling, 73, 74;
    acting through resolutions alters men’s tendencies to action,
        74, 75, 75 note 1;
    its emotional antecedents of secondary ethical importance, 77

  Voluntary action, definition of, 59

  Voluntary choice and irresistible impulse, 67 note 3


  Wayland, _Elements of Moral Science_, 256 note 2

  Wealth, 153, 154, 155

  Well-being (the Good attainable in human life), 92, 92 note 1;
    Stoic view of, 92;
    Aristotle’s view of, 92, 92 note 2;
    not = mere promise of future being, 396, 397

  Whewell, 58, 86;
    (_Elements of Morality_), 58 note 2, 317 note 1, 329 note 1

  Will--Subjective Rightness of, and Ultimate Good, 394, 395;
    divorced from Objective Rightness is fanaticism, 395

  Wisdom, 230, 231-236 _passim_, 344, 345, 393, 430;
    meaning and use of term, 231;
    Greek view of, 231;
    common sense definition of, 233;
    refers to ends as well as means, 231-233;
    in selection of ends and means, how far voluntary, 233-235;
    in adoption of selected ends, 235;
    comprehensiveness of, 238;
    and Temperance and Justice, tautological maxims of, 375;
    and Caution and Decision, do not furnish independent rules, 237 Note

  Wundt, 184 note 3


  Zeal or Moral Ardour, 237, 392

  Zeno, 376


THE END


_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Note


Many references in the index are to the original numbers of the notes,
which do not correspond to the renumbering used in this e-text.


The following apparent errors have been corrected:

p. ix "more that" changed to "more than"

p. xii "chap iv." changed to "chap. iv."

p. xix "chap iv." changed to "chap. iv."

p. xxviii "201" changed to "201-207"

p. xxxv "legal code" changed to "legal code."

p. 44 "his own," changed to "his own."

p. 55 "adapted by" changed to "adopted by"

p. 272 (note) "§ 2" changed to "§ 2."

p. 318 (note) "chap i." changed to "chap. i."

p. 415 (note) "appear" changed to "appears"

p. 492 "let as" changed to "let us"

p. 518 "285:" changed to "285;"

p. 519 "cf. Law" changed to "cf. _Law_"

p. 519 "cf. Perfection" changed to "cf. _Perfection_"

p. 520 "180-182," changed to "180-182;"

p. 521 "Hedonistic Zero" changed to "_Hedonistic Zero_"

p. 522 "Note; 486" changed to "Note, 486"

p. 523 "203 note 1," changed to "203 note 1;"

p. 524 "84, 97:" changed to "84, 97;"

p. 526 "Good, Ultimate Good" changed to "_Good_, "Ultimate Good"


The following possible errors have been left as printed:

p. 177 evaluing

p. 524 405 note 1; 441


The following are used inconsistently in the text:

Common-sense and Common-Sense

counterbalancing and counter-balancing

fairminded and fair-minded

goodwill and good-will

highminded and high-minded

lawgiver and law-giver

note and Note

truthspeaking, truth-speaking, Truthspeaking and Truth-speaking

twofold and two-fold

_vice versâ_ and _vice versa_

wellbeing, well-being, Wellbeing and Well-being

widespread and wide-spread

wrongdoing and wrong-doing






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Methods of Ethics, by Henry Sidgwick

