CHAPTER V

HAPPINESS AND DUTY


§ 1. The belief in the connexion of Happiness with Duty is one to
which we find a general tendency among civilised men, at least after
a certain stage in civilisation has been reached. But it is doubtful
whether it would be affirmed, among ourselves, as a generalisation from
experience, and not rather as a matter of direct Divine Revelation, or
an inevitable inference from the belief that the world is governed by a
perfectly Good and Omnipotent Being. To examine thoroughly the validity
of the latter belief is one of the most important tasks that human
reason can attempt: but involving as it does an exhaustive inquiry
into the evidences of Natural and Revealed Religion, it could hardly
be included within the scope of the present treatise.[125] Here, then,
I shall only consider the coincidence of Duty and Happiness in so far
as it is maintained by arguments drawn from experience and supposed to
be realised in our present earthly life. Perhaps, as so restricted,
the coincidence can hardly be said to be “currently believed”: indeed
it may be suggested that the opposite belief is implied in the general
admission of the necessity of rewards and punishments in a future
state, in order to exhibit and realise completely the moral government
of the world. But reflection will show that this implication is not
necessary; for it is possible to hold that even here virtue is always
rewarded and vice punished, so far as to make the virtuous course of
action always the most prudent; while yet the rewards and punishments
are not sufficient to satisfy our sense of justice. Admitting that
the virtuous man is often placed on earth in circumstances so
adverse that his life is not as happy as that of many less virtuous;
it is still possible to maintain that by virtue he will gain the
maximum of happiness that can be gained under these circumstances,
all appearances to the contrary notwithstanding. And this view has
certainly been held by moralists of reputation on grounds drawn from
actual experience of human life; and seems often to be confidently put
forward on similar grounds by popular preachers and moralisers. It
appears therefore desirable to subject this opinion to a careful and
impartial examination. In conducting this examination, at the present
stage of our inquiry, we shall have to use the received notions of Duty
without further definition or analysis: but it is commonly assumed
by those whose view we are to examine that these conceptions--as
they are found in the moral consciousness of ordinary well-meaning
persons--are at least approximately valid and trustworthy; and the
preceding chapters will have fully shown that the generalisations of
Hedonism must be established, if at all, by large considerations and
decisive preponderances, and that it would be idle in considering a
question of this kind to take account of slight differences, and to
pretend to weigh in our mental scales comparatively small portions of
happiness.[126]

§ 2. Accepting, then, the common division[127] of duties into
self-regarding and social, it may be conceded that as far as the first
are concerned the view that we are examining is not likely to provoke
any controversy: for by ‘duties towards oneself’ are commonly meant
acts that tend directly or indirectly to promote one’s happiness. We
may therefore confine our attention to the social department of Duty,
and consider whether by observing the moral rules that prescribe
certain modes of behaviour towards others we shall always tend to
secure the greatest balance of happiness to ourselves.

Here it will be convenient to adopt with some modification the
terminology of Bentham; and to regard the pleasures consequent on
conformity to moral rules, and the pains consequent on their violation,
as the ‘sanctions’ of these rules. These ‘sanctions’ we may classify
as External and Internal. The former class will include both ‘Legal
Sanctions,’ or penalties inflicted by the authority, direct or
indirect, of the sovereign; and ‘Social Sanctions,’ which are either
the pleasures that may be expected from the approval and goodwill of
our fellow-men generally, and the services that they will be prompted
to render both by this goodwill and by their appreciation of the
usefulness of good conduct, or the annoyance and losses that are to
be feared from their distrust and dislike. The internal sanctions
of duty--so far as it diverges from the conduct which self-interest
apart from morality would dictate--will lie in the pleasurable emotion
attending virtuous action, or in the absence of remorse, or will
result more indirectly from some effect on the mental constitution of
the agent produced by the maintenance of virtuous dispositions and
habits. This classification is important for our present purpose,
chiefly because the systems of rules to which these different sanctions
are respectively attached may be mutually conflicting. The Positive
Morality of any community undergoes development, and is thus subject
to changes which affect the consciences of the few before they are
accepted by the many; so that the rules at any time sustained by the
strongest social sanctions may not only fall short of, but even clash
with, the intuitions of those members of the community who have most
moral insight. For similar reasons Law and Positive Morality may be
at variance, in details. For though a law could not long exist, which
it was universally thought wrong to obey; there may easily be laws
commanding conduct that is considered immoral by some more or less
enlightened fraction of the community, especially by some sect or party
that has a public opinion of its own: and any individual may be so much
more closely connected with this fraction than with the rest of the
community, that the social sanction may in his case practically operate
against the legal.

This conflict of sanctions is of great importance in considering
whether these sanctions, as at present capable of being foreseen,
are sufficient in all cases to determine a rational egoist to the
performance of social duty: for the more stress we lay on either the
legal or the social sanctions of moral conduct, the greater difficulty
we shall have in proving the coincidence of duty and self-interest in
the exceptional cases in which we find these sanctions arrayed against
what we conceive to be duty.

But even if we put these cases out of sight, it still seems clear that
the external sanctions of morality alone are not always sufficient to
render immoral conduct also imprudent. We must indeed admit that in an
even tolerably well-ordered society--_i.e._ in an ordinary civilised
community in its normal condition--all serious open violation of law is
contrary to prudence, unless it is an incident in a successful process
of violent revolution: and further, that violent revolutions would
very rarely--perhaps never--be made by a combination of persons, all
perfectly under the control of enlightened self-love; on account of
the general and widespread destruction of security and of other means
of happiness which such disturbances inevitably involve. Still, so
long as actual human beings are not all rational egoists, such times
of disorder will be liable to occur: and we cannot say that _under
existing circumstances_ it is a clear universal precept of Rational
Self-love that a man should “seek peace and ensue it”; since the
disturbance of political order may offer to a cool and skilful person,
who has the art of fishing in troubled waters, opportunities of gaining
wealth, fame, and power, far beyond what he could hope for in peaceful
times. In short, though we may admit that a society composed entirely
of rational egoists would, when once organised, tend to remain in a
stable and orderly condition, it does not follow that any individual
rational egoist will always be on the side of order in any existing
community.[128]

But at any rate, in the most orderly societies with which we are
acquainted, the administration of law and justice is never in so
perfect a state as to render _secret_ crimes always acts of folly, on
the score of the legal penalties attached to them. For however much
these may outweigh the advantages of crime, cases must inevitably
occur in which the risk of discovery is so small, that on a sober
calculation the almost certain gain will more than compensate for the
slight chance of the penalty. And finally, in no community is the law
actually in so perfect a state that there are not certain kinds of
flagrantly anti-social conduct which slip through its meshes and escape
legal penalties altogether, or incur only such legal penalties as are
outweighed by the profit of law-breaking.

§ 3. Let us proceed, then, to consider how far the social sanction in
such cases supplies the defects of the legal. No doubt the hope of
praise and liking and services from one’s fellow-men, and the fear
of forfeiting these and incurring instead aversion, refusal of aid,
and social exclusion, are considerations often important enough to
determine the rational egoist to law-observance, even in default of
adequate legal penalties. Still these sanctions are liable to fail
just where the legal penalties are defective; social no less than
legal penalties are evaded by secret crimes; and in cases of criminal
revolutionary violence, the efficacy of the social sanction is apt
to be seriously impaired by the party spirit enlisted on the side of
the criminal. For it has to be observed that the force of the social
sanction diminishes very rapidly, in proportion to the number of
dissidents from the common opinion that awards it. Disapprobation that
is at once intense and quite universal would be so severe a penalty
as perhaps to outweigh any imaginable advantages; since it seems
impossible for a human being to live happily, whatever other goods
he may enjoy, without the kindly regards of some of his fellows: and
so, in contemplating the conventional portrait of the tyrant, who is
represented as necessarily suspicious of those nearest him, even of
the members of his own family, we feel prepared to admit that such
a life must involve the extreme of unhappiness. But when we turn
to contemplate the actual tyrannical usurpers, wicked statesmen,
successful leaders of unwarranted rebellion, and, speaking generally,
the great criminals whose position raises them out of the reach of
legal penalties, it does not appear that the moral odium under which
they lie must necessarily count for much in an egoistic calculation of
the gain and loss resulting from their conduct. For this disesteem
is only expressed by a portion of the community: and its utterance
is often drowned in the loud-voiced applause of the multitude whose
admiration is largely independent of moral considerations. Nor are
there wanting philosophers and historians whose judgment manifests a
similar independence.

It seems, then, impossible to affirm that the external sanctions of
men’s legal duties will always be sufficient to identify duty with
interest. And a corresponding assertion would be still more unwarranted
in respect of moral duties not included within the sphere of Law. In
saying this, I am fully sensible of the force of what may be called
the Principle of Reciprocity, by which certain utilitarians have
endeavoured to prove the coincidence of any individual’s interest with
his social duties. Virtues (they say) are qualities either useful or
directly agreeable to others: thus they either increase the market
value of the virtuous man’s services, and cause others to purchase them
at a higher rate and to allot to him more dignified and interesting
functions; or they dispose men to please him, both out of gratitude
and in order to enjoy the pleasures of his society in return: and
again--since man is an imitative animal--the exhibition of these
qualities is naturally rewarded by a reciprocal manifestation of them
on the part of others, through the mere influence of example. I do
not doubt that the prospect of these advantages is an adequate motive
for cultivating many virtues and avoiding much vice. Thus on such
grounds a rational egoist will generally be strict and punctual in the
fulfilment of all his engagements, and truthful in his assertions,
in order to win the confidence of other men; and he will be zealous
and industrious in his work, in order to obtain gradually more
important and therefore more honourable and lucrative employment; and
he will control such of his passions and appetites as are likely to
interfere with his efficiency; and will not exhibit violent anger or
use unnecessary harshness even towards servants and subordinates; and
towards his equals and superiors in rank he will be generally polite
and complaisant and good-humoured, and prompt to show them all such
kindness as costs but little in proportion to the pleasure it gives.
Still, reflection seems to show that the conduct recommended by this
line of reasoning does not really coincide with moral duty. For, first,
what one requires for social success is that one should _appear_,
rather than _be_, useful to others: and hence this motive will not
restrain one from doing secret harm to others, or even from acting
openly in a way that is really harmful, though not perceived to be
so. And again, a man is not useful to others by his virtue only, but
sometimes rather by his vice; or more often by a certain admixture
of unscrupulousness with his good and useful qualities. And further,
morality prescribes the performance of duties equally towards all, and
that we should abstain as far as possible from harming any: but on the
principle of Reciprocity we should exhibit our useful qualities chiefly
towards the rich and powerful, and abstain from injuring those who can
retaliate; while we may reasonably omit our duties to the poor and
feeble, if we find a material advantage in so doing, unless they are
able to excite the sympathy of persons who can harm us. Moreover, some
vices (as for example, many kinds of sensuality and extravagant luxury)
do not inflict any immediate or obvious injury on any individual,
though they tend in the long-run to impair the general happiness: hence
few persons find themselves strongly moved to check or punish this kind
of mischief.

Doubtless in the last-mentioned cases the mere disrepute inevitably
attaching to open immorality is an important consideration. But I do
not think that this will be seriously maintained to be sufficient
always to turn the scales of prudence against vice--at least by
any one who has duly analysed the turbid and fluctuating streams
of social opinion upon which the good or ill repute of individuals
mainly depends, and considered the conflicting and divergent elements
that they contain. Many moralists have noticed the discrepancy in
modern Europe between the Law of Honour (or the more important rules
maintained by the social sanction of polite persons) and the morality
professed in society at large. This is, however, by no means the only
instance of a special code, divergent in certain points from the
moral rules generally accepted in the community where it exists. Most
religious sects and parties, and probably the majority of trades and
professions, exhibit this phenomenon in some degree. I do not mean
merely that special rules of behaviour are imposed upon members of
each profession, corresponding to their special social functions and
relations: I mean that a peculiar moral opinion is apt to grow up,
conflicting to a certain extent with the opinion of the general public.
The most striking part of this divergence consists generally in the
approval or excusal of practices disapproved by the current morality:
as (_e.g._) licence among soldiers, bribery among politicians in
certain ages and countries, unveracity of various degrees among priests
and advocates, fraud in different forms among tradesmen. In such cases
there are generally strong natural inducements to disobey the stricter
rule (in fact it would seem to be to the continual pressure of these
inducements that the relaxation of the rule has been due): while at the
same time the social sanction is weakened to such an extent that it
is sometimes hard to say whether it outweighs a similar force on the
other side. For a man who, under these circumstances, conforms to the
stricter rule, if he does not actually meet with contempt and aversion
from those of his calling, is at least liable to be called eccentric
and fantastic: and this is still more the case if by such conformity
he foregoes advantages not only to himself but to his relatives or
friends or party. Very often this professional or sectarian excusal of
immorality of which we are speaking is not so clear and explicit as to
amount to the establishment of a rule, conflicting with the generally
received rule: but is still sufficient to weaken indefinitely the
social sanction in favour of the latter. And, apart from these special
divergences, we may say generally that in most civilised societies
there are two different degrees of positive morality, both maintained
in some sort by common consent; a stricter code being publicly taught
and avowed, while a laxer set of rules is privately admitted as the
only code which can be supported by social sanctions of any great
force. By refusing to conform to the stricter code a man is often not
liable to incur exclusion from social intercourse, or any material
hindrance to professional advancement, or even serious dislike on the
part of any of the persons whose society he will most naturally seek;
and under such circumstances the mere loss of a certain amount of
reputation is not likely to be felt as a very grave evil, except by
persons peculiarly sensitive to the pleasures and pains of reputation.
And there would seem to be many men whose happiness does not depend
on the approbation or disapprobation of the moralist--and of mankind
in general in so far as they support the moralist--to such an extent
as to make it prudent for them to purchase this praise by any great
sacrifice of other goods.

§ 4. We must conclude, then, that if the conduct prescribed to the
individual by the avowedly accepted morality of the community of which
he is a member, can be shown to coincide with that to which Rational
Self-love would prompt, it must be, in many cases, solely or chiefly on
the score of the internal sanctions. In considering the force of these
sanctions, I shall eliminate those pleasures and pains which lie in the
anticipation of rewards and punishments in a future life: for as we
are now supposing the calculations of Rational Egoism to be performed
without taking into account any feelings that are beyond the range of
experience, it will be more consistent to exclude also the pleasurable
or painful anticipations of such feelings.

Let us, then, contemplate by itself the satisfaction that attends the
performance of duty as such (without taking into consideration any
ulterior consequences), and the pain that follows on its violation.
After the discussions of the two preceding chapters I shall not of
course attempt to weigh exactly these pleasures and pains against
others; but I see no empirical grounds for believing that such feelings
are always sufficiently intense to turn the balance of prospective
happiness in favour of morality. This will hardly be denied if the
question is raised in respect of isolated acts of duty. Let us take
an extreme case, which is yet quite within the limits of experience.
The call of duty has often impelled a soldier or other public servant,
or the adherent of a persecuted religion, to face certain and painful
death, under circumstances where it might be avoided with little or
no loss even of reputation. To prove such conduct always reasonable
from an egoistic point of view, we have to assume that, in all cases
where such a duty could exist and be recognised, the mere pain[129]
that would follow on evasion of duty would be so great as to render
the whole remainder of life hedonistically worthless. Surely such an
assumption would be paradoxical and extravagant. Nothing that we know
of the majority of persons in any society would lead us to conclude
that their moral feelings taken alone form so preponderant an element
of their happiness. And a similar conclusion seems irresistible even in
more ordinary cases, where a man is called on to give up, for virtue’s
sake, not life, but a considerable share of the ordinary sources
of human happiness. Can we say that all, or even most, men are so
constituted that the satisfactions of a good conscience are certain to
repay them for such sacrifices, or that the pain and loss involved in
them would certainly be outweighed by the remorse that would follow the
refusal to make them?[130]

Perhaps, however, so much as this has scarcely ever been expressly
maintained. What Plato in his _Republic_ and other writers on the same
side have rather tried to prove, is not that at any particular moment
duty will be, to every one on whom it may devolve, productive of more
happiness than any other course of conduct; but rather that it is every
one’s interest on the whole to choose the life of the virtuous man. But
even this it is very difficult even to render probable: as will appear,
I think, if we examine the lines of reasoning by which it is commonly
supported.

To begin with Plato’s argument. He represents the soul of the virtuous
man as a well-ordered polity of impulses, in which every passion and
appetite is duly obedient to the rightful sovereignty of reason, and
operates only within the limits laid down by the latter. He then
contrasts the tranquil peace of such a mind with the disorder of
one where a succession of baser impulses, or some ruling passion,
lords it over reason: and asks which is the happiest, even apart from
external rewards and punishments. But we may grant all that Plato
claims, and yet be no further advanced towards the solution of the
question before us. For here the issue does not lie between Reason and
Passion, but rather--in Butler’s language--between Rational Self-love
and Conscience. We are supposing the Egoist to have all his impulses
under control, and are only asking how this control is to be exercised.
Now we have seen that the regulation and organisation of life best
calculated to attain the end of self-interest appears _prima facie_
divergent at certain points from that to which men in general are
prompted by a sense of duty. In order to maintain Plato’s position it
has to be shown that this appearance is false; and that a system of
self-government, which under certain circumstances leads us to pain,
loss, and death, is still that which self-interest requires. It can
scarcely be said that our nature is such that only this anti-egoistic
kind of regulation is possible; that the choice lies between this
and none at all. It is easy to imagine a rational egoist, strictly
controlling each of his passions and impulses--including his social
sentiments--within such limits that its indulgence should not involve
the sacrifice of some greater gratification: and experience seems to
show us many examples of persons who at least approximate as closely to
this type as any one else does to the ideal of the orthodox moralist.
Hence if the regulation of Conscience be demonstrably the best means
to the individual’s happiness, it must be because the order kept by
Self-love involves a sacrifice of pleasure on the whole, as compared
with the order kept by Conscience. And if this is the case, it would
seem that it can only be on account of the special emotional pleasure
attending the satisfaction of the moral sentiments, or special pain or
loss of happiness consequent on their repression and violation.

Before, however, we proceed further, a fundamental difficulty must be
removed which has probably some time since suggested itself to the
reader. If a man thinks it reasonable to seek his own interest, it
is clear that he cannot himself disapprove of any conduct that comes
under this principle or approve of the opposite. And hence it may
appear that the pleasures and pains of conscience cannot enter into
the calculation whether a certain course of conduct is or is not in
accordance with Rational Egoism, because they cannot attach themselves
in the egoist’s mind to any modes of action which have not been already
decided, on other grounds, to be reasonable or the reverse. And this
is to a certain extent true; but we must here recur to the distinction
(indicated in Book i. chap. iii. § 1) between the general impulse
to do what we believe to be reasonable, and special sentiments of
liking or aversion for special kinds of conduct, independent of their
reasonableness. In the moral sentiments as they exist in ordinary men,
these two kinds of feeling are indistinguishably blended; because it
is commonly believed that the rules of conduct to which the common
moral sentiments are attached are in some way or other reasonable. We
can, however, conceive the two separated: and in fact, as was before
said, we have experience of such separation whenever a man is led by a
process of thought to adopt a different view of morality from that in
which he has been trained; for in such a case there will always remain
in his mind some quasi-moral likings and aversions, no longer sustained
by his deliberate judgment of right and wrong. And thus there is every
reason to believe that most men, however firmly they might adopt the
principles of Egoistic Hedonism, would still feel sentiments prompting
to the performance of social duty, as commonly recognised in their
society, independently of any conclusion that the actions prompted by
such sentiments were reasonable and right. For such sentiments would
always be powerfully supported by the sympathy of others, and their
expressions of praise and blame, liking and aversion: and since it is
agreed that the conduct commonly recognised as virtuous is _generally_
coincident with that which enlightened self-love would dictate, a
rational egoist’s habits of conduct will be such as naturally to
foster these (for him) ‘quasi-moral’ feelings. The question therefore
arises--not whether the egoist should cherish and indulge these
sentiments up to a certain point, which all would admit--but whether he
can consistently encourage them to grow to such a pitch that they will
always prevail over the strongest opposing considerations; or, to put
it otherwise, whether prudence requires him to give them the rein and
let them carry him whither they will. We have already seen ground for
believing that Rational Self-love will best attain its end by limiting
its conscious operation and allowing free play to disinterested
impulses: can we accept the further paradox that it is reasonable for
it to abdicate altogether its supremacy over some of these impulses?

On a careful consideration of the matter, it will appear, I think,
that this abdication of self-love is not really a possible occurrence
in the mind of a sane person, who still regards his own interest as
the reasonable ultimate end of his actions. Such a man may, no doubt,
resolve that he will devote himself unreservedly to the practice of
virtue, without any particular consideration of what appears to him
to be his interest: he may perform a series of acts in accordance
with this resolution, and these may gradually form in him strong
habitual tendencies to acts of a similar kind. But it does not seem
that these habits of virtue can ever become so strong as to gain
irresistible control over a sane and reasonable will. When the
occasion comes on which virtue demands from such a man an extreme
sacrifice--the imprudence of which must force itself upon his notice,
however little he may be in the habit of weighing his own pleasures
and pains--he must always be able to deliberate afresh, and to act (as
far as the control of his will extends) without reference to his past
actions. It may, however, be said that, though an egoist retaining
his belief in rational egoism cannot thus abandon his will to the
sway of moral enthusiasm, still, supposing it possible for him to
change his conviction and prefer duty to interest,--or supposing we
compare him with another man who makes this choice,--we shall find
that a gain in happiness on the whole results from this preference.
It may be held that the pleasurable emotions attendant upon such
virtuous or quasi-virtuous habits as are compatible with adhesion
to egoistic principles are so inferior to the raptures that attend
the unreserved and passionate surrender of the soul to virtue, that
it is really a man’s interest--even with a view to the present life
only--to obtain, if he can, the convictions that render this surrender
possible; although under certain circumstances it must necessarily
lead him to act in a manner which, considered by itself, would be
undoubtedly imprudent. This is certainly a tenable proposition, and
I am quite disposed to think it true of persons with specially
refined moral sensibilities. But--though from the imperfections of the
hedonistic calculus the proposition cannot in any case be conclusively
disproved--it seems, as I have said, to be opposed to the broad results
of experience, so far as the great majority of mankind are concerned.
Observation would lead me to suppose that most men are so constituted
as to feel far more keenly pleasures (and pains) arising from some
other source than the conscience; either from the gratifications of
sense, or from the possession of power and fame, or from strong human
affections, or from the pursuit of science, art, etc.; so that in many
cases perhaps not even early training could have succeeded in giving
to the moral feelings the requisite predominance: and certainly where
this training has been wanting, it seems highly improbable that a mere
change of ethical conviction could develop their moral susceptibilities
so far as to make it clearly their earthly interest to resolve on
facing all sacrifices for the fulfilment of duty.

To sum up: although the performance of duties towards others and
the exercise of social virtue seem to be _generally_ the best means
to the attainment of the individual’s happiness, and it is easy to
exhibit this coincidence between Virtue and Happiness rhetorically
and popularly; still, when we carefully analyse and estimate the
consequences of Virtue to the virtuous agent, it appears improbable
that this coincidence is complete and universal. We may conceive
the coincidence becoming perfect in a Utopia where men were as much
in accord on moral as they are now on mathematical questions, where
Law was in perfect harmony with Moral Opinion, and all offences were
discovered and duly punished: or we may conceive the same result
attained by intensifying the moral sentiments of all members of the
community, without any external changes (which indeed would then be
unnecessary). But just in proportion as existing societies and existing
men fall short of this ideal, rules of conduct based on the principles
of Egoistic Hedonism seem liable to diverge from those which most men
are accustomed to recognise as prescribed by Duty and Virtue.

FOOTNOTES:

[125] Such discussion of the question as seemed desirable in a work
like this will be found in the concluding chapter of the treatise.

[126] For a similar reason I shall here treat the notions of ‘Duty’
and ‘Virtuous action’ as practically coincident; reserving for future
discussion the divergences between the two which reflection on the
common usage of the terms appears to indicate. See Book iii. chap. ii.

[127] Whatever modifications of this division may afterwards appear to
be necessary (cf. Book iii. chap. ii. § 1, and chap. vii. § 1) will
not, I think, tend to invalidate the conclusions of the present chapter.

[128] I do not here consider the case of revolutionists aiming
sincerely at the general wellbeing; since the morality of such
revolutions will generally be so dubious, that these cases cannot
furnish any clear argument on either side of the question here
discussed.

[129] Under the notion of ‘moral pain’ (or pleasure) I intend to
include, in this argument, all pain (or pleasure) that is due to
sympathy with the feelings of others. It is not convenient to enter, at
this stage of the discussion, into a full discussion of the relation
of Sympathy to Moral Sensibility; but I may say that it seems to me
certain, on the one hand, that these two emotional susceptibilities
are actually distinct in most minds, whatever they may have been
originally; and on the other hand that sympathetic and strictly
moral feelings are almost inextricably blended in the ordinary moral
consciousness: so that, for the purposes of the present argument it is
not of fundamental importance to draw a distinction between them. I
have, however, thought it desirable to undertake a further examination
of sympathy--as the internal sanction on which Utilitarians specially
lay stress--in the concluding chapter of this treatise: to which,
accordingly, the reader may refer.

[130] A striking confirmation of this is furnished by those Christian
writers of the last century who treat the _moral_ unbeliever as a fool
who sacrifices his happiness both here and hereafter. These men were,
for the most part, earnestly engaged in the practice of virtue, and yet
this practice had not made them love virtue so much as to prefer it,
even under ordinary circumstances, to the sensual and other enjoyments
that it excludes. It seems then absurd to suppose that, in the case of
persons who have not developed and strengthened by habit their virtuous
impulses, the pain that might afterwards result from resisting the call
of duty would always be sufficient to neutralise all other sources of
pleasure.




