CHAPTER III

RELATION OF UTILITARIANISM TO THE MORALITY OF COMMON SENSE


§ 1. It has been before observed (Book i. chap. vi.) that the two
sides of the double relation in which Utilitarianism stands to the
Morality of Common Sense have been respectively prominent at two
different periods in the history of English ethical thought. Since
Bentham we have been chiefly familiar with the negative or aggressive
aspect of the Utilitarian doctrine. But when Cumberland, replying to
Hobbes, put forward the general tendency of the received moral rules
to promote the “common Good[322] of all Rationals” his aim was simply
Conservative: it never occurs to him to consider whether these rules as
commonly formulated are in any way imperfect, and whether there are any
discrepancies between such common moral opinions and the conclusions
of Rational Benevolence. So in Shaftesbury’s system the “Moral” or
“Reflex Sense” is supposed to be always pleased with that “balance”
of the affections which tends to the good or happiness of the whole,
and displeased with the opposite. In Hume’s treatise this coincidence
is drawn out more in detail, and with a more definite assertion that
the perception of utility[323] (or the reverse) is in each case the
source of the moral likings (or aversions) which are excited in us
by different qualities of human character and conduct. And we may
observe that the most penetrating among Hume’s contemporary critics,
Adam Smith, admits unreservedly the objective coincidence of Rightness
or Approvedness and Utility: though he maintains, in opposition to
Hume, that “it is not the view of this utility or hurtfulness, which
is either the first or the principal source of our approbation or
disapprobation.” After stating Hume’s theory that “no qualities of
the mind are approved of as virtuous, but such as are useful or
agreeable either to the person himself or to others, and no qualities
are disapproved of as vicious but such as have a contrary tendency”;
he remarks that “Nature seems indeed to have so happily adjusted our
sentiments of approbation and disapprobation to the conveniency both of
the individual and of the society, that after the strictest examination
it will be found, I believe, that this is universally the case.”

And no one can read Hume’s _Inquiry into the First Principles of
Morals_ without being convinced of this at least, that if a list were
drawn up of the qualities of character and conduct that are directly or
indirectly productive of pleasure to ourselves or to others, it would
include all that are commonly known as virtues. Whatever be the origin
of our notion of moral goodness or excellence, there is no doubt that
“Utility” is a general characteristic of the dispositions to which we
apply it: and that, so far, the Morality of Common Sense may be truly
represented as at least unconsciously Utilitarian. But it may still be
objected, that this coincidence is merely general and qualitative, and
that it breaks down when we attempt to draw it out in detail, with the
quantitative precision which Bentham introduced into the discussion.
And no doubt there is a great difference between the assertion that
virtue is always productive of happiness, and the assertion that the
right action is under all circumstances that which will produce the
greatest possible happiness on the whole. But it must be borne in mind
that Utilitarianism is not concerned to prove the absolute coincidence
in results of the Intuitional and Utilitarian methods. Indeed, if it
could succeed in proving as much as this, its success would be almost
fatal to its practical claims; as the adoption of the Utilitarian
principle would then become a matter of complete indifference.
Utilitarians are rather called upon to show a natural transition from
the Morality of Common Sense to Utilitarianism, somewhat like the
transition in special branches of practice from trained instinct and
empirical rules to the technical method that embodies and applies the
conclusions of science: so that Utilitarianism may be presented as the
scientifically complete and systematically reflective form of that
regulation of conduct, which through the whole course of human history
has always tended substantially in the same direction. For this purpose
it is not necessary to prove that existing moral rules are _more_
conducive to the general happiness than any others: but only to point
out in each case some manifest felicific tendency which they possess.

Hume’s dissertation, however, incidentally exhibits much more than a
simple and general harmony between the moral sentiments with which we
commonly regard actions and their foreseen pleasurable and painful
consequences. And, in fact, the Utilitarian argument cannot be fairly
judged unless we take fully into account the cumulative force which
it derives from the complex character of the coincidence between
Utilitarianism and Common Sense.

It may be shown, I think, that the Utilitarian estimate of consequences
not only supports broadly the current moral rules, but also sustains
their generally received limitations and qualifications: that,
again, it explains anomalies in the Morality of Common Sense,
which from any other point of view must seem unsatisfactory to the
reflective intellect; and moreover, where the current formula is not
sufficiently precise for the guidance of conduct, while at the same
time difficulties and perplexities arise in the attempt to give it
additional precision, the Utilitarian method solves these difficulties
and perplexities in general accordance with the vague instincts of
Common Sense, and is naturally appealed to for such solution in
ordinary moral discussions. It may be shown further, that it not only
supports the generally received view of the relative importance of
different duties, but is also naturally called in as arbiter, where
rules commonly regarded as co-ordinate come into conflict: that, again,
when the same rule is interpreted somewhat differently by different
persons, each naturally supports his view by urging its Utility,
however strongly he may maintain the rule to be self-evident and
known _a priori_: that where we meet with marked diversity of moral
opinion on any point, in the same age and country, we commonly find
manifest and impressive utilitarian reasons on both sides: and that
finally the remarkable discrepancies found in comparing the moral
codes of different ages and countries are for the most part strikingly
correlated to differences in the effects of actions on happiness, or in
men’s foresight of, or concern for, such effects. Most of these points
are noticed by Hume, though in a somewhat casual and fragmentary way:
and many of them have been incidentally illustrated in the course of
the examination of Common Sense Morality, with which we were occupied
in the preceding Book. But considering the importance of the present
question, it may be well to exhibit in systematic detail the cumulative
argument which has just been summed up, even at the risk of repeating
to some extent the results previously given.

§ 2. We may begin by replying to an objection which is frequently
urged against Utilitarianism. How, it is asked, if the true ground
of the moral goodness or badness of actions lies in their utility or
the reverse, can we explain the broad distinction drawn by Common
Sense between the moral and other parts of our nature? Why is the
excellence of Virtue so strongly felt to be different in kind, not
merely from the excellence of a machine, or a fertile field, but also
from the physical beauties and aptitudes, the intellectual gifts and
talents of human beings. I should answer that--as was argued in an
earlier chapter (Book iii. chap. ii.)--qualities that are, in the
strictest sense of the term, Virtuous, are always such as we conceive
capable of being immediately realised by voluntary effort, at least
to some extent; so that the prominent obstacle to virtuous action is
absence of adequate motive. Hence we expect that the judgments of
moral goodness or badness, passed either by the agent himself or by
others, will--by the fresh motive which they supply on the side of
virtue--have an immediate practical effect in causing actions to be at
least externally virtuous: and the habitual consciousness of this will
account for almost any degree of difference between moral sentiments
and the pleasure and pain that we derive from the contemplation of
either extra-human or non-voluntary utilities and inutilities. To this,
however, it is replied, that among the tendencies to strictly voluntary
actions there are many not commonly regarded as virtuous, which are
yet not only useful but on the whole _more_ useful than many virtues.
“The selfish instinct that leads men to accumulate confers ultimately
more advantage on the world than the generous instinct that leads men
to give.... It is scarcely doubtful that a modest, diffident, and
retiring nature, distrustful of its own abilities, and shrinking with
humility from conflict, produces on the whole less benefit to the world
than the self-assertion of an audacious and arrogant nature, which is
impelled to every struggle, and develops every capacity. Gratitude has
no doubt done much to soften and sweeten the intercourse of life, but
the corresponding feeling of revenge was for centuries the one bulwark
against social anarchy, and is even now one of the chief restraints to
crime. On the great theatre of public life, especially in periods of
great convulsions where passions are fiercely roused, it is neither
the man of delicate scrupulosity and sincere impartiality, nor yet
the single-minded religious enthusiast, incapable of dissimulation or
procrastination, who confers most benefit on the world. It is much
rather the astute statesman, earnest about his ends, but unscrupulous
about his means, equally free from the trammels of conscience and
from the blindness of zeal, who governs because he partly yields to
the passions and the prejudices of his time. But ... it has scarcely
yet been contended that the delicate conscience which in these cases
impairs utility constitutes vice.”[324]

These objections are forcibly urged; but they appear to me not very
difficult to answer, it being always borne in mind that the present
argument does not aim at proving an exact coincidence between
Utilitarian inferences and the intuitions of Common Sense, but
rather seeks to represent the latter as inchoately and imperfectly
Utilitarian.

In the first place, we must carefully distinguish between the
recognition of goodness in dispositions, and the recognition of
rightness in conduct. An act that a Utilitarian must condemn as likely
to do more harm than good may yet show a disposition or tendency that
will on the whole produce more good than harm. This is eminently the
case with scrupulously conscientious acts. However true it may be
that unenlightened conscientiousness has impelled men to fanatical
cruelty, mistaken asceticism, and other infelicific conduct, I suppose
no Intuitionist would maintain that carefulness in conforming to
accepted moral rules has not, on the whole, a tendency to promote
happiness. It may be observed, however, that when we perceive the
effects of a disposition generally felicific to be in any particular
case adverse to happiness, we often apply to it, as so operating, some
term of condemnation: thus we speak, in the case above noticed, of
‘over-scrupulousness’ or ‘fanaticism.’ But in so far as we perceive
that the same disposition would generally produce good results,
it is not inconsistent still to regard it, abstracting from the
particular case, as a good element of character. Secondly, although,
in the view of a Utilitarian, only the useful is praiseworthy, he
is not bound to maintain that it is necessarily worthy of praise in
proportion as it is useful. From a Utilitarian point of view, as has
been before said, we must mean by calling a quality ‘deserving of
praise,’ that it is expedient to praise it, with a view to its future
production: accordingly, in distributing our praise of human qualities,
on utilitarian principles, we have to consider primarily not the
usefulness of the quality, but the usefulness of the praise: and it
is obviously not expedient to encourage by praise qualities which are
likely to be found in excess rather than in defect. Hence (_e.g._)
however necessary self-love or resentment may be to society, it is
quite in harmony with Utilitarianism that they should not be recognised
as virtues by Common Sense, in so far as it is reasonably thought that
they will always be found operating with at least sufficient intensity.
We find, however, that when self-love comes into conflict with impulses
seen to be on the whole pernicious, it is praised as Prudence: and
that when a man seems clearly deficient in resentment, he is censured
for tameness: though as malevolent impulses are much more obviously
productive of pain than pleasure, it is not unnatural that their
occasional utility should be somewhat overlooked. The case of Humility
and Diffidence may be treated in a somewhat similar way. As we saw[325]
it is only inadvertently that Common Sense praises the tendency to
underrate one’s own powers: on reflection it is generally admitted
that it cannot be good to be in error on this or any other point. But
the desires of Superiority and Esteem are so strong in most men, that
arrogance and self-assertion are both much commoner than the opposite
defects, and at the same time are faults peculiarly disagreeable to
others: so that humility gives us an agreeable surprise, and hence
Common Sense is easily led to overlook the more latent and remote bad
consequences of undue self-distrust.

We may observe further that the perplexity which we seemed to find in
the Morality of Common Sense, as to the relation of moral excellence
to moral effort, is satisfactorily explained and removed when we
adopt a Utilitarian point of view: for on the one hand it is easy to
see how certain acts--such as kind services--are likely to be more
felicific when performed without effort, and from other motives than
regard for duty: while on the other hand a person who in doing similar
acts achieves a triumph of duty over strong seductive inclinations,
exhibits thereby a character which we recognise as felicific in a
more general way, as tending to a general performance of duty in all
departments. So again, there is a simple and obvious utilitarian
solution of another difficulty which I noticed, as to the choice
between Subjective and Objective rightness in the exceptional case in
which alone the two can be presented as alternatives,--_i.e._ when we
are considering whether we shall influence another to act contrary to
his conviction as to what is right. A utilitarian would decide the
question by weighing the felicific consequences of the particular right
act against the infelicific results to be apprehended hereafter from
the moral deterioration of the person whose conscientious convictions
were overborne by other motives: unless the former effects were very
important he would reasonably regard the danger to character as the
greater: but if the other’s mistaken sense of duty threatened to cause
a grave disaster, he would not hesitate to overbear it by any motives
which it was in his power to apply. And in practice I think that the
Common Sense of mankind would come to similar conclusions by more vague
and semi-conscious reasoning of the same kind.

In order, however, to form a precise estimate of the extent to which
Utilitarianism agrees or disagrees with Common Sense, it seems best
to examine the more definite judgments of right and wrong in conduct,
under the particular heads represented by our common notions of
virtues and duties. I may begin by pointing out once more that so far
as any adequately precise definitions of these notions are found to
involve, implicitly or explicitly, the notion of ‘good’ or of ‘right’
supposed already determinate, they can afford no ground for opposing
a Utilitarian interpretation of these fundamental conceptions. For
example, we saw this to be the case with the chief of the intellectual
excellences discussed in Book iii. chap. iii. Wisdom, as commonly
conceived, is not exactly the faculty of choosing the right means to
the end of universal happiness; rather, as we saw, its notion involves
an uncritical synthesis of the different ends and principles that are
distinguished and separately examined in the present treatise. But if
its import is not distinctly Utilitarian, it is certainly not anything
else as distinct from Utilitarian: if we can only define it as the
faculty or habit of choosing the right or best means to the right or
best end, for that very reason our definition leaves it quite open to
us to give the notions ‘good’ and ‘right’ a Utilitarian import.

§ 3. Let us then examine first the group of virtues and duties discussed
in Book iii. chap. iv., under the head of Benevolence. As regards the
general conception of the duty, there is, I think, no divergence that
we need consider between the Intuitional and Utilitarian systems.
For though Benevolence would perhaps be more commonly defined as a
disposition to promote the Good of one’s fellow-creatures, rather than
their Happiness (as definitely understood by Utilitarians); still, as
the chief element in the common notion of good (besides happiness)
is moral good or Virtue,[326] if we can show that the other virtues
are--speaking broadly--all qualities conducive to the happiness of the
agent himself or of others, it is evident that Benevolence, whether it
prompts us to promote the virtue of others or their happiness, will
aim directly or indirectly at the Utilitarian end.[327]

Nor, further, does the comprehensive range which Utilitarians give to
Benevolence, in stating as their ultimate end the greatest happiness
of all sentient beings, seem to be really opposed to Common Sense;
for in so far as certain Intuitional moralists restrict the scope of
the direct duty of Benevolence to human beings, and regard our duties
to brute animals as merely indirect and derived “from the duty of
Self-culture,” they rather than their Utilitarian opponents appear
paradoxical. And if, in laying down that each agent is to consider all
other happiness as equally important with his own, Utilitarianism seems
to go beyond the standard of duty commonly prescribed under the head
of Benevolence, it yet can scarcely be said to conflict with Common
Sense on this point. For the practical application of this theoretical
impartiality of Utilitarianism is limited by several important
considerations. In the first place, generally speaking, each man is
better able to provide for his own happiness than for that of other
persons, from his more intimate knowledge of his own desires and needs,
and his greater opportunities of gratifying them. And besides, it is
under the stimulus of self-interest that the active energies of most
men are most easily and thoroughly drawn out: and if this were removed,
general happiness would be diminished by a serious loss of those means
of happiness which are obtained by labour; and also, to some extent,
by the diminution of the labour itself. For these reasons it would not
under actual circumstances promote the universal happiness if each man
were to concern himself with the happiness of others as much as with
his own. While if I consider the duty abstractly and ideally, even
Common Sense morality seems to bid me “love my neighbour as myself.”

It might indeed be plausibly objected, on the other hand, that under
the notions of Generosity, Self-sacrifice, etc., Common Sense praises
(though it does not prescribe as obligatory) a suppression of egoism
beyond what Utilitarianism approves: for we perhaps admire as virtuous
a man who gives up his own happiness for another’s sake, even when the
happiness that he confers is clearly less than that which he resigns,
so that there is a diminution of happiness on the whole. But (1) it
seems very doubtful whether we do altogether approve such conduct when
the disproportion between the sacrifice and the benefit is obvious
and striking: and (2) a spectator is often unable to judge whether
happiness is lost on the whole, as (_a_) he cannot tell how far he who
makes the sacrifice is compensated by sympathetic and moral pleasure,
and (_b_) the remoter felicific consequences flowing from the moral
effects of such a sacrifice on the agent and on others have to be taken
into account: while (3) even if there be a loss in the particular
case, still our admiration of self-sacrifice will admit of a certain
Utilitarian justification, because such conduct shows a disposition far
above the average in its general tendency to promote happiness, and it
is perhaps this disposition that we admire rather than the particular
act.

It has been said,[328] however, that the special claims and duties
belonging to special relations, by which each man is connected with
a few out of the whole number of human beings, are expressly ignored
by the rigid impartiality of the Utilitarian formula: and hence that,
though Utilitarianism and Common Sense may agree in the proposition
that all right action is conducive to the happiness of some one or
other, and so far beneficent, still they are irreconcileably divergent
on the radical question of the _distribution_ of beneficence.

Here, however, it seems that even fair-minded opponents have scarcely
understood the Utilitarian position. They have attacked Bentham’s
well-known formula, “every man to count for one, nobody for more than
one,” on the ground that the general happiness will be best attained by
inequality in the distribution of each one’s services. But so far as it
is clear that it will be best attained in this way, Utilitarianism will
necessarily prescribe this way of aiming at it; and Bentham’s dictum
must be understood merely as making the conception of the ultimate end
precise--laying down that one person’s happiness is to be counted for
as much as another’s (supposed equal in degree) as an element of the
general happiness--not as directly prescribing the rules of conduct
by which this end will be best attained. And the reasons why it is,
generally speaking, conducive to the general happiness that each
individual should distribute his beneficence in the channels marked out
by commonly recognised ties and claims, are tolerably obvious.

For first, in the chief relations discussed in chap. iv. of Book
iii.--the domestic, and those constituted by consanguinity,
friendship, previous kindnesses, and special needs,--the services
which Common Sense prescribes as duties are commonly prompted by
natural affection, while at the same time they tend to develop and
sustain such affection. Now the subsistence of benevolent affections
among human beings is itself an important means to the Utilitarian
end, because (as Shaftesbury and his followers forcibly urged) the
most intense and highly valued of our pleasures are derived from such
affections; for both the emotion itself is highly pleasurable, and it
imparts this quality to the activities which it prompts and sustains,
and the happiness thus produced is continually enhanced by the
sympathetic echo of the pleasures conferred on others. And again, where
genuine affection subsists, the practical objections to spontaneous
beneficence, which were before noticed, are much diminished in force.
For such affection tends to be reciprocated, and the kindnesses
which are its outcome and expression commonly win a requital of
affection: and in so far as this is the case, they have less tendency
to weaken the springs of activity in the person benefited; and may
even strengthen them by exciting other sources of energy than the
egoistic--personal affection, and gratitude, and the desire to deserve
love, and the desire to imitate beneficence. And hence it has been
often observed that the injurious effects of almsgiving are at least
much diminished if the alms are bestowed with unaffected sympathy
and kindliness, and in such a way as to elicit a genuine response of
gratitude. And further, the beneficence that springs from affection is
less likely to be frustrated from defect of knowledge: for not only are
we powerfully stimulated to study the real conditions of the happiness
of those whom we love, but also such study is rendered more effective
from the sympathy which naturally accompanies affection.

On these grounds the Utilitarian will evidently approve of the
cultivation of affection and the performance of affectionate services.
It may be said, however, that what we ought to approve is not so much
affection for special individuals, but rather a feeling more universal
in its scope--charity, philanthropy, or (as it has been called) the
‘Enthusiasm of Humanity.’ And certainly all special affections tend
occasionally to come into conflict with the principle of promoting the
general happiness: and Utilitarianism must therefore prescribe such a
culture of the feelings as will, so far as possible, counteract this
tendency. But it seems that most persons are only capable of strong
affections towards a few human beings in certain close relations,
especially the domestic: and that if these were suppressed, what they
would feel towards their fellow-creatures generally would be, as
Aristotle says, “but a watery kindness” and a very feeble counterpoise
to self-love: so that such specialised affections as the present
organisation of society normally produces afford the best means of
developing in most persons a more extended benevolence, to the degree
to which they are capable of feeling it. Besides, each person is for
the most part, from limitation either of power or knowledge, not in a
position to do much good to more than a very small number of persons;
it therefore seems, on this ground alone, desirable that his chief
benevolent impulses should be correspondingly limited.

And this leads us to consider, secondly, the reasons why, affection
apart, it is conducive to the general happiness that special claims
to services should be commonly recognised as attaching to special
relations; so as to modify that impartiality in the distribution
of beneficence which Utilitarianism _prima facie_ inculcates. For
clearness’ sake it seems best to take this argument separately,
though it cannot easily be divided from the former one, because the
services in question are often such as cannot so well be rendered
without affection. In such cases, as we saw,[329] Common Sense
regards the affection itself as a duty, in so far as it is capable
of being cultivated: but still prescribes the performance of the
services even if the affection be unhappily absent. Indeed we may
properly consider the services to which we are commonly prompted by
the domestic affections, and also those to which we are moved by
gratitude and pity, as an integral part of the system of mutual aid
by which the normal life and happiness of society is maintained,
under existing circumstances; being an indispensable supplement to
the still more essential services which are definitely prescribed by
Law, or rendered on commercial terms as a part of an express bargain.
As political economists have explained, the means of happiness are
immensely increased by that complex system of co-operation which has
been gradually organised among civilised men: and while it is thought
that under such a system it will be generally best on the whole to let
each individual exchange such services as he is disposed to render for
such return as he can obtain for them by free contract, still there
are many large exceptions to this general principle. Of these the most
important is constituted by the case of children. It is necessary for
the well-being of mankind that in each generation children should
be produced in adequate numbers, neither too many nor too few; and
that, as they cannot be left to provide for themselves, they should
be adequately nourished and protected during the period of infancy;
and further, that they should be carefully trained in good habits,
intellectual, moral, and physical: and it is commonly believed that the
best or even the only known means of attaining these ends in even a
tolerable degree is afforded by the existing institution of the Family,
resting as it does on a basis of legal and moral rules combined. For
Law fixes a minimum of mutual services and draws the broad outlines of
behaviour for the different members of the family, imposing[330] on the
parents lifelong union and complete mutual fidelity and the duty of
providing for their children the necessaries of life up to a certain
age; in return for which it gives them the control of their children
for the same period, and sometimes lays on the latter the burden of
supporting their parents when aged and destitute: so that Morality, in
inculcating a completer harmony of interests and an ampler interchange
of kindnesses, is merely filling in the outlines drawn by Law. We
found, however, in attempting to formulate the different domestic
duties as recognised by Common Sense, that there seemed to be in most
cases a large vague margin with respect to which general agreement
could not be affirmed, and which, in fact, forms an arena for continual
disputes. But we have now to observe that it is just this margin
which reveals most clearly the latent Utilitarianism of common moral
opinion: for when the question is once raised as to the precise mutual
duties (_e.g._) of husbands and wives, or of parents and children, each
disputant commonly supports his view by a forecast of the effects on
human happiness to be expected from the general establishment of any
proposed rule; this seems to be the standard to which the matter is, by
common consent, referred.

Similarly the claim to services that arises out of special need (which
natural sympathy moves us to recognise) may obviously be rested on an
utilitarian basis: indeed the proper fulfilment of this duty seems so
important to the well-being of society, that it has in modern civilised
communities generally been brought to some extent within the sphere of
Governmental action. We noticed that the main utilitarian reason why it
is not right for every rich man to distribute his superfluous wealth
among the poor, is that the happiness of all is on the whole most
promoted by maintaining in adults generally (except married women),
the expectation that each will be thrown on his own resources for the
supply of his own wants. But if I am made aware that, owing to a sudden
calamity that could not have been foreseen, another’s resources are
manifestly inadequate to protect him from pain or serious discomfort,
the case is altered; my theoretical obligation to consider his
happiness as much as my own becomes at once practical; and I am bound
to make as much effort to relieve him as will not entail a greater
loss of happiness to myself or others. If, however, the calamity is
one which might have been foreseen and averted by proper care, my duty
becomes more doubtful: for then by relieving him I seem to be in danger
of encouraging improvidence in others. In such a case a Utilitarian
has to weigh this indirect evil against the direct good of removing
pain and distress: and it is now more and more generally recognised
that the question of providing for the destitute has to be treated as
a utilitarian problem of which these are the elements,--whether we are
considering the minimum that should be secured to them by law, or the
proper supplementary action of private charity.

Poverty, however, is not the only case in which it is conducive to
the general happiness that one man should render unbought services to
another. In any condition or calling a man may find himself unable
to ward off some evil, or to realise some legitimate or worthy end,
without assistance of such kind as he cannot purchase on the ordinary
commercial terms;--assistance which, on the one hand, will have no bad
effect on the receiver, from the exceptional nature of the emergency,
while at the same time it may not be burdensome to the giver. Here,
again, some jurists have thought that where the service to be rendered
is great, and the burden of rendering it very slight, it might properly
be made matter of legal obligation: so that (_e.g._) if I could save
a man from drowning by merely holding out a hand, I should be legally
punishable if I omitted the act. But, however this may be, the moral
rule condemning the refusal of aid in such emergencies is obviously
conducive to the general happiness.

Further, besides these--so to say--_accidentally_ unbought services,
there are some for which there is normally no market-price; such as
counsel and assistance in the intimate perplexities of life, which one
is only willing to receive from genuine friends. It much promotes the
general happiness that such services should be generally rendered. On
this ground, as well as through the emotional pleasures which directly
spring from it, we perceive Friendship to be an important means to the
Utilitarian end. At the same time we feel that the charm of Friendship
is lost if the flow of emotion is not spontaneous and unforced. The
combination of these two views seems to be exactly represented by the
sympathy that is not quite admiration with which Common Sense regards
all close and strong affections; and the regret that is not quite
disapproval with which it contemplates their decay.

In all cases where it is conducive to the general happiness that
unbought services should be rendered, Gratitude (if we mean by this
a settled disposition to repay the benefit in whatever way one can
on a fitting opportunity) is enjoined by Utilitarianism no less than
by Common Sense; for experience would lead us to expect that no
kind of onerous services will be adequately rendered unless there
is a general disposition to requite them. In fact we may say that a
general understanding that all services which it is expedient that _A_
should render to _B_ will be in some way repaid by _B_, is a natural
supplement of the more definite contracts by which the main part of
the great social interchange of services is arranged. Indeed the
one kind of requital merges in the other, and no sharp line can be
drawn between the two: we cannot always say distinctly whether the
requital of a benefit is a pure act of gratitude or the fulfilment of
a tacit understanding.[331] There is, however, a certain difficulty in
this view of gratitude as analogous to the fulfilment of a bargain.
For it may be said that of the services peculiar to friendship
disinterestedness is an indispensable characteristic; and that in all
cases benefits conferred without expectation of reward have a peculiar
excellence, and are indeed peculiarly adapted to arouse gratitude;
but if they are conferred in expectation of such gratitude, they lose
this excellence; and yet, again, it would be very difficult to treat
as a friend one from whom gratitude was not expected. This seems,
at first sight, an inextricable entanglement: but here, as in other
cases, an apparent ethical contradiction is found to reduce itself to a
psychological complexity. For most of our actions are done from several
different motives, either coexisting or succeeding one another in rapid
alternation: thus a man may have a perfectly disinterested desire
to benefit another, and one which might possibly prevail over all
conflicting motives if all hope of requital were cut off, and yet it
may be well that this generous impulse should be sustained by a vague
trust that requital will not be withheld. And in fact the apparent
puzzle really affords another illustration of the latent Utilitarianism
of Common Sense. For, on the one hand, Utilitarianism prescribes that
we should render services whenever it is conducive to the general
happiness to do so, which may often be the case without taking into
account the gain to oneself which would result from their requital: and
on the other hand, since we may infer from the actual selfishness of
average men that such services would not be adequately rendered without
expectation of requital, it is also conducive to the general happiness
that men should recognise a moral obligation to repay them.

We have discussed only the most conspicuous of the duties of affection:
but it is probably obvious that similar reasonings would apply in the
case of the others.

In all such cases there are three distinct lines of argument which
tend to show that the commonly received view of special claims and
duties arising out of special relations, though _prima facie_ opposed
to the impartial universality of the Utilitarian principle, is really
maintained by a well-considered application of that principle.
First, morality is here in a manner protecting the normal channels
and courses of natural benevolent affections; and the development of
such affections is of the highest importance to human happiness, both
as a direct source of pleasure, and as an indispensable preparation
for a more enlarged “altruism.” And again, the mere fact that such
affections are normal, causes an expectation of the services that are
their natural expression; and the disappointment of such expectations
is inevitably painful. While finally, apart from these considerations,
we can show in each case strong utilitarian reasons why, generally
speaking, services should be rendered to the persons commonly
recognised as having such claims rather than to others.

We have to observe, in conclusion, that the difficulties which we found
in the way of determining by the Intuitional method the limits and the
relative importance of these duties are reduced in the Utilitarian
system, to difficulties of hedonistic comparison.[332] For each of the
preceding arguments has shown us different kinds of pleasures gained
and pains averted by the fulfilment of the claims in question. There
are, first, those which the service claimed would directly promote or
avert: secondly, there is the pain and secondary harm of disappointed
expectation, if the service be not rendered: thirdly, we have to reckon
the various pleasures connected with the exercise of natural benevolent
affections, especially when reciprocated, including the indirect
effects on the agent’s character of maintaining such affections. All
these different pleasures and pains combine differently, and with
almost infinite variation as circumstances vary, into utilitarian
reasons for each of the claims in question; none of these reasons being
absolute and conclusive, but each having its own weight, while liable
to be outweighed by others.

§ 4. I pass to consider another group of duties, often contrasted with
those of Benevolence, under the comprehensive notion of Justice.

“That Justice is useful to society,” says Hume, “it would be a
superfluous undertaking to prove”: what he endeavours to show at some
length is “that public utility is the _sole_ origin of Justice”: and
the same question of origin has occupied the chief attention of J.
S. Mill.[333] Here, however, we are not so much concerned with the
growth of the sentiment of Justice from experiences of utility, as
with the Utilitarian basis of the mature notion; while at the same
time if the analysis previously given be correct, the Justice that
is commonly demanded and inculcated is something more complex than
these writers have recognised. What Hume (_e.g._) means by Justice is
rather what I should call Order, understood in its widest sense: the
observance of the actual system of rules, whether strictly legal or
customary, which bind together the different members of any society
into an organic whole, checking malevolent or otherwise injurious
impulses, distributing the different objects of men’s clashing desires,
and exacting such positive services, customary or contractual, as are
commonly recognised as matters of debt. And though there have rarely
been wanting plausible empirical arguments for the revolutionary
paradox quoted by Plato, that “laws are imposed in the interest of
rulers,” it remains true that the general conduciveness to social
happiness of the habit of Order or Law-observance, is, as Hume says,
too obvious to need proof; indeed it is of such paramount importance
to a community, that even where particular laws are clearly injurious
it is usually expedient to observe them, apart from any penalty which
their breach might entail on the individual. We saw, however, that
Common Sense sometimes bids us refuse obedience to bad laws, because
“we ought to obey God rather than men” (though there seems to be no
clear intuition as to the kind or degree of badness that justifies
resistance); and further allows us, in special emergencies, to violate
rules generally good, for “necessity has no law,” and “salus populi
suprema lex.”

These and similar common opinions seem at least to suggest that
the limits of the duty of Law-observance are to be determined by
utilitarian considerations. While, again, the Utilitarian view gets
rid of the difficulties in which the attempt to define intuitively the
truly legitimate source of legislative authority involved us;[334]
at the same time that it justifies to some extent each of the
different views current as to the intrinsic legitimacy of governments.
For, on the one hand, it finds the moral basis of any established
political order primarily in its effects rather than its causes; so
that, generally speaking, obedience will seem due to any _de facto_
government that is not governing very badly. On the other hand, in
so far as laws originating in a particular way are likely to be (1)
better, or (2) more readily observed, it is a Utilitarian duty to aim
at introducing this mode of origination: and thus in a certain stage
of social development it may be right that (_e.g._) a ‘representative
system’ should be popularly demanded, or possibly (in extreme cases)
even introduced by force: while, again, there is expediency in
maintaining an ancient mode of legislation, because men readily obey
such: and loyalty to a dispossessed government may be on the whole
expedient, even at the cost of some temporary suffering and disorder,
in order that ambitious men may not find usurpation too easy. Here,
as elsewhere, Utilitarianism at once supports the different reasons
commonly put forward as absolute, and also brings them theoretically to
a common measure, so that in any particular case we have a principle of
decision between conflicting political arguments.

As was before said, this Law-observance, in so far at least as it
affects the interests of other individuals, is what we frequently
mean by Justice. It seems, however,[335] that the notion of Justice,
exhaustively analysed, includes several distinct elements combined in
a somewhat complex manner: we have to inquire, therefore, what latent
utilities are represented by each of these elements.

Now, first, a constant part of the notion, which appears in it even
when the Just is not distinguished from the Legal, is impartiality or
the negation of arbitrary inequality. This impartiality, as we saw[336]
(whether exhibited in the establishment or in the administration of
laws), is merely a special application of the wider maxim that it
cannot be right to treat two persons differently if their cases are
similar in all material circumstances. And Utilitarianism, as we saw,
admits this maxim no less than other systems of Ethics. At the same
time, this negative criterion is clearly inadequate for the complete
determination of what is just in laws, or in conduct generally; when we
have admitted this, it still remains to ask, “What are the inequalities
in laws, and in the distribution of pleasures and pains outside the
sphere of law, which are not arbitrary and unreasonable? and to what
general principles can they be reduced?”

Here in the first place we may explain, on utilitarian principles,
why apparently arbitrary inequality in a certain part of the conduct
of individuals[337] is not regarded as injustice or even--in some
cases--as in any way censurable. For freedom of action is an important
source of happiness to the agents, and a socially useful stimulus
to their energies: hence it is obviously expedient that a man’s
free choice in the distribution of wealth or kind services should
not be restrained by the fear of legal penalties, or even of social
disapprobation, beyond what the interests of others clearly require;
and therefore, when distinctly recognised claims are satisfied, it
is _pro tanto_ expedient that the mere preferences of an individual
should be treated by others as legitimate grounds for inequality in
the distribution of his property or services. Nay, as we have before
seen, it is within certain limits expedient that each individual should
practically regard his own unreasoned impulses as reasonable grounds of
action: as in the rendering of services prompted by such affections as
are normally and properly spontaneous and unforced.

Passing to consider the general principles upon which ‘just claims’ as
commonly recognised appear to be based, we notice that the grounds of a
number of such claims may be brought under the general head of ‘normal
expectations’; but that the stringency of such obligations varies
much in degree, according as the expectations are based upon definite
engagements, or on some vague mutual understanding, or are merely such
as an average man would form from past experience of the conduct of
other men. In these latter cases Common Sense appeared to be somewhat
perplexed as to the validity of the claims. But for the Utilitarian
the difficulty has ceased to exist. He will hold any disappointment
of expectations to be _pro tanto_ an evil, but a greater evil in
proportion to the previous security of the expectant individual, from
the greater shock thus given to his reliance on the conduct of his
fellow-men generally: and many times greater in proportion as the
expectation is generally recognised as normal and reasonable, as in
this case the shock extends to all who are in any way cognisant of his
disappointment. The importance to mankind of being able to rely on
each other’s actions is so great, that in ordinary cases of absolutely
definite engagements there is scarcely any advantage that can
counterbalance the harm done by violating them. Still, we found[338]
that several exceptions and qualifications to the rule of Good Faith
were more or less distinctly recognised by Common Sense: and most of
these have a utilitarian basis, which it does not need much penetration
to discern. To begin, we may notice that the superficial view of the
obligation of a promise which makes it depend on the assertion of the
promiser, and not, as Utilitarians hold, on the expectations produced
in the promisee, cannot fairly be attributed to Common Sense: which
certainly condemns a breach of promise much more strongly when others
have acted in reliance on it, than when its observance did not directly
concern others, so that its breach involves for them only the indirect
evil of a bad precedent,--as when a man breaks a pledge of total
abstinence. We see, again, how the utilitarian reasons for keeping a
promise are diminished by a material change of circumstances,[339] for
in that case the expectations disappointed by breaking it are at least
not those which the promise originally created. It is obvious, too,
that it is a disadvantage to the community that men should be able
to rely on the performance of promises procured by fraud or unlawful
force, so far as encouragement is thereby given to the use of fraud or
force for this end.[340] We saw, again,[341] that when the performance
would be injurious to the promisee, Common Sense is disposed to admit
that its obligation is superseded; and is at least doubtful whether the
promise should be kept, even when it is only the promiser who would
be injured, if the harm be extreme;--both which qualifications are in
harmony with Utilitarianism. And similarly for the other qualifications
and exceptions: they all turn out to be as clearly utilitarian, as the
general utility of keeping one’s word is plain and manifest.

But further, the expediency of satisfying normal expectations, even
when they are not based upon a definite contract, is undeniable; it
will clearly conduce to the tranquillity of social existence, and
to the settled and well-adjusted activity on which social happiness
greatly depends, that such expectations should be as little as possible
baulked. And here Utilitarianism relieves us of the difficulties which
beset the common view of just conduct as something absolutely precise
and definite. For in this vaguer region we cannot draw a sharp line
between valid and invalid claims; ‘injustice’ shades gradually off into
mere ‘hardship.’ Hence the Utilitarian view that the disappointment of
natural expectations is an evil, but an evil which must sometimes be
incurred for the sake of a greater good, is that to which Common Sense
is practically forced, though it is difficult to reconcile it with the
theoretical absoluteness of Justice in the Intuitional view of Morality.

The gain of recognising the relativity of this obligation will be still
more felt, when we consider what I distinguished as Ideal Justice, and
examine the general conceptions of this which we find expressed or
latent in current criticisms of the existing order of Society.

We have seen that there are two competing views of an ideally just
social order--or perhaps we may say two extreme types between which
the looser notions of ordinary men seem to fluctuate--which I called
respectively Individualistic and Socialistic. According to the former
view an ideal system of Law ought to aim at Freedom, or perfect mutual
non-interference of all the members of the community, as an absolute
end. Now the general utilitarian reasons for leaving each rational
adult free to seek happiness in his own way are obvious and striking:
for, generally speaking, each is best qualified to provide for his own
interests, since even when he does not know best what they are and how
to attain them, he is at any rate most keenly concerned for them: and
again, the consciousness of freedom and concomitant responsibility
increases the average effective activity of men: and besides, the
discomfort of constraint is directly an evil and _pro tanto_ to be
avoided. Still, we saw[342] that the attempt to construct a consistent
code of laws, taking Maximum Freedom (instead of Happiness) as an
absolute end, must lead to startling paradoxes and insoluble puzzles:
and in fact the practical interpretation of the notion ‘Freedom,’ and
the limits within which its realisation has been actually sought, have
always--even in the freest societies--been more or less consciously
determined by considerations of expediency. So that we may fairly say
that in so far as Common Sense has adopted the Individualistic ideal
in politics, it has always been as subordinate to and limited by the
Utilitarian first principle.[343]

It seems, however, that what we commonly demand or long for, under the
name of Ideal Justice, is not so much the realisation of Freedom, as
the distribution of good and evil according to Desert: indeed it is as
a means to this latter end that Freedom is often advocated; for it is
said that if we protect men completely from mutual interference, each
will reap the good and bad consequences of his own conduct, and so be
happy or unhappy in proportion to his deserts. In particular, it has
been widely held that if a free exchange of wealth and services is
allowed, each individual will obtain from society, in money or other
advantages, what his services are really worth. We saw, however, that
the price which an individual obtains under a system of perfect free
trade, for wealth or services exchanged by him, may for several reasons
be not proportioned to the social utility of what he exchanges: and
reflective Common Sense seems to admit this disproportion as to some
extent legitimate, under the influence of utilitarian considerations
correcting the unreflective utterances of moral sentiments.

To take a particular case: if a moral man were asked how far it is
right to take advantage in bargaining of another’s ignorance, probably
his first impulse would be to condemn such a procedure altogether.
But reflection, I think, would show him that such a censure would
be too sweeping: that it would be contrary to Common Sense to “blame
_A_ for having, in negotiating with a stranger _B_, taken advantage
of _B_’s ignorance of facts known to himself, provided that _A_’s
superior knowledge had been obtained by a legitimate use of diligence
and foresight, which _B_ might have used with equal success.... What
prevents us from censuring in this and similar cases is, I conceive,
a more or less conscious apprehension of the indefinite loss to the
wealth of the community that is likely to result from any effective
social restrictions on the free pursuit and exercise” of economic
knowledge. And for somewhat similar reasons of general expediency, if
the question be raised whether it is fair for a class of persons to
gain by the unfavourable economic situation of any class with which
they deal, Common Sense at least hesitates to censure such gains--at
any rate when such unfavourable situation is due “to the gradual action
of general causes, for the existence of which the persons who gain are
not specially responsible.”[344]

The general principle of ‘requiting good desert,’ so far as Common
Sense really accepts it as practically applicable to the relations of
men in society, is broadly in harmony with Utilitarianism; since we
obviously encourage the production of general happiness by rewarding
men for felicific conduct; only the Utilitarian scale of rewards will
not be determined entirely by the magnitude of the services performed,
but partly also by the difficulty of inducing men to perform them.
But this latter element seems to be always taken into account (though
perhaps unconsciously) by Common Sense: for, as we have been led to
notice,[345] we do not commonly recognise merit in right actions,
if they are such as men are naturally inclined to perform rather
too much than too little. Again, in cases where the Intuitional
principle that ill-desert lies in wrong intention conflicts with the
Utilitarian view of punishment as purely preventive, we find that in
the actual administration of criminal justice, Common Sense is forced,
however reluctantly, into practical agreement with Utilitarianism.
Thus after a civil war it demands the execution of the most purely
patriotic rebels; and after a railway accident it clamours for the
severe punishment of unintentional neglects, which, except for their
consequences, would have been regarded as very venial.

If, however, in any distribution of pleasures and privileges, or of
pains and burdens, considerations of desert do not properly come in
(_i.e._ if the good or evil to be distributed have no relation to any
conduct on the part of the persons who are to receive either)--or
if it is practically impossible to take such considerations into
account--then Common Sense seems to fall back on simple equality as
the principle of just apportionment.[346] And we have seen that the
Utilitarian, in the case supposed, will reasonably accept Equality
as the only mode of distribution that is not arbitrary; and it may
be observed that this mode of apportioning the means of happiness is
likely to produce more happiness on the whole, not only because men
have a disinterested aversion to unreason, but still more because they
have an aversion to any kind of inferiority to others (which is much
intensified when the inferiority seems unreasonable). This latter
feeling is so strong that it often prevails in spite of obvious claims
of desert; and it may even be sometimes expedient that it should so
prevail.

For, finally, it must be observed that Utilitarianism furnishes us
with a common standard to which the different elements included in
the notion of Justice may be reduced. Such a standard is imperatively
required: as these different elements are continually liable to
conflict with each other. The issue, for example, in practical
politics between Conservatives and Reformers often represents such a
conflict: the question is, whether we ought to do a certain violence to
expectations arising naturally out of the existing social order, with
the view of bringing about a distribution of the means of happiness
more in accordance with ideal justice. Here, if my analysis of the
common notion of Justice be sound, the attempt to extract from it a
clear decision of such an issue must necessarily fail: as the conflict
is, so to say, permanently latent in the very core of Common Sense. But
the Utilitarian will merely use this notion of Justice as a guide to
different kinds of utilities; and in so far as these are incompatible,
he will balance one set of advantages against the other, and decide
according to the preponderance.

§ 5. The duty of Truth-speaking is sometimes taken as a striking
instance of a moral rule not resting on a Utilitarian basis. But a
careful study of the qualifications with which the common opinion of
mankind actually inculcates this duty seems to lead us to an opposite
result: for not only is the general utility of truth-speaking so
manifest as to need no proof, but wherever this utility seems to be
absent, or outweighed by particular bad consequences, we find that
Common Sense at least hesitates to enforce the rule. For example, if
a man be pursuing criminal ends, it is _prima facie_ injurious to the
community that he should be aided in his pursuit by being able to rely
on the assertions of others. Here, then, deception is _prima facie_
legitimate as a protection against crime: though when we consider
the bad effects on habit, and through example, of even a single act
of unveracity, the case is seen to be, on Utilitarian principles,
doubtful: and this is just the view of Common Sense. Again, though it
is generally a man’s interest to know the truth, there are exceptional
cases in which it is injurious to him--as when an invalid hears bad
news--and here, too, Common Sense is disposed to suspend the rule.
Again, we found it difficult to define exactly wherein Veracity
consists; for we may either require truth in the spoken words, or in
the inferences which the speaker foresees will be drawn from them,
or in both. Perfect Candour, no doubt, would require it in both:
but in the various circumstances where this seems inexpedient, we
often find Common Sense at least half-willing to dispense with one
or other part of the double obligation. Thus we found a respectable
school of thinkers maintaining that a religious truth may properly be
communicated by means of a historical fiction: and, on the other hand,
the unsuitability of perfect frankness to our existing social relations
is recognised in the common rules of politeness, which impose on us
not unfrequently the necessity of suppressing truths and suggesting
falsehoods. I would not say that in any of these cases Common Sense
pronounces quite decidedly in favour of unveracity: but then neither
is Utilitarianism decided, as the utility of maintaining a general
habit of truth-speaking is so great, that it is not easy to prove it to
be clearly outweighed by even strong special reasons for violating the
rule.

Yet it may be worth while to point out how the different views as to
the legitimacy of Malevolent impulses, out of which we found it hard
to frame a consistent doctrine for Common Sense, exactly correspond
to different forecasts of the consequences of gratifying such
impulses. _Prima facie_, the desire to injure any one in particular
is inconsistent with a deliberate purpose of benefiting as much as
possible people in general; accordingly, we find that what I may
call Superficial Common Sense passes a sweeping condemnation on
such desires. But a study of the actual facts of society shows that
resentment plays an important part in that repression of injuries which
is necessary to social wellbeing; accordingly, the reflective moralist
shrinks from excluding it altogether. It is evident, however, that
personal ill-will is a very dangerous means to the general happiness:
for its direct end is the exact opposite of happiness; and though
the realisation of this end may in certain cases be the least of two
evils, still the impulse if encouraged is likely to prompt to the
infliction of pain beyond the limits of just punishment, and to have an
injurious reaction on the character of the angry person. Accordingly,
the moralist is disposed to prescribe that indignation be directed
always against acts, and not against persons; and if indignation so
restricted would be efficient in repressing injuries, this would seem
to be the state of mind most conducive to the general happiness. But it
is doubtful whether average human nature is capable of maintaining this
distinction, and whether, if it could be maintained, the more refined
aversion would by itself be sufficiently efficacious: accordingly,
Common Sense hesitates to condemn personal ill-will against
wrong-doers--even if it includes a desire of malevolent satisfaction.

Finally, it is easy to show that Temperance, Self-control, and what
are called the Self-regarding virtues generally, are ‘useful’ to the
individual who possesses them: and if it is not quite clear, in the
view of Common Sense, to what end that regulation and government of
appetites and passions, which moralists have so much inculcated and
admired, is to be directed; at least there seems no obstacle in the
way of our defining this end as Happiness. And even in the ascetic
extreme of Self-control, which has sometimes led to the repudiation
of sensual pleasures as radically bad, we may trace an unconscious
Utilitarianism. For the ascetic condemnation has always been chiefly
directed against those pleasures, in respect of which men are
especially liable to commit excesses dangerous to health; and free
indulgence in which, even when it keeps clear of injury to health,
is thought to interfere with the development of other faculties and
susceptibilities which are important sources of happiness.

§ 6. An apparent exception to this statement may seem to be constituted
in the case of the sexual appetite, by the regulation prescribed under
the notion of Purity or Chastity. And there is no doubt that under
this head we find condemned, with special vehemence and severity, acts
of which the immediate effect is pleasure not obviously outweighed by
subsequent pain. But a closer examination of this exception transforms
it into an important contribution to the present argument: as it
shows a specially complex and delicate correspondence between moral
sentiments and social utilities.

In the first place, the peculiar intensity and delicacy of the moral
sentiments that govern the relations of the sexes are thoroughly
justified by the vast importance to society of the end to which they
are obviously a means,--the maintenance, namely, of the permanent
unions which are held to be necessary for the proper rearing and
training of children. Hence the first and fundamental rule in this
department is that which directly secures conjugal fidelity: and the
utilitarian grounds for protecting marriage indirectly, by condemning
all extra-nuptial intercourse of the sexes, are obvious: for to remove
the moral censure that rests on such intercourse would seriously
diminish men’s motives for incurring the restraints and burdens which
marriage entails; and the youth of both sexes would form habits of
feeling and conduct tending to unfit them for marriage; and, if such
intercourse were fertile, it would be attended with that imperfect care
of the succeeding generation, which it seems the object of permanent
unions to prevent; while if it were sterile, the future of the human
race would, as far as we can see, be still more profoundly imperilled.

But, further, it is only on Utilitarian principles that we can account
for the anomalous difference which the morality of Common Sense has
always made between the two sexes as regards the simple offence of
unchastity. For the offence is commonly more deliberate in the man,
who has the additional guilt of soliciting and persuading the woman;
in the latter, again, it is far more often prompted by some motive
that we rank higher than mere lust: so that, according to the ordinary
canons of intuitional morality, it ought to be more severely condemned
in the man. The actual inversion of this result can only be justified
by taking into account the greater interest that society has in
maintaining a high standard of female chastity. For the degradation
of this standard must strike at the root of family life, by impairing
men’s security in the exercise of their parental affections: but there
is no corresponding consequence of male unchastity, which may therefore
prevail to a considerable extent without imperilling the very existence
of the family, though it impairs its wellbeing.

At the same time, the condemnation of unchastity in men by the common
moral sense of Christian countries at the present day, is sufficiently
clear and explicit: though we recognise the existence of a laxer
code--the morality, as it is called, of ‘the world’--which treats
it as indifferent, or very venial. But the very difference between
the two codes gives a kind of support to the present argument; as
it corresponds to easily explained differences of insight into the
consequences of maintaining certain moral sanctions. For partly,
it is thought by ‘men of the world’ that men cannot practically be
restrained from sexual indulgence, at least at the period of life when
the passions are strongest: and hence that it is expedient to tolerate
such kind and degree of illicit sexual intercourse as is not directly
dangerous to the wellbeing of families. Partly, again, it is maintained
by some, in bolder antagonism to Common Sense, that the existence of
a certain limited amount of such intercourse (with a special class of
women, carefully separated, as at present, from the rest of society)
is scarcely a real evil, and may even be a positive gain in respect
of general happiness; for continence is perhaps somewhat dangerous
to health, and in any case involves a loss of pleasure considerable
in intensity; while at the same time the maintenance of as numerous
a population as is desirable in an old society does not require
that more than a certain proportion of the women in each generation
should become mothers of families; and if some of the surplus make it
their profession to enter into casual and temporary sexual relations
with men, there is no necessity that their lives should compare
disadvantageously in respect of happiness with those of other women in
the less favoured classes of society.

This view has perhaps a superficial plausibility: but it ignores the
essential fact that it is only by the present severe enforcement
against unchaste women of the penalties of social contempt and
exclusion, resting on moral disapprobation, that the class of
courtesans is kept sufficiently separate from the rest of female
society to prevent the contagion of unchastity from spreading; and
that the illicit intercourse of the sexes is restrained within such
limits as not to interfere materially with the due development of the
race. This consideration is sufficient to decide a Utilitarian to
support generally the established rule against this kind of conduct,
and therefore to condemn violations of the rule as on the whole
infelicific, even though they may perhaps appear to have this quality
only in consequence of the moral censure attached to them.[347]
Further, the ‘man of the world’ ignores the vast importance to the
human race of maintaining that higher type of sexual relations which
is not, generally speaking, possible, except where a high value is set
upon chastity in both sexes. From this point of view the Virtue of
Purity may be regarded as providing a necessary shelter under which
that intense and elevated affection between the sexes, which is most
conducive both to the happiness of the individual and to the wellbeing
of the family, may grow and flourish.

And in this way we are able to explain what must have perplexed
many reflective minds in contemplating the common-sense regulation
of conduct under the head of Purity: viz. that on the one hand the
sentiment that supports these rules is very intense, so that the
subjective difference between right and wrong in this department is
marked with peculiar strength: while on the other hand it is found
impossible to give a clear definition of the conduct condemned under
this notion. For the impulse to be restrained is so powerful and so
sensitive to stimulants of all kinds, that, in order that the sentiment
of purity may adequately perform its protective function, it is
required to be very keen and vivid; and the aversion to impurity must
extend far beyond the acts that primarily need to be prohibited, and
include in its scope everything (in dress, language, social customs,
etc.) which may tend to excite lascivious ideas. At the same time it
is not necessary that the line between right and wrong in such matters
should be drawn with theoretical precision: it is sufficient for
practical purposes if the main central portion of the region of duty be
strongly illuminated, while the margin is left somewhat obscure. And,
in fact, the detailed regulations which it is important to society to
maintain depend so much upon habit and association of ideas, that they
must vary to a great extent from age to age and from country to country.

§ 7. The preceding survey has supplied us with several illustrations of
the manner in which Utilitarianism is normally introduced as a method
for deciding between different conflicting claims, in cases where
common sense leaves their relative importance obscure,--as (_e.g._)
between the different duties of the affections, and the different
principles which analysis shows to be involved in our common conception
of Justice--: and we have also noticed how, when a dispute is raised
as to the precise scope and definition of any current moral rule, the
effects of different acceptations of the rule on general happiness
or social wellbeing are commonly regarded as the ultimate grounds
on which the dispute is to be decided. In fact these two arguments
practically run into one; for it is generally a conflict between maxims
that impresses men with the need of giving each a precise definition.
It may be urged that the consequences to which reference is commonly
made in such cases are rather effects on ‘social wellbeing’ than on
‘general happiness’ as understood by Utilitarians; and that the two
notions ought not to be identified. I grant this: but in the last
chapter of the preceding Book I have tried to show that Common Sense
is unconsciously utilitarian in its practical determination of those
very elements in the notion of Ultimate Good or Wellbeing which at
first sight least admit of a hedonistic interpretation. We may now
observe that this hypothesis of ‘Unconscious Utilitarianism’ explains
the different relative importance attached to particular virtues by
different classes of human beings, and the different emphasis with
which the same virtue is inculcated on these different classes by
mankind generally. For such differences ordinarily correspond to
variations--real or apparent--in the Utilitarian importance of the
virtues under different circumstances. Thus we have noticed the greater
stress laid on chastity in women than in men: courage, on the other
hand, is more valued in the latter, as they are more called upon to
cope energetically with sudden and severe dangers. And for similar
reasons a soldier is expected to show a higher degree of courage than
(_e.g._) a priest. Again, though we esteem candour and scrupulous
sincerity in most persons, we scarcely look for them in a diplomatist
who has to conceal secrets, nor do we expect that a tradesman in
describing his goods should frankly point out their defects to his
customers.

Finally, when we compare the different moral codes of different ages
and countries, we see that the discrepancies among them correspond, at
least to a great extent, to differences either in the actual effects
of actions on happiness, or in the extent to which such effects are
generally foreseen--or regarded as important--by the men among whom
the codes are maintained. Several instances of this have already been
noticed: and the general fact, which has been much dwelt upon by
Utilitarian writers, is also admitted and even emphasised by their
opponents. Thus Dugald Stewart[348] lays stress on the extent to which
the moral judgments of mankind have been modified by “the diversity in
their physical circumstances,” the “unequal degrees of civilisation
which they have attained,” and “their unequal measures of knowledge
or of capacity.” He points out, for instance, that theft is regarded
as a very venial offence in the South Sea Islanders, because little
or no labour is there required to support life; that the lending of
money for interest is commonly reprehended in societies where commerce
is imperfectly developed, because the ‘usurer’ in such communities is
commonly in the odious position of wringing a gain out of the hard
necessities of his fellows; and that where the legal arrangements for
punishing crime are imperfect, private murder is either justified or
regarded very leniently. Many other examples might be added to these
if it were needful. But I conceive that few persons who have studied
the subject will deny that there is a certain degree of correlation
between the variations in the moral code from age to age, and the
variations in the real or perceived effects on general happiness of
actions prescribed or forbidden by the code. And in proportion as the
apprehension of consequences becomes more comprehensive and exact,
we may trace not only change in the moral code handed down from age
to age, but progress in the direction of a closer approximation to
a perfectly enlightened Utilitarianism. Only we must distinctly
notice another important factor in the progress, which Stewart has
not mentioned: the extension, namely, of the capacity for sympathy
in an average member of the community. The imperfection of earlier
moral codes is at least as much due to defectiveness of sympathy as
of intelligence; often, no doubt, the ruder man did not perceive the
effects of his conduct on others; but often, again, he perceived them
more or less, but felt little or no concern about them. Thus it happens
that changes in the conscience of a community often correspond to
changes in the extent and degree of the sensitiveness of an average
member of it to the feelings of others. Of this the moral development
historically worked out under the influence of Christianity affords
familiar illustrations.[349]

I am not maintaining that this correlation between the development of
current morality and the changes in the consequences of conduct as
sympathetically forecast, is perfect and exact. On the contrary,--as I
shall have occasion to point out in the next chapter--the history of
morality shows us many evidences of what, from the Utilitarian point
of view, appear to be partial aberrations of the moral sense. But
even in these instances we can often discover a germ of unconscious
Utilitarianism; the aberration is often only an exaggeration of an
obviously useful sentiment, or the extension of it by mistaken analogy
to cases to which it does not properly apply, or perhaps the survival
of a sentiment which once was useful but has now ceased to be so.

Further, it must be observed that I have carefully abstained from
asserting that the perception of the rightness of any kind of
conduct has always--or even ordinarily--been derived by conscious
inference from a perception of consequent advantages. This hypothesis
is naturally suggested by such a survey as the preceding; but the
evidence of history hardly seems to me to support it: since, as we
retrace the development of ethical thought, the Utilitarian basis of
current morality, which I have endeavoured to exhibit in the present
chapter, seems to be rather less than more distinctly apprehended by
the common moral consciousness. Thus (_e.g._) Aristotle sees that
the sphere of the Virtue of Courage (ἀνδρεία), as recognised
by the Common Sense of Greece, is restricted to dangers in war: and
we can now explain this limitation by a reference to the utilitarian
importance of this kind of courage, at a period of history when the
individual’s happiness was bound up more completely than it now is with
the welfare of his state, while the very existence of the latter was
more frequently imperilled by hostile invasions: but this explanation
lies quite beyond the range of Aristotle’s own reflection. The origin
of our moral notions and sentiments lies hid in those obscure regions
of hypothetical history where conjecture has free scope: but we do
not find that, as our retrospect approaches the borders of this
realm, the conscious connexion in men’s minds between accepted moral
rules and foreseen effects on general happiness becomes more clearly
traceable. The admiration felt by early man for beauties or excellences
of character seems to have been as direct and unreflective as his
admiration of any other beauty: and the stringency of law and custom in
primitive times presents itself as sanctioned by the evils which divine
displeasure will supernaturally inflict on their violators, rather than
by even a rude and vague forecast of the natural bad consequences of
non-observance. It is therefore not as the mode of regulating conduct
with which mankind began, but rather as that to which we can now see
that human development has been always tending, as the adult and not
the germinal form of Morality, that Utilitarianism may most reasonably
claim the acceptance of Common Sense.

       *       *       *       *       *

[350]If we consider the relation of Ethics to Politics from a
Utilitarian point of view, the question, what rules of conduct for the
governed should be fixed by legislators and applied by judges, will be
determined by the same kind of forecast of consequences as will be used
in settling all questions of private morality: we shall endeavour to
estimate and balance against each other the effects of such rules on
the general happiness. In so far, however, as we divide the Utilitarian
theory of private conduct from that of legislation, and ask which is
prior, the answer would seem to be different in respect of different
parts of the legal code.

1. To a great extent the rules laid down in a utilitarian code of law
will be such as any man sincerely desirous of promoting the general
happiness would generally endeavour to observe, even if they were not
legally binding. Of this kind is the rule of not inflicting any bodily
harm or gratuitous annoyance on any one, except in self-defence or
as retribution for wrong; the rule of not interfering with another’s
pursuit of the means of happiness, or with his enjoyment of wealth
acquired by his own labour or the free consent of others; the rule
of fulfilling all engagements freely entered into with any one,--at
any rate unless the fulfilment were harmful to others, or much more
harmful to oneself than beneficial to him, or unless there were good
grounds for supposing that the other party would not perform his share
of a bilateral contract--; and the rule of supporting one’s children
while helpless, and one’s parents if decrepit, and of educating one’s
children suitably to their future life. As regards such rules as these,
Utilitarian Ethics seems independent of Politics, and naturally prior
to it; we first consider what conduct is right for private individuals,
and then to how much of this they can advantageously be compelled by
legal penalties.

2. There are other rules again which it is clearly for the general
happiness to observe, if only their observance is enforced on others;
_e.g._ abstinence from personal retaliation of injuries, and a more
general and unhesitating fulfilment of contracts than would perhaps be
expedient if they were not legally enforced.

3. But again, in the complete determination of the mutual claims
of members of society to services and forbearances, there are many
points on which the utilitarian theory of right private conduct apart
from law would lead to a considerable variety of conclusions, from
the great difference in the force of the relevant considerations
under different circumstances; while at the same time uniformity is
either indispensable, to prevent disputes and disappointments, or at
least highly desirable, in order to maintain effectively such rules
of conduct as are _generally_--though not _universally_--expedient.
Under this head would come the exacter definition of the limits of
appropriation,--_e.g._ as regards property in literary compositions and
technical inventions,--and a large part of the law of inheritance, and
of the law regulating the family relations. In such cases, in so far as
they are capable of being theoretically determined, Utilitarian Ethics
seems to blend with Utilitarian Politics in a rather complicated way;
since we cannot determine the right conduct for a private individual in
any particular case, without first considering what rule (if any) it
would be on the whole expedient to maintain, in the society of which
he is a member, by legal penalties, as well as by the weaker and less
definite sanctions of moral opinion. This problem, moreover, in any
concrete case is necessarily further complicated by the consideration
of the delicate mutual relations of Positive Law and Positive
Morality--as we may call the actual moral opinions generally held in a
given society at a given time. For on the one hand it is dangerous in
legislation to advance beyond Positive Morality, by prohibiting actions
(or inactions) that are generally approved or tolerated; on the other
hand, up to the point at which this danger becomes serious, legislation
is a most effective instrument for modifying or intensifying public
opinion, in the direction in which it is desirable that it should
progress. Leaving this difficult question of social dynamics, we may
say that normally in a well-organised society the most important and
indispensable rules of social behaviour will be legally enforced and
the less important left to be maintained by Positive Morality. Law will
constitute, as it were, the skeleton of social order, clothed upon by
the flesh and blood of Morality.

FOOTNOTES:

[322] It ought to be observed that Cumberland does not adopt a
hedonistic interpretation of Good. Still, I have followed Hallam in
regarding him as the founder of English Utilitarianism: since it seems
to have been by a gradual and half-unconscious process that ‘Good’ came
to have the definitely hedonistic meaning which it has implicitly in
Shaftesbury’s system, and explicitly in that of Hume.

[323] I should point out that Hume uses “utility” in a narrower sense
than that which Bentham gave it, and one more in accordance with the
usage of ordinary language. He distinguishes the “useful” from the
“immediately agreeable”: so that while recognising “utility” as the
main ground of our moral approbation of the more important virtues,
he holds that there are other elements of personal merit which we
approve because they are “immediately agreeable,” either to the person
possessed of them or to others. It appears, however, more convenient
to use the word in the wider sense in which it has been current since
Bentham.

[324] Lecky, _Hist. of Eur. Mor._ chap. i, pp. 37, 40 _seqq_. (13th
impression).

[325] Book iii. chap. x.

[326] Book iii. chap. iv. § 1.

[327] It will be seen that I do not here assume in their full breadth
the conclusions of chap. xiv. of the preceding Book.

[328] Cf. J. Grote, _An Examination of the Utilitarian Philosophy_,
chap. v.

[329] Book iii. chap. iv. § 1.

[330] Strictly speaking, of course, the Law of modern states does not
enforce this, but only refuses to recognise connubial contracts of any
other kind: but the social effect is substantially the same.

[331] Sometimes such unbargained requital is even legally obligatory:
as when children are bound to repay the care spent on them by
supporting their parents in decrepitude.

[332] Further discussion of the method of dealing with these
difficulties, in their utilitarian form, will be found in the two
following chapters.

[333] _Utilitarianism_, chap. v.

[334] Cf. Book iii. chap. vi. §§ 2, 3.

[335] Cf. Book iii. chap. v.

[336] Book iii. chap. xiii. § 3.

[337] Cf. _ante_, p. 268 note.

[338] Book iii. chap. vi.

[339] Cf. _ante_, Book iii. chap. vi. § 8.

[340] In the case of force, however, there is the counterbalancing
consideration that the unlawful aggressor may be led to inflict worse
injury on his victim, if he is unable to rely on the latter’s promise.

[341] Cf. Book iii. chap. vi. § 8.

[342] Book iii. chap. v. § 4.

[343] In another work (_Principles of Political Economy_, Book iii.
chap. ii.) I have tried to show that complete _laisser faire_, in the
organisation of industry, tends in various ways to fall short of the
most economic production of wealth.

[344] The quotations are from my _Principles of Political Economy_,
Book iii. chap. ix.; where these questions are discussed at somewhat
greater length.

[345] Cf. _ante_, § 2, and Book iii. chap. ii. § 1.

[346] I have before observed that it is quite in harmony with
Utilitarian principles to recognise a sphere of private conduct within
which each individual may distribute his wealth and kind services as
unequally as he chooses, without incurring censure as unjust.

[347] It is obvious that so long as the social sanction is enforced,
the lives of the women against whom society thus issues its ban
must tend to be unhappy from disorder and shame, and the source of
unhappiness to others; and also that the breach by men of a recognised
and necessary moral rule must tend to have injurious effects on their
moral habits generally.

[348] _Active and Moral Powers_, Book ii. chap. iii.

[349] Among definite changes in the current morality of the Græco-Roman
civilised world, which are to be attributed mainly if not entirely to
the extension and intensification of sympathy due to Christianity,
the following may be especially noted: (1) the severe condemnation
and final suppression of the practice of exposing infants; (2)
effective abhorrence of the barbarism of gladiatorial combats; (3)
immediate moral mitigation of slavery, and a strong encouragement of
emancipation; (4) great extension of the eleemosynary provision made
for the sick and poor.

[350] This passage, which in the second and subsequent editions
occurred in chap. ii. of Book i., was omitted by Professor Sidgwick
from that chapter in the sixth edition, with the intention of
incorporating it in Book iv., which he did not live to revise.




