CHAPTER VIII

INTUITIONISM


§ 1. I have used the term ‘Intuitional’ to denote the view of ethics
which regards as the practically ultimate end of moral actions their
conformity to certain rules or dictates[85] of Duty unconditionally
prescribed. There is, however, considerable ambiguity as to the exact
antithesis implied by the terms ‘intuition,’ ‘intuitive,’ and their
congeners, as currently used in ethical discussion, which we must now
endeavour to remove. Writers who maintain that we have ‘intuitive
knowledge’ of the rightness of actions usually mean that this rightness
is ascertained by simply “looking at” the actions themselves, without
considering their ulterior consequences. This view, indeed, can hardly
be extended to the whole range of duty; since no morality ever existed
which did not consider ulterior consequences to some extent. Prudence
or Forethought has commonly been reckoned a virtue: and all modern
lists of Virtues have included Rational Benevolence, which aims at the
happiness of other human beings generally, and therefore necessarily
takes into consideration even remote effects of actions. It must be
observed, too, that it is difficult to draw the line between an act and
its consequences: as the effects consequent on each of our volitions
form a continuous series of indefinite extension, and we seem to be
conscious of causing all these effects, so far as at the moment of
volition we foresee them to be probable. However, we find that in the
common notions of different kinds of actions, a line is actually drawn
between the results included in the notion and regarded as forming part
of the act, and those considered as its consequences. For example,
in speaking truth to a jury, I may possibly foresee that my words,
operating along with other statements and indications, will unavoidably
lead them to a wrong conclusion as to the guilt or innocence of
the accused, as certainly as I foresee that they will produce a
right impression as to the particular matter of fact to which I am
testifying: still, we should commonly consider the latter foresight or
intention to determine the nature of the act as an act of veracity,
while the former merely relates to a consequence. We must understand
then that the disregard of consequences, which the Intuitional view is
here taken to imply, only relates to certain determinate classes of
action (such as Truth-speaking) where common usage of terms adequately
defines what events are to be included in the general notions of the
acts, and what regarded as their consequences.

But again: we have to observe that men may and do judge remote as well
as immediate results to be in themselves good, and such as we ought to
seek to realise, without considering them in relation to the feelings
of sentient beings. I have already assumed this to be the view of those
who adopt the general Perfection, as distinct from the Happiness, of
human society as their ultimate end; and it would seem to be the view
of many who concentrate their efforts on some more particular results,
other than morality, such as the promotion of Art or Knowledge. Such
a view, if expressly distinguished from Hedonism, might properly be
classed as Intuitional, but in a sense wider than that defined in
the preceding paragraph: _i.e._ it would be meant that the results in
question are judged to be good _immediately_, and not by inference from
experience of the pleasures which they produce. We have, therefore,
to admit a wider use of ‘Intuition,’ as equivalent to ‘immediate
judgment as to what ought to be done or aimed at.’ It should, however,
be observed that the current contrast between ‘intuitive’ or ‘_a
priori_’ and ‘inductive’ or ‘_a posteriori_’ morality commonly involves
a certain confusion of thought. For what the ‘inductive’ moralist
professes to know by induction, is commonly not the same thing as what
the ‘intuitive’ moralist professes to know by intuition. In the former
case it is the conduciveness to pleasure of certain kinds of action
that is methodically ascertained: in the latter case, their rightness:
there is therefore no proper opposition. If Hedonism claims to give
authoritative guidance, this can only be in virtue of the principle
that pleasure is the only reasonable ultimate end of human action: and
this principle cannot be known by induction from experience. Experience
can at most tell us that all men always do seek pleasure as their
ultimate end (that it does not support this conclusion I have already
tried to show): it cannot tell us that any one ought so to seek it.
If this latter proposition is legitimately affirmed in respect either
of private or of general happiness, it must either be immediately
known to be true,--and therefore, we may say, a moral intuition--or be
inferred ultimately from premises which include at least one such moral
intuition; hence either species of Hedonism, regarded from the point
of view primarily[86] taken in this treatise, might be legitimately
said to be in a certain sense ‘intuitional.’ It seems, however, to be
the prevailing opinion of ordinary moral persons, and of most of the
writers who have maintained the existence of moral intuitions, that
certain kinds of actions are unconditionally prescribed without regard
to ulterior consequences: and I have accordingly treated this doctrine
as a distinguishing characteristic of the Intuitional method, during
the main[87] part of the detailed examination of that method which I
attempt in Book iii.

§ 2. Further; the common antithesis between ‘intuitive’ and ‘inductive’
morality is misleading in another way: since a moralist may hold the
rightness of actions to be cognisable apart from the pleasure produced
by them, while yet his method may be properly called Inductive. For he
may hold that, just as the generalisations of physical science rest
on particular observations, so in ethics general truths can only be
reached by induction from judgments or perceptions relating to the
rightness or wrongness of particular acts.

For example, when Socrates is said by Aristotle to have applied
inductive reasoning to ethical questions, it is this kind of induction
which is meant.[88] He discovered, as we are told, the latent ignorance
of himself and other men: that is, that they used general terms
confidently, without being able, when called upon, to explain the
meaning of those terms. His plan for remedying this ignorance was
to work towards the true definition of each term, by examining and
comparing different instances of its application. Thus the definition
of Justice would be sought by comparing different actions commonly
judged to be just, and framing a general proposition that would
harmonise with all these particular judgments.

So again, in the popular view of Conscience it seems to be often
implied that particular judgments are the most trustworthy.
‘Conscience’ is the accepted popular term for the faculty of moral
judgment, as applied to the acts and motives of the person judging;
and we most commonly think of the dictates of conscience as relating
to particular actions. Thus when a man is bidden, in any particular
case, to ‘trust to his conscience,’ it commonly seems to be meant
that he should exercise a faculty of judging morally this particular
case without reference to general rules, and even in opposition to
conclusions obtained by systematic deduction from such rules. And
it is on this view of Conscience that the contempt often expressed
for ‘Casuistry’ may be most easily justified: for if the particular
case can be satisfactorily settled by conscience without reference
to general rules, ‘Casuistry,’ which consists in the application
of general rules to particular cases, is at best superfluous. But
then, on this view, we shall have no practical need of any such
general rules, or of scientific Ethics at all. We may of course form
general propositions by induction from these particular conscientious
judgments, and arrange them systematically: but any interest which
such a system may have will be purely speculative. And this accounts,
perhaps, for the indifference or hostility to systematic morality
shown by some conscientious persons. For they feel that they can at
any rate do without it: and they fear that the cultivation of it may
place the mind in a wrong attitude in relation to practice, and prove
rather unfavourable than otherwise to the proper development of the
practically important faculty manifested or exercised in particular
moral judgments.

The view above described may be called, in a sense,
‘ultra-intuitional,’ since, in its most extreme form, it recognises
simple immediate intuitions alone and discards as superfluous all modes
of reasoning to moral conclusions: and we may find in it one phase or
variety of the Intuitional method,--if we may extend the term ‘method’
to include a procedure that is completed in a single judgment.

§ 3. But though probably all moral agents have experience of such
particular intuitions, and though they constitute a great part of the
moral phenomena of most minds, comparatively few are so thoroughly
satisfied with them, as not to feel a need of some further moral
knowledge even from a strictly practical point of view. For these
particular intuitions do not, to reflective persons, present themselves
as quite indubitable and irrefragable: nor do they always find when
they have put an ethical question to themselves with all sincerity,
that they are conscious of clear immediate insight in respect of
it. Again, when a man compares the utterances of his conscience at
different times, he often finds it difficult to make them altogether
consistent: the same conduct will wear a different moral aspect at one
time from that which it wore at another, although our knowledge of
its circumstances and conditions is not materially changed. Further,
we become aware that the moral perceptions of different minds, to
all appearance equally competent to judge, frequently conflict: one
condemns what another approves. In this way serious doubts are aroused
as to the validity of each man’s particular moral judgments: and we are
led to endeavour to set these doubts at rest by appealing to general
rules, more firmly established on a basis of common consent.

And in fact, though the view of conscience above discussed is one
which much popular language seems to suggest, it is not that which
Christian and other moralists have usually given. They have rather
represented the process of conscience as analogous to one of jural
reasoning, such as is conducted in a Court of Law. Here we have always
a system of universal rules given, and any particular action has to be
brought under one of these rules before it can be pronounced lawful or
unlawful. Now the rules of positive law are usually not discoverable
by the individual’s reason: this may teach him that law ought to be
obeyed, but what law is must, in the main, be communicated to him
from some external authority. And this is not unfrequently the case
with the conscientious reasoning of ordinary persons when any dispute
or difficulty forces them to reason: they have a genuine impulse to
conform to the right rules of conduct, but they are not conscious, in
difficult or doubtful cases, of seeing for themselves what these are:
they have to inquire of their priest, or their sacred books, or perhaps
the common opinion of the society to which they belong. In so far as
this is the case we cannot strictly call their method Intuitional.
They follow rules generally received, not intuitively apprehended.
Other persons, however (or perhaps all to some extent), do seem to
see for themselves the truth[89] and bindingness of all or most of
these current rules. They may still put forward ‘common consent’ as an
argument for the validity of these rules: but only as supporting the
individual’s intuition, not as a substitute for it or as superseding it.

Here then we have a second Intuitional Method: of which the fundamental
assumption is that we can discern certain general rules with really
clear and finally valid intuition. It is held that such general rules
are implicit in the moral reasoning of ordinary men, who apprehend
them adequately for most practical purposes, and are able to enunciate
them roughly; but that to state them with proper precision requires
a special habit of contemplating clearly and steadily abstract moral
notions. It is held that the moralist’s function then is to perform
this process of abstract contemplation, to arrange the results as
systematically as possible, and by proper definitions and explanations
to remove vagueness and prevent conflict. It is such a system as this
which seems to be generally intended when Intuitive or _a priori_
morality is mentioned, and which will chiefly occupy us in Book iii.

§ 4. By philosophic minds, however, the ‘Morality of Common Sense’ (as
I have ventured to call it), even when made as precise and orderly as
possible, is often found unsatisfactory as a system, although they have
no disposition to question its general authority. It is found difficult
to accept as scientific first principles the moral generalities that
we obtain by reflection on the ordinary thought of mankind, even
though we share this thought. Even granting that these rules can be so
defined as perfectly to fit together and cover the whole field of human
conduct, without coming into conflict and without leaving any practical
questions unanswered,--still the resulting code seems an accidental
aggregate of precepts, which stands in need of some rational synthesis.
In short, without being disposed to deny that conduct commonly
judged to be right is so, we may yet require some deeper explanation
_why_ it is so. From this demand springs a third species or phase of
Intuitionism, which, while accepting the morality of common sense as in
the main sound, still attempts to find for it a philosophic basis which
it does not itself offer: to get one or more principles more absolutely
and undeniably true and evident, from which the current rules might
be deduced, either just as they are commonly received or with slight
modifications and rectifications.[90]

The three phases of Intuitionism just described may be treated as
three stages in the formal development of Intuitive Morality: we may
term them respectively Perceptional, Dogmatic, and Philosophical. The
last-mentioned I have only defined in the vaguest way: in fact, as
yet I have presented it only as a problem, of which it is impossible
to foresee how many solutions may be attempted: but it does not seem
desirable to investigate it further at present, as it will be more
satisfactorily studied after examining in detail the Morality of Common
Sense.

It must not be thought that these three phases are sharply
distinguished in the moral reasoning of ordinary men: but then no more
is Intuitionism of any sort sharply distinguished from either species
of Hedonism. A loose combination or confusion of methods is the most
common type of actual moral reasoning. Probably most moral men believe
that their moral sense or instinct in any case will guide them fairly
right, but also that there are general rules for determining right
action in different departments of conduct: and that for these again
it is possible to find a philosophical explanation, by which they may
be deduced from a smaller number of fundamental principles. Still for
systematic direction of conduct, we require to know on what judgments
we are to rely as ultimately valid.

So far I have been mainly concerned with differences in intuitional
method due to difference of generality in the intuitive beliefs
recognised as ultimately valid. There is, however, another class of
differences arising from a variation of view as to the precise quality
immediately apprehended in the moral intuition. These are peculiarly
subtle and difficult to fix in clear and precise language, and I
therefore reserve them for a separate chapter.

 NOTE.--Intuitional moralists have not always taken sufficient
 care in expounding their system to make clear whether they regard
 as ultimately valid, moral judgments on single acts, or general
 rules prescribing particular kinds of acts, or more universal and
 fundamental principles. For example, Dugald Stewart uses the term
 “perception” to denote the immediate operation of the moral faculty;
 at the same time, in describing what is thus perceived, he always
 seems to have in view general rules.

 Still we can tolerably well distinguish among English ethical writers
 those who have confined themselves mainly to the definition and
 arrangement of the Morality of Common Sense, from those who have
 aimed at a more philosophical treatment of the content of moral
 intuition. And we find that the distinction corresponds in the main
 to a difference of periods: and that--what perhaps we should hardly
 have expected--the more philosophical school is the earlier. The
 explanation of this may be partly found by referring to the doctrines
 in antagonism to which, in the respective periods, the Intuitional
 method asserted and developed itself. In the first period all orthodox
 moralists were occupied in refuting Hobbism. But this system, though
 based on Materialism and Egoism, was yet intended as ethically
 constructive. Accepting in the main the commonly received rules of
 social morality, it explained them as the conditions of peaceful
 existence which enlightened self-interest directed each individual to
 obey; provided only the social order to which they belonged was not
 merely ideal, but made actual by a strong government. Now no doubt
 this view renders the theoretical basis of duty seriously unstable;
 still, assuming a decently good government, Hobbism may claim to at
 once explain and establish, instead of undermining, the morality
 of Common Sense. And therefore, though some of Hobbes’ antagonists
 (as Cudworth) contented themselves with simply reaffirming the
 absoluteness of morality, the more thoughtful felt that system must
 be met by system and explanation by explanation, and that they must
 penetrate beyond the dogmas of common sense to some more irrefragable
 certainty. And so, while Cumberland found this deeper basis in the
 notion of “the common good of all Rationals” as an ultimate end,
 Clarke sought to exhibit the more fundamental of the received rules
 as axioms of perfect self-evidence, necessarily forced upon the
 mind in contemplating human beings and their relations. Clarke’s
 results, however, were not found satisfactory: and by degrees the
 attempt to exhibit morality as a body of scientific truth fell into
 discredit, and the disposition to dwell on the emotional side of the
 moral consciousness became prevalent. But when ethical discussion
 thus passed over into psychological analysis and classification, the
 conception of the objectivity of duty, on which the authority of moral
 sentiment depends, fell gradually out of view: for example, we find
 Hutcheson asking why the moral sense should not vary in different
 human beings, as the palate does, without dreaming that there is any
 peril to morality in admitting such variations as legitimate. When,
 however, the new doctrine was endorsed by the dreaded name of Hume,
 its dangerous nature, and the need of bringing again into prominence
 the cognitive element of moral consciousness, were clearly seen: and
 this work was undertaken as a part of the general philosophic protest
 of the Scottish School against the Empiricism that had culminated
 in Hume. But this school claimed as its characteristic merit that
 it met Empiricism on its own ground, and showed among the facts of
 psychological experience which the Empiricist professed to observe,
 the assumptions which he repudiated. And thus in Ethics it was led
 rather to expound and reaffirm the morality of Common Sense, than to
 offer any profounder principles which could not be so easily supported
 by an appeal to common experience.

FOOTNOTES:

[85] I use the term “dictates” to include the view afterwards mentioned
(§ 2) in which the ultimately valid moral imperatives are conceived as
relating to particular acts.

[86] I have explained in the concluding paragraph of chap. iii. that a
different view of hedonistic systems is admissible.

[87] The wider of the two meanings of ‘Intuition’ here distinguished is
required in treating of Philosophical Intuitionism. See Book iii. chap.
xiii.

[88] It must, however, be remembered that Aristotle regarded the
general proposition obtained by induction as really more certain (and
in a higher sense knowledge) than the particulars through which the
mind is led up to it.

[89] Strictly speaking, the attributes of truth and falsehood only
belong formally to Rules when they are changed from the imperative mood
(“Do _X_”) into the indicative (“_X_ ought to be done”).

[90] It should be observed that such principles will not necessarily
be “intuitional” in the narrower sense that excludes consequences; but
only in the wider sense as being self-evident principles relating to
‘what ought to be.’




