CHAPTER II

THE RELATION OF ETHICS TO POLITICS


§ 1. In the last chapter I have spoken of Ethics and Politics as being
both Practical Studies, including in the scope of their investigation
somewhat that lies outside the sphere of positive sciences--viz. the
determination of ends to be sought, or rules to be unconditionally
obeyed. Before proceeding further, it would seem desirable to determine
in outline the mutual relations of these cognate studies, regarded from
the point of view of Ethics.

As I have defined them, Ethics aims at determining what ought to be
done by individuals, while Politics aims at determining what the
government of a state or political society ought to do and how it ought
to be constituted,--including under the latter head all questions as to
the control over government that should be exercised by the governed.

At first sight it may seem that Politics, so conceived, must be a
branch of Ethics. For all the actions of government are actions of
individuals, alone or in combination, and so are all the actions of
those who, obeying, influencing, or perhaps occasionally resisting
government, maintain and from time to time modify the constitution of
their state: and it would seem that if properly performed such actions
must be determined on ethical principles or be capable of justification
by such principles. But this argument is not decisive; for by similar
reasoning Ethics would have to comprehend all arts, liberal and
industrial. _E.g._ it is a main part of the moral duty of a sea-captain
and his subordinates to navigate their ship properly; but we do not
take Ethics to include a study of the rules of navigation. It may be
replied that every man is not a sailor, but--at least in a country
under popular government--every citizen has important political duties,
which he ought to perform according to knowledge, so far as possible;
but, similarly, it is an important part of every adult’s moral duty
to take care of his health, and it is proverbial that “every man at
forty is a fool or his own physician”; yet we do not consider Ethics to
include the art of medicine.

The specially important connexion between Ethics and Politics arises in
a different way. It is the business of government, by laying down and
enforcing laws, to regulate the outward conduct of the governed, not in
one department only, but in all their social relations, so far as such
conduct is a proper subject for coercive rules. And not only ought this
regulation to be in harmony with morality--for obviously people ought
not to be compelled to do what they ought not to do--but further, to an
important extent the Law of a man’s state will properly determine the
details of his moral duty, even beyond the sphere of legal enforcement.
Thus we commonly regard it as an individual’s moral duty, under the
head of Justice, to “give every man his own,” even when--through some
accident--the other party has not the power of legally enforcing his
right; but still, in considering what is the other’s “own,” we assume
him generally to be guided by the law of his state; if that were
changed, his moral duty would change with it. Similarly, the mutual
moral duties of husbands and wives, and of children and parents, will
vary in detail with the variations in their legal relations.

But when we look closer at the relation thus constituted between
Ethics and Politics, we see that a distinction has to be taken between
actual or Positive Law and Ideal Law or Law as it ought to be. It is
for the latter that Political Theory lays down principles; but it is
Positive, not Ideal, Law that primarily determines right conduct for an
individual here and now, in the manner just exemplified. No doubt if
Positive and Ideal Law appear to me to diverge very widely--if (_e.g._)
I am convinced by political theory that a fundamental change in the
law of property is desirable--this conviction is likely to influence
my view of my moral duty under the existing law; but the extent of
this influence is vague and uncertain. Suppose I am a slave-owner
in a society in which slavery is established, and become convinced
that private property in human beings should be abolished by law: it
does not therefore follow that I shall regard it as my moral duty to
set free my slaves at once. I may think immediate general abolition
of slavery not only hopeless, but even inexpedient for the slaves
themselves, who require a gradual education for freedom: so that it is
better for the present to aim at legal changes that would cut off the
worst evils of slavery, and meanwhile to set an example of humane and
considerate treatment of bondsmen. Similar reasonings might be applied
to the abolition of private property in the instruments of production,
or in appointments to offices, civil or ecclesiastical. Speaking
generally, the extent to which political ideals ought to influence
moral duty would seem to depend partly on the apparent remoteness
or nearness of the prospect of realising the ideal, partly on its
imperativeness, or the expediency of immediate realisation: and the
force attached to both these considerations is likely to vary with the
political method adopted; so that it belongs to Politics rather than
Ethics to determine them more precisely.

To sum up: we have to distinguish clearly between two questions: (1)
how far the determination of right conduct for an individual here
and now ought to be influenced by Positive Laws, and other commands
of Government as actually established; and (2) how far it ought to
be influenced by Political Theory, as to the functions and structure
of Government as it ought to be. As regards the former, it clearly
belongs to Ethics to determine the grounds and limits of obedience
to Government; and also the general conception of political duty, so
far as it goes beyond mere obedience--with due recognition of the
large variations due to the varying political conditions of different
states. (A “good citizen” in the United States will reasonably form
a conception of his actual political duty widely divergent from that
reasonably formed by a good citizen in Russia.[23]) And this will be
the primary business of Ethics so far as it deals with the political
side of life. The discussion of political ideals will only come within
its purview in a more indefinite and indirect way, so far as such
ideals cannot but have some influence on the determination of political
duty under existing conditions.

§ 2. I have stated the Relation of Ethics to Politics--regarded from an
ethical point of view--that seems to me to accord with the definition
of the former subject adopted in the preceding chapter. Some thinkers,
however, take a view of Ethical Theory which involves a relation to
Political Theory quite different from that just set forth; regarding
Theoretical or “Absolute” Ethics as properly an investigation not of
what ought to be done here and now, but of what ought to be the rules
of behaviour in a society of ideally perfect human beings. Thus the
subject-matter of our study would be doubly ideal: as it would not only
prescribe what ought to be done as distinct from what is, but what
ought to be done in a society that itself _is_ not, but only _ought_ to
be. In this view the conclusions of Theoretical or “Absolute” Ethics
would have as indirect and uncertain a relation to the practical
problems of actual life as those of Theoretical Politics:--or even more
so, as in sober political theory it is commonly only the government and
not the governed society that is conceived in an ideal condition. Still
the two studies are not unlikely to blend in one theory of ideal social
relations;--unless the ideal society is conceived as having no need
of government, so that Politics, in the ordinary sense,[24] vanishes
altogether.

Those who take this view[25] adduce the analogy of Geometry to show
that Ethics ought to deal with ideally perfect human relations, just
as Geometry treats of ideally straight lines and perfect circles. But
the irregular lines which we meet with in experience have spatial
relations which Geometry does not ignore altogether; it can and does
ascertain them with a sufficient degree of accuracy for practical
purposes: though of course they are more complex than those of
perfectly straight lines. So in Astronomy, it would be more convenient
for purposes of study if the stars moved in circles, as was once
believed: but the fact that they move not in circles but in ellipses,
and even in imperfect and perturbed ellipses, does not take them out
of the sphere of scientific investigation: by patience and industry we
have learnt how to reduce to principles and calculate even these more
complicated motions. It may be useful for purposes of instruction to
assume that the planets move in perfect ellipses: but what we want, as
astronomers, to know is the actual motion of the stars, and its causes:
and similarly as moralists we naturally inquire what ought to be done
in the actual world in which we live. In neither case can we hope to
represent in our general reasonings the full complexity of the actual
considerations: but we endeavour to approximate to it as closely as
possible. It is only so that we really grapple with the question to
which mankind generally require an answer: ‘What is a man’s duty in his
present condition?’ For it is too paradoxical to say that the whole
duty of man is summed up in the effort to attain an ideal state of
social relations; and unless we say this, we must determine our duties
to existing men in view of existing circumstances: and this is what
the student of Ethics seeks to do in a systematic manner.

The inquiry into the morality of an ideal society can therefore be at
best but a preliminary investigation, after which the step from the
ideal to the actual, in accordance with reason, remains to be taken.
We have to ask, then, how far such a preliminary construction seems
desirable. And in answering this we must distinguish the different
methods of Ethics. For it is generally held by Intuitionists that true
morality prescribes absolutely what is in itself right, under all
social conditions; at least as far as determinate duties are concerned:
as (_e.g._) that truth should always be spoken and promises kept, and
‘Justice be done, though the sky should fall.’ And so far as this is
held it would seem that there can be no fundamental distinction drawn,
in the determination of duty, between the actual state of society and
an ideal state: at any rate the general definition of (_e.g._) Justice
will be the same for both, no less than its absolute stringency. Still
even an extreme Intuitionist would admit that the details of Justice
and other duties will vary with social institutions: and it is a
plausible suggestion, that if we can clearly contemplate as a pattern
the “absolute” Justice of an ideal community, we shall be better able
to attain the merely “relative” Justice that is alone possible under
existing conditions. How far this is so, we shall be in a better
position to judge when we have examined the definition of Justice from
an Intuitional point of view.

The question takes a simpler form in the case of the method which
proposes as an ultimate end, and supreme standard, Universal
Happiness.[26] Here we have merely to ask how far a systematic
consideration of the social relations of an ideally happy group of
human beings is likely to afford guidance in our efforts to promote
human happiness here and now. I shall not at present deny that this
task might usefully be included in an exhaustive study of this method.
But it can easily be shown that it is involved in serious difficulties.

For as in ordinary deliberation we have to consider what is best
under certain conditions of human life, internal or external, so
we must do this in contemplating the ideal society. We require to
contemplate not so much the end supposed to be attained--which is
simply the most pleasant consciousness conceivable, lasting as long and
as uninterruptedly as possible--but rather some method of realising
it, pursued by human beings; and these, again, must be conceived as
existing under conditions not too remote from our own, so that we
can at least endeavour to imitate them. And for this we must know
how far our present circumstances are modifiable; a very difficult
question, as the constructions which have actually been made of such
ideal societies show. For example, the _Republic_ of Plato seems in
many respects sufficiently divergent from the reality, and yet he
contemplates war as a permanent unalterable fact, to be provided for
in the ideal state, and indeed such provision seems the predominant
aim of his construction; whereas the soberest modern Utopia would
certainly include the suppression of war. Indeed the ideal will often
seem to diverge in diametrically opposite directions from the actual,
according to the line of imagined change which we happen to adopt,
in our visionary flight from present evils. For example, permanent
marriage-unions now cause some unhappiness, because conjugal affection
is not always permanent; but they are thought to be necessary, partly
to protect men and women from vagaries of passion pernicious to
themselves, but chiefly in order to the better rearing of children. Now
it may seem to some that in an ideal state of society we could trust
more to parental affections, and require less to control the natural
play of emotion between the sexes, and that ‘Free Love’ is therefore
the ideal; while others would maintain that permanence in conjugal
affection is natural and normal, and that any exceptions to this rule
must be supposed to disappear as we approximate to the ideal. Again,
the happiness enjoyed in our actual society seems much diminished by
the unequal distribution of the means of happiness, and the division
of mankind into rich and poor. But we can conceive this evil removed
in two quite different ways: either by an increased disposition on
the part of the rich to redistribute their share, or by such social
arrangements as would enable the poor to secure more for themselves. In
the one case the ideal involves a great extension and systematisation
of the arbitrary and casual almsgiving that now goes on: in the other
case, its extinction.

In short, it seems that when we abandon the firm ground of actual
society we have an illimitable cloudland surrounding us on all sides,
in which we may construct any variety of pattern states; but no
definite ideal to which the actual undeniably approximates, as the
straight lines and circles of the actual physical world approximate to
those of scientific geometry.

It may be said, however, that we can reduce this variety by studying
the past history of mankind, as this will enable us to predict to
some extent their future manner of existence. But even so it does
not appear that we shall gain much definite guidance for our present
conduct. For let us make the most favourable suppositions that we can,
and such as soar even above the confidence of the most dogmatic of
scientific historians. Let us assume that the process of human history
is a progress of mankind towards ever greater happiness. Let us assume
further that we can not only fix certain limits within which the future
social condition of mankind must lie, but even determine in detail the
mutual relations of the different elements of the future community,
so as to view in clear outline the rules of behaviour, by observing
which they will attain the maximum of happiness. It still remains quite
doubtful how far it would be desirable for us to imitate these rules
in the circumstances in which we now live. For this foreknown social
order is _ex hypothesi_ only presented as a more advanced stage in
our social progress, and not as a type or pattern which we ought to
make a struggle to realise approximately at an earlier stage. How far
it should be taken as such a pattern, is a question which would still
have to be determined, and in the consideration of it the effects of
our actions on the existing generation would after all be the most
important element.[27]

FOOTNOTES:

[23] It may be doubted whether the latter ought properly to be termed
a “good citizen,” and not rather a “faithful subject of the Czar of
Russia.” But this doubt only illustrates the divergence to which I am
drawing attention.

[24] Sometimes, as before observed, Politics appears to be used in a
wider sense, to denote the theory of ideal social relations, whether
conceived to be established through governmental coercion or otherwise.

[25] In writing this section I had primarily in view the doctrine set
forth in Mr. Spencer’s _Social Statics_. As Mr. Spencer has restated
his view and replied to my arguments in his _Data of Ethics_, it is
necessary for me to point out that the first paragraph of this section
is not directed against such a view of ‘Absolute’ and ‘Relative’
Ethics as is given in the later treatise--which seems to me to differ
materially from the doctrine of _Social Statics_. In _Social Statics_
it is maintained not merely--as in the _Data of Ethics_--that Absolute
Ethics which “formulates normal conduct in an ideal society” ought to
“take precedence of Relative Ethics”; but that Absolute Ethics is the
only kind of Ethics with which a philosophical moralist can possibly
concern himself. To quote Mr. Spencer’s words:--“Any proposed system of
morals which recognises existing defects, and countenances acts made
needful by them, stands self-condemned.... Moral law ... requires as
its postulate that human beings be perfect. The philosophical moralist
treats solely of the _straight_ man ... shows in what relationship
he stands to other straight men ... a problem in which a _crooked_
man forms one of the elements, is insoluble by him.” _Social Statics_
(chap. i.). Still more definitely is Relative Ethics excluded in the
following passage of the concluding chapter of the same treatise (the
italics are mine):--“It will very likely be urged that, whereas the
perfect moral code is confessedly beyond the fulfilment of imperfect
men, some other code is needful for our present guidance ... to say
that the imperfect man requires a moral code which recognises his
imperfection and allows for it, _seems at first sight reasonable_. _But
it is not really so_ ... a system of morals which shall recognise man’s
present imperfections and allow for them _cannot be devised; and would
be useless if it could be devised_.”

[26] I omit, for the present, the consideration of the method which
takes Perfection as an ultimate end: since, as has been before
observed, it is hardly possible to discuss this satisfactorily, in
relation to the present question, until it has been somewhat more
clearly distinguished from the ordinary Intuitional Method.

[27] Some further consideration of this question will be found in a
subsequent chapter. Cf. Book iv. chap. iv. § 2.




