CHAPTER IV

THE METHOD OF UTILITARIANISM


§ 1. If the view maintained in the preceding chapter as to the general
Utilitarian basis of the Morality of Common Sense may be regarded as
sufficiently established, we are now in a position to consider more
closely to what method of determining right conduct the acceptance
of Utilitarianism will practically lead. The most obvious method, of
course, is that of Empirical Hedonism, discussed in Book ii. chap.
iii.; according to which we have in each case to compare all the
pleasures and pains that can be foreseen as probable results of the
different alternatives of conduct presented to us, and to adopt the
alternative which seems likely to lead to the greatest happiness on the
whole.

In Book ii., however, it appeared that even the more restricted
application of this method, which we there had to consider, was
involved in much perplexity and uncertainty. Even when an individual is
only occupied in forecasting his own pleasures, it seems difficult or
impossible for him to avoid errors of considerable magnitude; whether
in accurately comparing the pleasantness of his own past feelings, as
represented in memory, or in appropriating the experience of others,
or in arguing from the past to the future. And these difficulties
are obviously much increased when we have to take into account all
the effects of our actions on all the sentient beings who may be
affected by them. At the same time, in Book ii. we could not find any
satisfactory substitute for this method of empirical comparison. It
did not appear reasonable to take refuge in the uncriticised beliefs
of men in general as to the sources of happiness: indeed, it seemed
impossible to extract any adequately clear and definite _consensus_
of opinion from the confused and varying utterances of Common Sense on
this subject. Nor again could it be shown that the individual would be
more likely to attain the greatest happiness open to him by practically
confining his efforts to the realisation of any scientifically
ascertainable physical or psychical conditions of happiness: nor did
it seem possible to infer on empirical grounds that the desired result
would be secured by conformity to the accepted principles of morality.
But when we consider these latter in relation, not to the happiness of
the individual, but to that of human (or sentient) beings generally,
it is clear from the preceding chapter that the question of harmony
between Hedonism and Intuitionism presents _prima facie_ an entirely
different aspect. Indeed from the considerations that we have just
surveyed it is but a short and easy step to the conclusion that in the
Morality of Common Sense we have ready to hand a body of Utilitarian
doctrine; that the “rules of morality for the multitude” are to be
regarded as “positive beliefs of mankind as to the effects of actions
on their happiness,”[351] so that the apparent first principles of
Common Sense may be accepted as the “middle axioms” of Utilitarian
method; direct reference being only made to utilitarian considerations,
in order to settle points upon which the verdict of Common Sense is
found to be obscure and conflicting. On this view the traditional
controversy between the advocates of Virtue and the advocates of
Happiness would seem to be at length harmoniously settled.

And the arguments for this view which have been already put forward
certainly receive support from the hypothesis, now widely accepted,
that the moral sentiments are ultimately derived, by a complex and
gradual process, from experiences of pleasure and pain. The hypothesis,
in a summary form, would seem to be this; (1) in the experience of
each member of the human community the pain or alarm caused to him by
actions of himself and of others tends by association to excite in
him a dislike of such actions, and a similar though feebler effect is
produced by his perception of pain or danger caused to others with
whom he is connected by blood, or by community of interest, or any
special tie of sympathy: (2) experience also tends more indirectly
to produce in him sentiments restraining him from actions painful or
alarming to others, through his dread of their resentment and its
consequences,--especially dread of his chief’s anger, and, where
religious influence has become strong, of the anger of supernatural
beings: (3) with these latter feelings blends a sympathetic aversion
to the pain of other men generally, which--at first comparatively
feeble--tends to grow in force as morality develops. In the same way
experiences of pleasure and gratitude, and desire of the goodwill of
others and its consequences, tend to produce liking for actions that
are perceived to cause pleasure to self or to others. The similar
aversions and likings that are thus produced in the majority of the
members of any society, through the general similarity of their natures
and conditions, tend to become more similar through communication
and imitation,--the desire of each to retain the goodwill of others
operating to repress individual divergencies. Thus common likings for
conduct that affects pleasurably the community generally or some part
of it, and common dislikes for conduct causing pain and alarm, come
to be gradually developed; they are transmitted from generation to
generation, partly perhaps by physical inheritance, but chiefly by
tradition from parents to children, and imitation of adults by the
young; in this way their origin becomes obscured, and they finally
appear as what are called the moral sentiments. This theory does not,
in my view, account adequately for the actual results of the faculty
of moral judgment and reasoning, so far as I can examine them by
reflection on my own moral consciousness: for this, as I have before
said, does not yield any apparent intuitions that stand the test of
rigorous examination except such as, from their abstract and general
character, have no cognisable relation to particular experiences of
any kind.[352] But that the theory gives a partially true explanation
of the historical origin of particular moral sentiments and habits and
commonly accepted rules, I see no reason to doubt; and thus regarded
it seems to supplement the arguments of the preceding chapter that
tend to exhibit the morality of common sense as unconsciously or
‘instinctively’ utilitarian.

But it is one thing to hold that the current morality expresses,
partly consciously but to a larger extent unconsciously, the results
of human experience as to the effects of actions: it is quite another
thing to accept this morality _en bloc_, so far as it is clear and
definite, as the best guidance we can get to the attainment of maximum
general happiness. However attractive this simple reconciliation
of Intuitional and Utilitarian methods may be, it is not, I think,
really warranted by the evidence. In the first place, I hold that in a
complete view of the development of the moral sense a more prominent
place should be given to the effect of sympathy with the impulses that
prompt to actions, as well as with the feelings that result from them.
It may be observed that Adam Smith[353] assigns to this operation
of sympathy,--the echo (as it were) of each agent’s passion in the
breast of unconcerned spectators,--the first place in determining our
approval and disapproval of actions[354]; sympathy with the effect of
conduct on others he treats as a merely secondary factor, correcting
and qualifying the former. Without going so far as this, I think that
there are certainly many cases where the resulting moral consciousness
would seem to indicate a balance or compromise between the two kinds of
sympathy; and the compromise may easily be many degrees removed from
the rule which Utilitarianism would prescribe. For though the passions
and other active impulses are doubtless themselves influenced, no
less than the moral sentiments, by experiences of pleasure and pain;
still this influence is not sufficient to make them at all trustworthy
guides to general, any more than to individual, happiness--as some
of our moral sentiments themselves emphatically announce. But even
if we consider our common moral sentiments as entirely due--directly
or indirectly--to the accumulated and transmitted experiences of
primary and sympathetic pains and pleasures; it is obvious that the
degree of accuracy with which sentiments thus produced will guide us
to the promotion of general happiness must largely depend upon the
degree of accuracy with which the whole sum of pleasurable and painful
consequences, resulting from any course of action, has been represented
in the consciousness of an average member of the community. And it is
seen at a glance that this representation has always been liable to
errors of great magnitude, from causes that were partly noticed in the
previous chapter, when we were considering the progress of morality. We
have to allow, first, for limitation of sympathy; since in every age
and country the sympathy of an average man with other sentient beings,
and even his egoistic regard for their likings and aversions, has been
much more limited than the influence of his actions on the feelings of
others. We must allow further for limitation of intelligence: for in
all ages ordinary men have had a very inadequate knowledge of natural
sequences; so that such indirect consequences of conduct as have been
felt have been frequently traced to wrong causes, and been met by wrong
moral remedies, owing to imperfect apprehension of the relation of
means to ends. Again, where the habit of obedience to authority and
respect for rank has become strong, we must allow for the possibly
perverting influence of a desire to win the favour or avert the anger
of superiors. And similarly we must allow again for the influences of
false religions; and also for the possibility that the sensibilities of
religious teachers have influenced the code of duty accepted by their
followers, in points where these sensibilities were not normal and
representative, but exceptional and idiosyncratic.[355]

On the other hand, we must suppose that these deflecting influences
have been more or less limited and counteracted by the struggle for
existence in past ages among different human races and communities;
since, so far as any moral habit or sentiment was unfavourable to the
preservation of the social organism, it would be a disadvantage in
the struggle for existence, and would therefore tend to perish with
the community that adhered to it. But we have no reason to suppose
that this force would be adequate to keep positive morality always
in conformity with a Utilitarian ideal. For (1) imperfect morality
would be only one disadvantage among many, and not, I conceive, the
most important, unless the imperfection were extreme,--especially
in the earlier stages of social and moral development, in which the
struggle for existence was most operative: and (2) a morality perfectly
preservative of a human community might still be imperfectly felicific,
and so require considerable improvement from a Utilitarian point of
view.[356] Further, analogy would lead us to expect that however
completely adapted the moral instincts of a community may be at some
particular time to its conditions of existence, any rapid change of
circumstances would tend to derange the adaptation, from survival of
instincts formerly useful, which through this change become useless or
pernicious. And indeed, apart from any apparent changes in external
circumstances, it might result from the operation of some law of human
development, that the most completely organised experience of human
happiness in the past would guide us but imperfectly to the right
means of making it a maximum in the future. For example, a slight
decrease in the average strength of some common impulse might render
the traditional rules and sentiments, that regulate this impulse,
infelicific on the whole. And if, when we turn from these abstract
considerations to history, and examine the actual morality of other
ages and countries, we undoubtedly find that, considered as an
instrument for producing general happiness, it continually seems to
exhibit palpable imperfections,--there is surely a strong presumption
that there are similar imperfections to be discovered in our own moral
code, though habit and familiarity prevent them from being obvious.

Finally, we must not overlook the fact that the divergences which we
find when we compare the moralities of different ages and countries,
exist to some extent side by side in the morality of any one society at
any given time. It has already been observed that whenever divergent
opinions are entertained by a minority so large, that we cannot fairly
regard the dogma of the majority as the plain utterance of Common
Sense, an appeal is necessarily made to some higher principle, and
very commonly to Utilitarianism. But a smaller minority than this,
particularly if composed of persons of enlightenment and special
acquaintance with the effects of the conduct judged, may reasonably
inspire us with distrust of Common Sense: just as in the more technical
parts of practice we prefer the judgment of a few trained experts
to the instincts of the vulgar. Yet again, a contemplation of these
divergent codes and their relation to the different circumstances in
which men live, suggests that Common-Sense morality is really only
adapted for ordinary men in ordinary circumstances--although it may
still be expedient that these ordinary persons should regard it as
absolutely and universally prescribed, since any other view of it may
dangerously weaken its hold over their minds. So far as this is the
case we must use the Utilitarian method to ascertain how far persons
in special circumstances require a morality more specially adapted to
them than Common Sense is willing to concede: and also how far men of
peculiar physical or mental constitution ought to be exempted from
ordinary rules, as has sometimes been claimed for men of genius, or
men of intensely emotional nature, or men gifted with more than usual
prudence and self-control.

Further, it is important to notice, that besides the large amount
of divergence that exists between the moral instincts of different
classes and individuals, there is often a palpable discrepancy
between the moral instincts of any class or individual, and such
Utilitarian reasonings as their untrained intellects are in the
habit of conducting. There are many things in conduct which many
people think right but not expedient, or at least which they would
not think expedient if they had not first judged them to be right;
in so far as they reason from experience only, their conclusions as
to what conduces to the general happiness are opposed to their moral
intuitions. It may be said that this results generally from a hasty and
superficial consideration of expediency; and that the discrepancy would
disappear after a deeper and completer examination of the consequences
of actions. And I do not deny that this would often turn out to be the
case: but as we cannot tell _a priori_ how far it would be so, this
only constitutes a further argument for a comprehensive and systematic
application of a purely Utilitarian method.

We must conclude, then, that we cannot take the moral rules of Common
Sense as expressing the _consensus_ of competent judges, up to the
present time, as to the kind of conduct which is likely to produce
the greatest amount of happiness on the whole. It would rather seem
that it is the unavoidable duty of a systematic Utilitarianism to make
a thorough revision of these rules, in order to ascertain how far
the causes previously enumerated (and perhaps others) have actually
operated to produce a divergence between Common Sense and a perfectly
Utilitarian code of morality.

§ 2. But in thus stating the problem we are assuming that the latter
term of this comparison can be satisfactorily defined and sufficiently
developed; that we can frame with adequate precision a system of rules,
constituting the true moral code for human beings as deduced from
Utilitarian principles. And this seems to have been commonly assumed
by the school whose method we are now examining. But when we set
ourselves in earnest to the construction of such a system, we find it
beset with serious difficulties. For, passing over the uncertainties
involved in hedonistic comparison generally, let us suppose that
the _quantum_ of happiness that will result from the establishment
of any plan of behaviour among human beings can be ascertained with
sufficient exactness for practical purposes--even when the plan is as
yet constructed in imagination alone. It still has to be asked, What
is the nature of the human being for whom we are to construct this
hypothetical scheme of conduct? For humanity is not something that
exhibits the same properties always and everywhere: whether we consider
the intellect of man or his feelings, or his physical condition and
circumstances, we find them so different in different ages and
countries, that it seems _prima facie_ absurd to lay down a set of
ideal Utilitarian rules for mankind generally. It may be said that
these differences after all relate chiefly to details; and that there
is in any case sufficient uniformity in the nature and circumstances of
human life always and everywhere to render possible an outline scheme
of ideal behaviour for mankind at large. But it must be answered, that
it is with details that we are now principally concerned; for the
previous discussion has sufficiently shown that the conduct approved by
Common Sense has a _general_ resemblance to that which Utilitarianism
would prescribe; but we wish to ascertain more exactly how far the
resemblance extends, and with what delicacy and precision the current
moral rules are adapted to the actual needs and conditions of human
life.

Suppose, then, that we contract the scope of investigation, and only
endeavour to ascertain the rules appropriate to men as we know them,
in our own age and country. We are immediately met with a dilemma:
the men whom we know are beings who accept more or less definitely a
certain moral code: if we take them as they are in this respect, we can
hardly at the same time conceive them as beings for whom a code is yet
to be constructed _de novo_: if, on the other hand, we take an actual
man--let us say, an average Englishman--and abstract his morality,
what remains is an entity so purely hypothetical, that it is not clear
what practical purpose can be served by constructing a system of moral
rules for the community of such beings. Could we indeed assume that
the scientific deduction of such a system would ensure its general
acceptance; could we reasonably expect to convert all mankind at once
to Utilitarian principles, or even all educated and reflective mankind,
so that all preachers and teachers should take universal happiness as
the goal of their efforts as unquestioningly as physicians take the
health of the individual body; and could we be sure that men’s moral
habits and sentiments would adjust themselves at once and without
any waste of force to these changed rules:--then perhaps in framing
the Utilitarian code we might fairly leave existing morality out of
account. But I cannot think that we are warranted in making these
suppositions; I think we have to take the moral habits, impulses, and
tastes of men as a material given us to work upon no less than the rest
of their nature, and as something which, as it only partly results
from reasoning in the past, so can only be partially modified by any
reasoning which we can now apply to it. It seems therefore clear that
the solution of the hypothetical Utilitarian problem of constructing an
ideal morality for men conceived to be in other respects as experience
shows them to be, but with their actual morality abstracted, will not
give us the result which we practically require.

It will perhaps be said, “No doubt such an ideal Utilitarian morality
can only be gradually, and perhaps after all imperfectly, introduced;
but still it will be useful to work it out as a pattern to which
we may approximate.” But, in the first place, it may not be really
possible to approximate to it: since any particular existing moral
rule, though not the ideally best even for such beings as existing
men under the existing circumstances, may yet be the best that they
can be got to obey: so that it would be futile to propose any other,
or even harmful, as it might tend to impair old moral habits without
effectively replacing them by new ones. And secondly, the endeavour
gradually to approximate to a morality constructed on the supposition
that the non-moral part of existing human nature remains unchanged, may
lead us wrong: because the state of men’s knowledge and intellectual
faculties, and the range of their sympathies, and the direction and
strength of their prevailing impulses, and their relations to the
external world and to each other, are continually being altered,
and such alteration is to some extent under our control and may be
felicific in a high degree: and any material modifications in important
elements and conditions of human life may require corresponding
changes in established moral rules and sentiments, in order that the
greatest possible happiness may be attained by the human being whose
life is thus modified. In short, the construction of a Utilitarian
code, regarded as an ideal towards which we are to progress, is met by
a second dilemma:--The nature of man and the conditions of his life
cannot usefully be assumed to be constant, unless we are confining our
attention to the present or proximate future; while again, if we are
considering them in the present or proximate future, we must take into
account men’s actual moral habits and sentiments, as a part of their
nature not materially more modifiable than the rest.

Nor, again, can I agree with Mr. Spencer[357] in thinking that it is
possible to solve the problems of practical ethics by constructing
the final perfect form of society, towards which the process of human
history is tending; and determining the rules of mutual behaviour which
ought to be, and will be, observed by the members of this perfect
society. For, firstly, granting that we can conceive as possible a
human community which is from a utilitarian point of view perfect; and
granting also Mr. Spencer’s definition of this perfection--viz. that
the voluntary actions of all the members cause “pleasure unalloyed
by pain anywhere” to all who are affected by them[358]--; it still
seems to me quite impossible to forecast the natures and relations
of the persons composing such a community, with sufficient clearness
and certainty to enable us to define even in outline their moral
code. And secondly, even if it were otherwise, even if we could
construct scientifically Mr. Spencer’s ideal morality, I do not think
such a construction would be of much avail in solving the practical
problems of actual humanity. For a society in which--to take one point
only--there is no such thing as punishment, is necessarily a society
with its essential structure so unlike our own, that it would be idle
to attempt any close imitation of its rules of behaviour. It might
possibly be best for us to conform approximately to some of these
rules; but this we could only know by examining each particular rule
in detail; we could have no general grounds for concluding that it
would be best for us to conform to them as far as possible. For even
supposing that this ideal society is ultimately to be realised, it
must at any rate be separated from us by a considerable interval of
evolution; hence it is not unlikely that the best way of progressing
towards it will be some other than the apparently directest way, and
that we shall reach it more easily if we begin by moving away from it.
Whether this is so or not, and to what extent, can only be known by
carefully examining the effects of conduct on actual human beings, and
inferring its probable effects on the human beings whom we may expect
to exist in the proximate future.

§ 3. Other thinkers of the evolutionist school suggest that the
difficulties of Utilitarian method might be avoided, in a way more
simple than Mr. Spencer’s, by adopting, as the _practically_ ultimate
end and criterion of morality, “health” or “efficiency” of the social
organism, instead of happiness. This view is maintained, for instance,
in Mr. Leslie Stephen’s _Science of Ethics_;[359] and deserves careful
examination. As I understand Mr. Stephen, he means by “health” that
state of the social organism which tends to its preservation under the
conditions of its existence, as they are known or capable of being
predicted; and he means the same by “efficiency”;--since the work for
which, in his view, the social organism has to be “efficient” is simply
the work of living, the function of “going on.” I say this because
“efficiency” might be understood to imply some ‘task of humanity’
which the social organism has to execute, beyond the task of merely
living; and similarly “health” might be taken to mean a state tending
to the preservation not of existence merely, but of _desirable_
existence--desirability being interpreted in some non-hedonistic
manner: and in this case an examination of either term would lead us
again over the ground traversed in the discussion on Ultimate Good (in
chap. xiv. of the preceding Book).[360] But I do not understand that
any such implications were in Mr. Stephen’s mind; and they certainly
would not be in harmony with the general drift of his argument. The
question, therefore, is whether, if General Happiness be admitted to
be the really ultimate end in a system of morality, it is nevertheless
reasonable to take Preservation of the social organism as the
practically ultimate “scientific criterion” of moral rules.

My reasons for answering this question in the negative are two-fold.
In the first place I know no adequate grounds for supposing that if we
aim exclusively at the preservation of the social organism we shall
secure the maximum attainable happiness of its individual members:
indeed, so far as I know, of two social states which equally tend
to be preserved one may be indefinitely happier than the other. As
has been before observed[361] a large part of the pleasures which
cultivated persons value most highly--æsthetic pleasures--are derived
from acts and processes that have no material tendency to preserve
the individual’s life:[362] and the statement remains true if we
substitute the social organism for the individual. And I may add that
much refined morality is concerned with the prevention of pains which
have no demonstrable tendency to the destruction of the individual
or of society. Hence, while I quite admit that the maintenance of
preservative habits and sentiments is the most indispensable function
of utilitarian morality--and perhaps almost its sole function in
the earlier stages of moral development, when to live at all was
a difficult task for human communities--I do not therefore think
it reasonable that we should be content with the mere securing of
existence for humanity generally, and should confine our efforts to
promoting the increase of this security, instead of seeking to make the
secured existence more desirable.

But, secondly, I do not see on what grounds Mr. Stephen holds that the
criterion of ‘tendency to the preservation of the social organism’
is necessarily capable of being applied with greater precision than
that of ‘tendency to general happiness,’ even so far as the two
ends are coincident: and that the former “satisfies the conditions
of a scientific criterion.” I should admit that this would probably
be the case, if the Sociology that we know were a science actually
constructed, and not merely the sketch of a possible future science:
but Mr. Stephen has himself told us that sociology at present “consists
of nothing more than a collection of unverified guesses and vague
generalisations, disguised under a more or less pretentious apparatus
of quasi-scientific terminology.” This language is stronger than I
should have ventured to use; but I agree generally with the view that
it expresses; and it appears to me difficult for a writer who holds
this view to maintain that the conception of “social health,” regarded
as a criterion and standard of right conduct, is in any important
degree more “scientific” than the conception of “general happiness.”

Holding this estimate of the present condition of Sociology, I consider
that, from the utilitarian point of view, there are equally decisive
reasons against the adoption of any such notion as “development” of
the social organism--instead of mere preservation--as the practically
ultimate end and criterion of morality. On the one hand, if by
“development” is meant an increase in “efficiency” or preservative
qualities, this notion is only an optimistic specialisation of that
just discussed (involving the--I fear--unwarranted assumption that the
social organism tends to become continually more efficient); so that
no fresh arguments need be urged against it. If, however, something
different is meant by development--as (_e.g._) a disciple of Mr.
Spencer might mean an increase in “definite coherent heterogeneity,”
whether or not such increase was preservative--then I know no
scientific grounds for concluding that we shall best promote general
happiness by concentrating our efforts on the attainment of this
increase. I do not affirm it to be impossible that every increase in
the definite coherent heterogeneity of a society of human beings may
be accompanied or followed by an increase in the aggregate happiness
of the members of the society: but I do not perceive that Mr. Spencer,
or any one else, has even attempted to furnish the kind of proof which
this proposition requires.[363]

To sum up: I hold that the utilitarian, in the existing state of our
knowledge, cannot possibly construct a morality _de novo_ either for
man as he is (abstracting his morality), or for man as he ought to
be and will be. He must start, speaking broadly, with the existing
social order, and the existing morality as a part of that order: and in
deciding the question whether any divergence from this code is to be
recommended, must consider chiefly the immediate consequences of such
divergence, upon a society in which such a code is conceived generally
to subsist. No doubt a thoughtful and well-instructed Utilitarian
may see dimly a certain way ahead, and his attitude towards existing
morality may be to some extent modified by what he sees. He may discern
in the future certain evils impending, which can only be effectually
warded off by the adoption of new and more stringent views of duty in
certain departments: while, on the other hand, he may see a prospect
of social changes which will render a relaxation of other parts of the
moral code expedient or inevitable. But if he keeps within the limits
that separate scientific prevision from fanciful Utopian conjecture,
the form of society to which his practical conclusions relate will be
one varying but little from the actual, with its actually established
code of moral rules and customary judgments concerning virtue and vice.

FOOTNOTES:

[351] Cf. J. S. Mill, _Utilitarianism_, chap. ii. Mill, however, only
affirms that the “rules of morality for the multitude” are to be
accepted by the philosopher provisionally, until he has got something
better.

[352] I refer to the abstract principles of Prudence, Justice, and
Rational Benevolence as defined in chap. xiii. of the preceding Book.

[353] _Theory of Moral Sentiments_, Book i.

[354] This operation of sympathy is strikingly illustrated in the penal
codes of primitive communities, both by the mildness of the punishments
inflicted for homicide, and by the startling differences between the
penalties allotted to the same crime according as the criminal was
taken in the act or not. “It is curious to observe,” says Sir H. Maine
(_Ancient Law_, chap. x.), “how completely the men of primitive times
were persuaded that the impulses of the injured person were the proper
measure of the vengeance he was entitled to exact, and how literally
they imitated the probable rise and fall of his passions in fixing the
scale of punishment.” And even in more civilised societies there is a
very common feeling of uncertainty as to the propriety of inflicting
punishment for crimes committed long ago, which seems traceable to the
same source.

[355] No doubt this influence is confined within strict limits:
no authority can permanently impose on men regulations flagrantly
infelicific: and the most practically originative of religious teachers
have produced their effect chiefly by giving new force and vividness to
sentiments already existing (and recognised as properly authoritive) in
the society upon which they acted. Still, it might have made a great
difference to the human race if (_e.g._) Mohammed had been fond of
wine, and indifferent to women.

[356] On this point I shall have occasion to speak further in the next
section.

[357] I refer especially to the views put forward by Mr. Spencer in the
concluding chapters of his _Data of Ethics_.

[358] This definition, however, does not seem to me admissible, from
a utilitarian point of view: since a society in this sense perfect
might not realise the maximum of possible happiness; it might still be
capable of a material increase of happiness through pleasures involving
a slight alloy of pain, such as Mr. Spencer’s view of perfection would
exclude.

[359] See especially chap. ix. Pars. 12-15.

[360] It is obvious that if ‘desirability,’ in the above definition,
were interpreted hedonistically, the term “health” would merely give us
a new name for the general problem of utilitarian morality; not a new
suggestion for its solution. I ought to say that the notions of “social
welfare” or “wellbeing” are elsewhere used by Mr. Stephen, in the place
of those here quoted, but I do not think that he means by them any more
than what I understand him to mean by “health” or “efficiency”--_i.e._
that state of the social organism which tends to its preservation under
the conditions of its existence.

[361] Book ii. chap. vi. § 3.

[362] I do not mean to assert that ‘play’ in some form is not necessary
for physical health: but there is a long step from the encouragement of
play, so far as salutary, to the promotion of social culture.

[363] It may be observed that the increased heterogeneity which the
development of modern industry has brought with it, in the form of a
specialisation of industrial functions which tends to render the lives
of individual workers narrow and monotonous, has usually been regarded
by philanthropists as seriously infelicific; and as needing to be
counteracted by a general diffusion of the intellectual culture now
enjoyed by the few--which, if realised, would tend _pro tanto_ to make
the lives of different classes in the community _less_ heterogeneous.




