CHAPTER IV

PLEASURE AND DESIRE


§ 1. In the preceding chapter I have left undetermined the emotional
characteristics of the impulse that prompts us to obey the dictates
of Reason. I have done so because these seem to be very different
in different minds, and even to vary much and rapidly in the same
mind, without any corresponding variation in the volitional direction
of the impulse. For instance, in the mind of a rational Egoist the
ruling impulse is generally what Butler and Hutcheson call a “calm”
or “cool” self-love: whereas in the man who takes universal happiness
as the end and standard of right conduct, the desire to do what is
judged to be reasonable as such is commonly blended in varying degrees
with sympathy and philanthropic enthusiasm. Again, if one conceives
the dictating Reason--whatever its dictates may be--as external to
oneself, the cognition of rightness is accompanied by a sentiment of
Reverence for Authority; which may by some be conceived impersonally,
but is more commonly regarded as the authority of a supreme Person,
so that the sentiment blends with the affections normally excited by
persons in different relations, and becomes Religious. This conception
of Reason as an external authority, against which the self-will
rebels, is often irresistibly forced on the reflective mind: at other
times, however, the identity of Reason and Self presents itself as
an immediate conviction, and then Reverence for Authority passes
over into Self-respect; and the opposite and even more powerful
sentiment of Freedom is called in, if we consider the rational Self
as liable to be enslaved by the usurping force of sensual impulses.
Quite different again are the emotions of Aspiration or Admiration
aroused by the conception of Virtue as an ideal of Moral Beauty.[40]
Other phases of emotion might be mentioned, all having with these
the common characteristic that they are inseparable from an apparent
cognition--implicit or explicit, direct or indirect--of _rightness_
in the conduct to which they prompt. There are, no doubt, important
differences in the moral value and efficacy of these different
emotions, to which I shall hereafter call attention; but their primary
practical effect does not appear to vary so long as the cognition of
rightness remains unchanged. It is then with these cognitions that
Ethics, in my view, is primarily concerned: its object is to free them
from doubt and error, and systematise them as far as possible.

There is, however, one view of the feelings which prompt to voluntary
action, which is sometimes thought to cut short all controversy as to
the principles on which such action ought to be regulated. I mean the
view that volition is always determined by pleasures or pains actual or
prospective. This doctrine--which I may distinguish as Psychological
Hedonism--is often connected and not seldom confounded with the method
of Ethics which I have called Egoistic Hedonism; and no doubt it seems
at first sight a natural inference that if one end of action--my
own pleasure or absence of pain--is definitely determined for me by
unvarying psychological laws, a different end cannot be prescribed for
me by Reason.

Reflection, however, shows that this inference involves the unwarranted
assumption that a man’s pleasure and pain are determined independently
of his moral judgments: whereas it is manifestly possible that our
prospect of pleasure resulting from any course of conduct may largely
depend on our conception of it as right or otherwise: and in fact the
psychological theory above mentioned would require us to suppose that
this is normally the case with conscientious persons, who habitually
act in accordance with their moral convictions. The connexion of the
expectation of pleasure from an act with the judgment that it is right
may be different in different cases: we commonly conceive a truly moral
man as one who finds pleasure in doing what he judges to be right
because he so judges it: but, even where moral sensibility is weak,
expectation of pleasure from an act may be a necessary consequent of a
judgment that it is right, through a belief in the moral government of
the world somehow harmonising Virtue and Self-interest.

I therefore conclude that there is no necessary connexion between
the psychological proposition that pleasure or absence of pain to
myself is always the actual ultimate end of my action, and the ethical
proposition that my own greatest happiness or pleasure is for me the
_right_ ultimate end. It may, however, be replied that if the former
proposition be accepted in the same quantitatively precise form as the
latter--if it is admitted that I must by a law of my nature always aim
at the greatest possible pleasure (or least pain) to myself--then at
least I cannot conceive any aim conflicting with this to be prescribed
by Reason. And this seems to me undeniable. If, as Bentham[41] affirms,
“on the occasion of every act he exercises, every human being is”
inevitably “led to pursue that line of conduct which, according to his
view of the case, taken by him at the moment, will be in the highest
degree contributory to his own greatest happiness,”[42] then, to any
one who knows this, it must become inconceivable that Reason dictates
to him to pursue any other line of conduct. But at the same time, as
it seems to me, the proposition that he ‘ought’ to pursue _that_ line
of conduct becomes no less clearly incapable of being affirmed with
any significance. For a psychological law invariably realised in my
conduct does not admit of being conceived as ‘a precept’ or ‘dictate’
of reason: this latter must be a rule from which I am conscious that it
is possible to deviate. I do not, however, think that the proposition
quoted from Bentham would be affirmed without qualification by any of
the writers who now maintain psychological Hedonism. They would admit,
with J. S. Mill,[43] that men often, not from merely intellectual
deficiencies, but from “infirmity of character, make their election
for the nearer good, though they know it to be less valuable: and this
no less when the choice is between two bodily pleasures ... they pursue
sensual indulgences to the injury of health, though perfectly aware
that health is the greater good.”[44]

This being so, Egoistic Hedonism becomes a possible ethical ideal
to which psychological Hedonism seems to point. If it can be shown
that the ultimate aim of each of us in acting is always solely _some_
pleasure (or absence of pain) to himself, the demonstration certainly
suggests that each _ought_ to seek his own _greatest_ pleasure.[45] As
has been said, no cogent inference is possible from the psychological
generalisation to the ethical principle: but the mind has a natural
tendency to pass from the one position to the other: if the actual
ultimate springs of our volition are always our own pleasures and
pains, it seems _prima facie_ reasonable to be moved by them in
proportion to their pleasantness and painfulness, and therefore to
choose the greatest pleasure or least pain on the whole. Further,
this psychological doctrine seems to conflict with an ethical view
widely held by persons whose moral consciousness is highly developed:
viz. that an act, to be in the highest sense virtuous, must not be
done solely for the sake of the attendant pleasure, even if that be
the pleasure of the moral sense; so that if I do an act from the sole
desire of obtaining the glow of moral self-approbation which I believe
will attend its performance, the act will not be truly virtuous.

It seems therefore important to subject psychological Hedonism, even in
its more indefinite form, to a careful examination.

§ 2. It will be well to begin by defining more precisely the question
at issue. First, I will concede that pleasure is a kind of feeling
which stimulates the will to actions tending to sustain or produce
it,--to sustain it, if actually present, and to produce it, if it be
only represented in idea--; and similarly pain is a kind of feeling
which stimulates to actions tending to remove or avert it.[46] It
seems convenient to call the felt volitional stimulus in the two cases
respectively Desire[47] and Aversion; though it should be observed
that the former term is ordinarily restricted to the impulse felt
when pleasure is not actually present, but only represented in idea.
The question at issue, then, is not whether pleasure, present or
represented, is normally accompanied by an impulse to prolong the
actual or realise the represented feeling, and pain correspondingly by
aversion: but whether there are no desires and aversions which have not
pleasures and pains for their objects--no conscious impulses to produce
or avert results other than the agent’s own feelings. In the treatise
to which I have referred, Mill explains that “desiring a thing, and
finding it pleasant, are, in the strictness of language, two modes of
naming the same psychological fact.” If this be the case, it is hard
to see how the proposition we are discussing requires to be determined
by “practised self-consciousness and self-observation”; as the denial
of it would involve a contradiction in terms. The truth is that an
ambiguity in the word Pleasure has tended to confuse the discussion
of this question.[48] When we speak of a man doing something “at his
pleasure,” or “as he pleases,” we usually signify the mere fact of
voluntary choice: not necessarily that the result aimed at is some
prospective feeling of the chooser. Now, if by “pleasant” we merely
mean that which influences choice, exercises a certain attractive force
on the will, it is an assertion incontrovertible because tautological,
to say that we desire what is pleasant--or even that we desire a
thing in proportion as it appears pleasant. But if we take “pleasure”
to denote the kind of feelings, above defined, it becomes a really
debateable question whether the end to which our desires are always
consciously directed is the attainment by ourselves of such feelings.
And this is what we must understand Mill to consider “so obvious, that
it will hardly be disputed.”

It is rather curious to find that one of the best-known of English
moralists regards the exact opposite of what Mill thinks so obvious, as
being not merely a universal fact of our conscious experience, but even
a necessary truth. Butler, as is well known, distinguishes self-love,
or the impulse towards our own pleasure, from “particular movements
towards particular external objects--honour, power, the harm or good
of another”; the actions proceeding from which are “no otherwise
interested than as every action of every creature must from the nature
of the case be; for no one can act but from a desire, or choice, or
preference of his own.” Such particular passions or appetites are,
he goes on to say, “_necessarily presupposed by the very idea_ of
an interested pursuit; since the very idea of interest or happiness
consists in this, that an appetite or affection enjoys its object.” We
could not pursue pleasure at all, unless we had desires for something
else than pleasure; for pleasure consists in the satisfaction of just
these “disinterested” impulses.

Butler has certainly over-stated his case,[49] so far as my own
experience goes; for many pleasures,--especially those of sight,
hearing and smell, together with many emotional pleasures,--occur to
me without any perceptible relation to previous desires, and it seems
quite _conceivable_ that our primary desires might be entirely directed
towards such pleasures as these. But as a matter of fact, it appears to
me that throughout the whole scale of my impulses, sensual, emotional,
and intellectual alike, I can distinguish desires of which the object
is something other than my own pleasure.

I will begin by taking an illustration of this from the impulses
commonly placed lowest in the scale. The appetite of hunger, so far
as I can observe, is a direct impulse to the eating of food. Such
eating is no doubt commonly attended with an agreeable feeling of
more or less intensity; but it cannot, I think, be strictly said that
this agreeable feeling is the object of hunger, and that it is the
representation of this pleasure which stimulates the will of the hungry
man as such. Of course, hunger is frequently and naturally accompanied
with anticipation of the pleasure of eating: but careful introspection
seems to show that the two are by no means inseparable. And even when
they occur together the pleasure seems properly the object not of the
primary appetite, but of a secondary desire which can be distinguished
from the former; since the _gourmand_, in whom this secondary desire
is strong, is often prompted by it to actions designed to stimulate
hunger, and often, again, is led to control the primary impulse, in
order to prolong and vary the process of satisfying it.

Indeed it is so obvious that hunger is something different from the
desire for anticipated pleasure, that some writers have regarded
its volitional stimulus (and that of desire generally) as a case of
aversion from present pain. This, however, seems to me a distinct
mistake in psychological classification. No doubt desire is a state of
consciousness so far similar to pain, that in both we feel a stimulus
prompting us to pass from the present state into a different one. But
aversion from pain is an impulse to get out of the present state and
pass into some other state which is only negatively represented as
different from the present: whereas in desire as such, the primary
impulse is towards the realisation of some positive future result. It
is true that when a strong desire is, for any reason, baulked of its
effect in causing action, it is generally painful in some degree: and
so a secondary aversion to the state of desire is generated, which
blends itself with the desire and may easily be confounded with it.
But here, again, we may distinguish the two impulses by observing the
different kinds of conduct to which they occasionally prompt: for the
aversion to the pain of ungratified desire, though it may act as an
additional stimulus towards the gratification of the desire, may also
(and often does) prompt us to get rid of the pain by suppressing the
desire.

The question whether all desire has in some degree the quality of pain,
is one of psychological rather than ethical interest;[50] so long as
it is admitted that it is often not painful in any degree comparable
to its intensity as desire, so that its volitional impulse cannot be
explained as a case of aversion to its own painfulness. At the same
time, so far as my experience goes, I have no hesitation in answering
the question in the negative. Consider again the case of hunger; I
certainly do not find hunger as an element of my normal life at all
a painful feeling: it only becomes painful when I am in ill health,
or when the satisfaction of the appetite is abnormally delayed. And,
generally speaking, any desire that is not felt to be thwarted in
its primary impulse to actions tending to its satisfaction, is not
only not itself a painful feeling--even when this attainment is still
remote--but is often an element of a state of consciousness which
as a whole is highly pleasurable. Indeed, the pleasures afforded by
the consciousness of eager activity, in which desire is an essential
element, constitute a considerable item in the total enjoyment of
life. It is almost a commonplace to say that such pleasures, which
we may call generally the pleasures of Pursuit, are more important
than the pleasures of Attainment: and in many cases it is the prospect
of the former rather than of the latter that induces us to engage in
a pursuit. In such cases it is peculiarly easy to distinguish the
desire to attain the object pursued, from a desire of the pleasure of
attainment: since the attainment only becomes pleasant in prospect
because the pursuit itself stimulates a desire for what is pursued.
Take, for example, the case of any game which involves--as most games
do--a contest for victory. No ordinary player before entering on such
a contest, has any desire for victory in it: indeed he often finds
it difficult to imagine himself deriving gratification from such
victory, before he has actually engaged in the competition. What he
deliberately, before the game begins, desires is not victory, but
the pleasant excitement of the struggle for it; only for the full
development of this pleasure a transient desire to win the game is
generally indispensable. This desire, which does not exist at first, is
stimulated to considerable intensity by the competition itself: and in
proportion as it is thus stimulated both the mere contest becomes more
pleasurable, and the victory, which was originally indifferent, comes
to afford a keen enjoyment.

The same phenomenon is exhibited in the case of more important kinds
of pursuit. Thus it often happens that a man, feeling his life languid
and devoid of interests, begins to occupy himself in the prosecution
of some scientific or socially useful work, for the sake not of the
end but of the occupation. At first, very likely, the occupation is
irksome: but soon, as he foresaw, a desire to attain the end at which
he aims is stimulated, partly by sympathy with other workers, partly by
his sustained exercise of voluntary effort directed towards it; so that
his pursuit, becoming eager, becomes also a source of pleasure. Here,
again, it is no doubt true that in proportion as his desire for the end
grows strong, the attainment of it becomes pleasant in prospect: but it
would be a palpable mistake to say that this prospective pleasure is
the object of the desire that causes it.[51]

When we compare these pleasures with those previously discussed,
another important observation suggests itself. In the former case,
though we could distinguish appetite, as it appears in consciousness,
from the desire of the pleasure attending the satisfaction of appetite,
there appeared to be no incompatibility between the two. The fact that
a glutton is dominated by the desire of the pleasures of eating in no
way impedes the development in him of the appetite which is a necessary
condition of these pleasures. But when we turn to the pleasures
of pursuit, we seem to perceive this incompatibility to a certain
extent: a certain subordination of self-regard seems to be necessary
in order to obtain full enjoyment. A man who maintains throughout an
epicurean mood, keeping his main conscious aim perpetually fixed on
his own pleasure, does not catch the full spirit of the chase; his
eagerness never gets just the sharpness of edge which imparts to the
pleasure its highest zest. Here comes into view what we may call the
fundamental paradox of Hedonism, that the impulse towards pleasure, if
too predominant, defeats its own aim. This effect is not visible, or at
any rate is scarcely visible, in the case of passive sensual pleasures.
But of our active enjoyments generally, whether the activities on
which they attend are classed as ‘bodily’ or as ‘intellectual’ (as
well as of many emotional pleasures), it may certainly be said that
we cannot attain them, at least in their highest degree, so long as
we keep our main conscious aim concentrated upon them. It is not only
that the exercise of our faculties is insufficiently stimulated by the
mere desire of the pleasure attending it, and requires the presence
of other more objective, ‘extra-regarding,’ impulses, in order to be
fully developed: we may go further and say that these other impulses
must be temporarily predominant and absorbing, if the exercise and
its attendant gratification are to attain their full scope. Many
middle-aged Englishmen would maintain the view that business is more
agreeable than amusement; but they would hardly find it so if they
transacted the business with a perpetual conscious aim at the attendant
pleasure. Similarly, the pleasures of thought and study can only be
enjoyed in the highest degree by those who have an ardour of curiosity
which carries the mind temporarily away from self and its sensations.
In all kinds of Art, again, the exercise of the creative faculty is
attended by intense and exquisite pleasures: but it would seem that in
order to get them, one must forget them: the genuine artist at work
seems to have a predominant and temporarily absorbing desire for the
realisation of his ideal of beauty.

The important case of the benevolent affections is at first sight
somewhat more doubtful. On the one hand it is of course true, that when
those whom we love are pleased or pained, we ourselves feel sympathetic
pleasure and pain: and further, that the flow of love or kindly feeling
is itself highly pleasurable. So that it is at least plausible to
interpret benevolent actions as aiming ultimately at the attainment
of one or both of these two kinds of pleasures, or at the averting
of sympathetic pain from the agent. But we may observe, first, that
the impulse to beneficent action produced in us by sympathy is often
so much out of proportion to any actual consciousness of sympathetic
pleasure and pain in ourselves, that it would be paradoxical to regard
this latter as its object. Often indeed we cannot but feel that a tale
of actual suffering arouses in us an excitement on the whole more
pleasurable than painful, like the excitement of witnessing a tragedy;
and yet at the same time stirs in us an impulse to relieve it, even
when the process of relieving is painful and laborious and involves
various sacrifices of our own pleasures. Again, we may often free
ourselves from sympathetic pain most easily by merely turning our
thoughts from the external suffering that causes it: and we sometimes
feel an egoistic impulse to do this, which we can then distinguish
clearly from the properly sympathetic impulse prompting us to relieve
the original suffering. And finally, the much-commended pleasures of
benevolence seem to require, in order to be felt in any considerable
degree, the pre-existence of a desire to do good to others for their
sake and not for our own. As Hutcheson explains, we may _cultivate_
benevolent affection for the sake of the pleasures attending it (just
as the glutton cultivates appetite), but we cannot produce it at will,
however strong may be our desire of these pleasures: and when it
exists, even though it may owe its origin to a purely egoistic impulse,
it is still essentially a desire to do good to others for their sake
and not for our own.

It cannot perhaps be said that the self-abandonment and
self-forgetfulness, which seemed an essential condition of the full
development of the other elevated impulses before noticed, characterise
benevolent affection normally and permanently; as love, when a powerful
emotion, seems naturally to involve a desire for reciprocated love,
strong in proportion to the intensity of the emotion; and thus the
consciousness of self and of one’s own pleasures and pains seems
often heightened by the very intensity of the affection that binds
one to others. Still we may at least say that this self-suppression
and absorption of consciousness in the thought of other human beings
and their happiness is a common incident of all strong affections:
and it is said that persons who love intensely sometimes feel a sense
of antagonism between the egoistic and altruistic elements of their
desire, and an impulse to suppress the former, which occasionally
exhibits itself in acts of fantastic and extravagant self-sacrifice.

If then reflection on our moral consciousness seems to show that “the
pleasure of virtue is one which can only be obtained on the express
condition of its not being the object sought,”[52] we need not distrust
this result of observation on account of the abnormal nature of the
phenomenon. We have merely another illustration of a psychological law,
which, as we have seen, is exemplified throughout the whole range
of our desires. In the promptings of Sense no less than in those of
Intellect or Reason we find the phenomenon of strictly disinterested
impulse: base and trivial external ends may excite desires of this
kind, as well as the sublime and ideal: and there are pleasures of the
merely animal life which can only be obtained on condition of not being
directly sought, no less than the satisfactions of a good conscience.

§ 3. So far I have been concerned to insist on the felt incompatibility
of ‘self-regarding’ and ‘extra-regarding’ impulses only as a means of
proving their essential distinctness. I do not wish to overstate this
incompatibility: I believe that most commonly it is very transient, and
often only momentary, and that our greatest happiness--if that be our
deliberate aim--is generally attained by means of a sort of alternating
rhythm of the two kinds of impulse in consciousness. A man’s conscious
desire is, I think, more often than not chiefly extra-regarding; but
where there is strong desire in any direction, there is commonly keen
susceptibility to the corresponding pleasures; and the most devoted
enthusiast is sustained in his work by the recurrent consciousness of
such pleasures. But it is important to point out that the familiar
and obvious instances of conflict between self-love and some
extra-regarding impulse are not paradoxes and illusions to be explained
away, but phenomena which the analysis of our consciousness in its
normal state, when there is no such conflict, would lead us to expect.
If we are continually acting from impulses whose immediate objects are
something other than our own happiness, it is quite natural that we
should occasionally yield to such impulses when they prompt us to an
uncompensated sacrifice of pleasure. Thus a man of weak self-control,
after fasting too long, may easily indulge his appetite for food to
an extent which he knows to be unwholesome: and that not because the
pleasure of eating appears to him, even in the moment of indulgence, at
all worthy of consideration in comparison with the injury to health;
but merely because he feels an impulse to eat food, which prevails
over his prudential judgment. Thus, again, men have sacrificed all
the enjoyments of life, and even life itself, to obtain posthumous
fame: not from any illusory belief that they would be somehow capable
of deriving pleasure from it, but from a direct desire of the future
admiration of others, and a preference of it to their own pleasure. And
so, again, when the sacrifice is made for some ideal end, as Truth, or
Freedom, or Religion: it may be a real sacrifice of the individual’s
happiness, and not merely the preference of one highly refined pleasure
(or of the absence of one special pain) to all the other elements of
happiness. No doubt this preference is possible; a man may feel that
the high and severe delight of serving his ideal is a “pearl of great
price” outweighing in value all other pleasures. But he may also feel
that the sacrifice will not repay _him_, and yet determine that it
shall be made.

To sum up: our conscious active impulses are so far from being always
directed towards the attainment of pleasure or avoidance of pain for
ourselves, that we can find everywhere in consciousness extra-regarding
impulses, directed towards something that is not pleasure, nor relief
from pain; and, indeed, a most important part of our pleasure depends
upon the existence of such impulses: while on the other hand they are
in many cases so far incompatible with the desire of our own pleasure
that the two kinds of impulse do not easily coexist in the same moment
of consciousness; and more occasionally (but by no means rarely) the
two come into irreconcilable conflict, and prompt to opposite courses
of action. And this incompatibility (though it is important to notice
it in other instances) is no doubt specially prominent in the case of
the impulse towards the end which most markedly competes in ethical
controversy with pleasure: the love of virtue for its own sake, or
desire to do what is right as such.

§ 4. The psychological observations on which my argument is based will
not perhaps be directly controverted, at least to such an extent as
to involve my main conclusion: but there are two lines of reasoning
by which it has been attempted to weaken the force of this conclusion
without directly denying it. In the first place, it is urged that
Pleasure, though not the only conscious aim of human action, is
yet always the result to which it is unconsciously directed. The
proposition would be difficult to disprove; since no one denies that
pleasure in some degree normally accompanies the attainment of a
desired end: and when once we go beyond the testimony of consciousness
there seems to be no clear method of determining which among the
consequences of any action is the end at which it is aimed. For the
same reason, however, the proposition is at any rate equally difficult
to prove. But I should go further, and maintain that if we seriously
set ourselves to consider human action on its unconscious side, we
can only conceive it as a combination of movements of the parts of
a material organism: and that if we try to ascertain what the ‘end’
in any case of such movements is, it is reasonable to conclude that
it is some material result, some organic condition conducive to the
preservation either of the individual organism or of the race to which
it belongs. In fact, the doctrine that pleasure (or the absence of
pain) is the end of all human action can neither be supported by the
results of introspection, nor by the results of external observation
and inference: it rather seems to be reached by an arbitrary and
illegitimate combination of the two.

But again, it is sometimes said that whatever be the case with our
present adult consciousness, our original impulses were all directed
towards pleasure[53] or from pain, and that any impulses otherwise
directed are derived from these by “association of ideas.” I can find
no evidence that even tends to prove this: so far as we can observe the
consciousness of children, the two elements, extra-regarding impulse
and desire for pleasure, seem to coexist in the same manner as they
do in mature life. In so far as there is any difference, it seems to
be in the opposite direction; as the actions of children, being more
instinctive and less reflective, are more prompted by extra-regarding
impulse, and less by conscious aim at pleasure. No doubt the two
kinds of impulse, as we trace back the development of consciousness,
gradually become indistinguishable: but this obviously does not justify
us in identifying with either of the two the more indefinite impulse
out of which both have been developed. But even supposing it were found
that our earliest appetites were all merely appetites for pleasure, it
would have little bearing on the present question. What I am concerned
to maintain is that men do not _now_ normally desire pleasure alone,
but to an important extent other things also: some in particular having
impulses towards virtue, which may and do conflict with their conscious
desire for their own pleasure. To say in answer to this that all men
_once_ desired pleasure is, from an ethical point of view, irrelevant:
except on the assumption that there is an original type of man’s
appetitive nature, to which, as such, it is right or best for him to
conform. But probably no Hedonist would expressly maintain this; though
such an assumption, no doubt, is frequently made by writers of the
Intuitional school.

 NOTE.--Some psychologists regard Desire as essentially painful. This
 view seems to me erroneous, according to the ordinary use of the term:
 and though it does not necessarily involve the confusion--against
 which I am chiefly concerned to guard in the present chapter--between
 the volitional stimulus of desire itself and the volitional stimulus
 of aversion to desire as painful, it has some tendency to cause
 this confusion. It may therefore be worth while to point out that
 the difference of opinion between myself and the psychologists in
 question--of whom I select Dr. Bain as a leading example--depends
 largely, though not entirely, on a difference of definition. In chap.
 viii. of the second division of his book on _The Emotions and the
 Will_, Dr. Bain defines Desire as “that phase of volition where there
 is a motive and not ability to act on it,” and gives the following
 illustration:--

 “The inmate of a small gloomy chamber conceives to himself the
 pleasure of light and of an expanded prospect: the unsatisfying ideal
 urges the appropriate action for gaining the reality; he gets up and
 walks out. Suppose now that the same ideal delight comes into the
 mind of a prisoner. Unable to fulfil the prompting, he remains under
 the solicitation of the motive: and his state is denominated craving,
 longing, appetite, desire. If all motive impulses could be at once
 followed up, desire would have no place ... there is a bar in the way
 of acting which leads to the state of conflict and renders desire a
 more or less painful state of mind.”

 Now I agree that Desire is most frequently painful in some degree
 when the person desiring is inhibited from acting for the attainment
 of the desired object. I do not indeed think that even under these
 circumstances it is always painful, especially when it is accompanied
 with hope. Take the simple case of hunger. Ordinarily, when I am
 looking forward to dinner with a good appetite, I do not find hunger
 painful--unless I have fasted unusually long--although custom and a
 regard for my digestion prevent me from satisfying the appetite till
 the soup is served. Still I admit that when action tending to fruition
 is excluded, desire is very liable to be painful.

 But it is surely contrary to usage to restrict the term Desire to this
 case. Suppose Dr. Bain’s prisoner becomes possessed of a file, and
 sees his way to getting out of prison by a long process, which will
 involve, among other operations, the filing of certain bars. It would
 surely seem absurd to say that his desire finally ceases when the
 operation of filing begins. No doubt the concentration of attention
 on the complex activities necessary for the attainment of freedom
 is likely to cause the prisoner to be so absorbed by other ideas
 and feelings that the desire of freedom may temporarily cease to be
 present in his consciousness. But as the stimulus on which his whole
 activity ultimately depends is certainly derived from the unrealised
 idea of freedom, this idea, with the concomitant feeling of desire,
 will normally recur at brief intervals during the process. Similarly
 in other cases, while it is quite true that men often work for a
 desired end without consciously feeling desire for the end, it would
 be absurd to say that they never feel desire while so working: at any
 rate this restricted use of the term has never, I think, been adopted
 by ethical writers in treating of Desire. And in some passages Dr.
 Bain himself seems to adopt a wider meaning. He says, for instance,
 in the chapter from which I have quoted, that “we have a form of
 desire ... _when we are working for distant ends_.” If, then, it be
 allowed that the feeling of Desire is at any rate sometimes an element
 of consciousness coexisting with a process of activity directed to
 the attainment of the desired object, or intervening in the brief
 pauses of such a process, I venture to think that when the feeling is
 observed under these conditions, it will not be found in accordance
 with the common experience of mankind to describe it as essentially
 painful.

 Take, as a simple instance, the case of a game involving bodily
 exercise and a contest of skill. Probably many persons who take part
 in such exercises for sanitary or social purposes begin without
 any perceptible desire to win the game: and probably as long as
 they remain thus indifferent the exercise is rather tedious.
 Usually, however, a conscious desire to win the game is excited,
 as a consequence of actions directed towards this end: and--in my
 experience at least--in proportion as the feeling grows strong, the
 whole process becomes more pleasurable. If this be admitted to be a
 normal experience, it must surely be also admitted that Desire in this
 case is a feeling in which introspection does not enable us to detect
 the slightest quality of pain.

 It would be easy to give an indefinite number of similar instances of
 energetic activity carried on for an end--whether in sport or in the
 serious business of life--where a keen desire for the attainment of
 the end in view is indispensable to a real enjoyment of the labour
 required to attain, and where at the same time we cannot detect any
 painfulness in the desire, however much we try to separate it in
 introspective analysis from its concomitant feeling.

 The error that I am trying to remove seems to me partly due to
 overlooking these cases, and contemplating exclusively cases in which
 Desire is for some reason or other prevented from having its normal
 effect in stimulating activity directed to the attainment of the
 desired object. Partly, however, it seems to be due to the resemblance
 between Desire and Pain, to which I have drawn attention in the text
 of this chapter, _i.e._ the _unrestfulness_ which is undoubtedly a
 characteristic of the state of desire, and--ordinarily--of pain.
 For the characteristic of “unrestfulness” requires some care to
 distinguish it from “uneasiness,” in the sense in which this latter
 term signifies some degree of painfulness. The mistake is connected
 with the equally erroneous view--which Hobbes controverts in his
 usual forcible style--that “the Felicity of this life consisteth
 in the repose of a mind satisfied”; and it has also some affinity
 with the widespread view--which has left its mark on more than one
 European language--that labour, strenuous activity, is essentially
 painful. On both these points, it ought to be said, there is doubtless
 considerable divergence between the experiences of different
 individuals: but at any rate among Englishmen I conceive that a person
 who finds desire always painful--in the sense in which, as I have
 tried to show, the word is commonly used both by moralists and in
 ordinary discourse--is as exceptional a being as one who finds labour
 always painful.

FOOTNOTES:

[40] The relation of the æsthetic to the moral ideal of conduct will be
discussed in a subsequent chapter (ix.) of this Book.

[41] I here, as in chap. i., adopt the exact hedonistic interpretation
of ‘happiness’ which Bentham has made current. This seems to me the
most suitable use of the term; but I afterwards (Book i. chap. vii. §
1) take note of other uses.

[42] _Constitutional Code_, Introduction, § 2.

[43] _Utilitarianism_, chap. ii. p. 14.

[44] Mr. Leslie Stephen, who holds (_Science of Ethics_, p. 50) that
“pain and pleasure are the sole determining causes of action,” at the
same time thinks that it “will be admitted on all hands” that “we are
not always determined by a calculation of pleasure to come.”

[45] Or, more precisely, ‘greatest surplus of pleasure over pain.’

[46] The qualifications and limitations which this proposition
requires, before it can be accepted as strictly true, do not seem to me
important for the purpose of the present argument. See Book ii. chap.
ii. § 2.

[47] In the present treatise ‘Desire’ is primarily regarded as a felt
impulse or stimulus to actions tending to the realisation of what is
desired. There are, however, states of feeling, sometimes intense, to
which the term ‘desire’ is by usage applicable, in which this impulsive
quality seems to be absent or at least latent; because the realisation
of the desired result is recognised as hopeless, and has long been
so recognised. In such cases the ‘desire’ (so-called) remains in
consciousness only as a sense of want of a recognised good, a feeling
no more or otherwise impulsive than the regretful memory of past joy.
That is, desire in this condition may develop a secondary impulse to
voluntary day-dreaming, by which a bitter-sweet imaginary satisfaction
of the want is attained; or, so far as it is painful, it may impel to
action or thought which will bring about its own extinction: but its
primary impulse to acts tending to realise the desired result is no
longer perceptible.

With this state of mind

        --“the desire of the moth for the star,
    Of the night for the morrow”--

I am not concerned in the present discussion. I notice it chiefly
because some writers (_e.g._ Dr. Bain) seem to contemplate as the sole
or typical case of desire, “where there is a motive and no ability to
act upon it”; thus expressly excluding that condition of desire (as I
use the term) which seems to me of primary importance from an ethical
point of view, _i.e._ where action tending to bring about the desired
result is conceived as at once possible.

[48] The confusion occurs in the most singular form in Hobbes, who
actually identifies Pleasure and Appetite--“this motion in which
consisteth pleasure, is a solicitation to draw near to the thing that
pleaseth.”

[49] The same argument is put in a more guarded, and, I think,
unexceptionable form by Hutcheson. It is perhaps more remarkable that
Hume, too, shares Butler’s view which he expresses almost in the
language of the famous sermons. “There are,” he says, “bodily wants
or appetites, acknowledged by every one, which necessarily precede
all sensual enjoyment, and carry us directly to seek possession of
the object. Thus hunger and thirst have eating and drinking for their
end: and from the gratification of these primary appetites arises a
pleasure, which may become the object of another species of inclination
that is secondary and interested.” Hence Hume finds that “the
hypothesis which allows of a disinterested benevolence, distinct from
self-love,” is “conformable to the analogy of nature.” See _Enquiry
concerning the Principles of Morals_ (Appendix II.).

[50] Some further discussion of it will be found in the note at the end
of the chapter.

[51] Professor J. S. Mackenzie, in his _Manual of Ethics_ (3rd edition,
Book i. chap. ii. note), arguing for the universal painfulness of
desire, urges that the so-called “pleasures of pursuit” are really
pleasures of “progressive attainment”; what causes pleasure being
the series of partial attainments that precede the final attainment.
There seems to me much truth in this view, as regards some forms of
pursuit; but in other cases I can find nothing deserving the name in
the course of the pursuit: the prominent element of the pleasure seems
to be clearly the reflex of eager and hopeful, perhaps consciously
skilful, activity. _E.g._ this is often the case in the pursuit of
truth, scientific or historical. I have spent most pleasant hours in
hunting for evidence in favour of a conjecture that had occurred to
me as a possible solution of a difficult historical question, without
any “progressive attainment” at all, as I found no evidence of any
importance: but the pleasure had none the less been real, at any rate
in the earlier part of the pursuit. Or take the common experience of
deer-stalking, or the struggle for victory in an evenly balanced game
of chess, or a prolonged race in which no competitor gains on the
others till near the end. I find nothing like “progressive attainment”
in these cases.

But even granting Mr. Mackenzie’s view to be more widely applicable
than I think it, the question it deals with seems to me in the main
irrelevant to the issue that I am now discussing: since it remains true
that the presence of antecedent desire is an essential condition of the
pleasures of attainment--whether “progressive” or “catastrophic”--and
that the desire is not itself perceptibly painful.

[52] Lecky, _Hist. of European Morals_, Introduction.

[53] I must ask the reader to distinguish carefully the question
discussed in this chapter, which relates to the _objects_ of desires
and aversions, from the different question whether the _causes_ of
these impulses are always to be found in antecedent experiences of
pleasure and pain. The bearing of this latter question on Ethics,
though not unimportant, is manifestly more indirect than that of the
question here dealt with: and it will be convenient to postpone it till
a later stage of the discussion. Cf. _post_, Book ii. chap. vi. § 2,
and Book iv. chap. iv. § 1.




