BOOK III

INTUITIONISM




CHAPTER I

INTUITIONISM


§ 1. The effort to examine, closely but quite neutrally, the system
of Egoistic Hedonism, with which we have been engaged in the last
Book, may not improbably have produced on the reader’s mind a certain
aversion to the principle and method examined, even though (like
myself) he may find it difficult not to admit the ‘authority’ of
self-love, or the ‘rationality’ of seeking one’s own individual
happiness. In considering ‘enlightened self-interest’ as supplying a
_prima facie_ tenable principle for the systematisation of conduct, I
have given no expression to this sentiment of aversion, being anxious
to ascertain with scientific impartiality the results to which this
principle logically leads. When, however, we seem to find on careful
examination of Egoism (as worked out on a strictly empirical basis)
that the common precepts of duty, which we are trained to regard as
sacred, must be to the egoist rules to which it is only generally
speaking and for the most part reasonable to conform, but which under
special circumstances must be decisively ignored and broken,--the
offence which Egoism in the abstract gives to our sympathetic and
social nature adds force to the recoil from it caused by the perception
of its occasional practical conflict with common notions of duty. But
further, we are accustomed to expect from Morality clear and decisive
precepts or counsels: and such rules as can be laid down for seeking
the individual’s greatest happiness cannot but appear wanting in these
qualities. A dubious guidance to an ignoble end appears to be all that
the calculus of Egoistic Hedonism has to offer. And it is by appealing
to the superior certainty with which the dictates of Conscience or the
Moral Faculty are issued, that Butler maintains the practical supremacy
of Conscience over Self-love, in spite of his admission (in the passage
before quoted[151]) of theoretical priority in the claims of the
latter.[152] A man knows certainly, he says, what he ought to do: but
he does not certainly know what will lead to his happiness.

In saying this, Butler appears to me fairly to represent the common
moral sense of ordinary mankind, in our own age no less than in his.
The moral judgments that men habitually pass on one another in ordinary
discourse imply for the most part that duty is usually not a difficult
thing for an ordinary man to _know_, though various seductive impulses
may make it difficult for him to _do_ it. And in such maxims as that
duty should be performed ‘advienne que pourra,’ that truth should be
spoken without regard to consequences, that justice should be done
‘though the sky should fall,’ it is implied that we have the power of
seeing clearly that certain kinds of actions are right and reasonable
in themselves, apart from their consequences;--or rather with a merely
partial consideration of consequences, from which other consequences
admitted to be possibly good or bad are definitely excluded.[153] And
such a power is claimed for the human mind by most of the writers who
have maintained the existence of moral intuitions; I have therefore
thought myself justified in treating this claim as characteristic of
the method which I distinguish as Intuitional. At the same time,
as I have before observed, there is a wider sense in which the term
‘intuitional’ might be legitimately applied to either Egoistic or
Universalistic Hedonism; so far as either system lays down as a first
principle--which if known at all must be intuitively known--that
happiness is the only rational ultimate end of action. To this meaning
I shall recur in the concluding chapters (xiii. and xiv.) of this Book;
in which I shall discuss more fully the intuitive character of these
hedonistic principles. But since the adoption of this wider meaning
would not lead us to a distinct ethical method, I have thought it best,
in the detailed discussion of Intuitionism which occupies the first
eleven chapters of this Book, to confine myself as far as possible to
Moral Intuition understood in the narrower sense above defined.

§ 2. Here, perhaps, it may be said that in thus defining Intuitionism I
have omitted its most fundamental characteristic; that the Intuitionist
properly speaking--in contrast with the Utilitarian--does not judge
actions by an external standard at all; that true morality, in his
view, is not concerned with outward actions as such, but with the
state of mind in which acts are done--in short with “intentions” and
“motives.”[154] I think, however, that this objection is partly due to
a misunderstanding. Moralists of all schools, I conceive, would agree
that the moral judgments which we pass on actions relate primarily to
intentional actions regarded as intentional. In other words, what we
judge to be ‘wrong’--in the strictest ethical sense--is not any part
of the actual effects, as such, of the muscular movements immediately
caused by the agent’s volition, but the effects which he foresaw in
willing the act; or, more strictly, his volition or choice of realising
the effects as foreseen.[155] When I speak therefore of acts, I must be
understood to mean--unless the contrary is stated--acts presumed to be
intentional and judged as such: on this point I do not think that any
dispute need arise.

The case of motives is different and requires careful discussion. In
the first place the distinction between “motive” and “intention” in
ordinary language is not very precise: since we apply the term “motive”
to foreseen consequences of an act, so far as they are conceived to be
objects of desire to the agent, or to the desire of such consequences:
and when we speak of the intention of an act we usually, no doubt,
have desired consequences in view. I think, however, that for purposes
of exact moral or jural discussion, it is best to include under the
term ‘intention’ all the consequences of an act that are foreseen as
certain or probable; since it will be admitted that we cannot evade
responsibility for any foreseen bad consequences of our acts by the
plea that we felt no desire for them, either for their own sake or
as means to ulterior ends:[156] such undesired accompaniments of the
desired results of our volitions are clearly chosen or willed by
us. Hence the intention of an act may be judged to be wrong, while
the motive is recognised as good; as when a man commits perjury to
save a parent’s or a benefactor’s life. Such judgments are, in fact,
continually passed in common moral discourse. It may, however, be said
that an act cannot be right, even when the intention is such as duty
would prescribe, if it be done from a bad motive: that--to take a case
suggested by Bentham--a man who prosecutes from malice a person whom
he believes to be guilty, does not really act rightly; for, though it
may be his duty to prosecute, he ought not to do it from malice. It is
doubtless true that it is our duty to get rid of bad motives if we can;
so that a man’s intention cannot be _wholly_ right, unless it includes
the repression, so far as possible, of a motive known to be bad. But
no one, I think, will contend that we can always suppress entirely
a strong emotion; and such suppression will be especially difficult
if we are to do the act to which the wrong impulse prompts; while
yet, if that act be clearly a duty which no one else can so properly
perform, it would be absurd to say that we ought to omit it because
we cannot altogether exclude an objectionable motive. It is sometimes
said that, though we may not be able in doing our duty to exclude a
bad motive altogether from our minds, it is still possible to refuse
to act from it. But I think that this is only possible so far as the
details of action to which a right motive would prompt differ to some
extent from those to which a wrong motive would prompt. No doubt this
is often the case:--thus, in Bentham’s example, a malevolent prosecutor
may be prompted to take unfair advantage of his enemy, or cause him
needless pain by studied insults; and it is obviously possible for
him--and his duty--to resist such promptings. But so far as precisely
the same action is prompted by two different motives, both present in
my consciousness, I am not conscious of any power to cause this action
to be determined by one of the two motives to the exclusion of the
other. In other words, while a man can resolve to aim at any end which
he conceives as a possible result of his voluntary action, he cannot
simultaneously resolve _not_ to aim at any other end which he believes
will be promoted by the same action; and if that other end be an object
of desire to him, he cannot, while aiming at it, refuse to act from
this desire.[157]

On the whole, then, I conclude (1) that while many actions are
commonly judged to be made _better_ or _worse_ by the presence or
absence of certain motives, our judgments of _right_ and _wrong_
strictly speaking relate to intentions, as distinguished from
motives;[158] and (2) that while intentions affecting the agent’s own
feelings and character are morally prescribed no less than intentions
to produce certain external effects, still, the latter form the
primary--though not the sole--content of the main prescriptions of
duty, as commonly affirmed and understood: but the extent to which this
is the case, will become more clear as we proceed.

It has indeed been maintained by moralists of influence that the moral
value of our conduct depends upon the degree to which we are actuated
by the one motive which they regard as truly moral: viz. the desire
or free choice[159] of doing what is right as such, realising duty or
virtue for duty or virtue’s sake:[160] and that a perfectly good act
must be done entirely from this motive. I think, however, that it is
difficult to combine this view--which I may conveniently distinguish as
Stoical--with the belief, which modern orthodox moralists have usually
been concerned to maintain, that it is always a man’s true interest
to act virtuously. I do not mean that a man who holds this belief
must necessarily be an egoist: but it seems to me impossible for him
to exclude from his motives a regard for his own interest, while yet
believing that it will be promoted by the act which he is willing.
If, therefore, we hold that this self-regard impairs the moral value
of an act otherwise virtuous, and at the same time hold that virtue
is always conducive to the virtuous agent’s interest, we seem driven
to the conclusion that knowledge of the true relation between virtue
and happiness is an insuperable obstacle to the attainment of moral
perfection. I cannot accept this paradox: and in subsequent chapters
I shall try to show that the Stoical view of moral goodness is not on
the whole sustained by a comprehensive survey and comparison of common
moral judgments: since in some cases acts appear to have the quality
of virtue even more strikingly when performed from some motive other
than the love of virtue as such. For the present I wish rather to point
out that the doctrine above stated is diametrically opposed to the
view that the universal or normal motives of human action are either
particular desires of pleasure or aversions to pain for the agent
himself, or the more general regard to his happiness on the whole which
I term Self-love; that it also excludes the less extreme doctrine that
duties may be to some extent properly done from such self-regarding
motives; and that one or other of these positions has frequently been
held by writers who have expressly adopted an Intuitional method of
Ethics. For instance, we find Locke laying down, without reserve or
qualification, that “good and evil are nothing but pleasure and pain,
or that which occasions or procures pleasure or pain to us:”[161] so
that “it would be utterly in vain to suppose a rule set to the free
actions of man, without annexing it to some reward or punishment to
determine his will.” On the other hand, he expresses, with no less
emphasis, the conviction that “from self-evident propositions, by
necessary consequences, as incontestable as those in mathematics, the
measures of right and wrong might be made out,”[162] so that “morality
might be placed among the sciences capable of demonstration.” The
combination of these two doctrines gives us the view that moral rules
are essentially laws of God, which men are impelled to obey, solely or
mainly, from fear or hope of divine punishments or rewards; and some
such view as this seems to be widely accepted, by plain men without
very refined moral sensibilities.

As an example, again, of thinkers who, while recognising in human
nature a disinterested regard for duty or virtue as such, still
consider that self-love is a proper and legitimate motive to right
conduct, we may refer to Butler and his disciples. Butler regards
“reasonable self-love” as not merely a normal motive to human action,
but as being--no less than conscience--a “chief or superior principle
in the nature of man”; so that an action “becomes unsuitable” to this
nature, if the principle of self-love be violated. Accordingly the
aim of his teaching is not to induce men to choose duty rather than
interest, but to convince them that there is no inconsistency between
the two; that self-love and conscience lead “to one and the same course
of life.”

This intermediate doctrine appears to me to be more in harmony with
the common sense of mankind on the whole than either of the extreme
views before contrasted. But I do not conceive that any one of the
three positions is inconsistent with fundamental assumptions of the
Intuitional method. Even those who hold that human beings cannot
reasonably be expected to conform to moral rules disinterestedly, or
from any other motive than that supplied by the sanctions divinely
attached to them, still commonly conceive God as supreme Reason,
whose laws must be essentially reasonable: and so far as such laws
are held to be cognisable by the ‘light of nature’--so that morality,
as Locke says, may be placed among demonstrative sciences--the method
of determining them will be none the less intuitional because it is
combined with the belief that God will reward their observance and
punish their violation. On the other hand those who hold that regard
for duty as duty is an indispensable condition of acting rightly,
would generally admit that acting rightly is not adequately defined as
acting from a pure desire to act rightly; that though, in a certain
sense, a man who sincerely desires and intends to act rightly does all
he can, and completely fulfils duty, still such a man may have a wrong
judgment as to the particulars of his duty, and therefore, in another
sense, may act wrongly. If this be admitted, it is evident that, even
on the view that the desire or resolution to fulfil duty as such is
essential to right action, a distinction between two kinds of rightness
is required; which we may express by saying that an act is--on this
view--“formally”[163] right, if the agent in willing is moved by pure
desire to fulfil duty or chooses duty for duty’s sake; “materially”
right, if he intends the right particular effects. This distinction
being taken, it becomes plain that there is no reason why the same
principles and method for determining material rightness, or rightness
of particular effects, should not be adopted by thinkers who differ
most widely on the question of formal rightness; and it is, obviously,
with material rightness that the work of the systematic moralist is
mainly concerned.

§ 3. The term ‘formal rightness,’ as above used, implying a _desire_ or
choice of the act as right, implies also a _belief_ that it is so. But
the latter condition may exist without the former: I cannot perform an
act from pure love of duty without believing it to be right: but I can
believe it to be right and yet do it from some other motive. And there
seems to be more agreement among moralists who adopt the Intuitional
Method as to the moral indispensability of such a belief, than we have
found with respect to the question of motive: at least, it would, I
conceive, be universally held that no act can be absolutely right,
whatever its external aspect and relations, which is believed by the
agent to be wrong.[164] Such an act we may call “subjectively” wrong,
even though “objectively” right. It may still be asked whether it is
better in any particular case that a man should do what he mistakenly
believes to be his duty, or what really is his duty in the particular
circumstances--considered apart from his mistaken belief--and would
be completely right if he could only think so. The question is rather
subtle and perplexing to Common Sense: it is therefore worth while to
point out that it can have only a limited and subordinate practical
application. For no one, in considering what he ought himself to do
in any particular case, can distinguish what he believes to be right
from what really is so: the necessity for a practical choice between
‘subjective’ and ‘objective’ rightness can only present itself in
respect of the conduct of another person whom it is in our power to
influence. If another is about to do what we think wrong while he
thinks it right, and we cannot alter his belief but can bring other
motives to bear on him that may overbalance his sense of duty, it
becomes necessary to decide whether we ought thus to tempt him to
realise what we believe to be objectively right against his own
convictions. I think that the moral sense of mankind would pronounce
against such temptation,--thus regarding the Subjective rightness
of an action as more important than the Objective,--unless the evil
of the act prompted by a mistaken sense of duty appeared to be very
grave.[165] But however essential it may be that a moral agent should
do what he believes to be right, this condition of right conduct is
too simple to admit of systematic development: it is, therefore, clear
that the details of our investigation must relate mainly to ‘objective’
rightness.

There is, however, one practical rule of some value, to be obtained by
merely reflecting on the general notion of rightness,[166] as commonly
conceived. In a previous chapter[167] I endeavoured to make this notion
clearer by saying that ‘what I judge to be right must, unless I am
in error, be judged to be so by all rational beings who judge truly
of the matter.’ This statement does not imply that what is judged
to be right for one man must necessarily be judged so for another:
‘objective’ rightness may vary from _A_ to _B_ no less than the
‘objective’ facts of their nature and circumstances vary. There seems,
however, to be this difference between our conceptions of ethical and
physical objectivity respectively: that we commonly refuse to admit
in the case of the former--what experience compels us to admit as
regards the latter--variations for which we can discover no rational
explanation. In the variety of coexistent physical facts we find an
accidental or arbitrary element in which we have to acquiesce, as we
cannot conceive it to be excluded by any extension of our knowledge
of physical causation. If we ask, for example, why any portion of
space empirically known to us contains more matter than any similar
adjacent portion, physical science can only answer by stating (along
with certain laws of change) some antecedent position of the parts of
matter which needs explanation no less than the present; and however
far back we carry our ascertainment of such antecedent positions, the
one with which we leave off seems as arbitrary as that with which we
started. But within the range of our cognitions of right and wrong, it
will be generally agreed that we cannot admit a similar unexplained
variation. We cannot judge an action to be right for _A_ and wrong for
_B_, unless we can find in the natures or circumstances of the two some
difference which we can regard as a reasonable ground for difference in
their duties. If therefore I judge any action to be right for myself, I
implicitly judge it to be right for any other person whose nature and
circumstances do not differ from my own in some important respects.
Now by making this latter judgment explicit, we may protect ourselves
against the danger which besets the conscience, of being warped and
perverted by strong desire, so that we too easily think that we ought
to do what we very much wish to do. For if we ask ourselves whether
we believe that any similar person in similar circumstances ought to
perform the contemplated action, the question will often disperse
the false appearance of rightness which our strong inclination has
given to it. We see that we should not think it right for another,
and therefore that it cannot be right for us. Indeed this test of
the rightness of our volitions is so generally effective, that Kant
seems to have held that all particular rules of duty can be deduced
from the one fundamental rule “Act as if the maxim of thy action
were to become by thy will a universal law of nature.”[168] But this
appears to me an error analogous to that of supposing that Formal
Logic supplies a complete criterion of truth. I should agree that a
volition which does not stand this test[169] is to be condemned; but I
hold that a volition which does stand it may after all be wrong. For
I conceive that all (or almost all) persons who act conscientiously
could sincerely will the maxims on which they act to be universally
adopted: while at the same time we continually find such persons in
thoroughly conscientious disagreement as to what each ought to do in a
given set of circumstances. Under these circumstances, to say that all
such persons act rightly--in the objective sense--because their maxims
all conform to Kant’s fundamental rule, would obliterate altogether
the distinction between subjective and objective rightness; it would
amount to affirming that whatever any one thinks right is so, unless he
is in error as to the facts of the case to which his judgment applies.
But such an affirmation is in flagrant conflict with common sense;
and would render the construction of a scientific code of morality
futile: as the very object of such a code is to supply a standard for
rectifying men’s divergent opinions.

We may conclude then that the moral judgments which the present method
attempts to systematise are primarily and for the most part intuitions
of the rightness or goodness (or the reverse) of particular kinds of
external effects of human volition, presumed to be intended by the
agent, but considered independently of the agent’s own view as to the
rightness or wrongness of his intention; though the quality of motives,
as distinct from intentions, has also to be taken into account.

§ 4. But the question may be raised, whether it is legitimate to take
for granted (as I have hitherto been doing) the existence of such
intuitions? And, no doubt, there are persons who deliberately deny
that reflection enables them to discover any such phenomenon in their
conscious experience as the judgment or apparent perception that an act
is in itself right or good, in any other sense than that of being the
right or fit means to the attainment of some ulterior end. I think,
however, that such denials are commonly recognised as paradoxical, and
opposed to the common experience of civilised men:--at any rate if the
psychological question, as to the _existence_ of such moral judgments
or apparent perceptions of moral qualities, is carefully distinguished
from the ethical question as to their _validity_, and from what we
may call the ‘psychogonical’ question as to their _origin_. The first
and second of these questions are sometimes confounded, owing to an
ambiguity in the use of the term “intuition”; which has sometimes
been understood to imply that the judgment or apparent perception
so designated is _true_. I wish therefore to say expressly, that by
calling any affirmation as to the rightness or wrongness of actions
“intuitive,” I do not mean to prejudge the question as to its ultimate
validity, when philosophically considered: I only mean that its truth
is apparently known immediately, and not as the result of reasoning. I
admit the possibility that any such “intuition” may turn out to have an
element of error, which subsequent reflection and comparison may enable
us to correct; just as many apparent perceptions through the organ of
vision are found to be partially illusory and misleading: indeed the
sequel will show that I hold this to be to an important extent the case
with moral intuitions commonly so called.

The question as to the validity of moral intuitions being thus
separated from the simple question ‘whether they actually exist,’ it
becomes obvious that the latter can only be decided for each person by
direct introspection or reflection. It must not therefore be supposed
that its decision is a simple matter, introspection being always
infallible: on the contrary, experience leads me to regard men as often
liable to confound with moral intuitions other states or acts of mind
essentially different from them,--blind impulses to certain kinds of
action or vague sentiments of preference for them, or conclusions from
rapid and half-unconscious processes of reasoning, or current opinions
to which familiarity has given an illusory air of self-evidence. But
any errors of this kind, due to careless or superficial reflection,
can only be cured by more careful reflection. This may indeed be much
aided by communication with other minds; it may also be aided, in a
subordinate way, by an inquiry into the antecedents of the apparent
intuition, which may suggest to the reflective mind sources of error
to which a superficial view of it is liable. Still the question
whether a certain judgment presents itself to the reflective mind as
intuitively known cannot be decided by any inquiry into its antecedents
or causes.[170]

It is, however, still possible to hold that an inquiry into the
Origin of moral intuitions must be decisive in determining their
Validity. And in fact it has been often assumed, both by Intuitionists
and their opponents, that if our moral faculty can be shown to be
‘derived’ or ‘developed’ out of other pre-existent elements of mind
or consciousness, a reason is thereby given for distrusting it; while
if, on the other hand, it can be shown to have existed in the human
mind from its origin, its trustworthiness is thereby established.
Either assumption appears to me devoid of foundation. On the one hand,
I can see no ground for supposing that a faculty thus derived, is, as
such, more liable to error than if its existence in the individual
possessing it had been differently caused:[171] to put it otherwise,
I cannot see how the mere ascertainment that certain apparently
self-evident judgments have been caused in known and determinate ways,
can be in itself a valid ground for distrusting this class of apparent
cognitions. I cannot even admit that those who affirm the truth of such
judgments are bound to show in their causes a tendency to make them
true: indeed the acceptance of any such _onus probandi_ would seem to
me to render the attainment of philosophical certitude impossible.
For the premises of the required demonstration must consist of caused
beliefs, which as having been caused will equally stand in need of
being proved true, and so on _ad infinitum_: unless it be held that
we can find among the premises of our reasonings certain apparently
self-evident judgments which have had no antecedent causes, and that
these are therefore to be accepted as valid without proof. But such an
assertion would be an extravagant paradox: and, if it be admitted that
all beliefs are equally in the position of being effects of antecedent
causes, it seems evident that this characteristic alone cannot serve to
invalidate any of them.

I hold, therefore, that the _onus probandi_ must be thrown the other
way: those who dispute the validity of moral or other intuitions on the
ground of their derivation must be required to show, not merely that
they are the effects of certain causes, but that these causes are of a
kind that tend to produce invalid beliefs. Now it is not, I conceive,
possible to prove by any theory of the derivation of the moral faculty
that the fundamental ethical conceptions ‘right’ or ‘what ought to
be done,’ ‘good’ or ‘what it is reasonable to desire and seek,’ are
invalid, and that consequently _all_ propositions of the form ‘_X_ is
right’ or ‘good’ are untrustworthy: for such ethical propositions,
relating as they do to matter fundamentally different from that with
which physical science or psychology deals, cannot be inconsistent
with any physical or psychological conclusions. They can only be shown
to involve error by being shown to contradict each other: and such a
demonstration cannot lead us cogently to the sweeping conclusion that
all are false. It may, however, be possible to prove that some ethical
beliefs have been caused in such a way as to make it probable that they
are wholly or partially erroneous: and it will hereafter be important
to consider how far any Ethical intuitions, which we find ourselves
disposed to accept as valid, are open to attack on such psychogonical
grounds. At present I am only concerned to maintain that no general
demonstration of the derivedness or developedness of our moral faculty
can supply an adequate reason for distrusting it.

On the other hand, if we have been once led to distrust our moral
faculty on other grounds--as (_e.g._) from the want of clearness and
consistency in the moral judgments of the same individual, and the
discrepancies between the judgments of different individuals--it seems
to me equally clear that our confidence in such judgments cannot
properly be re-established by a demonstration of their ‘originality.’
I see no reason to believe that the ‘original’ element of our moral
cognition can be ascertained; but if it could, I see no reason to hold
that it would be especially free from error.

§ 5. How then can we hope to eliminate error from our moral intuitions?
One answer to this question was briefly suggested in a previous chapter
where the different phases of the Intuitional Method were discussed.
It was there said that in order to settle the doubts arising from the
uncertainties and discrepancies that are found when we compare our
judgments on particular cases, reflective persons naturally appeal
to general rules or formulæ: and it is to such general formulæ that
Intuitional Moralists commonly attribute ultimate certainty and
validity. And certainly there are obvious sources of error in our
judgments respecting concrete duty which seem to be absent when we
consider the abstract notions of different kinds of conduct; since
in any concrete case the complexity of circumstances necessarily
increases the difficulty of judging, and our personal interests or
habitual sympathies are liable to disturb the clearness of our moral
discernment. Further, we must observe that most of us feel the need
of such formulæ not only to correct, but also to supplement, our
intuitions respecting particular concrete duties. Only exceptionally
confident persons find that they always seem to see clearly what ought
to be done in any case that comes before them. Most of us, however
unhesitatingly we may affirm rightness and wrongness in ordinary
matters of conduct, yet not unfrequently meet with cases where our
unreasoned judgment fails us; and where we could no more decide the
moral issue raised without appealing to some general formula, than we
could decide a disputed legal claim without reference to the positive
law that deals with the matter.

And such formulæ are not difficult to find: it only requires a little
reflection and observation of men’s moral discourse to make a
collection of such general rules, as to the validity of which there
would be apparent agreement at least among moral persons of our own age
and civilisation, and which would cover with approximate completeness
the whole of human conduct. Such a collection, regarded as a code
imposed on an individual by the public opinion of the community
to which he belongs, we have called the Positive Morality of the
community: but when regarded as a body of moral truth, warranted to
be such by the _consensus_ of mankind,--or at least of that portion
of mankind which combines adequate intellectual enlightenment with
a serious concern for morality--it is more significantly termed the
morality of Common Sense.

When, however, we try to apply these currently accepted principles, we
find that the notions composing them are often deficient in clearness
and precision. For instance, we should all agree in recognising Justice
and Veracity as important virtues; and we shall probably all accept the
general maxims, that ‘we ought to give every man his own’ and that ‘we
ought to speak the truth’: but when we ask (1) whether primogeniture
is just, or the disendowment of corporations, or the determination of
the value of services by competition, or (2) whether and how far false
statements may be allowed in speeches of advocates, or in religious
ceremonials, or when made to enemies or robbers, or in defence of
lawful secrets, we do not find that these or any other current maxims
enable us to give clear and unhesitating decisions. And yet such
particular questions are, after all, those to which we naturally expect
answers from the moralist. For we study Ethics, as Aristotle says, for
the sake of Practice: and in practice we are concerned with particulars.

Hence it seems that if the formulæ of Intuitive Morality are really to
serve as scientific axioms, and to be available in clear and cogent
demonstrations, they must first be raised--by an effort of reflection
which ordinary persons will not make--to a higher degree of precision
than attaches to them in the common thought and discourse of mankind
in general. We have, in fact, to take up the attempt that Socrates
initiated, and endeavour to define satisfactorily the general notions
of duty and virtue which we all in common use for awarding approbation
or disapprobation to conduct. This is the task upon which we shall be
engaged in the nine chapters that follow. I must beg the reader to
bear in mind that throughout these chapters I am not trying to prove or
disprove Intuitionism, but merely by reflection on the common morality
which I and my reader share, and to which appeal is so often made in
moral disputes, to obtain as explicit, exact, and coherent a statement
as possible of its fundamental rules.

FOOTNOTES:

[151] See p. 119.

[152] It may seem, he admits, that “since interest, one’s own
happiness, is a manifest obligation,” in any case in which virtuous
action appears to be not conducive to the agent’s interest, he would
be “under two contrary obligations, _i.e._ under none at all. But,” he
urges, “the obligation on the side of interest really does not remain.
For the natural authority of the principle of reflection or conscience
is an obligation ... the most certain and known: whereas the contrary
obligation can at the utmost appear no more than probable: since no
man can be _certain_ in any circumstances that vice is his interest in
the present world, much less can he be certain against another: and
thus the certain obligation would entirely supersede and destroy the
uncertain one.”--(Preface to Butler’s _Sermons_.)

[153] I have before observed (Book i. chap. viii. § 1) that in the
common notion of an act we include a certain portion of the whole
series of changes partly caused by the volition which initiated the
so-called act.

[154] Some would add “character” and “disposition.” But since
characters and disposition not only cannot be known directly but can
only be definitely conceived by reference to the volitions and feelings
in which they are manifested, it does not seem to me possible to regard
them as the primary objects of intuitive moral judgments. See chap. ii.
§ 2 of this Book.

[155] No doubt we hold a man responsible for unintended bad
consequences of his acts or omissions, when they are such as he might
with ordinary care have foreseen; still, as I have before said (p. 60),
we admit on reflection that moral blame only attaches to such careless
acts or omissions indirectly, in so far as the carelessness is the
result of some previous wilful neglect of duty.

[156] I think that common usage, when carefully considered, will be
found to admit this definition. Suppose a nihilist blows up a railway
train containing an emperor and other persons: it will no doubt be held
correct to say simply that his intention was to kill the emperor; but
it would be thought absurd to say that he ‘did not intend’ to kill the
other persons, though he may have had no desire to kill them and may
have regarded their death as a lamentable incident in the execution of
his revolutionary plans.

[157] A further source of confusion between “intention” and “motive”
arises from the different points of view from which either may be
judged. Thus an act may be one of a series which the agent purposes
to do for the attainment of a certain end: and our moral judgment of
it may be very different, according as we judge the intention of the
particular act, or the general intention of the series regarded as a
whole. Either point of view is legitimate, and both are often required;
for we commonly recognise that, of the series of acts which a man does
to attain (_e.g._) any end of ambition, some may be right or allowable,
while others are wrong; while the general intention to attain the end
by wrong means, if necessary, as well as right--

    “Get place and wealth, if possible with grace;
    If not, by any means get wealth and place”--

is clearly a wrong intention. So again, in judging a motive to be good
or bad, we may either consider it simply in itself, or in connexion
with other balancing and controlling motives--either actually present
along with it, or absent when they ought to be present. Thus in the
above case we do not commonly think the desire for wealth or rank bad
in itself; but we think it bad as the sole motive of a statesman’s
public career. It is easy to see that one or other of these different
distinctions is apt to blend with and confuse the simple distinction
between intention and motive.

[158] The view that moral judgments relate primarily or most properly
to motives will be more fully discussed in chap. xii. of this Book.

[159] I use these alternative terms in order to avoid the Free Will
Controversy.

[160] Many religious persons would probably say that the motive of
obedience or love to God was the highest. But those who take this view
would generally say that obedience and love are due to God as a Moral
Being, possessing the attributes of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and
not otherwise: and if so, these religious motives would seem to be
substantially identical with regard for duty and love of virtue, though
modified and complicated by the addition of emotions belonging to
relations between persons.

[161] Locke’s _Essay_, II. c. 28, §§ 5, 6.

[162] _Ibid._ IV. c. 3, § 18.

[163] I do not myself usually employ the antithesis of Form and Matter
in philosophical exposition, as it appears to me open to the charge of
obscurity and ambiguity. In the present case we may interpret “formal
rightness” as denoting at once a _universal_ and _essential_, and a
_subjective_ or _internal_ condition of the rightness of actions.

[164] It is not, I conceive, commonly held to be indispensable, in
order to constitute an act completely right, that a belief that it
is right should be actually present in the agent’s mind: it might be
completely right, although the agent never actually raised the question
of its rightness or wrongness. See p. 225.

[165] The decision would, I think, usually be reached by weighing
bad consequences to the agent’s character against bad consequences
of a different kind. In extreme cases the latter consideration would
certainly prevail in the view of common sense. Thus we should generally
approve a statesman who crushed a dangerous rebellion by working on the
fear or cupidity of a leading rebel who was rebelling on conscientious
grounds. Cf. _post_, Book iv. chap. iii. § 3.

[166] The antithesis of ‘subjective’ and ‘objective’ cannot be applied
to the condition of right conduct considered in this paragraph: for
this formal condition is at once subjective and objective; being,
as I argue, involved in our common notion of right conduct, it
is, therefore, necessarily judged by us to be of really universal
application: and, though it does not secure complete objective
rightness, it is an important protection against objective wrongness.

[167] Cf. Book i. chap. iii. § 3.

[168] See the _Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten_ (pp. 269-273,
Hartenstein; Abbott’s transl. [1879] pp. 54-61). Here Kant first says,
“There is therefore but one categorical imperative, namely, this: _Act
only on that maxim whereby thou canst at the same time will that it
should become a universal law_. Now, if all imperatives of duty can be
deduced from this one imperative as from their principle ... we shall
at least be able to show what we understand by [duty] and what this
notion means.” He then demonstrates the application of the principle
to four cases, selected as representative of “the many actual duties”;
and continues: “if now we attend to ourselves on occasion of any
transgression of duty, we shall find that we in fact do not will that
our maxim should be a universal law, for that is impossible for us”
...: then, summing up the conclusion of this part of his argument, he
says, “we have exhibited clearly and definitely for _every practical
application_ the content of the categorical imperative which must
contain the principle of all duty, if there is such a thing at all.”

[169] I do not mean that I am prepared to accept Kant’s fundamental
maxim, in the precise form in which he has stated it: but the
qualifications which it seems to me to require will be more
conveniently explained later.

[170] See Book i. chap. iii. p. 32.

[171] I cannot doubt that every one of our cognitive faculties,--in
short the human mind as a whole,--has been derived and developed,
through a gradual process of physical change, out of some lower life
in which cognition, properly speaking, had no place. On this view, the
distinction between ‘original’ and ‘derived’ reduces itself to that
between ‘prior’ and ‘posterior’ in development: and the fact that the
moral faculty appears somewhat later in the process of evolution than
other faculties can hardly be regarded as an argument against the
validity of moral intuition; especially since this process is commonly
conceived to be homogeneous throughout. Indeed such a line of reasoning
would be suicidal; as the cognition that the moral faculty is developed
is certainly later in development than moral cognition, and would
therefore, by this reasoning, be less trustworthy.




