CHAPTER I

INTRODUCTION


§ 1. The boundaries of the study called Ethics are variously and often
vaguely conceived: but they will perhaps be sufficiently defined, at
the outset, for the purposes of the present treatise, if a ‘Method
of Ethics’ is explained to mean any rational procedure by which we
determine what individual human beings ‘ought’--or what it is ‘right’
for them--to do, or to seek to realise by voluntary action.[9] By
using the word “individual” I provisionally distinguish the study of
Ethics from that of Politics,[10] which seeks to determine the proper
constitution and the right public conduct of governed societies: both
Ethics and Politics being, in my view, distinguished from positive
sciences by having as their special and primary object to determine
what ought to be, and not to ascertain what merely is, has been, or
will be.

The student of Ethics seeks to attain systematic and precise general
knowledge of what ought to be, and in this sense his aims and methods
may properly be termed ‘scientific’: but I have preferred to call
Ethics a study rather than a science, because it is widely thought that
a Science must necessarily have some department of actual existence
for its subject-matter. And in fact the term ‘Ethical Science’
might, without violation of usage, denote either the department of
Psychology that deals with voluntary action and its springs, and with
moral sentiments and judgments, as actual phenomena of individual
human minds; or the department of Sociology dealing with similar
phenomena, as manifested by normal members of the organised groups of
human beings which we call societies. We observe, however, that most
persons do not pursue either of these studies merely from curiosity,
in order to ascertain what actually exists, has existed, or will exist
in time. They commonly wish not only to understand human action, but
also to regulate it; in this view they apply the ideas ‘good’ and
‘bad,’ ‘right’ and ‘wrong,’ to the conduct or institutions which they
describe; and thus pass, as I should say, from the point of view of
Psychology or Sociology to that of Ethics or Politics. My definition
of Ethics is designed to mark clearly the fundamental importance of
this transition. It is true that the mutual implication of the two
kinds of study--the positive and the practical--is, on any theory, very
close and complete. On any theory, our view of what ought to be must
be largely derived, in details, from our apprehension of what is; the
means of realising our ideal can only be thoroughly learnt by a careful
study of actual phenomena; and to any individual asking himself ‘What
ought I to do or aim at?’ it is important to examine the answers which
his fellow-men have actually given to similar questions. Still it seems
clear that an attempt to ascertain the general laws or uniformities
by which the varieties of human conduct, and of men’s sentiments and
judgments respecting conduct, may be _explained_, is essentially
different from an attempt to determine which among these varieties of
conduct is _right_ and which of these divergent judgments _valid_. It
is, then, the systematic consideration of these latter questions which
constitutes, in my view, the special and distinct aim of Ethics and
Politics.

§ 2. In the language of the preceding section I could not avoid taking
account of two different forms in which the fundamental problem of
Ethics is stated; the difference between which leads, as we shall
presently see, to rather important consequences. Ethics is sometimes
considered as an investigation of the true Moral laws or rational
precepts of Conduct; sometimes as an inquiry into the nature of the
Ultimate End of reasonable human action--the Good or ‘True Good’ of
man--and the method of attaining it. Both these views are familiar,
and will have to be carefully considered: but the former seems most
prominent in modern ethical thought, and most easily applicable
to modern ethical systems generally. For the Good investigated in
Ethics is limited to Good in some degree attainable by human effort;
accordingly knowledge of the end is sought in order to ascertain what
actions are the right means to its attainment. Thus however prominent
the notion of an Ultimate Good--other than voluntary action of any
kind--may be in an ethical system, and whatever interpretation may be
given to this notion, we must still arrive finally, if it is to be
practically useful, at some determination of precepts or directive
rules of conduct.

On the other hand, the conception of Ethics as essentially an
investigation of the ‘Ultimate Good’ of Man and the means of attaining
it is not universally applicable, without straining, to the view of
Morality which we may conveniently distinguish as the Intuitional
view; according to which conduct is held to be right when conformed
to certain precepts or principles of Duty, intuitively known to be
unconditionally binding. In this view the conception of Ultimate Good
is not necessarily of fundamental importance in the determination of
Right conduct except on the assumption that Right conduct itself--or
the character realised in and developed through Right conduct--is the
sole Ultimate Good for man. But this assumption is not implied in the
Intuitional view of Ethics: nor would it, I conceive, accord with the
moral common sense of modern Christian communities. For we commonly
think that the complete notion of human Good or Well-being must include
the attainment of Happiness as well as the performance of Duty; even if
we hold with Butler that “the happiness of the world is the concern of
Him who is the Lord and the Proprietor of it,” and that, accordingly,
it is not right for men to make their performance of Duty conditional
on their knowledge of its conduciveness to their Happiness. For those
who hold this, what men ought to take as the _practically_ ultimate
end of their action and standard of Right conduct, may in some cases
have no logical connexion with the conception of Ultimate Good for man:
so that, in such cases, however indispensable this latter conception
may be to the completeness of an ethical system, it would still not be
important for the methodical determination of Right conduct.

It is on account of the prevalence of the Intuitional view just
mentioned, and the prominent place which it consequently occupies in
my discussion, that in defining Ethics I have avoided the term ‘Art of
Conduct’ which some would regard as its more appropriate designation.
For the term ‘Art’--when applied to the contents of a treatise--seems
to signify systematic express knowledge (as distinguished from the
implicit knowledge or organised habit which we call skill) of the right
means to a given end. Now if we assume that the rightness of action
depends on its conduciveness to some ulterior end, then no doubt--when
this end has been clearly ascertained--the process of determining the
right rules of conduct for human beings in different relations and
circumstances would naturally come under the notion of Art. But on
the view that the practically ultimate end of moral action is often
the Rightness of the action itself--or the Virtue realised in and
confirmed by such action--and that this is known intuitively in each
case or class of cases, we can hardly regard the term ‘Art’ as properly
applicable to the systematisation of such knowledge. Hence, as I do not
wish to start with any assumption incompatible with this latter view, I
prefer to consider Ethics as the science or study of what is right or
what ought to be, so far as this depends upon the voluntary action of
individuals.[11]

§ 3. If, however, this view of the scope of Ethics is accepted, the
question arises why it is commonly taken to consist, to a great extent,
of psychological discussion as to the ‘nature of the moral faculty’;
especially as I have myself thought it right to include some discussion
of this kind in the present treatise. For it does not at first appear
why this should belong to Ethics, any more than discussions about the
mathematical faculty or the faculty of sense-perception belong to
mathematics and physics respectively. Why do we not simply start with
certain premises, stating what ought to be done or sought, without
considering the faculty by which we apprehend their truth?

One answer is that the moralist has a practical aim: we desire
knowledge of right conduct in order to act on it. Now we cannot help
believing what we see to be true, but we can help doing what we see
to be right or wise, and in fact often do what we know to be wrong or
unwise: thus we are forced to notice the existence in us of irrational
springs of action, conflicting with our knowledge and preventing its
practical realisation: and the very imperfectness of the connexion
between our practical judgment and our will impels us to seek for more
precise knowledge as to the nature of that connexion.

But this is not all. Men never ask, ‘Why should I believe what I see to
be true?’ but they frequently ask, ‘Why should I do what I see to be
right?’ It is easy to reply that the question is futile, since it could
only be answered by a reference to some other recognised principle of
right conduct, and the question might just as well be asked as regards
that again, and so on. But still we do ask the question widely and
continually, and therefore this demonstration of its futility is not
completely satisfactory; we require besides some explanation of its
persistency.

One explanation that may be offered is that, since we are moved
to action not by moral judgment alone, but also by desires and
inclinations that operate independently of moral judgment, the answer
which we really want to the question ‘Why should I do it?’ is one which
does not merely prove a certain action to be right, but also stirs in
us a predominant inclination to do the action.

That this explanation is true for some minds in some moods I would not
deny. Still I think that when a man seriously asks ‘why he should do’
anything, he commonly assumes in himself a determination to pursue
whatever conduct may be shown by argument to be reasonable, even though
it be very different from that to which his non-rational inclinations
may prompt. And we are generally agreed that reasonable conduct in any
case has to be determined on principles, in applying which the agent’s
inclination--as it exists apart from such determination--is only one
element among several that have to be considered, and commonly not the
most important element. But when we ask what these principles are, the
diversity of answers which we find manifestly declared in the systems
and fundamental formulæ of professed moralists seems to be really
present in the common practical reasoning of men generally; with this
difference, that whereas the philosopher seeks unity of principle, and
consistency of method at the risk of paradox, the unphilosophic man
is apt to hold different principles at once, and to apply different
methods in more or less confused combination. If this be so, we can
offer another explanation of the persistent unsatisfied demand for an
ultimate reason, above noticed. For if there are different views of
the ultimate reasonableness of conduct, implicit in the thought of
ordinary men, though not brought into clear relation to each other,--it
is easy to see that any single answer to the question ‘why’ will not
be completely satisfactory, as it will be given only from one of these
points of view, and will always leave room to ask the question from
some other.

I am myself convinced that this is the main explanation of the
phenomenon: and it is on this conviction that the plan of the present
treatise is based. We cannot, of course, regard as valid reasonings
that lead to conflicting conclusions; and I therefore assume as a
fundamental postulate of Ethics, that so far as two methods conflict,
one or other of them must be modified or rejected. But I think it
fundamentally important to recognise, at the outset of Ethical inquiry,
that there is a diversity of methods applied in ordinary practical
thought.

§ 4. What then are these different methods? what are the different
practical principles which the common sense of mankind is _prima facie_
prepared to accept as ultimate? Some care is needed in answering this
question: because we frequently prescribe that this or that ‘ought’
to be done or aimed at without any express reference to an ulterior
end, while yet such an end is tacitly presupposed. It is obvious that
such prescriptions are merely, what Kant calls them, Hypothetical
Imperatives; they are not addressed to any one who has not first
accepted the end.

For instance: a teacher of any art assumes that his pupil wants to
produce the product of the art, or to produce it excellent in quality:
he tells him that he _ought_ to hold the awl, the hammer, the brush
differently. A physician assumes that his patient wants health: he
tells him that he _ought_ to rise early, to live plainly, to take hard
exercise. If the patient deliberately prefers ease and good living
to health, the physician’s precepts fall to the ground: they are no
longer addressed to him. So, again, a man of the world assumes that his
hearers wish to get on in society, when he lays down rules of dress,
manner, conversation, habits of life. A similar view may be plausibly
taken of many rules prescribing what are sometimes called “duties to
oneself”: it may be said that they are given on the assumption that
a man regards his own Happiness as an ultimate end: that if any one
should be so exceptional as to disregard it, he does not come within
their scope: in short, that the ‘_ought_’ in such formulæ is still
implicitly relative to an _optional_ end.

It does not, however, seem to me that this account of the matter is
exhaustive. We do not all look with simple indifference on a man who
declines to take the right means to attain his own happiness, on no
other ground than that he does not care about happiness. Most men would
regard such a refusal as irrational, with a certain disapprobation;
they would thus implicitly assent to Butler’s statement[12] that
“interest, one’s own happiness, is a manifest obligation.” In other
words, they would think that a man _ought_ to care for his own
happiness. The word ‘ought’ thus used is no longer relative: happiness
now appears as an ultimate end, the pursuit of which--at least within
the limits imposed by other duties--appears to be prescribed by
reason ‘categorically,’ as Kant would say, _i.e._ without any tacit
assumption of a still ulterior end. And it has been widely held by even
orthodox moralists that all morality rests ultimately on the basis
of “reasonable self-love”;[13] _i.e._ that its rules are ultimately
binding on any individual only so far as it is his interest on the
whole to observe them.

Still, common moral opinion certainly regards the duty or virtue of
Prudence as only a part--and not the most important part--of duty
or virtue in general. Common moral opinion recognises and inculcates
other fundamental rules--_e.g._ those of Justice, Good Faith,
Veracity--which, in its ordinary judgments on particular cases, it is
inclined to treat as binding without qualification and without regard
to ulterior consequences. And, in the ordinary form of the Intuitional
view of Ethics, the “categorical” prescription of such rules is
maintained explicitly and definitely, as a result of philosophical
reflection: and the realisation of Virtue in act--at least in the
case of the virtues just mentioned--is held to consist in strict and
unswerving conformity to such rules.

On the other hand it is contended by many Utilitarians that all the
rules of conduct which men prescribe to one another as moral rules
are really--though in part unconsciously--prescribed as means to the
general happiness of mankind, or of the whole aggregate of sentient
beings; and it is still more widely held by Utilitarian thinkers that
such rules, however they may originate, are only valid so far as their
observance is conducive to the general happiness. This contention I
shall hereafter examine with due care. Here I wish only to point out
that, if the duty of aiming at the general happiness is thus taken
to include all other duties, as subordinate applications of it, we
seem to be again led to the notion of Happiness as an ultimate end
categorically prescribed,--only it is now General Happiness and not the
private happiness of any individual. And this is the view that I myself
take of the Utilitarian principle.

At the same time, it is not necessary, in the methodical investigation
of right conduct, considered relatively to the end either of private or
of general happiness, to assume that the end itself is determined or
prescribed by reason: we only require to assume, in reasoning to cogent
practical conclusions, that it is adopted as ultimate and paramount.
For if a man accepts any end as ultimate and paramount, he accepts
implicitly as his “method of ethics” whatever process of reasoning
enables him to determine the actions most conducive to this end.[14]
Since, however, to every difference in the end accepted at least
some difference in method will generally correspond: if all the ends
which men are found practically to adopt as ultimate (subordinating
everything else to the attainment of them under the influence of
‘ruling passions’), were taken as principles for which the student of
Ethics is called upon to construct rational methods, his task would
be very complex and extensive. But if we confine ourselves to such
ends as the common sense of mankind appears to accept as rational
ultimate ends, the task is reduced, I think, within manageable limits;
since this criterion will exclude at least many of the objects which
men practically seem to regard as paramount. Thus many men sacrifice
health, fortune, happiness, to Fame; but no one, so far as I know, has
deliberately maintained that Fame is an object which it is reasonable
for men to seek for its own sake. It only commends itself to reflective
minds either (1) as a source of Happiness to the person who gains
it, or (2) a sign of his Excellence, moral or intellectual, or (3)
because it attests the achievement by him of some important benefit
to society, and at the same time stimulates him and others to further
achievement in the future: and the conception of “benefit” would, when
examined in its turn, lead us again to Happiness or Excellence of human
nature,--since a man is commonly thought to benefit others either by
making them happier or by making them wiser and more virtuous.

Whether there are any ends besides these two, which can be reasonably
regarded as ultimate, it will hereafter[15] be part of our business to
investigate: but we may perhaps say that _prima facie_ the only two
ends which have a strongly and widely supported claim to be regarded
as rational ultimate ends are the two just mentioned, Happiness and
Perfection or Excellence of human nature--meaning here by ‘Excellence’
not primarily superiority to others, but a partial realisation of,
or approximation to, an ideal type of human Perfection. And we must
observe that the adoption of the former of these ends leads us to
two _prima facie_ distinct methods, according as it is sought to be
realised universally, or by each individual for himself alone. For
though doubtless a man may often best promote his own happiness by
labouring and abstaining for the sake of others, it seems to be implied
in our common notion of self-sacrifice that actions most conducive to
the general happiness do not--in this world at least--always tend
also to the greatest happiness of the agent.[16] And among those who
hold that “happiness is our being’s end and aim” we seem to find a
fundamental difference of opinion as to whose happiness it is that it
is ultimately reasonable to aim at. For to some it seems that “the
constantly proper end of action on the part of any individual at the
moment of action is his real greatest happiness from that moment to
the end of his life”;[17] whereas others hold that the view of reason
is essentially universal, and that it cannot be reasonable to take
as an ultimate and paramount end the happiness of any one individual
rather than that of any other--at any rate if equally deserving
and susceptible of it--so that general happiness must be the “true
standard of right and wrong, in the field of morals” no less than of
politics.[18] It is, of course, possible to adopt an end intermediate
between the two, and to aim at the happiness of some limited portion
of mankind, such as one’s family or nation or race: but any such
limitation seems arbitrary, and probably few would maintain it to be
reasonable _per se_, except as the most practicable way of aiming at
the general happiness, or of indirectly securing one’s own.

The case seems to be otherwise with Excellence or Perfection.[19] At
first sight, indeed, the same alternatives present themselves:[20] it
seems that the Excellence aimed at may be taken either individually
or universally; and circumstances are conceivable in which a man is
not unlikely to think that he could best promote the Excellence of
others by sacrificing his own. But no moralist who takes Excellence
as an ultimate end has ever approved of such sacrifice, at least so
far as Moral Excellence is concerned; no one has ever directed an
individual to promote the virtue of others except in so far as this
promotion is compatible with, or rather involved in, the complete
realisation of Virtue in himself.[21] So far, then, there seems to
be no need of separating the method of determining right conduct
which takes the Excellence or Perfection of the individual as the
ultimate aim from that which aims at the Excellence or Perfection of
the human community. And since Virtue is commonly conceived as the
most valuable element of human Excellence--and an element essentially
preferable to any other element that can come into competition with
it as an alternative for rational choice--any method which takes
Perfection or Excellence of human nature as ultimate End will _prima
facie_ coincide to a great extent with that based on what I called
the Intuitional view: and I have accordingly decided to treat it as a
special form of this latter.[22] The two methods which take happiness
as an ultimate end it will be convenient to distinguish as Egoistic
and Universalistic Hedonism: and as it is the latter of these, as
taught by Bentham and his successors, that is more generally understood
under the term ‘Utilitarianism,’ I shall always restrict that word to
this signification. For Egoistic Hedonism it is somewhat hard to find
a single perfectly appropriate term. I shall often call this simply
Egoism: but it may sometimes be convenient to call it Epicureanism: for
though this name more properly denotes a particular historical system,
it has come to be commonly used in the wider sense in which I wish to
employ it.

§ 5. The last sentence suggests one more explanation, which, for
clearness’ sake, it seems desirable to make: an explanation, however,
rather of the plan and purpose of the present treatise than of the
nature and boundaries of the subject of Ethics as generally understood.

There are several recognised ways of treating this subject, none of
which I have thought it desirable to adopt. We may start with existing
systems, and either study them historically, tracing the changes in
thought through the centuries, or compare and classify them according
to relations of resemblance, or criticise their internal coherence.
Or we may seek to add to the number of these systems: and claim after
so many unsuccessful efforts to have at last attained the one true
theory of the subject, by which all others may be tested. The present
book contains neither the exposition of a system nor a natural or
critical history of systems. I have attempted to define and unfold
not one Method of Ethics, but several: at the same time these are not
here studied historically, as methods that have actually been used or
proposed for the regulation of practice; but rather as alternatives
between which--so far as they cannot be reconciled--the human mind
seems to me necessarily forced to choose, when it attempts to frame
a complete synthesis of practical maxims and to act in a perfectly
consistent manner. Thus, they might perhaps be called natural methods
rationalised; because men commonly seem to guide themselves by a
mixture of different methods, more or less disguised under ambiguities
of language. The impulses or principles from which the different
methods take their rise, the different claims of different ends to be
rational, are admitted, to some extent, by all minds: and as along
with these claims is felt the need of harmonising them--since it is,
as was said, a postulate of the Practical Reason, that two conflicting
rules of action cannot both be reasonable--the result is ordinarily
either a confused blending, or a forced and premature reconciliation,
of different principles and methods. Nor have the systems framed by
professed moralists been free from similar defects. The writers have
usually proceeded to synthesis without adequate analysis; the practical
demand for the former being more urgently felt than the theoretical
need of the latter. For here as in other points the development of the
theory of Ethics would seem to be somewhat impeded by the preponderance
of practical considerations; and perhaps a more complete detachment
of the theoretical study of right conduct from its practical
application is to be desired for the sake even of the latter itself:
since a treatment which is a compound between the scientific and the
hortatory is apt to miss both the results that it would combine; the
mixture is bewildering to the brain and not stimulating to the heart.
So again, I am inclined to think that here, as in other sciences, it
would be an advantage to draw as distinct a line as possible between
the known and the unknown; as the clear indication of an unsolved
problem is at any rate a step to its solution. In ethical treatises,
however, there has been a continual tendency to ignore and keep out
of sight the difficulties of the subject; either unconsciously, from
a latent conviction that the questions which the writer cannot answer
satisfactorily must be questions which ought not to be asked; or
consciously, that he may not shake the sway of morality over the minds
of his readers. This last well-meant precaution frequently defeats
itself: the difficulties thus concealed in exposition are liable to
reappear in controversy: and then they appear not carefully limited,
but magnified for polemical purposes. Thus we get on the one hand vague
and hazy reconciliation, on the other loose and random exaggeration of
discrepancies; and neither process is effective to dispel the original
vagueness and ambiguity which lurks in the fundamental notions of our
common practical reasonings. To eliminate or reduce this indefiniteness
and confusion is the sole immediate end that I have proposed to
myself in the present work. In order better to execute this task, I
have refrained from expressly attempting any such complete and final
solution of the chief ethical difficulties and controversies as would
convert this exposition of various methods into the development of a
harmonious system. At the same time I hope to afford aid towards the
construction of such a system; because it seems easier to judge of the
mutual relations and conflicting claims of different modes of thought,
after an impartial and rigorous investigation of the conclusions to
which they logically lead. It is not uncommon to find in reflecting
on practical principles, that--however unhesitatingly they seem to
command our assent at first sight, and however familiar and apparently
clear the notions of which they are composed--nevertheless when we
have carefully examined the consequences of adopting them they wear a
changed and somewhat dubious aspect. The truth seems to be that most of
the practical principles that have been seriously put forward are more
or less satisfactory to the common sense of mankind, so long as they
have the field to themselves. They all find a response in our nature:
their fundamental assumptions are all such as we are disposed to
accept, and such as we find to govern to a certain extent our habitual
conduct. When I am asked, “Do you not consider it ultimately reasonable
to seek pleasure and avoid pain for yourself?” “Have you not a moral
sense?” “Do you not intuitively pronounce some actions to be right and
others wrong?” “Do you not acknowledge the general happiness to be a
paramount end?” I answer ‘yes’ to all these questions. My difficulty
begins when I have to choose between the different principles or
inferences drawn from them. We admit the necessity, when they conflict,
of making this choice, and that it is irrational to let sometimes one
principle prevail and sometimes another; but the necessity is a painful
one. We cannot but hope that all methods may ultimately coincide: and
at any rate, before making our election we may reasonably wish to have
the completest possible knowledge of each.

My object, then, in the present work, is to expound as clearly and as
fully as my limits will allow the different methods of Ethics that I
find implicit in our common moral reasoning; to point out their mutual
relations; and where they seem to conflict, to define the issue as much
as possible. In the course of this endeavour I am led to discuss the
considerations which should, in my opinion, be decisive in determining
the adoption of ethical first principles: but it is not my primary
aim to establish such principles; nor, again, is it my primary aim to
supply a set of practical directions for conduct. I have wished to keep
the reader’s attention throughout directed to the processes rather than
the results of ethical thought: and have therefore never stated as my
own any positive practical conclusions unless by way of illustration:
and have never ventured to decide dogmatically any controverted points,
except where the controversy seemed to arise from want of precision or
clearness in the definition of principles, or want of consistency in
reasoning.

FOOTNOTES:

[9] The exact relation of the terms ‘right’ and ‘what ought to be’ is
discussed in chap. iii. of this Book. I here assume that they may be
used as convertible, for most purposes.

[10] I use ‘Politics’ in what I take to be its most ordinary
signification, to denote the science or study of Right or Good
Legislation and Government. There is a wider possible sense of the
term, according to which it would include the greater part of Ethics:
_i.e._ if understood to be the Theory of Right Social Relations. See
chap. ii. § 2.

[11] The relation of the notion of ‘Good’ to that of ‘Right’ or ‘what
ought to be’ will be further considered in a subsequent chapter of this
Book (ix.)

[12] See the Preface to Butler’s _Sermons on Human Nature_.

[13] The phrase is Butler’s.

[14] See the last paragraph of chap. iii. of this Book.

[15] See chap. ix. of this Book, and Book iii. chap. xiv.

[16] For a full discussion of this question, see Book ii. chap. v. and
the concluding chapter of the work.

[17] Bentham, _Memoirs_ (vol. x. of Bowring’s edition), p. 560.

[18] Bentham again, _Memoirs_, p. 79. See note at the end of Book i.
chap. vi. The Utilitarians since Bentham have sometimes adopted one,
sometimes the other, of these two principles as paramount.

[19] I use the terms ‘Excellence’ and ‘Perfection’ to denote the same
ultimate end regarded in somewhat different aspects: meaning by either
an ideal complex of mental qualities, of which we admire and approve
the manifestation in human life: but using ‘Perfection’ to denote the
ideal as such, while ‘Excellence’ denotes such partial realisation of
or approximation to the ideal as we actually find in human experience.

[20] It may be said that even more divergent views of the reasonable
end are possible here than in the case of happiness: for we are not
necessarily limited (as in that case) to the consideration of sentient
beings: inanimate things also seem to have a perfection and excellence
of their own and to be capable of being made better or worse in their
kind; and this perfection, or one species of it, appears to be the end
of the Fine Arts. But reflection I think shows that neither beauty
nor any other quality of inanimate objects can be regarded as good or
desirable in itself, out of relation to the perfection or happiness of
sentient beings. Cf. _post_, chap. ix. of this Book.

[21] Kant roundly denies that it can be my duty to take the Perfection
of others for my end: but his argument is not, I think, valid. Cf.
_post_, Book iii. chap. iv. § 1.

[22] See Book iii. chap. xiv., where I explain my reasons for only
giving a subordinate place to the conception of Perfection as Ultimate
End.




