INTERPRETATIONS

OF

POETRY AND RELIGION

BY

GEORGE SANTAYANA

NEW YORK

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS


1900




PREFACE


The following volume is composed of a number of papers written at
various times and already partially printed; they are now revised and
gathered together in the hope that they may lead the reader, from
somewhat different points of approach, to a single idea. This idea is
that religion and poetry are identical in essence, and differ merely
in the way in which they are attached to practical affairs. Poetry
is called religion when it intervenes in life, and religion, when it
merely supervenes upon life, is seen to be nothing but poetry.

It would naturally follow from this conception that religious doctrines
would do well to withdraw their pretension to be dealing with matters
of fact. That pretension is not only the source of the conflicts of
religion with science and of the vain and bitter controversies of
sects; it is also the cause of the impurity and incoherence of religion
in the soul, when it seeks its sanctions in the sphere of reality,
and forgets that its proper concern is to express the ideal. For the
dignity of religion, like that of poetry and of every moral ideal, lies
precisely in its ideal adequacy, in its fit rendering of the meanings
and values of life, in its anticipation of perfection; so that the
excellence of religion is due to an idealization of experience which,
while making religion noble if treated as poetry, makes it necessarily
false if treated as science. Its function is rather to draw from
reality materials for an image of that ideal to which reality ought
to conform, and to make us citizens, by anticipation, in the world we
crave.

It also follows from our general conception that poetry has a universal
and a moral function. Its rudimentary essays in the region of fancy
and pleasant sound, as well as its idealization of episodes in human
existence, are only partial exercises in an art that has all time and
all experience for its natural subject-matter and all the possibilities
of being for its ultimate theme. As religion is deflected from its
course when it is confused with a record of facts or of natural laws,
so poetry is arrested in its development if it remains an unmeaning
play of fancy without relevance to the ideals and purposes of life. In
that relevance lies its highest power. As its elementary pleasantness
comes from its response to the demands of the ear, so its deepest
beauty comes from its response to the ultimate demands of the soul.

This theory can hardly hope for much commendation either from the
apologists of theology or from its critics. The mass of mankind is
divided into two classes, the Sancho Panzas who have a sense for
reality, but no ideals, and the Don Quixotes with a sense for ideals,
but mad. The expedient of recognizing facts as facts and accepting
ideals as ideals,--and this is all we propose,--although apparently
simple enough, seems to elude the normal human power of discrimination.
If, therefore, the champion of any orthodoxy should be offended at our
conception, which would reduce his artful cosmos to an allegory, all
that could be said to mitigate his displeasure would be that our view
is even less favourable to his opponents than to himself.

The liberal school that attempts to fortify religion by minimizing
its expression, both theoretic and devotional, seems from this point
of view to be merely impoverishing religious symbols and vulgarizing
religious aims; it subtracts from faith that imagination by which faith
becomes an interpretation and idealization of human life, and retains
only a stark and superfluous principle of superstition. For meagre and
abstract as may be the content of such a religion, it contains all
the venom of absolute pretensions; it is no less cursed than the more
developed systems with a controversial unrest and with a consequent
undertone of constraint and suspicion. It tortures itself with the
same circular proofs in its mistaken ambition to enter the plane of
vulgar reality and escape its native element of ideas. It casts a
greater blight than would a civilized orthodoxy on any joyous freedom
of thought. For the respect exacted by an establishment is limited and
external, and not greater than its traditional forms probably deserve,
as normal expressions of human feeling and apt symbols of moral truth.
A reasonable deference once shown to authority, the mind remains, under
such an establishment, inwardly and happily free; the conscience is not
intimidated, the imagination is not tied up. But the preoccupations of
a hungry and abstract fanaticism poison the liberty nominally allowed,
bias all vision, and turn philosophy itself, which should be the purest
of delights and consolations, into an obsession and a burden to the
soul. In such a spectral form religious illusion does not cease to be
illusion. Mythology cannot become science by being reduced in bulk, but
it may cease, as a mythology, to be worth having.

On the other hand, the positivistic school of criticism would seem, if
our theory is right, to have overlooked in its programme the highest
functions of human nature. The environing world can justify itself to
the mind only by the free life which it fosters there. All observation
is observation of brute fact, all discipline is mere repression, until
these facts digested and this discipline embodied in humane impulses
become the starting-point for a creative movement of the imagination,
the firm basis for ideal constructions in society, religion, and art.
Only as conditions of these human activities can the facts of nature
and history become morally intelligible or practically important. In
themselves they are trivial incidents, gossip of the Fates, cacklings
of their inexhaustible garrulity. To regard the function of man as
accomplished when these chance happenings have been recorded by him or
contributed to by his impulsive action, is to ignore his reason, his
privilege,--shared for the rest with every living creature,--of using
Nature as food and substance for his own life. This human life is not
merely animal and passionate. The best and keenest part of it consists
in that very gift of creation and government which, together with all
the transcendental functions of his own mind, man has significantly
attributed to God as to his highest ideal. Not to see in this rational
activity the purpose and standard of all life is to have left human
nature half unread. It is to look to the removal of certain incidental
obstacles in the work of reason as to the solution of its positive
tasks. In comparison with such apathetic naturalism, all the errors
and follies of religion are worthy of indulgent sympathy, since they
represent an effort, however misguided, to interpret and to use the
materials of experience for moral ends, and to measure the value of
reality by its relation to the ideal.

The moral function of the imagination and the poetic nature of religion
form, then, the theme of the following pages. It may not be amiss to
announce it here, as the rather miscellaneous subjects of these essays
might at first sight obscure the common import of them all.




CONTENTS

      I.   UNDERSTANDING, IMAGINATION, AND MYSTICISM
     II.   THE HOMERIC HYMNS
    III.   THE DISSOLUTION OF PAGANISM
     IV.   THE POETRY OF CHRISTIAN DOGMA
      V.   PLATONIC LOVE IN SOME ITALIAN POETS
     VI.   THE ABSENCE OF RELIGION IN SHAKESPEARE
    VII.   THE POETRY OF BARBARISM
   VIII.   EMERSON
     IX.   A RELIGION OF DISILLUSION
      X.   THE ELEMENTS AND FUNCTION OF POETRY




I


UNDERSTANDING, IMAGINATION, AND MYSTICISM


When we consider the situation of the human mind in Nature, its limited
plasticity and few channels of communication with the outer world, we
need not wonder that we grope for light, or that we find incoherence
and instability in human systems of ideas. The wonder rather is that we
have done so well, that in the chaos of sensations and passions that
fills the mind, we have found any leisure for self-concentration and
reflection, and have succeeded in gathering even a light harvest of
experience from our distracted labours. Our occasional madness is less
wonderful than our occasional sanity. Relapses into dreams are to be
expected in a being whose brief existence is so like a dream; but who
could have been sure of this sturdy and indomitable perseverance in the
work of reason in spite of all checks and discouragements?

The resources of the mind are not commensurate with its ambition. Of
the five senses, three are of little use in the formation of permanent
notions: a fourth, sight, is indeed vivid and luminous, but furnishes
transcripts of things so highly coloured and deeply modified by the
medium of sense, that a long labour of analysis and correction is
needed before satisfactory conceptions can be extracted from it. For
this labour, however, we are endowed with the requisite instrument.
We have memory and we have certain powers of synthesis, abstraction,
reproduction, invention,--in a word, we have understanding. But this
faculty of understanding has hardly begun its work of deciphering the
hieroglyphics of sense and framing an idea of reality, when it is
crossed by another faculty--the imagination. Perceptions do not remain
in the mind, as would be suggested by the trite simile of the seal
and the wax, passive and changeless, until time wear off their sharp
edges and make them fade. No, perceptions fall into the brain rather
as seeds into a furrowed field or even as sparks into a keg of powder.
Each image breeds a hundred more, sometimes slowly and subterraneously,
sometimes (when a passionate train is started) with a sudden burst of
fancy. The mind, exercised by its own fertility and flooded by its
inner lights, has infinite trouble to keep a true reckoning of its
outward perceptions. It turns from the frigid problems of observation
to its own visions; it forgets to watch the courses of what should be
its "pilot stars." Indeed, were it not for the power of convention in
which, by a sort of mutual cancellation of errors, the more practical
and normal conceptions are enshrined, the imagination would carry men
wholly away,--the best men first and the vulgar after them. Even as it
is, individuals and ages of fervid imagination usually waste themselves
in dreams, and must disappear before the race, saddened and dazed,
perhaps, by the memory of those visions, can return to its plodding
thoughts.

Five senses, then, to gather a small part of the infinite influences
that vibrate in Nature, a moderate power of understanding to interpret
those senses, and an irregular, passionate fancy to overlay that
interpretation--such is the endowment of the human mind. And what is
its ambition? Nothing less than to construct a picture of all reality,
to comprehend its own origin and that of the universe, to discover
the laws of both and prophesy their destiny. Is not the disproportion
enormous? Are not confusions and profound contradictions to be looked
for in an attempt to build so much out of so little?

Yet the metaphysical ambition we speak of cannot be abandoned, because
whatever picture of things we may carry about in our heads we are bound
to regard as a map of reality; although we may mark certain tracts
of it "unexplored country," the very existence of such regions is
vouched for only by our representation, and is necessarily believed
to correspond to our idea. All we can do is, without abandoning
the aspiration to knowledge which is the inalienable birthright of
reason, to control as best we may the formation of our conceptions; to
arrange them according to their derivation and measure them by their
applicability in life, so prudently watching over their growth that we
may be spared the deepest of sorrows--to survive the offspring of our
own thought.

The inadequacy of each of our faculties is what occasions the intrusion
of some other faculty into its field. The defect of sense calls in
imagination, the defect of imagination calls in reasoning, the defect
of reasoning divination. If our senses were clairvoyant and able to
observe all that is going on in the world, if our instincts were
steady, prompting us to adequate reactions upon these observations, the
fancy might remain free. We should not need to call upon it to piece
out the imperfections of sense and reflection, but we should employ it
only in avowed poetry, only in building dream-worlds alongside of the
real, not interfering with the latter or confusing it, but repeating
its pattern with as many variations as the fertility of our minds
could supply. As it is, the imagination is brought into the service
of sense and instinct, and made to do the work of intelligence. This
substitution is the more readily effected, in that imagination and
intelligence do not differ in their origin, but only in their validity.
Understanding is an applicable fiction, a kind of wit with a practical
use. Common sense and science live in a world of expurgated mythology,
such as Plato wished his poets to compose, a world where the objects
are imaginative in their origin and essence, but useful, abstract, and
beneficent in their suggestions. The sphere of common sense and science
is concentric with the sphere of fancy; both move in virtue of the same
imaginative impulses. The eventual distinction between intelligence and
imagination is ideal; it arises when we discriminate various functions
in a life that is dynamically one. Those conceptions which, after
they have spontaneously arisen, prove serviceable in practice, and
capable of verification in sense, we call ideas of the understanding.
The others remain ideas of the imagination. The shortness of life,
the distractions of passion, and the misrepresentation to which all
transmitted knowledge is subject, have made the testing of ideas by
practice extremely slow in the history of mankind. Hence the impurity
of our knowledge, its confusion with fancy, and its painful inadequacy
to interpret the whole world of human interests. These shortcomings are
so many invitations to foreign powers to intervene, so many occasions
for new waves of imagination to sweep away the landmarks of our old
labour, and flood the whole mind with impetuous dreams.

It is accordingly the profounder minds that commonly yield to the
imagination, because it is these minds that are capable of feeling
the greatness of the problems of life and the inadequacy of the
understanding, with its present resources, to solve them. The same
minds are, moreover, often swayed by emotion, by the ever-present
desire to find a noble solution to all questions, perhaps a solution
already hallowed by authority and intertwined inextricably, for those
who have always accepted it, with the sanctions of spiritual life.
Such a coveted conclusion may easily be one which the understanding,
with its basis in sense and its demand for verification, may not be
able to reach. Therefore the impassioned soul must pass beyond the
understanding, or else go unsatisfied; and unless it be as disciplined
as it is impassioned it will not tolerate dissatisfaction. From what
quarter, then, will it draw the wider views, the deeper harmonies,
which it craves? Only from the imagination. There is no other faculty
left to invoke. The imagination, therefore, must furnish to religion
and to metaphysics those large ideas tinctured with passion, those
supersensible forms shrouded in awe, in which alone a mind of great
sweep and vitality can find its congenial objects. Thus the stone
which the builder, understanding, rejected, becomes the chief stone
of the corner; the intuitions which science could not use remain the
inspiration of poetry and religion.

The imagination, when thus employed to anticipate or correct the
conclusions of the understanding, is of course not called imagination
by those, who appeal to it. The religious teachers call it prophecy or
revelation, the philosophers call it a higher reason. But these names
are merely eulogistic synonyms for imagination, implying (what is
perfectly possible) that the imagination has not misled us. They imply
on the contrary that in the given instances the imagination has hit
upon an ultimate truth. A prophet, unless he be the merely mechanical
vehicle of truths he does not understand, cannot be conceived as
anything but a man of imagination, whose visions miraculously mirror
the truth. A metaphysician who transcends the intellect by his reason
can be conceived only as using his imagination to such good purpose
as to divine by it the ideal laws of reality or the ultimate goals of
moral effort. His reason is an imagination that succeeds, an intuition
that guesses the principle of experience. But if this intuition were of
such a nature that experience could verify it, then that higher reason
or imagination would be brought down to the level of the understanding;
for understanding, as we have defined it, is itself a kind of
imagination, an imagination prophetic of experience, a spontaneity of
thought by which the science of perception is turned into the art of
life. The same absence of verification distinguishes revelation from
science; for when the prophecies of faith are verified, the function
of faith is gone. Faith and the higher reason of the metaphysicians
are therefore forms of imagination believed to be avenues to truth,
as dreams or oracles may sometimes be truthful, not because their
necessary correspondence to truth can be demonstrated, for then they
would be portions of science, but because a man dwelling on those
intuitions is conscious of a certain moral transformation, of a certain
warmth and energy of life. This emotion, heightening his ideas and
giving them power over his will, he calls faith or high philosophy, and
under its dominion he is able to face his destiny with enthusiasm, or
at least with composure.

The imagination, even when its premonitions are not wholly justified
by subsequent experience, has thus a noble role to play in the life
of man. Without it his thoughts would be not only far too narrow
to represent, although it were symbolically, the greatness of the
universe, but far too narrow even to render the scope of his own
life and the conditions of his practical welfare. Without poetry and
religion the history of mankind would have been darker than it is. Not
only would emotional life have been poorer, but the public conscience,
the national and family spirit, so useful for moral organization and
discipline, would hardly have become articulate. By what a complex
and uninspired argumentation would the pure moralist have to insist
upon those duties which the imagination enforces so powerfully in
oaths sworn before the gods, in commandments written by the finger of
God upon stone tablets, in visions of hell and heaven, in chivalrous
love and loyalty, and in the sense of family dignity and honour? What
intricate, what unavailing appeals to positive interests would have to
be made before those quick reactions could be secured in large bodies
of people which can be produced by the sight of a flag or the sound
of a name? The imagination is the great unifier of humanity. Men's
perceptions may be various, their powers of understanding very unequal;
but the imagination is, as it were, the self-consciousness of instinct,
the contribution which the inner capacity and demand of the mind makes
to experience. To indulge the imagination is to express the universal
self, the common and contagious element in all individuals, that
rudimentary potency which they all share. To stimulate the imagination
is to produce the deepest, the most pertinacious emotions. To repress
it is to chill the soul, so that even the clearest perception of the
truth remains without the joy and impetuosity of conviction. The
part played by imagination is thus indispensable; but obviously the
necessity and beneficence of this contribution makes the dangers
of it correspondingly great. Wielding a great power, exercising an
omnipresent function, the imagination may abuse a great force. While
its inspirations coincide with what would be the dictates of reason,
were reason audible in the world, all is well, and the progress of man
is accelerated by his visions; but being a principle _a priori_ the
imagination is an irresponsible principle; its rightness is an inward
rightness, and everything in the real world may turn out to be disposed
otherwise than as it would wish. Our imaginative preconceptions
are then obstacles to the perception of fact and of rational duty;
the faith that stimulated our efforts and increased our momentum,
multiplies our wanderings. The too hasty organization of our thoughts
becomes the cause of their more prolonged disorganization, for to the
natural obscurity of things and the difficulty of making them fit
together among themselves, we add the cross lights of our prejudices
and the impossibility of fitting reality into the frame we have made
for it in our ignorance of its constitution and extent. And as we love
our hopes, and detest the experience that seems to contradict them,
we add fanaticism to our confusion. The habits of the imagination, in
conflict with the facts of sense, thus come to cloud science with
passion, with fiction, with sentimental prejudice. Nor is this the
end of our troubles. For Imagination herself suffers violence in this
struggle; she seeks to reduce herself to conformity with existence,
in the hope of vindicating her nominal authority at the price of some
concessions. She begins to feign that she demanded nothing but what
she finds. Thus she loses her honesty and freedom, becomes a flatterer
of things instead of the principle of their ideal correction, and in
the attempt to prove herself prophetic and literally valid (as in a
moment of infatuation she had fancied herself to be) she forfeits that
symbolic truth, that inner propriety, which gave her a moral value.
Thus the false steps of the imagination lead to a contorted science and
to a servile ideal.

These complications not unnaturally inspire discouragement and a sense
of the hopeless relativity of human thought. Indeed, if there be any
special endowment of mind and body called human nature, as there seems
to be, it is obvious that all human experience must be relative to
that. But the truth, the absolute reality, surrounds and precedes
these operations of finite faculty. What value, then, we may say, have
these various ideals or perceptions, or the conflicts between them?
Are not our senses as human, as "subjective" as our wills? Is not the
understanding as visionary as the fancy? Does it not transform the
Unknowable into as remote a symbol as does the vainest dream?

The answer which a rational philosophy would make to these questions
would be a double one. It is true that every idea is equally relative
to human nature and that nothing can be represented in the human mind
except by the operation of human faculties. But it is not true that all
these products of human ideation are of equal value, since they are not
equally conducive to human purposes or satisfactory to human demands.

The impulse that would throw over as equally worthless every product
of human art, because it is not indistinguishable from some alleged
external reality, does not perceive the serious self-contradictions
under which it labours. In the first place the notion of an external
reality is a human notion; our reason makes that hypothesis, and its
verification in our experience is one of the ideals of science, as its
validity is one of the assumptions of daily life. In throwing over all
human ideas, because they are infected with humanity, all human ideas
are being sacrificed to one of them--the idea of an absolute reality.
If this idea, being human, deserved that such sacrifices should be made
for it, have the other notions of the mind no rights? Furthermore, even
if we granted for the sake of argument a reality which our thoughts
were essentially helpless to represent, whence comes the duty of our
thoughts to represent it? Whence comes the value of this unattainable
truth? From an ideal of human reason. We covet truth. So that the
attempt to surrender all human science as relative and all human ideals
as trivial is founded on a blind belief in one human idea and an
absolute surrender to one human passion.

In spite of these contradictions, which only a dispassionate logic
could thoroughly unravel, the enthusiast is apt to rush on. The vision
of absolute truth and absolute reality intoxicates him, and as he
is too subtle a thinker, too inward a man, to accept the content of
his senses or the conventions of his intelligence for unqualified
verities, he fortifies himself against them with the consciousness of
their relativity, and seeks to rise above them in his meditations.
But to rise to what? To some more elaborate idea? To some object,
like a scientific cosmos or a religious creed, put together by longer
and more indirect processes than those of common perception? Surely
not. If I renounce my senses and vulgar intellect because they are
infected with finitude and smell of humanity, how shall I accept
a work of art, a product of reasoning, or an idol made originally
with hands and now encrusted all over, like the statue of Glaucus,
with traditional accretions? Poetry, science, and religion, in their
positive constructions, are more human, more conditioned, than are the
senses and the common understanding themselves. The lover of inviolate
reality must not look to them. If the data of human knowledge must be
rejected as subjective, how much more should we reject the inferences
made from those data by human thought. The way of true wisdom,
therefore, if true wisdom is to deal with the Absolute, can only lie
in abstention: neither the senses nor the common understanding, and
much less the superstructure raised upon these by imagination, logic,
or tradition, must delude us: we must keep our thoughts fixed upon the
inanity of all this in comparison with the unthinkable truth, with the
undivided and unimaginable reality. Everything, says the mystic, is
nothing, in comparison with the One.

This confusion, the logical contradiction of which we have just seen,
may, for lack of a more specific word, be called mysticism. It consists
in the surrender of a category of thought on account of the discovery
of its relativity. If I saw or reasoned or judged by such a category,
I should be seeing, reasoning, or judging in a specific manner, in
a manner conditioned by my finite nature. But the specific and the
finite, I feel, are odious; let me therefore aspire to see, reason and
judge in no specific or finite manner--that is, not to see, reason or
judge at all. So I shall be like the Infinite, nay I shall become one
with the Infinite and (marvellous thought!) one with the One.

The ideal of mysticism is accordingly exactly contrary to the ideal
of reason; instead of perfecting human nature it seeks to abolish it;
instead of building a better world, it would undermine the foundations
even of the world we have built already; instead of developing our mind
to greater scope and precision, it would return to the condition of
protoplasm--to the blessed consciousness of an Unutterable Reality. In
the primary stages, of course, mysticism does not venture to abolish
all our ideas, or to renounce all our categories of thought. Thus many
Christian mystics have still clung, out of respect for authority,
to traditional theology, and many philosophical mystics have made
some room for life and science in the post-scripts which they, like
Parmenides, have appended to the blank monism of their systems. But
such concessions or hesitations are inconsistent with the mystical
spirit which will never be satisfied, if fully developed and fearless,
with anything short of Absolute Nothing.

For the very reason, however, that mysticism is a tendency to
obliterate distinctions, a partial mysticism often serves to bring
out with wonderful intensity those underlying strata of experience
which it has not yet decomposed. The razing of the edifice of reason
may sometimes discover its foundations. Or the disappearance of one
department of activity may throw the mind with greater energy into
another. So Spinoza, who combined mysticism in morals with rationalism
in science, can bring out the unqualified naturalism of his system
with a purity and impressiveness impossible to men who still retain an
ideal world, and seek to direct endeavour as well as to describe it.
Having renounced all ideal categories, Spinoza has only the material
categories left with which to cover the ground. He thus acquires all
the concentrated intensity, all the splendid narrowness, which had
belonged to Lucretius, while his mystical treatment of the spheres
which Lucretius simply ignored, gives him the appearance of a greater
profundity. So an ordinary Christian who is mystical, let us say,
about time and space, may use his transcendentalism in that sphere to
intensify his positivism in theology, and to emphasize his whole-souled
surrender to a devout life.

What is impossible is to be a transcendentalist "all 'round." In that
case there would be nothing left to transcend; the civil war of the
mind would have ended in the extermination of all parties. The art of
mysticism is to be mystical in spots and to aim the heavy guns of your
transcendental philosophy against those realities or those ideas which
you find particularly galling. Planted on your dearest dogma, on your
most precious postulate, you may then transcend everything else to your
heart's content. You may say with an air of enlightened profundity
that nothing is "really" right or wrong, because in Nature all things
are regular and necessary, and God cannot act for purposes as if
his will were not already accomplished; your mysticism in religion
and morals is kept standing, as it were, by the stiff backing which
is furnished by your materialistic cosmology. Or you may say with a
tone of devout rapture that all sights and sounds are direct messages
from Divine Providence to the soul, without any objects "really"
existing in space; your mysticism about the world of perception and
scientific inference is sustained by the naive theological dogmas
which you substitute for the conceptions of common sense. Yet among
these partialities and blind denials a man's positive insight seems to
thrive, and he fortifies and concentrates himself on his chosen ground
by his arbitrary exclusions. The patient art of rationalizing the
various sides of life, the observational as well as the moral, without
confusing them, is an art apparently seldom given to the haste and
pugnacity of philosophers.

Thus mysticism, although a principle of dissolution, carries with it
the safeguard that it can never be consistently applied. We reach it
only in exceptional moments of intuition, from which we descend to our
pots and pans with habits and instincts virtually unimpaired. Life goes
on; virtues and affections endure, none the worse, the mystic feels,
for that slight film of unreality which envelops them in a mind not
unacquainted with ecstasy. And although mysticism, left free to express
itself, can have no other goal than Nirvana, yet moderately indulged
in and duly inhibited by a residuum of conventional sanity, it serves
to give a touch of strangeness and elevation to the character and to
suggest superhuman gifts. It is not, however, in the least superhuman.
It is hardly even abnormal, being only an exaggeration of a rational
interest in the highest abstractions. The divine, the universal, the
absolute, even the One, are legitimate conceptions. They are terms
of human thought having as such a meaning in language and a place
in speculation. Those who live in the mind, whose passions are only
audible in the keen overtones of dialectic, are no doubt exalted and
privileged natures, choosing a better part which should not be taken
from them. So the poet and the mathematician have their spheres of
abstract and delicate labour, in which a liberal legislator would not
disturb them. Trouble only arises when the dialectician represents
his rational dreams as knowledge of existences, and the mystic his
excusable raptures as the only way of life. Poets and mathematicians do
not imagine that their pursuits raise them above human limitations and
are no part of human life, but rather its only goal and justification.
Such a pretension would be regarded as madness in the mathematician
or the poet; and is not the mystic as miserably a man? Is he not
embodying, at his best, the analytic power of a logician, or the
imagination of an enthusiast, and, at his worst, the lowest and most
obscure passions of human nature?

Yes, in spite of himself, the mystic remains human. Nothing is
more normal than abstraction. A contemplative mind drops easily
its practical preoccupations, rises easily into an ideal sympathy
with impersonal things. The wheels of the universe have a wonderful
magnetism for the human will. Our consciousness likes to lose itself
in the music of the spheres, a music that finer ears are sometimes
privileged to catch. The better side of mysticism is an æsthetic
interest in large unities and cosmic laws. The æsthetic attitude is
not the moral, but it is not for that reason illegitimate. It gives us
refreshment and a foretaste of that perfect adaptation of things to
our faculties and of our faculties to things which, could it extend
to every part of experience, would constitute the ideal life. Such
happiness is denied us in the concrete; but a hint and example of it
may be gathered by an abstracted element of our nature as it travels
through an abstracted world. Such an indulgence adds to the value of
reality only such value as it may itself have in momentary experience;
it may have a doubtful moral effect on the happy dreamer himself. But
it serves to keep alive the conviction, which a confused experience
might obscure, that perfection is essentially possible; it reminds
us, like music, that there are worlds far removed from the actual
which are yet living and very near to the heart. Such is the fruit
of abstraction when abstraction bears any fruit. If the imagination
merely alienates us from reality, without giving us either a model for
its correction or a glimpse into its structure, it becomes the refuge
of poetical selfishness. Such selfishness is barren, and the fancy,
feeding only on itself, grows leaner every day. Mysticism is usually an
incurable disease. Facts cannot arouse it, since it never denied them.
Reason cannot convince it, for reason is a human faculty, assuming a
validity which it cannot prove. The only thing that can kill mysticism
is its own uninterrupted progress, by which it gradually devours every
function of the soul and at last, by destroying its own natural basis,
immolates itself to its inexorable ideal.

Need we ask, after all these reflections, where we should look for
that expansion and elevation of the mind which the mystic seeks so
passionately and so unintelligently? We can find that expansion, in
the first place, in the imagination itself. That is the true realm of
man's infinity, where novelty may exist without falsity and perpetual
diversity without contradiction. But such exercise of imagination
leaves the world of knowledge untouched. Is there no escape from the
prison, as the mystic thinks it, of science and history which shall
yet not carry us beyond reality? Is there no truth beyond conventional
truth, no life behind human existence?

Certainly. Behind the discovered there is the discoverable, beyond
the actual, the possible. Science and history are not exhausted. In
their determinate directions they are as infinite as fancy in its
indetermination. The spectacle which science and history now spread
before us is as far beyond the experience of an ephemeral insect as any
Absolute can be beyond our own; yet we have put that spectacle together
out of just such sensations as the insect may have--out of this
sunlight and this buzz and these momentary throbs of existence. The
understanding has indeed supervened, but it has supervened not to deny
the validity of those sensations, but to combine their messages. We may
still continue in the same path, by the indefinite extension of science
over a world of experience and of intelligible truth. Is that prospect
insufficient for our ambition? With a world so full of stuff before
him, I can hardly conceive what morbid instinct can tempt a man to look
elsewhere for wider vistas, unless it be unwillingness to endure the
sadness and the discipline of the truth.

But can our situation be made better by refusing to understand it? If
we renounced mysticism altogether and kept imagination in its place,
should we not live in a clearer and safer world, as well as in a
truer? Nay, are we sure that this gradually unfolding, intelligible,
and real world would not turn out to be more congenial and beautiful
than any wilful fiction, since it would be the product of a universal
human labour and the scene of the accumulated sufferings and triumphs
of mankind? When we compare the temple which we call Nature, built of
sights and sounds by memory and understanding, with all the wonderful
worlds evocable by the magician's wand, may we not prefer the humbler
and more lasting edifice, not only as a dwelling, but even as a house
of prayer? It is not always the loftiest architecture that expresses
the deepest soul; the inmost religion of the Pagan haunted his
hearth as that of the Christian his catacombs or his hermitage. So
philosophy is more spiritual in her humility and abstinence than in
her short-lived audacities, and she would do well to inscribe over her
gates what, in an ancient Spanish church, may be seen written near the
steep entrance to a little subterraneous crypt:--

    "Wouldst thou pass this lowly door?
    Go, and angels greet thee there;
    For by this their sacred stair
    To descend is still to soar.
    Bid a measured silence keep
    What thy thoughts be telling o'er;
    Sink, to rise with wider sweep
    To the heaven of thy rest,
    For he climbs the heavens best
    Who would touch the deepest deep."




