VI

CLASSIC SURVIVALS


Before passing in review Browning's treatment of classical subjects as
compared with the other great poets of the nineteenth century, it will be
interesting to take a glimpse at his choice of subject-matter in general.

To compare Browning's choice of subject-matter with that of other English
poets is to strike at the very root of his position in the chain of
literary development. Subject-matter is by no means simple in its nature,
but as a musical sound is composed of vibrations within vibrations, so it
is made up of the complex relations of body and spirit--the mere external
facts of the story are blended with such philosophical undercurrent, or
dramatic _motif_, or unfolding of the hidden springs of action as the poet
is able to insinuate into it.

However far back one penetrates in the history of poetry, poets will be
found depending largely upon previous sources, rather than upon their own
creative genius, for the body of their subject-matter, until the
question presents itself with considerable force as to who could have been
the mysterious first poet who supplied plots to the rest of mankind.
Conjecture is obliged to play a part here, as it does wherever human
origins are in question. Doubtless, this first poet was no separate
individual, but simply the elements man and nature, through whose action
and reaction upon each other grew up story-forms, evidently compounded of
human customs, and observed natural phenomena such as those we find in the
great Hindu, Greek, and Teutonic classics, and which thus crystallized
became great well-springs of inspiration for future generations of poets.

Each new poet, however, who is worthy of the name, sets up his own
particular interplay with man and nature; and however much he may be
indebted for his inspiration to past products of this universal law of
action and reaction, he is bound to use them or interpret them in a manner
colored by his own personal and peculiar relations with the universe.

In so doing he supplies the more important spiritual side of
subject-matter and becomes in very truth the poet or maker, to that extent
at least which Browning himself lays down as the province of art--namely,
to arrange,

  "Dissociate, redistribute, interchange
  Part with part: lengthen, broaden
  ... simply what lay loose
  At first lies firmly after, what design
  Was faintly traced in hesitating line
  Once on a time grows firmly resolute
  Henceforth and evermore."

Sometimes the poet's power of arranging and redistributing and
interchanging carries him upward into the realm of ideas alone, among
which his imagination plays in absolute freedom; he throws over the
results of man's past dallyings with Nature and makes his own terms with
her, and the result is an approach to absolute creation.

Except in the case of lyric poetry the instances where there have been no
suggestions as to subject-matter are rare in comparison with those where
the subject-matter has been derived from some source.

Look, for instance, at the father of English poetry, Chaucer, how he
ransacked French, Italian and Latin literature for his subject-matter,
most conscientiously carrying out his own saying, that

  "Out of olde feldys as men sey
    Comyth all this newe corn from yere to yere,
  And out of olde books in good fey
    Cometh all this new science that men alere."

How external a way he had of working over old materials, especially in his
earlier work, is well illustrated in "The Parliament of Fowls," which he
opens by relating the dream of Scipio, originally contained in Cicero's
treatise on the "Republic," and preserved by Macrobius. This dream, which
tells how Africanus appears to Scipio, and carries him up among the stars
of the night, shows him Carthage, and prophesies to him of his future
greatness, tells him of the blissful immortal life that is in store for
those who have served their country, points out to him the brilliant
celestial fires, and how insignificant the earth is in comparison with
them, and opens his ears to the wondrous harmony of the spheres--this
dream is as far removed from the main argument of the poem as anything
well could be a contest between three falcons for the hand of a formel.
The bringing together of such diverse elements presents no difficulties to
the childlike stage of literary development that depends upon surface
analogies for the linking together of its thoughts. Just as talking about
his ancestor, the great Scipio Africanus, with the old King Masinissa
caused Scipio to dream of him, so reading about this dream caused Chaucer,
who has to close his book and go to bed for want of a light, to dream of
Scipio Africanus also, who "was come and stood right at his bedis syde."

Africanus then plays the part of conductor to Chaucer in a manner
suggestive not only of his relations to Scipio, but of Virgil's relation
to Dante, and brings him to the great gateway and through it into the
garden of love. The description is of the temple of Venus in Boccaccio's
"La Teseide." There Nature and the "Fowls" are introduced and described,
and at last the point is reached. Nature proclaims that it is St.
Valentine's day, and all the fowls may choose them mates. The royal falcon
is given first choice, and chooses the lovely formel that sits upon
Nature's hand. Two other ardent falcons declare their devotion to the same
fowl, and Nature, when the formel declares that she will serve neither
Venus nor Cupid and asks a respite for a year, decides that the three
shall serve their lady another year--a pretty allegory supposed to refer
to the wooing of Blanche of Lancaster by John of Gaunt.

The main argument of this poem, when it finally is reached by artificially
welding together rich links borrowed from other poets, is one of the few
examples in Chaucer of subject-matter derived direct from a real event,
but the putting of it in an allegorical form at once lays him under
obligations to his poetic predecessors, not only on Anglo-Saxon soil, but
in France and Italy.

His most important contributions as an inventor are, of course, his
descriptions of the Canterbury Pilgrims, which are the pure outcome of a
keen observation of men and women at first hand. So lifelike are they that
in them he has made the England of the fourteenth century live again. But
how small a proportion of the bulk of the "Canterbury Tales" is contained
in these glimpses of English life and manners. It is but the framework
upon which luxuriate vines of fancy transplanted from many another garden,
and even in its place resembling, if not borrowed from, Boccaccio.

The thoroughly human instincts of the poet assert themselves, however, in
the choice of the tales which he puts into the mouths of his pilgrims. He
allows a place to the crudities and even the vulgarities of common stories
as well as to culture-lore. The magic of the East, the love tales of
Italy, the wisdom of philosophers, the common stories of the people, all
give up their wealth to his gentle touch. With a keen sense of propriety
he, with few exceptions, gives each one of his pilgrims a tale suited in
its general tendency to the character of its narrator, and in the critical
chatter of the pilgrims about the tales, reflects not only his own tastes,
but that of the times, the opinions expressed frequently being most
uncomplimentary in their tenor.

In fine, the life of reality and the life of books is spread out before
Chaucer, and his observation of both is keen and interested; and this it
is which makes him much more than the "great translator" that Eustace Les
Champs called him, and settles the nature of the "subtle thing" called
spirit contributed by the individuality of the poet to his subject-matter.
He brings everything within the reach of human sympathy, because his way
of putting a story into his own words is sympathetic. He was a combination
of the story-teller, the scholar, the poet, and the critic. As a scholar
he brings in learned allusions that are entirely extraneous to the action
in hand; as the story-teller, he takes delight in the tales that both the
poet and the people have told; as the poet, his imagination dresses up a
story with a fresh environment, often anachronous, and sometimes he alters
the moral tone of the characters. Cressida is an interesting example of
this. But instead of the characters suggesting by their own action and
speech all the needed moral, Chaucer himself appears ever at hand to
analyze and criticise and moralize, though he does it so delightfully that
one hesitates to call him didactic. The result of all this is that the
external form and the underlying essence of his subject-matter are not
completely fused. We often see a sort of guileless working of the
machinery of art, yet it is true, no doubt, though perhaps not to the
extent insisted on by Morley, that he has something of the Shakespearian
quality which enables him to show men as they really are, "wholly
developed as if from within, not as described from without by an imperfect
and prejudiced observer."

In his great work, Spenser is no less dependent upon sources for his
inspiration, but there is a marked difference in his use of them. Although
his range of observation is much narrower than Chaucer's, hardly extending
at all into the realm of actual human effort, yet he makes an advance in
so far as his powers of redistribution are much greater than Chaucer's.

The various knights of the "Fairy Queen" and their exploits are not
modeled directly upon any previous stories, but they are made up of
incidents similar to those found scattered all through classic lore; and
as his inspirations were drawn in most cases directly from the
fountain-head of story in the Greek writers--instead of as they filtered
through the Latin, Italian, and French, with the inevitable accretions
that result from migrations,--and from the comparatively unalloyed
Arthurian legends, there is a clearer reflection in them of the cosmic
elements that shine through both the Greek and Arthurian originals than is
found in Chaucer.

Although Spenser was certainly unaware of any such modern refinement of
the mythologist as a solar myth, yet the "Fairy Queen" forms a curious and
interesting study on account of the survivals everywhere evident of solar
characteristics in his characters and plots. Indeed it could hardly be
otherwise, considering his intention, and his method of carrying it out,
which he, himself, explains in his quaint letter to Sir Walter
Raleigh--namely, "to fashion a gentleman or noble person in virtuous and
gentle discipline." He goes on:

    "I close the history of King Arthur as most fit for the excellency of
    his person, being made famous by many men's former works, and also
    further from danger and envy of suspicion of present time. In which I
    have followed all the antique poets historical; first Homer, who in
    the person of Agamemnon and Ulysses hath ensampled a good governor
    and a virtuous man, the one in his 'Iliad,' the other in his
    'Odyssey'; then Virgil, whose like intention was to do in the person
    of AEneas: After him, Ariosto comprised them both in his Orlando, and
    lately Tasso dissevered them again, and formed both parts in two
    persons, the part which they in Philosophy call Ethice or virtues of a
    private man, colored in his Rinaldo, the other, named Politice, in his
    Godfieldo. By example of which excellent poets, I labor to portray in
    Arthur before he was King, the image of a brave Knight perfected in
    the twelve private moral virtues as Aristotle hath devised, the which
    is the purpose of these first twelve books."

In the fashioning of his knight he took Arthur, a hero whose life as it
appears in the early romances is inextricably mingled with solar elements,
and has built up his virtues upon other ancient solar heroes. Here are all
the paraphernalia of solar mythology: invincible knights with marvelous
weapons, brazen castles guarded by dragons, marriage with a beautiful
maiden and parting from the bride to engage in new quests, an enchantress
who turns men into animals, even the outcast child; but none of the
incidents appear intact. It is as if there had been a great explosion in
the ancient land of romance and that in the mending up of things the
separate pieces are all recognizable, although all joined together in a
different pattern, while under all is the allegory. A gentle knight is
no longer a solar hero as set forth by Max Mueller or Cox, but Holiness;
his invincible armor is not the all-powerful rays of the sun, but truth;
the enchantress not night casting a spell over mortals, but sensuous
pleasure entangling them.

These two poets, Chaucer and Spenser, are prototypes of two poet types of
two poetical tendencies that have gone on developing side by side in
English literature: Chaucer, democratic, interested supremely in the
personalities of men and women, portraying the real, and Spenser,
aristocratic, interested in imaging forth an ideal of manhood, choosing
his subject-matter from sources that will lend themselves to such a
purpose; Chaucer drawing his lessons out of the real actions of humanity;
Spenser framing his story so that it will illustrate the moral he wishes
to inculcate.

Shakespeare, of course, ranges himself in line with Chaucer. His interest
centered on character, and wherever a story capable of character
development presented itself, that he chose, altered it in outline
comparatively little, and when he did so it was in order to carry forward
the dramatic _motif_ which he infused into his subject. The dramatic
form in which he wrote furnished him a better medium for reaching a
complete welding together of the external and spiritual side of his
subject-matter. Where Chaucer hinted at the possibilities of an artistic
development of character that would cause the events of the story to
appear as the inevitable outcome of the hidden springs of action,
Shakespeare accomplished it, and peopled the world of imagination with
group after group of living, acting characters.

In the nineteenth century Tennyson and Browning have represented, broadly
speaking, these two tendencies. As with Spenser, the classics and the
Arthurian legends have been the sources from which Tennyson has drawn most
largely; but although a philosophical undercurrent is this poet's
spiritual addition to the subject-matter, his method of putting his soul
inside his work is very different from Spenser's. He does not tear the old
myths to pieces and join them together again after a pattern of his own to
fit his allegorical situation, but keeps the events of his stories almost
unchanged, in this particular resembling Chaucer and Shakespeare,
and--except in a few instances, such as Tithonus and Lucretius, where the
classic spirit of the originals is preserved--he infuses in his subject a
vein of philosophy, illustrating those modern tendencies of English
thought of which Tennyson, himself, was the exemplar. Even when inventing
subjects, founded upon the experiences of everyday life, he so manipulates
the story as to make it illustrate some of his favorite moral maxims. His
characters do not act from motives which are the inherent necessities of
their natures, but they act in accordance with Tennyson's preconceived
notions of how they ought to act. He manipulates the elements of character
to suit his own view of development, just as Spenser manipulated the
elements of the story to suit his own allegorical purpose.

Browning is the nineteenth-century heir of Chaucer; but it is doubtful
whether Chaucer would recognize his own offspring, so remarkable has the
development been in those five centuries. With Chaucer's keen interest in
human nature deepened to a profound insight into the very soul of
humanity, and the added wealth of these centuries of human history,
Browning not only had a far wider range of choice in subject-matter, but
he was enabled to instil into it greater intellectual and emotional
complexities.

Rarely has he treated any subject that has already been treated poetically
unless we except the transcripts from the classics soon to be
considered. Wherever he saw an interesting historical personage,
interesting, not on account of his brilliant achievements in the eyes of
the world, but on account of potentialities of character, such a one he
has set before us to reveal himself. There are between twenty and thirty
portraits of this nature in his work, chosen from all sorts and conditions
of men--men who stand for some phase of growth in human thought; and
always in developing a personality he gives the kernel of truth upon which
their peculiar point of view is based. Thus, among the musical poems, Abt
Vogler speaks for the intuitionalist--he who is blessed by a glimpse of
the absolute truth. Charles Avison, on the other hand, is the philosopher
of the relative in music and the arts generally. Among the art poems, Fra
Lippo Lippi is the apostle of beauty in realism, Andrea del Sarto the
attainer of perfection in form. In the religious poems the Jewish
standpoint is illustrated in "Saul" and "Rabbi Ben Ezra," the Christian in
the portrait of John in "The Death in the Desert"; the empirical reasoner
in "Paracelsus."

This is only one of Browning's methods in the choice and use of
subject-matter. The characters and incidents in his stories are
frequently the result of pure invention, but he sets them in an
environment recreated from history, developing their individualities in
harmony with the environment, thus giving at one stroke the spirit of the
time and the individual qualities of special representatives of the time.
Examples of this are: "My Last Duchess," where the Duke is an entirely
imaginary person and the particular incident is invented, but he is made
to act and talk in a way perfectly in keeping with the spirit of the
time--mediaeval Italy. "Hugues of Saxe-Gotha" is another being of
Browning's fancy, who yet represents to perfection the spirit of the old
fugue writers. "Luria," "The Soul's Tragedy," "In a Balcony," all
represent the same method.

Another plan pursued by the poet is either to invent or borrow a
historical personage into whose mouth he puts the defence of some course
of action or ethical standard that may or may not be founded upon the
highest ideals. Sludge, the hero of "Fifine at the Fair," Bishop Blougram,
Hohenstiel-Schwangau, range themselves in this group.

There are comparatively few cases where he has taken a complete story and
developed its spiritual possibilities without much change in external
detail, but how adequate his art was to such ends, "The Ring and the
Book," "Inn Album," "Two Poets of Croisic," "Red Cotton Nightcap Country,"
the historical dramas of "Strafford," and "King Victor and King Charles"
fully prove, including, as they do, some of his finest masterpieces.

History and story have furnished many of the incidents which he has worked
up in his dramatic lyrics and romances like "Clive," "Herve Riel,"
"Donald," etc. There remains, however, a large number of poems containing
some of Browning's loveliest work in which the subject-matter is, as far
as we know, the creation of pure, unadulterated fancy. "A Blot in the
'Scutcheon," "In a Balcony," "Colombe's Birthday," "Childe Roland," "James
Lee's Wife" are some of them. Even in this rapid survey of the field the
fact is patent that Browning's range of subject-matter is infinitely wider
and his method of developing it far more varied than has been that of any
other English poet. He seems the first to have completely shaken himself
free from the trammels of classic or mediaeval literature. There are no
echoes of Arthur and his Knights in his poetry, the shadows of the Greek
gods and goddesses exert no spell--except in the few instances when he
deliberately chose a Greek subject.

The fact that Browning was so free from classical influence in the great
body of his work as compared with the other chief poets of the nineteenth
century gives an especial interest to those poems in which he chose
classical themes for his subjects. There are not more than ten all told,
and one of these is a translation, yet they represent some of his finest
and most original work, for Browning could not touch a classical theme
without infusing into it that grasp and insight peculiar to his own
genius.

His first and most conventionally classical poem is the fragment in "Men
and Women," "Artemis Prologizes," written in 1842. It was to have been the
introduction to a long poem telling of the mad love of Hippolytus for a
nymph of Artemis, after that goddess had brought about his resuscitation.
It has been suggested by Mr. Boynton in an interesting paper that Browning
shows traces of the influence of Landor in his poetry. This fragment
certainly furnishes argument for this opinion, though it has a strength of
diction along with its Greek severity and terseness of style which leads
to the conclusion that the influence came from the fountain head of
Greek poetry itself rather than through the lesser muse of this
nineteenth-century Greek.

The poem is said to have been begun on a sick-bed and when the poet
recovered he had forgotten or lost interest in his plans. This is to be
regretted for if he had continued as he began, the poem would have stood
unique in his work as a true survival of Greek subject wedded with
classical form and style, and would certainly have challenged comparison
with the best work done in this field by Landor or Swinburne, who tell
over the classical stories or even invent new episodes, but, when all is
said, do not write as if they were actually themselves Greeks.

There is no other instance in Browning of such a survival. In his other
poems on Greek subjects it is Browning bringing Greek life to our ken with
wonderful distinctness, but doing it according to his own accustomed
poetical methods, or, as in "Ixion," a Greek story has been used as a
symbol for the inculcating of a philosophy which is largely Browning's
own.

In spite of the fact that he has turned to Greece so seldom for
inspiration, his Greek poems range from such stirring pictures of Greek
life and feeling as one gets in the splendid dramatic idyl
"Pheidippides," based on a historical incident, through the imaginary
"Cleon," in which is found the sublimated essence of Greek philosophical
thought at the time of Christ--thought, weary of law and beauty, longing
for a fresh inspiration, knowing not what, and unable to perceive it in
the new ideal of love being taught by the Christians--to "Aristophanes'
Apology," in which the Athens of his day, with its literary and political
factions, is presented with a force and analysis which place it second
only to "The Ring and the Book."

This poem taken, with Balaustion, gives the reader not only a
comprehensive view of the historical atmosphere of the time but indirectly
shows the poet's own attitude toward the literary war between Euripides
and Aristophanes. So different are Browning's Greek poems from all other
poems upon classical subjects that it will be interesting to dwell upon
the most important of them at greater length than has been deemed
necessary in the case of the more widely known and read of the poems.

"Cleon" links itself with the nineteenth century, because of its dealing
with the problem of immortality, a problem which has been ever present in
the mind of the century. Cleon has, beside that type of synthetic mind
which belongs to a ripe phase of civilization. Though he is a Greek and a
pagan, he stretches hands across the centuries to men of the type of
Morris or Matthew Arnold. He is the latest child of his own time, the heir
of all the ages during which Greece had developed its aesthetic perfection,
discovered the inadequacy of its established religion, come through its
philosophers and poets to a perception of the immortality of the soul, and
sunk again to a skepticism which had no vision of personal immortality at
least, though among the stoics there were some who believed in an
absorption into divine being. Cleon would fain believe in personal
immortality but cannot, and, like Matthew Arnold, believes in facing death
imperturbably.

In "Balaustion's Adventure" a historical tradition is used as the central
episode of the poem, but life and romance are given to it by the creation
of the heroine, Balaustion, a young Greek woman whose fascinating
personality dominates the whole poem. She was a Rhodian, else her freedom
of action and speech might seem too modern, but among the islands of
Greece, at least at the time of Euripides, there still survived that
attitude toward woman which we see reflected in the Homeric epics. Away
from Athens, too, Euripides was a power; hence his defence is put into the
mouth of one not an Athenian. She had saved a shipload of Athenian
sympathizers by reciting Euripides when they were in danger from the
hostile Syracusans.

[Illustration: EURIPIDES]

Besides the romantic touch which is given the story by the creation of the
lyric girl, there is an especial fitness in making the enthusiastic
devotee of this poet a woman, for no one among the ancients has so fully
and sympathetically portrayed woman in all her human possibilities of
goodness and badness as Euripides, yet he has been called a
woman-hater--because some of his men have railed against women--but one
Alkestis is enough to offset any dramatic utterances of his men about
women. The poet's attitude should be looked for in his power of portraying
women of fine traits, not in any opinions expressed by his men.
Furthermore, Browning had before him a model of Balaustion in her
enthusiasm for Euripides, in Mrs. Browning. These circumstances are
certainly sufficient to prove the appropriateness of making a Rhodian girl
the defender of Euripides.

There is nothing more delicious in Browning than Balaustion's relation of
"Alkestis," as she had seen it acted, to her three friends. Her woman's
comment and criticisms combine a Browning's penetration of the fine points
in the play with a girl's idealism. Such a combination of masculine
intellectualism and feminine charm has been known in women of all
centuries. As the translation of the beautiful play of "Alkestis"
proceeds, Balaustion interprets its art and moral, defending her favorite
poet, not with the ponderousness of a grave critic weighing the influences
which may have molded his genius, or calculating the pros and cons of his
style, but with the swift appreciation of a mind and spirit full of the
ardor of sympathy. Moreover, her talk of the play being a recollection of
how it appeared to her as she saw it acted, the mere text is constantly
enlarged upon and made vital with flashing glimpses of the action, as, for
example, in the passage just after the funeral of Alkestis:

  "So, to the struggle off strode Herakles,
  When silence closed behind the lion-garb,
  Back came our dull fact settling in its place,
  Though heartiness and passion half-dispersed
  The inevitable fate. And presently
  In came the mourners from the funeral,
  One after one, until we hoped the last
  Would be Alkestis, and so end our dream.
  Could they have really left Alkestis lone
  I' the wayside sepulchre! Home, all save she!
  And when Admetos felt that it was so,
  By the stand-still: when he lifted head and face
  From the two hiding hands and peplos' fold,
  And looked forth, knew the palace, knew the hills,
  Knew the plains, knew the friendly frequence there,
  And no Alkestis any more again,
  Why, the whole woe billow-like broke on him."

Again, her criticism of Admetos gives at once the natural feeling of a
girl who could not be satisfied with what seemed to her his selfish
action, and Browning's feeling that Euripides saw its selfishness just as
surely as Balaustion, despite the fact that it was in keeping, as numerous
critics declare, with the customs of the age, and would not by any of his
contemporaries be regarded as selfish on his part:

  "So he stood sobbing: nowise insincere,
  But somehow child-like, like his children, like
  Childishness the world over. What was new
  In this announcement that his wife must die?
  What particle of pain beyond the pact
  He made with his eyes wide open, long ago--
  Made and was, if not glad, content to make?
  Now that the sorrow, he had called for, came,
  He sorrowed to the height: none heard him say,
  However, what would seem so pertinent,
  'To keep this pact, I find surpass my power;
  Rescind it, Moirai! Give me back her life,
  And take the life I kept by base exchange!
  Or, failing that, here stands your laughing-stock
  Fooled by you, worthy just the fate o' the fool
  Who makes a pother to escape the best
  And gain the worst you wiser Powers allot!'
  No, not one word of this; nor did his wife
  Despite the sobbing, and the silence soon
  To follow, judge so much was in his thought--
  Fancy that, should the Moirai acquiesce,
  He would relinquish life nor let her die.
  The man was like some merchant who in storm,
  Throws the freight over to redeem the ship;
  No question, saving both were better still,
  As it was,--why, he sorrowed, which sufficed.
  So, all she seemed to notice in his speech
  Was what concerned her children."

Among modern critics who take the conventional ground in regard to Admetos
may be cited Churton Collins, whose opinion is, of course, weighty. He
writes:

    "Alcestis would be considered fortunate for having had an opportunity
    of displaying so conspicuously the fidelity to a wife's first and
    capital duty. Had Admetus prevented such a sacrifice he would have
    robbed Alcestis of an honor which every nobly ambitious woman in
    Hellas would have coveted. This is so much taken for granted by the
    poet that all that he lays stress on in the drama is the virtue
    rewarded by the return of Alcestis to life, the virtue characteristic
    of Admetus, the virtue of hospitality; to this duty in all the agony
    of his sorrow Admetus had been nobly true, and as a reward for what he
    had thus earned, the wife who had been equally true to woman's
    obligations was restored all-glorified to home and children and mutual
    love."

Most readers, however, will find it difficult to put themselves into the
appropriate Greek frame of mind, and will sympathize with Browning's
supposition that after all Euripides had transcended current ideas on the
subject and deliberately intended to convey such an interpretation of the
character of Admetos as Balaustion gives.

Balaustion shows her penetration again in her appreciation of Herakles. He
distinguishes clearly between evil that is inherent in the nature as the
selfishness of Admetos, and evil which is more or less external, growing
out of conditions incident to the time rather than from any real trait of
nature. Herakles' delight in the hospitality accorded him, his drinking
and feasting in the interim of his labors, did not touch the genuine,
large-hearted helpfulness of the demigod, who became sober the moment he
learned there was sorrow in the house and need of his aid.

In her proposed version of the story, Balaustion is surely the romantic
girl, who would have her hero a hero indeed and in every way the equal of
his spouse. Yet if we delve below this romanticism of Balaustion we shall
find the poet's own belief in the almost omniscient power of human love
the basis of the relation between Admetos and Alkestis.

The soul of Alkestis in one look entered into that of Admetos; she died,
but he is entirely guiltless of agreeing to her death. Alkestis herself
had made the pact with Apollo to die for her husband. He, when he learns
it, refuses to accept the sacrifice, and unable to persuade him that his
duty to humanity demands that he accept it, Alkestis asks him to look at
her. Then her soul enters his, but when she goes to Hades and demands to
become a ghost, the Queen of Hades replies:

  "Hence, thou deceiver! This is not to die,
  If, by the very death which mocks me now,
  The life, that's left behind and past my power,
  Is formidably doubled--Say, there fight
  Two athletes, side by side, each athlete armed
  With only half the weapons, and no more,
  Adequate to a contest with their foes.
  If one of these should fling helm, sword and shield
  To fellow--shieldless, swordless, helmless late--
  And so leap naked o'er the barrier, leave
  A combatant equipped from head to heel,
  Yet cry to the other side, 'Receive a friend
  Who fights no longer!' 'Back, friend, to the fray!'
  Would be the prompt rebuff; I echo it.
  Two souls in one were formidable odds:
  Admetos must not be himself and thou!

  "And so, before the embrace relaxed a whit,
  The lost eyes opened, still beneath the look;
  And lo, Alkestis was alive again,
  And of Admetos' rapture who shall speak?"

How unique a treatment of a classical subject this poem is, is
self-evident. Not content with making a superb translation of the play,
remarkable both for its literalness and for its poetic beauty, the poet
has dared to present that translation indirectly through the mouth of
another speaker, and to incorporate with it a running commentary of
criticism in blank verse. Still more daring was it to make play and
criticism an episode in a dramatic monologue in which we learn not only
the story of the rescue of the shipload of Athenian sympathizers, but the
story of Balaustion's love. Along with all this complexity of interest
there is still room for a lifelike portrayal of Balaustion herself, one of
the loveliest conceptions of womanhood in literature.

To reiterate what I have upon another occasion expressed in regard to her,
she is a girl about whom the fancy loves to cling--she is so joyous, so
brave, and so beautiful, and possessed of so rare a mind scintillating
with wit, wisdom and critical insight, not Browning's own mind either
except in so far as his sympathies were with Euripides. Her ardor for
purity and perfection is perhaps peculiarly feminine. It is quite
different from that of the mind tormented by the problem of evil and
taking refuge in a partisanship of evil as a force which works for good
and without which the world would be a waste of insipidity. Her suggested
version of the Alkestis story converts Admetos into as much of a saint as
Alkestis, and makes an exquisite and soul-stirring romance of their
perfect union, though it must be admitted that it would do away with all
the intensity and dramatic force of the play as it is presented by
Euripides. Like the angels who rejoice more over one sinner returned than
over the ninety and nine that did not go astray, an artist prefers the
contrast and movement of a sinning and regenerated Admetos to an Admetos
more suited from the first to be the consort of Alkestis. This is the
touch, however, which preserves Balaustion's feminine charm and makes her
truly her own self--an ardent soul very far from being simply Browning's
mouthpiece.

"Aristophanes' Apology" is a still more remarkable play in its complexity.
Again, Balaustion is the speaker, and Browning has set himself the task in
this monologue of relating the fall of Athens, of presenting the
personality of Aristophanes, of defending Euripides, a translation of
whose play, "Herakles," is included, and incidentally sketching the
history of Greek comedy, all through the mouth of the one speaker,
Balaustion. Not until one has grasped the law by which the poet has
accomplished this, and has moreover freshly in his mind the facts of Greek
history at the time of Athens' fall, and Greek literature, especially the
plays of Aristophanes and Euripides, can the poem be thoroughly enjoyed.

In the very first line the suggestion of the scene setting is given, and
such suggestions occur from time to time all through the poem. It should
be observed that they are never brought in for themselves alone, but are
always used in connection with some mood of Balaustion's or as imagery in
relation to some thought. While the reader is thus kept conscious of the
background of wind and wave, as Balaustion and her husband voyage toward
Rhodes, it is not until the end of the poem that we learn with a pleasant
surprise that the boat on which they are sailing is the same one saved
once by Balaustion when she recited Euripides' "sweetest, saddest song."
Thus there is a dramatic denouement in connection with the scene setting.

Through the expression of a mood of despair on the part of Balaustion at
the opening of the poem the reader is put in possession not only of the
scene setting but of the occasion of the voyage, which is the overthrow
of Athens. From the mood of despair Balaustion passes to one in which she
describes how she could better have borne to see Athens perish. This
carries her on to a more hopeful frame of mind, in which she can foresee
the spiritual influence of Athens persisting. The peace of mind ensuing
upon this consideration makes it possible for her calmly to survey the
events connected with its downfall, among which the picturesque episode of
the dancing of the flute girls to the demolition of the walls of the
Piraeus is conspicuous. She then sees the vision of the immortal Athens
while Sparta the victorious in arms will die. Then comes a mood in which
she declares it will be better to face the grief than to brood over it,
which leads to her proposing to Euthukles that they treat the fall of
Athens as a tragic theme, as the poet might do, and enact it on the
voyage. Then grief over the recent events takes possession of her again,
and now with the feminine privilege of changing her mind, she thinks it
would be better to rehearse an event which happened to herself a year ago
as a prologue. Speaking of adventures causes her very naturally to drop
into reminiscences about her first adventure, when she recited
Euripides and met the man who was to become her husband.

[Illustration: ARISTOPHANES]

Thus, through this perfectly natural transition from one mood to another,
Balaustion leads up to the real subject-matter of the poem, Aristophanes'
defence of himself, which, however, is preceded by an account of the
effect of the death of Euripides upon the Athenians as witnessed by
Euthukles, his death being the occasion of Aristophanes' call on
Balaustion. What she calls the prologue is really the main theme of the
poem, while all her talk up to this point is truly the prologue. The
actual account of the fall of Athens does not come until the conclusion,
and is related in comparatively few words.

What seems, then, to be the chief theme of the poem with its setting of
wind and wave and bark bears somewhat the same relation to the real theme
as incidental music does to a play. Upon first thoughts it may seem like a
clumsy contrivance for introducing Aristophanes upon the scene, but in the
end it will be perceived, I think, that it serves the artistic purpose of
placing Aristophanes in proper perspective. Balaustion with her
exquisitely human moods and progressive spirit forms the right complement
to the decaying ideals of Aristophanes, and gives him the proper flavor
of antiquity. Instead of seeing him in the broad light of a direct
dramatic presentation we see him indirectly through Balaustion's thoughts
and moods, who, though permitting him to do full justice to himself, yet
surrounds him all the time with the subtle influence of her sympathy for
Euripides.

As the better way to follow the development of the preliminary part of the
poem is by regarding every step as the outcome of a mood on the part of
Balaustion, so the better way of following Aristophanes through what seems
his interminable defence of himself is again by tracing the moods through
which his arguments express themselves.

Aristophanes comes in half drunk to make his call on Balaustion, and his
first mood is one of graciousness toward her whose beauty has impressed
his artistic perceptions, but noticing her dignity and its effect in
routing the chorus, he immediately begins to be on the defensive. The
disappearance of his chorus, however, takes him off on a little excursion
about the moves which are being made by the city to cut down the expense
of dramatic performances by curtailing the chorus. In a spirit of bravado
he declares that he does not care so long as he has his actors left. A
coarse reference causes Balaustion to turn and he changes his mood. He
acknowledges he is drunk and rushes off into a defence of drunkenness in
general for playwrights and for himself, which on this occasion came about
on account of the supper he and his players have attended. He rattles on
about the supper, telling how the merriment increased until something
happened. The thought of this something changes his mood completely.
Balaustion notices it, he reads her expression, and characteristically
explains the change in himself as due to her fixed regard. The reader is
left in suspense as to the something which happened, yet it haunts the
memory, and he feels convinced that some time he is to know what it was.

Now Aristophanes bids Balaustion speak to him without fear. She does so,
conveying in her welcome both her disapproval and her admiration.
Aristophanes, evidently piqued, does not answer, but makes personal
remarks upon the manner of her speech, asking her if she learned tragedy
from _him_--Euripides. This starts him off on dreams of a new comedy in
which women shall act, but he concludes that his mission is to ornament
comedy as he finds it, not invent a new comedy.

This gives Balaustion a chance to ask if in his last play, later than the
one Euthukles had seen, he had smoothed this ancient club of comedy he
speaks of into a more human and less brutal implement of warfare, and was
it a conviction of this new method he might use in comedy which was the
something that happened at the feast. Aristophanes, as usual when he is
cornered, makes no direct reply, but asks if Euthukles saw his last play,
to which Balaustion frankly replies that having seen the first he never
cared to see the following. Aristophanes avows he can show cause why he
wrote them, but glances off in a sarcastic reference to Euripides, whose
art he says belongs to the closet or the cave, not to the world. He
prefers to stick to the old forms of art and make Athens happy in what
coarse way she desires. He then proceeds to enlarge upon what that is.
Then he changes again and asks with various excursions into side issues
(for example: the rise of comedy; how it is now being regarded by the
government, which favors tragedy, giving him another chance for a dig at
Euripides) if he is the man likely to be satisfied to be classed merely a
comic poet since he wrote the "Birds?" Balaustion encourages him a little
here, and, cheered up, he goes on to tell how he gave the people draught
divine in "Wasps" and "Grasshoppers," and how he praised peace by
showing the kind of pleasures one may have when peace reigns--and still at
every opportunity casting slurs at the tragic muse, especially Euripides.

He goes on describing his play until he touches on some of the sarcasms
which make Balaustion wince.

Then he turns about and declares he loathes as much as she does the things
of which he tells, but his attempts at bringing comedy up to a high level
having failed, he is obliged to give the Athenians what they want, a
smartened up version of the "Thesmaphoriazousai," which had failed the
year before. He describes his triumph with this which was being celebrated
at the supper when the something happened which is now at last
described--namely, the entrance of Sophocles, who announces that he
intends to commemorate the death of Euripides by having his chorus clothed
in black and ungarlanded at the performance of his play next month.

This startling scene, being prepared for and not brought in until
Aristophanes has done much talking, seems to throw a sudden flash of
reality into the poem. Ill-natured criticism, Aristophanes shows, follows
on the part of the feasters, though Aristophanes' mood is one of sudden
recognition of the value of Euripides. But when he, sobered for the time
being, proposes a toast to the Tragic Muse, the feasters consider it a
joke. He quickly accepts the situation, and comes off triumphant by
proposing a toast to both muses.

After this Balaustion asks Aristophanes if he will commemorate Euripides
with them. But his sober mood is gone. He looks about the room, sees
things that belong to Euripides, and immediately begins stabbing at him.
Balaustion objects, and upon the theme of respect to the dead he begins
his usual invective against his rivals, but finally ends by giving respect
to Euripides, him whose serenity, he declares, could never with his gibes
be disturbed.

After venting this mood of animosity he begins soberly to discuss the
origin of comedy. He traces its growth to the point where he found it, and
enlarges on the improvements he has made, touching, as always, upon the
criticisms of his opposers, and finally arriving at the chief point of
difference between himself and Euripides, which he enlarges upon at great
length. Here the incidental music breaks in with talk between Balaustion
and Euthukles, in which the former rather tries to excuse herself from
relating her reply to Aristophanes.

However, she does give her reply, which is conducted in a more truly
argumentative fashion than the defence of Aristophanes. She picks up his
points and makes her points against him usually by denying the truth of
what he has said. Her supreme defence is, however, the reading of the play
"Herakles."

Aristophanes, touched but not convinced, finally insists that he is
Athens' best friend. He is no Thamuris to be punished for seeing beyond
human vision. The last characteristic touch is when Aristophanes catches
up the psalterion and sings the lyric of Thamuris. Then he departs, and
Balaustion rehearses the last days of Athens, with Euthukles' part in
delaying the tragedy of the doomed city.

By threading one's way thus through the apology, not from the point of
view of Aristophanes' arguments, but from the point of view of his moods,
one experiences a tremendous sense of the personality of the man.
Repetitions which are not required for the full presentation of his case
take their place as natural to a man who is not only inordinately vain but
is immediately swayed by every suggestion and emotion that comes to him.
Owing to his volatile temperament the argument is varied by now a bit of
vivid description like that of the archon's feast when Sophocles appeared,
now by some merely personal remark to Balaustion.

The criticism in this play, as in that of "Balaustion's Adventure," may be
considered either as representing some phase of contemporary opinion about
Aristophanes or as expressing the opinion of the poet himself.
Balaustion's indignation is especially aroused by the two plays, "The
Lusistrata" and the "Thesmophoriazousai," both of which she finds utterly
detestable. It is interesting to compare with this entirely unfavorable
criticism the feeling of such distinguished classical scholars as Gilbert
Murray and J. A. Symonds. The first Murray describes as a play "full of
daring indecency, it is true, but the curious thing is that Aristophanes,
while professing to ridicule the women, is all through on their side. The
jokes made by the superior sex at the expense of the inferior--to give
them their Roman names--are seldom remarkable either for generosity or
refinement, and it is our author's pleasant humor to accuse everybody of
every vice he can think of at the moment. Yet with the single exception
that he credits women with an inordinate fondness for wine parties--the
equivalent it would seem of afternoon tea--he makes them on the whole
perceptibly more sensible and more sympathetic than his men."

Of the second play Symonds speaks with actual enthusiasm. "It has a
regular plot--an intrigue and a solution--and its persons are not
allegorical but real. Thus it approaches the standard of modern comedy.
But the plot, though gigantic in its scale, and prodigious in its wealth
of wit and satire, is farcical. The artifices by which Euripides endeavors
to win Agathon to undertake his cause, the disguise of Muesilochus in
female attire, the oratory of the old man against the women in the midst
of their assembly, his detection, the momentary suspension of the dramatic
action by his seizure of the supposed baby, his slaughter of the swaddled
wine jar, his apprehension by Cleisthenes, the devices and disguises by
which Euripides endeavors to extricate his father-in-law from the scrape,
and the final _ruse_ by which he eludes the Scythian bowmen, and carries
off Muesilochus in triumph--all these form a series of highly diverting
comic scenes." Again, "There is no passage in Aristophanes more amusing
than the harangue of Muesilochus. The portrait, too, of Agathon in the act
of composition is exquisitely comic. But the crowning sport of the
'Thesmophoriazousai' is in the last scene when Muesilochus adapts the
Palamedes and the Helen of Euripides to his own forlorn condition,
jumbling up the well-known verses of these tragedies with coarse-flavored,
rustical remarks; and when at last Euripides, himself, acts Echo and
Perseus to the Andromeda of his father-in-law, and both together mystify
the policeman by their ludicrous utterance of antiphonal lamentation."

In her welcome of him, Balaustion expresses rather what she thinks he
might be than what she really thinks he is. She welcomes him:

  "Good Genius! Glory of the poet, glow
  O' the humorist who castigates his kind,
  Suave summer-lightning lambency which plays
  On stag-horned tree, misshapen crag askew,
  Then vanishes with unvindictive smile
  After a moment's laying black earth bare.
  Splendor of wit that springs a thunder ball--
  Satire--to burn and purify the world,
  True aim, fair purpose: just wit justly strikes
  Injustice,--right, as rightly quells the wrong,
  Finds out in knaves', fools', cowards', armory
  The tricky tinselled place fire flashes through.
  No damage else, sagacious of true ore;
  Wit learned in the laurel, leaves each wreath
  O'er lyric shell or tragic barbiton,--
  Though alien gauds be singed,--undesecrate."

Her attitude here is very like that of criticism in general, except that
she is more or less sarcastic, meaning to imply that such Aristophanes
might be but is not. Symonds, on the other hand, thinks him really what
Balaustion thinks he might be.

"If," he says, "Coleridge was justified in claiming the German word
Lustspiel for the so-called comedies of Shakespeare, we have a far greater
right to appropriate this wide and pregnant title to the plays of
Aristophanes. The brazen mask which crowns his theatre smiles indeed
broadly, serenely, as if its mirth embraced the universe; but its hollow
eye-sockets suggest infinite possibilities of profoundest irony.
Buffoonery carried to the point of paradox, wisdom disguised as insanity,
and gaiety concealing the whole sum of human disappointment, sorrow and
disgust, seem ready to escape from its open but rigid lips, which are
molded to a proud perpetual laughter. It is a laughter which spares
neither God nor man--which climbs Olympus only to drag down the immortals
to its scorn, and trails the pall of august humanity in the mire; but
which, amid its mockery and blasphemy, seems everlastingly asserting, as
by paradox, that reverence of the soul which bends our knees to heaven and
makes us respect our brothers."

One cannot help feeling, in view of these very diverse opinions, that both
are exaggerated. The enthusiasm of Symonds seems almost fanatic. Though no
one of penetration can fail to see the wit and wisdom, and at times, in
such lyrics as those in "The Clouds," the poetic charm of Aristophanes,
the person of fastidious taste, whether a Greek girl of his own day, or a
man of these latter days, must sometimes feel that his buffoonery
oversteps the bounds of true wit, even when it is not shadowed by a
coarseness not to be borne at the present day. When Balaustion asks him
"in plain words,"

  "Have you exchanged brute blows, which teach the brute
  Man may surpass him in brutality,--
  For human fighting, or true god-like force
  Which breeds persuasion nor needs fight at all?"

Aristophanes replies that it had not been his intention to turn art's
fabric upside down and invent an entirely new species of comedy. That sort
of thing can be done by one who has turned his back on life, friendly
faces, sympathetic cheer, as Euripides had done in his Salaminian cave.

This may be regarded, on the whole, as a good bit of defence on
Aristophanes' part. It is equivalent to his saying that there was no use
in his trying to be anything for which his genius had not fitted him. This
chimes in, again, with such authoritative criticism as Murray's, who
declares: "The general value of his view of life, and, above all, his
treatment of his opponent's alleged vices, may well be questioned. Yet
admitting that he often opposed what was best in his age, or advocated it
on the lowest grounds, admitting that his slanders are beyond description
and that, as a rule, he only attacks the poor and the leaders of the poor,
nevertheless he does it all with such exhuberant high spirits, such an air
of its all being nonsense together, such insight and swiftness, such
incomparable directness and charm of style, that even if some Archelaus
had handed him over to Euripides to scourge, he would probably have
escaped his well-earned whipping."

Much of Aristophanes' defence consists in slurring at Euripides, against
whom he waxes more and more fierce as he goes on. His plays furnish
numerous illustrations of his rivalry with Euripides, yet curiously
enough, as critics have pointed out, Aristophanes imitates Euripides to a
noteworthy extent, so much so that the dramatist Cratinus invented a word
to describe the style of the two--Euripid-Aristophanize. Judging from his
parodies on Euripides, he must certainly have read and reread his plays
until he knew them practically by heart.

Balaustion, as Browning has portrayed her in this poem, is the lyric girl
developed into splendid womanhood. She has a large heart and a large
brain, as well as imagination and strong ethical fervor. Her intense
feeling at the fall of Athens, which had been the ideal to her of
greatness, and her reverential love for Euripides, her charity toward
Aristophanes the man, if not toward his work, show how deep and
far-reaching her sympathies were. Again, her imagination flashes forth in
her picturesque descriptions of the ruined Athens and her prophetic
picture of the new Athens, of the spirit which will arise in its place, in
her telling portraiture of Aristophanes and his entrance into her house,
as well as in many another passage. Her intellect shines out in her clever
management of the argument with Aristophanes, and her ethical fervor in
her denunciations of the moral depravity of certain of the plays.

As to the question of whether a young Greek woman would be likely to
criticise Aristophanes in this way, opinion certainly differs. History is,
for the most part, silent about women. As Mahaffy says, it is only in the
dramatists and the philosophers that we can get any glimpses of the woman
of the time.

Mahaffy's opinions are worth quoting as an example of the pessimism
growing out of a bias in favor of a particular type of woman which he
idealized in his own mind. He seems utterly incapable of appreciating the
humanness of the women in the Greek dramatists, especially those in
Euripides. "Sadder than the condition of the aged was that of women," he
writes, "at this remarkable period. The days of the noble and
high-principled Penelope, of the refined and intellectual Helen, of the
innocent and spirited Nausikaa, of the gentle and patient Andromache, had
passed away. Men no longer sought and respected the society of the gentler
sex. Would that Euripides had even been familiar, as Homer was, with the
sound of women brawling in the streets! For in these days they were
confined to Asiatic silence and seclusion, while the whole life of the
men, both in business and recreation, was essentially public. Just as the
feverish excitement of political life nowadays prompts men to spend even
their leisure in the clubs, where they meet companions of like passions
and interests with themselves, so the Athenian gentleman only came home
to eat and sleep. His leisure as well as his business kept him in the
market place. His wife and daughters, ignorant of philosophy and politics,
were strangers to his real life, and took no interest in his pursuits.

"The results were fatal to Athenian society. The women, uninstructed,
neglected, and enslaved, soon punished their oppressors with their own
keen and bitter weapons, and with none keener than their vices. For, of
course, all the grace and delicacy of female character disappeared.
Intellectual power in women was distinctly associated with moral
depravity, so that excessive ignorance and stupidity was considered the
only guarantee of virtue. The qualifications for society became
incompatible with the qualifications for home duties, so that the outcasts
from society, as we call them, were not the immoral and the profligate but
the honorable and the virtuous."

Such is the view to be gleaned from history, and in Mahaffy's opinion the
literature of the time tells the same story. He goes on: "When we consult
the literature of the day, we find women treated either with contemptuous
ridicule in comedy, or with still more contemptuous silence in history. In
tragedy or in the social theories of the philosophers alone can we hope
for a glimpse into the average character and position of Athenian women.
Here at least we might have expected that the portraits drawn with such
consummate skill by Homer would have been easily transferred to the
Athenian stage. But to our astonishment we find the higher social feelings
toward women so weak that the Athenian tragic poets seem quite unable to
appreciate, or even to understand, the more delicate features in Homeric
characters. They are painted so coarsely and ignorantly by Euripides that
we should never recognize them but for their names. Base motives and
unseemly wrangling take the place of chivalrous honor and graceful
politeness.

"But the critics of the day complained that Euripides degraded the ideal
character of tragedy by painting human nature as he found it: in fact as
it was, and not as it ought to be. Let us turn, then, to Sophokles, who
painted the most ideal women which the imagination of a refined Athenian
could conceive, and consider his most celebrated characters, his Antigone
and his Elektra. A calm, dispassionate survey will, I think, pronounce
them harsh and masculine. They act rightly, no doubt, and even nobly, but
they do it in the most disagreeable way. Except in their external
circumstances they differ in no respect from men."

Certainly, the opinion expressed of the women of Euripides is tainted by
the feeling that they ought to act like English matrons and their
daughters.

Quite a different impression is given by Symonds, who, in regard to some
of the sentences occurring in Euripides which are uncomplimentary to
women, says: "It is impossible to weigh occasional sententious sarcasms
against such careful studies of heroic virtue in women as the Iphigenia,
the Elektra, the Polyxena, the Alkestis."

But the complete vindication of the fact that Balaustion and Mrs. Browning
and our own women of to-day are on the right side in their appreciation of
Euripides as the great woman's poet of antiquity is found in the opinion
of our contemporary critic, Gilbert Murray, who more than thirty years
after these poems were written writes of the "wonderful women-studies by
which Euripides dazzled and aggrieved his contemporaries. They called him
a hater of women; and Aristophanes makes the women of Athens conspire for
revenge against him. Of course he was really the reverse. He loved and
studied and expressed the women whom the Socratics ignored and Pericles
advised to stay in their rooms. Crime, however, is always more striking
and palpable than virtue. Heroines like Medea, Phaedra, Stheneboia,
Aerope, Clytemnestra, perhaps fill the imagination more than those of the
angelic or devoted type--Alcestis, who died to save her husband, Evadne
and Laodamia, who could not survive theirs, and all the great list of
virgin-martyrs. But the significant fact is that, like Ibsen, Euripides
refuses to idealize any man, and does idealize women. There is one
youth-martyr, Menoikeus in the 'Phaenissae,' but his martyrdom is a
masculine, businesslike performance--he gets rid of his prosaic father by
a pretext about traveling money without that shimmer of loveliness that
hangs over the virgins."

Where then did Euripides find these splendid women of force and character?
It seems quite impossible that he could have evolved them out of his own
inner consciousness. He must have known women who served at least, in
part, as models. Besides, there was undoubtedly a new woman movement in
the air or Plato in his "Republic" would not have suggested a plan for
educating men and women alike. The free women of Athens are known in some
cases to have attained a high degree of culture. Aspasia, who became the
wife of Pericles, is a shining example. There was Sappho, also, with her
school of poetry attended by girls in Lesbos.

Taking all these facts into consideration, it would seem that Browning was
sufficiently justified in drawing such a woman as Balaustion, and that a
woman of her penetrating intellect and ardor of spirit would love
Euripides, and dislike Aristophanes, seems absolutely certain.

Therefore, if the historical attitude is taken toward Balaustion and her
criticism and appreciation, it can be on the whole accepted as reflecting
what would probably be the feeling of an ardent woman-follower of
Euripides in his own day.

But, on the other hand, if the criticism be taken as Browning's own, it is
open to question whether it is partisan rather than entirely broad-minded.
Take the consensus of opinion of modern critics and we find them all
agreed in regard to the genius of Aristophanes, though admitting that his
coarseness must, at times, detract from their enjoyment of him.

There is much truth in Symonds' criticism of the poem. He says of it: "As
a sophist and a rhetorician of poetry, Mr. Browning proves himself
unrivaled, and takes rank with the best writers of historical romances.
Yet students may fairly accuse him of some special pleading in favor of
his friends and against his foes. It is true that Aristophanes did not
bring back again the golden days of Greece; true that his comedy revealed
a corruption latent in Athenian life. But neither was Euripides in any
sense a savior. Impartiality regards them both as equally destructive:
Aristophanes, because he indulged animalism and praised ignorance in an
age which ought to have outgrown both; Euripides, because he criticised
the whole fabric of Greek thought and feeling in an age which had not yet
distinguished between analysis and skepticism.

"What has just been said about Mr. Browning's special pleading indicates
the chief fault to be found with his poem. The point of view is modern.
The situation is strained. Aristophanes becomes the scapegoat of Athenian
sins, while Euripides shines forth a saint as well as a sage. Balaustion,
for her part, beautiful as her conception truly is, takes up a position
which even Plato could not have assumed. Into her mouth Mr. Browning has
put the views of the most searching and most sympathetic modern analyst.
She judges Euripides not as he appeared to his own Greeks, but as he
strikes the warmest of his admirers, who compare his work with that of all
the poets who have ever lived."

It would seem that Mr. Symonds, himself, does some special pleading here.
As we have seen, Euripides, though not a favorite in Athens, did have warm
admirers in his own day; consequently there is nothing out of the way in
portraying one of his contemporaries as an admirer. Furthermore,
Balaustion does not represent him as a savior of his age. She sees only
too clearly that in the narrow sense of convincing his age he has not been
a success. What is her vision of the spiritual Athens which is to arise
but a confession of this fact! Nor is it entirely improbable that she
might be prophetic of a time when Euripides will be recognized as the true
power. Any disciple of a poet ahead of his time perceives these things.
One should be careful in judging of the poem as good modern criticism not
to be entirely guided by the opinions of Balaustion. It should never be
forgotten that it is a dramatic poem in which Aristophanes is allowed to
speak for himself at great length, and whatever can be accepted as good
argument for himself upon his own ground should be set over against the
sweeping strictures of Balaustion. Indeed it may turn out that Browning
has, after all, said for him the most exculpatory word of any critic, for
he has so presented his case as to show that he considers him the outcome
of the undeveloped phase of morals then existing for which he is hardly
responsible because the higher light has not yet broken in upon him. This
is evidenced especially in the strange combination in him of a frank
belief in a life of the senses which goes along with a puritanical
reverence for the gods, and a hatred of anything that falls within his own
definition of vice.

To sum up, if I may again be forgiven for re-expressing an opinion
elsewhere printed, which states as clearly as I am able to do my
conviction of where the play stands as criticism, like all dramatic work,
this poem aims to present the actual spirit of the time in which the
actors moved upon the stage of life, and to reproduce something of their
mental and emotional natures. Any criticism of the poets who figure in the
poem, or of the larger question of the quarrel between tragedy and comedy,
should be deduced indirectly, as implied in the sympathetic presentation
of both sides, not based exclusively upon direct expressions of opinion
on either side. So regarded it would seem that Browning was able to
appreciate the genius of Aristophanes as well as that of Euripides, but
that he considered Aristophanes to have value chiefly in relation to his
age, as the artistic mouthpiece of its long-established usages, while
Euripides had caught the breath of the future, and was the mirror of the
prophetic impulses of his age rather than of its dominant civilization.

It is not improbable that Landor's fascinating portrayal of the brilliant
Aspasia may have had some influence upon Browning's conception of
Balaustion, upon the intellectual side at least. Alcibiades says that many
people think her language as pure and elegant as Pericles, and Pericles
says she was never seen out of temper or forgetful of what argument to
urge first and most forcibly. When all is said, however, it may be that
the "halo irised around" Balaustion's head was due, more than to any one
else, to the influence of the memory of Mrs. Browning, of whom she is made
to say with a sublime disregard of its anachronism:

  "I know the poetess who graved in gold,
  Among her glories that shall never fade,
  This style and title for Euripides,
  _The Human with his droppings of warm tears_."

After such a study of Greek life as this, wherein every available incident
in history, every episode in the plays of Aristophanes bearing on the
subject, every contemporary allusion are all woven together with such
consummate skill that the very soul and body of the time is imaged forth,
the classical poems of the other great names of the century seem almost
like child's play. Landor's poems on Greek subjects sound like imitations
in inferior material of antiquity. Arnold's are even duller. Swinburne
tells his Greek tales in an endless flow of rhythmical, musical verse,
which occasionally rises into the realm of having something to say. Morris
tells his at equal length in a manner suggestive of Chaucer without
Chaucer's snap, but where among them all is there such a bit of stinging
life as in "Pheidippedes" or "Echetlos?"

[Illustration: WALTER SAVAGE LANDOR]

Tennyson has, it is true, written some altogether exquisite verse, upon
classical themes, and in every case the poems are not descriptive nor
dramatic, but are dramatic soliloquies, thus approaching in form
Browning's dramatic idyls. One of the most beautiful of these is "Oenone."
There we have a mere tradition enlarged upon and the feelings of Oenone
upon the desertion of Paris expressed with a richness of emotional fervor
in a setting of appropriate nature imagery which carries us back to the
idyls of Theocritus. "Ulysses," again gives the psychology of a wanderer
who has become so habituated to adventures that he is quite incapable of
settling down with Penelope for the remainder of his life. One cannot
quite forgive the poet for calling the ever youthful and beautiful
Penelope, whose hand was sought by so many suitors, and who, although
twenty years had passed, might still be quite young, an "aged wife." It
has always seemed to the writer like a wholly unnecessary stab at a very
beautiful story, and the poem would have been just as effective if
Ulysses' hunger for lands beyond the sun had not been coupled with any
scorn of Penelope, but with a feeling of pain that again Fate must take
him away from her. Aside from this note of bad taste--bad, because it
shadows a picture of faithfulness, cherished as an almost universal
possession of humanity--the poem is fine. There is also, though not Greek,
the remarkable study of Lucretius going mad from the effects of his wife's
love philter, in which the most fascinating glimpses of his philosophy of
atoms are caught amid his maniacal wanderings, and, last, the very
beautiful Demeter and Persephone.

These are as unique in their way as Browning's Greek poems are in theirs,
standing quite apart from such work as Morris', or Swinburne's, not only
because of their haunting music, which even Swinburne cannot equal, but
because of a deeper vein of thought running through them. As far as
thought is concerned, however, all pale in significance the moment they
are placed in juxtaposition with any of Browning's classical productions.

Not the least interesting of Browning's classical poems is "Ixion." In his
treatment of the myth of Ixion he proves himself a true child of the
Greeks, not that he makes any slavish attempt to reproduce a Greek
atmosphere as it existed in the lifetime of Greek poetry, but he exercises
that prerogative which the Greek poets always claimed, of interpreting a
myth to suit their own ends.

It has become a sort of critical axiom to compare Browning's "Ixion" with
the "Prometheus" of literature. This is one of those catching analogies
which lay hold upon the mind, and cannot be shaken off again without
considerable difficulty. Mr. Arthur Symons first spoke of the resemblance;
and almost every other critic with the exception of Mr. Nettleship has
dwelt mainly upon that aspect of the poem which bears out the comparison.
But why, it might very well be asked, did Browning, if he intended to make
another Prometheus, choose Ixion for his theme? And the answer is evident,
because in the story of Ixion he found some quality different from any
which existed in the story of Prometheus, and which was especially suited
to the end he had in view.

The kernel of the myth of Prometheus as developed by AEschylus is proud,
unflinching suffering of punishment, inflicted, not by a god justly angry
for sin against himself, but by a god sternly mindful of his own
prerogatives, whose only right is might, and jealous of any interference
in behalf of the race which he detested--the race of man. Thus Prometheus
stands out as a hero in Greek mythology, a mediator between man and the
blind anger of a god of unconditional power; and Prometheus, with an
equally blind belief in Fate, accepts while he defies the punishment
inflicted by Zeus. He tacitly acknowledges the right of Zeus to punish
him, since he confesses his deeds to be sins, but, nevertheless, he would
do exactly the same thing over again:

                "By my choice, my choice
  I freely sinned--I will confess my sin--
  And helping mortals found mine own despair."

On the other hand, Ixion never appears in classic lore as a hero. He has
been called the "Cain" of Greece, because he was the first, as Pindar
says, "to introduce to mortal men the murder of kin not unaccompanied by
cunning." Zeus appears, however, to have shown more leniency to him for
the crime of killing his father-in-law than he ever did to Prometheus, as
he not only purified him from murder, but invited him to a seat among the
gods. But to quote Pindar again, "he found his prosperity too great to
bear, when with infatuate mind he became enamored of Hera.... Thus his
conceit drave him to an act of enormous folly, but the man soon suffered
his deserts, and received an exquisite torture." Ixion, then, in direct
contrast to Prometheus, stands forth an embodiment of the most detestable
of sins, perpetrated simply for personal ends. To depict such a man as
this in an attitude of defiance, and yet to justify his defiance, is a far
more difficult problem than to justify the already admired heroism of
Prometheus. It is entirely characteristic of Browning that he should
choose perhaps the most unprincipled character in the whole range of Greek
mythology as his hero. He is not content, like Emerson, with simply
telling us that "in the mud and scum of things there alway, alway
something sings"; his aim is ever to bring us face to face with reality,
and to open our ears that we may hear for ourselves this universal song.
In fine, Browning chose Ixion and not another, because he wanted above all
things an unquestioned sinner; and the task he set himself was to show the
use of sin and at the same time exonerate the sinner from the eternal
consequences of his act.

So mystical is the language of the poem that it is extremely difficult to
trace behind it the subtle reasoning. Mr. Nettleship has given by far the
best exposition of the poem, though even he does not seize all its
suggestiveness.

Ixion, the sinner, suffering eternal torment, questions the justice of
such torment. The first very important conclusion to which he comes, and
it is one entirely in accord with science, is that sin is an aberration of
sense, merely the result of external conditions in which the soul of man
has no active part. The soul simply dreams, but once fully awakened, it
would free itself from this bondage of sense if it were allowed to do so.
Ixion argues that it is Zeus that hath made him and not he himself, and if
he has sinned it is through the bodily senses which Zeus has conferred
upon him, and if he were the friendly and all-powerful god which he
claimed himself to be and which Ixion believed he was, why did he allow
these distractions of sense to lead him (Ixion) into sin which could only
be expiated by eternal punishment? Without body there would have been
nothing to obstruct his soul's rush upon the real; and with one touch of
pitying power Zeus might have dispersed "this film-work, eye's and ear's."
It is entirely the fault of Zeus that he had sinned; and having done so
will external torture make him repent any more who has repented already?
This is the old, old problem that has taxed the brains of many a
philosopher and the faith of many a theologian--the reconcilement of the
existence of evil with an omnipotent God. Then follows a comparison
between the actions of Zeus, a god, and of Ixion, the human king; and
Ixion declares could he have known all, as Zeus does, he would have warded
off evil from his subjects, would have seen that they were trained aright
from the first--in fact, would not have allowed evil to exist, or failing
this, could he have seen the heart of the criminals and realized how they
repented he would have given them a chance to retrieve their past. Ixion
now realizes that his human ideal is higher than that of Zeus. He had
imagined him possessed of human qualities, and finds his qualities are
less than human. What must be the inevitable result of arriving at such a
conclusion? It means the dethronement of the god, and either a lapse into
hopeless atheism or the recognition that the conception formed of the god
was that of the human mind at an earlier stage of understanding. This
conception becomes crystallized into an anthropomorphic god; but the mind
of man goes onward on its way to higher heights, and lo! there comes a day
when the god-ideal of the past is lower than the human ideal of the
present. It is such a crisis as this that Ixion has arrived at, and his
faith is equal to the strain. Since Zeus is man's own mind-made god,
Ixion's tortures must be the natural consequences of his sin, and not the
arbitrary punishment of a god; and what is Ixion's sin as Browning has
interpreted the myth?

The sin is that of arrogance. Ixion, a mere man, strives to be on an
equality with gods. In Lucian's dialogue between Hera and Zeus the stress
is laid upon the arrogance of Ixion. Jupiter declares that Ixion shall pay
the "penalty not of his love--for that surely is not so dreadful a
crime--but of his loud boasting." Browning raises the sin into a rarer
atmosphere than that of the Greek or Latin. Zeus and Hera may be taken to
represent the attributes of power and love as conceived by man in
Divinity; and Ixion, symbolic of man, arrogantly supposes that he is
capable of putting himself on an equality with Divinity by conceiving the
entire nature of Divinity, that out of his finite mind he can construct
the absolute god, and this is the sin, or, better, the aberration of
sense, which results in the crystallization of his former inadequate
conceptions into an anthropomorphic god, and causes his own downfall.
Ixion, now fully aroused to the fact that the god he has been defying is
but his own miserable conception of God, realizes that the suffering
caused by this conception of God is the very means through which man
struggles toward higher ideals: through evil he is brought to a
recognition of the good; from his agony is bred the rainbow of hope, which
ever shines above him glorified by the light from a Purity far beyond,
all-unobstructed. Successive conceptions of God must sink; but man,
however misled by them, must finally burst through the obstructions of
sense, freeing his spirit to aspire forever toward the light.

"Ixion," then, is not merely an argument against eternal punishment, nor
a picture of heroic suffering, though he who will may draw these lessons
from it, but it is a tremendous symbol of the spiritual development of
man. Pure in its essence, the spirit learns through the obstructions of
sense to yearn forever for higher attainment, and this constitutes the
especial blessedness of man as contrasted with Zeus. He, like the
Pythagorean Father of Number, is the conditioned one; but man is
privileged through all aeons of time to break through conditions, and thus
Ixion, triumphant, exclaims:

            "Where light, where light is, aspiring
  Thither I rise, whilst thou--Zeus, keep the godship and sink."

In these poems, as in other phases of his work, Browning runs the gamut of
life, of art, and of thought. He has set a new standard in regard to the
handling of classic material, one which should open the field of classic
lore afresh to future poets. Instead of trying to ape in more or less
ineffectual imitations the style and thought of the great masters of
antiquity, or simply use their mythology as a well-spring of romance to be
clothed in whatever vagaries of style the individual poet might be able to
invent, the aim of the future poet should be to reconstruct the life and
thought of that wonderful civilization. One playwright, at least, has made
a step in the right direction. I refer to Gilbert Murray, whose classical
scholarship has thrown so much light upon the vexed questions of
Browning's attitude toward Euripides, and who, in his "Andromache," has
written a play, not in classical, but in modern form, which seems to bring
us more into touch with the life of Homer's day than even Homer himself.




