VII

PROPHETIC VISIONS


The division between centuries, though it be an arbitrary one, does
actually appear to mark fairly definite steps in human development, and
already there are indications that the twentieth century is taking on a
character quite distinct from that of the nineteenth. It looks now as if
it were to be the century of the realization of mankind's wildest dreams
in the past. Air navigation, the elixir of life, perpetual motion, are
some of them. About the first no one can now have much skepticism, for if
airships are not as yet common objects of the everyday sky, they, at
least, occupy a large share of attention in the magazines, while the
aviator, a being who did not exist in the last century, is now the hero of
the hour.

With regard to the second, though no sparkling elixir distilled from some
rare flower, such as that Septimius Felton sought in Hawthorne's tale, has
been discovered, the great scientist Metchnikoff has brought to light a
preserver of youth more in keeping with the science of the day--namely, a
microbe, possessing power to destroy the poison that produces age. Whether
perpetual youth is to lead to immortality in the flesh will probably be a
question for other centuries to discuss, though if Metchnikoff is right
there is no reason why we should not retain our youthfulness all our lives
in this century. Add to this, machinery run by the perpetual energy of
radium--a possibility, if radium can ever be obtained in sufficient
quantities to supply the needed power to keep modern civilization on its
ceaseless "go"--and we may picture to ourselves, before the end of the
twentieth century, youths of ninety starting forth on voyages of thirty
years in radium ships, which, like the fairy watch of the Princess
Rossetta, will never go wrong and will never need to be wound up,
metaphorically speaking. It would almost seem as if some method of
enlarging the earth, or of arranging voyages to the moon and Mars, would
be necessary in order to give the new radium machinery sufficient scope
for its activities. However, at present it seems unlikely that it will
ever be possible to produce more than half an ounce of radium a year. As
it would take a ton to run one ship for thirty years, and the expense
would be something almost incalculable, it is a dream only to be realized
by the inventing of methods by which the feeble radio-activity known to
exist in many other substances can be utilized. These methods have not yet
been invented, but it is a good deal that they have been thought of, for
what man thinks of he generally seems to have the indomitable energy to
accomplish.

How such inventions as these, even if very far from attaining success, may
affect the social and thought ideals of the century it is impossible to
say. The automobile is said to have brought about a change, not altogether
beneficial, to the intellectual and artistic growth of society to-day. It
has taken such powerful possession of the minds of humanity that homes
have been mortgaged, music and books and pictures have been sacrificed, in
order that all the money procurable could be put into the machines and
their running. You hear complaints against the automobile from writers,
musicians, and artists. The only thing that really has a good sale is the
automobile. What effect rushing about so constantly at high speed in the
open air is to have on the brain-power is another interesting problem.
Perhaps it is this growing subjective delight in motion which is causing
the development of an artistic taste dependent upon motion as its chief
element. Motion pictures and dancing appeal to the public with such
insistence that plays will not hold successfully without an almost
exaggerated attention to action and dancing, which, whenever it is at all
possible, make a part of the "show."

The pictures of the new school of painters, the futurists, also reveal the
craze for motion. They try to put into their pictures the successive and
decidedly blurred impressions, from the illustrations I have seen, of
scenes in motion, with a result that is certainly startling and
interesting, but which it is difficult to believe is beautiful. One has a
horrible suspicion that all this emphasis upon motion in art is a running
to seed of the art which appeals to the eye and with a psychological
content derived principally from sensation. Perhaps in some other century,
fatuous humanity will like to listen to operas or to plays in a pitch-dark
theatre. This will represent the going to seed of the art which appeals to
the ear, and a psychological content derived principally from sentiment.

While movement seems to be the keynote of the century thus far, in its
everyday life and in its art manifestation, very interesting developments
are taking place in scientific theories and in philosophy, as well as in
the world of education and sociology.

In relation to Browning and the other chief poets of the nineteenth
century, the only aspects of interest are in the region of thought and
social ideals.

With the exception of Tennyson, no other of the chief poets of the century
need be considered in this connection with Browning, because, as we have
seen in a previous chapter, they reflected on the whole the prevalent
disbelief and doubt of the century which came with the revelations of
science. Many people have regarded Tennyson as the chief prophet of the
century. He seems, however, to the present writer to have held an attitude
which reflected the general tone of religious aspiration in the century,
rather than one which struck a new note indicating the direction in which
future religious aspiration might turn.

The conflict in his mind is between doubt and belief. To doubt he has
often given the most poignant expression, as in his poem called "Despair."
The story is of a man and his wife who have lost all religious faith
through the reading of scientific books:

  "Have I crazed myself over their horrible infidel writings? O, yes,
  For these are the new dark ages, you see, of the popular press,
  When the bat comes out of his cave, and the owls are whooping at noon,
  And doubt is the lord of the dunghill, and crows to the sun and the moon,
  Till the sun and the moon of our science are both of them turned into
      blood.
  And hope will have broken her heart, running after a shadow of good;
  For their knowing and know-nothing books are scatter'd from hand to
      hand--
  _We_ have knelt in your know-all chapel, too, looking over the sand."

If the effect of science was bad upon this weak-minded pair, the effect of
religion as it had been taught them was no better. The absolute
hopelessness of a blasted faith in all things reaches its climax in the
following stanzas:

  "And the suns of the limitless universe sparkled and shone in the sky,
  Flashing with fires as of God, but we knew that their light was a lie--
  Bright as with deathless hope--but, however they sparkled and shone,
  The dark little worlds running round them were worlds of woe like our
      own--
  No soul in the heaven above, no soul on the earth below,
  A fiery scroll written over with lamentation and woe.

  "See, we were nursed in the drear nightfold of your fatalist creed,
  And we turn'd to the growing dawn, we had hoped for a dawn indeed,
  When the light of a sun that was coming would scatter the ghosts of the
      past.
  And the cramping creeds that had madden'd the peoples would vanish at
      last,
  And we broke away from the Christ, our human brother and friend,
  For He spoke, or it seemed that He spoke, of a hell without help,
      without end.

  "Hoped for a dawn, and it came, but the promise had faded away;
  We had passed from a cheerless night to the glare of a drearier day;
  He is only a cloud and a smoke who was once a pillar of fire,
  The guess of a worm in the dust and the shadow of its desire--
  Of a worm as it writhes in a world of the weak trodden down by the
      strong,
  Of a dying worm in a world, all massacre, murder and wrong."

There are many hopeful passages in Tennyson to offset such deep pessimism
as is expressed in this one, which, moreover, being a dramatic utterance
it must be remembered, does not reflect any settled conviction on the
poet's part, though it shows him liable to moods of the most extreme
doubt. In "The Ancient Sage" the agnostic spirit of the century is fully
described, but instead of leading to a mood of despair, the mood is one
of clinging to faith in the face of all doubt. The sage speaking, says:

  "Thou canst not prove the Nameless, O my son,
  Nor canst thou prove the world thou movest in,
  Thou canst not prove that thou art body alone,
  Nor canst thou prove that thou art both in one.
  Thou canst not prove thou art immortal, no,
  Nor yet that thou art mortal--nay, my son,
  Thou canst not prove that I who speak with thee,
  Are not thyself in converse with thyself,
  For nothing worthy proving can be proven,
  Nor yet disproven. Wherefore thou be wise,
  Cleave ever to the sunnier side of doubt,
  And cling to Faith beyond the forms of Faith!
  She reels not in the storm of warring words,
  She brightens at the clash of 'Yes' and 'No.'
  She sees the best that glimmers thro' the worst,
  She feels the sun is hid but for a night,
  She spies the summer thro' the winter bud,
  She tastes the fruit before the blossom falls,
  She hears the lark within the songless egg,
  She finds the fountain where they wail'd Mirage!"

There is nothing here more reassuring than a statement made by the sage,
based upon no argument, nor revelation, nor intuition--nothing but the
utilitarian doctrine that it will be wiser to cling to Faith beyond Faith!
This is a sample of the sort of assurance in the reality of God and of
immortality which Tennyson was in the habit of giving. In the poem called
"Vastness" he presents with genuine power a pessimistic view of humanity
and civilization in all its various phases--all of no use, neither the
good any more than the bad, "if we all of us end but in being our own
corpse-coffins at last?" The effect of the dismal atmosphere of the poem
as a whole is supposed to be dissipated by the last stanza:

  "Peace, let it be! for I loved him, and love him forever: the dead are
      not dead but alive."

The conviction here of immortality through personal love is born of the
feeling that his friend whom he has loved must live forever. The note of
"In Memoriam" is sounded again. Tennyson's philosophy, in a nutshell,
seems to be that doubts are not so much overcome as quieted by a
struggling faith in the truths of religion, of which the chief assurance
lies in the thought of personal love. Not as in Browning, that human love,
because of its beauty and ecstasy, is a symbol of divine love, but because
of its wish to be reunited to the one beloved is an earnest of continued
existence. While Tennyson's poetry is saturated with allusions to the
science of the century, it seems to be ever the dark side of the doctrine
of evolution that is dwelt upon by him, while his religion is held to in
spite of the truths of science, not because the truths of science have
given him in any way a new revelation of beauty.

Much more emphasis has been laid upon Tennyson's importance as a prophet
in religious matters than seems to the present writer warranted. He did
not even keep pace with the thought of the century, though his poetry
undoubtedly reflected the liberalized theology of the earlier years of the
second half of the century. As Joseph Jacobs says, "In Memoriam" has been
to the Broad Church Movement what the "Christian Year" has been to the
High Church. But where is the Broad Church now? Tennyson was, on the
whole, adverse to evolution, which has been almost an instinct in English
speculation for the last quarter of a century. So far as he was the voice
of his age in speculative matters, he only represented the thought of the
"sixties."

What vision Tennyson did have came not through intuition or the higher
reason, but through his psychic power of self-hypnotism. In "The Ancient
Sage" is a passage describing the sort of trance into which he could
evidently cause himself to fall:

                          "For more than once when I
  Sat all alone, revolving in myself
  The word that is the symbol of myself,
  The mortal limit of the self was loosed,
  And passed into the Nameless, as a cloud
  Melts into Heaven. I touch'd my limbs, the limbs
  Were strange, not mine--and yet no shade of doubt,
  But utter clearness, and thro' loss of self,
  The gain of such large life as match'd with ours
  Were sun to spark--unshadowable in words,
  Themselves but shadows of a shadow world."

Such trances have been of common occurrence in the religious life of the
world, as Professor James has shown so exhaustively in his great book,
"Varieties of Religious Experience." And in that book, too, it is
maintained, against the scientific conclusions, that such ecstasies
"signify nothing but suggested and imitated hypnoid states, on an
intellectual basis of superstition, and a corporal one of degeneration and
hysteria," that mystical states have an actual value as revelations of the
truth. After passing in review many examples of ecstasy and trance, from
the occasional experiences of the poets to the constant experiences of the
mediaeval mystics and the Hindu Yogis, he finally comes to the interesting
conclusion that:

    "This overcoming of all the usual barriers between the individual and
    the absolute is the great mystic achievement. In mystic states we
    both become one with the Absolute and we become aware of our one-ness.
    This is the everlasting and triumphant mystical tradition, hardly
    altered by differences of clime or creed. In Hinduism, in
    Neoplatonism, in Sufism, in Christian mysticism, in Whitmanism, we
    find the same recurring note, so that there is about mystical
    utterances an eternal unanimity--which ought to make a critic stop and
    think, and which brings it about that the mystical classics have, as
    has been said, neither birthday nor native land."

The witness given religion in Tennyson's mystical trances is then his most
valuable contribution to the speculative thought of the century, and in a
sense is prophetic of the twentieth century, because in this century
revelations attained in this way have been given a credence long denied
them except in the case of the uneducated and super-emotional, by a man of
the sound scholarship and good judgment of Professor James.

How fully Browning was a representative of the thought of this time,
combining as he did an intuitional with a scientific outlook has already
been shown. Evolution means for him the progress toward the infinite, and
is full of beauty and promise. The failures in nature and life which fill
Tennyson with despair furnish to Browning's mind a proof of the existence
of the absolute, or a somewhere beyond, where things will be righted.
Observation shows him everywhere in the universe the existence of power
and mystery. The mystery is either that of the incomprehensibleness of
causes, or is emphasized in the existence of evil. The first leads to awe
and wonder, and is a constant spur to mankind to seek further knowledge,
but the poet insists that the knowledge so accumulated is not actual gain,
but only a means to gain in so far as it keeps bringing home to the human
mind the fact of its own inadequacy in the discovery of truth. The
existence of evil leads to the constant effort to overcome it, and to
sympathy and pity, and as the failure of knowledge proves a future of
truth to be won, so the failure of mankind to attain perfection in moral
action proves a future of goodness to be realized. All this may be found
either explicitly or implied in the synthetic philosophy of Herbert
Spencer, whose fundamental principles, despite the fire of criticism to
which he has been subjected from all sides--science, religion,
metaphysics, each of which felt it could not claim him exclusively as its
own, yet resenting his inclusion of the other two--are now, in the first
decade of the twentieth century, receiving the fullest recognition by such
masters of the history of nineteenth-century thought as Theodore Merz and
Emile Boutroux.

People often forget that while Spencer spent his life upon the knowledge
or scientific side of human experience, he frequently asserted that there
was in the human consciousness an intuition of the absolute which was the
only certain knowledge possessed by man. Here again Browning was at one
with Spencer. Discussing the problem of a future life in "La Saisiaz," he
declares that God and the soul are the only facts of which he is
absolutely certain:

  "I have questioned and am answered. Question, answer presuppose
  Two points: that the thing itself which questions, answers--_is_, it
      knows;
  As it also knows the thing perceived outside itself--a force
  Actual ere its own beginning, operative through its course,
  Unaffected by its end--that this thing likewise needs must be;
  Call this--God, then, call that--soul, and both--the only facts for me.
  Prove them facts? That they o'erpass my power of proving, proves them
      such."

To this scientific and metaphysical side Browning adds, as has also
already been pointed out, a mystical side based upon feeling. His
revelations of divinity do not come by means of self-induced trances, as
Tennyson's seem to have come, but through the mystery of feeling. This
mystical state seems to have been his habitual one, if we may judge by its
prominence in his poetry. He occasionally descends to the realm of reason,
as he has in "La Saisiaz," but the true plane of his existence is up among
the exaltations of aspiration and love. His cosmic sense is a sense of God
as Love, and is the quality most characteristic of the man. It is like,
though perhaps not identical with, the mysticism of Whitman, which seems
to have been an habitual state. He writes: "There is, apart from mere
intellect, in the make-up of every superior human identity, a wondrous
something that realizes without argument, frequently without what is
called education (though I think it the goal and apex of all education
deserving the name), an intuition of the absolute balance, in time and
space, of the whole of this multifariousness, this revel of fools, and
incredible make-believe and general unsettledness we call _the world_; a
soul-sight of that divine clue and unseen thread which holds the whole
congeries of things, all history and time, and all events, however
trivial, however momentous, like a leashed dog in the hand of the
hunter."

This mystic mood of Browning's which underlies his whole work--even a work
like "The Ring and the Book," where evil in various forms is rampant and
seems for the time being to conquer--is nowhere more fully, and at the
same time more concisely, expressed than in his poem "Reverie," one of his
last, which ends with a full revelation of this mystical feeling, from
which the less inspired reasoning of "La Saisiaz" is a descent:

  "Even as the world its life,
      So have I lived my own--
  Power seen with Love at strife,
      That sure, this dimly shown--
  Good rare and evil rife

  "Whereof the effect be--faith
      That, some far day, were found
  Ripeness in things now rathe,
      Wrong righted, each chain unbound,
  Renewal born out of scathe.

  "Why faith--but to lift the load,
      To leaven the lump, where lies
  Mind prostrate through knowledge owed
      To the loveless Power it tries
  To withstand, how vain! In flowed

  "Ever resistless fact:
      No more than the passive clay
  Disputes the potter's act,
      Could the whelmed mind disobey
  Knowledge the cataract.

  "But, perfect in every part,
      Has the potter's moulded shape,
  Leap of man's quickened heart,
      Throe of his thought's escape,
  Stings of his soul which dart,

  "Through the barrier of flesh, till keen
      She climbs from the calm and clear,
  Through turbidity all between
      From the known to the unknown here,
  Heaven's 'Shall be' from Earth's 'Has been'?

  "Then life is--to wake not sleep,
      Rise and not rest, but press
  From earth's level where blindly creep
      Things perfected more or less,
  To the heaven's height, far and steep,

  "Where, amid what strifes and storms
      May wait the adventurous quest,
  Power is Love--transports, transforms,
      Who aspired from worst to best,
  Sought the soul's world, spurned the worms!

  "I have faith such end shall be:
      From the first, Power was--I knew.
  Life has made clear to me
      That, strive but for closer view,
  Love were as plain to see.

  "When see? When there dawns a day,
      If not on the homely earth,
  Then yonder, worlds away,
      Where the strange and new have birth
  And Power comes full in play."

Browning has, far more than Tennyson, put religious speculation upon a
basis where it may stand irrespective of a belief in the revelations of
historical Christianity. For the central doctrine of Christianity he had
so profound a reverence that he recurs to it again and again in his
poetry, and at times his feeling seems to carry him to the verge of
orthodox belief. So near does he come to it that many religious critics
have been convinced that he might be claimed as a Christian in the
orthodox sense of the word.

A more careful reading, however, of such poems as "The Death in the
Desert," and "Christmas Eve and Easter Day," upon which rest principally
the claim of the poet's orthodoxy, will reveal that no certain assertion
of a belief in supernaturalism is made, even though the poems are dramatic
and it might be made without necessarily expressing the feeling of the
poet. What Browning felt was that in historical Christianity the highest
symbol of divine love had been reached. Though he may at times have had
moods in which he would fain have believed true an ideal which held for
him great beauty, his worth for his age was in saving religion, _not_ upon
a basis of faith, but upon the ground of logical arguments deduced from
the failure of knowledge, of his personal intuition of God and his
mystical vision in regard to the nature of God.

So complete a synthesis is this that only in the present century is its
full purport likely to be realized. The thought of the century is showing
everywhere a strong reaction away from materialism and toward religious
thought.

Even in the latest stronghold of science, psychology, as we have already
seen, there is no formula which will explain the existence of
individuality. While the scientists themselves plod on, often quite
unconscious that they are not dealing with ultimates, the thinkers are no
longer satisfied with a philosophy of materialism, and once more it is
being recognized that the province of philosophy is to give us God, the
soul and immortality.

It is especially interesting in this connection to observe that Germany,
the land of destructive biblical criticism, which Browning before the
middle of the century handled with the consummate skill characteristic of
him, by accepting its historical conclusions while conserving the spirit
of Christianity, has now in the person of Professor Rudolf Eucken done an
almost similar thing. Like Browning, he is a strong individualist and
believes that the development of the soul is the one thing of supreme
moment. "There is a spontaneous springing up of the individual spiritual
life," he writes, "only within the soul of the individual. All social and
all historical life that does not unceasingly draw from this source falls
irrecoverably into a state of stagnation and desolation. The individual
can never be reduced to the position of a mere member of society, of a
church, of a state; notwithstanding all external subordination, he must
assert an inner superiority; each spiritual individual is more than the
whole external world."

[Illustration: BROWNING AT 77 (1889)]

He calls his system "activism," which merely seems to be another way of
saying that the soul-life is one of aspiration toward moral ideals and the
will to carry them out. Such a life, he thinks, demands a new world and a
new character in man, and is entirely at variance with nature. "Our whole
life is an indefatigable seeking and pressing forward. In
self-consciousness the framework is given which has to be filled; in it we
have acquired only the basis upon which the superstructure has to be
raised. We have to find experience in life itself to reveal something new,
to develop life, to increase its range and depth. The endeavor to advance
in spirituality, to win through struggle, is the soul of the life of the
individual and the work of universal history." Readers of Browning will
certainly not feel that there is anything new in this.

In so far, however, as he finds the spiritual life at variance with nature
he parts company with Browning, showing himself to be under the influence
of the dualism of the past which regarded matter and spirit as
antagonistic. In Browning's view, matter and spirit are the two aspects of
God, in the one, power being manifested; in the other, love.

It follows naturally from this, that Eucken does not think of evil as a
means by which good is developed. He prefers to regard it as unexplained,
and forever with us to be overcome. Its reduction to a means of realizing
the good leads, he thinks, "to a weakening which threatens to transform
the mighty world-struggle into an artistic arrangement of things and into
an effeminate play, and which takes away that bitterness from evil without
which there is no strenuousness in the struggle and no vitality in life.
Thus it remains true that religion does not so much explain as presuppose
evil." An attempt to explain evil, he says, belongs to speculation rather
than to religion. That he has an inkling of the region to which
speculation might lead him is shown when it is realized, that upon his
explanation, as one critic of him has said, it might be possible to find
"some reconciliation in the fact that this world with its negations had
awakened the spiritual life to its absolute affirmation, which could,
therefore, not be in absolute opposition."

In leaving aside speculation and confining himself to what he considers
the religious aspects of life, he no doubt strengthens himself as a leader
of those whose speculative powers have not yet been developed, or who can
put one side of the mind to sleep and accept with the other half-truths.
The more developed mind, however, will prefer Browning's greater
inclusiveness. To possess a complete view of life, man must live his own
life as a human being struggling to overcome the evil, at the same time
keeping in mind the fact that evil is in a sense the raw material provided
by God, or the Absolute, or whatever name one chooses to give to the
all-powerful and all-loving, from which the active soul of man is to
derive a richness of beauty and harmony of development not otherwise
possible. Eucken's attitude toward Jesus is summed up in a way which
reminds one strongly of the position taken in the comment made at the end
of "The Death in the Desert." He writes: "The position of the believer in
the universal Christian Church is grounded upon a relation to God whose
uniqueness emerges from the essential divinity of Jesus; only on this
supposition can the personality of Christ stand as the unconditional Lord
and Master to whom the ages must do homage. And while the person of Jesus
retains a wonderful majesty apart from dogma, its greatness is confined to
the realm of humanity, and whatever of new and divine life it brings to us
must be potential and capable of realization in us all. We therefore see
no more in this figure the normative and universally valid type of all
human life, but merely an incomparable individuality which cannot be
directly imitated. At any rate the figure of Jesus, thus understood in all
its height and pure humanity, can no longer be an object of faith and
divine honor. All attempts to take shelter in a mediating position are
shattered against a relentless either--or. Between man and God there is no
intermediate form of being for us, for we cannot sink back into the
ancient cult of heroes. If Jesus, therefore, is not God, if Christ is not
the second person in the Trinity, then he is a man; not a man like any
average man among ourselves, but still man. We can therefore honor him as
a leader, a hero, a martyr, but we cannot directly bind ourselves to him
or root ourselves in him; we cannot submit to him unconditionally. Still
less can we make him the centre of a cult. To do so from our point of view
would be nothing else than an intolerable deification of a human being."
The comment at the end of "The Death in the Desert" puts a similar
question, and answers, "Call Christ, then, the illimitable God, Or Lost!"
But the final word which casts a light back upon the previous conclusion
is "But, 'twas Cerinthus that is lost"--the man, in other words, who held
the heresy that the Christ part only resided in Jesus, who was merely
human, and that the divine part was not crucified, having flown away
before. Thus it is implied that neither those who believe Jesus divine,
nor those who believe him human, are lost, but those who try as Cerinthus
did to make a compromise. The same note is struck in "Christmas Eve," and
now Professor Eucken takes an exactly similar ground in regard to any sort
of compromise, coming out boldly, however, as Browning does not in this
poem, though he makes no strong argument against it--in the acceptance of
Christ as human. Browning's own attitude is expressed as clearly as it is
anywhere in his work in the epilogue to "Dramatis Personae," in which the
conclusion is entirely in sympathy with that of Eucken:

  "When you see what I tell you--nature dance
  About each man of us, retire, advance,
  As though the pageant's end were to enhance

  "His worth, and--once the life, his product gained--
  Roll away elsewhere, keep the strife sustained,
  And show thus real, a thing the North but feigned--

  "When you acknowledge that one world could do
  All the diverse work, old yet ever new,
  Divide us, each from other, me from you--

  "Why, where's the need of Temple, when the walls
  O' the world are that? What use of swells and falls
  From Levites' choir, Priests' cries, and trumpet calls?

  "That one Face, far from vanish, rather grows,
  Or decomposes but to recompose,
  Become my universe that feels and knows."

The hold which the philosophy of Eucken seems to have taken upon the minds
of many people all over the world shows that it must have great elements
of strength. That there is a partial resemblance between his thought,
which belongs to the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the
twentieth century, and Browning's is certain, but the fact remains that
the poet made a synthesis of the elements which must go to the forming of
any complete religious conceptions of the future so far in advance of his
own century that even Eucken is in some respects behind it.

Another interesting instance of Browning's presenting a line of reasoning
which resembles very strongly one phase of present-day philosophy is to be
found in "Bishop Blougram's Apology." The worldly Bishop gives voice to
good pragmatic doctrine, which in a nutshell is, "believe in, or rather
follow, that ideal which will be of the most use to you, and if it turns
out not to be successful, then try another one." The poet declares that
Blougram said good things but called them by wrong names. If the ideal is
a high one there is no great danger in such reasoning, but it can very
easily be turned into sophistical arguments for an ideal of living to
thoroughly selfish ends, as Blougram actually did. The poem might almost
be taken as a prophetic criticism of the weak aspects of pragmatism.

The belief in immortality which pervades Browning's work often comes out
in a form suggesting the idea of reincarnation. His future for the human
soul is not a heaven of bliss, but life in other worlds full of activity
and aspiration. This note is struck in "Paracelsus," where life's destiny
is described to be the climbing of pleasure's heights forever the seeking
of a flying point of bliss remote. In his last volume the idea is more
fully brought out in "Rephan." In this it is held that a state of perfect
bliss might grow monotonous, and that a preferable state would be to
aspire, yet never attain, to the object aimed at. The transmigration is
from "Rephan," where all was merged in a neutral Best to Earth, where the
soul which had been stagnating would have an opportunity to strive, not
rest. The most beautiful expression, however, of the idea of a future of
many lives is found in "One Word More":

  "So it seems: I stand on my attainment.
  This of verse, alone, one life allows me;
  Verse and nothing else have I to give you.
  Other heights in other lives, God willing:
  All the gifts from all the heights, your own, Love!"

Though the theory of reincarnation is so ancient a one, and one entirely
discredited by Christianity, Browning was again expressing an ideal which
was to be revived in our own day. Oriental thought has made it almost a
commonplace of talk. Many people doubtless speak of what they mean to do
in their next incarnation without having the thought very deeply imbedded
in their consciousness, yet the mere fact that one hears the remark so
often proves what a hold the theory has on the imagination of mankind. As
Browning gives it in "One Word More," the successive incarnations take one
on to higher heights--"other lives in other worlds." Thus regarded, it is
the final outcome of evolution and progress, a process to be carried
forward in other worlds than our own, and has no degrading suggestion of a
degenerating, because of sin, into lower forms of existence. The movement
is always upward. Thus it has been effected by the idea that progress is
the law of life, and that evolution means, on the whole, progress.

Again, in the liberality of his social ideals, combined with an intensest
belief in the supremacy of genuine love, he was the forerunner of Ibsen,
who, the world is beginning to discover, was not a subverter of high moral
ideals, as it had thought, but a prophet of the new day, when to be untrue
to the highest ideal of love will be accounted the greatest crime of one
human being against another. From "The Doll's House" to "When We That Are
Dead Awaken" the same lesson is taught. Few people realize that this is
the keynote of Browning's teaching, or would be ready to regard him as a
prophet of an ideal of love which shall come to be seen as the true one
after the science of eugenics, the latest of the exact sciences, has found
itself as powerless as all other sciences have been to touch the reality
of life, because amid all the mysteries of the universe none is greater
than the spiritual mystery of love. Among writers who are to-day
recognizing a part of the truth, at least, is Ellen Key, but neither she
nor Ibsen has insisted in the way that Browning has upon the mystical
source of human love. That Browning is the poet who has given the world
the utmost certainty of God, the soul and immortality, and the most
inspiring ideals of human love, will be more completely recognized in the
future. As time goes on he will emerge above the tumultuous intellectual
life of the present, which, with its enormous increase of knowledge of
phenomena, bringing with it a fairly titanic mastery of the forces of
nature, and its generation of multitudes of ideas upon every conceivable
subject, many of them trite, many of them puerile, and some of them no
doubt of genuine value, obscures for the time being the greatness of any
one voice. A little later, when the winnowing of ideas shall come,
Browning will be recognized as one of the greatest men of his own age or
any age--a man combining knowledge, wisdom, aspiration, and vision to a
marvelous degree. He belongs to the master-order of poets, who write some
things which will pass into the popular knowledge of the day, but whose
serious achievements will be read and studied by the cultured and
scholarly of all time. No students of Greek literature will feel that they
can omit from their reading his Greek poems, no students of sociology will
feel that they can omit from their reading "The Ring and the Book." Lovers
of the drama must ever respond to the beauty of "The Blot in the
'Scutcheon" and "Pippa Passes." Even the student of verse technique will
not be able to leave Browning out of account, and making allowances for
the fact that the individuality of his style sometimes overasserts itself,
he will realize more and more its freshness and its vividness, its power
of suggestion, and its depths of emotional fervor. When the romanticism of
a Keats or a Shelley has completely worked itself out in musical
efflorescence; from which all thought-content has disappeared, there may
grow up a school of poets which shall, without direct imitation, develop
poetry along the lines of vigor and strength in form, and which shall have
for its content a tremendous sense of the worth of humanity and an
unshakable belief in the splendor of its destiny. _Virilists_ might well
be the name of this future school of poets who would hark back to Browning
as their inspiration, and a most pleasant contrast would they be to the
sentimental namby-pambyism which passes muster as poetry in much of the
work of to-day.

In closing this volume which has been inspired by a deep sense of the
abiding greatness of Robert Browning, it has been my desire to put on
record in some way my personal indebtedness to his poetry as an
inspiration not only to high thinking and living, but as a genuine
revelation to me of the rare possibilities in poetic art, for I may almost
say that Browning was my first poet, and through him, strange as it may
seem, I came to an appreciation of all other poets. His poetry,
fortunately for me an early influence in my life, awakened my, until then,
dormant faculty for poetic appreciation. I owe him, therefore, a double
debt of gratitude: Not only has he given me the joy of knowing his own
great work, but through him I have entered the land of all poesie, led as
I truly think by his sympathy with the scientific dispensation into which
I was born. His thought has always seemed so naturally akin to my own
that it has never seemed to me obscure. Finding such thoughts expressed
through the medium of great poetic genius, the beauty of poetic expression
was brought home to me as it never had been before, and hence the poetic
expression of all thought became a deep pleasure to me.

So much interpretation and criticism of Browning has been given to the
world during the last twenty years, that further work in that direction
seems hardly necessary for the present. There will for many a day to come
be those who feel him to be among the greatest poets the world has seen,
and those who find much more to blame in his work than to praise.

I have tried to give a few suggestions in regard to what Robert Browning
actually was in relation to his time. The nineteenth century was so
remarkable a one in the complexity of its growth, both in practical
affairs and in intellectual developments, that it has been possible in the
space of one volume to touch only upon the most important aspects under
each division, and to try to show what measure of influence important
movements had in the molding of the poet's genius.

Though in the nature of the case the treatment could not be exhaustive, I
hope to have opened out a sufficient number of pathways into the
fascinating vistas of the nineteenth century in its relation to Browning
to inspire others to make further excursions for themselves; and, above
all, I hope I may have added at least one stone to the cairn which many,
past and to come, are building to his fame.


THE END


THE COUNTRY LIFE PRESS, GARDEN CITY, N. Y.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] The influence of the "Prometheus Unbound" upon the conception of
Aprile's character was first brought forward by the writer in a paper read
before the Boston Browning Society, March 15, 1910, a typewritten copy of
which was placed in the Browning alcove in the Boston Public Library. In
the "Life of Browning," published the same year and not read by the writer
until recently, Mr. Hall Griffin touches upon the same thought in the
following words: "From some elements in the myth of Prometheus Browning
unmistakably evolved the conception of his Aprile as not only the lover
and the poet but as the potential sculptor, painter, orator, and
musician."

[2] See the author's "Browning's England."

[3] See Introduction to "Ring and Book"--Camberwell Browning.






End of Project Gutenberg's Browning and His Century, by Helen Archibald Clarke



