V

ART SHIBBOLETHS


In the foregoing chapters the relations of the poet to the philosophical,
religious, political, and social movements of the nineteenth century have
been pointed out. In this and the next chapter some account of his
relation to the artistic and literary ideals of the century will be
attempted.

Browning's relation to the art of the century is, of course, twofold,
dealing as it must with his own conceptions and criticisms of art as well
as with the position of his own art in the poetic development of the
century.

In order to understand more fully his own contribution to the developing
literary standards of the century it may be well first to consider the
fundamental principles of art laid down by him in various poems wherein he
has deliberately dealt with the subject.

The poem in which he has most clearly formulated the general principles
underlying the growth of art is the "Parleying" with Charles Avison.
Though music is the special art under consideration, the rules of growth
obtaining in that are equally applicable to other arts. They are found to
be, as we should expect in Browning, a combination of the ideas of
evolution and conservation. Though the standards of art change and
develop, because as man's soul evolves, more complex forms are needed to
express his deeper experiences, his wider vision, yet in each stage of the
development there is an element of permanent beauty which by the aid of
the historical sense man may continue to enjoy. That element of permanence
exists when genuine feeling and aspiration find expression in forms of
art. The element of change grows out of the fact that both the thought
expressed and the form in which it is expressed are partial manifestations
of the beauty or truth toward which feeling aspires; hence the need of
fresh attempts to reach the infinite. The permanence of feeling,
expressing itself in ever new forms, is brought out finely in this
passage:

                                          "Truths escape
  Time's insufficient garniture: they fade,
  They fall--those sheathings now grown sere, whose aid
  Was infinite to truth they wrapped, saved fine
    And free through march frost: May dews crystalline
    Nourish truth merely,--does June boast the fruit
  As--not new vesture merely but, to boot,
  Novel creation? Soon shall fade and fall
  Myth after myth--the husk-like lies I call
  New truth's Corolla-safeguard."

In another passage is shown how the permanence of feeling conserves even
the form, if we will bring ourselves into touch with it:

                                "Never dream
  That what once lived shall ever die! They seem
  Dead--do they? lapsed things lost in limbo? Bring
  Our life to kindle theirs, and straight each king
  Starts, you shall see, stands up."

This kindling of an old form with our own life is more difficult in the
case of music than it is in painting or poetry, for in these we have a
concrete form to deal with--a form which reflects the thought with much
more definiteness than music is able to do. The strength and weakness, at
once, of music is that it gives expression to subtler regions of thought
and feeling than the other arts, at the same time that the form is more
evanescent, because fashioned out of elements infinitely less related to
nature than those of other art forms. In his poems on music, the poet
always emphasizes these aspects of music. Its supremacy as a means of
giving expression to the subtlest regions of feeling is dwelt upon in
"Abt Vogler" and "Fifine at the Fair." The Abbe, from the standpoint of
the creator of music, feels so strongly from the inside its power for
expressing infinite aspiration that in his ecstasy he exclaims: "The rest
may reason and welcome. 'Tis we musicians know." Upon the evanescence of
the form peculiar emphasis is also laid in this poem, through the fact
that the music is improvised. Yet even this fact does not mean the entire
annihilation of the form. In the tenth stanza of the poem the idea of the
permanence of the art form as well as of the feeling is expanded into a
symbol of the immortality of all good:

  "All we have willed or hoped or dreamed of good shall exist;
    Not its semblance, but itself; no beauty, nor good, nor power
  Whose voice has gone forth, but each survives for the melodist
    When eternity confirms the conception of an hour,
  The high that proved too high, the heroic for earth too hard,
    The passion that left the ground to lose itself in the sky,
  Are music sent up to God by the lover and the bard;
    Enough that he heard it once: we shall hear it by-and-by."

The sophistical arguer in "Fifine" feels this same power of music to
express thoughts not to be made palpable in any other manner.

                        "Words struggle with the weight
  So feebly of the False, thick element between
  Our soul, the True, and Truth! which, but that intervene
  False shows of things, were reached as easily by thought
  Reducible to word, and now by yearnings wrought
  Up with thy fine free force, oh Music, that canst thrill,
  Electrically win a passage through the lid
  Of earthly sepulchre, our words may push against,
  Hardly transpierce as thou."

And again, in another passage, he gives to music the power of conserving a
mood of feeling, which in this case is not an exalted one, since it is one
that chimes in with his own rather questionable feeling for Fifine, the
fiz-gig. It is found in Schumann's "Carnival":

  "Thought hankers after speech, while no speech may evince
  Feeling like music,--mine, o'er-burthened with each gift
  From every visitant, at last resolved to shift
  Its burthen to the back of some musician dead
  And gone, who feeling once what I feel now, instead
  Of words, sought sounds, and saved forever, in the same,
  Truth that escapes prose,--nay, puts poetry to shame.
  I read the note, I strike the Key, I bid _record_
  The instrument--thanks greet the veritable word!
  And not in vain I urge: 'O dead and gone away,
  Assist who struggles yet, thy strength becomes my stay,
  Thy record serve as well to register--I felt
  And knew thus much of truth! With me, must knowledge melt
  Into surmise and doubt and disbelief unless
  Thy music reassure--I gave no idle guess,
  But gained a certitude I yet may hardly keep!
  What care? since round is piled a monumental heap
  Of music that conserves the assurance, thou as well
  Was certain of the same! thou, master of the spell,
  Mad'st moonbeams marble, didst _record_ what other men
  Feel only to forget!'"

The man in the case is merely an appreciator, not a creator, yet he
experiences with equal force music's power as a recorder of feeling. He
notes also that the feeling must appear from time to time in a new dress,

                              "the stuff that's made
  To furnish man with thought and feeling is purveyed
  Substantially the same from age to age, with change
  Of the outside only for successive feasters."

In this case, the old tunes have actually been worked over by the more
modern composer whose form has not yet sufficiently gone by to fail of an
immediate appeal to this person with feelings kindled by similar
experiences. What the speaker in the poem perceives is not merely the fact
of the feelings experienced but the power of the music to take him off
upon a long train of more or less philosophical reasoning born of that
very element of change. In this power of suggestiveness lies music's
greater range of spiritual force even when the feeling expressed is not of
the deepest.

If we look at his poems on painting, the same principles of art are
insisted upon except that more emphasis is laid upon the positive value of
the incompleteness of the form. In so far as painting or sculpture reaches
a perfect unity of thought and form it loses its power of suggesting an
infinite beauty beyond any that our earth-born race may express.

This in Browning's opinion is the limitation of Greek art. It touches
perfection or completion in expression and in so doing limits its range to
the brief passion of a day. The effect of such art is to arouse a sort of
despair, for it so far transcends merely human beauty that there seems
nothing left to accomplish:

  "So, testing your weakness by their strength,
    Your meagre charms by their rounded beauty
  Measured by Art in your breadth and length,
    You learned--to submit is a mortal's duty."

When such a deadlock as this is reached through the stultifying effect of
an art expression which seems to have embodied all there is of passion and
physical beauty, the one way out is to turn away from the abject
contemplation of such art and go back again to humanity itself, in whose
widening nature may be discovered the promise of an eternity of
progression. Therefore, "To cries of Greek art and what more wish you?"
the poet would have it that the early painters replied:

          "To become now self-acquainters,
    And paint man, whatever the issue!
  Make new hopes shine through the flesh they fray,
    New fears aggrandize the rags and tatters:
  To bring the invisible full into play!
    Let the visible go to the dogs--what matters?"

The revolution in art started by these early worthies had more of
spiritual promise in it than the past perfection--"The first of the new,
in our race's story, beats the last of the old."

His emphasis here upon the return to humanity in order to gain a new
source of inspiration in art is further illustrated in his attitude toward
the two painters which he portrays so splendidly: Fra Lippo Lippi, the
realist, whose Madonnas looked like real women, and who has scandalized
some critics on this account, and Andrea del Sarto, the faultless painter,
who exclaims in despair as he gazes upon a picture by Raphael, in which he
sees a fault to pardon in the drawing's line, an error that he could alter
for the better, "But all the play, the insight and the stretch," beyond
him.

The importance of basing art upon the study of the human body is later
insisted upon in Francis Furini, not as an end in itself, but as the
dwelling place of the soul. "Let my pictures prove I know," says Furini,

  "Somewhat of what this fleshly frame of ours
  Or is or should be, how the soul empowers
  The body to reveal its every mood
  Of love and hate, pour forth its plenitude
  Of passion."

The evolutionary ideal appears again in his utterances upon poetry, though
when speaking of poetry it is the value of the subject matter and its
intimate relation to the form upon which he dwells.

The little poem "Popularity" shows as clearly as any the importance which
he attaches to a new departure in poetic expression, besides giving vent
to his scorn of the multitude which sees nothing in the work of the
innovator but which is ready at a later date to laud his imitators. Any
minor poet, for that matter, any Nokes or Stokes who merely prints blue
according to the poetic conventions of the past, possessing not a
suspicion of the true inspiration which goes to the making of a poet of
the new order, is more acceptable to an unseeing public than him with
power to fish "the murex up" that contains the precious drop of royal
blue.

More than one significant hint may be gleaned from his verse in regard to
his opinion upon the formal side of the poet's art. In "Transcendentalism"
he has his fling at the didactic poet who pleases to speak naked thoughts
instead of draping them in sights and sounds, for "song" is the art of the
poet. Some stout mage like him of Halberstadt has his admiration, who with
a

                "'Look you!' vents a brace of rhymes,
  And in there breaks the sudden rose herself,
  Over us, under, round us every side,
  Nay, in and out the tables and the chairs
  And musty volumes, Boehme's book and all,--
  Buries us with a glory young once more,
  Pouring heaven into this shut house of life."

He was equally averse to an ornate classical embellishment of a latter day
subject or to a looking at nature through mythopoeic Greek eyes. This is
driven home in the splendid fooling in "Gerard de Lairesse" where the poet
himself indulges by way of a joke in some high-flown classical imagery in
derision of the style of Lairesse and hints covertly probably at the
nineteenth-century masters of classical resuscitation, in subject matter
and allusion, Swinburne and Morris. Reacting to soberer mood, he
reiterates his belief in the utter deadness of Greek ideals of art,
speaking with a strength of conviction so profound as to make one feel
that here at least Browning suffered from a decided limitation, all the
more strange, too, when one considers his own masterly treatment of Greek
subjects. To the poets whose poetic creed is

              "Dream afresh old godlike shapes,
  Recapture ancient fable that escapes,
  Push back reality, repeople earth
  With vanished falseness, recognize no worth
  In fact new-born unless 'tis rendered back
  Pallid by fancy, as the western rack
  Of fading cloud bequeaths the lake some gleam
  Of its gone glory!"

he would reply,

                          "Let things be--not seem,
  I counsel rather,--do, and nowise dream!
  Earth's young significance is all to learn;
  The dead Greek lore lies buried in the urn
  Where who seeks fire finds ashes. Ghost, forsooth!
  What was the best Greece babbled of as truth?
  A shade, a wretched nothing,--sad, thin, drear,

    *       *       *       *       *

                                    Sad school
  Was Hades! Gladly,--might the dead but slink
  To life back,--to the dregs once more would drink
  Each interloper, drain the humblest cup
  Fate mixes for humanity."

The rush onward to the supreme is uppermost in the poet's mind in this
poem. Though he does indulge in the refrain that there shall never be one
lost good echoing the thought in "Charles Avison," the climax of his mood
is in the contemplation of the evolutionary force of the soul which must
leave Greek art behind and find new avenues of beauty:

                                  "The Past indeed
  Is past, gives way before Life's best and last
  The all-including Future! What were life
  Did soul stand still therein, forego her strife
  Through the ambiguous Present to the goal
  Of some all-reconciling Future? Soul,
  Nothing has been which shall not bettered be
  Hereafter,--leave the root, by law's decree
  Whence springs the ultimate and perfect tree!
  Busy thee with unearthing root? Nay, climb--
  Quit trunk, branch, leaf and flower--reach, rest sublime
  Where fruitage ripens in the blaze of day."

When it comes to the subject matter of poetry, Browning constantly insists
that it should be the study of the human soul. A definite statement as to
the range of subjects under this general material of poetry is put forth
very early in his poetical career in "Paracelsus" and it is all-inclusive.
It is the passage where Aprile describes how universal he wished to make
his sympathy as a poet. No one is to be left out of his all-embracing
democracy.

Such, then, are his general principles in regard to poetic development and
subject matter. These do not touch upon the question so often discussed of
the relative value of the subjective as against the objective poet. This
point the poet considers in "Sordello," where he throws in his weight on
the side of the objective poet. In the passage in the third book the poet,
speaking in person, gives illustrations of three sorts of poetic
composition: the dramatic, the descriptive and the meditative; the first
belongs to the objective, the second, not distinctively to either, and the
third to the subjective manner of writing. The dramatic method is the most
forceful, for it imparts the gift of seeing to others, while the
descriptive and meditative merely tell what they saw, or, worse still,
talk about it.

Further indications of his allegiance to the dramatic form of poetry as
the supreme one are found in his poems inspired by Shakespeare, "House"
and "Shop," but we must turn to a pregnant bit of his prose in order to
find his exact feeling upon the relations of the subjective and objective
poet, together with a clear conception of what he meant by a dramatic
poet, which was something more than Shakespeare's "holding the mirror up
to nature." In his view the dramatic poet must have the vision of the seer
as well as the penetration of a psychologist. He must hold the mirror up
not only to nature, regarded as phenomena, but to the human soul, and he
must perceive the relation of that human soul to the universal. He must in
fact plunge beneath the surface of actions and events and bring forth to
the light the psychic and cosmic causes of these things. The passage
referred to in the "Introduction to the Shelley Letters" points out how in
the evolution of poetry there will be the play and interplay of the
subjective and the objective faculties upon each other, with the probable
result of the arising of poets who will combine the two sorts of faculty.
While Browning's own sympathy with the dramatic poet is as fully evident
here as in the passage in "Sordello," he realizes, as perhaps he did not
at that time, when he was himself breaking away from Shelley's influence,
the value of the subjective method in carrying on the process of poetic
evolution:

    "It would be idle to inquire, of these two kinds of poetic faculty in
    operation, which is the higher or even rarer endowment. If the
    subjective might seem to be the ultimate requirement of every age,
    the objective, in the strictest state, must still retain its original
    value. For it is with this word, as starting-point and basis alike,
    that we shall always have to concern ourselves: the world is not to be
    learned and thrown aside, but reverted to and relearned. The spiritual
    comprehension may be infinitely subtilized, but the raw material it
    operates upon must remain. There may be no end of the poets who
    communicate to us what they see in an object with reference to their
    own individuality; what it was before they saw it, in reference to the
    aggregate human mind, will be as desirable to know as ever. Nor is
    there any reason why these two modes of poetic faculty may not issue
    hereafter from the same poet in successive perfect works, examples of
    which, according to what are now considered the exigencies of art, we
    have hitherto possessed in distinct individuals only. A mere running
    in of the one faculty upon the other is, of course, the ordinary
    circumstance. Far more rarely it happens that either is found so
    decidedly prominent and superior as to be pronounced comparatively
    pure: while of the perfect shield, with the gold and the silver side
    set up for all comers to challenge, there has yet been no instance. A
    tribe of successors (Homerides), working more or less in the same
    spirit, dwell on his discoveries and reinforce his doctrine; till, at
    unawares, the world is found to be subsisting wholly on the shadow of
    a reality, on sentiments diluted from passions, on the tradition of a
    fact, the convention of a moral, the straw of last year's harvest.
    Then is the imperative call for the appearance of another sort of
    poet, who shall at once replace this intellectual rumination of food
    swallowed long ago, by a supply of the fresh and living swathe;
    getting at new substance by breaking up the assumed wholes into parts
    of independent and unclassed value, careless of the unknown laws for
    recombining them (it will be the business of yet another poet to
    suggest those hereafter), prodigal of objects for men's outer and not
    inner sight; shaping for their uses a new and different creation from
    the last, which it displaces by the right of life over death,--to
    endure until, in the inevitable process, its very sufficiency to
    itself shall require, at length, an exposition of its affinity to
    something higher--when the positive yet conflicting facts shall again
    precipitate themselves under a harmonizing law, and one more degree
    will be apparent for a poet to climb in that mighty ladder, of which,
    however cloud-involved and undefined may glimmer the topmost step, the
    world dares no longer doubt that its gradations ascend."

If we measure Browning's own work by the poetic standards which he has
himself set up in the course of that work, it is quite evident that he has
on the whole lived up to them. He has shown himself to be an illustration
of the evolutionary principles in which he believes by breaking away from
all previous standards of taste in poetry. The history of poetry in
England has shown this to be a distinctive characteristic of all the
greatest English poets. From Shakespeare down they have one and all run
afoul of the critics whose special province seems to be to set up literary
shibboleths which every genius is bent upon disregarding. When Spenser was
inventing his stanza, verse critics were abject in their worship of
hexameters, and their hatred of bald rhymes. Though these sticklers for
classical forms could see clearly enough that Spenser was possessed of
genius, they yet lamented the blindness of one, who might have written
hexameters, perversely exclaiming "Why a God's name may not we as else the
Greeks have the kingdom of our own language, and measure our accents by
the sound, reserving quantity to the verse?" When Milton appears and finds
blank verse the medium best suited to his subject, he comes up against the
rhyming standards of his day and is forced to submit to the indignity of
having his "Paradise Lost" "tagged with rhymes," as he expresses it, by
Dryden, who graciously devoted his powers of rhyme to an improved version
of the poem. Milton was actually obliged to defend himself in his preface
to "Paradise Lost" for using blank verse, as Browning defends himself in
the Epilogue to "Pacchiarotto and How We Worked in Distemper" for writing
"strong" verse instead of the "sweet" verse the critics demand of him.

By the time the nineteenth century dawns the critics are safely intrenched
in the editorial den, from which, shielded by any sort of shibboleth they
can get hold of, they may hurl forth their projectiles upon the
unoffending head of the genius, who, with no chance of firing back in the
open arena of the magazine, must either suffer in silence or take refuge
in sarcastic slurs upon his critics in his poetry, for here lies the only
chance of getting even without waiting for the whirligig of time to bring
the public round to a recognition of the fact that he is the one who has
in very truth, "fished the murex up."

The caliber of man who could speak of "The Ode to Immortality" as "a most
illegible and unintelligible poem," or who wonders that any man in his
senses could put his name to such a rhapsody as "Endymion," or who
dismissed "Prometheus Unbound" with the remark that it was a _melange_ of
nonsense, cockneyism, poverty and pedantry, would hardly be expected to
welcome "Sordello" with effusion. Even very intelligent people cracked
unseemly jokes upon the appearance of "Sordello," and what wonder, for
Browning's British instinct for freedom carried him in this poem to the
most extreme lengths. In "Pauline" he had allied himself with things
familiar to the English reader of poetry. Many of the allusions are
classical and introduced with a rich musicalness that Shelley himself
might have envied. The reminiscences of Shelley would also come within the
intellectual acreage of most of the cultured people of the time. And even
in "Paracelsus," despite the unfamiliarity of the subject, there was
music and imagery such as to link the art with the admired poetic art of
the day, but in "Sordello" all bounds are broken.

No one but a delver in the byways of literature could, at that time, have
been expected to know anything about Sordello; no one but a historian
could have been expected to know about the complicated struggles of the
Guelfs and the Ghibellines; no one but a philosopher about the tendencies,
both political and literary, manifesting themselves in the direction of
the awakening of democratic ideals in these pre-Dantean days; no one but a
psychologist about the tortuous windings of Sordello's mind.

Only by special searching into all these regions of knowledge can one
to-day gain a complete grasp of the situation. He must patiently tread all
the paths that Browning trod before he can enter into sympathy with the
poet. Then he will crack no more jokes, but he will marvel at the mind
which could wield all this knowledge with such consummate familiarity; he
will grow ecstatic over the splendors of the poem, and will regret its
redundancy not of diction so much but of detail and its amazing lack of
organic unity.

No one but a fanatic could claim that "Sordello" is a success as an
organic work of art. While the poet had a mastery of knowledge, thought
and feeling, he did not have sufficient mastery of his own form to weld
these together into a harmonious and convincing whole, such mastery as he,
for example, shows in "The Ring and the Book," though even in that there
is some survival of the old redundancy.

One feels when considering "Sordello" as a whole as if gazing upon a
picture in which the perspective and the high lights and the shadows are
not well related to each other. As great an abundance of detail is
expended upon the less important as upon the more important fact, and
while the details may be interesting enough in themselves, they dislodge
more important affairs from the center of consciousness. It is, not to be
too flippant, something like Alice's game of croquet in "Through the
Looking Glass." When the hedgehog ball is nicely rolled up ready to be
struck, the flamingo mallet walks off somewhere else.

There, then, in "Sordello" is perhaps the most remarkable departure from
the accepted in poetic art that an Englishman has ever attempted. In its
elements of failure, however, it gave "a triumph's evidence," to use the
poet's own phrase, "of the fulness of the days." In this poem he had
thrown down the gauntlet. His subject matter was not to be like that of
any other poet, nor was his form to be like that of any other poet. He
discarded the flowing music of "Pauline" and of "Paracelsus." His
allusions were no longer to be classic, but to be directly related to
whatever subject he had in hand; his style was also to be forth-right and
related to his subject, strong, idiomatic, rugged, even jolting if need
be, or noble, sweeping along in large rhythms or couched in rare forms of
symbolism, but, whatever it was to be, always different from what had
been.

All he required at the time when "Sordello" appeared was to find that form
in which he could so unify his powers that his poems would gain the
organic completeness necessary to a work of art. No matter what new
regions an artist may push into he must discover the law of being of this
new region. Unless he does, his art will not convince, but the moment he
does, all that was not convincing falls into its right place. He becomes
the master of his art, and relates the new elements in such a way that
their rightness and their beauty, if not immediately recognized, are sure
sooner or later to be recognized by the evolving appreciator, who is the
necessary complement, by the way, of the evolving artist. Before
"Sordello" Browning had tried three other forms; the subjective narrative
in "Pauline," the dramatic poem in "Paracelsus," a regular drama in
"Strafford," which however runs partly parallel with "Sordello" in
composition. He had also done two or three short dramatic monologues.

He evidently hoped that the regular drama would prove to be the form most
congenial to him, for he kept on persistently in that form for nearly ten
years, wrote much magnificent poetry in it and at times attained a
grandeur of dramatic utterance hardly surpassed except in the master of
all dramatists, Shakespeare. But while he has attained a very genuine
success in this form, it is not the success of the popular acting drama.
His dramas are to-day probably being left farther and farther aside every
moment in the present exaggerated demands for characters in action, or
perhaps it might be nearer the truth to say clothes horses in action.
Besides, the drama of action in character, which is the type of drama
introduced into English literature by Browning, has reached a more perfect
development in other hands. Ibsen's dramas are preeminently dramas of
action in character, but the action moves with such rapidity that the
audience is almost cheated into thinking they are the old thing over
again--that is, dramas of characters in action.

Browning's characters in his dramas are presented with a completeness of
psychological analysis which makes them of paramount interest to those few
who can and like to listen to people holding forth to any length on the
stage, and with superb actors, who can give every subtlest change of mood,
a Browning drama furnishes an opportunity for the utmost intensity of
pleasure. Still, one cannot help but feel that the impressionistic
psychology of Ibsen reaches a pinnacle of dramatic art not attained by
Browning in his plays, delightful in character portrayal as they are, and
not upon any account to have been missed from dramatic literature.

In the dramatic monologue Browning found just that form which would focus
his forces, bringing them into the sort of relationship needed to reveal
the true law of being for his new region of poetic art.

If we inquire just why this form was the true medium for the most perfect
expression of his genius, I think we may answer that in it, as he has
developed it, is given an opportunity for the legitimate exercise of his
mental subtlety. Through the voice of one speaker he can portray not only
the speaker but one or more other characters, and at the same time show
the scene setting, and all without any direct description. On the other
hand, his tendency to redundancy, so marked when he is making a character
reveal only his own personality, is held in check by the necessity of
using just those words and turns of expression and dwelling upon just
those details which will make each character stand out distinctly, and at
the same time bring the scene before the reader.

The people in his dramatic monologues live before us by means of a
psychology as impressionistic as that of Ibsen's in his plays. The effect
is the same as that in a really great impressionistic painting. Nature is
revealed far more distinctly--the thing of lights and shadows, space and
movement--than in pictures bent upon endless details of form. "My Last
Duchess" is one among many fine examples of his method in monologue. In
that short poem we are made to see what manner of man is the duke, what
manner of woman the duchess. We see what has been the duke's past, what is
to be his future, also the present scene, as the duke stands in the hall
of his palace talking to an ambassador from the count who has come to
arrange a marriage with the duke for the count's daughter. Besides all
this a glimpse of the ambassador's attitude of mind is given. This is done
by an absolutely telling choice of words and by an organic relationing of
the different elements. The law of his genius asserts itself.

Browning's own ideal of the poet who makes others see was not completely
realized until he had perfected a form which would lend itself most
perfectly to the manner of thing which he desired to make others
see--namely, the human soul in all its possible manifestations of feeling
and mood, good, bad, and indifferent, from the uninspired organist who
struggles with a mountainous fugue to the inspired improvisor whose soul
ascends to God on the wings of his music, from the unknown sensitive
painter who cannot bear to have his pictures the subject of criticism or
commerce to the jolly life-loving Fra Lippo, from the jealous, vindictive
woman of "The Laboratory" to the vision-seeing Pompilia, from Ned Bratts
to Bishop Blougram, and so on--so many and wonderful that custom cannot
state their infinite variety.

Consistent, so far, with his own theories we find the work of Browning to
be. He also follows his ideal in the discarding of classical allusion
and illustration. Part of his dictum that the form should express the
thought is shown in his habitual fitting of his allusions to the subject
he is treating. By this means he produces his atmosphere and brings the
scene clearly before us; witness his constant references to Molinos and
his influence in "The Ring and the Book," an influence which was making
itself felt in all classes of society at the time when the actual tragedy
portrayed in the poem occurred. This habit, of course, brings into his
poetry a far wider range of allusions unfamiliar to his contemporaries
than is to be found in other Victorian poets, and makes it necessary that
these should be "looked up" before an adequate enjoyment of their fitness
is possible. Hence the Browning societies, so often held up to ridicule by
the critics, who blindly prefer to show their superior attitude of mind in
regard to everything they do not know, and growl about his obscurity, to
welcoming any movement which means an increase of general culture. The
Browning societies have not only done much to make Browning's unusual
allusions common matters of knowledge, but they have helped to keep alive
a taste for all poetry in an age when poetry has needed all the friendly
support it could get.

All great poets lead the ordinary mind to unfamiliar regions of knowledge
and thereby to fresh planes of enjoyment. That Browning has outdone all
other poets in this particular should be to his honor, not to his
dispraise.

In one very marked direction, however, he is not a perfect exemplar of his
own theories--that is, he is not always consistently dramatic. He belongs
to that order of poets described by himself in the Shelley Introduction as
neither completely subjective nor completely objective, but with the two
faculties at times running in upon each other. He is often absolutely
objective in his expression of a mood or a feeling, but the moment the
mood takes upon it the tinge of thought we begin to feel Browning himself.

The fundamental principles upon which he bases his own solution of the
problems of existence are seen to crop out, colored, it is true, by the
personality of the speaker, but yet traceable to their source in the
mental make up of Browning himself. It may well be that Browning has come
so near to the ultimate truth discoverable by man in his fundamental
principles that they are actually universal truths, to be found lying deep
down at the roots of all more partial expressions, just as gravitation,
conservation of energy, evolution underlie every phenomena of nature,
and therefore when a Pope in "The Ring and the Book," a Prince
Hohenstiel-Swangau, a Bishop Blougram, a Cleon or a John in "The Death in
the Desert," give utterance to their views upon life, they are bound to
touch from one or another angle the basic principles of life common to all
humanity as well as to the poet--the center within us all where "truth
abides in fulness."

This would seem an even more complete fusing of the two faculties in one
poet than that spoken of by Browning, where a poet would issue successive
works, in some of them the one faculty and in some of them the other
faculty being supreme.

That Browning was, to a certain extent, a poet of this third order of
which he prophesied is true, for he has written a number of poems like "La
Saisiaz," "Reverie," various of his prologues and epilogues which are
purely subjective in content. There are also subjective passages in the
midst of other poems, like those in "Sordello," "Prince Hohenstiel," the
"Parleyings," etc. If we place such a poem as "Reverie" side by side with
"Fra Lippo Lippi" we see well-nigh perfect illustrations of the two
faculties as they existed in the one poet, Browning. On the other hand,
in those poems where the thought, as I have said, suggests Browning, in
the speech of his characters he has something of the quality of what
Browning calls the subjective poet of modern classification. "Gifted like
the objective poet, with the fuller perception of nature and man, he is
impelled to embody the thing he perceives, not so much with reference to
the many below as to the One above him, the supreme intelligence which
apprehends all things in their absolute truth, an ultimate view ever
aspired to, if but partially attained, by the poet's soul."

Browning may be said to have carried to its flood tide the "Liberal
Movement in English Literature," as Courthope calls it, inaugurated at the
dawn of the century by the Lake School, which reacted against the correct
school of Dryden and Pope. Along with the earlier poets of the century he
shared lack of appreciation at the hands of critics in general. The
critics had been bred in the school of the eighteenth century, and
naturally would be incapable of understanding a man whose thought was
permeated with the doctrines of evolution, then an unknown quantity except
to the elect in scientific circles, and not to become the possession of
the thinking world at large until beyond the middle of the century;
whose soul was full of the ardor of democracy, shown not only in his
choice and treatment of subjects, but in his reckless independence of all
the shibboleths of the past; and whose liberalness in the treatment of
moral and religious problems was such as to scandalize many in an age when
the law forbade that a man should marry his deceased wife's sister, and
when the Higher Criticism of the Bible had not yet migrated to England
from Germany; and, finally, whose style was everything that was atrocious
because entirely different from anything they had seen before.

The century had to grow up to him. It is needless to say that it did so.
Just as out of the turmoil of conflicting scientific and religious thought
has emerged a serene belief in man's spiritual destiny, so out of the
turmoil of conflicting schools of criticism has arisen a perception of the
value of the new, the original, the different in art. Critics begin to
apply the principles of evolution to their criticism as Browning applied
it to his art, with the result that they no longer measure by past
standards of art but by relating the art to the life of the time in its
various manifestations, not forgetting that the poet or the dramatist may
have a further vision of what is to come than any other man of his age.

The people first, for the most part, found out that here in Browning's
work was a new force, and calmly formed themselves into groups to study
what manner of force it might be, regardless of the sneers of newspaperdom
and conventional academies. And gradually to the few appreciative critics
of the early days have been added one authoritative voice after another
until the chorus of praise has become a large one, and Browning, though
later than any great poet of the century, is coming into his own.

In a certain chart of English literature with which I am acquainted,
wherein the poets are graphically represented in mountain ranges with
peaks of various heights, Tennyson is shown as the towering peak of the
Victorian Era, while Browning is a sturdy but much lower peak with a
blunted top. This is quite symbolic of the general attitude toward
Browning at the end of the century, for, with all the appreciation, there
has been on the part of authority a disinclination to assign to him the
chief place among the poets of the Victorian Era. Courthope, who most of
the time preserves a remarkable reticence upon Browning, voices this
general attitude in a remark ventured upon in one of his lectures in
1900. He says:

"No one who is capable of appreciating genius will refuse to admire the
powers of this poet, the extent of his sympathy and interest in external
things, the boldness of his invention, the energy of his analysis, the
audacity of his experiments. But so absolutely does he exclude all
consideration for the reader from his choice of subject, so arbitrarily,
in his treatment of his themes, does he compel his audience to place
themselves at his own point of view, that the life of his art depends
entirely upon his own individuality. Should future generations be less
inclined than our own to surrender their imagination to his guidance, he
will not be able to appeal to them through that element of life which lies
in the Universal."

To the present writer this seems simply like a confession on Courthope's
part that he was unable to perceive in Browning the elements of the
Universal which are most assuredly there, and which were fully recognized
by a Scotch writer, Dawson, at the same time that Courthope was
questioning his power to hold coming generations.

"The fashions of the world may change," writes Dawson, "and the old doubts
may wear themselves out and sink like shadows out of sight in the
morning of a stronger faith; but even so the world will still turn to the
finer poems of Browning for intellectual stimulus, for the purification of
pity and of pathos, for the exaltation of hope.

"Or if the darkness still thickens, all the more will men turn to this
strong man of the race, who has wrestled and prevailed; who has illumined
with imaginative insight the deepest problems of the ages; who has made
his poetry not merely the vehicle of pathos, passion, tenderness, fancy,
and imagination, but also of the most robust and masculine thought. He has
written lyrics which must charm all who love, epics which must move all
who act, songs which must cheer all who suffer, poems which must fascinate
all who think; and when 'Time hath sundered shell from pearl,' however
stern may be the scrutiny, it may be said that there will remain enough of
Robert Browning to give him rank among the greatest of poets, and secure
for him the sure reward of fame."

But it is to France we must go for the surest authoritative note--that
land of the Academy and correct taste which _hums_ and _hahs_ over its own
Immortals in proverbially unpenetrating conclave. No less a man than
Taine declares that Browning stands first among English poets--"the most
excellent where excellence is greatness, the most gifted where genius is a
common dower."

While there can be no doubt that Browning outdid all the other great poets
of his time in "azure feats," in developing an absolutely self-centered
ideal of art, which is yet so true to the ultimate tendencies of the
century, indeed to those of all time, for evolution and democracy are
henceforth the torch-bearers of the human soul--each of the other
half-dozen or so greatest poets had distinct and independent
individualities which were more nearly the outcome of the current
tendencies of the time than Browning's.

[Illustration: ALFRED TENNYSON]

Tennyson was equally familiar with the thought and much more familiar with
the politics of the day, but there is an infinite difference in their
attitude. Browning, if I may be excused for quoting one of Shakespeare's
most abused phrases, rides over the century like a "naked new-born babe
striding the blast." Tennyson ambles through it on a palfrey which has a
tendency to flounder into every slough of despond it comes to. This may
seem to be putting it rather too strongly, but is it not true? Browning
has the vision belonging to the latest child of time. He never follows; he
leads. With his eyes fixed upon a far-off future where man shall be _man_
at last, he faces every problem with the intrepidity of an Oedipus
confronting the Sphynx. The mystery of its riddles has no terrors for him.
It is given to him as to few others to see the ineffable beauty of life's
mystery, the promise it holds out of eternal joy. While he frequently
discourses upon the existence of evil, he never for a moment admits any
doubt into his own utmost soul of the beneficent part evil is meant to
play in the molding of human destinies. Mr. Santayana has called him a
barbarous poet. In a certain sense he is, if to be born among the first on
a new plane of psychic perception where of no account become the endless
metaphysical meanderings of the intellect, which cry "proof, proof, where
there can be no proof," is barbarous. It was doubtless largely owing to
this power of vision reminding us again somewhat of the child's in
Maeterlinck's "Les Aveugles" which kept Browning from tinkering in the
half-measures of the political leaders of his time. His plane is not
unlike that of his own Lazarus, about whom the Arab physician says:

  "The man is witless of the size, the sum,
  The value in proportion of all things,
  Or whether it be little or be much.
  Discourse to him of prodigious armament
  Assembled to besiege his city now,
  And of the passing of a mule with gourds--
  'Tis one! Then take it on the other side,
  Speak of some trifling fact,--he will gaze rapt
  With stupor at its very littleness,
  (For as I see) as if in that indeed
  He caught prodigious import, whole results;
  And so will turn to us the bystanders
  In ever the same stupor (note this point)
  That we, too, see not with his opened eyes."

The import of an event is everything. Large imports may lurk more surely
in the awakening of some obscure soul than in the pageantry of law
bringing a tardy and wholly inadequate measure of justice to humanity.
Though Tennyson talks of the "far-off divine event" he has no burning
conviction of it and does not ride toward it with triumph in his eye and
flaming joy in his soul. As he ambles along, steeping himself in the
science of the time, its revelations make him nervous; he falls into doubt
from which he can only extricate himself by holding on to belief, a very
different thing from Browning's vision.

Thus it happens that Tennyson voices the feelings of an immense class of
cultured people, who have gone through the century in the same ambling
fashion, a prey to its fears, intellectual enough to see the truths of
science, but not spiritual enough to see the import of the dawn of the new
day.

Tennyson, then, quite of and in his time, would desire above all things to
appeal to it as it appealed to him. He waxes enthusiastic over
conventional politics, he treats his social problems so entirely in
accordance with the conventions of the day that they are not problems at
all, and he is quite in love with the beauty of aristocratic society,
though he occasionally descends to the people for a subject. These are all
entirely sufficient reasons for his popularity as a poet during his life,
further emphasized by the added fact that having no subject matter (that
is thought-content) wherewith to startle the world by strangeness, he took
the wiser part of delighting them with his exquisite music.

Though so satisfactory a representative of his times, he did outrage one
of the shibboleths of the critics in his efforts to find a new and richer
music than poets had before used by bringing scientific imagery into his
verse. Of all the absurd controversies indulged in by critics, the most
absurd is that fought out around the contention that science and poetry
cannot be made to harmonize. Wordsworth was keen enough to see this before
the rest of the world and prophesied in the preface to his "Lyrical
Ballads" that science would one day become the closest of allies to
poetry, and Tennyson was brilliant enough to seize the new possibilities
in scientific language with a realization that nature imagery might almost
be made over by the use in describing it of scientific epithets. A famous
illustration of the happy effects he produced by these means is in the
lines "Move eastward happy Earth and round again to-night." His
observation of Nature, moreover, had a scientific accuracy, which made
possible far more delicate and individual descriptions of Nature's aspects
than had been produced before. It was also a happy thought for him to
weave so much of his poetry around the Arthurian legends. Beautiful in
themselves, they came nearer home than classical or Italian legends, and,
when made symbolic of an ideal which must appeal to the heart of every
cultured Englishman, who regarded himself as a sort of prototype of the
blameless King Arthur, and whose grief at the failure of the social fabric
planned by him would be as poignant as that of the King himself, they
carried with them a romantic and irresistible attraction.

The reasons why Tennyson should appeal especially to the nineteenth
century cultured and highly respectable Englishman far outweighed any
criticisms that might be made by critics on his departure from poetic
customs of the past. He pleased the highest powers in the land, became
Laureate and later Lord Tennyson. He will therefore always remain the poet
most thoroughly representative of that especial sort of beauty belonging
to a social order which has reached a climax of refinement and
intelligence, but which, through its very self-satisfaction, cuts itself
off from a perception of the true value of the new forces coming into play
in the on-rushing stream of social development.

The other poets who divide with Browning and Tennyson the highest honors
of the Victorian Era are Landor, Arnold, Rossetti, Swinburne, Morris, Mrs.
Browning, George Meredith.

Landor and Arnold preserved more than any of the others a genuine
classical aroma in their verse, and on this account have always been
delighted in by a few. After all, the people may not immediately accept a
poet of too great independence, but they are least of all likely to grow
enthusiastic over anything reactionary either in style or thought.
Romantic elements of not too startling a character win the favor of most
readers.

Though classic in style both these poets reflected phases of the century's
thought. Landor differed from Browning in the fact that he frequently
expressed himself vigorously upon the subject of current politics. His
political principles were not of the most advanced type, however. He
believed in the notion of a free society, but seems to have thought the
best way of attaining it would be a commonwealth in which the wise should
rule, and see that the interests of all should be secured. Still his
insistence upon liberty, however old-fashioned his ideas of the means by
which it should be maintained, puts him in the line of the democratic
march of the century.

Swinburne calls him his master, and represents himself in verse as having
learned many wise and gracious things of him, but his thought was not
sufficiently progressive to triumph over the classicism of his style in an
age of romantic poetry, though there will always be those who hold on to
the shibboleth that, after all, the classic is the real thing in poetry,
never realizing that where the romantic is old enough, it, too, becomes
classic.

Matthew Arnold stands in poetry where men like Huxley and Clifford stood
in science, who, Childe-Roland like, came to the dark tower, calmly put
the slug horn to their lips and blew a blast of courage. Science had
undermined their belief in a future life as well as destroying the
revealed basis of moral action. In such a man the intellectual nature
overbalances the intuitional, and when inherited belief based on authority
is destroyed, there is nothing but the habit of morality left.

Arnold has had the sympathy of those who could no longer believe in their
revealed religion, but who loved it and regretted its passing away from
them. He gives expression to this feeling in lines like these:

                      "The sea of faith
  Was once, too, at the full, and round earth's shore
  Lay like the folds of a bright girdle furl'd.
  But now I only hear
  Its melancholy, long, withdrawing roar,
  Retreating, to the breath
  Of the night-wind, down the vast edges drear
  And naked shingles of the world."

The regret for something beautiful that is gone is capable of exquisite
poetic treatment, but it is not an abiding note of the century. It
represents only one phase of its thought, and that a transcient one,
because it could be felt with poignancy only by those whose lives were
rudely shaken by the destruction of the ideal in which they had been bred
and in which they devoutly believed. Arnold's sympathetic treatment of
this phase of doubt seems, however, to have been of incalculable service
to those who felt as he did. It softened the anguish of the shock to have
not only the beauty of the past dwelt upon, but to have the beauty of
courage in the face of a destroyed ideal erected into a new ideal for
living brave and noble lives. In "Stanzas from the Grande Chartreuse" is a
fine example of the beauty which may be imparted to a mood as melancholy
as could well be imagined:

  "Not as their friend, or child, I speak!
    But as, on some far northern strand,
  Thinking of his own Gods, a Greek
    In pity and mournful awe might stand
  Before some fallen Runic stone--
  For both were faiths, and both are gone.

  "Wandering between two worlds, one dead
    The other powerless to be born,
  With nowhere yet to rest my head,
    Like these, on earth I wait forlorn,
  Their faith, my tears, the world deride--
  I come to shed them at their side."

Such hope as he has to offer comes out in stanzas like the following,
but all is dependent upon strenuous living:

  "No, no! the energy of life may be
  Kept on after the grave, but not begun;
  And he who flagg'd not in the earthly strife,
  From strength to strength advancing--only he,
  His soul well-knit, and all his battle won,
  Mounts, and that hardly, to eternal life."

Nor shall better days on earth come without struggle since life

  "Is on all sides o'ershadowed by the high
  Uno'erleaped Mountains of Necessity,
  Sparing us narrower margin than we deem.
  Nor will that day dawn at a human nod,
  When, bursting through the network, superposed
  By selfish occupation--plot and plan,
  Lust, avarice, envy-liberated man,
  All difference with his fellow-mortal closed,
  Shall be left standing face to face with God."

Though Arnold was sternly criticised he had before the end of the century
been accorded his proper place as a poet, which was that of the chief poet
between the greatest lights of the century, Browning and Tennyson and the
pre-Raphaelite group. Gosse, with more penetration than can always be
accorded to him, declares that "His devotion to beauty, the composure,
simplicity and dignity of his temper, and his deep moral sincerity gave
to his poetry a singular charm which may prove as durable as any element
in modern verse."

The phase of romanticism carried to its climax by the pre-Raphaelite poets
Rossetti and his sister, Morris and Swinburne had, like the work of
Tennyson, its full recognition, in its own time, because these poets, like
him, have put into exquisite music romantic subjects derived both from the
classics and from mediaeval legend. The new note of sensuousness, due
largely to the Italian influence of Rossetti, with his sensuous
temperament, his intensity of passion and his love of art, and also in
Morris and Swinburne to their pagan feeling, one of the elements
inaugurated by the general breaking down of orthodox religious ideals
through the encroachments of science, does not seem to have affected their
popularity.

As there were those who would sympathize with the Tennysonian attitude
toward doubt, and those who would sympathize with Matthew Arnold's, there
were others to feel like Swinburne, pantheistic, and, like Morris, utterly
hopeless of a future, while others again might criticise the pagan
feeling, but, with their inheritance of beauty from Tennyson and his
predecessors of the dawn of the century, would delight in these new
developments of the romantic spirit.

[Illustration: A. C. SWINBURNE]

Ruskin is said to have been the original inspirer of these four poets,
though Fitz-Gerald's "Rubaiyat" of Omar Khayyam was not without its
influence. But as Edmund Gosse says, "The attraction of the French
romances of chivalry for William Morris, of Tuscan painting for D. G.
Rossetti, of the spirit of English Gothic architecture for Christina
Rossetti, of the combination of all these with Greek and Elizabethan
elements for Swinburne, were to be traced back to start--words given by
the prophetic author of the 'Seven Lamps of Architecture.'"

Though the first books of this group of poets, the "Defence of Guenevere"
(1858), "Goblin Market," "Early Italian Poets," "Queen Mother and
Rosamond" (1861), did not make any impression on the public, with the
publication of Swinburne's "Atalanta in Calydon" an interest was awakened
which reached a climax with the publication of Rossetti's poems in 1870.
Rossetti had thrown these poems into his wife's grave, as the world knows,
but was prevailed upon to have them recovered and published.

In the success of this group was vindicated at last the principles of the
naturalists of the dawn of the century. Here was a mixture of color, of
melody, of mysticism, of sensuousness, of elaboration of form which
carried originality and independence as far as it could well go in a
direction which painted life primarily from the outside. But when this
brilliant culminating flash of the early school of Coleridge and Keats
began to burn itself out, there was Tennyson, who might be called the
conservative wing of the romantic movement, dominant as ever, and
Browning, the militant wing, advanced from his mid-century obscurity into
a flood-tide of appreciation which was to bear him far onward toward
literary pre-eminence, placing him among the few greatest names in
literature.

The originality of the pre-Raphaelites grew out of their welding of
romantic, classical, and mediaeval elements, tempered in each case by the
special mental attitude of the poet.

Rossetti and his brother artists, Millais and Holman Hunt, who founded the
pre-Raphaelite brotherhood of painters, pledged themselves to the
fundamental principle laid down by Rossetti in the little magazine they
started called the _Germ_. This new creed was simple enough and ran: "The
endeavor held in view throughout the writings on art will be to
encourage and enforce an entire adherence to the simplicity of Nature."

In their interpretation and development of this simple principle, artists
and the poets who joined them differentiated from one another often to a
wide extent. In Rossetti, it becomes an adoration of the beauty of woman
expressed in ultra-sensuous though not in sensual imagery, combined with
an atmosphere of religious wonder such as one finds in mediaeval poets, of
which "The Blessed Damozel" stands as a typical example. In it, as one
appreciator has said, all the qualities of Rossetti's poetry are found.
"He speaks alternately like a seer and an artist; one who is now bewitched
with the vision of beauty, and now is caught up into Paradise, where he
hears unutterable things. To him the spiritual world is an intense
reality. He hears the voices, he sees the presences of the supernatural.
As he mourns beside the river of his sorrow, like Ezekiel, he has his
visions of winged and wheeling glory, and leaning over the ramparts of the
world his gaze is fixed on the uncovered mysteries of a world to come.
There is no poet to whom the supernatural has been so much alive.
Religious doubt he seems never to have felt. But the temper of religious
wonder, the old, childlike, monkish attitude of awe and faith in the
presence of the unseen, is never absent in him. The artistic force of his
temperament drives him to the worship of beauty; the poetic and religious
forces to the adoration of mystery."

To Swinburne the simplicity of nature included the utmost lengths to which
eroticism could go. Upon this ground he has been severely censured and he
has had an unfortunate influence upon scores and scores of younger writers
who have seemed to think that the province of the poet is to decry the
existence of sincere affection, and who in their turn have exercised
actual mischief in lowering social standards.

This is not all of Swinburne, however. His superb metrical power is his
chief contribution to the originality of this group, and when he developed
away from his nauseating eroticism, he could charm as no one else with his
delicious music, though it often be conspicuous for its lack of richness
in thought.

His fate has been somewhat different from that of most poets. When his
"Atalanta in Calydon" was published it was received with enthusiasm, but
the volumes overweighted with eroticism which followed caused a fierce
controversy, and many have not even yet discovered that this was only one
phase of Swinburne's art, and that, unfortunate as it is in many
respects, it was a phase of the century's life which must find its
expression in art if that life is to be completely given, and that it was
a passing phase Swinburne himself proved in the development of other
phases shown in his interest in current political situations, his
enthusiasm for Italy and his later expressions of high moral ideals, as
well as in a quasi-religious attitude of mind, not so far from that of
Emerson, himself, in which strong emphasis is placed upon the importance
of the individual, and upon the unity of God and man.

There is moral courage and optimism in the face of doubt of a high order
in the following lines:

  --"Are ye not weary and faint not by the way
  Seeing night by night devoured of day by day,
    Seeing hour by hour consumed in sleepless fire?
      Sleepless; and ye too, when shall ye, too sleep?
  --We are weary in heart and head, in hands and feet,
  And surely more than all things sleep were sweet,
    Than all things save the inexorable desire
      Which whoso knoweth shall neither faint nor weep.

  "Is this so sweet that one were fain to follow?
  Is this so sure when all men's hopes are hollow,
     Even this your dream, that by much tribulation
      Ye shall make whole flawed hearts, and bowed necks straight?
  --Nay though our life were blind, our death were fruitless,
  Not therefore were the whole world's high hope rootless;
    But man to man, nation would turn to nation,
      And the old life live, and the old great word be great."

But Swinburne in his farthest reaches of pantheistic aspiration is to be
seen in a poem like "Hertha":

              "I am that which began;
                Out of me the years roll;
              Out of me God and man;
                I am equal and whole;
  God changes, and man, and the form of them bodily; I am the soul.

              "The tree many-rooted
                That swells to the sky
              With frondage red-fruited
                The life-tree am I;
  In the buds of your lives is the sap of my leaves; ye shall live and not
      die.

              "But the Gods of your fashion
                That take and that give,
              In their pity and passion
                That scourge and forgive,
  They are worms that are bred in the bark that falls off; they shall die
      and not live.

              "My own blood is what stanches
                The wounds in my bark:
              Stars caught in my branches
                Make day of the dark,
  And are worshipped as suns till the sunrise shall tread out their fires
      as a spark."

Morris's interpretation of pre-Raphaelite tenets took him into mediaeval
legend and the classics for his subject matter. In his first volume, "The
Defence of Guenevere and Other Poems," he came into competition with
Tennyson, who was at the same time issuing his Arthurian legends. The
polish of Tennyson's verse, as well as its symbolical meaning for the
time, was more acceptable than the actual return to the nature of the
fifteenth century, and this the first volume from a pre-Raphaelite was
hardly noticed by the critics. Morris sulked within his literary tents for
ten years before he again appeared, this time with "The Life and Death of
Jason" (1867), which immediately became popular. Later came the "Earthly
Paradise." These tales, in verse noble and simple, in style recalling the
tales of Chaucer, yet with a charm all their own, in which the real men
and women of Chaucer give place to types, have been the delight of those
who like to find in poetry a dreamland of romance where they may enjoy
themselves far from the problems and toils of everyday life. He differs
from all the other poets of this group in his lack of religious hope. His
mind was of the type that could not stand up against the undermining
influences of the age: hence world-weariness and despair are the
constantly recurring notes.

[Illustration: DANTE GABRIEL ROSSETTI]

Mrs. Browning far outdistanced her husband in the early days in
popularity. She pleased the people by her social enthusiasm, a
characteristic more marked in her verse than in that of any of the poets
mentioned. The critics have found many faults in her style, mainly those
growing out of an impassioned nature which carried her at times beyond the
realm of perfectly balanced art. But even an English critic of the
conservatism of Edmund Gosse could at last admit that "In some of her
lyrics and more rarely in her sonnets she rose to heights of passionate
humanity which place her only just below the great poets of her country."

Contemporary criticism of "Aurora Leigh," which was certainly a departure
both in form and matter from the accepted standards, was, on the whole,
just. _The Quarterly Review_ in 1862 said of it: "This 'Aurora Leigh' is a
great poem. It is a wonder of art. It will live. No large audience will it
have, but it will have audience; and that is more than most poems have. To
those who know what poetry is and in what struggles it is born--how the
great thoughts justify themselves--this work will be looked upon as one of
the wonders of the age." Mrs. Browning resembles her husband in the fact
that she does not fit into the main line of evolution of the romantic
school, but is an individual manifestation of the romantic spirit, showing
almost as great freedom from the trammels of accepted romanticism as
Browning does.

The writer of the century whose experience as a novelist almost paralleled
that of Browning as poet was Meredith. Because of his psychological
analysis and the so-called obscurity of his style, he waited many years
for recognition and finally was accepted as one of the most remarkable
novelists of the age. His poetry, showing similar tendencies, and
overshadowed by his novels, has not yet emerged into the light of
universal appreciation. One finds it even ignored altogether in the most
recent books of English literature, yet he is the author of one of the
most remarkable series of sonnets in the English language, "Modern Love,"
presenting, as it does, a vivid picture of domestic decadence which forms
a strange contrast to Rossetti's sonnets, "The House of Life," indicating
how many and various have been the forces at work during the nineteenth
century in the disintegrating and molding of social ideals. Meredith
writes of "Hiding the Skeleton".

  "At dinner she is hostess, I am host.
  Went the feast ever cheerfuller? She keeps
  The topic over intellectual deeps
  In buoyancy afloat. They see no ghost.
  With sparkling surface-eyes we ply the ball:
  It is in truth a most contagious game;
  _Hiding the Skeleton_ shall be its name.
  Such play as this the devils might appall,
  But here's the greater wonder; in that we,
  Enamor'd of our acting and our wits,
  Admire each other like true hypocrites.
  Warm-lighted glances, Love's Ephemeral,
  Shoot gayly o'er the dishes and the wine.
  We waken envy of our happy lot.
  Fast sweet, and golden, shows our marriage-knot.
  Dear guests, you now have seen Love's corpse-light shine!"

Rossetti writes "Lovesight":

  "When do I see thee most, beloved one?
    When in the light the spirits of mine eyes
    Before thy face, their altar, solemnize
  The worship of that Love through thee made known?
  Or when, in the dusk hours (we two alone),
    Close-kiss'd and eloquent of still replies
    Thy twilight--hidden glimmering visage lies,
  And my soul only sees thy soul its own?
    O love, my love! if I no more should see
    Thyself, nor on the earth the shadow of thee,
  Nor image of thine eyes in any spring,--
    How then should sound upon Life's darkening slope,
    The ground-whirl of the perish'd leaves of Hope,
  The wind of Death's imperishable wing?"

Browning's criticism of painting was evidently much influenced by the
pre-Raphaelites. Their admiration for the painters who preceded Raphael,
revealing as it did to them an art not satisfied with itself, but reaching
after higher things, and earnestly seeking to interpret nature and human
life, is echoed in his "Old Pictures in Florence," which was written but
six years after Hunt, Millais, and Rossetti formed their brotherhood. In
poetry, they did not eschew classical subjects, as Browning did for the
most part, but they treated these subjects in a romantic spirit, and so
removed them from the sort of strictures that Browning made upon the
perfection of Greek art.

From this summary of the chief lines of literary development in the
nineteenth century it will be seen, not only what a marvelous age it has
been for the flowering of individualism in literary invention, but how
Browning has surpassed all the other poets of note in the wideness of his
departure from accepted standards, and how helpless the earlier critics
were in the face of this departure, because of their dependence always
upon critical shibboleths--in other words, of principles not sufficiently
universal--as their means of measuring a poet's greatness. Tennyson and
the pre-Raphaelites won their popularity sooner among critics because
they followed logically in the line of development inaugurated by the
earlier poets, Wordsworth, Shelley, Keats, etc., whose poetry had already
done some good work in breaking down the school of Dryden and Pope, though
it succeeded only in erecting another standard not sufficiently universal
to include Browning. The evolution of art forms, a principle so clearly
understood, as we have shown by Browning, has never become a guiding one
with critics, though Mr. Gosse in his "Modern English Literature" has
expressed a wish that the principle of evolution might be adapted to
criticism. He has evidently felt how hopeless is the task of appraising
poets by the old individualistic method, which, as he says, has been in
favor for at least a century. It possesses, he declares, considerable
effectiveness in adroit hands, but is, after all, an adaptation of the old
theory of the unalterable type, merely substituting for the one authority
of the ancients an equal rigidity in a multitude of isolated modern
instances. For this inflexible style of criticism he proposes that a
scientific theory shall be adopted which shall enable us at once to take
an intelligent pleasure in Pope and in Wordsworth, in Spenser and in
Swift. He writes:

"Herbert Spencer has, with infinite courage, opened the entire world of
phenomena to the principles of evolution, but we seem slow to admit them
into the little province of aesthetics. We cling to the individualist
manner, to that intense eulogy which concentrates its rays on the
particular object of notice and relegates all others to proportional
obscurity. There are critics of considerable acumen and energy who seem to
know no other mode of nourishing a talent or a taste than that which is
pursued by the cultivators of gigantic gooseberries. They do their best to
nip off all other buds, that the juices of the tree of fame may be
concentrated on their favorite fruit. Such a plan may be convenient for
the purposes of malevolence, and in earlier times our general ignorance of
the principles of growth might well excuse it. But it is surely time that
we should recognize only two criteria of literary judgment. The first is
primitive, and merely clears the ground of rubbish; it is, Does the work
before us, or the author, perform what he sets out to perform with a
distinguished skill in the direction in which his powers are exercised? If
not, he interests the higher criticism not at all; but if yes, then
follows the second test: Where, in the vast and ever-shifting scheme of
literary evolution, does he take his place, and in what relation does he
stand, not to those who are least like him, but to those who are of his
own kith and kin?"

[Illustration: GEORGE MEREDITH]

With such principles of criticism as this, the public would sooner be
brought to an appreciation of all that is best worth while in literature,
instead of being taken, as it too often is, upon a wrong scent to worship
at the shrine of the Nokes and Stokes, who simply print blue and eat the
turtles.

If Mr. Gosse had himself been fully imbued with such principles would he
have made the statement quoted in chapter two in regard to Browning's
later books? And should we have such senseless criticism as a remark which
has become popular lately, and which I believe emanated from a university
in the South--namely, that Browning never said anything that Tennyson had
not said better? As an illustration of this a recent critic may be quoted
who is entirely scornful of the person who prefers Browning's

  "God's in his heaven, all's right with the world"

to Tennyson's

  "And hear at times a sentinel
    Who moves about from place to place,
    And whispers to the worlds of space
  In the deep night that all is well."

One might reply to this that it is a matter of taste had not Courthope
shown conclusively that Matthew Arnold's criterion of criticism--namely,
that a taste which is born of culture is the only certain possession by
which the critic can measure the beauty of a poet's line--is a fallacy.
His argument is worth quoting:

    "You have stated strongly one side of the truth, but you have ignored,
    completely ignored, the other. You have asserted the claims of
    individual liberty, and up to a certain point I agree with you. I do
    not deny that spiritual liberty is founded on consciousness, and hence
    the self-consciousness of the age is part of the problem we are
    considering. I do not deny that the prevailing rage for novelty must
    also be taken into account. Liberty, variety, novelty, are all
    necessary to the development of Art. Without novelty there can be no
    invention, without variety there can be no character, without liberty
    there can be no life. Life, character, invention, these are of the
    essence of Poetry. But while you have defended with energy the freedom
    of the Individual, you have said nothing of the authority of society.
    And yet the conviction of the existence of this authority is a belief
    perhaps even more firmly founded in the human mind than the sentiment
    as to the rights of individual liberty....

    The great majority of the professors of poetry, however various their
    opinions, however opposite their tastes, have felt sure that there was
    in taste, as in science, a theory of false and true; in art, as in
    conduct, a rule of right and wrong. And even among those who have
    asserted most strongly the inward and relative nature of poetry, do
    you think there was one so completely a skeptic as to imagine that he
    was the sole proprietor of the perception he sought to embody in
    words; one who doubted his power, by means of accepted symbols, to
    communicate to his audience his own ideas and feelings about external
    things? Yet until some man shall have been found bold enough to defend
    a thesis so preposterous, we must continue to believe that there is a
    positive standard, by which those at least who speak a common language
    may reason about questions of taste."

Armed with this gracious permission on the part of a professor of poetry,
we may venture to reason a little upon the foregoing quotations from
Tennyson and Browning to the effect that the person of really good taste
might like each of them in its place. While Tennyson's mystical quatrain
is beautiful and quite appropriate in such a poem as "In Memoriam," it
would not be in the least appropriate from the lips of a little
silk-winding girl as she wanders through the streets of Asolo on a sunny
morning singing her little songs. She is certainly a more lifelike child
speaking Browningese, as she has often been criticised for doing, than she
would be if upon this occasion she spoke in a Tennysonian manner. That her
song has touched the hearts of the twentieth century, if it was not
altogether appreciated in the nineteenth, is proved by the fact that it is
one of the most popular songs of the day as set by Mrs. H. H. A. Beach,
and that the line is heard upon the lips of people to-day who do not even
know whose it is, and herein lies the ultimate test of greatness.




