CHAPTER XXIII. THEY FALL IN WITH FRIENDS.


Now awoke Goldilind when the morning was young and fresh, and she drew
the mantle up over her shoulders; and as she did so, but half awake, she
deemed she heard other sounds than the singing of the black-birds and
throstles about the edge of the thicket, and she turned her eyes toward
the oak trees and the hazel-thicket, and saw at once three of mankind
coming on foot over the greensward toward her. She was afraid, so that
she durst not put out a hand to awaken Christopher, but sat gazing on
those three as they came toward her; she saw that two were tall men,
clad much as Christopher; but presently she saw that there was a woman
with them, and she took heart somewhat thereat; and she noted that one
of the men was short-haired and dark-haired, and the other had long red
hair falling about his shoulders; and as she put out her hand and laid
it on Christopher's shoulder, the red-haired one looked toward her a
moment under the sharp of his hand (for the sun was on their side),
and then set off running, giving out a great whoop therewithal. Even
therewith leapt up Christopher, still half awake, and the red-haired man
ran right up to him, and caught him by the shoulders, and kissed him on
both cheeks; so that Goldilind saw that these were the fellows whereof
Christopher had told, and she stood there shame-fast and smiling.

Presently came up the others, to wit, Gilbert and Joanna, and they also
kissed and embraced Christopher, and all they were as full of joy as
might be. Then came Joanna to Goldilind, and said: "I wot not who this
may be, brother, yet meseems she will be someone who is dear to thee,
wherefore is she my sister." And therewith she kissed Goldilind; and she
was kind, and sweet of flesh, and goodly of body, and Goldilind rejoiced
in her.

Joanna made much of her, and said to her: "Here is to do, whereas two
men have broken into a lady's chamber; come, sister, let us to the
thicket, and I will be thy tiring-maid, and while these others tell
their tales we shall tell ours." And she took her hand and they went
into the hazels; but the two new-come men seemed to find it hard to keep
their eyes off Goldilind, till the hazels had hidden her.

Then turned David to Christopher, and said: "Thy pardon, little King,
that we have waked thee so early; but we wotted not that thou hadst been
amongst the wood-women; and, sooth to say, my lad, we had little ease
till we found thee, after we came home and saw all those hoof-marks
yonder."

"Yea," said Gilbert, "if we had lost thee we had been finely holpen up,
for we could neither have gone back to the Tofts nor into the kingdom:
for I think my father would have hanged us if we had come back with a
'By the way, Christopher is slain.' But tell us, lad, what hath befallen
thee with yonder sweetling?"

"Yea, tell us," said David, "and sit down here betwixt us, with thy back
to the hazel-thicket, or we shall get no tale out of thee--tush, man,
Joanna will bring her back, and that right soon, I hope."

Christopher laughed, and sat down between them, and told all how it
had gone with him, and of Goldilind, who she was. The others hearkened
heedfully, and Gilbert said: "With all thou hast told us, brother, it
is clear we shall find it hard to dwell in Littledale; so soon as thy
loveling hath rested her at our house, we must go our ways to the Tofts,
and take counsel of our father."

Christopher yea-said this, and therewithal was come Joanna leading
Goldilind duly arrayed (yet still in her green gown, for she would none
other), fresh, blushing, and all lovely; and David and Christopher
did obeisance before her as to a great lady; but she hailed them as
brothers, merrily and kindly, and bade them kiss her; and they kissed
her cheek, but shyly, and especially David.

Thereafter they broke their fast under the oak trees, and spent a merry
hour, and then departed, the two women riding the horses, the others
afoot; so came they to the house of Littledale, some while before
sunset, and were merry and glad there. Young they were, troubles were
behind them, and many a joy before them.




CHAPTER XXIV. THEY TAKE COUNSEL AT LITTLEDALE.


Ten days they abode in the house of Littledale in all good cheer, and
Joanna led Goldilind here and there about the woods, and made much of
her, so that the heart within her was full of joy, for the freedom
of the wild-woods and all the life thereof was well-nigh new to her;
whereas on the day of her flight from Greenharbour, and on two other
such times, deadly fear, as is aforesaid, was mingled with her joyance,
and would have drowned it utterly, but for the wilfulness which hardened
her heart against the punishment to come. But now she was indeed free,
and it seemed to her, as to Christopher when he was but new healed of
his hurt, as if all this bright beauty of tree and flower, and beast and
bird, was but made for her alone, and she wondered that her fellow could
be so calm and sedate amidst of all this pleasure. And now, forsooth,
was her queenhood forgotten, and better and better to her seemed
Christopher's valiant love; and the meeting in the hall of the eventide
was so sweet to her, that she might do little but stand trembling whiles
Christopher came up to her, and Joanna's trim feet were speeding her
over the floor to meet her man, that she might be a sharer in his deeds
of the day.

Many tales withal Joanna told the Queen of the deeds of her husband and
his kindred, and of the freeing of her and the other three from their
captivity at Wailing Knowe, and of the evil days they wore there before
the coming of their lads, which must have been worser by far, thought
Goldilind, than the days of Greenharbour; so with all these tales, and
the happy days in the house of the wild-woods, Goldilind now began to
deem of this new life as if there had been none other fated for her,
so much a part was she now become of the days of those woodmen and
wolf-heads.

But when the last of those ten days was wearing to an end and those five
were sitting happy in the hall (albeit David sat somewhat pensive, now
staring at Goldilind's beauty, now rising from his seat to pace the
floor restlessly), Gilbert spake and said: "Brethren, and thou, Queen
Goldilind, it may be that the time is drawing near for other deeds
than letting fly a few shafts at the dun deer, and eating our meat, and
singing old songs as we lie at our ladies' feet; for though we be at
peace here in the wild-wood, forgetting all things save those that are
worthy to be remembered, yet in the cities and the courts of kings guile
is not forgotten, and pride is alive, and tyranny, and the sword is
whetted for innocent lives, and the feud is eked by the destruction of
those who be sackless of its upheaving. Wherefore it behoveth to defend
us by the ready hand and the bold heart and the wise head. So, I say,
let us loiter here no longer, but go our ways to-morrow to the Tofts,
and take the rede of our elders. How say ye, brethren?"

Quoth Christopher: "Time was, brother, when what thou sayest would have
been as a riddle to me, and I would have said: Here are we merry, though
we be few; and if ye lack more company, let me ride to the Tofts and
come back with a half score of lads and lasses, and thus let us eke our
mirth; and maybe they will tell us whitherward to ride. But now there is
a change, since I have gained a gift over-great for me, and I know that
they shall be some of the great ones who would be eager to take it from
me; and who knows what guile may be about the weaving even now, as on
the day when thou first sawest this hall, beloved."

Goldilind spake and sighed withal: "Whither my lord will lead me,
thither will I go; but here is it fair and sweet and peaceful; neither
do I look for it that men will come hither to seek the Queen of
Meadham."

David said: "Bethink thee, though, my Lady, that he who wedded thee to
the woodman may yet rue, and come hither to undo his deed, by slaying
the said woodman, and showing the Queen unto the folk."

Goldilind turned pale; but Joanna spake: "Nay, brother David, why
wilt thou prick her heart with this fear? For my part, I think that,
chance-hap apart, we might dwell here for years in all safety, and
happily enough, maybe. Yet also I say that we of the Tofts may well be
eager to show this jewel to our kindred, and especially to our father
and mother of the Tofts; so to-morrow we will set about the business of
carrying her thither, will she, nill she." And therewith she threw her
arms about Goldilind, and clipped her and kissed her; and Goldilind
reddened for pleasure and for joy that she was so sore prized by them
all.




