CHAPTER IX. SQUIRE SIMON COMES BACK TO OAKENHAM. THE EARL MARSHAL TAKEN
TO KING IN OAKENREALM.


Now as to Squire Simon, whether the devil helped him, or his luck, or
were it his own cunning and his, horse's stoutness, we wot not; but in
any case he fell not in with Ralph Longshanks and Anthony Green, but
rode as far and as fast as his horse would go, and then lay down in the
wild-wood; and on the morrow arose and went his ways, and came in the
even to the Castle of the Uttermost March, and went on thence the morrow
after on a fresh horse to Oakenham. There he made no delay but went
straight to the High House, and had privy speech of the Earl Marshal;
and him he told how he had smitten Christopher, and, as he deemed, slain
him. The Earl Marshal looked on him grimly and said: "Where is the ring
then?"

"I have it not," said Simon. "How might I light down to take it, when
the seven sons were hard on us?" And therewith he told him all the tale,
and how he had risen to slay Christopher the even before; and how he had
found out after that the youngling had become guest and fosterling of
the folk of the Tofts; and how warily Christopher had ridden, so that
he, Simon, had had to do his best at the last moment. "And now, Lord,"
quoth he, "I see that it will be my luck to have grudging of thee, or
even worse it may be; yea, or thou wilt be presently telling me that
I am a liar and never struck the stroke: but I warrant me that by
this time Jack of the Tofts knoweth better, for I left my knife in the
youngling's breast, and belike he wotteth of my weapons. Well, then, if
thou wilt be quit of me, thou hast but to forbear upholding me against
the Toft folk, and then am I gone without any to-do of thee."

Earl Rolf spake quietly in answer, though his face was somewhat
troubled: "Nay, Simon, I doubt thee not, not one word; for why shouldest
thou lie to me? nor do I deem thou wouldest, for thou art trusty and
worthy. Yet sore I doubt if the child be dead. Well, even so let it be,
for I am alive; and full surely I am mightier than Jack of the Tofts,
both to uphold thee against him (wherein I shall not fail), and
otherwise. But may God make me even as that young man if I be not
mightier yet in a few days. But now do thou go and eat and drink and
take thy disport; for thou hast served me well; and in a little while I
shall make thee knight and lord, and do all I can to pleasure thee."

So then Simon knelt to the Earl and made obeisance to him, and arose and
went his ways, light-hearted and merry.

But within the month it so befel that some of the lords and dukes came
to the Earl Marshal, and prayed him to call together a great Folk-mote
of all Oakenrealm; and he answered them graciously, and behight them to
do as they would; and even so did he.

And that Mote was very great, and whenas it was hallowed, there arose
a great lord, grey and ancient, and bewailed him before the folk, that
they had no king over Oakenrealm to uphold the laws & ward the land; and
"Will ye live bare and kingless for ever?" said he at last. "Will ye
not choose you a king, and crown him, before I die, and we others of the
realm who are old and worn?" Then he sat down, and another arose, and in
plain terms he bade them take the Earl Marshal to king. And then arose
one after other, and each sang the same song, till the hearts of the
people grew warm with the big words, and at first many, and then more
cried out: "A King, a King! The Earl Marshal for King! Earl Rolf for
King!" So that at last the voices rose into a great roar, and sword
clashed on shield, and they who were about the Earl turned to him and
upraised him on a great war-shield, and he stood thereon above the folk
with a naked sword in his hand, and all the folk shouted about him.

Thereafter the chiefs and all the mightiest came and did homage to him
for King of Oakenrealm as he sat on the Hill of the Folk-mote: and that
night there was once more a King of Oakenrealm, and Earl Rolf was no
more, but King Rolf ruled the people.

But now the tale leaves telling of him, and turns again to Christopher
the woodman, who lay sick of his hurt in the House of the Tofts.




CHAPTER X. OF CHRISTOPHER AT THE TOFTS.


Christopher was six weeks ere he could come and go as he was wont; but
it was but a few days ere he was well enough to tell his tale to Jack of
the Tofts and his seven bold sons; and they cherished him and made
much of him, and so especially did David, the youngest son, to his
board-fellow and troth-brother.

On a day when he was well-nigh whole, as he sat under an oak-tree nigh
the house, in the cool of the evening, Jack of the Tofts came to him and
sat beside him, and made him tell his tale to him once more, and when he
was done he said to him: "Foster-son, for so I would have thee deem of
thyself, what is the thing that thou rememberest earliest in thy days?"

Said Christopher: "A cot without the Castle walls at the Uttermost
Marches, and a kind woman therein, big, sandy-haired, and freckled, and
a lad that was white-haired and sturdy, somewhat bigger than I. And
I mind me standing up against the door-post of the cot and seeing
men-at-arms riding by in white armour, and one of them throwing an apple
to me, and I raised my arm to throw it back at him, but my nurse (for
somehow I knew she was not my mother) caught my hand and drew me back
indoors, and I heard the men laughing behind me. And then a little after
my nurse took me into the Castle court, and there was again the man who
had thrown me the apple, sitting on a bench therein, clad in a scarlet
gown furred with brown fur; and she led me up to him, and he stooped
down and chucked me under the chin and put his hand on my head, and
looked at my nurse and said: 'Yea, he is a big lad, and groweth apace,
whereas he is but of six winters.' 'Nay, Lord,' said my nurse, 'he is
but scantly five.' He knit his brows and said: 'Nay, I tell thee he is
six.' She shook her head, but said nought, and the great man scowled on
her and said: 'Mistress, wilt thou set thy word against mine? Know now
that this child is of six years. Now then, how old is he?' She said
faintly: 'Six years.' Said he: 'Look to it that thy head and thy mouth
forget it not, else shall we make thy back remember it.' Then he put his
hand on my head again, and said: 'Well, I say thou art a big lad for six
years;' and therewith he gave me a silver penny; and even as he spake,
came up a grey-clad squire to him and looked on me curiously. Then I
went away with my nurse, and wondered why she was grown so pale, whereas
she was mostly red-cheeked and jolly. But when she had brought me into
the cot again, she kissed me and clipped me, weeping sorely the while;
wherefore I wept, though I knew not why. Sithence, I soon came to know
that the man was the lord and governor of the Castle, as ye may well
wot; but to this hour I know not what he meant by threatening my nurse."

Said Jack: "And how old art thou now, Christopher mine?"

Said the youngling, laughing: "By my lord the Castellan's reckoning I am
twenty and two years; but if thou wilt trow my good and kind nurse, that
yet liveth a kind dame, thou must take twelve months off the tale."

Jack sat silent a little; then he laughed and said: "Well, thou art a
mickle babe, Christopher, and it may be that one day many a man shall
know it. But now tell me again; thou hadst said to me before that thou
hast known neither father nor mother, brother nor sisters: is it so,
verily?"

Said Christopher: "Never a kinsman of blood have I, though many
well-wishers."

Said Jack: "Well, now hast thou father and mother, brethren and sisters,
though they be of the sort of man-slayers and strong-thieves and
outlaws; yet they love thee, lad, and thou mayst one day find out how
far thou mayst trust them."

Christopher nodded and smiled at him merrily; then he fell silent
awhile, and the outlaw sat looking on him; at last he said suddenly:
"Foster-father, tell me what I am, and of what kindred, I pray thee;
for, methinks, thou knowest thereof; and what wonder, wise man as thou
art."

"Forsooth, son Christopher, I have a deeming thereof, or somewhat more,
and when it is waxen greater yet, I will tell it thee one day, but not
now. But hearken! for I have other tidings for thee. Thou art now whole
and strong, and in a few days thou mayst wend the wild-wood as stoutly
as e'er a one of us. Now, therefore, how sayest thou, if I bid thee fare
a two days' journey with David and Gilbert thy brethren, and thy sister
Joanna, till they bring thee to a fair little stead which I call mine
own, to dwell there awhile? For, meseemeth, lad, that the air of the
Tofts here may not be overwholesome unto thee."

Christopher reddened, and he half rose up, and said: "What is this,
foster-father? Is it that there shall be battle at the Tofts, and that
thou wouldst have me away thence? Am I then such a weakling?"

Said Jack, laughing: "Be still now, thou sticked one. The Tofts go down
to battle at some whiles; but seldom comet battle to the Tofts; and no
battle do I look for now. But do my bidding, sweet fosterling, and it
will be better for me and better for thee, and may, perchance, put off
battle for awhile; which to me as now were not unhandy. If thou wilt
but abide at Littledale for somewhile, there shall be going and coming
betwixt us, and thou shalt drink thy Yule at the Tofts, and go back
afterwards, and ever shalt thou have thy sweet fellows with thee; so be
wise, since thou goest not perforce."

"Yea, yea," said Christopher, laughing; "thou puttest force on no man,
is it not so, foster-father? Wherefore I will go, and uncompelled."

Therewith came up to them, from out of the wild-wood, David, and with
him Joanna, who was the wife of Gilbert, and one of those fair maidens
from the Wailful Castle, though not the fairest of them; they had been
a-hunting, for ever those three would willingly go together, Gilbert,
David, and Joanna; and now Gilbert had abided behind, to dight the
quarry for fetching home. Christopher looked on the two joyfully, as a
man getting whole after sickness smiles on goodly things; and Joanna was
fair to see in her hunter's attire, with brogues tied to her naked feet,
and the shapeliness of her legs bare to the knee beneath the trussing up
of her green skirts.

They greeted Christopher kindly, and Joanna sat down by him to talk,
but Jack of the Tofts took his son by the arm, and went toward the house
with him in earnest speech.




