CHAPTER XIII. OF GOLDILIND IN THE GARTH.


Now, as she went in that garden with her face turned toward the postern
which led into the open space of the greenwood, which was but two
bow-shots from the thicket, she heard the clatter of horse-hoofs on the
loose stones of the path, and how they stopped at the said postern; and
presently there was a key in the lock, the door opened, and a man came
in walking stiffly, like a rider who has ridden far and fast. He was
clad in jack and sallet, and had a sword by his side, and on his sleeve
was done in green and gold a mountain aflame; so that Goldilind knew him
at once for a man of Earl Geoffrey's; and, indeed, she had seen the
man before, coming and going on errands that she knew nought of, and
on which nothing followed that was of import to her. Therefore, as
she watched him cross the garden and go straight up to the door of the
Foresters' Tower, and take out another key and enter, she heeded him but
little, nor did his coming increase her trouble a whit.

She walked on toward the postern, and now she saw that the errand-bearer
had left it open behind him, and when she came close up to it, she saw
his horse tied to a ring in the wall, a strong and good bay nag. The
sight of him, and the glimpse of the free and open land, stirred in her
the misery of her days and the yearning for the loveliness of the world
without, converse of friends, hope of the sufficiency of desire, and the
sweetness of love returned. And so strong a wave of anguish swept over
her, that she bowed her down upon the grass and wept bitterly. Yet but
a little while it lasted; she rose up presently and looked warily all
round her, and up to the Castle, and saw none stirring; she drew up the
skirts of her green gown into her girdle, till the hem but just hid her
knees; then she stepped lightly through the half-open door with flushed
cheeks and glittering eyes, while her heart rose within her; then she
lifted her hand, unhitched the reins from the iron ring, and quietly
led the horse close under the garth-wall, and stole gently up the
slope which, as all roads from the Castle, went straightway toward the
thicket, but this was the straightest. So she went, till she came to the
corner of the garth-wall, and a little further; and the Castle on that
side was blind, save for the swale on the battlement, whereon in that
deep peace was little going; and, moreover, it was not even yet six
o'clock.




CHAPTER XIV. GOLDILIND GOES FREE.


There then she stayed the horse, and, flushed and panting, got lightly
into the saddle and bestrode it, and, leaning over on the beast's neck,
smote his flanks with her heels; the horse was fresh, though his
master had been weary, whereas the said messenger had gotten him from
a forester some six miles away in the wood that morning, so the nag
answered to her call for speed, and she went a great gallop into the
wood, and was hidden in a twinkling from any eyes that might be looking
out of the Castle.

Without checking the nag she sped along, half mad with joy at the
freedom of this happy morn. Nigh aimless she was, but had an inkling
that it were well with her if she could hold northward ever; for the old
man aforesaid had told her of Oakenrealm, and how it lay northward of
them; so that way she drifted as the thicket would suffer her. When she
had gone as much of a gallop as she might for some half hour, she drew
rein to breathe her nag, and hearkened; she turned in the saddle, but
heard nought to affright her, so she went on again, but some what more
soberly; and thuswise she rode for some two hours, and the day waxed
hot, and she was come to a clear pool amidst of a little clearing,
covered with fine greensward right down to the water's edge.

There she made stay, and got off her horse, and stood awhile by him
as he cropped the sweet grass; and the birds sang at the edge of the
thicket, and the rabbits crept and gambolled on the other side of the
water; and from the pool's edge the moorhens cried. She stood half
leaning against the side of the horse till she became somewhat drowsy;
yea, and even dreamed a little, and that little but ill, it seemed, as
she gave a troubled cry and shrank together and turned pale. Then she
rubbed her eyes and smiled, and turned to the pool, where now a little
ripple was running over the face of it, and a thought came upon her,
and she set her hand to the clasp of her gown and undid it, and drew the
gown off her shoulders, and so did off all her raiment, and stood
naked a little on the warm sunny grass, and then bestirred her and went
lightly into the pool, and bathed and sported there, and then came on to
the grass again, and went to and fro to dry her in the air and sun. Then
she did on her raiment again, and laid her down under a thorn-bush
by the pool-side, and there, would she, would she not, went to sleep
soundly and dreamed not. And when she awoke she deemed her sleep had
been long, but it was not so, but scarce a score of minutes. Anyhow, she
sprang up now and went to her horse, and drew the girths tight (which
she had loosed erewhile,) and so bestrode the good horse, and shook the
reins, and rode away much comforted and enheartened.




CHAPTER XV. OF GOLDILIND IN THE WILD-WOOD.


Goldilind rode on, hastening yet to put as many miles as she might
betwixt her and Greenharbour. Within a three hours from her bathing she
fell a-hungering sore, and knew not what to do to eat, till she found a
pouch made fast to the saddle-bow, and therein a little white loaf, that
and no more, which she took and ate the half of with great joy, sitting
down by a brook-side, whence she had her drink.

Then again she mounted, and rode on till dusk overtook her just as she
came to a little river running from the north from pool to shallow, and
shallow to pool. And whereas she was now exceeding weary, and the good
horse also much spent, and that the grass was very sweet and soft down
to the water's edge, and that there was a thick thorn-bush to cover her,
she made up her mind that this place should be her bed-chamber. So she
took saddle and bridle off the horse, as he must needs bite the grass,
and then when she had eaten the other half of her bread, she laid her
down on the green grass, with her head on the saddle, and when she had
lain listening to the horse cropping the grass close anigh her for
a minute or two, she fell fast asleep, and lay there long and had no
dreams.




