CHAPTER IV. OF THE MAIDEN GOLDILIND.


AMIDST of all his other business Earl Geoffrey bethought him in a while
of the dead King's daughter, and he gave her in charge to a gentlewoman,
somewhat stricken in years, a widow of high lineage, but not over
wealthy. She dwelt in her own house in a fair valley some twenty miles
from Meadhamstead: thereabode Goldilind till a year and a half was worn,
and had due observance, but little love, and not much kindness from
the said gentlewoman, who hight Dame Elinor Leashowe. Howbeit, time
and again came knights and ladies and lords to see the little lady, and
kissed her hand and did obeisance to her; yet more came to her in the
first three months of her sojourn at Leashowe than the second, and more
in the second than the third.

At last, on a day when the said year and a half was fully worn, thither
came Earl Geoffrey with a company of knights and men-at-arms, and he did
obeisance, as due was, to his master's daughter, and then spake awhile
privily with Dame Elinor; and thereafter they went into the hall, he,
and she, and Goldilind, and there before all men he spake aloud and
said:

"My Lady Goldilind, meseemeth ye dwell here all too straitly; for
neither is this house of Leashowe great enough for thy state, and the
entertainment of the knights and lords who shall have will to seek to
thee hither; nor is the wealth of thy liege dame and governante as great
as it should be, and as thou, meseemeth, wouldst have it. Wherefore I
have been considering thy desires herein, and if thou deem it meet to
give a gift to Dame Elinor, and live queenlier thyself than now thou
dost, then mayst thou give unto her the Castle of Greenharbour, and the
six manors appertaining thereto, and withal the rights of wild-wood and
fen and fell that lie thereabout. Also, if thou wilt, thou mayst honour
the said castle with abiding there awhile at thy pleasure; and I shall
see to it that thou have due meney to go with thee thither. How sayest
thou, my lady?"

Amongst that company there were two or three who looked at each other
and half smiled; and two or three looked on the maiden, who was
goodly as of her years, as if with compassion; but the more part kept
countenance in full courtly wise.

Then spake Goldilind in a quavering voice (for she was afraid and wise),
and she said: "Cousin and Earl, we will that all this be done; and it
likes me well to eke the wealth of this lady and my good friend Dame
Elinor."

Quoth Earl Geoffrey: "Kneel before thy lady, Dame, and put thine hands
between hers and thank her for the gift." So Dame Elinor knelt down, and
did homage and obeisance for her new land; and Goldilind raised her
up and kissed her, and bade her sit down beside her, and spake to her
kindly; and all men praised the maiden for her gentle and courteous
ways; and Dame Elinor smiled upon her and them, what she could.

She was small of body and sleek; but her cheeks somewhat flagging; brown
eyes she had, long, half opened; thin lips, and chin somewhat falling
away from her mouth; hard on fifty winters had she seen; yet there have
been those who were older and goodlier both.




CHAPTER V. GOLDILIND COMES TO GREENHARBOUR.


But a little while tarried the Earl Geoffrey at Leashowe, but departed
next morning and came to Meadhamstead. A month thereafter came folk from
him to Leashowe, to wit, the new meney for the new abode of Goldilind;
amongst whom was a goodly band of men-at-arms, led by an old lord
pinched and peevish of face, who kneeled to Goldilind as the new
burgreve of Greenharbour; and a chaplain, a black canon, young,
broad-cheeked and fresh-looking, but hard-faced and unlovely; three
new damsels withal were come for the young Queen, not young maids, but
stalworth women, well-grown, and two of them hard-featured; the third,
tall, black-haired, and a goodly-fashioned body.

Now when these were come, who were all under the rule of Dame Elinor,
there was no gainsaying the departure to the new home; and in two days'
time they went their ways from Leashowe. But though Goldilind was young,
she was wise, and her heart misgave her, when she was amidst this new
meney, that she was not riding toward glory and honour, and a world of
worship and friends beloved. Howbeit, whatso might lie before her, she
put a good face upon it, and did to those about her queenly and with all
courtesy.

Five days they rode from Leashowe north away, by thorpe and town and
mead and river, till the land became little peopled, and the sixth day
they rode the wild-wood ways, where was no folk, save now and again the
little cot of some forester or collier; but the seventh day, about
noon, they came into a clearing of the wood, a rugged little plain of
lea-land, mingled with marish, with a little deal of acre-land in barley
and rye, round about a score of poor frame-houses set down scattermeal
about the lea. But on a long ridge, at the northern end of the said
plain, was a grey castle, strong, and with big and high towers, yet
not so much greater than was Leashowe, deemed Goldilind, as for a
dwelling-house.

Howbeit, they entered the said castle, and within, as without, it was
somewhat grim, though nought was lacking of plenishing due for folk
knightly. Long it were to tell of its walls and baileys and chambers;
but let this suffice, that on the north side, toward the thick forest,
was a garden of green-sward and flowers and potherbs; and a garth-wall
of grey stone, not very high, was the only defence thereof toward the
wood, but it was overlooked by a tall tower of the great wall, which
hight the Foresters' Tower. In the said outer garth-wall also was a
postern, whereby there was not seldom coming in and going out.

Now when Goldilind had been in her chamber for a few days, she found out
for certain, what she had before misdoubted, that she had been brought
from Leashowe and the peopled parts near to Meadhamstead unto the
uttermost parts of the realm to be kept in prison there.

Howbeit, it was in a way prison courteous; she was still served with
observance, and bowed before, and called my lady and queen, and so
forth: also she might go from chamber to hall and chapel, to and fro,
yet scarce alone; and into the garden she might go, yet not for the more
part unaccompanied; and even at whiles she went out a-gates, but then
ever with folk on the right hand and the left. Forsooth, whiles and
again, within the next two years of her abode at Greenharbour, out of
gates she went and alone; but that was as the prisoner who strives to be
free (although she had, forsooth, no thought or hope of escape), and as
the prisoner brought back was she chastised when she came within gates
again.

Everywhere, to be short, within and about the Castle of Greenharbour,
did Goldilind meet the will and the tyranny of the little sleek widow,
Dame Elinor, to whom both carle and quean in that corner of the world
were but as servants and slaves to do her will; and the said Elinor, who
at first was but spiteful in word and look toward her lady, waxed worse
as time wore and as the blossom of the King's daughter's womanhood began
to unfold, till at last the she-jailer had scarce feasted any day
when she had not in some wise grieved and tormented her prisoner; and
whatever she did, none had might to say her nay.

But Goldilind took all with a high heart, and her courage grew with
her years, nor would she bow the head before any grief, but took to her
whatsoever solace might come to her; as the pleasure of the sun and the
wind, and the beholding of the greenery of the wood, and the fowl and
the beasts playing, which oft she saw afar, and whiles anear, though
whiles, forsooth, she saw nought of it all, whereas she was shut up
betwixt four walls, and that not of her chamber, but of some bare and
foul prison of the Castle, which, with other griefs, must she needs
thole under the name and guise of penance.

However, she waxed so exceeding fair and sweet and lovely, that the
loveliness of her pierced to the hearts of many of her jailers, so that
some of them, and specially of the squires and men-at-arms, would do her
some easement which they might do unrebuked, or not sorely rebuked;
as bringing her flowers in the spring, or whiles a singing-bird or a
squirrel; and an old man there was of the men-at-arms, who would ask
leave, and get it at whiles, to come to her in her chamber, or the
garden? and tell her minstrel tales and the like for her joyance. Sooth
to say, even the pinched heart of the old Burgreve was somewhat touched
by her; and he alone had any might to stand between her and Dame Elinor;
so that but for him it had gone much harder with her than it did.

For the rest, none entered the Castle from the world without, nay not so
much as a travelling monk, or a friar on his wanderings, save and except
some messenger of Earl Geoffrey who had errand with Dame Elinor or the
Burgreve.

So wore the days and the seasons, till it was now more than four years
since she had left Leashowe, and her eighteenth summer was beginning.

But now the tale leaves telling of Goldilind, and goes back to
the matters of Oakenrealm, and therein to what has to do with King
Christopher and Rolf the Marshal.




