CHAPTER XI. HOW CHRISTOPHER CAME TO LITTLEDALE TO ABIDE THERE A WHILE.


In about a week's time from this, those four fellows went their ways
southward from the Tofts, having with them four good nags and four
sumpter beasts laden with such things as they needed, whereof were
weapons enough, though they all, save Christopher, bare bows; and he
and the others were girt with swords, and a leash of good dogs followed
them. Two milch kine also they drave with them.

Merry they were all as they went their ways through the woods, but the
gladness of Christopher was even past words; wherefore, after a little,
he spake scarce at all, but sat in his saddle hearkening the tales and
songs and jests of his fellows, who went close beside him, for more
often they went a-foot than rode. And, forsooth, as the sweet morning
wore, it seemed to him, so great was his joy, as if all the fair show
of the greenery, and the boles of the ancient oaks, and the squirrels
running from bough to bough, and the rabbits scuttling from under the
bracken, and the hind leaping in the wood-lawn, and the sun falling
through the rustling leaves, and the wind on his face, and the scent of
the forest, yea, and his fair companions and their loveliness & valiancy
and kindness, and the words and songs that came from their dear mouths,
all these seemed to him, as it were, one great show done for the behoof
and pleasure of him, the man come from the peril of death and the
sick-bed.

They lay that night in all glee under the green boughs; and arose on the
morrow, and went all day, and again slept in the greenwood, and the
next morning came down into a fair valley, which was indeed Littledale,
through which ran a pleasant little river; and on a grassy knoll, but
a short way from its bank, was a long framed hall, somewhat narrow,
and nought high, whitherward they turned them straightway, and were
presently before the door; then Gilbert drew a key from out of his scrip
and unlocked the door, and they entered, and found within a fair little
hall, with shut-beds out from it on the further side, and kitchen, and
store-bowers at the end; all things duly appointed with plenishing, and
meal and wine; for it was but some three months since one of Jack of the
Tofts' allies, Sir Launcelot a'Green and his wife and two bairns, had
left it till their affair was made straight; whereas he had dwelt there
a whole year, for he had been made an outlaw of Meadham, and was a dear
friend of the said Jack.

"Now," said David smiling, "here is now thy high house and thy castle,
little King Christopher; how doth it like thee?"

"Right well," said Christopher; "and, to say sooth, I would almost that
it were night, or my bones do else, that I might lie naked in a bed."

"Nay, lad," said Gilbert, "make it night now, and we will do all that
needs must be done, while thou liest lazy, as all kings use to do."

"Nay," said Christopher, "I will be more a king than so, for I will do
neither this nor that; I will not work and I will not go to bed, but
will look on, till it is time for me to take to the crooked stick and
the grey-goose wing and seek venison."

"That is better than well," said David; "for I can see by thine eyes,
that are dancing with pleasure, that in three or four days thou wilt be
about the thickets with us."

"Meantime," said Joanna, "thou shalt pay for thy meat and drink by
telling us tales when we come home weary."

"Yea," said Christopher laughing, "that ye may go to sleep before your
time."

So they talked, and were joyous and blithe together, and between them
they made the house trim, and decked it with boughs and blossoms; and
though Christopher told them no tale that night, Joanna and David sang
both; and in a night or two it was Christopher that was the minstrel. So
when the morrow came there began their life of the woodland; but, save
for the changing of the year and the chances of the hunt, the time
passed on from day to day with little change, and it was but seldom that
any man came their way. When Yule was, they locked the house door behind
them and went their ways home to the Tofts; and now of all of these
wayfarers was Christopher by far the hardest and strongest, for his side
had utterly forgotten Simon's knife. At the Tofts they were welcomed
with all triumph, and they were about there in the best of cheer, till
it was wearing toward Candlemas, and then they took occasion of a bright
and sunny day to go back to Littledale once more, and there they abode
till spring was come and was wearing into summer, and messages had come
and gone betwixt them and the Tofts, and it was agreed that with the
first of autumn they should go back to the Tofts and see what should
betide.

But now leave we Christopher and these good fellows of the Tofts and
turn to Goldilind, who is yet dwelling amid no very happy days in the
Castle of Greenharbour, on the northernmost marches of Meadham.




CHAPTER XII. OF GOLDILIND IN THE MAY MORNING AT GREENHARBOUR.


May was on the land now, and was come into its second week, and
Goldilind awoke on a morn in the Castle of Greenharbour; but little did
her eyes behold of the May, even when they were fully open; for she
was lying, not in her own chamber, which was proper, and even somewhat
stately, and from whence she could look on the sky and greenwood, but
in a chamber low down amidst the footings of the wall, little lighted,
unadorned, with nought in it for sport or pleasure; nought, forsooth,
save the pallet bed on which she lay, a joint stool and water ewer.
To be short, though it were called the Least Guard-chamber, it was a
prison, and she was there dreeing her penance, as Dame Elinor would
call the cruelty of her malice, which the chaplain, Dame Elinor's
led captain, had ordained her for some sin which the twain had forged
between them.

She lay there naked in her smock, with no raiment anigh her, and this
was the third morning whereon she had awakened to the dusky bare walls,
and a long while had their emptiness made of the hours: but she lay
quiet and musing, not altogether without cheer now; for indeed she was
not wont to any longer penance than this she had but now tholed, so she
looked for release presently: and, moreover, there had grown in her mind
during those three days a certain purpose; to wit, that she would get
hold of the governor of the castle privily, and two or three others of
the squires who most regarded her, and bewail her case to them, so that
she might perchance get some relief. Forsooth, as she called to mind
this resolve, her heart beat and her cheek flushed, for well she knew
that there was peril in it, and she forecast what might be the worst
that would come thereof, while, on the other hand, the best that might
be seemed to her like a glimpse of Paradise.

As she lay there and turned the matter over in her mind for this many an
hundred time, there came a key into the lock, and the door opened;
and thereby entered a tall woman, dark-haired, white-skinned, somewhat
young, and not ill-favoured: Goldilind still lay there, till the
new-comer said to her in a hard voice, wherein was both threatening and
mockery: "Rise up, our Lady! the Dame Elinor saith that it is enough,
and that thou art to go forth. Nay, hold a while; for I say unto thee
that it is yet early in the day, and that thy chamber is not yet dight
for thee, so thou must needs bestow thyself elsewhere till it be done."

Goldilind rose up, and said smiling: "Yea, Aloyse, but thou hast not
brought my raiment: and thou seest!"

The maid stood looking at her a moment somewhat evilly, and then said:
"Well, since it is but scant six o'clock, I may do that; but I bid thee
ask me not overmuch; for meseemeth Dame Elinor is not overwell pleased
with thee to-day, nor our chaplain either."

Therewith she turned and went out, locking the door behind her, and came
back presently bearing on her arm a green gown and other raiment: she
laid them on the stool before the Lady, and said: "Hasten, my Lady, and
let me go to my place: sooth to say, it may well be double trouble to
thee to don thy clothes, for thou mayst have to doff them again before
long."

Goldilind answered nought, but reddened and paled again as she clad her
under the waiting-maid's eyes. Then they went out together, and up a
short stone stair, till they were level with the greensward without.
Then the maid turned to Goldilind and said: "And now thou art clad and
out, my Lady, I wot not where thou art to go to, since to thy chamber
thou must not go. Nay, hold and hearken! here we be at the door which
opens on to the Foresters' Garth under the Foresters' Tower, thither
shalt thou abide till I come to fetch thee. How now, my Lady! what else
wouldst thou?"

Goldilind looked on her with a smile, yet with eagereyes, and said: "O
good Aloyse, wouldst thou but give me a piece of bread? for I hunger;
thou wottest my queenly board hath not been overloaded these last days."

"Ha!" said Aloyse; "if thou ask me overmuch I fear thou mayst pay for
it, my Lady; but this last asking thou shalt have, and then none other
till all thy penance thou hast dreed. Abide!"

Therewith she went up the stairs, and Goldilind, who now was but weak
with her prison and the sudden light, and the hope and fear of her
purpose of bewailing her story, sat her down on the stair there, almost,
as it were, 'twixt home and hell, till her heart came back to her and
the tears began to flow from her eyes. Forthright came back Aloyse,
bearing a white loaf and a little pitcher of milk on a silver
serving-dish; she laid them down, unlocked the door into the garden, and
thrust Goldilind through by the shoulders; then she turned and took up
her serving-dish with the bread and milk, and handed it to Goldilind
through the door, and said: "Now is my Lady served. It were indeed well
that my Lady should strengthen herself this hour for the hour next to
come."

Therewith she turned about, and shut and locked the door; and the King's
daughter fell to eagerly on her bread, and thought of little till
she had eaten and drunk, save that she felt the sweet scent of the
gilliflowers and eglantine as it were a part of her meal.

Then she went slowly down the garden, treading the greensward beside the
flowers; and she looked on the hold, and the low sun gilded the walls
thereof and glittered in a window here and there, and though there was
on her a foreboding of the hours of that day, she did what she might
to make the best of the fragrant May morning and the song of birds and
rustle of leaves, though, indeed, at whiles the tears would gush out of
her eyes when she thought how young she was and how feeble, and the pity
of herself became sweet unto her.




