VII

THE IDEA OF GREAT MEN

  "_I had a vision under a green hedge
  A hedge of hips and haws--Men yet shall hear
  Archangels rolling over the high mountains
  Old Satan's empty skull._"


As it looks from MOUNT TOM, casting a general glance around, the Earth
has about been put into shape, now, to do things.

The Earth has never been seen before looking so trim and
convenient--so ready for action--as it is now. Steamships and looms
and printing presses and railways have been supplied, wireless
telegraph furnishings have lately been arranged throughout, and we
have put in speaking tubes on nearly all the continents, and it
looks--as seen from Mount Tom, at least, as if the planet were just
being finished up, now, for a Great Author.

It is true that art and literature do not have, at first glance, a
prosperous look in a machine age, but probably the real trouble the
modern world is having with its authors is not because it is a world
full of materialism and machinery, but because its authors are the
wrong size.

The modern world as it booms along recognizes this, in its practical
way, and instead of stopping to speak to its little authors, to its
poets crying beside it, and stooping to them and encouraging them, it
is quietly and sensibly (as it seems to some of us) going on with its
machines and things making preparations for bigger ones.

I have thought the great authors in every age were made by the
greatness of the listening to them. The greatest of all, I notice,
have felt listened to by God. Even the lesser ones (who have sometimes
been called greatest) have felt listened to, most of them, one finds,
by nothing less than nations. The man Jesus gathers kingdoms about Him
in His talk, like an infant class. It was the way He felt. Almost any
one who could have felt himself listened to in this daring way that
Jesus did would have managed to say something. He could hardly have
missed, one would think, letting fall one or two great ideas at
least--ideas that nations would be born for.

It ought not to be altogether without meaning to a modern man that the
great prophets and interpreters have talked as a rule to whole nations
and that they have talked to them generally, too, for the glory of the
whole earth. They could not get their souls geared smaller than a
whole earth. Shakspeare feels the generations stretching away like
galleries around him listening--when he makes love. It was no
particular heroism or patience in the man Columbus that made him sail
across an ocean and discover a continent. He had the girth of an earth
in him and had to do something with it. He could not have helped it.
He discovered America because he felt crowded.

One would think from the way some people have of talking or writing of
immortality that it must be a kind of knack. As a matter of historic
fact it has almost always been some mere great man's helplessness.
When people have to be created and born on purpose, generation after
generation of them, to listen to a man, two or three thousand years of
them sometimes, on this planet, it is because the man himself when he
spoke felt the need of them--and mentioned it. It is the man who is in
the habit of addressing his remarks to a few continents and to several
centuries who gets them.

I would not dare to say just how or when our next great author on this
earth is going to happen to us, but I shall begin to listen hard and
look expectant the first time I hear of a man who gets up on his feet
somewhere in it and who speaks as if the whole earth were listening to
him. If ever there was an earth that is getting ready to listen, and
to listen all over, it is this one. And the first great man who speaks
in it is going to speak as if he knew it. It is a world which has been
allowed about a million years now, to get to the point where it could
be said to begin to be conscious of being a world at all. And I cannot
believe that a world which for the first time in its history has at
last the conveniences for listening all over, if it wants to, is not
going to produce at the same time a man who shall have something to
say to it--a man that shall be worthy of the first single full
audience, sunset to sunset, that has ever been thought of. It would
seem as if, to say the least, such an audience as this, gathering half
in light and half in darkness around a star, would celebrate by having
a man to match. It would not be necessary for him to fall back,
either, one would think, upon anything that has ever been said or
thought of before. Already even in the sight and sounds of this
present world has the verse of scripture about the next come
true--"Eye hath not seen nor ear heard." It is not conceivable that
there shall not be something said unspeakably and incredibly great to
the first full house the planet has afforded.

I have gone to the place of books. I have seen before this all the
peoples flocking past me under the earth with their little
corner-saviors--each with his own little disc of worship all to
himself on the planet--partitioned away from the rest for thousands of
years. But now the whole face of the earth is changed. No longer can
great men and great events be aimed at it and glanced off on it--into
single nations. Great men, when they come now, can generally have a
world at their feet. It is not possible that we shall not have them.
The whole earth is the wager that we are going to have them. The bids
are out--great statesmen, great actors, great financiers, great
authors--even millionaires will gradually grow great. It cannot be
helped. And it will be strange if someone cannot think of something to
say, with the first full house this planet has afforded.

Even as it is now, let any man with a great girth of love in him but
speak once--but speak one single round-the-world delight and nations
sit at his feet. When Rudyard Kipling is dying with pneumonia seven
seas listen to his breathing. The nations are in galleries on the
stage of the earth now, one listening above the other to the same play
following around the sunrise. Every one is affected by it--a kind of
soul-suction--a great pulling from the world. People who do not want
to write at all feel it--a kind of huge, soft, capillary attraction
apparently--to a pen. The whole planet kindles every man's solitude.
Continents are bellows for the glow in him if there is any. The
wireless telegraph beckons ideas around the world. "How does a planet
applaud?" dreams the young author. "With a faint flush of light?" One
would like to be liked by it--speak one's little piece to it. When one
was through, one could hear the soft hurrah through Space.

I wonder sometimes that in This Presence I ever could have thought or
had times of thinking it was a little or a lonely world to write
in--to flicker out thoughts in. When I think of what a world it was
that came to men once and of the world that waits around me--around
all of us now--I do like to mention it.

When many years ago, as a small boy, I was allowed for the first time
to open the little inside door in the paddle-box of a great side-wheel
steamer and watched its splendid thrust on the sea, I did not know why
it was that I could not be called away from it, or why I stood and
watched hour after hour unconscious before it--the thunder and the
foam piling up upon my being. I have guessed now. I watch the
drive-wheel of an engine now as if I were tracking out at last the
last secret of loneliness. I face Time and Space with it. I know I
have but to do a true deed and I am crowded round--to help me do it. I
know I have but to think a true thought, but to be true and deep
enough with a book--feel a worldful for it, put a worldful in it--and
the whole planet will look over my shoulder while I write. Thousands
of printing presses under a thousand skies I hear truth working
softly, saying over and over, and around and around the earth, the
word that was given to me to say.

Can any one believe that this strange new, deep, beautiful,
clairvoyant feeling a man has nowadays every day, every hour, for the
other side of a star, is not going to make arts and men and words and
actions great in the world?

Silently, you and I, Gentle Reader, are watching the first great
gathering-in of a world to listen and to live. The continents are
unanimous. There has never been a quorum before. They are getting
together at last for the first world-sized man, for the first
world-sized word. They are listening him into life. It is really
getting to be a planet now, a whole completed articulated, furnished,
lived-through, loved-through star, from sun's end to sun's end. One
sees the sign on it

            TO LET
  TO ANY MAN WHO REALLY WANTS IT.




