I

THE IDEA OF INCARNATION

  "_I sought myself through earth and fire and seas,

  And found it not--but many things beside;
  Behemoth old, Leviathans that ride.
  And protoplasm, and jellies of the tide.

  Then wandering upward through the solid earth
  With its dim sounds, potential rage and mirth,
  I faced the dim Forefather of my birth,

  And thus addressed Him: 'All of you that lie
  Safe in the dust or ride along the sky--
  Lo, these and these and these! But where am I?_'"


The grasshopper may be called the poet of the insects. He has more hop
for his size than any of the others. I am very fond of watching
him--especially of watching those two enormous beams of his that loom
up on either side of his body. They have always seemed to me one of
the great marvels of mechanics. By knowing how to use them, he jumps
forty times his own length. A man who could contrive to walk as well
as any ordinary grasshopper does (and without half trying) could make
two hundred and fifty feet at a step. There is no denying, of course,
that the man does it, after his fashion, but he has to have a trolley
to do it with. The man seems to prefer, as a rule, to use things
outside to get what he wants inside. He has a way of making everything
outside him serve him as if he had it on his own body--uses a whole
universe every day without the trouble of always having to carry it
around with him. He gets his will out of the ground and even out of
the air. He lays hold of the universe and makes arms and legs out of
it. If he wants at any time, for any reason, more body than he was
made with, he has his soul reach out over or around the planet a
little farther and draw it in for him.

The grasshopper, so far as I know, does not differ from the man in
that he has a soul and body both, but his soul and body seem to be
perfectly matched. He has his soul and body all on. It is probably the
best (and the worst) that can be said of a grasshopper's soul, if he
has one, that it is in his legs--that he really has his wits about
him.

Looked at superficially, or from the point of view of the next hop, it
can hardly be denied that the body the human soul has been fitted out
with is a rather inferior affair. From the point of view of any
respectable or ordinarily well-equipped animal the human body--the one
accorded to the average human being in the great show of
creation--almost looks sometimes as if God really must have made it as
a kind of practical joke, in the presence of the other animals, on the
rest of us. It looks as if He had suddenly decided at the very moment
he was in the middle of making a body for a man, that out of all the
animals man should be immortal--and had let it go at that. With the
exception of the giraffe and perhaps the goose or camel and an extra
fold or so in the hippopotamus, we are easily the strangest, the most
unexplained-looking shape on the face of the earth. It is exceedingly
unlikely that we are beautiful or impressive, at first at least, to
any one but ourselves. Nearly all the things we do with our hands and
feet, any animal on earth could tell us, are things we do not do as
well as men did once, or as well as we ought to, or as well as we did
when we were born. Our very babies are our superiors.

The only defence we are able to make when we are arraigned before the
bar of creation, seems to be, that while some of the powers we have
exhibited have been very obviously lost, we have gained some very fine
new invisible ones. We are not so bad, we argue, after all,--our
nerves, for instance,--the mentalized condition of our organs. And
then, of course, there is the superior quality of our gray matter.
When we find ourselves obliged to appeal in this pathetic way from the
judgment of the brutes, or of those who, like them, insist on looking
at us in the mere ordinary, observing, scientific, realistic fashion,
we hint at our mysteriousness--a kind of mesh of mysticism there is in
us. We tell them it cannot really be seen from the outside, how well
our bodies work. We do not put it in so many words, but what we mean
is, that we need to be cut up to be appreciated, or seen in the large,
or in our more infinite relations. Our matter may not be very well
arranged on us, perhaps, but we flatter ourselves that there is a
superior unseen spiritual quality in it. It takes seers or surgeons to
appreciate us--more of the same sort, etc. In the meantime (no man can
deny the way things look) here we all are, with our queer, pale,
little stretched-out legs and arms and things, floundering about on
this earth, without even our clothes on, covering ourselves as best we
can. And what could really be funnier than a human body living before
The Great Sun under its frame of wood and glass, all winter and all
summer ... strange and bleached-looking, like celery, grown almost
always under cloth, kept in the kind of cellar of cotton or wool it
likes for itself, moving about or being moved about, the way it is, in
thousands of queer, dependent, helpless-looking ways? The earth, we
can well believe, as we go up and down in it is full of soft laughter
at us. One cannot so much as go in swimming without feeling the fishes
peeking around the rocks, getting their fun out of us in some still,
underworld sort of way. We cannot help--a great many of us--feeling,
in a subtle way, strange and embarrassed in the woods. Most of us, it
is true, manage to keep up a look of being fairly at home on the
planet by huddling up and living in cities. By dint of staying
carefully away from the other animals, keeping pretty much by
ourselves, and whistling a good deal and making a great deal of noise,
called civilization, we keep each other in countenance after a
fashion, but we are really the guys of the animal world, and when we
stop to think of it and face the facts and see ourselves as the others
see us, we cannot help acknowledging it. I, for one, rather like to,
and have it done with.

It is getting to be one of my regular pleasures now, as I go up and
down the world,--looking upon the man's body,--the little funny one
that he thinks he has, and then stretching my soul and looking upon
the one that he really has. When one considers what a man actually
does, where he really lives, one sees very plainly that all that he
has been allowed is a mere suggestion or hint of a body, a sort of
central nerve or ganglion for his real self. A seed or spore of
infinity, blown down on a star--held there by the grip, apparently, of
Nothing--a human body is pathetic enough, looked at in itself. There
is something indescribably helpless and wistful and reaching out and
incomplete about it--a body made to pray with, perhaps, one might say,
but not for action. All that it really comes to or is for, apparently,
is a kind of light there is in it.

But the sea is its footpath. The light that is in it is the same light
that reaches down to the central fires of the earth. It flames upon
heaven. Helpless and unfinished-looking as it is, when I look upon it,
I have seen the animals slinking to their holes before it, and
worshipping, or following the light that is in it. The great waters
and the great lights flock to it--this beckoning and a prayer for a
body, which the man has.

I go into the printing room of a great newspaper. In a single flash of
black and white the press flings down the world for him--birth, death,
disgrace, honor and war and farce and love and death, sea and hills,
and the days on the other side of the world. Before the dawn the
papers are carried forth. They hasten on glimmering trains out through
the dark. Soon the newsboys shrill in the streets--China and the
Philippines and Australia, and East and West they cry--the voices of
the nations of the earth, and in my soul I worship the body of the
man. Have I not seen two trains full of the will of the body of the
man meet at full speed in the darkness of the night? I have watched
them on the trembling ground--the flash of light, the crash of power,
ninety miles an hour twenty inches apart, ... thundering aisles of
souls ... on into blackness, and in my soul I worship the body of the
man.

And when I go forth at night, feel the earth walking silently across
heaven beneath my feet, I know that the heart-beat and the will of the
man is in it--in all of it. With thousands of trains under it, over
it, around it, he thrills it through with his will. I no longer look,
since I have known this, upon the sun alone, nor upon the countenance
of the hills, nor feel the earth around me growing softly or resting
in the light, lifting itself to live. All that is, all that reaches
out around me, is the body of the man. One must look up to stars and
beyond horizons to look in his face. Who is there, I have said, that
shall trace upon the earth the footsteps of this body, all wireless
telegraph and steel, or know the sound of its going? Now, when I see
it, it is a terrible body, trembling the earth. Like a low thunder it
reaches around the crust of it, grasping it. And now it is a gentle
body (oh, Signor Marconi!), swift as thought up over the hill of the
sea, soft and stately as the walking of the clouds in the upper air.

Is there any one to-day so small as to know where he is? I am always
coming suddenly upon my body, crying out with joy like a child in the
dark, "And I am here, too!"

Has the twentieth century, I have wondered, a man in it who shall feel
Himself?

And so it has come to pass, this vision I have seen with my own
eyes--Man, my Brother, with his mean, absurd little unfinished body,
going triumphant up and down the earth making limbs of Time and Space.
Who is there who has not seen it, if only through the peephole of a
dream--the whole earth lying still and strange in the hollow of his
hand, the sea waiting upon him? Thousands of times I have seen it, the
whole earth with a look, wrapped white and still in its ball of mist,
the glint of the Atlantic on it, and in the blue place the vision of
the ships.

  Between the seas and skies
  The Shuttle flies
  Seven sunsets long, tropic-deep,
  Thousand-sailed,
  Half in waking, half in sleep.

  Glistening calms and shouting gales
  Water-gold and green,
  And many a heavenly-minded blue
  It thrusts and shudders through,
  Past my starlight,
  Past the glow of suns I know,
  Weaving fates,
  Loves and hates
  In the Sea--
  The stately Shuttle
  To and fro,
  Mast by mast,
  Through the farthest bounds of moons and noons.
  Flights of Days and Nights
  Flies fast.

It may be true, as the poets are telling us, that this fashion the
modern man has, of reaching out with steel and vapor and smoke, and
holding a star silently in his hand, has no poetry in it, and that
machinery is not a fit subject for poets. Perhaps. I am merely judging
for myself. I have seen the few poets of this modern world crowded
into their corner of it (in Westminster Abbey), and I have seen also a
great foundry chiming its epic up to the night, freeing the bodies and
the souls of men around the world, beating out the floors of cities,
making the limbs of the great ships silently striding the sea, and
rolling out the roads of continents.

If this is not poetry, it is because it is too great a vision. And yet
there are times I am inclined to think when it brushes against
us--against all of us. We feel Something there. More than once I have
almost touched the edge of it. Then I have looked to see the man
wondering at it. But he puts up his hands to his eyes, or he is merely
hammering on something. Then I wish that some one would be born for
him, and write a book for him, a book that should come upon the man
and fold him in like a cloud, breathe into him where his wonder is. He
ought to have a book that shall be to him like a whole Age--the one he
lives in, coming to him and leaning over him, whispering to him,
"Rise, my Son and live. Dost thou not behold thy hands and thy feet?"

The trains like spirits flock to him.

There are days when I can read a time-table. When I put it back in my
pocket it sings.

In the time-table I carry in my pocket I unfold the earth.

I have come to despise poets and dreams. Truths have made dreams pale
and small. What is wanted now is some man who is literal enough to
tell the truth.




