II

THE IDEA OF SIZE


Sometimes I have a haunting feeling that the other readers of Mount
Tom (besides me) may not be so tremendously interested after all in
machinery and interpretations of machinery. Perhaps they are merely
being polite about the subject while up here with me on the mountain,
not wanting to interrupt exactly and not talking back. It is really no
place for talking back, perhaps they think, on a mountain. But the
trouble is, I get more interested than other people before I know it.
Then suddenly it occurs to me to wonder if they are listening
particularly and are not looking off at the scenery and the river and
the hills and the meadow while I wander on about railroad trains and
symbolism and the Mount Tom Pulp Mill and socialism and electricity
and Schopenhauer and the other things, tracking out relations. It gets
worse than other people's genealogies.

But all I ask is, that when they come, as they are coming now, just
over the page to some more of these machine ideas, or interpretations
as one might call them, or impressions, or orgies with engines, they
will not drop the matter altogether. They may not feel as I do. It
would be a great disappointment to all of us, perhaps, if I could be
agreed with by everybody; but boring people is a serious
matter--boring them all the time, I mean. It's no more than fair, of
course, that the subscribers to a magazine should run some of the
risk--as well as the editor--but I do like to think that in these next
few pages there are--spots, and that people will keep hopeful.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some people are very fond of looking up at the sky, taking it for a
regular exercise, and thinking how small they are. It relieves them. I
do not wish to deny that there is a certain luxury in it. But I must
say that for all practical purposes of a mind--of having a mind--I
would be willing to throw over whole hours and days of feeling very
small, any time, for a single minute of feeling big. The details are
more interesting. Feeling small, at best, is a kind of glittering
generality.

I do not think I am altogether unaware how I look from a star--at
least I have spent days and nights practising with a star, looking
down from it on the thing I have agreed for the time being (whatever
it is) to call myself, and I have discovered that the real luxury for
me does not consist in feeling very small or even in feeling very
large. The luxury for me is in having a regular reliable feeling,
every day of my life, that I have been made on purpose--and very
conveniently made, to be infinitely small or infinitely large as I
like. I arrange it any time. I find myself saying one minute, "Are not
the whole human race my house-servants? Is not London my valet--always
at my door to do my bidding? Clouds do my errands for me. It takes a
world to make room for my body. My soul is furnished with other worlds
I cannot see."

The next minute I find myself saying nothing. The whole star I am on
is a bit of pale yellow down floating softly through space. What I
really seem to enjoy is a kind of insured feeling. Whether I am small
or large all space cannot help waiting upon me--now that I have taken
iron and vapor and light and made hands for my hands, millions of
them, and reached out with them. A little one shall become a thousand.
I have abolished all size--even my own size does not exist. If all the
work that is being done by the hands of my hands had literally to be
done by men, there would not be standing room for them on the
globe--comfortable standing room. But even though, as it happens, much
of the globe is not very good to stand on, and vast tracts of it,
every year, are going to waste, it matters nothing to us. Every thing
we touch is near or far, or large or small, as we like. As long as a
young woman can sit down by a loom which is as good as six hundred
more just like her, and all in a few square feet--as long as we can do
up the whole of one of Napoleon's armies in a ball of dynamite, or
stable twelve thousand horses in the boiler of an ocean steamer, it
does not make very much difference what kind of a planet we are on, or
how large or small it is. If suddenly it sometimes seems as if it were
all used up and things look cramped again (which they do once in so
often) we have but to think of something, invent something, and let it
out a little. We move over into a new world in a minute. Columbus was
mere bagatelle. We get continents every few days. Thousands of men are
thinking of them--adding them on. Mere size is getting to be
old-fashioned--as a way of arranging things. It has never been a very
big earth--at best--the way God made it first. He made a single spider
that could weave a rope out of her own body around it. It can be
ticked all through, and all around, with the thoughts of a man. The
universe has been put into a little telescope and the oceans into a
little compass. Alice in Wonderland's romantic and clever way with a
pill is become the barest matter of fact. Looking at the world a
single moment with a soul instead of a theodolite, no one who has ever
been on it--before--would know it. It's as if the world were a little
wizened balloon that had been given us once and had been used so for
thousands of years, and we had just lately discovered how to blow it.




III

THE IDEA OF LIBERTY


Some one told me one morning not so very long ago that the sun was
getting a mile smaller across every ten years. It gave me a shut-in
and helpless feeling. I found myself several times during that day
looking at it anxiously. I almost held my hands up to it to warm them.
I knew in a vague fashion that it would last long enough for me. And a
mile in ten years was not much. It did not take much figuring to see
that I had not the slightest reason to be anxious. But my feelings
were hurt. I felt as if something had hit the universe. I could not
get myself--and I have not been able to get myself since--to look at
it impersonally. I suppose every man lives in some theory of the
universe, unconsciously, every day, as much as he lives in the
sunlight. And he does not want it disturbed. I have always felt safe
before. And, what was a necessary part of safety with me, I have felt
that history was safe--that there was going to be enough of it.

I have been in the world a good pleasant while on the whole, tried it
and got used to it--used to the weather on it and used to having my
friends hate me and my enemies turn on me and love me, and the other
uncertainties; but all the time, when I looked up at the sun and saw
it, or thought of it down under the world, I counted on it. I
discovered that my soul had been using it daily as a kind of fulcrum
for all things. I helped God lift with it. It was obvious that it was
going to be harder for both of us--a mere matter of time. I could not
get myself used to the thought. Every fresh look I took at the sun
peeling off mile after mile up there, as fast as I lived, flustered
me--made my sky less useful to me, less convenient to rest in. I
found myself trying slowly to see how this universe would look--what
it would be like, if I were the last man on it. Somebody would have to
be. It would be necessary to justify things for him. He would probably
be too tired and cold to do it. So I tried.

I had a good deal the same experience with Mount Pelee last summer. I
resented being cooped up helplessly, on a planet that leaked.

The fact that it leaked several thousand miles away, and had made a
comparatively safe hole for it, out in the middle of the sea, only
afforded momentary relief. The hurt I felt was deeper than that. It
could not be remedied by a mere applying long distances to it. It was
underneath down in my soul. Time and Space could not get at it. The
feeling that I had been trapped in a planet somehow, and that I could
not get off possibly, the feeling that I had been deliberately taken
body and soul, without my knowing it and without my ever having been
asked, and set down on a cooled-off cinder to live, whether I wanted
to or not--the sudden new appalling sense I had, that the ground
underneath my feet was not really good and solid, that I was living
every day of my life just over a roar of great fire, that I was being
asked (and everybody else) to make history and build stone houses, and
found institutions and things on the bare outside--the destroyed and
ruined part of a ball that had been tossed out in space to burn itself
up--the sense, on top of all this, that this dried crust I live on, or
bit of caked ashes, was liable to break through suddenly at any time
and pour down the center of the earth on one's head, did not add to
the dignity, it seemed to me, or the self-respect of human life. "You
might as well front the facts, my dear youth, look Mount Pelee in the
face," I tried to say coldly and calmly to myself. "Here you are, set
down helplessly among stars, on a great round blue and green something
all fire and wind inside. And it is all liable--this superficial crust
or geological ice you are on--perfectly liable, at any time or any
place after this, to let through suddenly and dump all the nations and
all ancient and modern history, and you and Your Book, into this awful
ceaseless abyss--of boiled mountains and stewed up continents that is
seething beneath your feet."

It is hard enough, it seems to me, to be an optimist on the edge of
this earth as it is, to keep on believing in people and things on it,
without having to believe besides that the earth is a huge round
swindle just of itself, going round and round through all heaven, with
all of us on it, laughing at us.

I felt chilled through for a long time after Mount Pelee broke out. I
went wistfully about sitting in sunny and windless places trying to
get warmed all summer. And it was not all in my soul. It was not all
subjective. I noticed that the thermometer was caught the same way. It
was a plain case enough--it seemed to me--the heater I lived on had
let through, spilled out and wasted a lot of its fire, and the ground
simply could not get warmed up after it. I sat in the sun and pictured
the earth freezing itself up slowly and deliberately, on the outside.
I had it all arranged in my mind. The end of the world was not coming
as the ancients saw it, by a kind of overflow of fire, but by the
fires going out. A mile off the sun every ten years (this for the loss
of outside heat) and volcanoes and things (for the inside heat), and
gradually between being frozen under us, and frozen over us, both,
both sides at once, the human race would face the situation. We would
have to learn to live together. Any one could see that. The human race
was going to be one long row, sometime--great nations of us and little
ones all at last huddled up along the equator to keep warm. Just
outside of this a little way, it would be perfectly empty star, all in
a swirl of snowdrifts.

I do not claim that it was very scientific to feel in this way, but I
have always had, ever since I can remember, a moderate or decent human
interest in the universe as a universe, and I had always felt as if
the earth had made, for all practical purposes, a sort of contract
with the human race, and when it acted like this--cooled itself off
all of a sudden, in the middle of a hot summer, and all to show off a
comparatively unknown and unimportant mountain hid on an island far
out at sea--I could not conceal from myself (in my present and usual
capacity as a kind of agent or sponsor for humanity) that there was
something distinctly jarring about it and disrespectful. I felt as if
we had been trifled with. It was not a feeling I had very long--this
injured feeling toward the universe in behalf of the man in it, but I
could not help it at first. There grew an anger within me and then out
of the anger a great delight. It seemed to me I saw my soul standing
afar off down there, on its cold and emptied-looking earth.

Then slowly I saw it was the same soul I had always had. I was
standing as I had always stood on an earth before, be it a bare or
flowering one. I saw myself standing before all that was. Then I
defied the heaven over my head and the ground under my feet not to
keep me strong and glad before God. I saw that it mattered not to me,
of an earth, how bare it was, or could be, or could be made to be; if
the soul of a man could be kept burning on it, victory and gladness
would be alive upon it. I fell to thinking of the man. I took an
inventory down in my being of all that the man was, of the might of
the spirit that was in him. Would it be anything new to the man to be
maltreated, a little, neglected--almost outwitted by a universe? Had
he not already, thousands of times in the history of this planet,
flung his spirit upon the cold, and upon empty space--and made homes
out of it? He had snuggled in icebergs. He had entered the place of
the mighty heat and made the coolness of shadow out of it.

It was nothing new. The planet had always been a little queer. It was
when it commenced. The only difference would seem to be that, instead
of having the earth at first the way it is going to be by and by
apparently--an earth with a little rim of humanity around it, great
nations toeing the equator to live--everything was turned around. All
the young nations might have been seen any day crowded around the ends
or tips of the earth to keep from falling into the fire that was still
at work on the middle of it, finishing it off and getting it ready to
have things happen on it. Boys might have been seen almost any
afternoon, in those early days, going out to the north pole and
playing duck on the rock to keep from being too warm.

It is a mere matter of opinion or of taste--the way a planet acts at
any given time. Now it is one way and now another, and we do as we
like.

I do not pretend to say in so many words if the sun grew feeble, just
what the man would do, down in his snowdrifts. But I know he would
make some kind of summer out of them. One cannot help feeling that if
the sun went out, it would be because he wanted it to--had arranged
something, if nothing but a good bit of philosophy. It is not likely
that the man has defied the heavens and the earth all these centuries
for nothing. The things they have done against him have been the
making of him. When he found this same sun we are talking about, in
the earliest days of all, was a sun that kept running away from him
and left him in a great darkness half of every day he lived, he knew
what to do. Every time that Heaven has done anything to him, he has
had his answer ready. The man who finds himself on a planet that is
only lighted part of the time, is merely reminded that he must think
of something. He digs light out of the ground and glows up the world
with her own sap. When he finds himself living on an earth that can
only be said to be properly heated a small fraction of the year, he
makes the earth itself to burn itself and keep him warm. Things like
this are small to us. We put coal through a desire and take the breath
out of its dark body, and put it in pipes, and cook our food with
poisons. We take water and burn it into air and we telegraph boilers,
and flash mills around the earth on poles. We move vast machines with
a little throb, like light. We put a street on a wire. Great crowds in
the great cities--whole blocks of them--are handed along day and night
like dots and dashes in telegrams. A man cannot be stopped by a
breath. We save a man up in his own whisper hundreds of years when he
is dead. A human voice that reaches only a few yards makes thousands
of miles of copper talk. Then we make the thousand miles talk without
the copper wire. We stand on the shore and beat the air with a thought
thousands of miles away--make it whisper for us to ships. One need not
fear for a man like this--a man who has made all the earth a deed, an
action of his own soul, who has thrown his soul at last upon the waste
of heaven and made words out of it. One cannot but believe that a man
like this is a free man. Let what will happen to the sun that warms
him or the star that seems just now his foothold in space. All shall
be as his soul says when his soul determines what it shall say. Fire
and wind and cold--when his soul speaks--and Invisibility itself and
Nothing are his servants.

The vision of a little helpless human race huddled in the tropics
saying its last prayers, holding up its face to a far-off
neglected-looking universe, warming its hands at the stars--the vision
of all the great peoples of the earth squeezed up into Esquimaux, in
furs up to their eyes, stamping their feet on the equator to keep
warm, is merely the sort of vision that one set of scientists gloats
on giving us. One needs but to look for what the other set is saying.
It has not time to be saying much, but what it practically says is:
"Let the sun wizen up if it wants to. There will be something.
Somebody will think of something. Possibly we are outgrowing suns. At
all events to a real man any little accident or bruise to the planet
he's on is a mere suggestion of how strong he is. Some new beautiful
impossibility--if the truth were known--is just what we are looking
for."

A human race which makes its car wheels and napkins out of paper, its
street pavements out of glass, its railway ties out of old shoes,
which draws food out of air, which winds up operas on spools, which
has its way with oceans, and plays chess with the empty ether that is
over the sea--which makes clouds speak with tongues, which lights
railway trains with pin-wheels and which makes its cars go by stopping
them, and heats its furnaces with smoke--it would be very strange if a
race like this could not find some way at least of managing its own
planet, and (heaped with snowdrifts though it be) some way of warming
it, or of melting off a place to live on. A corporation was formed
down in New Jersey the other day to light a city by the tossing of the
waves. We are always getting some new grasp--giving some new sudden
almost humorous stretch to matter. We keep nature fairly smiling at
herself. One can hardly tell, when one hears of half the new things
nowadays--actual facts--whether to laugh or cry, or form a stock
company or break out into singing. No one would dare to say that a
thousand years from now we will not have found some other use for
moonlight than for love affairs and to haul tides with. We will be
manufacturing noon yet, out of compressed starlight, and heating
houses with it. It will be peddled about the streets like milk, from
door to door in cases and bottles.

First and last, whatever else may be said of us, we do as we like with
a planet. Nothing it can do to us, nothing that can happen to it,
outwits us--at least more than a few hundred years at a time. The idea
that we cannot even keep warm on it is preposterous. Nothing would be
more likely--almost any time now--than for some one to decide that we
ought to have our continents warmed more, winters. It would not be
much, as things are going, to remodel the floors of a few of our
continents--put in registers and things, have the heat piped up from
the center of the earth. The best way to get a faint idea of what
science is going to be like the next few thousand years, is to pick
out something that could not possibly be so and believe it. We
manufacture ice in July by boiling it, and if we cannot warm a planet
as we want to--at least a few furnished continents--with hot things,
we will do it with cold ones, or by rubbing icebergs together. If one
wants a good simple working outfit for a prophet in science and
mechanics, all one has to do is to think of things that are unexpected
enough, and they will come to pass. A scientist out in the Northwest
has just finished his plans for getting hold of the other end of the
force of gravity. The general idea is to build a sort of tower or
flag-pole on the planet--something that reaches far enough out over
the edge to get an underhold as it were--grip hold of the force of
gravity where it works backwards. Of course, as anyone can see at a
glance, when it is once built out with steel, the first forty miles or
so (workmen using compressed air and tubular trolleys, etc.),
everything on the tower would pull the other way and the pressure
would gradually be relieved until the thing balanced itself. When
completed it could be used to draw down electricity from waste space
(which has as much as everybody on this planet could ever want, and
more). What a little earth like ours would develop into, with a
connection like this--a sort of umbilical cord to the infinite--no one
would care to try to say. It would at least be a kind of planet that
would always be sure of anything it wanted. When we had used up all
the raw material or live force in our own world we could draw on the
others. At the very least we would have a sort of signal station to
the planets in general that would be useful. They would know what we
want, and if we could not get it from them they would tell us where we
could.

All this may be a little mixing perhaps. It is always difficult to
tell the difference between the sublime and the ridiculous in talking
of a being like man. It is what makes him sublime--that there is no
telling about him--that he is a great, lusty, rollicking, easy-going
son of God and throws off a world every now and then, or puts one on,
with quips and jests. When the laugh dies away his jokes are
prophecies. It behooves us therefore to walk softly, you and I, Gentle
Reader, while we are here with him--while this dear gentle ground is
still beneath our feet. There is no telling his reach. Let us notice
stars more.

In the meantime it does seem to me that a comparatively simple affair
like this one single planet, need not worry us much.

I still keep seeing it--I cannot help it--I always keep seeing
it--eternities at a time, warm, convenient, and comfortable, the same
old green and white, with all its improvements on it, whatever the sun
does. And above all I keep seeing the Man on it, full of defiance and
of love and worship, being born and buried--the little-great man,
running about and strutting, flying through space on it, all his
interests and his loves wound about it like clouds, but beckoning to
worlds as he flies. And whatever the Man does with the other worlds or
with this one, I always keep seeing this one, the same old stand or
deck in eternity, for praying and singing and living, it always was.
Long after I am dead, oh, dear little planet, least and furthest
breath that is blown on thy face, my soul flocks to you, rises around
you, and looks back upon you and watches you down there in your round
white cloud, rowing faithfully through space!




