The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Voice of the Machines
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Voice of the Machines

Author: Gerald Stanley Lee


        
Release date: January 15, 2007 [eBook #20361]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20361

Credits: Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Lee Spector and
        the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Lee Spector and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net





The Voice of the Machines

An Introduction to the Twentieth Century


BY


Gerald Stanley Lee


The Mount Tom Press
Northampton, Massachusetts




COPYRIGHT, 1906
BY
THE MOUNT TOM PRESS




TO JENNETTE LEE

  ... "Now and then my fancy caught
  A flying glimpse of a good life beyond--
  Something of ships and sunlight, streets and singing,
  Troy falling, and the ages coming back,
  And ages coming forward."...




Contents


PART I

THE MEN BEHIND THE MACHINES

     I.--Machines as Seen from a Meadow
    II.--As Seen through a Hatchway
   III.--The Souls of Machines
    IV.--Poets
     V.--Gentlemen
    VI.--Prophets


PART II

THE LANGUAGE OF THE MACHINES

     I.--As Good as Ours
    II.--On Being Busy and Still
   III.--On Not Showing Off
    IV.--On Making People Proud of the World
     V.--A Modest Universe


PART III

THE MACHINES AS POETS

     I.--Plato and the General Electric Works
    II.--Hewing away on the Heavens and the Earth
   III.--The Grudge against the Infinite
    IV.--Symbolism in Modern Art
     V.--The Machines as Artists
    VI.--The Machines as Philosophers


PART IV

THE IDEAS BEHIND THE MACHINES

     I.--The Idea of Incarnation
    II.--The Idea of Size
   III.--The Idea of Liberty
    IV.--The Idea of Immortality
     V.--The Idea of God
    VI.--The Idea of the Unseen and the Intangible
   VII.--The Idea of Great Men
  VIII.--The Idea of Love and Comradeship




PART ONE

THE MEN BEHIND THE MACHINES




I

MACHINES. AS SEEN FROM A MEADOW


It would be difficult to find anything in the encyclopedia that would
justify the claim that we are about to make, or anything in the
dictionary. Even a poem--which is supposed to prove anything with a
little of nothing--could hardly be found to prove it; but in this
beginning hour of the twentieth century there are not a few of us--for
the time at least allowed to exist upon the earth--who are obliged to
say (with Luther), "Though every tile on the roundhouse be a devil, we
cannot say otherwise--the locomotive is beautiful."

As seen when one is looking at it as it is, and is not merely using
it.

As seen from a meadow.

We had never thought to fall so low as this, or that the time would
come when we would feel moved--all but compelled, in fact--to betray
to a cold and discriminating world our poor, pitiful, one-adjective
state.

We do not know why a locomotive is beautiful. We are perfectly aware
that it ought not to be. We have all but been ashamed of it for being
beautiful--and of ourselves. We have attempted all possible words upon
it--the most complimentary and worthy ones we know--words with the
finer resonance in them, and the air of discrimination the soul loves.
We cannot but say that several of these words from time to time have
seemed almost satisfactory to our ears. They seem satisfactory also
for general use in talking with people, and for introducing
locomotives in conversation; but the next time we see a locomotive
coming down the track, there is no help for us. We quail before the
headlight of it. The thunder of its voice is as the voice of the
hurrying people. Our little row of adjectives is vanished. All
adjectives are vanished. They are as one.

Unless the word "beautiful" is big enough to make room for a glorious,
imperious, world-possessing, world-commanding beauty like this, we are
no longer its disciples. It is become a play word. It lags behind
truth. Let it be shut in with its rim of hills--the word
beautiful--its show of sunsets and its bouquets and its doilies and
its songs of birds. We are seekers for a new word. It is the first
hour of the twentieth century. If the hill be beautiful, so is the
locomotive that conquers a hill. So is the telephone, piercing a
thousand sunsets north to south, with the sound of a voice. The night
is not more beautiful, hanging its shadow over the city, than the
electric spark pushing the night one side, that the city may behold
itself; and the hour is at hand--is even now upon us--when not the sun
itself shall be more beautiful to men than the telegraph stopping the
sun in the midst of its high heaven, and holding it there, while the
will of a child to another child ticks round the earth. "Time shall be
folded up as a scroll," saith the voice of Man, my Brother. "The
spaces between the hills, to ME," saith the Voice, "shall be as though
they were not."

The voice of man, my brother, is a new voice.

It is the voice of the machines.




