V

THE MACHINES AS ARTISTS


It is not necessary, in order to connect a railway train with the
infinite, to see it steaming along a low sky and plunging into a huge
white hill of cloud, as I did the other day. It is quite as infinite
flying through granite in Hoosac Mountain. Most people who do not
think there is poetry in a railway train are not satisfied with flying
through granite as a trait of the infinite in a locomotive, and yet
these same people, if a locomotive could be lifted bodily to where
infinity is or is supposed to be (up in the sky somewhere)--if they
could watch one night after night plowing through planets--would want
a poem written about it at once.

A man who has a theory he does not see poetry in a locomotive, does
not see it because theoretically he does not connect it with infinite
things: the things that poetry is usually about. The idea that the
infinite is not cooped up in heaven, that it can be geared and run on
a track (and be all the more infinite for not running off the track),
does not occur to him. The first thing he does when he is told to look
for the infinite in the world is to stop and think a moment, where he
is, and then look for it somewhere else.

It would seem to be the first idea of the infinite, in being infinite,
not to be anywhere else. It could not be anywhere else if it tried;
and if a locomotive is a real thing, a thing wrought in and out of the
fiber of the earth and of the lives of men, the infinity and poetry in
it are a matter of course. I like to think that it is merely a matter
of seeing a locomotive as it is, of seeing it in enough of its actual
relations as it is, to feel that it is beautiful; that the beauty, the
order, the energy, and the restfulness of the whole universe are
pulsing there through its wheels.

The times when we do not feel poetry in a locomotive are the times
when we are not matter-of-fact enough. We do not see it in enough of
its actual relations. Being matter-of-fact enough is all that makes
anything poetic. Everything in the universe, seen as it is, is seen as
the symbol, the infinitely connected, infinitely crowded symbol of
everything else in the universe--the summing up of everything
else--another whisper of God's.

Have I not seen the great Sun Itself, from out of its huge heaven,
packed in a seed and blown about on a wind? I have seen the leaves of
the trees drink all night from the stars, and when I have listened
with my soul--thousands of years--I have heard The Night and The Day
creeping softly through mountains. People called it geology.

It seems that if a man cannot be infinite by going to the infinite, he
is going to be infinite where he is. He is carving it on the hills,
tunneling it through the rocks of the earth, piling it up on the crust
of it, with winds and waters and flame and steel he is writing it on
all things--that he is infinite, that he will be infinite. The whole
planet is his signature.

If what the modern man is trying to say in his modern age is his own
infinity, it naturally follows that the only way a modern artist can
be a great artist in a modern age is to say in that age that man is
infinite, better than any one else is saying it.

The best way to express this infinity of man is to seek out the things
in the life of the man which are the symbols of his infinity--which
suggest his infinity the most--and then play on those symbols and let
those symbols play on him. In other words the poet's program is
something like this. The modern age means the infinity of man. Modern
art means symbolism of man's infinity. The best symbol of the man's
infinity the poet can find, in this world the man has made, is The
Machine.

At least it seems so to me. I was looking out of my study window down
the long track in the meadow the other morning and saw a smoke-cloud
floating its train out of sight. A high wind was driving, and in long
wavering folds the cloud lay down around the train. It was like a
great Bird, close to the snow, forty miles an hour. For a moment it
almost seemed that, instead of a train making a cloud, it was a cloud
propelling a train--wing of a thousand tons. I have often before seen
a broken fog towing a mountain, but never have I seen before, a train
of cars with its engine, pulled by the steam escaping from its
whistle. Of course the train out in my meadow, with its pillar of fire
by night and of cloud by day hovering over it, is nothing new; neither
is the tower of steam when it stands still of a winter morning
building pyramids, nor the long, low cloud creeping back on the
car-tops and scudding away in the light; but this mad and splendid
Thing of Whiteness and Wind, riding out there in the morning, this
ghost of a train--soul or look in the eyes of it, haunting it,
gathering it all up, steel and thunder, into itself, catching it away
into heaven--was one of the most magical and stirring sights I have
seen for a long time. It came to me like a kind of Zeit-geist or
passing of the spirit of the age.

When I looked again it was old 992 from the roundhouse escorting
Number Eight to Springfield.




VI

THE MACHINES AS PHILOSOPHERS


If we could go into History as we go into a theatre, take our seats
quietly, ring up the vast curtain on any generation we liked, and then
could watch it--all those far off queer happy people living before our
eyes, two or three hours--living with their new inventions and their
last wonders all about them, they would not seem to us, probably to
know why they were happy. They would merely be living along with their
new things from day to day, in a kind of secret clumsy gladness.

Perhaps it is the same with us. The theories for poems have to be
arranged after we have had them. The fundamental appeal of machinery
seems to be to every man's personal everyday instinct and experience.
We have, most of the time, neither words nor theories for it.

I do not think that our case must stand or fall with our theory. But
there is something comfortable about a theory. A theory gives one
permission to let ones self go--makes it seem more respectable to
enjoy things. So I suggest something--the one I have used when I felt
I had to have one. I have partitioned it off by itself and it can be
skipped.

1. The substance of a beautiful thing is its Idea.

2. A beautiful thing is beautiful in proportion as its form reveals
the nature of its substance, that is, conveys its idea.

3. Machinery is beautiful by reason of immeasurable ideas consummately
expressed.

4. Machinery has poetry in it because the three immeasurable ideas
expressed by machinery are the three immeasurable ideas of poetry and
of the imagination and the soul--infinity and the two forms of
infinity, the liberty and the unity of man.

5. These immeasurable ideas are consummately expressed by machinery
because machinery expresses them in the only way that immeasurable
ideas can ever be expressed: (1) by literally doing the immeasurable
things, (2) by suggesting that it is doing them. To the man who is in
the mood of looking at it with his whole being, the machine is
beautiful because it is the mightiest and silentest symbol the world
contains of the infinity of his own life, and of the liberty and unity
of all men's lives, which slowly, out of the passion of history is now
being wrought out before our eyes upon the face of the earth.

6. It is only from the point of view of a nightingale or a sonnet that
the aesthetic form of a machine, if it is a good machine, can be
criticised as unbeautiful. The less forms dealing with immeasurable
ideas are finished forms the more symbolic and speechless they are;
the more they invoke the imagination and make it build out on God, and
upon the Future, and upon Silence, the more artistic and beautiful and
satisfying they are.

7. The first great artist a modern or machine age can have, will be
the man who brings out for it the ideas behind its machines. These
ideas--the ones the machines are daily playing over and about the
lives of all of us--might be stated roughly as follows:

  The idea of the incarnation--the god in the body of the man.
  The idea of liberty--the soul's rescue from others.
  The idea of unity--the soul's rescue from its mere self.
  The idea of the Spirit--the Unseen and Intangible.
  The idea of immortality.
  The cosmic idea of God.
  The practical idea of invoking great men.
  The religious idea of love and comradeship.

And nearly every other idea that makes of itself a song or a prayer in
the human spirit.




PART FOUR

IDEAS BEHIND THE MACHINES




