II

ON BEING BUSY AND STILL


One of the hardest things about being an inventor is that the machines
(excepting the poorer ones) never show off. The first time that the
phonograph (whose talking had been rumored of many months) was allowed
to talk in public, it talked to an audience in Metuchen, New Jersey,
and, much to Mr. Edison's dismay, everybody laughed. Instead of being
impressed with the real idea of the phonograph--being impressed
because it could talk at all--people were impressed because it talked
through its nose.

The more modern a machine is, when a man stands before it and seeks to
know it,--the more it expects of the man, the more it appeals to his
imagination and his soul,--the less it is willing to appeal to the
outside of him. If he will not look with his whole being at a
twin-screw steamer, he will not see it. Its poetry is under water.
This is one of the chief characteristics of the modern world, that its
poetry is under water. The old sidewheel steamer floundering around in
the big seas, pounding the air and water both with her huge, showy
paddles, is not so poetic-looking as the sailboat, and the poetry in
the sailboat is not so obvious, so plainly on top, as in a gondola.

People who do not admit poetry in machinery in general admit that
there is poetry in a Dutch windmill, because the poetry is in sight. A
Dutch windmill flourishes. The American windmill, being improved so
much that it does not flourish, is supposed not to have poetry in it
at all. The same general principle holds good with every machine that
has been invented. The more the poet--that is, the inventor--works on
it, the less the poetry in it shows. Progress in a modern machine, if
one watches it in its various stages, always consists in making a
machine stop posing and get down to work. The earlier locomotive,
puffing helplessly along with a few cars on its crooked rails, was
much more fire-breathing, dragon-like and picturesque than the present
one, and the locomotive that came next, while very different, was more
impressive than the present one. Every one remembers it,--the
important-looking, bell-headed, woodpile-eating locomotive of thirty
years ago, with its noisy steam-blowing habits and its ceaseless
water-drinking habits, with its grim, spreading cowcatcher and its
huge plug-hat--who does not remember it--fussing up and down stations,
ringing its bell forever and whistling at everything in sight? It was
impossible to travel on a train at all thirty years ago without always
thinking of the locomotive. It shoved itself at people. It was always
doing things--now at one end of the train and now at the other,
ringing its bell down the track, blowing in at the windows, it fumed
and spread enough in hauling three cars from Boston to Concord to get
to Chicago and back. It was the poetic, old-fashioned way that engines
were made. One takes a train from New York to San Francisco now, and
scarcely knows there is an engine on it. All he knows is that he is
going, and sometimes the going is so good he hardly knows that.

The modern engines, the short-necked, pin-headed, large-limbed, silent
ones, plunging with smooth and splendid leaps down their aisles of
space--engines without any faces, blind, grim, conquering, lifting the
world--are more poetic to some of us than the old engines were, for
the very reason that they are not so poetic-looking. They are less
showy, more furtive, suggestive, modern and perfect.

In proportion as a machine is modern it hides its face. It refuses to
look as poetic as it is; and if it makes a sound, it is almost always
a sound that is too small for it, or one that belongs to some one
else. The trolley-wire, lifting a whole city home to supper, is a
giant with a falsetto voice. The large-sounding, the poetic-sounding,
is not characteristic of the modern spirit. In so far as it exists at
all in the modern age, either in its machinery or its poetry, it
exists because it is accidental or left over. There was a deep bass
steamer on the Mississippi once, with a very small head of steam,
which any one would have admitted had poetry in it--old-fashioned
poetry. Every time it whistled it stopped.




III

ON NOT SHOWING OFF


It is not true to say that the modern man does not care for poetry. He
does not care for poetry that bears on--or for eloquent poetry. He
cares for poetry in a new sense. In the old sense he does not care for
eloquence in anything. The lawyer on the floor of Congress who seeks
to win votes by a show of eloquence is turned down. Votes are facts,
and if the votes are to be won, facts must be arranged to do it. The
doctor who stands best with the typical modern patient is not the most
agreeable, sociable, jogging-about man a town contains, like the
doctor of the days gone by. He talks less. He even prescribes less,
and the reason that it is hard to be a modern minister (already cut
down from two hours and a half to twenty or thirty minutes) is that
one has to practise more than one can preach.

To be modern is to be suggestive and symbolic, to stand for more than
one says or looks--the little girl with her loom clothing twelve
hundred people. People like it. They are used to it. All life around
them is filled with it. The old-fashioned prayer-meeting is dying out
in the modern church because it is a mere specialty in modern life.
The prayer-meeting recognizes but one way of praying, and people who
have a gift for praying that way go, but the majority of
people--people who have discovered that there are a thousand other
ways of praying, and who like them better--stay away.

When the telegraph machine was first thought of, the words all showed
on the outside. When it was improved it became inner and subtle. The
messages were read by sound. Everything we have which improves at all
improves in the same way. The exterior conception of righteousness of
a hundred years ago--namely, that a man must do right because it is
his duty--is displaced by the modern one, the morally thorough
one--namely, that a man must do right because he likes it--do it from
the inside. The more improved righteousness is, the less it shows on
the outside. The more modern righteousness is, the more it looks like
selfishness, the better the modern world likes it, and the more it
counts.

On the whole, it is against a thing rather than in its favor, in the
twentieth century, that it looks large. Time was when if it had not
been known as a matter of fact that Galileo discovered heaven with a
glass three feet long, men would have said that it would hardly do to
discover heaven with anything less than six hundred feet long. To the
ancients, Galileo's instrument, even if it had been practical, would
not have been poetic or fitting. To the moderns, however, the fact
that Galileo's star-tool was three feet long, that he carried a new
heaven about with him in his hands, was half the poetry and wonder of
it. Yet it was not so poetic-looking as the six-hundred-foot telescope
invented later, which never worked.

Nothing could be more impressive than the original substantial R----
typewriter. One felt, every time he touched a letter, as if he must
have said a sentence. It was like saying things with pile-drivers. The
machine obtruded itself at every point. It flourished its means and
ends. It was a gesticulating machine. One commenced every new line
with his foot.

The same general principle may be seen running alike through machinery
and through life. The history of man is traced in water-wheels. The
overshot wheel belonged to a period when everything else--religion,
literature, and art--was overshot. When, as time passed on, common men
began to think, began to think under a little, the Reformation came
in--and the undershot wheel, as a matter of course. There is no
denying that the overshot wheel is more poetic-looking--it does its
work with twelve quarts of water at a time and shows every quart--but
it soon develops into the undershot wheel, which shows only the
drippings of the water, and the undershot wheel develops into the
turbine wheel, which keeps everything out of sight--except its work.
The water in the six turbine wheels at Niagara has sixty thousand
horses in it, but it is not nearly as impressive and poetic-looking as
six turbine wheels' worth of water would be--wasted and going over the
Falls.

The main fact about the modern man as regards poetry is, that he
prefers poetry that has this reserved turbine-wheel trait in it. It is
because most of the poetry the modern man gets a chance to see to-day
is merely going over the Falls that poetry is not supposed to appeal
to the modern man. He supposes so himself. He supposes that a dynamo
(forty street-cars on forty streets, flying through the dark) is not
poetic, but its whir holds him, sense and spirit, spellbound, more
than any poetry that is being written. The things that are hidden--the
things that are spiritual and wondering--are the ones that appeal to
him. The idle, foolish look of a magnet fascinates him. He gropes in
his own body silently, harmlessly with the X-ray, and watches with awe
the beating of his heart. He glories in inner essences, both in his
life and in his art. He is the disciple of the X-ray, the defier of
appearances. Why should a man who has seen the inside of matter care
about appearances, either in little things or great? Or why argue
about the man, or argue about the man's God, or quibble with words?
Perhaps he is matter. Perhaps he is spirit. If he is spirit, he is
matter-loving spirit, and if he is matter, he is spirit-loving matter.
Every time he touches a spiritual thing, he makes it (as God makes
mountains out of sunlight) a material thing. Every time he touches a
material thing, in proportion as he touches it mightily he brings out
inner light in it. He spiritualizes it. He abandons the glistening
brass knocker--pleasing symbol to the outer sense--for a tiny knob on
his porch door and a far-away tinkle in his kitchen. The brass knocker
does not appeal to the spirit enough for the modern man, nor to the
imagination. He wants an inner world to draw on to ring a door-bell
with. He loves to wake the unseen. He will not even ring a door-bell
if he can help it. He likes it better, by touching a button, to have a
door-bell rung for him by a couple of metals down in his cellar
chewing each other. He likes to reach down twelve flights of stairs
with a thrill on a wire and open his front door. He may be seen riding
in three stories along his streets, but he takes his engines all off
the tracks and crowds them into one engine and puts it out of sight.
The more a thing is out of the sight of his eyes the more his soul
sees it and glories in it. His fireplace is underground. Hidden water
spouts over his head and pours beneath his feet through his house.
Hidden light creeps through the dark in it. The more might, the more
subtlety. He hauls the whole human race around the crust of the earth
with a vapor made out of a solid. He stops solids--sixty miles an
hour--with invisible air. He photographs the tone of his voice on a
platinum plate. His voice reaches across death with the platinum
plate. He is heard of the unborn. If he speaks in either one of his
worlds he takes two worlds to speak with. He will not be shut in with
one. If he lives in either he wraps the other about him. He makes men
walk on air. He drills out rocks with a cloud and he breaks open
mountains with gas. The more perfect he makes his machines the more
spiritual they are, the more their power hides itself. The more the
machines of the man loom in human life the more they reach down into
silence, and into darkness. Their foundations are infinity. The
infinity which is the man's infinity is their infinity. The machines
grasp all space for him. They lean out on ether. They are the man's
machines. The man has made them and the man worships with them. From
the first breath of flame, burning out the secret of the Dust to the
last shadow of the dust--the breathless, soundless shadow of the dust,
which he calls electricity--the man worships the invisible, the
intangible. Electricity is his prophet. It sums him up. It sums up his
modern world and the religion and the arts of his modern world. Out of
all the machines that he has made the electric machine is the most
modern because it is the most spiritual. The empty and futile look of
a trolley wire does not trouble the modern man. It is his instinctive
expression of himself. All the habits of electricity are his habits.
Electricity has the modern man's temperament--the passion of being
invisible and irresistible. The electric machine fills him with
brotherhood and delight. It is the first of the machines that he can
not help seeing is like himself. It is the symbol of the man's highest
self. His own soul beckons to him out of it.

And the more electricity grows the more like the man it grows, the
more spirit-like it is. The telegraph wire around the globe is melted
into the wireless telegraph. The words of his spirit break away from
the dust. They envelop the earth like ether, and Human Speech, at
last, unconquerable, immeasurable, subtle as the light of
stars,--fights its way to God.

The man no longer gropes in the dull helpless ground or through the
froth of heaven for the spirit. Having drawn to him the X-ray, which
makes spirit out of dust, and the wireless telegraph, which makes
earth out of air, he delves into the deepest sea as a cloud. He
strides heaven. He has touched the hem of the garment at last of
ELECTRICITY--the archangel of matter.




