IV

THE IDEA OF IMMORTALITY


If I had never thought of it before, and some one were to come around
to my study tomorrow morning and tell me that I was immortal, I am not
at all sure that I would be attracted by it. The first thing that I
should do, probably, would be to argue a little--ask him what it was
for. I might take some pains not to commit myself (one does not want
to settle a million years in a few minutes), but I cannot help being
conscious, on the inside of my own mind, at least, that the first
thought on immortality that would come to me, would be that perhaps it
might be overdoing things a little.

I can speak only for myself. I am not unaware that a great many men
and women are talking to-day about immortality and writing about it. I
know many people too, who, in a faithful, worried way seem to be
lugging about with them, while they live, what they call a faith in
immortality. I would not mean to say a word against immortality, if I
were asked suddenly and had never thought of it before. If by putting
out my hand I could get some of it, for other people,--people that
wanted it or thought they did--I would probably. They would be happier
and easier to live with. I could watch them enjoying the idea of how
long they were going to last. There would be a certain social pleasure
in it. But, speaking strictly for myself, if I were asked suddenly and
had never heard of it before, I would not have the slightest
preference on the subject. It may be true, as some say, that a man is
only half alive if he does not long to live forever, but while I have
the best wishes and intentions with regard to my hope for immortality
I cannot get interested. I feel as if I were living forever now, this
very moment, right here on the premises--Universe, Earth, United
States of America, Hampshire County, Northampton, Massachusetts. I
feel infinitely related every day and hour and minute of my life, to
an infinite number of things. As for joggling God's elbow or praying
to Him or any such thing as that, under the circumstances, and begging
Him to let me live forever, it always seems to me (I have done it
sometimes when I was very tired) as if it were a way of denying Him to
His face. How a man who is literally standing up to his soul's eyes,
and to the tops of the stars in the infinite, who can feel the eternal
throbbing through the very pores of his body, can so far lose his
sense of humor in a prayer, or his reverence in it, as to put up a
petition to God to live forever, I entirely fail to see. I always feel
as if I had stopped living forever--to ask Him.

I have traveled in the blaze of a trolley car when all the world was
asleep, and have been shot through still country fields in the great
blackness. All things that were--it seemed to my soul, were snuffed
out. It was as if all the earth had become a whir and a bit of
light--had dwindled away to a long plunge, or roll and roar through
Nothing. Slowly as I came to myself I said, "Now I will try to realize
Motion. I will see if I can know. I spread my soul about me...." Ties
flying under my feet, black poles picked out with lights, flapping
ghostlike past the windows.... Voices of wheels over and under.... The
long, dreary waver of the something that sounds when the car stops
(and which feels like taking gas) ... the semi-confidential,
semi-public talk of the passengers, the sudden collision with silence,
they come to, when the car halts--all these. Finally when I look up
every one has slipped away. Then I find my soul spreading further and
further. The great night, silent and splendid, builds itself over me.
The night is the crowded time to travel--car almost to one's self,
nothing but a few whirls of light and a conductor for company--the
long monotone of miles--miles--flying beside me and above and around
and beneath--all this shadowed world to belong to, to dwell in, to
pick out with one's soul from Darkness. "Here am I," I said as the
roar tightened once more, and gripped on its awful wire and glowed
through the blackness. "Here I am in infinite space, I and my bit of
glimmer.... Worlds fall about me. The very one I am on, and stamp my
feet on to know it is there, falls and plunges with me out through
deserts of space, and stars I cannot see have their hand upon me and
hold me."

No one would deny that the idea of immortality is a well-meaning idea
and pleasantly inclined and intended to be appreciative of a God, but
it does seem to me that it is one of the most absent-minded ways of
appreciating Him that could be conceived. I am infinite at 88 High
Street. I have all the immortality I can use, without going through my
own front gate. I have but to look out of a window. There is no denying
that Mount Tom is convenient, and as a kind of soul-stepping-stone, or
horse-block to the infinite, the immeasurable and immortal, a mountain
may be an advantage, perhaps, and make some difference; but I must
confess that it seems to me that in all times and in all places a man's
immortality is absolutely in his own hands. His immortality consists in
his being in an immortally related state of mind. His immortality is
his sense of having infinite relations with all the time there is, and
his infinity consists in his having infinite relations with all the
space there is. Wherever, as a matter of form, a man may say he is
living or staying, the universe is his real address.

I have been at sea--lain with a board over me out in the wide night
and looked at the infinite through a port-hole. Over the edge of the
swash of a wave I have gathered in oceans and possessed them. Under my
board in the night I have lain still with the whole earth and mastered
it in my heart, shared it until I could not sleep with the joy of
it--the great ship with all its souls throbbing a planet through me
and chanting it to me. I thought to my soul, "Where art thou?" I
looked down upon myself as if I were a God looking down on myself and
upon the others, and upon the ship and upon the waters.

  A thousand breaths we lie
  Shrouded limbs and faces
  Horizontal
  Packed in cases
  In our named and numbered places,
  Catalogued for sleep,
  Trembling through the Godlight
  Below, above,
  Deep to Deep.

How a church-going man in a world like this can possibly contrive to
have time to cry out or worry on it, or to be troubled about
another--how he can demand another, the way he does sometimes, as if
it were the only thing left a God could do to straighten matters out
for having put him on this one, and how he can call this religion--is
a problem that leaves my mind like an exhausted receiver. It is a
grave question whether any immortality they are likely to get in
another world would ever really pay some people for the time they have
wasted in this one, worrying about it.

Does any science in the world suppose or dare to suppose that I am as
unimportant in it as I look--or that I could be if I tried? that I am
a parasite rolled up in a drop of dew, down under a shimmering mist of
worlds that do not serve me nor care for me? I swear daily that I am
not living and that I will not and cannot live underneath a universe
... with a little horizon or teacup of space set down over me. The
whole sky is the tool of my daily life. It belongs to me and I to it.
I have said to the heavens that they shall hourly minister to me--to
the uses of my spirit and the needs of my body. When I, or my spirit,
would move a little I swing out on stars. In the watches of the night
they reach under my eyelids and serve my sleep and wait on me with
dreams, I know I am immortal because I know I am infinite. A man is at
least as long as he is wide. There is no need to quibble with words. I
care little enough whether I am supposed to say it is forever across
my soul or everywhere across it. Whichever it is, I make it the other
when I am ready. If a man is infinite and lives an infinitely related
life, why should it matter whether he is eternal as he calls it or
not,--takes his immortality sideways here, now, and in the terms of
space or later with some kind of time-arrangement stretched out and
petering along over a long, narrow row of years?

Thousands of things are happening that are mine--out, around, and
through the great darkness--being born and killed and ticked and
printed while I sleep. When I have stilled myself with sleep, do I not
know that the lightning is waiting on me? When I see a cloud of steam
I say, "There is my omnipresence." My being is busy out in the
universe having its way somewhere. The days on the other side of the
world are my days. I get what I want out of them without having to
keep awake for them. In the middle of the night and without trying I
lay my hand on the moon. It is my moon, wherever it may be, or whether
I so much as look upon it, and when I do look upon it it is no roof
for me, and the stars behind it flow in my veins.


II

I have been reading lately a book on Immortality, the leading idea of
which seems to be a sort of astral body for people--people who are
worthy of it. The author does not believe after the old-fashioned
method that we are going to the stars. He intimates (for all practical
purposes) that we do not need to. The stars are coming to us,--are
already being woven in us. The author does not say it in so many
words, but the general idea seems to be that the more spiritual or
subtle body we are going to have, is already started in us--if we live
as we should--growing like a kind of lining for this one.

I can only speak for one, but I find that when I am willing to take
the time from reading books on immortality to enjoy a few infinite
experiences, I am not apt to be troubled very much about another
world.

It is daily obvious to me that I belong and that I am living in an
infinite and eternal world, inconceivably better planned and managed
than one of mine would be, and the only logical thing that I can do,
is to take it for granted that the next one is even better than this.
If the main feature of the next world consists in there not being one,
then so much the better. I would not have thought so. It seems a
little abrupt at this moment, perhaps, but it is a mere detail and why
not leave it to God to work it out? He doesn't have to neglect
anything to do it--which is what we do--and He is going to do it
anyway.

I have refused to take time from my infinity now for a theory of a
theory about some new kind by and by. I have but to stand perfectly
still. There is an infinite opening and shutting of doors for me,
through all the heavens and the earth. I lie with my head in the deep
grass. A square yard is forever across. I listen to a great city in
the grass--millions of insects. Microscopes have threaded it for me. I
know their city--all its mighty little highways. I possess it. And
when I walk away I rebuild their city softly in my heart. Winds,
tides, and vapors are for me everywhere, that my soul may possess
them. I reach down to the silent metals under my feet that millions of
ages have worked on, and fire and wonder and darkness. I feel the sun
and the lives of nations flowing around to me, from under the sea. Who
can shut me out from anybody's sunrise?

  "Oh, tenderly the haughty day
  Fills his blue urn with fire;
  One morn is in the mighty heaven
  And one in my desire."

I play with the Seasons, with all the weathers on earth. I can
telegraph for them. I go to the weather I want. The sky--to me--is no
longer a great, serious, foreign-looking shore, conducting a big
foolish cloud-business, sending down decrees of weather on helpless
cities. With a whistle and a roar I defy it--move any strip of it out
from over me--for any other strip. I order the time of year. It is my
sky. I bend it a little--just a little. The sky no longer has a
monopoly of wonder. With the hands of my hands, my brother and I have
made an earth that can answer a sky back, that can commune with a sky.
The soul at last guesses at its real self. It reaches out and dares.
Men go about singing with telescopes. I do not always need to lift my
hands to a sky and pray to it now. I am related to it. With the hands
of my hands I work with it. I say "I and the sky." I say "I and the
Earth." We are immortal because we are infinite. We have reached over
with the hands of our hands. They are praying a stupendous prayer--a
kind of god's prayer. God's hand has been grasped--vaguely--wonderfully
out in the Dark. No longer is the joy of the universe to a man, one of
his great, solemn, solitary joys. The sublime itself is a neighborly
thought. God's machine--up--There--and the machines of the man have
signaled each other.




