V

THE IDEA OF GOD


My study (not the place where I get my knowledge but the place where I
put it together) is a great meadow--ten square splendid level miles of
it--as fenceless and as open as a sky--merely two mountains to stand
guard. If H---- the scientist who lives nearest to me (that is;
nearest to my mind,) were to come down to me to-morrow morning, down
in my meadow, with its huge triangle of trolleys and railways humming
gently around the edges and tell me that he had found a God, I would
not believe it. "Where?" I would say, "in which Bottle?" I have groped
for one all these years. Ever since I was a child I have been groping
for a God. I thought one had to. I have turned over the pages of
ancient books and hunted in morning papers and rummaged in the events
of the great world and looked on the under sides of leaves and guessed
on the other sides of the stars and all in vain. I never could make
out to find a God in that way. I wonder if anyone can.

I know it is not the right spirit to have, but I must confess that
when the scientist (the smaller sort of scientist around the corner in
my mind and everybody's mind) with all his retorts and things,
pottering with his argument of design, comes down to me in my meadow
and reminds me that he has been looking for a God and tells me
cautiously and with all his kind, conscientious hems and haws that he
has found Him, I wonder if he has.

The very necessity a man is under of seeking a God at all, in a world
alive all over like this, of feeling obliged to go on a long journey
to search one out makes one doubt if the kind of God he would find
would be worth while. I have never caught a man yet who has found his
God in this way, enjoying Him or getting anyone else to.

It does seem to me that the idea of a God is an absolutely plain,
rudimentary, fundamental, universal human instinct, that the very
essence of finding a God consists in His not having to be looked for,
in giving one's self up to one's plain every-day infinite experiences.
I suppose if it could be analyzed, the poet's real quarrel with the
scientist is not that he is material, but that he is not material
enough,--he does not conceive matter enough to find a God. I cannot
believe for instance that any man on earth to whom the great spectacle
of matter going on every day before his eyes is a scarcely noticed
thing--any man who is willing to turn aside from this spectacle--this
spectacle as a whole--and who looks for a God like a chemist in a
bottle for instance--a bottle which he places absolutely by itself,
would be able to find one if he tried. It seems to me that it is by
letting one's self have one's infinite--one's infinitely related
experiences, and not by cutting them off that one comes to know a God.
To find a God who is everywhere one must at least spend a part of
one's time in being everywhere one's self--in relating one's knowledge
to all knowledge.

There are various undergirding arguments and reasons, but the only way
that I really know there is an infinite God is because I am
infinite--in a small way--myself. Even the matter that has come into
the world connected with me, and that belongs to me, is infinite. If
my soul, like some dim pale light left burning within me, were merely
to creep to the boundaries of its own body, it would know there was a
God. The very flesh I live with every day is infinite flesh. From the
furthest rumors of men and women, the furthest edge of time and space
my soul has gathered dust to itself. I carry a temple about with me.
If I could do no better, and if there were need, I am my own
cathedral. I worship when I breathe. I bow down before the tick of my
pulse. I chant to the palm of my hand. The lines in the tips of my
fingers could not be duplicated in a million years. Shall any man ask
me to prove there are miracles or to put my finger on God? or to go
out into some great breath of emptiness or argument to be sure there
is a God? I am infinite. Therefore there is a God. I feel daily the
God within me. Has He not kindled the fire in my bones and out of the
burning dust warmed me before the stars--made a hearth for my soul
before them? I am at home with them. I sit daily before worlds as at
my own fireside.

I suppose there is something intolerant and impatient and a little
heartless about an optimist--especially the kind of optimism that is
based upon a simple everyday rudimentary joy in the structure of the
world. There is such a thing, I suppose, with some of us, as having a
kind of devilish pride in faith, as one would say to ordinary mortals
and creepers and considerers and arguers "Oh now just see me believe!"
We are like boys taking turns jumping in the Great Vacant Lot, seeing
which can believe the furthest. We need to be reminded that a man
cannot simply bring a little brag to God, about His world, and make a
religion out of it. I do not doubt in the least, as a matter of
theory, that I have the wrong spirit--sometimes--toward the scientific
man who lives around the corner of my mind. It seems to me he is
always suggesting important-looking unimportant things. I have days of
sympathizing with him, of rolling his great useless heavy-empty pack
up upon my shoulders and strapping it there. But before I know it I'm
off. I throw it away or melt it down into a tablet or something--put
it in my pocket. I walk jauntily before God.

And the worst of it is, I think He intended me to. I think He intended
me to know and to keep knowing daily what He has done for me and is
doing now, out in the universe, and what He has made me to do. I also
am a God. From the first time I saw the sun I have been one daily. I
have performed daily all the homelier miracles and all the common
functions of a God. I have breathed the Invisible into my being. Out
of the air of heaven I have made flesh. I have taken earth from the
earth and burned it within me and made it into prayers and into songs.
I have said to my soul "To eat is to sing." I worship all over. I am
my own sacrament. I lay before God nights of sleep, and the delight
and wonder of the flesh I render back to Him again, daily, as an
offering in His sight.

And what is true of my literal body--of the joy of my hands and my
feet, is still more true of the hands of my hands.

When I wake in the night and send forth my thought upon the darkness,
track out my own infinity in it, feel my vast body of earth and sky
reaching around me, all telegraphed through with thought, and floored
with steel, I may have to grope for a God a little (I do sometimes),
but I do it with loud cheers. I sing before the door of heaven if
there is a heaven or needs to be a heaven. When I look upon the glory
of the other worlds, has not science itself told me that they are a
part of me and I a part of them? Nothing is that would not be
different without something else. My thoughts are ticking through the
clouds, and the great sun itself is creeping through me daily down in
my bones. The steam cloud hurries for me on a hundred seas. I turn
over in my sleep at midnight and lay my hand on the noon. And when I
have slept and walk forth in the morning, the stars flow in my veins.
Why should a man dare to whine? "Whine not at me!" I have said to man
my brother. If you cannot sing to me do not interrupt me.

  Let him sing to me
  Who sees the watching of the stars above the day,
  Who hears the singing of the sunrise
  On its way
  Through all the night.
  Who outfaces skies, outsings the storms,
  Whose soul has roamed
  Infinite-homed
  Through tents of Space,
  His hand in the dim Great Hand that forms
  All wonder.

  Let him sing to me
  Who is The Sky Voice, The Thunder Lover
  Who hears above the wind's fast-flying shrouds
  The drifted darkness, the heavenly strife,
  The singing on the sunny sides of all the clouds,
  Of His Own Life.




