VI

PROPHETS


The world follows the creative spirit. Where the spirit is creating,
the strong and the beautiful flock. If the creative spirit is not in
poetry, poetry will call itself something else. If it is not in the
church, religion will call itself something else. It is the business
of a living religion, not to wish that the age it lives in were some
other age, but to tell what the age is for, and what every man born in
it is for. A church that can see only what a few of the men born in an
age are for, can help only a few. If a church does not believe in a
particular man more than he believes in himself, the less it tries to
do for him the better. If a church does not believe in a man's work as
he believes in it, does not see some divine meaning and spirit in it
and give him honor and standing and dignity for the divine meaning in
it; if it is a church in which labor is secretly despised and in which
it is openly patronized, in which a man has more honor for working
feebly with his brain than for working passionately and perfectly with
his hands, it is a church that stands outside of life. It is
excommunicated by the will of Heaven and the nature of things, from
the only Communion that is large enough for a man to belong to or for
a God to bless.

If there is one sign rather than another of religious possibility and
spiritual worth in the men who do the world's work with machines
to-day, it is that these men are never persuaded to attend a church
that despises that work.

Symposiums on how to reach the masses are pitiless irony. There is no
need for symposiums. It is an open secret. It cries upon the
house-tops. It calls above the world in the Sabbath bells. A church
that believes less than the world believes shall lose its leadership
in the world. "Why should I pay pew rent," says the man who sings with
his hands, "to men who do not believe in me, to worship, with men who
do not believe in me, a God that does not believe in me?" If heaven
itself (represented as a rich and idle place,--seats free in the
evening) were opened to the true laboring man on the condition that he
should despise his hands by holding palms in them, he would find some
excuse for staying away. He feels in no wise different with regard to
his present life. "Unless your God," says the man who sings with his
hands, to those who pity him and do him good,--"unless your God is a
God I can worship in a factory, He is not a God I care to worship in a
church."

Behold it is written: The church that does not delight in these men
and in what these men are for, as much as the street delights in them,
shall give way to the street. The street is more beautiful. If the
street is not let into the church, it shall sweep over the church and
sweep around it, shall pile the floors of its strength upon it, above
it. From the roofs of labor--radiant and beautiful labor--shall men
look down upon its towers. Only a church that believes more than the
world believes shall lead the world. It always leads the world. It
cannot help leading it. The religion that lives in a machine age, and
that cannot see and feel, and make others see and feel, the meaning of
that machine age, is a religion which is not worthy of us. It is not
worthy of our machines. One of the machines we have made could make a
better religion than this. Even now, almost everywhere in almost every
town or city where one goes, if one will stop or look up or listen,
one hears the chimneys teaching the steeples. It would be blind for
more than a few years more to be discouraged about modern religion.
The telephone, the wireless telegraph, the X-rays, and all the other
great believers are singing up around it. The very railroads are
surrounding it and taking care of it. A few years more and the
steeples will stop hesitating and tottering in the sight of all the
people. They will no longer stand in fear before what the crowds of
chimneys and railways and the miles of smokestacks sweeping past are
saying to the people.

They will listen to what the smokestacks are saying to the people.

They will say it better.

In the meantime they are not listening.

Religion and art at the present moment, both blindfolded and both with
their ears stopped, are being swept to the same irrevocable issue. By
all poets and prophets the same danger signal shall be seen spreading
before them both jogging along their old highways. It is the arm that
reaches across the age.

      RAILROAD CROSSING
    LOOK OUT FOR THE ENGINE!




PART II.

THE LANGUAGE OF THE MACHINES




I

AS GOOD AS OURS


One is always hearing it said that if a thing is to be called poetic
it must have great ideas in it, and must successfully express them.
The idea that there is poetry in machinery, has to meet the objection
that, while a machine may have great ideas in it, "it does not look
it." The average machine not only fails to express the idea that it
stands for, but it generally expresses something else. The language of
the average machine, when one considers what it is for, what it is
actually doing, is not merely irrelevant or feeble. It is often
absurd. It is a rare machine which, when one looks for poetry in it,
does not make itself ridiculous.

The only answer that can be made to this objection is that a
steam-engine (when one thinks of it) really expresses itself as well
as the rest of us. All language is irrelevant, feeble, and absurd. We
live in an organically inexpressible world. The language of everything
in it is absurd. Judged merely by its outer signs, the universe over
our heads--with its cunning little stars in it--is the height of
absurdity, as a self-expression. The sky laughs at us. We know it when
we look in a telescope. Time and space are God's jokes. Looked at
strictly in its outer language, the whole visible world is a joke. To
suppose that God has ever expressed Himself to us in it, or to suppose
that He could express Himself in it, or that any one can express
anything in it, is not to see the point of the joke.

We cannot even express ourselves to one another. The language of
everything we use or touch is absurd. Nearly all of the tools we do
our living with--even the things that human beings amuse themselves
with--are inexpressive and foolish-looking. Golf and tennis and
football have all been accused in turn, by people who do not know them
from the inside, of being meaningless. A golf-stick does not convey
anything to the uninitiated, but the bare sight of a golf-stick lying
on a seat is a feeling to the one to whom it belongs, a play of sense
and spirit to him, a subtle thrill in his arms. The same is true of a
new fiery-red baby, which, considering the fuss that is made about it,
to a comparative outsider like a small boy, has always been from the
beginning of the world a ridiculous and inadequate object. A man could
not possibly conceive, even if he gave all his time to it, of a more
futile, reckless, hapless expression of or pointer to an immortal soul
than a week-old baby wailing at time and space. The idea of a baby may
be all right, but in its outer form, at first, at least, a baby is a
failure, and always has been. The same is true of our other musical
instruments. A horn caricatures music. A flute is a man rubbing a
black stick with his lips. A trombone player is a monster. We listen
solemnly to the violin--the voice of an archangel with a board tucked
under his chin--and to Girardi's 'cello--a whole human race laughing
and crying and singing to us between a boy's legs. The eye-language of
the violin has to be interpreted, and only people who are cultivated
enough to suppress whole parts of themselves (rather useful and
important parts elsewhere) can enjoy a great opera--a huge conspiracy
of symbolism, every visible thing in it standing for something that
can not be seen, beckoning at something that cannot be heard. Nothing
could possibly be more grotesque, looked at from the outside or by a
tourist from another planet or another religion, than the celebration
of the Lord's Supper in a Protestant church. All things have their
outer senses, and these outer senses have to be learned one at a time
by being flashed through with inner ones. Except to people who have
tried it, nothing could be more grotesque than kissing, as a form of
human expression. A reception--a roomful of people shouting at each
other three inches away--is comical enough. So is handshaking. Looked
at from the outside, what could be more unimpressive than the
spectacle of the greatest dignitary of the United States put in a vise
in his own house for three hours, having his hand squeezed by long
rows of people? And, taken as a whole, scurrying about in its din,
what could possibly be more grotesque than a great city--a city looked
at from almost any adequate, respectable place for an immortal soul to
look from--a star, for instance, or a beautiful life?

Whether he is looked at by ants or by angels, every outer token that
pertains to man is absurd and unfinished until some inner thing is put
with it. Man himself is futile and comic-looking (to the other
animals), rushing empty about space. New York is a spectacle for a
squirrel to laugh at, and, from the point of view of a mouse, a man is
a mere, stupid, sitting-down, skull-living, desk-infesting animal.

All these things being true of expression--both the expression of men
and of God--the fact that machines which have poetry in them do not
express it very well does not trouble me much. I do not forget the
look of the first ocean-engine I ever saw--four or five stories of it;
nor do I forget the look of the ocean-engine's engineer as in its
mighty heart-beat he stood with his strange, happy, helpless "Twelve
thousand horse-power, sir!" upon his lips.

That first night with my first engineer still follows me. The time
seems always coming back to me again when he brought me up from his
whirl of wheels in the hold to the deck of stars, and left me--my new
wonder all stumbling through me--alone with them and with my thoughts.

  The engines breathe.
  No sound but cinders on the sails
  And the ghostly heave,
  The voice the wind makes in the mast--
  And dainty gales
  And fluffs of mist and smoking stars
  Floating past--
  From night-lit funnels.

  In the wild of the heart of God I stand.
  Time and Space
  Wheel past my face.
  Forever. Everywhere.
  I alone.
  Beyond the Here and There
  Now and Then
  Of men,
  Winds from the unknown
  Round me blow
  Blow to the unknown again.

  Out in its solitude I hear the prow
  Beyond the silence-crowded decks
  Laughing and shouting
  At Night,
  Lashing the heads and necks
  Of the lifted seas,
  That in their flight
  Urge onward
  And rise and sweep and leap and sink
  To the very brink
  Of Heaven.

  Timber and steel and smoke
  And Sleep
  Thousand-souled
  A quiver,
  A deadened thunder,
  A vague and countless creep
  Through the hold,
  The weird and dusky chariot lunges on
  Through Fate.
  From the lookout watch of my soul's eyes
  Above the houses of the deep
  Their shadowy haunches fall and rise
  --O'er the glimmer-gabled roofs
  The flying of their hoofs,
  Through the wonder and the dark
  Where skies and waters meet
  The shimmer of manes and knees
  Dust of seas...
  The sound of breathing, urge, confusion
  And the beat, the starlight beat
  Soft and far and stealthy-fleet
  Of the dim unnumbered trampling of their feet.




