I

PLATO AND THE GENERAL ELECTRIC WORKS


I have an old friend who lives just around the corner from one of the
main lines of travel in New England, and whenever I am passing near by
and the railroads let me, I drop in on him awhile and quarrel about
art. It's a good old-fashioned comfortable, disorderly conversation we
have generally, the kind people used to have more than they do
now--sketchy and not too wise--the kind that makes one think of things
one wishes one had said, afterward.

We always drift a little at first, as if of course we could talk about
other things if we wanted to, but we both know, and know every time,
that in a few minutes we shall be deep in a discussion of the Things
That Are Beautiful and the Things That Are Not.

Brim thinks that I have picked out more things to be beautiful than I
have a right to, or than any man has, and he is trying to put a stop
to it. He thinks that there are enough beautiful things in this world
that have been beautiful a long while, without having people--well,
people like me, for instance, poking blindly around among all these
modern brand-new things hoping that in spite of appearances there is
something one can do with them that will make them beautiful enough to
go with the rest. I'm afraid Brim gets a little personal in talking
with me at times and I might as well say that, while disagreeing in a
conversation with Brim does not lead to calling names it does seem to
lead logically to one's going away, and trying to find afterwards,
some thing that is the matter with him.

"The trouble with you, my dear Brim, is," I say (on paper, afterwards,
as the train speeds away), "that you have a false-classic or
Stucco-Greek mind. The Greeks, the real Greeks, would have liked all
these things--trolley cars, cables, locomotives,--seen the beautiful
in them, if they had to do their living with them every day, the way
we do. You would say you were more Greek than I am, but when one
thinks of it, you are just going around liking the things the Greeks
liked 3000 years ago, and I am around liking the things a Greek would
like now, that is, as well as I can. I don't flatter myself I begin to
enjoy the wireless telegraph to-day the way Plato would if he had the
chance, and Alcibiades in an automobile would get a great deal more
out of it, I suspect, than anyone I have seen in one, so far; and I
suspect that if Socrates could take Bliss Carman and, say, William
Watson around with him on a tour of the General Electric Works in
Schenectady they wouldn't either of them write sonnets about anything
else for the rest of their natural lives."

I can only speak for one and I do not begin to see the poetry in the
machines that a Greek would see, as yet.

But I have seen enough.

I have seen engineers go by, pounding on this planet, making it small
enough, welding the nations together before my eyes.

I have seen inventors, still men by lamps at midnight with a whirl of
visions, with a whirl of thoughts, putting in new drivewheels on the
world.

I have seen (in Schenectady,) all those men--the five thousand of
them--the grime on their faces and the great caldrons of melted
railroad swinging above their heads. I have stood and watched them
there with lightning and with flame hammering out the wills of cities,
putting in the underpinnings of nations, and it seemed to me me that
Bliss Carman and William Watson would not be ashamed of them ...
brother-artists every one ... in the glory ... in the dark ...
Vulcan-Tennysons, blacksmiths to a planet, with dredges, skyscrapers,
steam shovels and wireless telegraphs, hewing away on the heavens and
the earth.




II

HEWING AWAY ON THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH


The poetry of machinery to-day is a mere matter of fact--a part of the
daily wonder of life to countless silent people. The next thing the
world wants to know about machinery is not that there is poetry in it,
but that the poetry which the common people have already found there,
has a right to be there. We have the fact. It is the theory to put
with the fact which concerns us next and which really troubles us
most. There are very few of us, on the whole, who can take any solid
comfort in a fact--no matter what it is--until we have a theory to
approve of it with. Its merely being a fact does not seem to make very
much difference.

1. Machinery has poetry in it because it is an expression of the soul.

2. It expresses the soul (1) of the individual man who creates the
machine--the inventor, and (2) the man who lives with the machine the
engineer.

3. It expresses God, if only that He is a God who can make men who can
thus express their souls. Machinery is an act of worship in the least
sense if not in the greatest. If a man who can make machines like this
is not clever enough with all his powers to find a God, and to worship
a God, he can worship himself. It is because the poetry of machinery
is the kind of poetry that does immeasurable things instead of
immeasurably singing about them that it has been quite generally taken
for granted that it is not poetry at all. The world has learned more
of the purely poetic idea of freedom from a few dumb, prosaic machines
that have not been able to say anything beautiful about it than from
the poets of twenty centuries. The machine frees a hundred thousand
men and smokes. The poet writes a thousand lines on freedom and has
his bust in Westminster Abbey. The blacks in America were freed by
Abraham Lincoln and the cotton gin. The real argument for unity--the
argument against secession--was the locomotive. No one can fight the
locomotive very long. It makes the world over into one world whether
it wants to be one world or not. China is being conquered by
steamships. It cannot be said that the idea of unity is a new one.
Seers and poets have made poetry out of it for two thousand years.
Machinery is making the poetry mean something. Every new invention in
matter that comes to us is a spiritual masterpiece. It is crowded with
ideas. The Bessemer process has more political philosophy in it than
was ever dreamed of in Shelley's poetry, and it would not be hard to
show that the invention of the sewing machine was one of the most
literary and artistic as well as one of the most religious events of
the nineteenth century. The loom is the most beautiful thought that
any one has ever had about Woman, and the printing press is more
wonderful than anything that has ever been said on it.

"This is all very true," interrupts the Logical Person, "about
printing presses and looms and everything else--one could go on
forever--but it does not prove anything. It may be true that the loom
has made twenty readers for Robert Browning's poetry where Browning
would have made but one, but it does not follow that because the loom
has freed women for beauty that the loom is beautiful, or that it is a
fit theme for poetry." "Besides"--breaks in the Minor Poet--"there is
a difference between a thing's being full of big ideas and its being
beautiful. A foundry is powerful and interesting, but is it beautiful
the way an electric fountain is beautiful or a sonnet or a doily?"

This brings to a point the whole question as to where the definition
of beauty--the boundary line of beauty--shall be placed. A thing's
being considered beautiful is largely a matter of size. The question
"Is a thing beautiful?" resolves itself into "How large has a
beautiful thing a right to be?" A man's theory of beauty depends, in a
universe like this, upon how much of the universe he will let into it.
If he is afraid of the universe if he only lets his thoughts and
passions live in a very little of it, he is apt to assume that if a
beautiful thing rises into the sublime and immeasurable--suggests
boundless ideas--the beauty is blurred out of it. It is
something--there is no denying that it is something--but, whatever it
is or is not, it is not beauty. Nearly everything in our modern life
is getting too big to be beautiful. Our poets are dumb because they
see more poetry than their theories have room for. The fundamental
idea of the poetry of machinery is infinity. Our theories of poetry
were made--most of them--before infinity was discovered.

Infinity itself is old, and the idea that infinity exists--a kind of
huge, empty rim around human life--is not a new idea to us, but the
idea that this same infinity has or can have anything to do with us or
with our arts, or our theories of art, or that we have anything to do
with IT, is an essentially modern discovery. The actual experience of
infinity--that is, the experience of being infinite (comparatively
speaking)--as in the use of machinery, is a still more modern
discovery. There is no better way perhaps, of saying what modern
machinery really is, than to say that it is a recent invention for
being infinite.

The machines of the world are all practically engaged in manufacturing
the same thing. They are all time-and-space-machines. They knit time
and space. Hundreds of thousands of things may be put in machines this
very day, for us, before night falls, but only eternity and infinity
shall be turned out. Sometimes it is called one and sometimes the
other. If a man is going to be infinite or eternal it makes little
difference which. It is merely a matter of form whether one is
everywhere a few years, or anywhere forever. A sewing machine is as
much a means of communication as a printing press or a locomotive. The
locomotive takes a woman around the world. The sewing machine gives
her a new world where she is. At every point where a machine touches
the life of a human being, it serves him with a new measure of
infinity.

This would seem to be a poetic thing for a machine to do. Traditional
poetry does not see any poetry in it, because, according to our
traditions poetry has fixed boundary lines, is an old, established
institution in human life, and infinity is not.

No one has wanted to be infinite before. Poetry in the ancient world
was largely engaged in protecting people from the Infinite. They were
afraid of it. They could not help feeling that the Infinite was over
them. Worship consisted in propitiating it, poetry in helping people
to forget it. With the exception of Job, the Hebrews almost invariably
employed a poet--when they could get one--as a kind of transfigured
policeman--to keep the sky off. It was what was expected of poets.

The Greeks did the same thing in a different way. The only difference
was, that the Greeks, instead of employing their poets to keep the sky
off, employed them to make it as much like the earth as possible--a
kind of raised platform which was less dreadful and more familiar and
homelike and answered the same general purpose. In other words, the
sky became beautiful to the Greek when he had made it small enough.
Making it small enough was the only way a Greek knew of making it
beautiful.

Galileo knew another way. It is because Galileo knew another
way--because he knew that the way to make the sky beautiful, was to
make it large enough--that men are living in a new world. A new
religion beats down through space to us. A new poetry lifts away the
ceilings of our dreams. The old sky, with its little tent of stars,
its film of flame and darkness burning over us, has floated to the
past. The twentieth century--the home of the Infinite--arches over our
human lives. The heaven is no longer, to the sons of men, a priests'
wilderness, nor is it a poet's heaven--a paper, painted heaven, with
little painted paper stars in it, to hide the wilderness.

It is a new heaven. Who, that has lived these latter years, that has
seen it crashing and breaking through the old one, can deny that what
is over us now is a new heaven? The infinite cave of it, scooped out
at last over our little naked, foolish lives, our running-about
philosophies, our religions, and our governments--it is the main fact
about us. Arts and literatures--ants under a stone, thousands of
years, blind with light, hither and thither, racing about, hiding
themselves.

But not long for dreams. More than this. The new heaven is matched by
a new earth. Men who see a new heaven make a new earth. In its cloud
of steam, in a kind of splendid, silent stammer of praise and love,
the new earth lifts itself to the new heaven, lifts up days out of
nights to It, digs wells for winds under It, lights darkness with
falling water, makes ice out of vapor, and heat out of cold, draws
down Space with engines, makes years out of moments with machines. It
is a new world and all the men that are born upon it are new
widemoving, cloud and mountain-moving men. The habits of stars and
waters, the huge habits of space and time, are the habits of the men.

The Infinite, at last, which in days gone by hung over us--the mere
hiding place of Death, the awful living-room of God--is the
neighborhood of human life.

Machinery has poetry in it because in expressing the soul it expresses
the greatest idea that the soul of man can have, namely, the idea that
the soul of man is infinite, or capable of being infinite.

Machinery has poetry in it also not merely because it is the symbol of
infinite power in human life, or because it makes man think he is
infinite, but because it is making him as infinite as he thinks he is.
The infinity of man is no longer a thing that the poet takes--that he
makes an idea out of--Machinery makes it a matter of fact.




