PART II.


AFTER the pleasures which arise from the gratification of the bodily
appetites, there seem to be none more natural to man than Music and
Dancing. In the progress of art and improvement they are, perhaps, the
first and earliest pleasures of his own invention; for those which
arise from the gratification of the bodily appetites cannot be said to
be his own invention. No nation has yet been discovered so uncivilized
as to be altogether without them. It seems even to be amongst the most
barbarous nations that the use and practice of them is both most
frequent and most universal, as among the negroes of Africa and the
savage tribes of America. In civilized nations, the inferior ranks of
people have very little leisure, and the superior ranks have many
other amusements; neither the one nor the other, therefore, can spend
much of their time in Music and Dancing. Among savage nations, the
great body of the people have frequently great intervals of leisure,
and they have scarce any other amusement; they naturally, therefore,
spend a great part of their time in almost the only one they have.

What the ancients called Rhythmus, what we call Time or Measure, is
the connecting principle of those two arts; Music consisting in a
succession of a certain sort of sounds, and Dancing in a succession of
a certain sort of steps, gestures, and motions, regulated according to
time or measure, and thereby formed, into a sort of whole or system;
which in the one art is called a song or tune, and in the other a
dance; the time or measure of the dance corresponding always exactly
with that of the song or tune which accompanies and directs it.[1]

[Footnote 1: The Author's Observations on the Affinity between Music,
Dancing, and Poetry, are annexed to the end of Part III. of this
Essay.]

The human voice, as it is always the best, so it would naturally be
the first and earliest of all musical instruments: in singing, or in
its first attempts towards singing, it would naturally employ sounds
as similar as possible to those which it had been accustomed to; that
is, it would employ words of some kind or other, pronouncing them only
in time and measure, and generally with a more melodious tone than had
been usual in common conversation. Those words, however, might not,
and probably would not, for a long time have any meaning, but might
resemble the syllables which we make use of in _fol-faing_, or
the {416} _derry-down-down_ of our common ballads; and serve only
to assist the voice in forming sounds proper to be modulated into
melody, and to be lengthened or shortened according to the time and
measure of the tune. This rude form of vocal Music, as it is by far
the most simple and obvious, so it naturally would be the first and
earliest.

In the succession of ages it could not fail to occur, that in room of
those unmeaning or musical words, if I may call them so, might be
substituted words which expressed some sense or meaning, and of which
the pronunciation might coincide as exactly with the time and measure
of the tune, as that of the musical words had done before. Hence the
origin of Verse or Poetry. The Verse would for a long time be rude and
imperfect. When the meaning words fell short of the measure required,
they would frequently be eked out with the unmeaning ones, as is
sometimes done in our common ballads. When the public ear came to be
so refined as to reject, in all serious Poetry, the unmeaning words
altogether, there would still be a liberty assumed of altering and
corrupting, upon many occasions, the pronunciation of the meaning
ones, for the sake of accommodating them to the measure. The syllables
which composed them would, for this purpose, sometimes be improperly
lengthened, and sometimes improperly shortened; and though no
unmeaning words were made use of, yet an unmeaning syllable would
sometimes be stuck to the beginning, to the end, or into the middle of
a word. All these expedients we find frequently employed in the verses
even of Chaucer, the father of the English Poetry. Many ages might
pass away before verse was commonly composed with such correctness,
that the usual and proper pronunciation of the words alone, and
without any other artifice, subjected the voice to the observation of
a time and measure, of the same kind with the time and measure of the
science of Music.

The Verse would naturally express some sense which suited the grave or
gay, the joyous or melancholy humour of the tune which it was sung to;
being as it were blended and united with that tune, it would seem to
give sense and meaning to what otherwise might not appear to have any,
or at least any which could be clearly understood, without the
accompaniment of such an explication.

A pantomime dance may frequently answer the same purpose, and, by
representing some adventure in love or war, may seem to give sense and
meaning to a Music, which might not otherwise appear to have any. It
is more natural to mimic, by gestures and motions, the adventures of
common life, than to express them in Verse or Poetry. The thought
itself is more obvious, and the execution is much more easy. If this
mimicry was accompanied by Music, it would of its own accord, and
almost without any intention of doing so, accommodate, in some
measure, its different steps and movements to the time and measure of
the tune; especially if the same person both sung the tune {417} and
performed the mimicry, as is said to be frequently the case among the
savage nations of Africa and America. Pantomime Dancing might in this
manner serve to give a distinct sense and meaning to Music many ages
before the invention, or at least before the common use of Poetry. We
hear little, accordingly, of the Poetry of the savage nations who
inhabit Africa and America, but a great deal of their pantomime
dances.

Poetry, however, is capable of expressing many things fully and
distinctly, which Dancing either cannot represent at all, or can
represent but obscurely and imperfectly; such as the reasonings and
judgments, of the understanding; the ideas, fancies, and suspicions of
the imagination; the sentiments, emotions, and passions of the heart.
In the power of expressing a meaning with clearness and distinctness,
Dancing is superior to Music, and Poetry to Dancing.

Of those three Sister Arts, which originally, perhaps, went always
together, and which at all times go frequently together, there are two
which can subsist alone, and separate from their natural companions,
and one which cannot. In the distinct observation of what the ancients
called Rhythmus, of what we call Time and Measure, consists the
essence both of Dancing and of Poetry or Verse; or the
characteristical quality which distinguishes the former from all other
motion and action, and the latter from all other discourse. But,
concerning the proportion between those intervals and divisions of
duration which constitute what is called time and measure, the ear, it
would seem, can judge with much more precision than the eye; and
Poetry, in the same manner as Music, addresses itself to the ear,
whereas Dancing addresses itself to the eye. In Dancing, the rhythmus,
the proper proportion, the time and measure of its motions, cannot
distinctly be perceived, unless they are marked by the more distinct
time and measure of Music. It is otherwise in Poetry; no accompaniment
is necessary to mark the measure of good Verse. Music and Poetry,
therefore, can each of them subsist alone; Dancing always requires the
accompaniment of Music.

It is Instrumental Music which can best subsist apart, and separate
from both Poetry and Dancing. Vocal Music, though it may, and
frequently does, consist of notes which have no distinct sense or
meaning, yet naturally calls for the support of Poetry. But, 'Music,
married to immortal Verse,' as Milton says, or even to words of any
kind which have a distinct sense or meaning, is necessarily and
essentially imitative. Whatever be the meaning of those words, though,
like many of the songs of ancient Greece, as well as some of those of
more modern times, they may express merely some maxims of prudence and
morality, or may contain merely the simple narrative of some important
event, yet even in such didactic and historical songs there will still
be imitation; there will still be a thing of one kind, which by art is
made to {418} resemble a thing of a very different kind; there will
still be Music imitating discourse; there will still be Rhythmus and
Melody, shaped and fashioned into the form either of a good moral
counsel, or of an amusing and interesting story.

In this first species of imitation, which being essential to, is
therefore inseparable from, all such Vocal Music, there may be, and
there commonly is, added a second. The words may, and commonly do,
express the situation of some particular person, and all the
sentiments and passions which he feels from that situation. It is a
joyous companion who gives vent to the gaiety and mirth with which
wine, festivity, and good company inspire him. It is a lover who
complains, or hopes, or fears, or despairs. It is a generous man who
expresses either his gratitude for the favours, or his indignation at
the injuries, which may have been done to him. It is a warrior who
prepares himself to confront danger, and who provokes or desires his
enemy. It is a person in prosperity who humbly returns thanks for the
goodness, or one in affliction who with contrition implores the mercy
and forgiveness of that invisible Power to whom he looks up as the
Director of all the events of human life. The situation may
comprehend, not only one, but two, three, or more persons; it may
excite in them all either similar or opposite sentiments; what is a
subject of sorrow to one, being an occasion of joy and triumph to
another; and they may all express, sometimes separately and sometimes
together, the particular way in which each of them is affected, as in a
duo, trio, or a chorus.

All this it may, and it frequently has been said is unnatural; nothing
being more so, than to sing when we are anxious to persuade, or in
earnest to express any very serious purpose. But it should be
remembered, that to make a thing of one kind resemble another thing of
a very different kind, is the very circumstance which, in all the
Imitative Arts, constitutes the merits of imitation; and that to
shape, and as it were to bend, the measure and the melody of Music, so
as to imitate the tone and the language of counsel and conversation,
the accent and the style of emotion and passion, is to make a thing of
one kind resemble another thing of a very different kind.

The tone and the movements of Music, though naturally very different
from those of conversation and passion, may, however, be so managed as
to seem to resemble them. On account of the great disparity between
the imitating and the imitated object, the mind in this, as in the
other cases, cannot only be contented, but delighted, and even charmed
and transported, with such an imperfect resemblance as can be had.
Such imitative Music, therefore, when sung to words which explain and
determine its meaning, may frequently appear to be a very perfect
imitation. It is upon this account, that even the incomplete Music of
a recitative seems to express sometimes all the sedateness and
composure of serious but calm discourse, and sometimes all the {419}
exquisite sensibility of the most interesting passion. The more
complete Music of an air is still superior, and, in the imitation of
the more animated passions, has one great advantage over every sort of
discourse, whether Prose or Poetry, which is not sung to Music. In a
person who is either much depressed by grief or enlivened by joy, who
is strongly affected either with love or hatred, with gratitude or
resentment, with admiration or contempt, there is commonly one thought
or idea which dwells upon his mind, which continually haunts him,
which, when he has chased it away, immediately returns upon him, and
which in company makes him absent and inattentive. He can think but of
one object, and he cannot repeat to them that object so frequently as
it recurs upon him. He takes refuge in solitude, where he can with
freedom either indulge the extasy or give way to the agony of the
agreeable or disagreeable passion which agitates him; and where he can
repeat to himself, which he does sometimes mentally, and sometimes
even aloud, and almost always in the same words, the particular
thought which either delights or distresses him. Neither Prose nor
Poetry can venture to imitate those almost endless repetitions of
passion. They may describe them as I do now, but they dare not imitate
them; they would become most insufferably tiresome if they did. The
Music of a passionate air, not only may, but frequently does, imitate
them; and it never makes its way so directly or so irresistibly to the
heart as when it does so. It is upon this account that the words of an
air, especially of a passionate one, though they are seldom very long,
yet are scarce ever sung straight on to the end, like those of a
recitative; but are almost always broken into parts, which are
transposed and repeated again and again, according to the fancy or
judgment of the composer. It is by means of such repetitions only,
that Music can exert those peculiar powers of imitation which
distinguish it, and in which it excels all the other Imitative Arts.
Poetry and Eloquence, it has accordingly been often observed, produce
their effect always by a connected variety and succession of different
thoughts and ideas: but Music frequently produces its effects by a
repetition of the same idea; and the same sense expressed in the same,
or nearly the same, combination of sounds, though at first perhaps it
may make scarce any impression upon us, yet, by being repeated again
and again, it comes at last gradually, and by little and little, to
move, to agitate, and to transport us.

To these powers of imitating, Music naturally, or rather necessarily,
joins the happiest choice in the objects of its imitation. The
sentiments and passions which Music can best imitate are those which
unite and bind men together in society; the social, the decent, the
virtuous, the interesting and affecting, the amiable and agreeable,
the awful and respectable, the noble, elevating, and commanding
passions. Grief and distress are interesting and affecting; humanity
and compassion, joy and admiration, are amiable and agreeable;
devotion is awful {420} and respectable; the generous contempt of
danger, the honourable indignation at injustice, are noble, elevating,
and commanding. But it is these and such like passions which Music is
fittest for imitating, and which it in fact most frequently imitates.
They are, if I may say so, all Musical Passions; their natural tones
are all clear, distinct, and almost melodious; and they naturally
express themselves in a language which is distinguished by pauses at
regular, and almost equal, intervals; and which, upon that account,
can more easily be adapted to the regular returns of the correspondent
periods of a tune. The passions, on the contrary, which drive men from
one another, the unsocial, the hateful, the indecent, the vicious
passions, cannot easily be imitated by Music, The voice of furious
anger, for example, is harsh and discordant; its periods are all
irregular, sometimes very long and sometimes very short, and
distinguished by no regular pauses. The obscure and almost
inarticulate grumblings of black malice and envy, the screaming
outcries of dastardly fear, the hideous growlings of brutal and
implacable revenge, are all equally discordant. It is with difficulty
that Music can imitate any of those passions, and the Music which does
imitate them is not the most agreeable. A whole entertainment may
consist, without any impropriety, of the imitation of the social and
amiable passions. It would be a strange entertainment which consisted
altogether in the imitation of the odious and the vicious. A single
song expresses almost always some social, agreeable, or interesting
passion. In an opera the unsocial and disagreeable are sometimes
introduced, but it is rarely, and as discords are introduced into
harmony, to set off by their contrast the superior beauty of the
opposite passions. What Plato said of Virtue, that it was of all
beauties the brightest, may with some sort of truth be said of the
proper and natural objects of musical imitation. They are either the
sentiments and passions, in the exercise of which consist both the
glory and the happiness of human life, or they are those from which it
derives its most delicious pleasures, and most enlivening joys; or, at
the worst and the lowest, they are those by which it calls upon our
indulgence and compassionate assistance to its unavoidable weaknesses,
distresses, and misfortunes.

To the merit of its imitation and to that of its happy choice in the
objects which it imitates, the great merits of Statuary and Painting,
Music joins another peculiar and exquisite merit of its own. Statuary
and Painting cannot be said to add any new beauties of their own to
the beauties of Nature which they imitate; they may assemble a greater
number of those beauties, and group them in a more agreeable manner
than they are commonly, or perhaps ever, to be found in Nature. It may
perhaps be true, what the artists are so very fond of telling us, that
no woman ever equalled, in all the parts of her body, the beauty of
the Venus of Medicis, nor any man that of the Apollo of Belvidere. But
they must allow, surely, that there is no particular {421} beauty in
any part or feature of those two famous statues, which is not at least
equalled, if not much excelled, by what is to be found in many living
subjects. But Music, by arranging, and as it were bending to its own
time and measure, whatever sentiments and passions it expresses, not
only assembles and groups, as well as Statuary and Painting, the
different beauties of Nature which it imitates, but it clothes them,
besides, with a new and an exquisite beauty of its own; it clothes
them with melody and harmony, which, like a transparent mantle, far
from concealing any beauty, serve only to give a brighter colour, a
more enlivening lustre and a more engaging grace to every beauty which
they infold.

To these two different sorts of imitation,--to that general one, by
which Music is made to resemble discourse, and to that particular one,
by which it is made to express the sentiments and feelings with which
a particular situation inspires a particular person,--there is
frequently joined a third. The person who sings may join to this
double imitation of the singer the additional imitation of the actor;
and express, not only by the modulation and cadence of his voice, but
by his countenance, by his attitudes, by his gestures, and by his
motions, the sentiments and feelings of the person whose situation is
painted in the song. Even in private company, though a song may
sometimes perhaps be said to be well sung, it can never be said to be
well performed, unless the singer does something of this kind; and
there is no comparison between the effect of what is sung coldly from
a music-book at the end of a harpsichord, and of what is not only
sung, but acted with proper freedom, animation, and boldness. An opera
actor does no more than this; and an imitation which is so pleasing,
and which appears even so natural, in private society, ought not to
appear forced, unnatural, or disagreeable upon the stage.

In a good opera actor, not only the modulations and pauses of his
voice, but every motion and gesture, every variation, either in the
air of his head, or in the attitude of his body, correspond to the
time and measure of Music: they correspond to the expression of the
sentiment or passion which the Music imitates, and that expression
necessarily corresponds to this time and measure. Music is as it were
the soul which animates him, which informs every feature of his
countenance, and even directs every movement of his eyes. Like the
musical expression of a song, his action adds to the natural grace of
the sentiment or action which it imitates, a new and peculiar grace of
its own; the exquisite and engaging grace of those gestures and
motions, of those airs and attitudes which are directed by the
movement, by the time and measure of Music; this grace heightens and
enlivens that expression. Nothing can be more deeply affecting than
the interesting scenes of the serious opera, when to good Poetry and
good Music, to the Poetry of Metastasio and the Music of Pergolese, is
added the {422} execution of a good actor. In the serious opera,
indeed, the action is too often sacrificed to the Music; the castrati,
who perform the principal parts, being always the most insipid and
miserable actors. The sprightly airs of the comic opera are, in the
same manner, in the highest degree enlivening and diverting. Though
they do not make us laugh so loud as we sometimes do at the scenes of
the common comedy, they make us smile more frequently; and the
agreeable gaiety, the temperate joy, if I may call it so, with which
they inspire us, is not only an elegant, but a most delicious
pleasure. The deep distress and the great passions of tragedy are
capable of producing some effect, though it should be but
indifferently acted. It is not so with the lighter misfortunes and
less affecting situations of comedy: unless it is at least tolerably
acted, it is altogether insupportable. But the castrati are scarce
ever tolerable actors; they are accordingly seldom admitted to play in
the comic opera; which, being upon that account commonly better
performed than the serious, appears to many people the better
entertainment of the two.

The imitative powers of Instrumental are much inferior to those of
Vocal Music; its melodious but unmeaning and inarticulated sounds
cannot, like the articulations of the human voice, relate distinctly
the circumstances of any particular story, or describe the different
situations which those circumstances produced; or even express
clearly, and so as to be understood by every hearer, the various
sentiments and passions which the parties concerned felt from these
situations: even its imitation of other sounds, the objects which it
can certainly best imitate, is commonly so indistinct, that alone, and
without any explication, it might not readily suggest to us what was
the imitated object. The rocking of a cradle is supposed to be
imitated in that concerto of Correlli, which is said to have been
composed for the Nativity: but unless we were told beforehand, it
might not readily occur to us what it meant to imitate, or whether it
meant to imitate any thing at all; and this imitation (which, though
perhaps as successful as any other, is by no means the distinguished
beauty of that admired composition) might only appear to us a singular
and odd passage in Music. The ringing of bells and the singing of the
lark and nightingale are imitated in the symphony of Instrumental
Music which Mr. Handel has composed for the Allegro and Penseroso of
Milton: these are not only sounds but musical sounds, and may
therefore be supposed to be more within the compass of the powers of
musical imitation. It is accordingly universally acknowledged, that in
these imitations this great master has been remarkably successful; and
yet, unless the verses of Milton explained the meaning of the Music,
it might not even in this case readily occur to us what it meant to
imitate, or whether it meant to imitate any thing at all. With the
explication of the words, indeed, the imitation appears, what it
certainly is, a very fine one; but without {423} that explication it
might perhaps appear only a singular passage, which had less
connexion either with what went before or with what came after it,
than any other in the Music.

Instrumental Music is said sometimes to imitate motion; but in reality
it only either imitates the particular sounds which accompany certain
motions, or it produces sounds of which the time and measure bear some
correspondence to the variations, to the pauses and interruptions, to
the successive accelerations and retardations of the motion which it
means to imitate: it is in this way that it sometimes attempts to
express the march and array of an army, the confusion and hurry of a
battle, &c. In all these cases, however, its imitation is so very
indistinct, that without the accompaniment of some other art, to
explain and interpret its meaning, it would be almost always
unintelligible; and we could scarce ever know with certainty, either
what it meant to imitate, or whether it meant to imitate any thing at
all.

In the imitative arts, though it is by no means necessary that the
imitating should so exactly resemble the imitated object, that the one
should sometimes be mistaken for the other, it is, however, necessary
that they should resemble at least so far, that the one should always
readily suggest the other. It would be a strange picture which
required an inscription at the foot to tell us, not only what
particular person it meant to represent, but whether it meant to
represent a man or a horse, or whether it meant to be a picture at
all, and to represent any thing. The imitations of instrumental Music
may, in some respects, be said to resemble such pictures. There is,
however, this very essential difference between them, that the picture
would not be much mended by the inscription; whereas, by what may be
considered as very little more than such an inscription, instrumental
Music, though it cannot always even then, perhaps, be said properly to
imitate, may, however, produce all the effects of the finest and most
perfect imitation. In order to explain how this is brought about, it
will not be necessary to descend into any great depth of philosophical
speculation.

That train of thoughts and ideas which is continually passing through
the mind does not always move on with, the same pace, if I may say so,
or with the same order and connection. When we are gay and cheerful,
its motion is brisker and more lively, our thoughts succeed one
another more rapidly, and those which immediately follow one another
seem frequently either to have but little connection, or to be
connected rather by their opposition than by their mutual resemblance.
As in this wanton and playful disposition of mind we hate to dwell
long upon the same thought, so we do not much care to pursue
resembling thoughts; and the variety of contrast is more agreeable to
us than the sameness of resemblance. It is quite otherwise when we are
melancholy and desponding; we then frequently find ourselves haunted,
as it were, by some thought which we would gladly chase away, but
{424} which constantly pursues us, and which admits no followers,
attendants, or companions, but such as are of its own kindred and
complexion. A slow succession of resembling or closely connected
thoughts is the characteristic of this disposition of mind; a quick
succession of thoughts, frequently contrasted and in general very
slightly connected, is the characteristic of the other. What may be
called the natural state of the mind, the state in which we are
neither elated nor dejected, the state of sedateness, tranquillity,
and composure, holds a sort of middle place between those two opposite
extremes; our thoughts may succeed one another more slowly, and with a
more distinct connection, than in the one; but more quickly and with
a greater variety, than in the other.

Acute sounds are naturally gay, sprightly, and enlivening; grave
sounds solemn, awful, and melancholy. There seems too to be some
natural connection between acuteness in tune and quickness in time or
succession, as well as between gravity and slowness: an acute sound
seems to fly off more quickly than a grave one: the treble is more
cheerful than the bass; its notes likewise commonly succeed one
another more rapidly. But instrumental Music, by a proper arrangement,
by a quicker or slower succession of acute and grave, of resembling
and contrasted sounds, can not only accommodate itself to the gay, the
sedate, or the melancholy mood; but if the mind is so far vacant as
not to be disturbed by any disorderly passion, it can, at least for
the moment, and to a certain degree, produce every possible
modification of each of those moods or dispositions. We all readily
distinguish the cheerful, the gay, and the sprightly Music, from the
melancholy, the plaintive, and the affecting; and both these from what
holds a sort of middle place between them, the sedate, the tranquil,
and the composing. And we are all sensible that, in the natural and
ordinary state of the mind, Music can, by a sort of incantation, sooth
and charm us into some degree of that particular mood or disposition
which accords with its own character and temper. In a concert of
instrumental Music the attention is engaged, with pleasure and
delight, to listen to a combination of the most agreeable and
melodious sounds, which follow one another, sometimes with a quicker,
and sometimes with a slower succession; and in which those that
immediately follow one another sometimes exactly or nearly resemble,
and sometimes contrast with one another in tune, in time, and in order
of arrangement. The mind being thus successively occupied by a train
of objects, of which the nature, succession, and connection
correspond, sometimes to the gay, sometimes to the tranquil, and
sometimes to the melancholy mood or disposition, it is itself
successively led into each of those moods or dispositions; and is thus
brought into a sort of harmony or concord with the Music which so
agreeably engages its attention.

{425} It is not, however, by imitation properly, that instrumental
Music produces this effect: instrumental Music does not imitate, as
vocal Music, as Painting, or as Dancing would imitate, a gay, a
sedate, or a melancholy person; it does not tell us, as any of those
other arts could tell us, a pleasant, a serious, or a melancholy
story. It is not, as in vocal Music, in Painting, or in Dancing, by
sympathy with the gaiety, the sedateness, or the melancholy and
distress of some other person, that instrumental Music soothes us into
each of these dispositions: it becomes itself a gay, a sedate, or a
melancholy object; and the mind naturally assumes the mood or
disposition which at the time corresponds to the object which engages
its attention. Whatever we feel from instrumental Music is an
original, and not a sympathetic feeling: it is our own gaiety,
sedateness, or melancholy; not the the reflected disposition of
another person.

When we follow the winding alleys of some happily situated and well
laid out garden, we are presented with a succession of landscapes,
which are sometimes gay, sometimes gloomy, and sometimes calm and
serene; if the mind is in its natural state, it suits itself to the
objects which successively present themselves, and varies in some
degree its mood and present humour with every variation of the scene.
It would be improper, however, to say that those scenes imitated the
gay, the calm, or the melancholy mood of the mind; they may produce in
their turn each of those moods, but they cannot imitate any of them.
Instrumental Music, in the same manner, though it can excite all those
different dispositions, cannot imitate any of them. There are no two
things in nature more perfectly disparate than sound and sentiment;
and it is impossible by any human power to fashion the one into any
thing that bears any real resemblance to the other.

This power of exciting and varying the different moods and
dispositions of the mind, which instrumental Music really possesses to
a very considerable degree, has been the principal source of its
reputation for those great imitative powers which have been ascribed
to it. 'Painting,' says an author, more capable of feeling strongly
than of analysing accurately, Mr. Rousseau of Geneva, 'Painting, which
presents its imitations, not to the imagination, but to the senses,
and to only one of the senses, can represent nothing besides the
objects of sight. Music, one might imagine, should be equally confined
to those of hearing. It imitates, however, every thing, even those
objects which are perceivable by sight only. By a delusion that seems
almost inconceivable, it can, as it were, put the eye into the ear;
and the greatest wonder, of an art which acts only by motion and
succession, is, that it can imitate rest and repose. Night, Sleep,
Solitude, and Silence are all within the compass of musical imitation.
Though all Nature should be asleep, the person who contemplates it is
awake; and the art of the musician consists in substituting, in the
room of an {426} image of what is not the object of hearing, that of
the movements which its presence would excite in the mind of the
spectator.'--That is, of the effects which it would produce upon his
mood and disposition. 'The musician (continues the same author) will
sometimes, not only agitate the waves of the sea, blow up the flames
of a conflagration, make the rain fall, the rivulets flow and swell
the torrents, but he will paint the horrors of a hideous desert,
darken the walls of a subterraneous dungeon, calm the tempest, restore
serenity and tranquillity to the air and the sky, and shed from the
orchestra a new freshness over the groves and the fields. He will not
directly represent any of these objects, but he will excite in the
mind the same movements which it would feel from seeing them.'

Upon this very eloquent description of Mr. Rousseau I must observe,
that without the accompaniment of the scenery and action of the opera,
without the assistance either of the scene-painter or of the poet, or
of both, the instrumental Music of the orchestra could produce none of
the effects which are here ascribed to it: and we could never know, we
could never even guess, which of the gay, melancholy, or tranquil
objects above mentioned it meant to represent to us; or whether it
meant to represent any of them, and not merely to entertain us with a
concert of gay, melancholy, or tranquil Music; or, as the ancients
called them, of the Diastaltic, of the Systaltic, or of the Middle
Music. With that accompaniment, indeed, though it cannot always even
then, perhaps, be said properly to imitate, yet by supporting the
imitation of some other art, it may produce all the same effects upon
us as if itself had imitated in the finest and most perfect manner.
Whatever be the object or situation which the scene-painter represents
upon the theatre, the Music of the orchestra, by disposing the mind to
the same sort of mood and temper which it would feel from the presence
of that object, or from sympathy with the person who was placed in
that situation, can greatly enhance the effect of that imitation: it
can accommodate itself to every diversity of scene. The melancholy of
the man who, upon some great occasion, only finds himself alone in the
darkness, the silence and solitude of the night, is very different
from that of one who, upon a like occasion, finds himself in the midst
of some dreary and inhospitable desert; and even in this situation his
feelings would not be the same as if he was shut up in a subterraneous
dungeon. The different degrees of precision with which the Music of
the orchestra can accommodate itself to each of those diversities,
must depend upon the taste, the sensibility, the fancy and imagination
of the composer: it may sometimes, perhaps, contribute to this
precision, that it should imitate, as well as it can, the sounds which
either naturally accompany, or which might be supposed to accompany,
the particular objects represented. The symphony in the French opera
of Alcyone, which imitated the violence of the winds and the dashing
of the waves, in the {427} tempest which was to drown Coix, is much
commended by cotemporary writers. That in the opera of Isse, which
imitated that murmuring in the leaves of the oaks of Dodona, which
might be supposed to precede the miraculous pronunciation of the
oracle: and that in the opera of Amadis, of which the dismal accents
imitated the sounds which might be supposed to accompany the opening
of the tomb of Ardari, before the apparition of the ghost of that
warrior, are still more celebrated. Instrumental Music, however,
without violating too much its own melody and harmony, can imitate but
imperfectly the sounds of natural objects, of which the greater part
have neither melody nor harmony. Great reserve, great discretion, and
a very nice discernment are requisite, in order to introduce with
propriety such imperfect imitations, either into Poetry or Music; when
repeated too often, when continued too long, they appear to be what
they really are, mere tricks, in which a very inferior artist, if he
will only give himself the trouble to attend to them, can easily equal
the greatest. I have seen a Latin translation of Mr. Pope's Ode on St.
Cecilia's Day, which in this respect very much excelled the original.
Such imitations are still easier in Music. Both in the one art and in
the other, the difficulty is not in making them as well as they are
capable of being made, but in knowing when and how far to make them at
all: but to be able to accommodate the temper and character of the
Music to every peculiarity of the scene and situation with such exact
precision, that the one shall produce the very same effect upon the
mind as the other, is not one of those tricks in which an inferior
artist can easily equal the greatest; it is an art which requires all
the judgment, knowledge, and invention of the most consummate master.
It is upon this art, and not upon its imperfect imitation, either of
real or imaginary sounds, that the great effects of instrumental Music
depend; such imitations ought perhaps to be admitted only so far as
they may sometimes contribute to ascertain the meaning, and thereby to
enhance the effects of this art.

By endeavouring to extend the effects of scenery beyond what the
nature of the thing will admit of, it has been much abused; and in the
common, as well as in the musical drama, many imitations have been
attempted, which, after the first and second time we have seen them,
necessarily appear ridiculous: such are, the Thunder rumbling from the
Mustard-bowl, and the Snow of Paper and thick Hail of Pease, so finely
exposed by Mr. Pope. Such imitations resemble those of painted
Statuary; they may surprise at first, but they disgust ever after, and
appear evidently such simple and easy tricks as are fit only for the
amusement of children and their nurses at a puppet-show. The thunder
of either theatre ought certainly never to be louder than that which
the orchestra is capable of producing; and their most dreadful
tempests ought never to exceed what the scene painter is capable of
representing. In such imitations there may be an art which merits
{428} some degree of esteem and admiration. In the other there can be
none which merits any.

This abuse of scenery has both subsisted much longer, and been carried
to a much greater degree of extravagance, in the musical than in the
common drama. In France it has been long banished from the latter; but
it still continues, not only to be tolerated, but to be admired and
applauded in the former. In the French operas, not only thunder and
lightning, storms and tempests, are commonly represented in the
ridiculous manner above mentioned, but all the marvellous, all the
supernatural of Epic Poetry, all the metamorphoses of Mythology, all
the wonders of Witchcraft and Magic, every thing that is most unfit to
be represented upon the stage, are every day exhibited with the most
complete approbation and applause of that ingenious nation. The music
of the orchestra producing upon the audience nearly the same effect
which a better and more artful imitation would produce, hinders them
from feeling, at least in its full force, the ridicule of those
childish and awkward imitations which necessarily abound in that
extravagant scenery. And in reality such imitations, though no doubt
ridiculous every where, yet certainly appear somewhat less so in the
musical than they would in the common drama. The Italian opera, before
it was reformed by Apostolo, Zeno, and Metastasio, was in this respect
equally extravagant, and was upon that account the subject of the
agreeable raillery of Mr. Addison in several different papers of the
Spectator. Even since that reformation it still continues to be a
rule, that the scene should change at least with every act; and the
unity of place never was a more sacred law in the common drama, than
the violation of it has become in the musical: the latter seems in
reality to require both a more picturesque and a more varied scenery,
than is at all necessary for the former. In an opera, as the Music
supports the effect of the scenery, so the scenery often serves to
determine the character, and to explain the meaning of the Music; it
ought to vary therefore as that character varies. The pleasure of an
opera, besides, is in its nature more a sensual pleasure, than that of
a common comedy or tragedy; the latter produce their effect
principally by means of the imagination: in the closet, accordingly,
their effect is not much inferior to what it is upon the stage. But
the effect of an opera is seldom very great in the closet; it
addresses itself more to the external senses, and as it soothes the
ear by its melody and harmony, so we feel that it ought to dazzle the
eye with the splendour of its scenery.

In an opera the instrumental Music of the orchestra supports the
imitation both of the poet and of the actor, as well as of the
scene-painter. The overture disposes the mind to that mood which fits
it for the opening of the piece. The Music between the acts keeps up
the impression which the foregoing had made, and prepares us for that
which the following is to make. When the orchestra interrupts, as it
{429} frequently does, either the recitative or the air, it is in
order either to enforce the effect of what had gone before, or to put
the mind in the mood which fits it for hearing what is to come after.
Both in the recitatives and in the airs it accompanies and directs the
voice, and often brings it back to the proper tone and modulation,
when it is upon the point of wandering away from them; and the
correctness of the best vocal Music is owing in a great measure to the
guidance of instrumental; though in all these cases it supports the
imitation of another art, yet in all of them it may be said rather to
diminish than to increase the resemblance between the imitating and
the imitated object. Nothing can be more unlike to what really passes
in the world, than that persons engaged in the most interesting
situations, both of public and private life, in sorrow, in
disappointment, in distress, in despair, should, in all that they say
and do, be constantly accompanied with a fine concert of instrumental
Music. Were we to reflect upon it, such accompaniment must in all
cases diminish the probability of the action, and render the
representation still less like nature than it otherwise would be. It
is not by imitation, therefore, that instrumental Music supports and
enforces the imitations of the other arts; but it is by producing upon
the mind, in consequence of other powers, the same sort of effect
which the most exact imitation of nature, which the most perfect
observation of probability, could produce. To produce this effect is,
in such entertainments, the sole end and purpose of that imitation and
observation. If it can be equally well produced by other means, this
end and purpose may be equally well answered.

But if instrumental Music can seldom be said to be properly imitative,
even when it is employed to support the imitation of some other art,
it is commonly still less so when it is employed alone. Why should it
embarrass its melody and harmony, or constrain its time and measure,
by attempting an imitation which, without the accompaniment of some
other art to explain and interpret its meaning, nobody is likely to
understand? In the most approved instrumental Music, accordingly, in
the overtures of Handel and the concertos of Correlli, there is little
or no imitation, and where there is any, it is the source of but a
very small part of the merit of those compositions. Without any
imitation, instrumental Music can produce very considerable effects;
though its powers over the heart and affections are, no doubt, much
inferior to those of vocal Music, it has, however, considerable
powers: by the sweetness of its sounds it awakens agreeably, and calls
upon the attention; by their connection and affinity it naturally
detains that attention, which follows easily a series of agreeable
sounds, which have all a certain relation both to a common,
fundamental, or leading note, called the key note; and to a certain
succession or combination of notes, called the song or composition. By
means of this relation each foregoing sound seems to introduce, and as
it were prepare the mind for the following: by its {430} rhythmus, by
its time and measure, it disposes that succession of sounds into a
certain arrangement, which renders the whole more easy to be
comprehended and remembered. Time and measure are to instrumental
Music what order and method are to discourse; they break it into
proper parts and divisions, by which we are enabled both to remember
better what is gone before, and frequently to foresee somewhat of what
is to come after; we frequently foresee the return of a period which
we know must correspond to another which we remember to have gone
before; and, according to the saying of an ancient philosopher and
musician, the enjoyment of Music arises partly from memory and partly
from foresight. When the measure, after having been continued so long
as to satisfy us, changes to another, that variety, which thus
disappoints, becomes more agreeable to us than the uniformity which
would have gratified our expectation: but without this order and
method we could remember very little of what had gone before, and we
could foresee still less of what was to come after; and the whole
enjoyment of Music would be equal to little more than the effect of
the particular sounds which rung in our ears at every particular
instant. By means of this order and method it is, during the progress
of the entertainment, equal to the effect of all that we remember, and
of all that we foresee; and at the conclusion of the entertainment, to
the combined and accumulated effect of all the different parts of
which the whole was composed.

A well-composed concerto of instrumental Music, by the number and
variety of the instruments, by the variety of the parts which are
performed by them, and the perfect concord or correspondence of all
these different parts; by the exact harmony or coincidence of all the
different sounds which are heard at the same time, and by that happy
variety of measure which regulates the succession of those which are
heard at different times, presents an object so agreeable, so great,
so various, and so interesting, that alone, and without suggesting any
other object, either by imitation or otherwise, it can occupy, and as
it were fill up, completely the whole capacity of the mind, so as to
leave no part of its attention vacant for thinking of any thing else.
In the contemplation of that immense variety of agreeable and
melodious sounds, arranged and digested, both in their coincidence and
in their succession, into so complete and regular a system, the mind
in reality enjoys not only a very great sensual, but a very high
intellectual pleasure, not unlike that which it derives from the
contemplation of a great system in any other science. A full concerto
of such instrumental Music, not only does not require, but it does not
admit of any accompaniment. A song or a dance, by demanding an
attention which we have not to spare, would disturb, instead of
heightening, the effect of the Music; they may often very properly
succeed, but they cannot accompany it. That music seldom means to tell
any particular story, or to imitate any {431} particular event, or in
general to suggest any particular object, distinct from that
combination of sounds of which itself is composed. Its meaning,
therefore, may be said to be complete in itself, and to require no
interpreters to explain it. What is called the subject of such Music
is merely, as has already been said, a certain leading combination of
notes, to which it frequently returns, and to which all its
digressions and variations bear a certain affinity. It is altogether
different from what is called the subject of a poem or a picture,
which is always something which is not either in the poem or in the
picture, or something distinct from that combination, either of words
on the one hand or of colours on the other, of which they are
respectively composed. The subject of a composition of instrumental
Music is part of that composition: the subject of a poem or picture is
part of neither.

The effect of instrumental Music upon the mind has been called its
expression. In the feeling it is frequently not unlike the effect of
what is called the expression of Painting, and is sometimes equally
interesting. But the effect of the expression of Painting arises
always from the thought of something which, though distinctly and
clearly suggested by the drawing and colouring of the picture, is
altogether different from that drawing and colouring. It arises
sometimes from sympathy with, sometimes from antipathy and aversion
to, the sentiments, emotions, and passions which the countenance, the
action, the air and attitude of the persons represented suggest. The
melody and harmony of instrumental Music, on the contrary, do not
distinctly and clearly suggest any thing that is different from that
melody and harmony. Whatever effect it produces is the immediate
effect of that melody and harmony, and not of something else which is
signified and suggested by them: they in fact signify and suggest
nothing. It may be proper to say that the complete art of painting,
the complete merit of a picture, is composed of three distinct arts or
merits; that of drawing, that of colouring, and that of expression.
But to say, as Mr. Addison does, that the complete art of a musician,
the complete merit of a piece of Music, is composed or made up of
three distinct arts or merits, that of melody, that of harmony, and
that of expression, is to say, that it is made up of melody and
harmony, and of the immediate and necessary effect of melody and
harmony: the division is by no means logical; expression in painting
is not the necessary effect either of good drawing or of good
colouring, or of both together; a picture may be both finely drawn and
finely coloured, and yet have very little expression: but that effect
upon the mind which is called expression in Music, is the immediate
and necessary effect of good melody. In the power of producing this
effect consists the essential characteristic which distinguishes such
melody from what is bad or indifferent. Harmony may enforce the effect
of good melody, but without good melody the most skilful harmony can
produce no effect which deserves the name {432} of expression; it can
do little more than fatigue and confound the ear. A painter may
possess, in a very eminent degree, the talents of drawing and
colouring, and yet possess that of expression in a very inferior
degree. Such a painter, too, may have great merit. In the judgment of
Du Piles, even the celebrated Titian was a painter of this kind. But
to say that a musician possessed the talents of melody and harmony in
a very eminent degree, and that of expression in a very inferior one,
would be to say, that in his works the cause was not followed by its
necessary and proportionable effect. A musician may be a very skilful
harmonist, and yet be defective in the talents of melody, air, and
expression; his songs may be dull and without effect. Such a musician
too may have a certain degree of merit, not unlike that of a man of
great learning, who wants fancy, taste, and invention.

Instrumental Music, therefore, though it may, no doubt, be considered
in some respects as an imitative art, is certainly less so than any
other which merits that appellation; it can imitate but a few objects,
and even these so imperfectly, that without the accompaniment of some
other art, its imitation is scarce ever intelligible: imitation is by
no means essential to it, and the principal effect it is capable of
producing arises from powers altogether different from those of
imitation.

-----

