PART I.


THE most perfect imitation of an object of any kind must in all cases,
it is evident, be another object of the same kind, made as exactly as
possible after the same model. What, for example, would be the most
perfect imitation of the carpet which now lies before me?--Another
carpet, certainly, wrought as exactly as possible after the same
pattern. But, whatever might be the merit or beauty of this second
carpet, it would not be supposed to derive any from the circumstance
of its having been made in imitation of the first. This circumstance
of its being not an original, but a copy, would even be considered as
some diminution of that merit; a greater or smaller, in proportion as
the object was of a nature to lay claim to a greater or smaller degree
of admiration. It would not much diminish the merit of a common
carpet, because in such trifling objects, which at best can lay claim
to so little beauty or merit of any kind, we do not always think it
worth while to affect originality: it would diminish a good deal that
of a carpet of very exquisite workmanship. In objects of still
greater importance, this exact, or, as it would be called, this
servile imitation, would be considered as the most unpardonable
blemish. To build another St. Peter's or St. Paul's church, of exactly
the same dimensions, proportions, and ornaments with the present
buildings at Rome or London, would be supposed to argue such a
miserable barrenness of genius and invention in the architect as would
disgrace the most expensive magnificence.

The exact resemblance of the correspondent parts of the same object
{406} is frequently considered as a beauty, and the want of it as a
deformity; as in the correspondent members of the human body, in the
opposite wings of the same building, in the opposite trees of the same
alley, in the correspondent compartments of the same piece of
carpet-work, or of the same flower-garden, in the chairs or tables
which stand in the correspondent parts of the same room, etc. But in
objects of the same kind, which in other respects are regarded as
altogether separate and unconnected, this exact resemblance is seldom
considered as a beauty, nor the want of it as a deformity. A man, and
in the same manner a horse, is handsome or ugly, each of them, on
account of his own intrinsic beauty or deformity, without any regard
to their resembling or not resembling, the one, another man, or the
other, another horse. A set of coach-horses, indeed, is supposed to be
handsomer when they are all exactly matched; but each horse is, in
this case, considered not as a separated and unconnected object, or as
a whole by himself, but as a part of another whole, to the other parts
of which he ought to bear a certain correspondence: separated from the
set, he derives neither beauty from his resemblance, nor deformity
from his unlikeness to the other horses which compose it.

Even in the correspondent parts of the same object, we frequently
require no more than a resemblance in the general outline. If the
inferior members of those correspondent parts are too minute to be
seen distinctly, without a separate and distinct examination of each
part by itself, as a separate and unconnected object, we should
sometimes even be displeased if the resemblance was carried beyond
this general outline. In the correspondent parts of a room we
frequently hang pictures of the same size; those pictures, however,
resemble one another in nothing but the frame, or, perhaps, in the
general character of the subject; if the one is a landscape, the other
is a landscape too; if the one represents a religious or a
bacchanalian subject, its companion represents another of the same
kind. Nobody ever thought of repeating the same picture in each
correspondent frame. The frame, and the general character of two or
three pictures, is as much as the eye can comprehend at one view, or
from one station. Each picture, in order, to be seen distinctly, and
understood thoroughly, must be viewed from a particular station, and
examined by itself as a separate and unconnected object. In a hall or
portico, adorned with statues, the niches, or perhaps the pedestals,
may exactly resemble one another, but the statues are always different
Even the masks which are sometimes carried upon the different
key-stones of the same arcade, or of the correspondent doors and
windows of the same front, though they may all resemble one another in
the general outline, yet each of them has always its own peculiar
features, and a grimace of its own. There are some Gothic buildings in
which the correspondent windows resemble one another only in the
general outline, and not in the smaller {407} ornaments and
subdivisions. These are different in each, and the architect had
considered them as too minute to be seen distinctly, without a
particular and separate examination of each window by itself, as a
separate and unconnected object. A variety of this sort, however, I
think, is not agreeable. In objects which are susceptible only of a
certain inferior order of beauty, such as the frames of pictures, the
niches or the pedestals of statues, &c., there seems frequently to be
affectation in the study of variety, of which the merit is scarcely
ever sufficient to compensate the want of that perspicuity and
distinctness, of that easiness to be comprehended and remembered,
which is the natural effect of exact uniformity. In a portico of the
Corinthian or Ionic order, each column resembles every other, not only
in the general outline, but in all the minutest ornaments; though some
of them, in order to be seen distinctly, may require a separate and
distinct examination in each column, and in the entablature of each
intercolumnation. In the inlaid tables, which, according to the
present fashion, are sometimes fixed in the correspondent parts of the
same room, the pictures only are different in each. All the other more
frivolous and fanciful ornaments are commonly, so far at least as I
have observed the fashion, the same in them all. Those ornaments,
however, in order to be seen distinctly, require a distinct
examination of each table.

The extraordinary resemblance of two natural objects, of twins, for
example, is regarded as a curious circumstance; which, though it does
not increase, yet does not diminish the beauty of either, considered
as a separate and unconnected object. But the exact resemblance of two
productions of art, seems to be always considered as some diminution
of the merit of at least one of them; as it seems to prove, that one
of them, at least, is a copy either of the other, or of some other
original. One may say, even of the copy of a picture, that it derives
its merit, not so much from its resemblance to the original, as from
its resemblance to the object which the original was meant to
resemble. The owner of the copy, so far from setting any high value
upon its resemblance to the original, is often anxious to destroy any
value or merit which it might derive from this circumstance. He is
often anxious to persuade both himself and other people that it is not
a copy, but an original, of which what passes for the original is only
a copy. But, whatever merit a copy may derive from its resemblance to
the original, an original can derive none from the resemblance of its
copy.

But though a production of art seldom derives any merit from its
resemblance to another object of the same kind, it frequently derives
a great deal from its resemblance to an object of a different kind,
whether that object be a production of art or of nature. A painted
cloth, the work of some laborious Dutch artist, so curiously shaded
and coloured as to represent the pile and softness of a woollen one,
might derive some merit from its resemblance even to the sorry carpet
which now {408} lies before me. The copy might, and probably would, in
this case, be of much greater value than the original. But if this
carpet was represented as spread, either upon a floor or upon a table,
and projecting from the background of the picture, with exact
observation of perspective, and of light and shade, the merit of the
imitation would be still even greater.

In Painting, a plain surface of one kind is made to resemble, not only
a plain surface of another, but all the three dimensions of a solid
substance. In Statuary and Sculpture, a solid substance of one kind,
is made to resemble a solid substance of another. The disparity
between the object imitating, and the object imitated, is much greater
in the one art than in the other; and the pleasure arising from the
imitation seems greater in proportion as this disparity is greater.

In Painting, the imitation frequently pleases, though the original
object be indifferent, or even offensive. In Statuary and Sculpture it
is otherwise. The imitation seldom pleases, unless the original object
be in a very high degree either great, or beautiful, or interesting. A
butcher's-stall, or a kitchen-dresser, with the objects which they
commonly present, are not certainly the happiest subjects, even for
Painting. They have, however, been represented with so much care and
success by some Dutch masters, that it is impossible to view the
pictures without some degree of pleasure. They would be most absurd
subjects for Statuary or Sculpture, which are, however, capable of
representing them. The picture of a very ugly or deformed man, such as
Æsop, or Scarron, might not make a disagreeable piece of furniture.
The statue certainly would. Even a vulgar ordinary man or woman,
engaged in a vulgar ordinary action, like what we see with so much
pleasure in the pictures of Rembrandt, would be too mean a subject for
Statuary. Jupiter, Hercules, and Apollo, Venus and Diana, the Nymphs
and the Graces, Bacchus, Mercury, Antinous, and Meleager, the
miserable death of Laocoon, the melancholy fate of the children of
Niobe, the Wrestlers, the fighting, the dying gladiator, the figures
of gods and goddesses, of heroes and heroines, the most perfect forms
of the human body, placed either in the noblest attitudes, or in the
most interesting situations which the human imagination is capable of
conceiving, are the proper, and therefore have always been the
favourite, subjects of Statuary: that art cannot, without degrading
itself, stoop to represent any thing that is offensive, or mean, or
even indifferent. Painting is not so disdainful; and, though capable
of representing the noblest objects, it can, without forfeiting its
title to please, submit to imitate those of a much more humble nature.
The merit of the imitation alone, and without any merit in the
imitated object, is capable of supporting the dignity of Painting: it
cannot support that of Statuary. There would seem, therefore, to be
more merit in the one species of imitation than in the other.

{409} In Statuary, scarcely any drapery is agreeable. The best of the
ancient statues were either altogether naked or almost naked; and
those of which any considerable part of the body is covered, are
represented as clothed in wet linen--a species of clothing which most
certainly never was agreeable to the fashion of any country. This
drapery too is drawn so tight, as to express beneath its narrow
foldings the exact form and outline of any limb, and almost of every
muscle of the body. The clothing which thus approached the nearest to
no clothing at all, had, it seems, in the judgment of the great
artists of antiquity, been that which was most suitable to Statuary. A
great painter of the Roman school, who had formed his manner almost
entirely upon the study of the ancient statues, imitated at first
their drapery in his pictures; but he soon found that in Painting it
had the air of meanness and poverty, as if the persons who wore it
could scarce afford clothes enough to cover them; and that larger
folds, and a looser and more flowing drapery, were more suitable to
the nature of his art. In Painting, the imitation of so very inferior
an object as a suit of clothes is capable of pleasing; and, in order
to give this object all the magnificence of which it is capable, it is
necessary that the folds should be large, loose, and flowing. It is
not necessary in Painting that the exact form and outline of every
limb, and almost of every muscle of the body, should be expressed
beneath the folds of the drapery; it is sufficient if these are so
disposed as to indicate in general the situation and attitude of the
principal limbs. Painting, by the mere force and merit of its
imitation, can venture, without the hazard of displeasing, to
substitute, upon many occasions, the inferior in the room of the
superior object, by making the one, in this manner, cover and entirely
conceal a great part of the other. Statuary can seldom venture to do
this, but with the utmost reserve and caution; and the same drapery,
which is noble and magnificent in the one art, appears clumsy and
awkward in the other. Some modern artists, however, have attempted to
introduce into Statuary the drapery which is peculiar to Painting. It
may not, perhaps, upon every occasion, be quite so ridiculous as the
marble periwigs in Westminster Abbey: but if it does not always appear
clumsy and awkward, it is at best always insipid and uninteresting.

It is not the want of colouring which hinders many things from
pleasing in Statuary which please in Painting; it is the want of that
degree of disparity between the imitating and the imitated object,
which is necessary, in order to render interesting the imitation of an
object which is itself not interesting. Colouring, when added to
Statuary, so far from increasing, destroys almost entirely the
pleasure which we receive from the imitation; because it takes away
the great source of that pleasure, the disparity between the imitating
and the imitated object. That one solid and coloured object should
exactly resemble another solid and coloured object, seems to be a
matter of no {410} great wonder or admiration. A painted statue,
though it may resemble a human figure much more exactly than any
statue which is not painted, is generally acknowledged to be a
disagreeable and even an offensive object; and so far are we from
being pleased with this superior likeness, that we are never satisfied
with it; and, after viewing it again and again, we always find that it
is not equal to what we are disposed to imagine it might have been:
though it should seem to want scarce any thing but the life, we could
not pardon it for thus wanting what it is altogether impossible it
should have. The works of Mrs. Wright, a self-taught artist of great
merit, are perhaps more perfect in this way than any thing I have ever
seen. They do admirably well to be seen now and then as a show; but
the best of them we shall find, if brought home to our own house, and
placed in a situation where it was to come often into view, would
make, instead of an ornamental, a most offensive piece of household
furniture. Painted statues, accordingly, are universally reprobated,
and we scarce ever meet with them. To colour the eyes of statues is
not altogether so uncommon: even this, however, is disapproved by all
good judges. 'I cannot bear it,' (a gentleman used to say, of great
knowledge and judgment in this art), 'I cannot bear it; I always want
them to speak to me.'

Artificial fruits and flowers sometimes imitate so exactly the natural
objects which they represent, that they frequently deceive us. We soon
grow weary of them, however; and, though they seem to want nothing but
the freshness and the flavour of natural fruits and flowers, we cannot
pardon them, in the same manner, for thus wanting what it is
altogether impossible they should have. But we do not grow weary of a
good flower and fruit painting. We do not grow weary of the foliage of
the Corinthian capital, or of the flowers which sometimes ornament the
frieze of that order. Such imitations, however, never deceive us;
their resemblance to the original objects is always much inferior to
that of artificial fruits and flowers. Such as it is, however, we are
contented with it; and, where there is such disparity between the
imitating and the imitated objects, we find that it is as great as it
can be, or as we expect that it should be. Paint that foliage and
those flowers with the natural colours, and, instead of pleasing more,
they will please much less. The resemblance, however, will be much
greater; but the disparity between the imitating and the imitated
objects will be so much less, that even this superior resemblance will
not satisfy us. Where the disparity is so very great, on the contrary,
we are often contented with the most imperfect resemblance; with the
very imperfect resemblance, for example, both as to the figure and the
colour, of fruits and flowers in shell-work.

It may be observed, however, that, though in Sculpture the imitation
of flowers and foliage pleases as an ornament of architecture, as a
part of the dress which is to set off the beauty of a different and a
more {411} important object, it would not please alone, or as a
separate and unconnected object, in the same manner as a fruit and
flower painting pleases. Flowers and foliage, how elegant and
beautiful soever, are not sufficiently interesting; they have not
dignity enough, if I may say so, to be proper subjects for a piece of
Sculpture, which is to please alone, and not to appear as the
ornamental appendage of some other object.

In Tapestry and Needle-work, in the same manner as in Painting, a
plain surface is sometimes made to represent all the three dimensions
of a solid substance. But both the shuttle of the weaver, and the
needle of the embroiderer, are instruments of imitation so much
inferior to the pencil of the painter, that we are not surprised to
find a proportionable inferiority in their productions. We have all
more or less experience that they usually are much inferior: and, in
appreciating a piece of Tapestry or Needle-work, we never compare the
imitation of either with that of a good picture, for it never could
stand that comparison, but with that of other pieces of Tapestry or
Needle-work. We take into consideration, not only the disparity
between the imitating and the imitated object, but the awkwardness of
the instruments of imitation; and if it is as well as any thing that
can be expected from these, if it is better than the greater part of
what actually comes from them, we are often not only contented but
highly pleased.

A good painter will often execute in a few days a subject which would
employ the best tapestry-weaver for many years; though, in proportion
to his time, therefore, the latter is always much worse paid than the
former, yet his work in the end comes commonly much dearer to market.
The great expense of good Tapestry, the circumstance which confines it
to the palaces of princes and of great lords, gives it, in the eyes
of the greater part of the people, an air of riches and magnificence,
which contributes still further to compensate the imperfection of its
imitation. In arts which address themselves, not to the prudent and
the wise, but to the rich and the great, to the proud and the vain, we
ought not to wonder if the appearances of great expense, of being what
few people can purchase, of being one of the surest characteristics of
great fortune, should often stand in the place of exquisite beauty,
and contribute equally to recommend their productions. As the idea of
expense seems often to embellish, so that of cheapness seems as
frequently to tarnish the lustre even of very agreeable objects. The
difference between real and false jewels is what even the experienced
eye of a jeweller can sometimes with difficulty distinguish. Let an
unknown lady, however, come into a public assembly, with a head-dress
which appears to be very richly adorned with diamonds, and let a
jeweller only whisper in our ear that they are false stones, not only
the lady will immediately sink in our imagination from the rank of a
princess to that of a very ordinary woman, but the {412} head-dress,
from being an object of the most splendid magnificence, will at once
become an impertinent piece of tawdry and tinsel finery.

It was some years ago the fashion to ornament a garden with yew and
holly trees, clipped into the artificial shapes of pyramids, and
columns, and vases, and obelisks. It is now the fashion to ridicule
this taste as unnatural. The figure of a pyramid or obelisk, however,
is not more unnatural to a yew-tree than to a block of porphyry or
marble. When the yew-tree is presented to the eye in this artificial
shape, the gardener does not mean that it should be understood to have
grown in that shape: he means, first, to give it the same beauty of
regular figure, which pleases so much in porphyry and marble; and,
secondly, to imitate in a growing tree the ornaments of those precious
materials: he means to make an object of one kind resembling another
object of a very different kind; and to the original beauty of figure
to join the relative beauty of imitation: but the disparity between
the imitating and the imitated object is the foundation of the beauty
of imitation. It is because the one object does not naturally resemble
the other, that we are so much pleased with it, when by art it is made
to do so. The shears of the gardener, it may be said, indeed, are very
clumsy instruments of Sculpture. They are so, no doubt, when employed
to imitate the figures of men, or even of animals. But in the simple
and regular forms of pyramids, vases, and obelisks, even the shears of
the gardener do well enough. Some allowance, too, is naturally made
for the necessary imperfection of the instrument, in the same manner
as in Tapestry and Needle-work. In short, the next time you have an
opportunity of surveying those out-of-fashion ornaments, endeavour
only to let yourself alone, and to restrain for a few minutes the
foolish passion for playing the critic, and you will be sensible that
they are not without some degree of beauty; that they give the air of
neatness and correct culture at least to the whole garden; and that
they are not unlike what the 'retired leisure, that' (as Milton says)
'in trim gardens takes his pleasure,' might be amused with. What then,
it may be said, has brought them into such universal disrepute among
us? In a pyramid or obelisk of marble, we know that the materials are
expensive, and that the labour which wrought them into that shape must
have been still more so. In a pyramid or obelisk of yew, we know that
the materials could cost very little, and the labour still less. The
former are ennobled by their expense; the latter degraded by their
cheapness. In the cabbage-garden of a tallow-chandler we may sometimes
perhaps have seen as many columns and vases and other ornaments in
yew, as there are in marble and porphyry at Versailles: it is this
vulgarity which has disgraced them. The rich and the great, the proud
and the vain will not admit into their gardens an ornament which the
meanest of the people can have as well as they. The taste for these
ornaments came originally from France; where, notwithstanding that
{413} inconstancy of fashion with which we sometimes reproach the
natives of that country, it still continues in good repute. In France,
the condition of the inferior ranks of people is seldom so happy as it
frequently is in England; and you will there seldom find even pyramids
and obelisks of yew in the garden of a tallow-chandler. Such
ornaments, not having in that country been degraded by their
vulgarity, have not yet been excluded from the gardens of princes and
lords.

The works of the great masters in Statuary and Painting, it is to be
observed, never produce their effect by deception. They never are, and
it never is intended that they should be, mistaken for the real
objects which they represent. Painted Statuary may sometimes deceive
an inattentive eye: proper Statuary never does. The little pieces of
perspective in Painting, which it is intended should please by
deception, represent always some very simple, as well as
insignificant, objects: a roll of paper, for example, or the steps of
a staircase, in the dark corner of some passage or gallery. They are
generally the works too of some very inferior artists. After being
seen once, and producing the little surprise which it is meant they
should excite, together with the mirth which commonly accompanies it,
they never please more, but appear to be ever after insipid and
tiresome.

The proper pleasure which we derive from those two imitative arts, so
far from being the effect of deception, is altogether incompatible
with it. That pleasure is founded altogether upon our wonder at seeing
an object of one kind represent so well an object of a very different
kind, and upon our admiration of the art which surmounts so happily
that disparity which Nature had established between them. The nobler
works of Statuary and Painting appear to us a sort of wonderful
phenomena, differing in this respect from the wonderful phenomena of
Nature, that they carry, as it were, their own explication along with
them, and demonstrate, even to the eye, the way and manner in which
they are produced. The eye, even of an unskilful spectator,
immediately discerns, in some measure, how it is that a certain
modification of figure in Statuary, and of brighter and darker colours
in Painting, can represent, with so much truth and vivacity, the
actions, passions, and behaviour of men, as well as a great variety of
other objects. The pleasing wonder of ignorance is accompanied with
the still more pleasing satisfaction of science. We wonder and are
amazed at the effect; and we are pleased ourselves, and happy to find
that we can comprehend, in some measure, how that wonderful effect is
produced upon us.

A good looking-glass represents the objects which are set before it
with much more truth and vivacity than either Statuary or Painting.
But, though the science of optics may explain to the understanding,
the looking-glass itself does not at all demonstrate to the eye how
this effect is brought about. It may excite the wonder of ignorance;
and {414} in a clown, who had never beheld a looking-glass before, I
have seen that wonder rise almost to rapture and extasy; but it cannot
give the satisfaction of science. In all looking-glasses the effects
are produced by the same means, applied exactly in the same manner. In
every different statue and picture the effects are produced, though by
similar, yet not by the same means; and those means too are applied in
a different manner in each. Every good statue and picture is a fresh
wonder, which at the same time carries, in some measure, its own
explication along with it. After a little use and experience, all
looking-glasses cease to be wonders altogether; and even the ignorant
become so familiar with them, as not to think that their effects
require any explication. A looking-glass, besides, can represent only
present objects; and, when the wonder is once fairly over, we choose,
in all cases, rather to contemplate the substance than to gaze at the
shadow. One's own face becomes then the most agreeable object which a
looking-glass can represent to us, and the only object which we do not
soon grow weary with looking at; it is the only present object of
which we can see only the shadow: whether handsome or ugly, whether
old or young, it is the face of a friend always, of which the features
correspond exactly with whatever sentiment, emotion, or passion we may
happen at that moment to feel.

In Statuary, the means by which the wonderful effect is brought about
appear more simple and obvious than in Painting; where the disparity
between the imitating and the imitated object being much greater, the
art which can conquer that greater disparity appears evidently, and
almost to the eye, to be founded upon a much deeper science, or upon
principles much more abstruse and profound. Even in the meanest
subjects we can often trace with pleasure the ingenious means by which
Painting surmounts this disparity. But we cannot do this in Statuary,
because the disparity not being so great, the means do not appear so
ingenious. And it is upon this account, that in Painting we are often
delighted with the representation of many things, which in Statuary
would appear insipid, and not worth the looking at.

It ought to be observed, however, that though in Statuary the art of
imitation appears, in many respects, inferior to what it is in
Painting, yet, in a room ornamented with both statues and pictures of
nearly equal merit, we shall generally find that the statues draw off
our eye from the pictures. There is generally but one or little more
than one, point of view from which a picture can be seen with
advantage, and it always presents to the eye precisely the same
object. There are many different points of view from which a statue
may be seen with equal advantage, and from each it presents a
different object. There is more variety in the pleasure which we
receive from a good statue, than in that which we receive from a good
picture; and one statue may frequently be the subject of many good
pictures or drawings, all different {415} from one another. The
shadowy relief and projection of a picture, besides, is much
flattened, and seems almost to vanish away altogether, when brought
into comparison with the real and solid body which stands by it. How
nearly soever these two arts may seem to be akin, they accord so very
ill with one another, that their different productions ought, perhaps,
scarce ever to be seen together.

-----

