CHAPTER 90.
The Consent of Athos


Raoul quitted the Palais-Royal full of ideas that admitted no delay in
execution. He mounted his horse in the courtyard, and followed the road
to Blois, while the marriage festivities of Monsieur and the princess
of England were being celebrated with exceeding animation by the
courtiers, but to the despair of De Guiche and Buckingham. Raoul lost
no time on the road, and in sixteen hours he arrived at Blois. As he
traveled along, he marshaled his arguments in the most becoming manner.
Fever also is an argument that cannot be answered, and Raoul had an
attack. Athos was in his study, making additions to his memoirs, when
Raoul entered, accompanied by Grimaud. Keen-sighted and penetrating, a
mere glance at his son told him that something extraordinary had
befallen him.

“You seem to come on a matter of importance,” said he to Raoul, after
he had embraced him, pointing to a seat.

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the young man; “and I entreat you to give me
the same kind attention that has never yet failed me.”

“Speak, Raoul.”

“I present the case to you, monsieur, free from all preface, for that
would be unworthy of you. Mademoiselle de la Vallière is in Paris as
one of Madame’s maids of honor. I have pondered deeply on the matter; I
love Mademoiselle de la Vallière above everything; and it is not proper
to leave her in a position where her reputation, her virtue even, may
be assailed. It is my wish, therefore, to marry her, monsieur, and I
have come to solicit your consent to my marriage.”

While this communication was being made to him, Athos maintained the
profoundest silence and reserve. Raoul, who had begun his address with
an assumption of self-possession, finished it by allowing a manifest
emotion to escape him at every word. Athos fixed upon Bragelonne a
searching look, overshadowed indeed by a slight sadness.

“You have reflected well upon it?” he inquired.

“Yes, monsieur.”

“I believe you are already acquainted with my views respecting this
alliance?”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied Raoul, in a low tone of voice, “but you added,
that if I persisted——”

“You do persist, then?”

Bragelonne stammered out an almost unintelligible assent.

“Your passion,” continued Athos, tranquilly, “must indeed be very
great, since, notwithstanding my dislike to this union, you persist in
wishing it.”

Raoul passed his trembling hand across his forehead to remove the
perspiration that collected there. Athos looked at him, and his heart
was touched by pity. He rose and said,——

“It is no matter. My own personal feelings are not to be taken into
consideration since yours are concerned; you need my assistance; I am
ready to give it. Tell me what you want.”

“Your kind indulgence, first of all, monsieur,” said Raoul, taking hold
of his hand.

“You have mistaken my feelings, Raoul, I have more than mere indulgence
for you in my heart.”

Raoul kissed as devotedly as a lover could have done the hand he held
in his own.

“Come, come,” said Athos, “I am quite ready; what do you wish me to
sign?”

“Nothing whatever, monsieur, only it would be very kind if you would
take the trouble to write to the king to whom I belong, and solicit his
majesty’s permission for me to marry Mademoiselle de la Vallière.”

“Well thought, Raoul! After, or rather before myself, you have a master
to consult, that master being the king; it is loyal in you to submit
yourself voluntarily to this double proof; I will grant your request
without delay, Raoul.”

The count approached the window, and leaning out, called to Grimaud,
who showed his head from an arbor covered with jasmine, which he was
occupied in trimming.

“My horses, Grimaud,” continued the count.

“Why this order, monsieur?” inquired Raoul.

“We shall set off in a few hours.”

“Whither?”

“For Paris.”

“Paris, monsieur?”

“Is not the king at Paris?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, ought we not to go there?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Raoul, almost alarmed by this kind condescension.
“I do not ask you to put yourself to such inconvenience, and a letter
merely——”

“You mistake my position, Raoul; it is not respectful that a simple
gentleman, such as I am, should write to his sovereign. I wish to
speak, I ought to speak, to the king, and I will do so. We will go
together, Raoul.”

“You overpower me with your kindness, monsieur.”

“How do you think his majesty is affected?”

“Towards me, monsieur?”

“Yes.”

“Excellently well disposed.”

“You know that to be so?” continued the count.

“The king has himself told me so.”

“On what occasion?”

“Upon the recommendation of M. d’Artagnan, I believe, and on account of
an affair in the Place de Greve, when I had the honor to draw my sword
in the king’s service. I have reason to believe that, vanity apart, I
stand well with his majesty.”

“So much the better.”

“But I entreat you, monsieur,” pursued Raoul, “not to maintain towards
me your present grave and serious manner. Do not make me bitterly
regret having listened to a feeling stronger than anything else.”

“That is the second time you have said so, Raoul; it was quite
unnecessary, you require my formal consent, and you have it. We need
talk no more on the subject, therefore. Come and see my new
plantations, Raoul.”

The young man knew very well, that, after the expression of his
father’s wish, no opportunity of discussion was left him. He bowed his
head, and followed his father into the garden. Athos slowly pointed out
to him the grafts, the cuttings, and the avenues he was planting. This
perfect repose of manner disconcerted Raoul extremely; the affection
with which his own heart was filled seemed so great that the whole
world could hardly contain it. How, then, could his father’s heart
remain void, and closed to its influence? Bragelonne, therefore,
collecting all his courage, suddenly exclaimed,——

“It is impossible, monsieur, you can have any reason to reject
Mademoiselle de la Vallière? In Heaven’s name, she is so good, so
gentle and pure, that your mind, so perfect in its penetration, ought
to appreciate her accordingly. Does any secret repugnance, or any
hereditary dislike, exist between you and her family?”

“Look, Raoul, at that beautiful lily of the valley,” said Athos;
“observe how the shade and the damp situation suit it, particularly the
shadow which that sycamore-tree casts over it, so that the warmth, and
not the blazing heat of the sun, filters through its leaves.”

Raoul stopped, bit his lips, and then with the blood mantling in his
face, he said, courageously,—“One word of explanation, I beg, monsieur.
You cannot forget that your son is a man.”

“In that case,” replied Athos, drawing himself up with sternness,
“prove to me that you are a man, for you do not show yourself a son. I
begged you to wait the opportunity of forming an illustrious alliance.
I would have obtained a wife for you from the first ranks of the rich
nobility. I wish you to be distinguished by the splendor which glory
and fortune confer, for nobility of descent you have already.”

“Monsieur,” exclaimed Raoul, carried away by a first impulse, “I was
reproached the other day for not knowing who my mother was.”

Athos turned pale; then, knitting his brows like the greatest of all
the heathen deities:—“I am waiting to learn the reply you made,” he
demanded, in an imperious manner.

“Forgive me! oh, forgive me,” murmured the young man, sinking at once
from the lofty tone he had assumed.

“What was your reply, monsieur?” inquired the count, stamping his feet
upon the ground.

“Monsieur, my sword was in my hand immediately, my adversary placed
himself on guard, I struck his sword over the palisade, and threw him
after it.”

“Why did you suffer him to live?”

“The king has prohibited duelling, and, at that moment, I was an
ambassador of the king.”

“Very well,” said Athos, “but all the greater reason I should see his
majesty.”

“What do you intend to ask him?”

“Authority to draw my sword against the man who has inflicted this
injury upon me.”

“If I did not act as I ought to have done, I beg you to forgive me.”

“Did I reproach you, Raoul?”

“Still, the permission you are going to ask from the king?”

“I will implore his majesty to sign your marriage-contract, but on one
condition.”

“Are conditions necessary with me, monsieur? Command, and you shall be
obeyed.”

“On one condition, I repeat,” continued Athos; “that you tell me the
name of the man who spoke of your mother in that way.”

“What need is there that you should know his name; the offense was
directed against myself, and the permission once obtained from his
majesty, to revenge it is my affair.”

“Tell me his name, monsieur.”

“I will not allow you to expose yourself.

“Do you take me for a Don Diego? His name, I say.”

“You insist upon it?”

“I demand it.”

“The Vicomte de Wardes.”

“Very well,” said Athos, tranquilly, “I know him. But our horses are
ready, I see; and, instead of delaying our departure for a couple of
hours, we will set off at once. Come, monsieur.”




