letter might contain a state secret,—in which every message was
connected with a dark and complicated intrigue. Perhaps, likewise, that
great name of M. le Prince expanded itself, beneath the roofs of Blois,
to the proportions of a phantom.

Monsieur pushed away his plate.

“Shall I tell the envoy to wait?” asked M. de Saint-Remy.

A glance from Madame emboldened Gaston, who replied: “No, no! let him
come in at once, on the contrary. A propos, who is he?”

“A gentleman of this country, M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne.”

“Ah, very well! Introduce him, Saint-Remy—introduce him.”

And when he had let fall these words, with his accustomed gravity,
Monsieur turned his eyes, in a certain manner, upon the people of his
suite, so that all, pages, officers, and equerries, quitted the
service, knives and goblets, and made towards the second chamber a
retreat as rapid as it was disorderly.

This little army had dispersed in two files when Raoul de Bragelonne,
preceded by M. de Saint-Remy, entered the refectory.

The short interval of solitude which this retreat had left him,
permitted Monsieur the time to assume a diplomatic countenance. He did
not turn round, but waited till the maitre d’hotel should bring the
messenger face to face with him.

Raoul stopped even with the lower end of the table, so as to be exactly
between Monsieur and Madame. From this place he made a profound bow to
Monsieur and a very humble one to Madame; then, drawing himself up into
military pose, he waited for Monsieur to address him.

On his part the Prince waited till the doors were hermetically closed;
he would not turn round to ascertain the fact, as that would have been
derogatory to his dignity, but he listened with all his ears for the
noise of the lock, which would promise him at least an appearance of
secrecy.

The doors being closed, Monsieur raised his eyes towards the vicomte,
and said, “It appears that you come from Paris, monsieur?”

“This minute, monseigneur.”

“How is the king?”

“His majesty is in perfect health, monseigneur.”

“And my sister-in-law?”

“Her majesty the queen-mother still suffers from the complaint in her
chest, but for the last month she has been rather better.”

“Somebody told me you came on the part of M. le Prince. They must have
been mistaken, surely?”

“No, monseigneur; M. le Prince has charged me to convey this letter to
your royal highness, and I am to wait for an answer to it.”

Raoul had been a little annoyed by this cold and cautious reception,
and his voice insensibly sank to a low key.

The prince forgot that he was the cause of this apparent mystery, and
his fears returned.

He received the letter from the Prince de Conde with a haggard look,
unsealed it as he would have unsealed a suspicious packet, and in order
to read it so that no one should remark the effects of it upon his
countenance, he turned round.

Madame followed, with an anxiety almost equal to that of the prince,
every maneuver of her august husband.

Raoul, impassible, and a little disengaged by the attention of his
hosts, looked from his place through the open window at the gardens and
the statues which peopled them.

“Well!” cried Monsieur, all at once, with a cheerful smile; “here is an
agreeable surprise, and a charming letter from M. le Prince. Look,
Madame!”

The table was too large to allow the arm of the prince to reach the
hand of Madame; Raoul sprang forward to be their intermediary, and did
it with so good a grace as to procure a flattering acknowledgment from
the princess.

“You know the contents of this letter, no doubt?” said Gaston to Raoul.

“Yes, monseigneur; M. le Prince at first gave me the message verbally,
but upon reflection his highness took up his pen.”

“It is beautiful writing,” said Madame, “but I cannot read it.”

“Will you read it to Madame, M. de Bragelonne?” said the duke.

“Yes, read it, if you please, monsieur.”

Raoul began to read, Monsieur giving again all his attention. The
letter was conceived in these terms:

“Monseigneur—The king is about to set out for the frontiers. You are
aware that the marriage of his majesty is concluded upon. The king has
done me the honor to appoint me his marechal-des-logis for this
journey, and as I knew with what joy his majesty would pass a day at
Blois, I venture to ask your royal highness’s permission to mark the
house you inhabit as our quarters. If, however, the suddenness of this
request should create to your royal highness any embarrassment, I
entreat you to say so by the messenger I send, a gentleman of my suite,
M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne. My itinerary will depend upon your royal
highness’s determination, and instead of passing through Blois, we
shall come through Vendome and Romorantin. I venture to hope that your
royal highness will be pleased with my arrangement, it being the
expression of my boundless desire to make myself agreeable to you.”

“Nothing can be more gracious toward us,” said Madame, who had more
than once consulted the looks of her husband during the reading of the
letter. “The king here!” exclaimed she, in a rather louder tone than
would have been necessary to preserve secrecy.

“Monsieur,” said his royal highness in his turn, “you will offer my
thanks to M. de Conde, and express to him my gratitude for the honor he
has done me.”

Raoul bowed.

“On what day will his majesty arrive?” continued the prince.

“The king, monseigneur, will in all probability arrive this evening.”

“But how, then, could he have known my reply if it had been in the
negative?”

“I was desired, monseigneur, to return in all haste to Beaugency, to
give counter-orders to the courier, who was himself to go back
immediately with counter-orders to M. le Prince.”

“His majesty is at Orleans, then?”

“Much nearer, monseigneur; his majesty must by this time have arrived
at Meung.”

“Does the court accompany him?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“A propos, I forgot to ask you after M. le Cardinal.”

“His eminence appears to enjoy good health, monseigneur.”

“His nieces accompany him, no doubt?”

“No, monseigneur, his eminence has ordered the Mesdemoiselles de
Mancini to set out for Brouage. They will follow the left bank of the
Loire, while the court will come by the right.”

“What! Mademoiselle Mary de Mancini quit the court in that manner?”
asked Monsieur, his reserve beginning to diminish.

“Mademoiselle Mary de Mancini in particular,” replied Raoul discreetly.

A fugitive smile, an imperceptible vestige of his ancient spirit of
intrigue, shot across the pale face of the prince.

“Thanks, M. de Bragelonne,” then said Monsieur. “You would, perhaps,
not be willing to carry M. le Prince the commission with which I would
charge you, and that is, that his messenger has been very agreeable to
me; but I will tell him so myself.”

Raoul bowed his thanks to Monsieur for the honor he had done him.

Monsieur made a sign to Madame, who struck a bell which was placed at
her right hand; M. de Saint-Remy entered, and the room was soon filled
with people.

“Messieurs,” said the prince, “his majesty is about to pay me the honor
of passing a day at Blois; I depend upon the king, my nephew, not
having to repent of the favor he does my house.”

“Vive le Roi!” cried all the officers of the household with frantic
enthusiasm, and M. de Saint-Remy louder than the rest.

Gaston hung down his head with evident chagrin. He had all his life
been obliged to hear, or rather to undergo this cry of “Vive le Roi!”
which passed over him. For a long time, being unaccustomed to hear it,
his ear had had rest, and now a younger, more vivacious, and more
brilliant royalty rose up before him, like a new and more painful
provocation.

Madame perfectly understood the sufferings of that timid, gloomy heart;
she rose from the table, Monsieur imitated her mechanically, and all
the domestics, with a buzzing like that of several bee-hives,
surrounded Raoul for the purpose of questioning him.

Madame saw this movement, and called M. de Saint Remy. “This is not the
time for gossiping, but working,” said she, with the tone of an angry
housekeeper.

M. de Saint-Remy hastened to break the circle formed by the officers
round Raoul, so that the latter was able to gain the ante-chamber.

“Care will be taken of that gentleman, I hope,” added Madame,
addressing M. de Saint-Remy.

The worthy man immediately hastened after Raoul. “Madame desires
refreshments to be offered to you,” said he; “and there is, besides, a
lodging for you in the castle.”

“Thanks, M. de Saint-Remy,” replied Raoul; “but you know how anxious I
must be to pay my duty to M. le Comte, my father.”

“That is true, that is true, Monsieur Raoul; present him, at the same
time, my humble respects, if you please.”

Raoul thus once more got rid of the old gentleman, and pursued his way.
As he was passing under the porch, leading his horse by the bridle, a
soft voice called him from the depths of an obscure path.

“Monsieur Raoul!” said the voice.

The young man turned round, surprised, and saw a dark complexioned
girl, who, with a finger on her lip, held out her other hand to him.
This young lady was an utter stranger.




