CHAPTER 76.
In which D’Artagnan finishes by at length placing his Hand upon his
Captain’s Commission


The reader guesses beforehand whom the usher preceded in announcing the
courier from Bretagne. This messenger was easily recognized. It was
D’Artagnan, his clothes dusty, his face inflamed, his hair dripping
with sweat, his legs stiff; he lifted his feet painfully at every step,
on which resounded the clink of his blood-stained spurs. He perceived
in the doorway he was passing through, the superintendent coming out.
Fouquet bowed with a smile to him who, an hour before, was bringing him
ruin and death. D’Artagnan found in his goodness of heart, and in his
inexhaustible vigor of body, enough presence of mind to remember the
kind reception of this man; he bowed then, also, much more from
benevolence and compassion, than from respect. He felt upon his lips
the word which had so many times been repeated to the Duc de Guise:
“Fly.” But to pronounce that word would have been to betray his cause;
to speak that word in the cabinet of the king, and before an usher,
would have been to ruin himself gratuitously, and could save nobody.
D’Artagnan then contented himself with bowing to Fouquet and entered.
At this moment the king floated between the joy the last words of
Fouquet had given him, and his pleasure at the return of D’Artagnan.
Without being a courtier, D’Artagnan had a glance as sure and as rapid
as if he had been one. He read, on his entrance, devouring humiliation
on the countenance of Colbert. He even heard the king say these words
to him;—

“Ah! Monsieur Colbert, you have then nine hundred thousand livres at
the intendance?” Colbert, suffocated, bowed, but made no reply. All
this scene entered into the mind of D’Artagnan, by the eyes and ears,
at once.

The first word of Louis to his musketeer, as if he wished it to
contrast with what he was saying at the moment, was a kind “good day.”
His second was to send away Colbert. The latter left the king’s
cabinet, pallid and tottering, whilst D’Artagnan twisted up the ends of
his mustache.

“I love to see one of my servants in this disorder,” said the king,
admiring the martial stains upon the clothes of his envoy.

“I thought, sire, my presence at the Louvre was sufficiently urgent to
excuse my presenting myself thus before you.”

“You bring me great news, then, monsieur?”

“Sire, the thing is this, in two words: Belle-Isle is fortified,
admirably fortified; Belle-Isle has a double enciete, a citadel, two
detached forts; its ports contain three corsairs; and the side
batteries only await their cannon.”

“I know all that, monsieur,” replied the king.

“What! your majesty knows all that?” replied the musketeer, stupefied.

“I have the plan of the fortifications of Belle-Isle,” said the king.

“Your majesty has the plan?”

“Here it is.”

“It is really correct, sire: I saw a similar one on the spot.”

D’Artagnan’s brow became clouded.

“Ah! I understand all. Your majesty did not trust to me alone, but sent
some other person,” said he in a reproachful tone.

“Of what importance is the manner, monsieur, in which I have learnt
what I know, so that I know it?”

“Sire, sire,” said the musketeer, without seeking even to conceal his
dissatisfaction; “but I must be permitted to say to your majesty, that
it is not worth while to make me use such speed, to risk twenty times
the breaking of my neck, to salute me on my arrival with such
intelligence. Sire, when people are not trusted, or are deemed
insufficient, they should scarcely be employed.” And D’Artagnan, with a
movement perfectly military, stamped with his foot, and left upon the
floor dust stained with blood. The king looked at him, inwardly
enjoying his first triumph.

“Monsieur,” said he, at the expiration of a minute, “not only is
Belle-Isle known to me, but, still further, Belle-Isle is mine.”

“That is well! that is well, sire, I ask but one thing more,” replied
D’Artagnan.—“My discharge.”

“What! your discharge?”

“Without doubt I am too proud to eat the bread of the king without
earning it, or rather by gaining it badly.—My discharge, sire!”

“Oh, oh!”

“I ask for my discharge, or I will take it.”

“You are angry, monsieur?”

“I have reason, mordioux! Thirty-two hours in the saddle, I ride night
and day, I perform prodigies of speed, I arrive stiff as the corpse of
a man who has been hung—and another arrives before me! Come, sire, I am
a fool!—My discharge, sire!”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Louis, leaning his white hand upon the
dusty arm of the musketeer, “what I tell you will not at all affect
that which I promised you. A king’s word given must be kept.” And the
king going straight to his table, opened a drawer, and took out a
folded paper. “Here is your commission of captain of musketeers; you
have won it, Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

D’Artagnan opened the paper eagerly, and scanned it twice. He could
scarcely believe his eyes.

“And this commission is given you,” continued the king, “not only on
account of your journey to Belle-Isle, but, moreover, for your brave
intervention at the Place de Greve. There, likewise, you served me
valiantly.”

“Ah, ah!” said D’Artagnan, without his self-command being able to
prevent a blush from mounting to his eyes—“you know that also, sire?”

“Yes, I know it.”

The king possessed a piercing glance and an infallible judgment, when
it was his object to read men’s minds. “You have something to say,”
said he to the musketeer, “something to say which you do not say. Come,
speak freely, monsieur; you know that I told you, once for all, that
you are to be always quite frank with me.”

“Well, sire! what I have to say is this, that I would prefer being made
captain of musketeers for having charged a battery at the head of my
company, or taken a city, than for causing two wretches to be hung.”

“Is this quite true you tell me?”

“And why should your majesty suspect me of dissimulation, I ask?”

“Because I know you well, monsieur; you cannot repent of having drawn
your sword for me.”

“Well, in that your majesty is deceived, and greatly; yes, I do repent
of having drawn my sword on account of the results that action
produced; the poor men who were hung, sire, were neither your enemies
nor mine; and they could not defend themselves.”

The king preserved silence for a moment. “And your companion, M.
d’Artagnan, does he partake of your repentance?”

“My companion?”

“Yes, you were not alone, I have been told.”

“Alone, where?”

“At the Place de Greve.”

“No, sire, no,” said D’Artagnan, blushing at the idea that the king
might have a suspicion that he, D’Artagnan, had wished to engross to
himself all the glory that belonged to Raoul; “no, mordioux! and as
your majesty says, I had a companion, and a good companion, too.”

“A young man?”

“Yes, sire; a young man. Oh! your majesty must accept my compliments,
you are as well informed of things out of doors as things within. It is
M. Colbert who makes all these fine reports to the king.”

“M. Colbert has said nothing but good of you, M. d’Artagnan, and he
would have met with a bad reception if he had come to tell me anything
else.”

“That is fortunate!”

“But he also said much good of that young man.”

“And with justice,” said the musketeer.

“In short, it appears that this young man is a fire-eater,” said Louis,
in order to sharpen the sentiment which he mistook for envy.

“A fire-eater! Yes, sire,” repeated D’Artagnan, delighted on his part
to direct the king’s attention to Raoul.

“Do you not know his name?”

“Well, I think——”

“You know him then?”

“I have known him nearly five-and-twenty years, sire.”

“Why, he is scarcely twenty-five years old!” cried the king.

“Well, sire! I have known him ever since he was born, that is all.”

“Do you affirm that?”

“Sire,” said D’Artagnan, “your majesty questions me with a mistrust in
which I recognize another character than your own. M. Colbert, who has
so well informed you, has he not forgotten to tell you that this young
man is the son of my most intimate friend?”

“The Vicomte de Bragelonne?”

“Certainly, sire. The father of the Vicomte de Bragelonne is M. le
Comte de la Fere, who so powerfully assisted in the restoration of king
Charles II. Bragelonne comes of a valiant race, sire.”

“Then he is the son of that nobleman who came to me, or rather to M.
Mazarin, on the part of King Charles II., to offer me his alliance?”

“Exactly, sire.”

“And the Comte de la Fere is a great soldier, say you?”

“Sire, he is a man who has drawn his sword more times for the king,
your father, than there are, at present, months in the happy life of
your majesty.”

It was Louis XIV. who now bit his lip.

“That is well, M. d’Artagnan, very well! And M. le Comte de la Fere is
your friend, say you?”

“For about forty years; yes, sire. Your majesty may see that I do not
speak to you of yesterday.”

“Should you be glad to see this young man, M. d’Artagnan?”

“Delighted, sire.”

The king touched his bell, and an usher appeared. “Call M. de
Bragelonne,” said the king.

“Ah! ah! he is here?” said D’Artagnan.

“He is on guard to-day, at the Louvre, with the company of the
gentlemen of monsieur le prince.”

The king had scarcely ceased speaking, when Raoul presented himself,
and, on seeing D’Artagnan, smiled on him with that charming smile which
is only found upon the lips of youth.

“Come, come,” said D’Artagnan, familiarly, to Raoul, “the king will
allow you to embrace me; only tell his majesty you thank him.”

Raoul bowed so gracefully, that Louis, to whom all superior qualities
were pleasing when they did not overshadow his own, admired his beauty,
strength and modesty.

“Monsieur,” said the king, addressing Raoul, “I have asked monsieur le
prince to be kind enough to give you up to me; I have received his
reply, and you belong to me from this morning. Monsieur le prince was a
good master, but I hope you will not lose by the exchange.”

“Yes, yes, Raoul, be satisfied; the king has some good in him,” said
D’Artagnan, who had fathomed the character of Louis, and who played
with his self-love, within certain limits; always observing, be it
understood, the proprieties and flattering, even when he appeared to be
bantering.

“Sire,” said Bragelonne, with a voice soft and musical, and with the
natural and easy elocution he inherited from his father, “sire, it is
not from to-day that I belong to your majesty.”

“Oh! no, I know,” said the king, “you mean your enterprise of the
Greve. That day, you were truly mine, monsieur.”

“Sire, it is not of that day I would speak; it would not become me to
refer to so paltry a service in the presence of such a man as M.
d’Artagnan. I would speak of a circumstance which created an epoch in
my life, and which consecrated me, from the age of sixteen, to the
devoted service of your majesty.”

“Ah! ah!” said the king, “what was that circumstance? Tell me,
monsieur.”

“This is it, sire.—When I was setting out on my first campaign, that is
to say, to join the army of monsieur le prince, M. le Comte de la Fere
came to conduct me as far as Saint-Denis, where the remains of King
Louis XIII. wait, upon the lowest steps of the funeral basilique, a
successor, whom God will not send him, I hope, for many years. Then he
made me swear upon the ashes of our masters, to serve royalty,
represented by you—incarnate in you, sire—to serve it in word, in
thought, and in action. I swore, and God and the dead were witnesses to
my oath. During ten years, sire, I have not so often as I desired had
occasion to keep it. I am a soldier of your majesty, and nothing else;
and, on calling me nearer to you, I do not change my master, I only
change my garrison.”

Raoul was silent, and bowed. Louis still listened after he had done
speaking.

“Mordioux!” cried D’Artagnan, “that was well spoken! was it not, your
majesty? A good race! a noble race!”

“Yes,” murmured the agitated king, without, however, daring to manifest
his emotion, for it had no other cause than contact with a nature
intrinsically noble. “Yes, monsieur, you say truly:—wherever you were,
you were the king’s. But in changing your garrison, believe me you will
find an advancement of which you are worthy.”

Raoul saw that this ended what the king had to say to him. And with the
perfect tact which characterized his refined nature, he bowed and
retired.

“Is there anything else, monsieur, of which you have to inform me?”
said the king, when he found himself again alone with D’Artagnan.

“Yes, sire, and I kept that news for the last, for it is sad, and will
clothe European royalty in mourning.”

“What do you tell me?”

“Sire, in passing through Blois, a word, a sad word, echoed from the
palace, struck my ear.”

“In truth, you terrify me, M. d’Artagnan.”

“Sire, this word was pronounced to me by a piqueur, who wore crape on
his arm.”

“My uncle, Gaston of Orleans, perhaps.”

“Sire, he has rendered his last sigh.”

“And I was not warned of it!” cried the king, whose royal
susceptibility saw an insult in the absence of this intelligence.

“Oh! do not be angry, sire,” said D’Artagnan; “neither the couriers of
Paris, nor the couriers of the whole world, can travel with your
servant; the courier from Blois will not be here these two hours, and
he rides well, I assure you, seeing that I only passed him on the
thither side of Orleans.”

“My uncle Gaston,” murmured Louis, pressing his hand to his brow, and
comprising in those three words all that his memory recalled of that
symbol of opposing sentiments.

“Eh! yes, sire, it is thus,” said D’Artagnan, philosophically replying
to the royal thought, “it is thus the past flies away.”

“That is true, monsieur, that is true; but there remains for us, thank
God! the future; and we will try to make it not too dark.”

“I feel confidence in your majesty on that head,” said D’Artagnan,
bowing, “and now——”

“You are right, monsieur; I had forgotten the hundred leagues you have
just ridden. Go, monsieur, take care of one of the best of soldiers,
and when you have reposed a little, come and place yourself at my
disposal.”

“Sire, absent or present, I am always yours.”

D’Artagnan bowed and retired. Then, as if he had only come from
Fontainebleau, he quickly traversed the Louvre to rejoin Bragelonne.




