CHAPTER VI

PHYSICAL PHENOMENA ALLEGED TO HAVE OCCURRED IN THE PRESENCE OF WILLIAM
STAINTON MOSES


It is mainly due to the labours of Mr. F. W. H. Myers, after Mr.
Stainton Moses' death, that the Physical Phenomena alleged to have
occurred in his presence can be included among those for which evidence
of a scientific character is claimed. It is much to be regretted that,
during Mr. Stainton Moses' lifetime, although phenomena of a very varied
character were alleged to have occurred with great frequency during many
years, no scientific man of eminence appears to have joined in the
seances, except on one or two occasions. Perhaps the primary reason for
this was that Mr. Stainton Moses' own attitude of mind towards the
subject did not court critical and scientific investigation of the
phenomena. But even during the last ten years of his life, subsequent to
the formation of the Society for Psychical Research, of which he was an
original member, and not only that, but for nearly five years a
Vice-President and a member of the Council, so far as I know, no
sittings were held with him on behalf of the Society, and no first-hand
authentic records of the alleged phenomena in earlier years were placed
before it. One reason for this probably was that the Council of the
Society informally adopted a sort of understanding that its earlier
investigations should not be directed towards "Spiritualism," but mainly
towards those branches of the great subject which were, so to speak,
just outside the field of recognised scientific inquiry--such, for
instance, as Thought-Transference and Hypnotism. In this course there
was doubtless a certain amount of wisdom, but to it was due the apathy
and the ultimate secession of a few members who took great interest in
the formation of the Society. Chief among these was W. Stainton Moses
himself. In November 1886 he withdrew from the Society, considering that
the evidence of phenomena of the genuine character of which he had
satisfied himself beyond doubt, was not being properly entertained or
fairly treated.

Mr. W. Stainton Moses entrusted by will his unpublished MSS. to two
friends as literary executors, Mr. Charles C. Massey and Mr. Alaric A.
Watts. At the earnest request of Mr. Myers, these gentlemen permitted
him to see a large number of them. Thirty-one note-books were placed in
his hands. Permission was further given to Mr. Myers to make selections
from these note-books for publication in the _Proceedings_ of the
Society. These selections form the substance of two long articles.[39]
The thirty-one books comprise twenty-four of Automatic Writing, four
Records of Physical Phenomena, and three of retrospect and summary. Two
of these recapitulate physical phenomena, with reflections.

Mr. Stainton Moses' most intimate friends were Dr. and Mrs. Stanhope T.
Speer. They, with the occasional attendance of another intimate friend,
Mr. F. W. Percival, barrister-at-law, and Examiner in the Education
Department, were generally the only members of the small group who
witnessed the phenomena. Mr. Stainton Moses' note-books had been kept
extremely private. It seems probable that no one had seen them until
they were placed in Mr. Myers' hands. Two note-books and other MSS. by
Dr. Speer were also handed to Mr. Myers, which he says contained
independent contemporary records of much evidential value. With regard
to Dr. and Mrs. Speer, Mr. Myers says: "Their importance as witnesses of
the phenomena is so great, that I must be pardoned for inserting a
'testimonial' to the late Dr. Speer (M.D., Edinburgh), which shall not,
however, be in my own words, but in those of Dr. Marshall Hall, F.R.S.,
one of the best-known physicians of the middle of this century. Writing
on 18th March 1849, Dr. Marshall Hall says (in a printed collection of
similar testimonials now before me): 'I have great satisfaction in
bearing my testimony to the talents and acquirements of Dr. Stanhope
Templeman Speer. Dr. Speer has had unusual advantages in having been at
the medical schools, not only of London and Edinburgh, but of Paris and
Montpellier, and he has availed himself of these advantages with
extraordinary diligence and talent. He ranks among our most
distinguished rising physicians,'"[40] Dr. Speer practised as a
physician at Cheltenham and in London, and at different times held
various important hospital posts. He had scientific and artistic tastes,
and being possessed of private means, he quitted professional work at
the age of thirty-four, and spent his subsequent life in studious
retirement. Mr. Myers says that his "cast of mind was strongly
materialistic, and it is remarkable that his interest in Mr. Moses'
phenomena was from first to last of a purely scientific, as contrasted
with an emotional or religious nature."[41] Mrs. Stanhope Speer also kept
careful records of the sittings. Over sixty instalments were published
in the weekly journal, _Light_, under the title of "Records of Private
Seances, from Notes taken at the time of each Sitting."

Mr. Stainton Moses was born in Lincolnshire in 1839. He studied at
Oxford, and was ordained as a clergyman of the Church of England. After
a few years of active life as a parish clergyman, he was offered a
Mastership in University College School, London, which post he held
until about three years before his death, which took place in 1892. As
to the "fundamental questions of sanity and probity," Mr. Myers says:
"Neither I myself, nor, so far as I know, any person acquainted with Mr.
Moses, has ever entertained any doubt."[42] Mr. Charles C. Massey says:
"However perplexed for an explanation, the crassest prejudice has
recoiled from ever suggesting a doubt of the truth and honesty of
Stainton Moses."[43] Mr. H. J. Hood, barrister-at-law, who knew him for
many years, writes: "I believe that he was wholly incapable of
deceit."[44] The principal published works of Mr. Stainton Moses
are--"Researches in Spiritualism," issued in _Human Nature_, a
periodical now extinct; "Spirit Identity" (1879), recently republished;
"Spirit Teachings" (1883), of which a new edition has lately appeared
with a biography by Mr. Charles Speer (son of Dr. S. T. Speer). Mr.
Stainton Moses was also Editor of _Light_ during its earlier years.

It has seemed important, in view of what is to follow, that the reader
should be in possession of this somewhat explicit account of Mr.
Stainton Moses, his life, his work, and his intimate friends.

Having briefly treated of these external matters in the first of his two
articles in the _Proceedings of the S.P.R._, Mr. Myers goes on to say:--

"But now our narrative must pass at a bound from the commonplace and the
credible to bewildering and inconceivable things. With the even tenour
of this straightforward and reputable life was inwoven a chain of
mysteries which, as I have before said, in whatever way soever they be
explained, make that life one of the most extraordinary which our
century has seen. For Stainton Moses' true history lies, not in the
everyday events thus far recorded, but in that series of physical
manifestations which began in 1872, and lasted for some eight years, and
that series of automatic writings and trance-utterances which began in
1873, received a record for some ten years, and did not, as is
believed, cease altogether until the earthly end was near."[45]


THE PHYSICAL PHENOMENA.

This inquiry concerns physical phenomena only. The wealth of material to
select from is enormous. It is proposed to give one or two examples of
each of the important classes of physical phenomena. In doing so such
examples only will be quoted as have been selected by Mr. Myers to
include in his articles in the _Proceedings of the S.P.R._ The reader
will therefore know that the following records have been under Mr.
Myers' scrutiny, and have been considered by him as of evidential value.
This will also simplify references, as it will be needful to refer only
to Mr. Myers' articles which are easily accessible, and not to the
original sources.


MOVEMENTS WITHOUT CONTACT.

After recording some movements of a table, Mr. Stainton Moses says: "All
that I have described occurs readily when the table is untouched.
Indeed, when the force is developed, we have found it better to remove
the hands and leave the table to its own devices. The tilting above
noticed has been even more marked when the sitters have been removed
from it to a distance of about two feet. It has rapped on the chair and
on the floor, inclined so as to play into a hand placed on the carpet,
and has been restored to its normal position when no hand has touched
it. The actual force required to perform this would be represented by
very considerable muscular exertion in a man of ordinary strength."[46]

The following account, besides being a record of physical phenomenon, is
a curious illustration of the result of not following alleged
instructions. Mr. Stainton Moses writes:--

"We had ventured on one occasion, contrary to direction, to add to our
circle a strange member. Some trivial phenomena occurred, but the usual
controlling spirit did not appear. When next we sat he came; and
probably none of us will easily forget the sledge-hammer blows with
which he smote the table. The noise was distinctly audible in the room
below, and gave one the idea that the table would be broken to pieces.
In vain we withdrew from the table, hoping to diminish the power. The
heavy blows increased in intensity, and the whole room shook with their
force. The direst penalties were threatened if we again interfered with
the development by bringing in new sitters. We have not ventured to do
so again; and I do not think we shall easily be persuaded to risk
another similar objurgation."[47]

The following account of some impromptu occurrences is written by Mr.
Serjeant Cox, and is quoted by Mr. Myers from the second volume of
Serjeant Cox's work, "What am I?" The scene was also orally described to
Mr. Myers by Serjeant Cox, who, as Mr. Myers remarks, was not himself a
"Spiritualist," but ascribed these and similar phenomena to a power
innate in the medium's own being.

"On Tuesday, 2nd June 1873, a personal friend [Mr. Stainton Moses] came
to my residence in Russell Square to dress for a dinner party to which
we were invited. He had previously exhibited considerable power as a
Psychic. Having half an hour to spare, we went into the dining-room. It
was just six o'clock, and of course broad daylight. I was opening
letters; he was reading the _Times_. My dining-table is of mahogany,
very heavy, old-fashioned, six feet wide, nine feet long. It stands on a
Turkey carpet, which much increases the difficulty of moving it. A
subsequent trial showed that the united efforts of two strong men
standing were required to move it one inch. There was no cloth upon it,
and the light fell full under it. No person was in the room but my
friend and myself. Suddenly, as we were sitting thus, frequent and loud
rappings came upon the table. My friend was then sitting holding the
newspaper with both hands, one arm resting on the table, the other on
the back of a chair, and turned sideways from the table, so that his
legs and feet were not under the table, but at the side of it. Presently
the solid table quivered as with an ague fit. Then it swayed to and fro
so violently as almost to dislocate the big pillar-like legs, of which
there are eight. Then it moved forward about three inches. I looked
under it to be sure it was not touched; but still it moved, and still
the blows were loud upon it.

"This sudden access of the Force at such a time, and in such a place,
with none present but myself and my friend, and with no thought then of
invoking it, caused the utmost astonishment in both of us. My friend
said that nothing like it had ever before occurred to him. I then
suggested that it would be an invaluable opportunity, with so great a
power in action, to make trial of _motion without contact_, the presence
of two persons only, the daylight, the place, the size and weight of the
table, making the experiment a crucial one. Accordingly we stood
upright, he on one side of the table, I on the other side of it. We
stood two feet from it, and held our hands eight inches above it. In one
minute it rocked violently. Then it moved over the carpet a distance of
seven inches. Then it rose three inches from the floor on the side on
which my friend was standing. Then it rose equally on my side. Finally
my friend held his hands four inches over the end of the table, and
asked that it would rise and touch his hand three times. It did so; and
then in accordance with the like request, it rose to my hand held at the
other end to the same height above it and in the same manner."[48]

LEVITATION.--The wonderful phenomenon of levitation must be included in
the category of "movements without contact"! Some of Mr. Stainton Moses'
experiences of this kind are much more explicitly and circumstantially
described than those alleged to have occurred with D. D. Home. Mr.
Stainton Moses gives the following account of his first personal
experience of this nature:--

"My first personal experience of levitation was about five months after
my introduction to spiritualism. Physical phenomena of a very powerful
description had been developed with great rapidity. We were new to the
subject, and the phenomena were most interesting.... One day (30th
August 1872) ... I felt my chair drawn back from the table and turned
into the corner near which I sat. It was so placed that my face was
turned away from the circle to the angle made by the two walls. In this
position the chair was raised from the floor to a distance of, I should
judge, twelve or fourteen inches. My feet touched the top of the
skirting-board, which would be about twelve inches in height. The chair
remained suspended for a few moments, and I then felt myself going from
it, higher and higher, with a very slow and easy movement. I had no
sense of discomfort nor of apprehension. I was perfectly conscious of
what was being done, and described the process to those who were sitting
at the table. The movement was very steady, and occupied what seemed a
long time before it was completed. I was close to the wall, so close
that I was able to put a pencil firmly against my chest, and to mark the
spot opposite to me on the wall-paper. That mark when measured
afterwards was found to be rather more than six feet from the floor,
and, from its position, it was clear that my head must have been in the
very corner of the room, close to the ceiling. I do not think that I was
in any way entranced. I was perfectly clear in my mind, quite alive to
what was being done, and fully conscious of the curious phenomenon. I
felt no pressure on any part of my body, only a sensation as of being in
a lift, whilst objects seemed to be passing away from below me. I
remember a slight difficulty in breathing, and a sensation of fulness in
the chest, with a general feeling of being lighter than the atmosphere.
I was lowered down quite gently, and placed in the chair, which had
settled in its old position. The measurements and observations were
taken immediately, and the marks which I had made with my pencil were
noted. My voice was said at the time to sound as if from the corner of
the room, close to the ceiling."[49]

Mr. Stainton Moses says that this experience was repeated, with
variations, on nine other occasions. Once he suddenly found himself on
the table--his chair being unmoved. This, "under ordinary
circumstances," he says, "is what we call impossible." On another
occasion he was placed on the table standing. But he discouraged these
phenomena of levitation as much as possible, from a dislike to violent
physical manifestations.

MOVEMENT OF OBJECTS IN A CLOSED ROOM, NO ONE BEING PRESENT.--I am not
aware of any other well-attested instances of a curious phenomenon
stated to have occurred when Mr. Stainton Moses was near but not
present. He thus describes the "first startling manifestation" of this
kind. It was on Sunday, 18th August 1872. Simple phenomena of raps and
movements of the table commenced at breakfast-time. Mr. Stainton Moses
went to church with his friend. On entering his bedroom afterwards, his
attention was drawn by loud rappings which followed him round the room,
to three articles so placed on the bed as to form an imperfect cross.
While he was in the room another article was added. He called his friend
whose guest he was. To avoid the possibility of children or servants
playing tricks, in case anything more happened, they well searched the
room--it contained no cupboard--bolted the window, locked the door on
leaving, and the host put the key in his pocket. After lunch two more
articles were found to be added. Another visit discovered other
additions. This went on till 5 P.M., "when a complete cross extending
the whole length of the bed was made entirely of little articles from
the toilet-table." The position of the room, and the whole
circumstances, convinced Mr. Stainton Moses and Dr. and Mrs. Speer, with
whom he was staying, beyond any doubt that human intervention was
impossible. A very detailed account of this incident exists in the
handwriting of Dr. Speer.[50]

THE CARRYING OF OBJECTS INTO A LOCKED ROOM, AND THE PASSAGE OF SOLID
OBJECTS THROUGH MATERIAL OBSTACLES.--During the two or three weeks
subsequent to the above, over fifty instances occurred in which objects
from different parts of the house were placed upon the table round which
Mr. Stainton Moses and Dr. and Mrs. Speer were sitting in a locked dark
room. The gas was always left burning brightly in the adjoining
dining-room, and in the hall outside, so that if either of the doors had
been opened, even for a moment, a blaze of light would have been let
into the room in which they sat. Mr. Stainton Moses remarks--"As this
never happened, we have full assurance from what Dr. Carpenter considers
the best authority, common sense, that the doors remained closed." On
one occasion a small edition of "Paradise Lost" was placed on the
table, and at the same time the words "to convince" were spelt out by
raps. This little book had been in the hands of all of them during the
evening, and they could testify to the position on a bookshelf where it
had been left. One evening seven objects in different rooms were brought
in; among them a little bell from the dining-room. They heard it begin
to ring, the sound approached the door, they were astonished soon to
hear the sound in the room where they sat, round which the bell was
carried, close to the faces of all, and finally placed on the table,
having been ringing loudly all the time. A curious incident occurred at
a later date, the circle of three sitting alone. A small Parian
statuette from an upper room was placed upon the table. One of the party
requested that a friend who usually communicates might be fetched. "We
are doing so" was spelt out by raps. This was taken to be the complete
answer, and they ceased to call over the alphabet. However, the alphabet
was called for again, and "mething else" was spelt out. No idea could be
formed as to the meaning of this. At request it was exactly repeated.
After much puzzling it occurred to one of the party to join it on to the
previous message--when the meaning became apparent. Mr. Stainton Moses
sarcastically remarks--"What a clear case of 'unconscious cerebration'"!
"Very soon an odour like Tonquin bean was apparent to all of us.
Something fell on the table, and light showed that a snuff-box which had
contained Tonquin bean had been brought from Dr. Speer's dressing-room.
The box was closed, and the odour was remarked before any of us had the
remotest idea that the box was in the room."[51]


PERFUMES AND WAVES OF SCENT-LADEN AIR.

This phase of the phenomena must be passed rapidly over, though
manifested to a much greater extent and in greater variety in Mr.
Stainton Moses' case than in any other with which I am acquainted. In
his circle music and singing were never introduced as a means of
harmonising the conditions. Mr. Stainton Moses says: "In our circle this
harmonising is effected by means of perfumes and waves of cool-scented
air." "If a new sitter is present, he or she is censed (if I may adopt
the expression), and so initiated." "If a new intelligence is to
communicate, or special honour to be paid to a chief, the room is
pervaded by perfumes which grow stronger as the spirit enters."
Sometimes the scent was in a liquid form, and apparently sprinkled down
from the ceiling. Sometimes dry musk was thrown about in considerable
quantities. A striking instance is given in the form of a statement from
Mr. F. W. Percival, mentioned at the commencement of this article--a
very occasional sitter. He says: "In compliance with your request, I
will describe as briefly as possible what occurred at the dark seance
held on the evening of 18th March 1874, when scent was produced so
abundantly in the presence of Mrs. Speer and myself, while you [Mr. S.
M.] were in a state of trance. The controlling spirit began by speaking
through you at some length, and we were told to expect unusual
manifestations. They commenced with a strongly scented breeze, which
passed softly round the circle, its course being marked by a pale light.
In a few minutes it suddenly changed, and blew upon us with considerable
force, as if a pair of bellows had been employed, and the temperature of
the room was perceptibly lowered. After this liquid scent was sprinkled
upon us several times; it appeared to come from the top of the room, and
fell upon us in small drops. Finally we were told that a new
manifestation would be attempted, and that we were to prepare for it by
joining hands and holding the palms upwards. In this position we waited
for two or three minutes, and then I felt a stream of liquid scent
poured out, as it were from the spout of a teapot, which fell on one
side of my left hand, and ran down upon the table. The same was done for
Mrs. Speer; and to judge from our impressions at the time, and from the
stains on the table, a very considerable quantity must have been
produced. I may remark in conclusion that there was no scent in the room
before the seance, and that we could distinguish several different
perfumes which made the atmosphere so oppressive that we were glad to
seek a purer air so soon as the seance came to an end."[52]


LIGHTS WITHOUT APPARENT PHYSICAL CAUSE.

The phenomenon of Light without any apparent physical cause was a
frequent one with Mr. Stainton Moses, and the manifestations were of a
very varied character. Several of these were described in Chapter IV.

An account is now given of some remarkable phenomena which occurred at
four consecutive seances on the 9th, 10th, 11th, and 12th of August
1873. Mr. Stainton Moses was on a holiday excursion with Dr. and Mrs.
Speer in the North of Ireland. The days were spent in orthodox holiday
fashion. The following is condensed from notes written in detail at the
time by Dr. Speer:--

On the 10th of August, after some other phenomena had occurred, a large
globe of light rose opposite to me, sailed up to the level of our faces,
and then vanished. Several more followed. By request one was placed in
the centre of the table. It was surrounded with drapery. A light came
and stood on the table close to me. "Now I will show you my hand" was
rapped out. A large very bright light then came up, and inside of it
appeared the materialised hand of the spirit. The fingers moved about
close to my face; the appearance was as distinct as can be conceived. I
was told to write an exact account of what had been done. The next
evening I placed the account I had written and a pencil on the table,
and asked that the light might be brought down upon it. This was done. I
then asked that if possible the spirit would append his signature. The
spirit said he would try. After other lights had been produced, the hand
appeared outside the drapery, I heard the pencil moving, and repeating
his instruction of the previous evening, he departed, leaving on the
paper a specimen of direct spirit caligraphy. On these two evenings no
other sitter was present but myself.[53]


DIRECT WRITING.

As has already been remarked, the wealth of material is so great that
selection is a matter of difficulty. There is much more I should like to
have included in this chapter, but it must be drawn to a close with a
brief detailed account of a case of "Direct Writing." There is perhaps
no phenomenon more incredible to the "beginner" in these studies, than
that legible and intelligent writing should be produced without human
agency, and yet there seems no other way of explaining the facts. The
following is an account, by Mr. Stainton Moses himself, of a seance held
on 19th September 1872, the last held before a break in the series
during the autumn of that year. "Imperator" had recently announced
himself as the leading guide or director of the phenomena.

[Illustration: Facsimile reduced from original. The paper was blue, with
faint blue lines. The corner at the top right hand was torn off for
identification of the paper.]

"We darkened the seance room, leaving the gas burning brightly in the
adjoining dining-room. Dr. and Mrs. Speer and I sat at the table. On the
floor under the table we put a piece of ruled paper and a pencil. A
corner of the paper I tore off, and handed it to Dr. Speer to identify
the sheet of paper if necessary. Various raps, some objects brought in,
and a noise rather like sawing wood. When light was called for, Mrs.
Speer stooped down and picked up the paper. The upper surface was blank.
Her endorsement on the back of the paper, afterwards written, reads: 'I
took the paper from under the table with the writing downwards,' _i.e._
on the surface touching the carpet. Dr. Speer and I wrote and signed
this endorsement: 'The above corner was torn by me (S. M.) before the
light was put out, and was given to Dr. S.' I (S. M.) afterwards put the
two pieces together. They fit exactly, and are secured by a couple of
halfpenny stamps, with the initials of Dr. S. and myself upon them. The
message follows the rules exactly. A facsimile is appended, omitting
only the initials of a deceased friend. It will be noticed that the
writing is clearly and laboriously executed on the ruled lines. In no
case are the lines deserted. I fancy the message is written backwards.
Imperator's signature is of his usual decided type, very like what is
automatically written by my hand. I suspect that the message was written
by two hands."[54]


FOOTNOTES:

[39] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 245-352, and vol. xi. pp.
24-113. Reference should also be made to an obituary notice of Mr.
Stainton Moses by Mr. Myers, in _Proceedings_, vol. viii. pp. 597-601.

[40] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 247-248.

[41] Ibid., p. 248.

[42] Ibid., p. 247.

[43] Ibid., p. 247.

[44] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. p. 247.

[45] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. p. 252.

[46] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. p. 259.

[47] Ibid.

[48] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 259-260.

[49] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. p. 261.

[50] See _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 263-266.

[51] See _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 266-267.

[52] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 267-273.

[53] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 274-276.

[54] _Proceedings S.P.R._, vol. ix. pp. 284-286.




