II

THE AUSTRIAN OFFER OF JULY 31, 1914

The author has noted (_ante_, p. 175) that as the belated offer of
Austria on July the 31st "to discuss [with Russia] the substance of
the Austrian ultimatum to Servia" did not offer to suspend military
preparations or operations, the concession was more nominal than real.
The Austrian _Red Book_ converts this inference into a certainty, and
makes clear that Austria's pretended change of policy was only
diplomatic finesse, as it contained no substantial modification of its
uncompromising attitude.

Russia had proposed on July the 30th (_ante_, p. 166) that "if Austria
consents to stay the march of her armies upon Servian territory" and
further agreed that the question of "the reparation which Servia could
accord to the Government of Austria-Hungary" could be examined by the
Great Powers, Russia would suspend her military preparations. As the
underlying question was whether Austria should be permitted to
subjugate Servia without interference, it was vital that that
subjugation should not proceed pending an examination by all
interested powers into its justice and ultimate ends.

Sir Edward Grey had previously requested Germany on July the 28th "to
use its influence" with the Austrian Government "to the effect that
the latter either consider the reply from Belgrade satisfactory or
else accept it as a basis for discussion between the Cabinets." The
German Foreign Office then instructed the German Ambassador at Vienna
"to submit the British proposal to the Vienna Cabinet for its
consideration" (Austrian _Red Book_, No. 43). As a result of this
suggestion, Count Berchtold on July the 29th (Austrian _Red Book_, No.
44) again shut the door upon any compromise by the contention that
Austria

     "no longer is in a position to meet the Servian reply in the
     spirit of the British suggestions, since at the time when
     the German request was presented here, a state of war
     already existed between the Dual Monarchy and Servia, _and
     thus the Servian reply had been superseded by events_."

The only counter-suggestion which Austria then made was as follows:

     "Should the British Cabinet be prepared to exert its
     influence upon the Russian Government for the maintenance of
     peace among the Great Powers, and for a localization of the
     war, which had been forced upon us by the Servian agitation
     of many years' standing, such efforts would meet with the
     Imperial and Royal Government's appreciation." (Austrian
     _Red Book_, No. 44.)

On July 31st the German Ambassador at Vienna, acting on instructions
(which instructions are again not disclosed in the German _White
Book_) informed Count Berchtold "of a conversation between Sir Edward
Grey and Prince Lichnowsky," in the course of which the British
Secretary of State declared to the German Ambassador that Russia felt
unable "to treat directly with Austria-Hungary and therefore requested
Great Britain to resume her mediation" and that "as a condition of
this mediation, however, the Russian Government stipulates the
suspension of hostilities in the meanwhile." (Austrian _Red Book_, No.
51.)

Thereupon Count Berchtold made the eleventh hour offer in question by
instructing the Austrian Ambassador at St. Petersburg

     "to express our readiness to consider Sir Edward Grey's
     proposition to mediate between us and Servia despite the
     changes brought about in the situation by Russia's
     mobilization. _Our acceptance, however, is subject to the
     condition that our military action against Servia shall
     nevertheless proceed and that the British Cabinet shall
     induce the Russian Government to stop the mobilization
     directed against us. It is understood that in this case we
     would at once cancel our defensive military counter-measures
     in Galicia, which had been forced upon us by Russia's
     mobilization._" (Austrian _Red Book_, No. 51.)

This suggestion was fatally objectionable in that it required Russia
to suspend its preparations to defend its interests while permitting
Austria to proceed with the subjugation of Servia. As the "bone
of contention" was this subjugation of Servia, this belated and
ostensibly conciliatory proposal of Austria amounted to an absurdity.
In that classic of nonsense, _Alice in Wonderland_, the unreasonable
and violent Queen announced in the trial of the Knave the similar
procedure of "sentence first, verdict afterwards," and Austria's final
proposal was essentially a like folly, for, stripped of diplomatic
pretense, it amounted to this, that Austria, while tying Russia's
hands, should proceed not merely to sentence but even to execute
Servia and subsequently discuss the justice of its action when it had
become irremediable.

The possible theory which we suggested (_ante_, p. 175), that Austria
at the eleventh hour may have experienced a change of heart and had
adopted a more conciliatory course, is apparently untenable.


III

THE INVASION OF FRANCE ON AUGUST 1ST

It has been Germany's contention that not only did the mobilization of
Russia cause the war, but that its eastern and western frontiers were
violated by Russian and French soldiers at a time when Germany's
intentions were sincerely pacific.

At 7 P.M. on July the 31st, Germany had given France until 1 P.M. of
the following day to declare whether it would remain neutral in the
event of a Russian-German war, and at that hour Viviani advised the
German Ambassador that France "would do that which her interests
dictated." (German _White Paper_, No. 27.) Notwithstanding France's
virtual refusal to meet the demand of Germany, the latter did not
declare war on France on that day, and this is the more significant as
it immediately declared war on Russia. The German Ambassador remained
in Paris until August the 3d, and only then demanded his passports
when his position in the French Capitol had become untenable.

In the meantime Germany was awaiting some act of aggression on the
part of France, that would enable it under the terms of the Triple
Alliance to demand as of right the coöperation of Italy, while
France, determined for this and other reasons not to be the aggressor,
had withdrawn its troops ten kilometers from the frontier and refused
to take any offensive step either before or after the expiration of
the ultimatum.

The confidential telegram of the Kaiser to King George suggests
the possibility that on August the 1st, about the time that the
eighteen-hour ultimatum had expired, Germany was ready and intended to
commence an immediate invasion of France, for on that day the Kaiser
telegraphs to King George:

     "_I hope that France will not become nervous. The troops on
     my frontier are in the act of being stopped by telegraph and
     telephone from crossing into France._" (_Ante_, p. 187.)

The exact hour when the Kaiser sent the King this message is
conjectural. We know from the German _White Paper_ that at 11 A.M.
on that day Sir Edward Grey inquired of Prince Lichnowsky over the
telephone whether Germany was "in a position to declare that we would
not attack France in a war between Germany and Russia in case France
should remain neutral."

This message prompted the Kaiser's telegram to King George. How soon
thereafter the Kaiser sent his telegram we do not know, but as the
impossibility of France's neutrality was recognized in Berlin on
receipt of Lichnowsky's telegram by 5 P.M. on that day, it is
altogether probable that the Kaiser's telegram was sent between those
hours.

If the telegram in question is now analyzed and the fair natural
import is given to the Kaiser's language, it would seem that the
invasion of France, either before or in any event simultaneously with
the expiration of the eighteen-hour ultimatum, had been determined
upon by the Kaiser and his military staff, for the Kaiser's intimation
that he has "stopped by telegraph and telephone [his army] from
crossing into France" fairly implies that previous orders had been
given to commence such invasion and that these orders had been
hurriedly recalled in the most expeditious way, upon the supposed
intimation of Sir Edward Grey that England might guarantee the
neutrality of France.

Under these circumstances, with the German Ambassador still at Paris
and ostensibly preserving friendly relations, it is evident that the
invasion was either to precede or to follow immediately upon the
severance of diplomatic relations. This in itself may not be
indefensible under international law, but it throws a searchlight upon
the contention of Germany that its intentions were pacific and that it
had been surprised by a sudden and treacherous attack on the part of
Russia, France, and England.

The difficulty, however, is to reconcile this apparent intention of
the Kaiser's military staff to invade France on August the 1st and the
action of his Foreign Office in failing to make any declaration of war
against France and in retaining its Ambassador at Paris and permitting
the French Ambassador to remain at Berlin. The diplomatic records
abundantly show that this latter policy of the German Foreign Office
was followed in the hope that France would become the aggressor, but
its inconsistency with the policy of the War Office implied in the
Kaiser's telegram is obvious.

Possibly the Kaiser's soldiers and diplomats were not working in
complete harmony. It may be true that the many blunders of German
diplomats were in part due to the reckless impetuosity of the War
Office and it is possible that some of von Bethmann-Hollweg's and von
Jagow's diplomatic blunders are more properly attributable to the
Kaiser and Moltke.

It is also possible that the natural inference from the Kaiser's
language above quoted is misleading and that the telegram to King
George did not mean to imply that any orders for an invasion had been
cancelled but simply that the army leaders on the Western frontier had
been cautioned not to cross the frontier until further orders.

Another possible theory is that the Kaiser for political reasons may
have exaggerated the extent of his concession, and magnified the
urgency of the situation to induce prompt and favorable action by
Great Britain.

But the readiness of Germany to strike a quick and fatal blow at Paris
cannot be gainsaid and strangely contrasts with the "injured
innocence" protestations that it was treacherously surprised by an
unexpected attack. Always with Prussia, "the readiness is all."


