CHAPTER XVII. “YOU ARE MY GIRL!”

MR. ANTHONY HARDING was pacing back and forth the length of the veranda
of the ranchhouse at El Orobo waiting for some word of hope from those
who had ridden out in search of his daughter, Barbara. Each swirling
dust devil that eddied across the dry flat on either side of the river
roused hopes within his breast that it might have been spurred into
activity by the hoofs of a pony bearing a messenger of good tidings; but
always his hopes were dashed, for no horseman emerged from the heat haze
of the distance where the little dust devils raced playfully among the
cacti and the greasewood.

But at last, in the northwest, a horseman, unheralded by gyrating dust
column, came into sight. Mr. Harding shook his head sorrowfully. It had
not been from this direction that he had expected word of Barbara, yet
he kept his eyes fastened upon the rider until the latter reined in at
the ranchyard and loped a tired and sweating pony to the foot of the
veranda steps. Then Mr. Harding saw who the newcomer was.

“Bridge!” he exclaimed. “What brings you back here? Don't you know that
you endanger us as well as yourself by being seen here? General Villa
will think that we have been harboring you.”

Bridge swung from the saddle and ran up onto the veranda. He paid not
the slightest attention to Anthony Harding's protest.

“How many men you got here that you can depend on?” he asked.

“None,” replied the Easterner. “What do you mean?”

“None!” cried Bridge, incredulity and hopelessness showing upon his
countenance. “Isn't there a Chinaman and a couple of faithful Mexicans?”

“Oh, yes, of course,” assented Mr. Harding; “but what are you driving
at?”

“Pesita is on his way here to clean up El Orobo. He can't be very far
behind me. Call the men you got, and we'll get together all the guns and
ammunition on the ranch, and barricade the ranchhouse. We may be able to
stand 'em off. Have you heard anything of Miss Barbara?”

Anthony Harding shook his head sadly.

“Then we'll have to stay right here and do the best we can,” said
Bridge. “I was thinking we might make a run for it if Miss Barbara was
here; but as she's not we must wait for those who went out after her.”

Mr. Harding summoned the two Mexicans while Bridge ran to the cookhouse
and ordered the Chinaman to the ranchhouse. Then the erstwhile
bookkeeper ransacked the bunkhouse for arms and ammunition. What little
he found he carried to the ranchhouse, and with the help of the others
barricaded the doors and windows of the first floor.

“We'll have to make our fight from the upper windows,” he explained to
the ranch owner. “If Pesita doesn't bring too large a force we may be
able to stand them off until you can get help from Cuivaca. Call up
there now and see if you can get Villa to send help--he ought to protect
you from Pesita. I understand that there is no love lost between the
two.”

Anthony Harding went at once to the telephone and rang for the central
at Cuivaca.

“Tell it to the operator,” shouted Bridge who stood peering through an
opening in the barricade before a front window; “they are coming now,
and the chances are that the first thing they'll do is cut the telephone
wires.”

The Easterner poured his story and appeal for help into the ears of the
girl at the other end of the line, and then for a few moments there was
silence in the room as he listened to her reply.

“Impossible!” and “My God! it can't be true,” Bridge heard the older man
ejaculate, and then he saw him hang up the receiver and turn from the
instrument, his face drawn and pinched with an expression of utter
hopelessness.

“What's wrong?” asked Bridge.

“Villa has turned against the Americans,” replied Harding, dully. “The
operator evidently feels friendly toward us, for she warned me not to
appeal to Villa and told me why. Even now, this minute, the man has a
force of twenty-five hundred ready to march on Columbus, New Mexico.
Three Americans were hanged in Cuivaca this afternoon. It's horrible,
sir! It's horrible! We are as good as dead this very minute. Even if
we stand off Pesita we can never escape to the border through Villa's
forces.”

“It looks bad,” admitted Bridge. “In fact it couldn't look much worse;
but here we are, and while our ammunition holds out about all we can
do is stay here and use it. Will you men stand by us?” he addressed the
Chinaman and the two Mexicans, who assured him that they had no love for
Pesita and would fight for Anthony Harding in preference to going over
to the enemy.

“Good!” exclaimed Bridge, “and now for upstairs. They'll be howling
around here in about five minutes, and we want to give them a reception
they won't forget.”

He led the way to the second floor, where the five took up positions
near the front windows. A short distance from the ranchhouse they could
see the enemy, consisting of a detachment of some twenty of Pesita's
troopers riding at a brisk trot in their direction.

“Pesita's with them,” announced Bridge, presently. “He's the little
fellow on the sorrel. Wait until they are close up, then give them a few
rounds; but go easy on the ammunition--we haven't any too much.”

Pesita, expecting no resistance, rode boldly into the ranchyard. At the
bunkhouse and the office his little force halted while three or four
troopers dismounted and entered the buildings in search of victims.
Disappointed there they moved toward the ranchhouse.

“Lie low!” Bridge cautioned his companions. “Don't let them see you, and
wait till I give the word before you fire.”

On came the horsemen at a slow walk. Bridge waited until they were
within a few yards of the house, then he cried: “Now! Let 'em have it!”
 A rattle of rifle fire broke from the upper windows into the ranks of
the Pesitistas. Three troopers reeled and slipped from their saddles.
Two horses dropped in their tracks. Cursing and yelling, the balance of
the horsemen wheeled and galloped away in the direction of the office
building, followed by the fire of the defenders.

“That wasn't so bad,” cried Bridge. “I'll venture a guess that Mr.
Pesita is some surprised--and sore. There they go behind the office.
They'll stay there a few minutes talking it over and getting up their
courage to try it again. Next time they'll come from another direction.
You two,” he continued, turning to the Mexicans, “take positions on
the east and south sides of the house. Sing can remain here with Mr.
Harding. I'll take the north side facing the office. Shoot at the first
man who shows his head. If we can hold them off until dark we may be
able to get away. Whatever happens don't let one of them get close
enough to fire the house. That's what they'll try for.”

It was fifteen minutes before the second attack came. Five dismounted
troopers made a dash for the north side of the house; but when Bridge
dropped the first of them before he had taken ten steps from the office
building and wounded a second the others retreated for shelter.

Time and again as the afternoon wore away Pesita made attempts to get
men close up to the house; but in each instance they were driven back,
until at last they desisted from their efforts to fire the house or rush
it, and contented themselves with firing an occasional shot through the
windows opposite them.

“They're waiting for dark,” said Bridge to Mr. Harding during a
temporary lull in the hostilities, “and then we're goners, unless the
boys come back from across the river in time.”

“Couldn't we get away after dark?” asked the Easterner.

“It's our only hope if help don't reach us,” replied Bridge.

But when night finally fell and the five men made an attempt to leave
the house upon the side away from the office building they were met
with the flash of carbines and the ping of bullets. One of the Mexican
defenders fell, mortally wounded, and the others were barely able to
drag him within and replace the barricade before the door when five
of Pesita's men charged close up to their defenses. These were finally
driven off and again there came a lull; but all hope of escape was gone,
and Bridge reposted the defenders at the upper windows where they might
watch every approach to the house.

As the hours dragged on the hopelessness of their position grew upon the
minds of all. Their ammunition was almost gone--each man had but a few
rounds remaining--and it was evident that Pesita, through an inordinate
desire for revenge, would persist until he had reduced their fortress
and claimed the last of them as his victim.

It was with such cheerful expectations that they awaited the final
assault which would see them without ammunition and defenseless in the
face of a cruel and implacable foe.

It was just before daylight that the anticipated rush occurred. From
every side rang the reports of carbines and the yells of the bandits.
There were scarcely more than a dozen of the original twenty left; but
they made up for their depleted numbers by the rapidity with which they
worked their firearms and the loudness and ferocity of their savage
cries.

And this time they reached the shelter of the veranda and commenced
battering at the door.

At the report of the rifle so close to them Billy Byrne shoved Barbara
quickly to one side and leaped forward to close with the man who barred
their way to liberty.

That they had surprised him even more than he had them was evidenced by
the wildness of his shot which passed harmlessly above their heads as
well as by the fact that he had permitted them to come so close before
engaging them.

To the latter event was attributable his undoing, for it permitted Billy
Byrne to close with him before the Indian could reload his antiquated
weapon. Down the two men went, the American on top, each striving for
a death-hold; but in weight and strength and skill the Piman was far
outclassed by the trained fighter, a part of whose daily workouts had
consisted in wrestling with proficient artists of the mat.

Barbara Harding ran forward to assist her champion but as the men rolled
and tumbled over the ground she could find no opening for a blow that
might not endanger Billy Byrne quite as much as it endangered his
antagonist; but presently she discovered that the American required no
assistance. She saw the Indian's head bending slowly forward beneath the
resistless force of the other's huge muscles, she heard the crack that
announced the parting of the vertebrae and saw the limp thing which
had but a moment before been a man, pulsing with life and vigor, roll
helplessly aside--a harmless and inanimate lump of clay.

Billy Byrne leaped to his feet, shaking himself as a great mastiff might
whose coat had been ruffled in a fight.

“Come!” he whispered. “We gotta beat it now for sure. That guy's shot'll
lead 'em right down to us,” and once more they took up their flight down
toward the valley, along an unknown trail through the darkness of the
night.

For the most part they moved in silence, Billy holding the girl's arm
or hand to steady her over the rough and dangerous portions of the path.
And as they went there grew in Billy's breast a love so deep and so
resistless that he found himself wondering that he had ever imagined
that his former passion for this girl was love.

This new thing surged through him and over him with all the blind,
brutal, compelling force of a mighty tidal wave. It battered down and
swept away the frail barriers of his new-found gentleness. Again he was
the Mucker--hating the artificial wall of social caste which separated
him from this girl; but now he was ready to climb the wall, or, better
still, to batter it down with his huge fists. But the time was not
yet--first he must get Barbara to a place of safety.

On and on they went. The night grew cold. Far ahead there sounded the
occasional pop of a rifle. Billy wondered what it could mean and as they
approached the ranch and he discovered that it came from that direction
he hastened their steps to even greater speed than before.

“Somebody's shootin' up the ranch,” he volunteered. “Wonder who it could
be.”

“Suppose it is your friend and general?” asked the girl.

Billy made no reply. They reached the river and as Billy knew not where
the fords lay he plunged in at the point at which the water first barred
their progress and dragging the girl after him, plowed bull-like for
the opposite shore. Where the water was above his depth he swam while
Barbara clung to his shoulders. Thus they made the passage quickly and
safely.

Billy stopped long enough to shake the water out of his carbine, which
the girl had carried across, and then forged ahead toward the ranchhouse
from which the sounds of battle came now in increased volume.

And at the ranchhouse “hell was popping.” The moment Bridge realized
that some of the attackers had reached the veranda he called the
surviving Mexican and the Chinaman to follow him to the lower floor
where they might stand a better chance to repel this new attack. Mr.
Harding he persuaded to remain upstairs.

Outside a dozen men were battering to force an entrance. Already one
panel had splintered, and as Bridge entered the room he could see the
figures of the bandits through the hole they had made. Raising his
rifle he fired through the aperture. There was a scream as one of the
attackers dropped; but the others only increased their efforts, their
oaths, and their threats of vengeance.

The three defenders poured a few rounds through the sagging door, then
Bridge noted that the Chinaman ceased firing.

“What's the matter?” he asked.

“Allee gonee,” replied Sing, pointing to his ammunition belt.

At the same instant the Mexican threw down his carbine and rushed for
a window on the opposite side of the room. His ammunition was exhausted
and with it had departed his courage. Flight seemed the only course
remaining. Bridge made no effort to stop him. He would have been glad to
fly, too; but he could not leave Anthony Harding, and he was sure that
the older man would prove unequal to any sustained flight on foot.

“You better go, too, Sing,” he said to the Chinaman, placing another
bullet through the door; “there's nothing more that you can do, and it
may be that they are all on this side now--I think they are. You fellows
have fought splendidly. Wish I could give you something more substantial
than thanks; but that's all I have now and shortly Pesita won't even
leave me that much.”

“Allee light,” replied Sing cheerfully, and a second later he was
clambering through the window in the wake of the loyal Mexican.

And then the door crashed in and half a dozen troopers followed by
Pesita himself burst into the room.

Bridge was standing at the foot of the stairs, his carbine clubbed, for
he had just spent his last bullet. He knew that he must die; but he was
determined to make them purchase his life as dearly as he could, and to
die in defense of Anthony Harding, the father of the girl he loved, even
though hopelessly.

Pesita saw from the American's attitude that he had no more ammunition.
He struck up the carbine of a trooper who was about to shoot Bridge
down.

“Wait!” commanded the bandit. “Cease firing! His ammunition is gone.
Will you surrender?” he asked of Bridge.

“Not until I have beaten from the heads of one or two of your friends,”
 he replied, “that which their egotism leads them to imagine are brains.
No, if you take me alive, Pesita, you will have to kill me to do it.”

Pesita shrugged. “Very well,” he said, indifferently, “it makes little
difference to me--that stairway is as good as a wall. These brave
defenders of the liberty of poor, bleeding Mexico will make an excellent
firing squad. Attention, my children! Ready! Aim!”

Eleven carbines were leveled at Bridge. In the ghastly light of early
dawn the sallow complexions of the Mexicans took on a weird hue. The
American made a wry face, a slight shudder shook his slender frame, and
then he squared his shoulders and looked Pesita smilingly in the face.

The figure of a man appeared at the window through which the Chinaman
and the loyal Mexican had escaped. Quick eyes took in the scene within
the room.

“Hey!” he yelled. “Cut the rough stuff!” and leaped into the room.

Pesita, surprised by the interruption, turned toward the intruder before
he had given the command to fire. A smile lit his features when he saw
who it was.

“Ah!” he exclaimed, “my dear Captain Byrne. Just in time to see a
traitor and a spy pay the penalty for his crimes.”

“Nothin' doin',” growled Billy Byrne, and then he threw his carbine to
his shoulder and took careful aim at Pesita's face.

How easy it would have been to have hesitated a moment in the window
before he made his presence known--just long enough for Pesita to speak
the single word that would have sent eleven bullets speeding into the
body of the man who loved Barbara and whom Billy believed the girl
loved. But did such a thought occur to Billy Byrne of Grand Avenue? It
did not. He forgot every other consideration beyond his loyalty to a
friend. Bridge and Pesita were looking at him in wide-eyed astonishment.

“Lay down your carbines!” Billy shot his command at the firing squad.
“Lay 'em down or I'll bore Pesita. Tell 'em to lay 'em down, Pesita. I
gotta bead on your beezer.”

Pesita did as he was bid, his yellow face pasty with rage.

“Now their cartridge belts!” snapped Billy, and when these had been
deposited upon the floor he told Bridge to disarm the bandit chief.

“Is Mr. Harding safe?” he asked of Bridge, and receiving an affirmative
he called upstairs for the older man to descend.

As Mr. Harding reached the foot of the stairs Barbara entered the room
by the window through which Billy had come--a window which opened upon
the side veranda.

“Now we gotta hike,” announced Billy. “It won't never be safe for
none of you here after this, not even if you do think Villa's your
friend--which he ain't the friend of no American.”

“We know that now,” said Mr. Harding, and repeated to Billy that which
the telephone operator had told him earlier in the day.

Marching Pesita and his men ahead of them Billy and the others made
their way to the rear of the office building where the horses of the
bandits were tethered. They were each armed now from the discarded
weapons of the raiders, and well supplied with ammunition. The Chinaman
and the loyal Mexican also discovered themselves when they learned that
the tables had been turned upon Pesita. They, too, were armed and all
were mounted, and when Billy had loaded the remaining weapons upon the
balance of the horses the party rode away, driving Pesita's live stock
and arms ahead of them.

“I imagine,” remarked Bridge, “that you've rather discouraged
pursuit for a while at least,” but pursuit came sooner than they had
anticipated.

They had reached a point on the river not far from Jose's when a band
of horsemen appeared approaching from the west. Billy urged his party to
greater speed that they might avoid a meeting if possible; but it soon
became evident that the strangers had no intention of permitting them to
go unchallenged, for they altered their course and increased their
speed so that they were soon bearing down upon the fugitives at a rapid
gallop.

“I guess,” said Billy, “that we'd better open up on 'em. It's a cinch
they ain't no friends of ours anywhere in these parts.”

“Hadn't we better wait a moment,” said Mr. Harding; “we do not want to
chance making any mistake.”

“It ain't never a mistake to shoot a Dago,” replied Billy. His eyes
were fastened upon the approaching horsemen, and he presently gave an
exclamation of recognition. “There's Rozales,” he said. “I couldn't
mistake that beanpole nowheres. We're safe enough in takin' a shot
at 'em if Rosie's with 'em. He's Pesita's head guy,” and he drew his
revolver and took a single shot in the direction of his former comrades.
Bridge followed his example. The oncoming Pesitistas reined in. Billy
returned his revolver to its holster and drew his carbine.

“You ride on ahead,” he said to Mr. Harding and Barbara. “Bridge and
I'll bring up the rear.”

Then he stopped his pony and turning took deliberate aim at the knot of
horsemen to their left. A bandit tumbled from his saddle and the fight
was on.

Fortunately for the Americans Rozales had but a handful of men with him
and Rozales himself was never keen for a fight in the open.

All morning he hovered around the rear of the escaping Americans; but
neither side did much damage to the other, and during the afternoon
Billy noticed that Rozales merely followed within sight of them, after
having dispatched one of his men back in the direction from which they
had come.

“After reinforcements,” commented Byrne.

All day they rode without meeting with any roving bands of soldiers or
bandits, and the explanation was all too sinister to the Americans when
coupled with the knowledge that Villa was to attack an American town
that night.

“I wish we could reach the border in time to warn 'em,” said Billy; “but
they ain't no chance. If we cross before sunup tomorrow morning we'll be
doin' well.”

He had scarcely spoken to Barbara Harding all day, for his duties as
rear guard had kept him busy; nor had he conversed much with Bridge,
though he had often eyed the latter whose gaze wandered many times to
the slender, graceful figure of the girl ahead of them.

Billy was thinking as he never had thought before. It seemed to him a
cruel fate that had so shaped their destinies that his best friend loved
the girl Billy loved. That Bridge was ignorant of Billy's infatuation
for her the latter well knew. He could not blame Bridge, nor could he,
upon the other hand, quite reconcile himself to the more than apparent
adoration which marked his friend's attitude toward Barbara.

As daylight waned the fugitives realized from the shuffling gait
of their mounts, from drooping heads and dull eyes that rest was
imperative. They themselves were fagged, too, and when a ranchhouse
loomed in front of them they decided to halt for much-needed
recuperation.

Here they found three Americans who were totally unaware of Villa's
contemplated raid across the border, and who when they were informed of
it were doubly glad to welcome six extra carbines, for Barbara not
only was armed but was eminently qualified to expend ammunition without
wasting it.

Rozales and his small band halted out of range of the ranch; but they
went hungry while their quarry fed themselves and their tired mounts.

The Clark brothers and their cousin, a man by the name of Mason, who
were the sole inhabitants of the ranch counseled a long rest--two hours
at least, for the border was still ten miles away and speed at the last
moment might be their sole means of salvation.

Billy was for moving on at once before the reinforcements, for which he
was sure Rozales had dispatched his messenger, could overtake them. But
the others were tired and argued, too, that upon jaded ponies they could
not hope to escape and so they waited, until, just as they were ready to
continue their flight, flight became impossible.

Darkness had fallen when the little party commenced to resaddle
their ponies and in the midst of their labors there came a rude and
disheartening interruption. Billy had kept either the Chinaman or Bridge
constantly upon watch toward the direction in which Rozales' men lolled
smoking in the dark, and it was the crack of Bridge's carbine which
awoke the Americans to the fact that though the border lay but a few
miles away they were still far from safety.

As he fired Bridge turned in his saddle and shouted to the others to
make for the shelter of the ranchhouse.

“There are two hundred of them,” he cried. “Run for cover!”

Billy and the Clark brothers leaped to their saddles and spurred toward
the point where Bridge sat pumping lead into the advancing enemy.
Mason and Mr. Harding hurried Barbara to the questionable safety of the
ranchhouse. The Mexican followed them, and Bridge ordered Sing back to
assist in barricading the doors and windows, while he and Billy and the
Clark boys held the bandits in momentary check.

Falling back slowly and firing constantly as they came the four
approached the house while Pesita and his full band advanced cautiously
after them. They had almost reached the house when Bridge lunged forward
from his saddle. The Clark boys had dismounted and were leading their
ponies inside the house. Billy alone noted the wounding of his friend.
Without an instant's hesitation he slipped from his saddle, ran back
to where Bridge lay and lifted him in his arms. Bullets were pattering
thick about them. A horseman far in advance of his fellows galloped
forward with drawn saber to cut down the gringos.

Billy, casting an occasional glance behind, saw the danger in time to
meet it--just, in fact, as the weapon was cutting through the air toward
his head. Dropping Bridge and dodging to one side he managed to escape
the cut, and before the swordsman could recover Billy had leaped to his
pony's side and seizing the rider about the waist dragged him to the
ground.

“Rozales!” he exclaimed, and struck the man as he had never struck
another in all his life, with the full force of his mighty muscles
backed by his great weight, with clenched fist full in the face.

There was a spurting of blood and a splintering of bone, and Captain
Guillermo Rozales sank senseless to the ground, his career of crime and
rapine ended forever.

Again Billy lifted Bridge in his arms and this time he succeeded in
reaching the ranchhouse without opposition though a little crimson
stream trickled down his left arm to drop upon the face of his friend as
he deposited Bridge upon the floor of the house.

All night the Pesitistas circled the lone ranchhouse. All night they
poured their volleys into the adobe walls and through the barricaded
windows. All night the little band of defenders fought gallantly for
their lives; but as day approached the futility of their endeavors was
borne in upon them, for of the nine one was dead and three wounded, and
the numbers of their assailants seemed undiminished.

Billy Byrne had been lying all night upon his stomach before a window
firing out into the darkness at the dim forms which occasionally showed
against the dull, dead background of the moonless desert.

Presently he leaped to his feet and crossed the floor to the room in
which the horses had been placed.

“Everybody fire toward the rear of the house as fast as they can,” said
Billy. “I want a clear space for my getaway.”

“Where you goin?” asked one of the Clark brothers.

“North,” replied Billy, “after some of Funston's men on the border.”

“But they won't cross,” said Mr. Harding. “Washington won't let them.”

“They gotta,” snapped Billy Byrne, “an' they will when they know there's
an American girl here with a bunch of Dagos yappin' around.”

“You'll be killed,” said Price Clark. “You can't never get through.”

“Leave it to me,” replied Billy. “Just get ready an' open that back door
when I give the word, an' then shut it again in a hurry when I've gone
through.”

He led a horse from the side room, and mounted it.

“Open her up, boes!” he shouted, and “S'long everybody!”

Price Clark swung the door open. Billy put spurs to his mount and threw
himself forward flat against the animal's neck. Another moment he was
through and a rattling fusillade of shots proclaimed the fact that his
bold feat had not gone unnoted by the foe.

The little Mexican pony shot like a bolt from a crossbow out across the
level desert. The rattling of carbines only served to add speed to its
frightened feet. Billy sat erect in the saddle, guiding the horse with
his left hand and working his revolver methodically with his right.

At a window behind him Barbara Harding stood breathless and spellbound
until he had disappeared into the gloom of the early morning darkness
to the north, then she turned with a weary sigh and resumed her place
beside the wounded Bridge whose head she bathed with cool water, while
he tossed in the delirium of fever.

The first streaks of daylight were piercing the heavens, the Pesitistas
were rallying for a decisive charge, the hopes of the little band of
besieged were at low ebb when from the west there sounded the pounding
of many hoofs.

“Villa,” moaned Westcott Clark, hopelessly. “We're done for now, sure
enough. He must be comin' back from his raid on the border.”

In the faint light of dawn they saw a column of horsemen deploy suddenly
into a long, thin line which galloped forward over the flat earth,
coming toward them like a huge, relentless engine of destruction.

The Pesitistas were watching too. They had ceased firing and sat in
their saddles forgetful of their contemplated charge.

The occupants of the ranchhouse were gathered at the small windows.

“What's them?” cried Mason--“them things floating over 'em.”

“They're guidons!” exclaimed Price Clark “--the guidons of the United
States cavalry regiment. See 'em! See 'em? God! but don't they look
good?”

There was a wild whoop from the lungs of the advancing cavalrymen.
Pesita's troops answered it with a scattering volley, and a moment later
the Americans were among them in that famous revolver charge which is
now history.

Daylight had come revealing to the watchers in the ranchhouse the
figures of the combatants. In the thick of the fight loomed the giant
figure of a man in nondescript garb which more closely resembled the
apparel of the Pesitistas than it did the uniforms of the American
soldiery, yet it was with them he fought. Barbara's eyes were the first
to detect him.

“There's Mr. Byrne,” she cried. “It must have been he who brought the
troops.”

“Why, he hasn't had time to reach the border yet,” remonstrated one of
the Clark boys, “much less get back here with help.”

“There he is though,” said Mr. Harding. “It's certainly strange. I can't
understand what American troops are doing across the border--especially
under the present administration.”

The Pesitistas held their ground for but a moment then they wheeled and
fled; but not before Pesita himself had forced his pony close to that of
Billy Byrne.

“Traitor!” screamed the bandit. “You shall die for this,” and fired
point-blank at the American.

Billy felt a burning sensation in his already wounded left arm; but his
right was still good.

“For poor, bleeding Mexico!” he cried, and put a bullet through Pesita's
forehead.


Under escort of the men of the Thirteenth Cavalry who had pursued
Villa's raiders into Mexico and upon whom Billy Byrne had stumbled by
chance, the little party of fugitives came safely to United States soil,
where all but one breathed sighs of heartfelt relief.

Bridge was given first aid by members of the hospital corps, who assured
Billy that his friend would not die. Mr. Harding and Barbara were taken
in by the wife of an officer, and it was at the quarters of the latter
that Billy Byrne found her alone in the sitting-room.

The girl looked up as he entered, a sad smile upon her face. She was
about to ask him of his wound; but he gave her no opportunity.

“I've come for you,” he said. “I gave you up once when I thought it was
better for you to marry a man in your own class. I won't give you up
again. You're mine--you're my girl, and I'm goin' to take you with me.
Were goin' to Galveston as fast as we can, and from there we're goin' to
Rio. You belonged to me long before Bridge saw you. He can't have you.
Nobody can have you but me, and if anyone tries to keep me from taking
you they'll get killed.”

He took a step nearer that brought him close to her. She did not
shrink--only looked up into his face with wide eyes filled with wonder.
He seized her roughly in his arms.

“You are my girl!” he cried hoarsely. “Kiss me!”

“Wait!” she said. “First tell me what you meant by saying that Bridge
couldn't have me. I never knew that Bridge wanted me, and I certainly
have never wanted Bridge. O Billy! Why didn't you do this long ago?
Months ago in New York I wanted you to take me; but you left me to
another man whom I didn't love. I thought you had ceased to care, Billy,
and since we have been together here--since that night in the room back
of the office--you have made me feel that I was nothing to you. Take me,
Billy! Take me anywhere in the world that you go. I love you and I'll
slave for you--anything just to be with you.”

“Barbara!” cried Billy Byrne, and then his voice was smothered by the
pressure of warm, red lips against his own.

A half hour later Billy stepped out into the street to make his way to
the railroad station that he might procure transportation for three
to Galveston. Anthony Harding was going with them. He had listened
to Barbara's pleas, and had finally volunteered to back Billy Byrne's
flight from the jurisdiction of the law, or at least to a place where,
under a new name, he could start life over again and live it as the
son-in-law of old Anthony Harding should live.

Among the crowd viewing the havoc wrought by the raiders the previous
night was a large man with a red face. It happened that he turned
suddenly about as Billy Byrne was on the point of passing behind him.
Both men started as recognition lighted their faces and he of the red
face found himself looking down the barrel of a six-shooter.

“Put it up, Byrne,” he admonished the other coolly. “I didn't know you
were so good on the draw.”

“I'm good on the draw all right, Flannagan,” said Billy, “and I ain't
drawin' for amusement neither. I gotta chance to get away and live
straight, and have a little happiness in life, and, Flannagan, the man
who tries to crab my game is goin' to get himself croaked. I'll never go
back to stir alive. See?”

“Yep,” said Flannagan, “I see; but I ain't tryin' to crab your game. I
ain't down here after you this trip. Where you been, anyway, that you
don't know the war's over? Why Coke Sheehan confessed a month ago that
it was him that croaked Schneider, and the governor pardoned you about
ten days ago.”

“You stringin' me?” asked Billy, a vicious glint in his eyes.

“On the level,” Flannagan assured him. “Wait, I gotta clippin' from the
Trib in my clothes somewheres that gives all the dope.”

He drew some papers from his coat pocket and handed one to Billy.

“Turn your back and hold up your hands while I read,” said Byrne, and as
Flannagan did as he was bid Billy unfolded the soiled bit of newspaper
and read that which set him a-trembling with nervous excitement.

A moment later Detective Sergeant Flannagan ventured a rearward glance
to note how Byrne was receiving the joyful tidings which the newspaper
article contained.

“Well, I'll be!” ejaculated the sleuth, for Billy Byrne was already
a hundred yards away and breaking all records in his dash for the
sitting-room he had quitted but a few minutes before.

It was a happy and contented trio who took the train the following day
on their way back to New York City after bidding Bridge good-bye in the
improvised hospital and exacting his promise that he would visit them in
New York in the near future.


It was a month later; spring was filling the southland with new, sweet
life. The joy of living was reflected in the song of birds and the
opening of buds. Beside a slow-moving stream a man squatted before a
tiny fire. A battered tin can, half filled with water stood close to the
burning embers. Upon a sharpened stick the man roasted a bit of meat,
and as he watched it curling at the edges as the flame licked it he
spoke aloud though there was none to hear:

  Just for a con I'd like to know (yes, he crossed over long ago;
 And he was right, believe me, bo!) if somewhere in the South,
  Down where the clouds lie on the sea, he found his sweet Penelope
 With buds of roses in her hair and kisses on her mouth.


“Which is what they will be singing about me one of these days,” he
commented.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mucker, by Edgar Rice Burroughs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MUCKER ***

***** This file should be named 331-0.txt or 331-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/331/

Produced by Judith Boss

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation”
 or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, “Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.”

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
“Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

