CHAPTER V

RICARDO


I. RICARDO'S STARTING-POINT

David Ricardo,[294] born 19th April 1772, was the son of a Dutch Jew
who had settled in England, and made money upon the Stock Exchange.
Ricardo had a desultory education, and was employed in business from
his boyhood. He abandoned his father's creed, and married an
Englishwoman soon after reaching his majority. He set up for himself
in business, and, at a time when financial transactions upon an
unprecedented scale were giving great opportunities for speculators,
he made a large fortune, and about 1814 bought an estate at Gatcombe
Park, Gloucestershire. He withdrew soon afterwards from business, and
in 1819 became member of parliament. His death on 11th September 1823
cut short a political career from which his perhaps too sanguine
friends anticipated great results. His influence in his own department
of inquiry had been, meanwhile, of the greatest importance. He had
shown in his youth some inclination for scientific pursuits; he
established a laboratory, and became a member of scientific societies.
The perusal of Adam Smith's _Wealth of Nations_ in 1799 gave him an
interest in the application of scientific methods to the questions
with which he was most conversant. Accepting Adam Smith as the leading
authority, he proceeded to think out for himself certain doctrines,
which appeared to him to have been insufficiently recognised by his
teacher. The first result of his speculations was a pamphlet published
in 1809 upon the depreciation of the currency. Upon that topic he
spoke as an expert, and his main doctrines were accepted by the famous
Bullion Committee. Ricardo thus became a recognised authority on one
great set of problems of the highest immediate interest. Malthus's
_Inquiry into Rent_ suggested another pamphlet; and in 1817,
encouraged by the warm pressure of his friend, James Mill, he
published his chief book, the _Principles of Political Economy and
Taxation_. This became the economic Bible of the Utilitarians. The
task of a commentator or interpreter is, for various reasons, a
difficult one.

There is a certain analogy between Ricardo and a very different
writer, Bishop Butler. Each of them produced a great effect by a short
treatise, and in each case the book owed very little to the ordinary
literary graces. Ricardo's want of literary training, or his natural
difficulty of utterance, made his style still worse than Butler's;
but, like Butler, he commands our respect by his obvious sincerity and
earnestness. He is content when he has so expressed his argument that
it can be seized by an attentive reader. He is incapable of, or
indifferent to, clear and orderly exposition of principles. The logic
is there, if you will take the trouble to look for it. Perhaps we
ought to be flattered by this tacit reliance upon our patience. 'You,'
Ricardo, like Butler, seems to say to us, 'are anxious for truth: you
do not care for ornament, and may be trusted to work out the full
application of my principles.' In another respect the two are alike.
Butler's argument has impressed many readers as a demolition of his
own case. It provokes revolt instead of adhesion. Ricardo, an orthodox
economist, laid down principles which were adopted by Socialists to
upset his own assumptions. Such a God as you worship, said Butler's
opponents, is an unjust being, and therefore worse than no God. Such a
system as you describe, said Ricardo's opponents, is an embodiment of
injustice, and therefore to be radically destroyed. Admitting the
logic, the argument may be read as a _reductio ad absurdum_ in both
cases.

Ricardo has involved himself in certain special difficulties. In the
first place, he presupposes familiarity with Adam Smith. The
_Principles_ is a running comment upon some of Smith's theories, and
no attempt is made to reduce them to systematic order. He starts by
laying down propositions, the proof of which comes afterwards, and is
then rather intimated than expressly given. He adopts the terminology
which Smith had accepted from popular use,[295] and often applies it
in a special significance, which is at least liable to be
misunderstood by his readers, or forgotten by himself. It is
difficult, again, to feel sure whether some of his statements are to
be taken as positive assertions of fact, or merely as convenient
assumptions for the purposes of his argument. Ricardo himself, as
appears in his letters, was painfully aware of his own awkwardness of
expression, and upon that point alone all his critics seem to be in
tolerable agreement. Happily, it will be enough for my purpose if I
can lay down his essential premises without following him to the
remoter deductions.

Ricardo's pamphlet upon Malthus (1815) gives a starting-point. Ricardo
cordially adopts Malthus's theory of rent, but declares that it is
fatal to some of Malthus's conclusions. Malthus, we have seen, wished
to regard rent as in some sense a gift of Providence--a positive
blessing due to the fertility of the soil. Ricardo maintains, on the
contrary, that 'the interest of the landlord is necessarily opposed to
the interest of every other class in the community.'[296] The landlord
is prosperous when corn is scarce and dear; all other persons when it
is plentiful and cheap. This follows upon Malthus's own showing. As
men are forced to have recourse to inferior soils, the landlord
obtains a larger share of the whole produce; and, moreover, since corn
also becomes more valuable, will have a larger share of a more
valuable product. The question apparently in dispute--whether we
should be glad that some land is better than the worst, or sorry
because all is not equal to the best--seems rather idle. The real
question, however, is whether rent, being a blessing, should be kept
up by protection,[297] or, being a curse, should be brought down by
competition? What is the real working of the system? Set the trade
free, says Ricardo, and the capital will be withdrawn from the poor
land and employed upon manufactures, to be exchanged for the corn of
other countries.[298] The change must correspond to a more
advantageous distribution of capital, or it would not be adopted. The
principle involved in this last proposition is, he adds, one of the
'best established in the science of political economy, and by no one
is more readily admitted than by Mr. Malthus.' To enforce protection
would be, on Malthus's illustration, to compel us to use the 'worst
machines, when, at a less expense, we could hire the very best from
our neighbours.'[299] Briefly, then, the landlord's interest is
opposed to the national interest, because it enforces a worse
distribution of capital. He compels us to get corn from his worst
land, instead of getting it indirectly, but in greater quantity, from
our spinning-jennies.

For Ricardo, as for Malthus, the ultimate driving force is the
pressure of population. The mass of mankind is always struggling to
obtain food, and is able to multiply so rapidly as to exhaust any
conceivable increase of supplies. The landlord class alone profits.
The greater the struggle for supply the greater will be the share of
the whole produce which must be surrendered to it. Beyond this,
however, lies the further problem which specially occupied Ricardo.
How will the resulting strain affect the relations of the two
remaining classes, the labourers and the capitalists? The ultimate
evil of protection is the bad distribution of capital. But capital
always acts by employing labour. The farmer's capital does not act by
itself, but by enabling his men to work. Hence, to understand the
working of the industrial machinery, we have to settle the relation of
wages and profits. Ricardo states this emphatically in his preface.
Rent, profit, and wages, he says, represent the three parts into which
the whole produce of the earth is divided. 'To determine the laws
which regulate this distribution is the principal problem in political
economy'; and one, he adds, which has been left in obscurity by
previous writers.[300] His investigations are especially directed by
the purpose thus defined. He was the first writer who fairly brought
under distinct consideration what he held, with reason, to be the most
important branch of economical inquiry.

There was clearly a gap in the economic doctrine represented by the
_Wealth of Nations_. Adam Smith was primarily concerned with the
theory of the 'market.' He assumes the existence of the social
arrangement which is indicated by that phrase. The market implies a
constitution of industrial agencies such that, within it, only one
price is possible for a given commodity, or, rather, such that a
difference of price cannot be permanent. According to the accepted
illustration, the sea is not absolutely level, but it is always
tending to a level.[301] A permanent elevation at one point is
impossible. The agency by which this levelling or equilibrating
process is carried out is competition, involving what Smith called the
'higgling of the market.' The momentary fluctuation, again, supposes
the action of 'supply and demand,' which, as they vary, raise and
depress prices. To illustrate the working of this machinery, to show
how previous writers had been content to notice a particular change
without following out the collateral results, and had thus been led
into fallacies such as that of the 'mercantile system,' was Smith's
primary task.

Beyond or beneath these questions lie difficulties, which Smith,
though not blind to their existence, treated in a vacillating and
inconsistent fashion. Variations of supply and demand cause
fluctuations in the price; but what finally determines the point to
which the fluctuating prices must gravitate? We follow the process by
which one wave propagates another; but there is still the question,
What ultimately fixes the normal level? Upon this point Ricardo could
find no definite statement in his teacher. 'Supply and demand' was a
sacred phrase which would always give a verbal answer, or indicate the
immediate cause of variations on the surface. Beneath the surface
there must be certain forces at work which settle why a quarter of
corn 'gravitates' to a certain price; why the landlord can get just so
many quarters of corn for the use of his fields; and why the produce,
which is due jointly to the labourer and the farmer, is divided in a
certain fixed proportion. To settle such points it is necessary to
answer the problem of distribution, for the play of the industrial
forces is directed by the constitution of the classes which co-operate
in the result. Ricardo saw in Malthus's doctrines of rent and of
population a new mode of approaching the problem. What was wanted, in
the first place, was to systematise the logic adopted by his
predecessors. Rent, it was clear, could not be both a cause and an
effect of price, though at different points of his treatise Smith had
apparently accepted each view of the relation. We must first settle
which is cause and which effect; and then bring our whole system into
the corresponding order. For the facts, Ricardo is content to trust
mainly to others. The true title of his work should be that which his
commentator, De Quincey, afterwards adopted, the _Logic of Political
Economy_. This aim gives a partial explanation of the characteristic
for which Ricardo is most generally criticised. He is accused of being
abstract in the sense of neglecting facts. He does not deny the
charge. 'If I am too theoretical (which I really believe to be the
case) you,' he says to Malthus, 'I think, are too practical.'[302] If
Malthus is more guided than Ricardo by a reference to facts, he has of
course an advantage. But so far as Malthus or Adam Smith
theorised--and, of course, their statement of facts involved a
theory--they were at least bound to be consistent. It is one thing to
recognise the existence of facts which your theory will not explain,
and to admit that it therefore requires modification. It is quite
another thing to explain each set of facts in turn by theories which
contradict each other. That is not to be historical but to be
muddleheaded. Malthus and Smith, as it seemed to Ricardo, had
occasionally given explanations which, when set side by side,
destroyed each other. He was therefore clearly justified in the
attempt to exhibit these logical inconsistencies and to supply a
theory which should be in harmony with itself. He was so far neither
more nor less 'theoretical' than his predecessors, but simply more
impressed by the necessity of having at least a consistent theory.

There was never a time at which logic in such matters was more wanted,
or its importance more completely disregarded. Rash and ignorant
theorists were plunging into intricate problems and propounding
abstract solutions. The enormous taxation made necessary by the war
suggested at every point questions as to the true incidence of the
taxes. Who really gained or suffered by the protection of corn? Were
the landlords, the farmers, or the labourers directly interested?
Could they shift the burthen upon other shoulders or not? What, again,
it was of the highest importance to know, was the true 'incidence' of
tithes, of a land-tax, of the poor-laws, of an income-tax, and of all
the multitudinous indirect taxes from which the national income was
derived? The most varying views were held and eagerly defended. Who
really paid? That question interested everybody, and occupies a large
part of Ricardo's book. The popular answers involved innumerable
inconsistencies, and were supported by arguments which only required
to be confronted in order to be confuted. Ricardo's aim was to
substitute a clear and consistent theory for this tangle of perplexed
sophistry. In that sense his aim was in the highest degree
'practical,' although he left to others the detailed application of
his doctrines to the actual facts of the day.


II. THE DISTRIBUTION PROBLEM

The rent doctrine gives one essential datum. A clear comprehension of
rent is, as he was persuaded, 'of the utmost importance to political
economy.'[303] The importance is that it enables him to separate one
of the primary sources of revenue from the others. It is as though, in
the familiar illustration, we were considering the conditions of
equilibrium of a fluid; and we now see that one part may be considered
as a mere overflow, resulting from (not determining) the other
conditions. The primary assumption in the case of the market is the
level of price. When we clearly distinguish rent on one side from
profits and wages on the other, we see that we may also assume a level
of profits. There cannot, as Ricardo constantly says, 'be two rates of
profit,' that is, at the same time and in the same country. But so
long as rent was lumped with other sources of revenue it was
impossible to see, what Malthus and West had now made clear, that in
agriculture, as in manufactures, the profits of the producer must
conform to the principle. Given their theory, it follows that the
power of land to yield a great revenue does not imply a varying rate
of profit or a special bounty of nature bestowed upon agriculture. It
means simply that, since the corn from the good and bad land sells at
the same price, there is a surplus on the good. But as that surplus
constitutes rent, the farmer's rate of profit will still be uniform.
Thus we have got rid of one complication, and we are left with a
comparatively simple issue. We have to consider the problem, What
determines the distribution as between the capitalist and the
labourer? That is the vital question for Ricardo.

Ricardo's theory, in the first place, is a modification of Adam
Smith's. He accepts Smith's statement that wages are determined by the
'supply and demand of labourers,' and by the 'price of commodities on
which their wages are expended.'[304] The appeal to 'supply and
demand' implies that the rate of wages depends upon unchangeable
economic conditions. He endorses[305] Malthus's statement about the
absurdity of considering 'wages' as something which may be fixed by
his Majesty's 'Justices of the Peace,' and infers with Malthus that
wages should be left to find their 'natural level.' But what precisely
is this 'natural level?' If the Justice of the Peace cannot fix the
rate of wages, what does fix them? Supply and demand? What, then, is
precisely meant in this case by the supply and demand? The 'supply' of
labour, we may suppose, is fixed by the actual labouring population at
a given time. The 'demand,' again, is in some way clearly related to
'capital.' As Smith again had said,[306] the demand for labour
increases with the 'increase of revenue and "stock," and cannot
possibly increase without it.' Ricardo agrees that 'population
regulates itself by the funds which are to employ it, and therefore
always increases or diminishes with the increase or diminution of
capital.'[307] It was indeed a commonplace that the increase of
capital was necessary to an increase of population, as it is obvious
enough that population must be limited by the means of subsistence
accumulated. Smith, for example, goes on to insist upon this in one of
the passages which partly anticipates Malthus.[308] But this does not
enable us to separate profit from wages, or solve Ricardo's problem.
When we speak of supply and demand as determining the price of a
commodity, we generally have in mind two distinct though related
processes. One set of people is growing corn, and another working coal
mines. Each industry, therefore, has a separate existence, though each
may be partly dependent upon the other. But this is not true of labour
and capital. They are not products of different countries or
processes. They are inseparable constituents of a single process.
Labour cannot be maintained without capital, nor can capital produce
without labour. Capital, according to Ricardo's definition, is the
'part of the wealth of a country which is employed in production, and
consists of food, clothing, raw materials, machinery, etc., necessary
to give effect to labour.'[309] That part, then, of capital which is
applied to the support of the labourer--his food, clothing, and so
forth--is identical with wages. To say that, if it increases, his
wages increase is to be simply tautologous. If, on the other hand, we
include the machinery and raw materials, it becomes difficult to say
in what sense 'capital' can be taken as a demand for labour. Ricardo
tells Malthus that an accumulation of profit does not, as Malthus had
said, necessarily raise wages[310]; and he ultimately decided, much
to the scandal of his disciple, M'Culloch, that an increase of 'fixed
capital' or machinery might be actually prejudicial, under certain
circumstances, to the labourer. The belief of the labouring class that
machinery often injures them is not, he expressly says, 'founded on
prejudice and error, but is conformable to the correct principles of
political economy.'[311] The word 'capital,' indeed, was used with a
vagueness which covered some of the most besetting fallacies of the
whole doctrine. Ricardo himself sometimes speaks as though he had in
mind merely the supply of labourers' necessaries, though he regularly
uses it in a wider sense. The generalities, therefore, about supply
and demand, take us little further.

From these difficulties Ricardo escapes by another method. Malthus's
theory of population gives him what he requires. The 'natural price of
labour' (as distinguished from its 'market price') is, as he asserts,
'that price which is necessary to enable the labourers, one with
another, to subsist and perpetuate their race without either increase
or diminution.'[312] This is the true 'natural price,' about which the
'market price' oscillates. An increase of capital may raise wages for
a time above the natural price, but an increase of population will
bring back the previous rate. Ricardo warns us, indeed, that this
natural price of labour is not to be regarded as something 'absolutely
fixed and constant.'[313] It varies in different times and countries,
and even in the same country at different times. An English cottager
now possesses what would once have been luxuries. Ricardo admits
again[314] that the wages of different classes of labourers may be
different, although he does not consider that this fact affects his
argument. We may allow for it by considering the skilled labourer as 2
or 1-1/2 labourers rolled into one. The assumption enables him to get
out of a vicious circle. He is seeking to discover the proportions in
which produce will be divided between the two classes, and which
co-operate in the production. The 'demand and supply' principle may
show that an increase of capital will tend to increase wages, but even
that tendency, as he carefully points out, can only be admitted
subject to certain important reservations. In any case, if it explains
temporary fluctuations, it will not ascertain the point round which
the fluctuations take place. But the two variables, wages and profit,
are clearly connected, and if we can once assume that one of these
variables is fixed by an independent law, we may explain in what way
the other will be fixed. Having got rid of 'rent,' the remaining
produce has to be divided between wages and profit. If the produce be
fixed, the greater the share of the labourer the less will be the
share of the capitalist, and _vice versa_. But the labourer's share
again is determined by the consideration that it must be such as to
enable him to keep up the population. The capitalist will get the
surplus produce after allowing to the labourer the share so
determined. Everything turns ultimately upon this 'natural price'--the
constant which underlies all the variations.

One other point is implied. The population is limited, as we see, by
the necessity of raising supplies of food from inferior soils.
Moreover, this is the sole limit. A different view had been taken
which greatly exercised the orthodox economists. It was generally
admitted that in the progress of society the rate of profit declined.
Adam Smith explained this by arguing that, as capital increased, the
competition of capitalists lowered the rate. To this it was replied
(as by West) that though competition equalised profits, it could not
fix the rate of profit. The simple increase of capital does not prove
that it will be less profitably employed. The economists had
constantly to argue against the terrible possibility of a general
'glut.' The condition of things at the peace had suggested this alarm.
The mischief was ascribed to 'over-production' and not to misdirected
production. The best cure for our evils, as some people thought, would
be to burn all the goods in stock. On this version of the argument, it
would seem that an increase of wealth might be equivalent to an
increase of poverty. To confute the doctrine in this form, it was only
necessary to have a more intelligent conception of the true nature of
exchange. As James Mill had argued in his pamphlet against Spence,
every increase of supply is also an increase of demand. The more there
is to sell, the more there is to buy. The error involved in the theory
of a 'glut' is the confusion between a temporary dislocation of the
machinery of exchange, which can and will be remedied by a new
direction of industry, and the impossible case of an excess of wealth
in general.[315] Malthus never quite cleared his mind of this error,
and Ricardo had to argue the point with him. Abundance of capital
cannot by itself, he says, 'make capital less in demand.' The 'demand
for capital is infinite.'[316] The decline in the rate of profit,
therefore, depends upon another cause. 'If, with every accumulation of
profit, we could tack a piece of fresh fertile land to our Island,
profits would never fall.'[317] Fertile land, however, is limited. We
have to resort to inferior soil, and therefore to employ capital at a
less advantage. In the _Principles_ he enforces the same doctrine with
the help of Say, who had shown 'most satisfactorily' that any amount
of capital might be employed.[318] If, in short, labour and capital
were always equally efficient, there would be no limit to the amount
producible. If the supply of food and raw materials can be multiplied,
wealth can be multiplied to any amount. The admitted tendency of
profits to fall must therefore be explained simply and solely by the
growing difficulty of producing the food and the raw material.

Ricardo's doctrine, then, is Malthus carried out more logically. Take
a nation in a state of industrial equilibrium. The produce of the
worst soil just supports the labourer, and leaves a profit to the
capitalist. The labourer gets just enough to keep up his numbers to
the standard; the capitalist just enough profit to induce him to keep
up the capital which supports the labourer. Since there can be only
one rate of wages and only one rate of profit, this fixes the shares
into which the whole produce of the nation is divided, after leaving
to the landlord the surplus produce of the more fertile soils.
Accepting this scheme as a starting-point, we get a method for
calculating the results of any changes. We can see how a tax imposed
upon rents or profits or wages will affect the classes which are thus
related; how improvements in cultivation or machinery, or a new demand
for our manufactures, will act, assuming the conditions implied in
this industrial organisation; how, in short, any disturbance of the
balance will work, so as to produce a new equilibrium. Ricardo exerts
all his ingenuity in working out the problem which, with the help of a
few assumptions, becomes mathematical. The arithmetical illustrations
which he employed for the purpose became a nuisance in the hands of
his disciples. They are very useful as checks to general statements,
but lend themselves so easily to the tacit introduction of erroneous
assumptions as often to give a totally false air of precision to the
results. Happily I need not follow him into that region, and may omit
any consideration of the logical value of his deductions. I must be
content to say that, so far as he is right, his system gives an
economic calculus for working out the ultimate result of assigned
economic changes. The pivot of the whole construction is the 'margin
of cultivation'--the point at which the food for a pressing population
is raised at the greatest disadvantages. 'Profits,' as he says,[319]
'depend on high and low wages; wages on the price of necessaries; and
the price of necessaries chiefly on the price of food, because all
other requisites may be increased almost without limit.'

Ricardo takes the actual constitution of society for granted. The
threefold division into landowners, capitalists, and labourers is
assumed as ultimate. For him that is as much a final fact as to a
chemist it is a final fact that air and water are composed of certain
elements. Each class represents certain economic categories. The
landlord sits still and absorbs the overflow of wealth created by
others. The labourer acts a very important but in one respect a purely
passive part. His whole means of subsistence are provided by the
capitalist, and advanced to him in the shape of wages. His share in
the process is confined to multiplying up to a fixed standard. The
capitalist is the really active agent. The labourer is simply one of
the implements used in production. His wages are part of the
capitalist's 'costs of production.' The capitalist virtually raises
labourers, one may say, so long as raising them is profitable, just as
he raises horses for his farm. Ricardo, in fact, points out that in
some cases it may be for the farmer's interest to substitute horses
for men.[320] If it be essential to any product that there should be a
certain number of labourers or a certain number of horses, that number
will be produced. But when the expense becomes excessive, and in the
case of labourers that happens as worse soils have to be broken up for
food, the check is provided through its effect upon the accumulation
of capital. That, therefore, becomes the essential point. The whole
aim of the legislator should be to give facilities for the
accumulation of capital, and the way to do that is to abstain from all
interference with the free play of the industrial forces. The test,
for example, of the goodness of a tax--or rather of its comparative
freedom from the evils of every tax--is that it should permit of
accumulation by interfering as little as possible with the tendency
of the capital to distribute itself in the most efficient way.


III. VALUE AND LABOUR

To solve the distribution problem, then, it is necessary to get behind
the mere fluctuations of the market, and to consider what are the
ultimate forces by which the market is itself governed. What effect
has this upon the theory of the market itself? This leads to a famous
doctrine.

According to his disciple, M'Culloch, Ricardo's great merit was that
he 'laid down the fundamental theorem of the science of value.' He
thus cleared up what had before been an 'impenetrable mystery,' and
showed the true relations of profit, wages, and prices.[321] Ricardo's
theory of value, again, was a starting-point of the chief modern
Socialist theories. It marked, as has been said,[322] the point at
which the doctrine of the rights of man changes from a purely
political to an economical theory. Ricardo remarks in his first
chapter that the vagueness of theories of value has been the most
fertile source of economic errors. He admitted to the end of his life
that he had not fully cleared up the difficulty. Modern economists
have refuted and revised and discussed, and, let us hope, now made
everything quite plain. They have certainly shown that some of
Ricardo's puzzles implied confusions singular in so keen a thinker.
That may serve as a warning against dogmatism. Boys in the next
generation will probably be asked by examiners to expose the palpable
fallacies of what to us seem to be demonstrable truths. At any rate,
I must try to indicate the critical point as briefly as possible.

The word 'value,' in the first place, has varying meanings, which give
an opportunity for writers of text-books to exhibit their powers of
lucid exposition. The value of a thing in one sense is what it will
fetch; the quantity of some other thing for which it is actually
exchanged in the market. In that sense, as Ricardo incidentally
observes,[323] the word becomes meaningless unless you can say what is
the other thing. It is self-contradictory to speak as if a thing by
itself could have a constant or any value. Value, however, may take a
different sense. It is the economic equivalent of the 'utility' of
Bentham's 'felicific calculus.' It means the 'lot of pleasure' which
causes a thing to be desirable. If we could tell how many units of
utility it contained we could infer the rate of exchange for other
things. The value of anything 'in use' will correspond to the number
of units of utility which it contains; and things which have the same
quantity of 'utilities' will have the same 'exchangeable value.'
Ricardo can thus consider the old problem of finding 'an invariable
measure of value.' He points out the difficulty of finding any
particular thing which will serve the purpose, inasmuch as the
relations of everything to everything else are constantly varying. He
therefore proposes to make use of an imaginary measure. If gold were
always produced under exactly the same circumstances, with the same
labour and the same capital, it would serve approximately for a
standard. Accordingly he gives notice that, for the purposes of his
book, he will assume this to be the case, and money to be 'invariable
in value.'[324] We can thus, on the one hand, compare values at
different periods. A thing has the same value at all times which at
all times requires 'the same sacrifice of toil and labour to produce
it.'[325] The 'sacrifice' measures the 'utility,' and we may assume
that the same labour corresponds in all ages to the same psychological
unit. But, on the other hand, at any given period things will exchange
in proportion to the labour of producing them. This follows at once
from Ricardo's postulates. Given the single rate of wages and profits,
and assuming the capital employed to be in the same proportion, things
must exchange in proportion to the quantity of labour employed; for if
I got the same value by employing one labourer as you get by employing
two, my profits would be higher. Ricardo, indeed, has to allow for
many complexities arising from the fact that very different quantities
of capital are required in different industries; but the general
principle is given by the simplest case. Hence we have a measure of
value, applicable at any given time and in comparing different times.
It implies, again, what M'Culloch sums up as the 'fundamental
theorem,' that the value of 'freely produced commodities' depends on
the quantity of labour required for their 'production.' What is made
by two men is worth twice what is made by one man. That gives what
M'Culloch calls the 'clue to the labyrinth.'

The doctrine leads to a puzzle. If I can measure the 'sacrifice,' can
I measure the 'utility' which it gains? The 'utility' of an ounce of
gold is not something 'objective' like its physical qualities, but
varies with the varying wants of the employer. Iron or coal may be
used for an infinite variety of purposes and the utility will be
different in each. The thing may derive part of its 'utility' from its
relation to other things. The utility of my food is not really
separate from the utility of my hat; for unless I eat I cannot wear
hats. My desire for any object, again, is modified by all my other
desires, and even if I could isolate a 'desire' as a psychological
unit, it would not give me a fixed measure. Twice the article does not
give twice the utility; a double stimulus may only add a small
pleasure or convert it into agony. These and other difficulties imply
the hopelessness of searching for this chimerical unit of 'utility'
when considered as a separate thing. It shifts and escapes from our
hands directly we grasp it. Ricardo discusses some of these points in
his interesting chapter on 'Value and Riches.' Gold, he says, may cost
two thousand times more than iron, but it is certainly not two
thousand times as useful.[326] Suppose, again, that some invention
enables you to make more luxuries by the same labour, you increase
wealth but not value. There will be, say, twice as many hats, but each
hat may have half its former value. There will be more things to
enjoy, but they will only exchange for the same quantity of other
things. That is, he says, the amount of 'riches' varies, while the
amount of value is fixed. This, according to him, proves that value
does not vary with 'utility.' 'Utility,' as he declares in his first
chapter, is 'absolutely essential to value,' but it is 'not the
measure of exchangeable value.'[327] A solution of these puzzles may
be sought in any modern text-book. Ricardo escapes by an apparently
paradoxical conclusion. He is undertaking an impossible problem when
he starts from the buyers' desire of an 'utility.' Therefore he turns
from the buyers to the sellers. The seller has apparently a measurable
and definable motive--the desire to make so much per cent. on his
capital.[328] Ricardo, unfortunately, speaks as though the two parties
to the bargain somehow represented mutually exclusive processes.
'Supply and demand' determine the value of 'monopolised articles,' but
the cost of other articles depends _not_ 'on the state of demand and
supply,' _but_ 'on the increased or diminished cost of their
production.'[329] Why 'not' and 'but'? If supply and demand
corresponds to the whole play of motives which determines the bargain,
this is like saying, according to the old illustration, that we must
attribute the whole effect of a pair of scissors to one blade and not
to the other. His view leads to the apparent confusion of taking for
the cause of value not our desire for a thing, but the sacrifice we
must make to attain it. Bentham[330] said, for example, that Ricardo
confused 'cost' with 'value.' The denial that utility must in some
sense or other determine value perplexes an intelligible and
consistent meaning. It is clearly true, upon his postulates, that the
value of goods, other than 'monopolised,' must conform to the cost of
production. He speaks as if he confounded a necessary condition with
an 'efficient cause,' and as if one of two correlative processes could
be explained without the other. But the fact that there is a
conformity, however brought about, was enough for his purpose. The
demand of buyers, he would say, determines the particular direction of
production: it settles whether hats should be made of silk or beaver;
whether we should grow corn or spin cotton. But the ultimate force is
the capitalist's desire for profit. So long as he can raise labourers'
necessaries by employing part of his capital, he can employ the labour
as he chooses. He can always produce wealth; all the wealth produced
can be exchanged, and the demand always be equal to the supply, since
the demand is merely the other side of the supply. The buyer's tastes
decide how the capital shall be applied, but does not settle how much
wealth there shall be, only what particular forms it shall take.
Somehow or other it must always adjust itself so that the value of
each particular kind shall correspond to the 'cost of production.' The
cost of production includes the tools and the raw materials, which are
themselves products of previous labour. All capital itself is
ultimately the product of labour, and thus, as Ricardo incidentally
says, may be regarded as 'accumulated labour.'[331]

This phrase sums up the doctrine which underlies his theory of value
and indicates its connection with the theory of distribution. Ricardo
had perceived that the supply and demand formula which would serve
sufficiently in problems of exchange, or the fluctuations of
market-price, could not be made to solve the more fundamental problem
of distribution. We must look beneath the superficial phenomena and
ask what is the nature of the structure itself: what is the driving
force or the mainspring which works the whole mechanism. We seem,
indeed, to be inquiring into the very origin of industrial
organisation. The foundation of a sound doctrine comes from Adam
Smith. Smith had said that in a primitive society the only rule would
be that things should exchange in proportion to the labour of getting
them. If it cost twice as much labour to kill a beaver as to kill a
deer, one beaver would be worth two deer. In accepting this bit of
what Smith's commentator, Dugald Stewart,[332] calls 'theoretical' or
'conjectural' history, Ricardo did not mean to state a historical
fact. He was not thinking of actual Choctaws or Cherokees. The beaver
was exchanged for the deer about the time when the primitive man
signed the 'social contract.' He is a hypothetical person used for
purposes of illustration and simplification. Ricardo is not really
dealing with the question of origins; but he is not the less implying
a theory of structure. It did not matter that the 'social contract'
was historically a figment; it would serve equally well to explain
government. It did not matter that actual savages may have exchanged
beavers and deer by the help of clubs instead of competition in the
market. The industrial fabric is what would have been had it been thus
built up. It can be constructed from base to summit by the application
of his formula. As in the imaginary state of deer and beaver, we have
a number of independent persons making their bargains upon this
principle of the equivalence of labour; and that principle is supposed
to be carried out so that the most remote processes of the industrial
machinery can be analysed into results of this principle. This gives a
sufficient clue to the whole labyrinth of modern industry, and there
is no need of considering the extinct forms of social structure, which
we know to have existed, and under which the whole system of
distribution took place under entirely different conditions.[333] A
great change has taken place since the time of the deer and beaver:
the capitalist has been developed, and has become the motive power.
The labourer's part is passive; and the 'value' is fixed by the
bargaining between the proprietors of 'accumulated labour,' forced by
competition to make equal profits, instead of being fixed by the
equitable bargain between the two hunters exchanging the products of
their individual labour. Essentially, however, the principle is the
same. In the last as in the first stage of society, things are
exchanged in proportion to the labour necessary to produce them. Now
it is plain enough that such a doctrine cannot lead to a complete
solution of the problem of distribution. It would be a palpably
inadequate account of historical processes which have determined the
actual relation of classes. The industrial mechanism has been
developed as a part of the whole social evolution; and, however
important the economic forces, they have been inextricably blended
with all the other forces by which a society is built up. For the same
reason, Ricardo's theorem would be inadequate 'sociologically,' or as
a formula which would enable us to predict the future distribution of
wealth. It omits essential factors in the process, and therefore
supposes forces to act automatically and invariably which will in fact
be profoundly modified in societies differently organised and
composed of individuals differing in character. The very fundamental
assumptions as to the elasticity of population, and the accumulation
of capital as wages and profits fluctuate, are clearly not absolute
truths. An increase of the capitalist's share, for example, at the
expense of wages, may lead to the lowered efficiency of the labourer;
and, instead of the compensating process supposed to result from the
stimulus to accumulation, the actual result may be a general
degeneration of the industry. Or, again, the capacity of labourers to
combine both depends and reacts upon their intelligence and moral
character, and will profoundly modify the results of the general
competition.[334] Such remarks, now familiar enough, are enough to
suggest that a full explanation of the economic phenomena would
require reference to considerations which lie beyond the proper sphere
of the economist. Yet the economist may urge that he is making a fair
and perhaps necessary abstraction. He may consider the forces to be
constant, although he may be fully aware that the assumption requires
to be corrected when his formulæ are applied to facts. He may consider
what is the play at any given time of the operations of the market,
though the market organisation is itself dependent upon the larger
organisation of which it is a product. He does not profess to deal in
'sociology,' but 'pure political economy.' In that more limited
sphere he may accept Ricardo's postulates. The rate of wages is fixed
at any given moment by the 'labour market.' That is the immediate
organ through which the adjustment is effected. Wages rise and fall
like the price of commodities, when for any reason the number of
hirers or the number of purchasers varies. The 'supply and demand'
formula, however, could not, as Ricardo saw, be summarily identified
with labour and capital. We must go behind the immediate phenomena to
consider how they are regulated by the ultimate moving power. Then,
with the help of the theories of population and rent, we find that the
wages are one product of the whole industrial process. We must look
beyond the immediate market fluctuation to the effect upon the
capitalists who constitute the market. The world is conceived as one
great market, in which the motives of the capitalist supply the motive
power; and the share which goes to the labourer is an incidental or
collateral result of the working of the whole machinery. Now, though
the sociologist would say that this is quite inadequate for his
purpose, and that we must consider the whole social structure, he may
also admit that the scheme has a validity in its own sphere. It
describes the actual working of the mechanism at any given time; and
it may be that in Ricardo's time it gave an approximate account of the
facts. To make it complete, it requires to be set, so to speak, in a
more general framework of theory; and we may then see that it cannot
give a complete solution. Still, as a consistent scheme which
corresponds to the immediate phenomena, it helps us to understand the
play of the industrial forces which immediately regulate the market.

Ricardo's position suggested a different line of reply. The doctrines
that capital is 'accumulated labour' and that all value is in
proportion to the labour fell in with the Socialist theory. If value
is created by labour, ought not 'labour' to possess what it makes? The
right to the whole produce of labour seemed to be a natural
conclusion. Ricardo might answer that when I buy your labour, it
becomes mine. I may consider myself to have acquired the rights of the
real creator of the wealth, and to embody all the labourers, whose
'accumulated labour' is capital. Still, there is a difficulty. The
beaver and deer case has an awkward ethical aspect. To say that they
are exchanged at such a rate seems to mean that they ought to be
exchanged at the rate. This again implies the principle that a man has
a right to what he has caught; that is, to the whole fruits of his
labour. James Mill, as we have seen, starts his political treatise by
assuming this as obvious.[335] He did not consider the possible
inferences; for it is certainly a daring assumption that the principle
is carried out by the economic system. According to Ricardo rent is
paid to men who don't labour at all. The fundholder was a weight upon
all industry, and as dead a weight as the landlord. The capitalist,
Ricardo's social mainspring, required at least cross-examination. He
represents 'accumulated labour' in some fashion, but it is not plain
that the slice which he takes out of the whole cake is proportioned
accurately to his personal labour. The right and the fact which
coincided in the deer and beaver period have somehow come to diverge.

Here, then, we are at a point common to the two opposing schools.
Both are absolute 'individualists' in different senses. Society is
built up, and all industrial relations determined, by the competition
of a multitude of independent atoms, each aiming at self-preservation.
Malthus's principle applies this to the great mass of mankind.
Systematically worked out, it has led to Ricardo's identification of
value with quantities of labour. Keeping simply to the matter of fact,
it shows how a small minority have managed to get advantages in the
struggle, and to raise themselves upon the shoulders of the struggling
mass. Malthus shows that the resulting inequality prevents the
struggle from lowering every one to starvation point. But the
advantage was not obvious to the struggling mass which exemplified the
struggle for existence. If equality meant not the initial facts but
the permanent right, society was built upon injustice. Apply the
political doctrine of rights of man to the economic right to wealth,
and you have the Socialist doctrine of right to the whole produce of
labour. It is true that it is exceedingly difficult to say what each
man has created when he is really part of a complex machinery; but
that is a problem to which Socialists could apply their ingenuity. The
real answer of the political economists was that although the existing
order implied great inequalities of wealth it was yet essential to
industrial progress, and therefore to an improvement in the general
standard of comfort. This, however, was the less evident the more they
insisted upon the individual interest. The net result seemed to be
that by accident or inheritance, possibly by fraud or force, a small
number of persons have got a much larger share of wealth than their
rivals. Ricardo may expound the science accurately; and, if so, we
have to ask, What are the right ethical conclusions?

For the present, the Utilitarians seem to have considered this
question as superfluous. They were content to take the existing order
for granted; and the question remains how far their conclusions upon
that assumption could be really satisfactory.


IV. THE CLASSICAL POLITICAL ECONOMY.

Ricardo had worked out the main outlines of the 'Classical Political
Economy': the system which to his disciples appeared to be as clear,
consistent, and demonstrable as Euclid; and which was denounced by
their opponents as mechanical, materialistic, fatalistic, and
degrading. After triumphing for a season, it has been of late years
often treated with contempt, and sometimes banished to the limbo of
extinct logomachies. It is condemned as 'abstract.' Of all delusions
on the subject, replies a very able and severe critic,[336] there is
none greater than the belief that it was 'wholly abstract and
unpractical.' Its merits lay in its treatment of certain special
questions of the day; while in the purely scientific questions it was
hopelessly confused and inconsistent. Undoubtedly, as I have tried to
point out, Malthus and Ricardo were reasoning upon the contemporary
state of things. The doctrine started from observation of facts; it
was too 'abstract' so far as it neglected elements in the concrete
realities which were really relevant to the conclusions. One cause of
confusion was the necessity of starting from the classification
implied in ordinary phrases. It is exemplified by the vague use of
such words as 'capital,' 'value,' 'supply and demand.' Definitions, as
is often remarked,[337] come at the end of an investigation, though
they are placed at the beginning of an exposition. When the primary
conceptions to be used were still so shifting and contradictory as is
implied in the controversies of the day, it is no wonder that the
formulæ should be wanting in scientific precision. Until we have
determined what is meant by 'force' we cannot have a complete science
of dynamics. The economists imagined that they had reached the goal
before they had got rid of ambiguities hidden in the accepted
terminology. Meanwhile it will be enough if I try to consider broadly
what was the nature of the body of statements which thus claimed to be
an elaborated science.

Ricardo's purpose was to frame a calculus, to give a method of
reasoning which will enable us to clinch our economic reasoning. We
are to be sure that we have followed out the whole cycle of cause and
effect. Capitalists, landowners, labourers form parts of a rounded
system, implying reciprocal actions and reactions. The imposition of a
tax or a tariff implies certain changes in existing relations: that
change involves other changes; and to trace out the total effect, we
must understand what are the ultimate conditions of equilibrium, or
what are the processes by which the system will adjust itself to the
new conditions. To describe, again, the play of a number of reciprocal
forces, we have to find what mathematicians call an 'independent
variable': some one element in the changes on which all other changes
will depend. That element, roughly speaking, ultimately comes out to
be 'labour.' The simplicity of the system gave an impression both of
clearness and certainty, which was transferred from the reasoning to
the premises. The facts seemed to be established, because they were
necessary to the system. The first step to an estimate of the value of
the doctrine would be to draw up a statement of the 'postulates'
implied. Among them, we should have such formulæ as the single rate of
profits and wages; which imply the 'transferability' of labour and
capital, or the flow of either element to the best-paid employment. We
should have again the Malthusian doctrine of the multiplication of
labour up to a certain standard; and the fact that scarcity means
dearness and plenty cheapness. These doctrines at least are taken for
granted; and it may perhaps be said that they are approximations which
only require qualifications, though sometimes very important
qualifications, to hold good of the society actually contemplated.

They were true enough to give the really conclusive answer to many
popular fallacies. The type of sophistry which Ricardo specially
assailed was that which results from neglecting the necessary
implications of certain changes. The arguments for the old 'mercantile
theory'--for 'protection' of industry, for the poor-law, for resisting
the introduction of machinery, the fear of 'gluts' and all manner of
doctrines about the currency--were really exposed by the economists
upon the right grounds. It was absurd to suppose that by simply
expanding the currency, or by making industry less efficient, or
forcing it to the least profitable employments, you were increasing
the national wealth; or to overlook the demoralising effects of a
right to support because you resolved only to see the immediate
benefits of charity to individuals. It is true, no doubt, that in some
cases there might be other arguments, and that the economists were apt
to take a narrow view of the facts. Yet they decisively exploded many
bad arguments, and by the right method of enforcing the necessity of
tracing out the whole series of results. It was partly to their
success in confuting absurd doctrines that their confidence was due;
though the confidence was excessive when it was transferred to the
axioms from which they professed to start. A doctrine may be true
enough to expose an error, and yet not capable of yielding definite
and precise conclusions. If I know that nothing can come out of
nothing, I am on the way to a great scientific principle and able to
confute some palpable fallacies; but I am still a very long way from
understanding the principle of the 'conservation of energy.' The truth
that scarcity meant dearness was apparently well known to Joseph in
Egypt, and applied very skilfully for his purpose. Economists have
framed a 'theory of value' which explains more precisely the way in
which this is brought about. A clear statement may be valuable to
psychologists; but for most purposes of political economy Joseph's
knowledge is quite sufficient. It is the doctrine which is really used
in practice whatever may be its ultimate justification.

The postulates, however, were taken by the economists to represent
something more than approximate statements of the fact. They imply
certain propositions which might be regarded as axioms. Men desire
wealth and prefer their own interests. The whole theory might then be
regarded as a direct deduction from the axioms. It thus seemed to
have a kind of mathematical certainty. When facts failed to conform to
the theory the difficulty could be met by speaking, as Malthus spoke,
of 'tendencies,' or by appealing to the analogy of 'friction' in
mechanics. The excuse might be perfectly valid in some cases, but it
often sanctioned a serious error. It was assumed that the formula was
still absolutely true of something, and that the check or friction was
a really separable and accidental interference. Thus it became easy to
discard, as irrelevant, objections which really applied to the
principle itself, and to exaggerate the conformity between fact and
theory. The economic categories are supposed to state the essential
facts, and the qualifications necessary to make them accurate were apt
to slip out of sight. Ricardo,[338] to mention a familiar instance,
carefully points out that the 'economic rent,' which clearly
represents an important economic category, is not to be confounded, as
in 'popular' use, with the payments actually made, which often include
much that is really profit. The distinction, however, was constantly
forgotten, and the abstract formula summarily applied to the concrete
fact.

The economists had constructed a kind of automaton which fairly
represented the actual working of the machinery. But then, each
element of their construction came to represent a particular formula,
and to represent nothing else. The landlord is simply the receiver of
surplus value; the capitalist the one man who saves, and who saves in
proportion to profit; and the labourer simply the embodiment of
Malthus's multiplying tendency. Then the postulates as to the ebb and
flow of capital and labour are supposed to work automatically and
instantaneously. Ricardo argues that a tax upon wages will fall, not,
as Buchanan thought, upon the labourer, nor, as Adam Smith thought,
upon rent, but upon profits; and his reason is apparently that if
wages were 'lowered the requisite population would not be kept
up.'[339] The labourer is able to multiply or diminish so rapidly that
he always conforms at once to the required standard. This would seem
to neglect the consideration that, after all, some time is required to
alter the numbers of a population, and that other changes of a totally
different character may be meanwhile set up by rises and falls of
wages. Ricardo, as his letters show,[340] was well aware of the
necessity of making allowance for such considerations in applying his
theorems. He simplified the exposition by laying them down too
absolutely; and the doctrine, taken without qualification, gives the
'economic man,' who must be postulated to make the doctrine work
smoothly. The labourer is a kind of constant unit--absolutely fixed in
his efficiency, his wants, and so forth; and the same at one period as
at another, except so far as he may become more prudent, and therefore
fix his 'natural price' a little higher. An 'iron law' must follow
when you have invented an iron unit. In short, when society is
represented by this hypothetical mechanism, where each man is an
embodiment of the required formula, the theory becomes imperfect so
far as society is made up of living beings, varying, though
gradually, in their whole character and attributes, and forming part
of an organised society incomparably too complex in its structure to
be adequately represented by the three distinct classes, each of which
is merely a formula embodied in an individual man. The general rules
may be very nearly true in a great many cases, especially on the
stock-exchange; but before applying them to give either a history or a
true account of the actual working of concrete institutions, a much
closer approximation must be made to the actual data.

I need not enlarge, however, upon a topic which has been so often
expounded. I think that at present the tendency is rather to do
injustice to the common-sense embodied in this system, to the
soundness of its aims, and to its value in many practical and
immediate questions, than to overestimate its claim to scientific
accuracy. That claim may be said to have become obsolete.

One point, however, remains. The holders of such a doctrine must, it
is said, have been without the bowels of compassion. Ricardo, as
critics observe with undeniable truth, was a Jew and a member of the
stock-exchange. Now Jews, in spite of Shylock's assertions, and
certainly Jewish stockbrokers, are naturally without human feeling. If
you prick them, they only bleed banknotes. They are fitted to be
capitalists, who think of wages as an item in an account, and of the
labourer as part of the tools used in business. Ricardo, however, was
not a mere money-dealer, nor even a walking treatise. He was a kindly,
liberal man, desirous to be, as he no doubt believed himself to be, in
sympathy with the leaders of political and scientific thought, and
fully sharing their aspirations. No doubt he, like his friends, was
more conspicuous for coolness of head than for impulsive
philanthropy. Like them, he was on his guard against 'sentimentalism'
and 'vague generalities,' and thought that a hasty benevolence was apt
to aggravate the evils which it attacked. The Utilitarians naturally
translated all aspirations into logical dogmas; but some people who
despised them as hard-hearted really took much less pains to give
effect to their own benevolent impulses. Now Ricardo, in this matter,
was at one with James Mill and Bentham, and especially Malthus.[341]
The essential doctrine of Malthus was that the poor could be made less
poor by an improved standard of prudence. In writing to Malthus,
Ricardo incidentally remarks upon the possibility of raising the
condition of the poor by 'good education' and the inculcation of
foresight in the great matter of marriage.[342] Incidental references
in the _Principles_ are in the same strain. He accepts Malthus's view
of the poor-laws, and hopes that, by encouraging foresight, we may by
degrees approach 'a sounder and more healthful state.'[343] He
repudiates emphatically a suggestion of Say that one of his arguments
implies 'indifference to the happiness' of the masses,[344] and holds
that 'the friends of humanity' should encourage the poor to raise
their standard of comfort and enjoyment. The labourers, as he
elsewhere incidentally observes, are 'by far the most important class
in society.'[345] How should they not be if the greatest happiness of
the greatest number be the legitimate aim of all legislation?

It is true that in his argument Ricardo constantly assumes that his
'natural price' will also be the real price of labour. The assumption
that the labourers' wages tend to a minimum is a base for his general
arguments. The inconsistency, if there be one, is easily intelligible.
Ricardo agreed with Malthus that, though the standard might be raised,
and though a rise was the only way to improvement, the chances of such
a rise were not encouraging. Improved wages, as he says,[346] might
enable the labourer to live more comfortably if only he would not
multiply. But 'so great are the delights of domestic society, that in
practice it is invariably found that an increase of population follows
an amended condition of the labourer,' and thus the advantage is lost
as soon as gained.

I have tried to show what was the logical convenience of the
assumption. Ricardo, who has always to state an argument at the cost
of an intellectual contortion, is content to lay down a rule without
introducing troublesome qualifications and reserves. Yet he probably
held that his postulate was a close approximation to the facts.
Looking at the actual state of things at the worst time of the
poor-law, and seeing how small were the prospects of stirring the
languid mind of the pauper to greater forethought, he thought that he
might assume the constancy of an element which varied so slowly. The
indifference of the Ricardo school generally to historical inquiry had
led them no doubt to assume such constancy too easily. Malthus, who
had more leaning to history, had himself called attention to many
cases in which the 'prudential check' operated more strongly than it
did among the English poor. Probably Ricardo was in this, as in other
cases, too hasty in assuming facts convenient for his argument. The
poor man's character can, it is clear, be only known empirically; and,
in fact, Ricardo simply appeals to experience. He thinks that, as a
fact, men always do multiply in excess. But he does not deny that
better education might change their character in this respect. Indeed,
as I have said, an even excessive faith in the possible modification
of character by education was one of the Utilitarian tenets. If
Ricardo had said broadly that a necessary condition of the improvement
of the poor was a change of the average character, I think that he
would have been saying what was perfectly true and very much to the
purpose both then and now. The objection to his version of a most
salutary doctrine is that it is stated in too narrow terms. The
ultimate unit, the human being, is indeed supposed to be capable of
great modification, but it is solely through increasing his foresight
as to the effects of multiplication that the change is supposed to be
attainable. The moral thus drawn implied a very limited view of the
true nature and influence of great social processes, and in practice
came too often to limiting possible improvement to the one condition
of letting things alone. Let a man starve if he will not work, and he
will work. That, as a sole remedy, may be insufficient; though, even
in that shape, it is a doctrine more likely to be overlooked than
overvalued. And meanwhile the acquiescence in the painful doctrine
that, as a matter of fact, labourers would always multiply to
starvation point, was calculated to produce revolt against the whole
system. Macaulay's doctrine that the Utilitarians had made political
economy unpopular was so far true that the average person resented the
unpleasant doctrines thus obtruded upon him in their most unpleasant
shape; and, if he was told that they were embodied logic, revolted
against logic itself.


V. THE RICARDIANS

It will be quite sufficient to speak briefly of the minor prophets who
expounded the classical doctrine; sometimes falling into fallacies,
against which Ricardo's logical instinct had warned him; and sometimes
perhaps unconsciously revealing errors which really lurked in his
premises. When Ricardo died, James Mill told M'Culloch that they were
'the two and only genuine disciples' of their common friend.[347] Mill
wrote what he intended for a Schoolbook of Political Economy.[348]
Brief, pithy, and vigorous, it purports to give the essential
principles in their logical order; but, as his son remarks,[349] had
only a passing importance. M'Culloch took a more important place by
his writings in the _Edinburgh Review_ and elsewhere, and by his
lectures at Edinburgh and at London. He was one of the first
professors of the new university. His _Principles of Political
Economy_[350] became a text-book, to be finally superseded by John
Stuart Mill. Other works statistical and bibliographical showed great
industry, and have still their value. He was so much the typical
economist of the day that he has been identified with Carlyle's
_M'Crowdy_, the apostle of the dismal science.[351] He writes,
however, with enough vivacity and fervour of belief in his creed to
redeem him from the charge of absolute dulness. An abler thinker was
Colonel (Robert) Torrens (1780-1864).[352] He had served with
distinction in the war; but retired on half-pay, and was drawn by some
natural idiosyncrasy into the dry paths of economic discussion. He was
already confuting the French economists in 1808; and was writing upon
the Bank-charter Act and the Ten Hours' Bill in 1844. Torrens held
himself, apparently with justice, to be rather an independent ally
than a disciple of Ricardo. His chief works were an essay upon the
'External Corn-trade' (1815)[353] and an 'Essay on the Production of
Wealth' (1821). Ricardo pronounced his arguments upon the Corn-trade
to be 'unanswered and unanswerable,'[354] and he himself claimed to be
an independent discoverer of the true theory of rent.[355] He was
certainly a man of considerable acuteness and originality. In these
writings we find the most sanguine expressions of the belief that
political economy was not only a potential, but on the verge of
becoming an actual, science. Torrens observes that all sciences have
to pass through a period of controversy; but thinks that economists
are emerging from this stage, and rapidly approaching unanimity. In
twenty years, says this hopeful prophet, there will scarcely exist a
'doubt of its' (Political Economy's) 'fundamental principles.'[356]
Torrens thinks that Ricardo has generalised too much, and Malthus too
little; but proposes, with proper professions of modesty, to take the
true _via media_, and weld the sound principles into a harmonious
whole by a due combination of observation and theory. The science, he
thinks, is 'analogous to the mixed mathematics.'[357] As from the laws
of motion we can deduce the theory of dynamics, so from certain simple
axioms about human nature we can deduce the science of Political
Economy. M'Culloch, at starting, insists in edifying terms upon the
necessity of a careful and comprehensive induction, and of the study
of industrial phenomena in different times and places, and under
varying institutions.[358] This, however, does not prevent him from
adopting the same methods of reasoning. 'Induction' soon does its
office, and supplies a few simple principles, from which we may make a
leap to our conclusions by a rapid, deductive process.

The problems appear to be too simple to require long preliminary
investigations of fact. Torrens speaks of proving by 'strictly
demonstrative evidence' or of 'proceeding to demonstrate' by strict
analysis.[359] This is generally the preface to one of those
characteristic arithmetical illustrations to which Ricardo's practice
gave a sanction. We are always starting an imaginary capitalist with
so many quarters of corn and suits of clothes, which he can transmute
into any kind of product, and taking for granted that he represents a
typical case. This gives a certain mathematical air to the reasoning,
and too often hides from the reasoner that he may be begging the
question in more ways than one by the arrangement of his imaginary
case. One of the offenders in this kind was Nassau Senior (1790-1864),
a man of remarkable good sense, and fully aware of the necessity of
caution in applying his theories to facts. He was the first professor
of Political Economy at Oxford (1825-1830), and his treatise[360] lays
down the general assumption of his orthodox contemporaries clearly and
briefly. The science, he tells us, is deducible from four elementary
propositions: the first of which asserts that every 'man desires to
obtain additional wealth with as little sacrifice as possible'; while
the others state the first principles embodied in Malthus's theory of
population, and in the laws corresponding to the increasing facility
of manufacturing and the decreasing facility of agricultural
industry.[361] As these propositions include no reference to the
particular institutions or historical development of the social
structure, they virtually imply that a science might be constructed
equally applicable in all times and places; and that, having obtained
them, we need not trouble ourselves any further with inductions. Hence
it follows that we can at once get from the abstract 'man' to the
industrial order. We may, it would seem, abstract from history in
general. This corresponds to the postulate explicitly stated by
M'Culloch. 'A state,' he tells us, 'is nothing more than an aggregate
of individuals': men, that is, who 'inhabit a certain tract of
country.'[362] He infers that 'whatever is most advantageous to them'
(the individuals) 'is most advantageous to the state.' Self-interest,
therefore, the individual's desire of adding to his 'fortune,' is the
mainspring or _causa causans_ of all improvement.[363] This is, of
course, part of the familiar system, which applies equally in ethics
and politics. M'Culloch is simply generalising Adam Smith's congenial
doctrine that statesmen are guilty of absurd presumption when they try
to interfere with a man's management of his own property.[364] This
theory, again, is expressed by the familiar maxim _pas trop
gouverner_, which is common to the whole school, and often accepted
explicitly.[365]

It will be quite enough to notice one or two characteristic results.
The most important concern the relation between the labourer and the
capitalist. Malthus gives the starting-point. Torrens, for example,
says that the 'real wages of labour have a constant tendency to settle
down' to the amount rendered necessary by 'custom and climate' in
order to keep up his numbers.[366] Mill observes in his terse way that
the capitalist in the present state of society 'is as much the owner
of the labour' as the manufacturer who operates with slaves. The only
'difference is in the mode of purchasing.'[367] One buys a man's whole
labour; the other his labour for a day. The rate of wages can
therefore be raised, like the price of slaves, only by limiting the
supply. Hence the 'grand practical problem is to find the means of
limiting the number of births.'[368] M'Culloch is equally clear, and
infers that every scheme 'not bottomed on' the principle of
proportioning labour to capital must be 'completely nugatory and
ineffectual.'[369]

The doctrine common to the whole school led M'Culloch to conclusions
which became afterwards notorious enough to require a word of notice.
Torrens, like Ricardo, speaks of capital as 'accumulated labour,' but
makes a great point of observing that, although this is true, the case
is radically changed in a developed state of society. The value of
things no longer depends upon the labour, but upon the amount of
capital employed in their production.[370] This, indeed, may seem to
be the most natural way of stating the accepted principle. M'Culloch
replies that the change makes no difference in the principle,[371]
inasmuch as capital being 'accumulated labour,' value is still
proportioned to labour, though in a transubstantiated shape. M'Culloch
supposed that by carrying out this principle systematically he was
simplifying Ricardo and bringing the whole science into unity. All
questions, whether of value in exchange, or of the rate of wages, can
then be reduced to comparing the simple unit called labour. Both Mill
and M'Culloch regard capital as a kind of labour, so that things may
be produced by capital alone, 'without the co-operation of any
immediate labour'[372]--a result which can hardly be realised with the
discovery of a perpetual motion. So, again, the value of a joint
product is the 'sum' of these two values.[373] All value, therefore,
can be regarded as proportioned to labour in one of its two states.
M'Culloch advanced to an unfortunate conclusion, which excited some
ridicule. Though Ricardo and Torrens[374] rejected it, it was accepted
by Mill in his second edition.[375] Wine kept in a cask might increase
in value. Could that value be ascribed to 'additional labour actually
laid out'? M'Culloch gallantly asserted that it could, though 'labour'
certainly has to be interpreted in a non-natural sense.[376] Not only
is capital labour, but fermentation is labour, or how can we say that
all value is proportioned to labour? This is only worth notice as a
pathetic illustration of the misfortunes of a theorist ridden by a
dogma of his own creation. Another conclusion is more important. The
'real value' of anything is measured by the labour required to produce
it. Nothing 'again is more obvious' than that equal labour implies the
'same sacrifice' in all states of society.[377] It might seem to
follow that the value of anything was measured by the labour which it
would command. This doctrine, however, though maintained by Malthus,
was, according to M'Culloch, a pestilent heresy, first exploded by
Ricardo's sagacity.[378] Things exchange, as he explains, in
proportion to the labour which produces them, but the share given to
the labourer may vary widely. The labourer, he says, 'gives a
constant, but receives a variable quantity in its stead.' He makes the
same sacrifice when he works for a day, but may get for it what he
produces in ten hours, or only in one. In every case, however, he gets
less than he produces, for the excess 'constitutes profits.'[379] The
capitalist must get his interest, that is, the wages of the
accumulated labour. Here we come again to the Socialist position, only
that the Socialist infers that the labourer is always cheated by the
capitalist, and does not consider that the machine can ask for 'wages'
on the pretext that it is accumulated labour. What, however,
determines the share actually received? After all, as a machine is not
actually a labourer, and its work not a separable product, we cannot
easily see how much wages it is entitled to receive. M'Culloch follows
the accepted argument. 'No proposition,' he says, 'can be better
established than that the market rate of wages ... is exclusively
determined by the proportion between capital and population.'[380] We
have ultimately here, as elsewhere, 'the grand principle to which we
must always come at last,' namely, 'the cost of production.'[381]
Wages must correspond to the cost of raising the labourer. This leads
to a formula, which afterwards became famous. In a pamphlet[382]
devoted to the question, he repeats the statement that wages depend
upon the proportion between population and capital; and then, as if
the phrase were identical, substitutes that portion of capital which
is required for the labourer's consumption. This is generally cited as
the first statement of the 'wage-fund' theory, to which I shall have
to return.

I need not pursue these illustrations of the awkward results of
excessive zeal in a disciple. It is worth noticing, however, that
M'Culloch's practical conclusions are not so rigid as might be
inferred. His abstract doctrines do not give his true theory, so much
as what he erroneously took to be his theory. The rules with which he
works are approximately true under certain conditions, and he
unconsciously assumes the conditions to be negligible, and the rules
therefore absolute. It must be added that he does not apply his
conclusions so rigidly as might be expected. By the help of
'friction,' or the admission that the ride is only true in nineteen
cases out of twenty, he can make allowance for many deviations from
rigid orthodoxy. He holds, for example, that government interference
is often necessary. He wishes in particular for the establishment of a
'good system of public education.'[383] He seems to have become more
sentimental in later years. In the edition of 1843 he approves the
Factory Acts, remarking that the last then passed 'may not, in some
respects, have gone far enough.'[384] He approves a provision for the
'impotent poor,' on the principle of the Elizabethan act, though he
disapproves the centralising tendency of the new poor-law. Though he
is a good Malthusian,[385] and holds the instinct of population to be
a 'constant quantity,'[386] he does not believe in the impossibility
of improvement. The 'necessary' rate of wages fixes only a minimum:
an increase of population has been accompanied by an increase of
comfort.[387] Wages rise if the standard of life be raised, and a rise
of wages tends to raise the standard. He cordially denounces the
benevolent persons who held that better wages only meant more
dissipation. Better wages are really the great spur to industry and
improvement.[388] Extreme poverty causes apathy; and the worst of
evils is the sluggishness which induces men to submit to reductions of
wages. A sense of comfort will raise foresight; and the _vis
medicatrix_ should be allowed to act upon every rank of society. He is
no doubt an individualist, as looking to the removal of restrictions,
such as the Conspiracy Laws,[389] rather than to a positive action of
the government; but it is worth notice that this typical economist is
far from accepting some of the doctrines attributed to the school in
general.

The classical school blundered when it supposed that the rules which
it formulated could be made absolute. To give them that character, it
was necessary to make false assumptions as to the ultimate
constitution of society; and the fallacy became clear when the formulæ
were supposed to give a real history or to give first principles, from
which all industrial relations could be deduced. Meanwhile, the
formulæ, as they really expressed conditional truths, might be very
useful so long as, in point of fact, the conditions existed, and were
very effective in disposing of many fallacies. The best illustration
would probably be given by the writings of Thomas Tooke
(1774-1858),[390] one of the founders of the Political Economy Club.
The _History of Prices_ is an admirable explanation of phenomena which
had given rise to the wildest theories. The many oscillations of trade
and finance during the great struggle, the distress which had followed
the peace, had bewildered hasty reasoners. Some people, of course,
found consolation in attributing everything to the mysterious action
of the currency; others declared that the war-expenditure had supplied
manufacturers and agriculturists with a demand for their wares,
apparently not the less advantageous because the payment came out of
their own pockets.[391] Tooke very patiently and thoroughly explodes
these explanations, and traces the fluctuations of price to such
causes as the effect of the seasons and the varying events of the war
which opened or closed the channels of commerce. The explanation in
general seems to be thoroughly sound and conclusive, and falls in, as
far as it goes, with the principles of his allies. He shows, for
example, very clearly what were the conditions under which the
orthodox theory of rent was really applicable; how bad seasons brought
gain instead of loss to the 'agricultural interest,' that is, as Tooke
explains, to the landlord and farmer; how by a rise of price out of
proportion to the diminution of supply, the farmer made large profits;
how rents rose, enclosure bills increased, and inferior land was
brought under the plough. The landlord's interest was for the time
clearly opposed to that of all other classes, however inadequate the
doctrine might become when made absolute by a hasty generalisation. I
need not dwell upon the free-trade argument which made the popular
reputation of the economists. It is enough to note briefly that the
error as to the sphere of applicability of the doctrine did not
prevent many of the practical conclusions from being of the highest
value.

FOOTNOTES:

[294] A life of Ricardo by M'Culloch is prefixed to his _Works_. I
cite the edition of 1880. Ricardo's letters to Malthus were published
by Mr. Bonar in 1887; his letters to M'Culloch, edited by Mr.
Hollander for the American Economic Association, in 1895; and his
letters to H. Trower, edited by Mr. Bonar and Mr. Hollander, have just
appeared (1900).

[295] He remarks upon this difficulty in the case of Smith's
treatment of rent, and gives a definition to which he scarcely
adheres.--_Works_, p. 34 ('Principles,' ch. ii., 1888).

[296] _Works_, p. 378. Ricardo, it should be said, complained when
Malthus interpreted him to mean that this opposition of interests was
permanent and absolute.

[297] Malthus admits the general principle of free trade, but supports
some degree of protection to corn, mainly upon political grounds. He
holds, however, with Adam Smith, that 'no equal quantity of productive
labour employed in manufactures could ever occasion so great a
reproduction as in agriculture' (_Grounds of an Opinion, etc._, p.
35)--a relic of the 'physiocrat' doctrine.

[298] _Works_, p. 385.

[299] _Ibid._ p. 386.

[300] See also _Letters to Malthus_, p. 175.

[301] 'Your modern political economists say that it is a principle in
their science that all things find their level; which I deny, and say,
on the contrary, that it is the true principle that all things are
finding their level, like water in a storm.'--Coleridge's
_Table-Talk_, 17th May 1833.

[302] _Letters to Malthus_, p. 96; and see the frequently quoted
passage where he complains that Malthus has taken his book as more
'practical' than he had intended it to be, and speaks of his method of
imagining 'strong cases.'--_Ibid._ p. 167.

[303] _Works_, p. 40 _n._ (ch. ii.).

[304] _Works_, p. 53 (ch. v.), and p. 124 (ch. xvi.), where he quotes
from the _Wealth of Nations_ (M'Culloch), p. 390 (bk. v. ch. ii. art.
3).

[305] _Works_, p. 131.

[306] _Wealth of Nations_ (M'Culloch), p. 31 (bk. i. ch. viii.).

[307] _Works_, p. 41 (ch. ii.).

[308] _Wealth of Nations_ (M'Culloch), p. 36.

[309] _Works_, p. 51 (ch. v.).

[310] _Letters to Malthus_, p. 98.

[311] _Works_, p. 239 (ch. xxxi., added in third edition, 1821).

[312] _Ibid._ p. 50 (ch. v.).

[313] _Ibid._ p. 52.

[314] _Ibid._ p. 15 (ch. i. sec. ii.).

[315] There is, indeed, a difficulty which I happily need not discuss.
Undoubtedly the doctrine of gluts was absurd. There is, of course, no
limit to the amount of wealth which can be used or exchanged. But
there certainly seems to be a great difficulty in effecting such a
readjustment of the industrial system as is implied in increased
production of wealth; and the disposition to save may at a given time
be greater than the power of finding profitable channels for employing
wealth. This involves economical questions beyond my ability to
answer, and happily not here relevant.

[316] _Letters to Malthus_, p. 101.

[317] _Ibid._ p. 52.

[318] _Works_, p. 174 (ch. xxi.).

[319] _Works_, p. 66 (ch. vi.).

[320] _Works_, p. 240 (ch. xxxi.).

[321] Ricardo, _Works_, p. xxiv.

[322] Menger's _Das Recht auf den vollen Arbeitsertrag_ (1891), p. 38.

[323] _Works_, p. 228 (ch. xxviii.).

[324] _Works_, pp. 29, 60.

[325] _Ibid._ p. 166.

[326] _Works_, p. 170 (ch. xx.).

[327] _Ibid._ p. 7.

[328] So he tells Malthus (_Letters_, pp. 173, 174) that the buyer has
'the least to do in the world' with the regulation of prices. It is
all the competition of the sellers. 'Demand' influences price for the
moment, but 'supply follows close upon its heels, and takes up the
regulation of price.'

[329] _Works_, p. 234.

[330] Bentham's _Works_, x. 498.

[331] _Works_, p. 250 (ch. xxxii.).

[332] Stewart's _Works_, x. 34.

[333] See Bagehot's remarks upon J. S. Mill's version of this doctrine
in _Economic Studies_: chapter on 'Cost of Production.'

[334] Another illustration of the need of such considerations is
given, as has been pointed out, in Adam Smith's famous chapter upon
the variation in the rate of wages. He assumes that the highest wages
will be paid for the least agreeable employments, whereas, in fact,
the least agreeable are generally the worst paid. His doctrine, that
is, is only true upon a tacit assumption as to the character and
position of the labourer, which must be revised before the rule can be
applied.

[335] J. S. Mill, too, in his _Political Economy_ makes the foundation
of private property 'the right of producers to what they themselves
have produced.' (Bk. ii. ch. ii. § 1.)

[336] Mr. Edwin Cannan, in _Production and Distribution_ (1894), p.
383.

[337] A definition, says Burke in his essay on the 'Sublime and
Beautiful' (introduction) 'seems rather to follow than to precede our
inquiry, of which it ought to be considered as the result.'

[338] _Works_, p. 34 (chap. ii.). Rent is there defined as the sum
paid for the original and indestructible powers of the soil.

[339] _Works_, p. 132 (chap. xvii.). He admits (_Ibid._ p. 210 _n._)
that the labourer may have a little more than what is absolutely
necessary, and that his inference is therefore 'expressed too
strongly.'

[340] See _Letters to M'Culloch_, p. xxi.

[341] 'The assaults upon Malthus's "great work,"' he says (_Works_, p.
243, ch. xxxii.), 'have only served to prove its strength.'

[342] _Letters to Malthus_, p. 226.

[343] _Works_, p. 58 (ch. v.).

[344] _Ibid._ p. 211 _n._ (ch. xxvi.).

[345] _Ibid._ p. 258 (ch. xxxii.).

[346] _Works_, p. 248 (ch. xxii.).

[347] Bain's _James Mill_, p. 211.

[348] Editions in 1821, 1824, and 1826.

[349] _Autobiography_, p. 204.

[350] The first edition, an expanded version of an article in the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_, appeared in 1825.

[351] _Latter-day Pamphlets_ (New Downing Street). M'Crowdy is
obviously a type, not an individual.

[352] See Mr. Hewin's life of him in _Dictionary of National
Biography_.

[353] Fourth edition in 1827.

[354] Ricardo's _Works_, p. 164 _n._

[355] _External Corn-trade_, preface to fourth edition. J. S. Mill
observes in his chapter upon 'International Trade' that Torrens was
the earliest expounder of the doctrine afterwards worked out by
Ricardo and Mill himself. For Ricardo's opinion of Torrens, see
_Letters to Trower_, p. 39.

[356] _Production of Wealth_ (Preface).

[357] _Production of Wealth_ (Preface).

[358] _Political Economy_ (1825), p. 21.

[359] _External Corn-trade_, pp. xviii, 109, 139; _Production of
Wealth_, p. 375.

[360] Originally in the _Encyclopædia Metropolitana_, 1836.

[361] Senior's _Political Economy_ (1850), p. 26.

[362] _Ibid._ (1825), pp. 55, 129-131.

[363] Senior's _Political Economy_ (150), p. 125.

[364] _Ibid._ p. 135. M'Culloch admits the possibility that a man may
judge his own interests wrongly, but thinks that this will not happen
in one case out of twenty (_Ibid._ p. 15).

[365] See Torrens's _Production of Wealth_, p. 208; and M'Culloch's
_Political Economy_ (1843), p. 294, where he admits some exceptions.

[366] _External Corn-trade_, p. 87, etc.

[367] _Political Economy_ (second edition), pp. 21, 22.

[368] _Ibid._ p. 67.

[369] _Political Economy_ (1825), p. 329.

[370] _Production of Wealth_, p. 34, etc.

[371] _Political Economy_ (1825), p. 318.

[372] Mill's _Political Economy_ (second edition), p. 102; M'Culloch's
_Political Economy_ (1825), pp. 289-291.

[373] M'Culloch's _Political Economy_, p. 290.

[374] Preface to _External Corn-trade_.

[375] _Ibid._ p. 95.

[376] _Political Economy_ (1825), pp. 313-18. This argument disappears
in later editions.

[377] _Ibid._ p. 217.

[378] _Political Economy_, p. 221. De Quincey makes a great point of
this doctrine, of which it is not worth while to examine the meaning.

[379] _Political Economy_, p. 221 _n._

[380] _Ibid._ p. 336.

[381] _Ibid._ p. 337.

[382] 'Essay upon the Circumstances which determine the Rate of Wages'
(1826), p. 113. This was written for Constable's _Miscellany_, and is
mainly repetition from the _Political Economy_. It was republished,
with alterations, in 1851.

[383] _Political Economy_, pp. 359-61.

[384] _Ibid._ (1843), p. 178. And see his remarks on the unfavourable
side of the Factory System, p. 186 _seq._

[385] 'Wherever two persons have the means of subsisting,' as he
quaintly observes, 'a marriage invariably takes place' (_Political
Economy_, p. 154).

[386] _Political Economy_, p. 206.

[387] _Political Economy_, p. 344.

[388] _Ibid._ pp. 349-52.

[389] See pamphlet on the rate of wages, pp. 178-204.

[390] Tooke's _Thoughts and Details on the High and Low Prices of the
last Thirty Years_ appeared in 1823 (second edition 1824). This was
rewritten and embodied in the _History of Prices_, the first two
volumes of which appeared in 1838. Four later volumes appeared in
1839, 1848, and 1857.

[391] The popular view is given by Southey. The Radicals, he says in
1823, desire war because they expect it to lead to revolution. 'In
this they are greatly deceived, for it would restore agricultural
prosperity, and give a new spur to our manufactures' (_Selections from
Southey's Letters_, iii. 382. See also _Life and Correspondence_, iv.
228, 386).




