II

IDEALISTIC TENDENCY

1.  Modern Idealism was inaugurated by Kant.  Kant's significance for
thought lies in his twofold demand for a new basis of knowledge and
morality.  He conceived that both are possible, and that both are
interdependent, and have but one solution.  The solution, however, could
only be achieved by a radical change of method, and by the introduction
of new standards of value.  Kant's theory of morals was an attempt to
reconcile the two opposing ethical principles which were current in the
eighteenth century.  On the one side, the Realists treated man simply as
a natural being, and accordingly demanded a pursuance of his natural
impulses.  On the other side, the Dogmatists conceived that conduct must
be governed by divine sanctions.  Both theories agreed in regarding
happiness as the end of life; the one the happiness of sensuous
enjoyment; the other, that of divine favour.  Both set an end outside of
man himself as the basis of their ethical doctrine.  Kant was
dissatisfied with this explanation of the moral life.  The question,
therefore, which arises is, Whence comes the idea of duty which is an
undeniable fact of our experience?  If it came merely from without, it
could never speak to us with absolute authority, nor claim unquestioning
obedience.  That which comes from without depends for its justification
upon some consequence external to our action, and must be based, indeed,
upon some excitement of reward or pain.  But that would destroy it as a
moral good; since nothing can be morally good that is not pursued for its
own sake.  Kant, therefore, seeks to show that the law of the moral life
must originate within us, must spring from an inherent principle of our
own rational nature.  Hence the distinctive feature of Kant's moral
theory is the enunciation of the 'Categorical Imperative'--the supreme
inner demand of reason.  From this principle of autonomy there arise at
once the notions of man's freedom and the law's {112} universality.
Self-determination is the presupposition of all morality.  But what is
true for one is true for all.  Each man is a member of a rational order,
and possesses the inalienable independence and the moral dignity of being
an end in himself.  Hence the formula of all duty is, 'Act from a maxim
at all times fit to be a universal law.'

It is the merit of Kant that he has given clear expression to the majesty
of the moral law.  No thinker has more strongly asserted man's spiritual
nature or done more to free the ideal of duty from all individual
narrowness and selfish interest.  But Kant's principle of duty labours
under the defect, that while it determines the form, it tells us nothing
of the content of duty.  We learn from him the grandeur of the moral law,
but not its essence or motive-power.  He does not clearly explain what it
is in the inner nature of man that gives to obligation its universal
validity or even its dominating force.  As a recent writer truly says,
'In order that morality may be possible at all, its law must be realised
_in_ me, but while the way in which it is realised is mine, the content
is not mine; otherwise the whole conception of obligation is
destroyed.'[13]  If the soul's function is purely formal how can we
attain to a self-contained life?  Moreover, if the freedom which Kant
assigns to man is really to achieve a higher ideal and bring forth a new
world, must there not be some spiritual power or energy, some dynamic
force, which, while it is within man, is also without, and independent
of, him?  'Duty for duty's sake' lacks lifting power, and is the essence
of legalism.  Love, after all, is the fulfilling of the law.

2.  To overcome the Kantian abstraction, and give content to the formal
law of reason was the aim of the idealistic writers who succeeded him.
Fichte conceived of morality as action--self-consciousness realising
itself in a world of deeds.  Hegel started with the _Idea_ as the source
of all reality, and developed the conception of Personality attaining
self-realisation through the growing consciousness of the world and of
God.  Personality involves capacity.  The {113} law of life, therefore,
is, 'Be a person and respect others as persons.'[14] Man only comes to
himself as he becomes conscious that his life is rooted in a larger self.
Morality is just the gradual unfolding of an eternal purpose whose whole
is the perfection of humanity.  It has been objected that the idea of
life as an evolutionary process, which finds its most imposing embodiment
in the system of Hegel, if consistently carried out, destroys all
personal motive and self-determining activity, and reduces the history of
the world to a soulless mechanism.  Hegel himself was aware of this
objection, and the whole aim of his philosophy was to show that
personality has no meaning if it be not the growing consciousness of the
infinite.  The more recent exponents of his teaching have endeavoured to
prove that the individual, so far from being suppressed, is really
_expressed_ in the process, that, indeed, while the universal life
underlies, unifies, and directs the particular phases of existence, the
individual in realising himself is at the same time determining and
evolving the larger spiritual world--a world already implicitly present
in his earliest consciousness and first strivings.  The absolute is
indeed within us from the very beginning, but we have to work it out.
Hence life is achieved through conflict.  The universe is not a place for
pleasure or apathy.  It is a place for soul-making.  No rest is to be
found by an indolent withdrawal from the world of reality.  'In one way
or another, in labour, in learning, and in religion, every man has his
pilgrimage to make, his self to remould and to acquire, his world and
surroundings to transform. . . .  It is in this adventure, and not apart
from it, that we find and maintain the personality which we suppose
ourselves to possess _ab initio_.'[15] The soul is a world in itself; but
it is not, and must not be treated as, an isolated personality impervious
to the mind of others.  At each stage of its evolution it is the focus
and expression of a larger world.  A man does not value himself as a
detached subject, but as the {114} inheritor of gifts which are focused
in him.  Man, in short, is a trustee for the world; and suffering and
privation are among his opportunities.  The question for each is, How
much can he make of them?  Something above us there must be to make us do
and dare and hope, and the important thing is not one's separate destiny,
but the completeness of experience and one's contribution to it.[16]

3.  It was inevitable that there should arise a reaction against the
extreme Intellectualism of Hegel and his school, and that a conception of
existence which lays the emphasis upon the claims of practical life
should grow in favour.  The pursuit of knowledge tended to become merely
a means of promoting human well-being.

The first definite attempt to formulate a specific theory of knowledge
with this practical aim in view takes the form of what is known as
'Pragmatism.'  The modern use of this term is chiefly connected with the
name of the late Professor James, to whose brilliant writings we are
largely indebted for the elucidation of its meaning.  'Pragmatism,' says
James, 'represents the empiricist attitude both in a more radical and
less objectionable form than it has ever yet assumed.'[17]  It agrees
with utilitarianism in explaining practical aspects, and with positivism
in disdaining useless abstractions.  It claims to be a method rather than
a system of philosophy.  And its method consists in bringing the pursuit
of knowledge into close relationship with life.  Nothing is to be
regarded as true which cannot be justified by its value for man.  The
hypothesis which on the whole works best, which most aptly fits the
circumstances of a particular case, is true.  The emphasis is laid not on
absolute principles, but on consequences.  We must not consider things as
they are in themselves, but in their reference to the good of mankind.
It is useless, for example, to speculate about the existence of God.  If
the hypothesis of a deity works satisfactorily, if the best results
follow for the moral well-being of humanity by believing in a God, {115}
then the hypothesis may be taken as true.  It is true at least for us.
Truth, according to Pragmatism, has no independent existence.  It is
wholly subjective, relative, instrumental.  Its only test is its utility,
its workableness.

This view of truth, though supported by much ingenuity and brilliance,
would seem to contradict the very idea of truth, and to be subversive of
all moral values.  If truth has no independent validity, if it is not
something to be sought for itself, irrespective of the inclinations and
interests of man, then its pursuit can bring no real enrichment to our
spiritual being.  It remains something alien and external, a mere
arbitrary appendix of the self.  It is not the essence and standard of
human life.  If its sole test is what is advantageous or pleasant it
sinks into a merely utilitarian opinion or selfish bias.  'Truth,' says
Eucken, 'can only exist as an end in itself.  Instrumental truth is no
truth at all.'[18]

According to this theory, moreover, truth is apt to be broken up into a
number of separate fragments without correlation or integrating unity.
There will be as many hypotheses as there are individual interests.  The
truth that seems to work best for one man or one age may not be the truth
that serves another.  In the collision of opinions who is to arbitrate?
If it be the institutions and customs of to-day, the present state of
morals, that is to be the measure of what is good, then we seem to be
committed to a condition of stagnancy, and involved in the quest of a
doubtful gain.

As might be expected, Professor James's view of truth determines his view
of the world.  It is pluralistic, not monistic; melioristic, not
optimistic.  It is characteristic of him that when he discusses the
question, Is life worth living? his answer practically is, 'Yes, if you
believe it is.'  Pragmatism is put forward as the mediator between two
opposite tendencies, those of 'tender-mindedness' and 'tough-mindedness.'
'The tendency to rest in the Absolute is the characteristic mark of the
tender-minded; the {116} radically tough-minded, on the other hand, needs
no religion at all.'[19]  There is something to be said for both of these
views, James thinks, and a compromise will probably best meet the case.
Hence, against these two ways of accepting the universe, he maintains the
pragmatic faith which is at once theistic, pluralistic, and melioristic.
He accepts a personal power as a workable theory of the universe.  But
God need not be infinite or all-inclusive, for 'all that the facts
require is that the power should be both other and larger than our common
selves.'[20] Such a conception of God, even on James's own admission, is
akin to polytheism.  And such polytheism implies a pluralistic view of
the universe.  The invisible order, in which we hope to realise our
larger life, is a world which does not grow integrally in accordance with
the preconceived plan of a single architect, 'but piecemeal by the
contributions of its several parts.'[21]  We make the world to our will,
and 'add our fiat to the fiat of the creator.'  With regard to the
supreme question of human destiny Professor James's view is what he calls
'melioristic.'  There is a striving for better things, but what the
ultimate outcome will be, no one can say.  For the world is still in the
making.  Life is a risk.  It has many possibilities.  Good and evil are
intermingled, and will continue so to be.  It is a pluralistic world just
because the will of man is free, and predetermination is excluded.  If
good was assured as the final goal of ill, and there was no sense of
venture, no possibility of loss or failure, then life would lack
interest, and moral effort would be shorn of reality and incentive.

In Professor James's philosophy of life there is much that is original
and stimulating, and it draws attention to facts of experience and modes
of thought which we were in danger of overlooking.  It has compelled us
to consider the psychological bases of personality, and to lay more
stress upon the power of the will and individual choice in the
determining of character and destiny.  It is pre-eminently {117} a
philosophy of action, and it emphasises an aspect of life which
intellectualism was prone to neglect--the function of personal endeavour
and initiative in the making of the world.  It postulates the reality of
a living God who invites our co-operation, and it encourages our belief
in a higher spiritual order which it is within our power to achieve.

Pragmatism has hitherto made headway chiefly in America and Britain, but
on its activistic side it is akin to a new philosophical movement which
has appeared in France and Germany.  The name generally given to this
tendency is 'Activism' or 'Vitalism'--a title chosen probably in order to
emphasise the self-activity of the personal consciousness directed
towards a world which it at once conquers and creates.  The authors of
this latest movement are the Frenchman, Henri Bergson, and the German,
Rudolf Eucken.  Differing widely in their methods and even in their
conclusions, they agree in making a direct attack both upon the realism
and the intellectualism of the past, and in their conviction that the
world is not a 'strung along universe,' as the late Professor James puts
it, but a world that is being made by the creative power and personal
freedom of man.  While Eucken has for many years occupied a position of
commanding influence in the realm of thought, Bergson has only recently
come into notice.  The publication of his striking work, _Creative
Evolution_, marks an epoch in speculation, and is awakening the interest
of the philosophical world.[22]

4.  With his passion for symmetry and completeness Bergson has evolved a
whole theory of the universe, {118} resorting, strange to say, to a form
of reasoning that implies the validity of logic, the instrument of the
intellect which he never wearies of impugning.  Without entering upon his
merely metaphysical speculations, we fix upon his theory of
consciousness--the relation of life to the material world--as involving
certain ethical consequences bearing upon our subject.  The idea of
freedom is the corner-stone of Bergson's system, and his whole philosophy
is a powerful vindication of the independence and self-determination of
the human will.  Life is free, spontaneous, creative and incalculable;
determined neither by natural law nor logical sequence.  It can break
through all causation and assert its own right.  It is not, indeed,
unrelated to matter, since it has to find its exercise in a material
world.  Matter plays at once, as he himself says, the role of obstacle
and stimulus.[23]  But it is not the world of things which legislates for
man; it is man who legislates for it.  Bergson's object is to vindicate
the autonomy of consciousness, and his entire philosophy is a protest
against every claim of determinism to dominate life.  By introducing the
creative will before all development, he displaces mechanical force, and
makes the whole evolution of life dependent upon the 'vital impulse'
which pushes forward against all obstacles to ever higher and higher
efficiency.  Similarly, by drawing a distinction between intellect and
intuition, he shows that the latter is the truly creative power in man
which penetrates to the heart of reality and shapes its own world.
Intellect and instinct have been developed along divergent lines.  The
intellect has merely a practical function.  It is related to the needs of
action.[24]  It is the faculty of manufacturing artificial objects,
especially tools to make tools.[25]  It deals with solids and geometrical
figures, and its instrument is logic.  But according to Bergson it has an
inherent incapacity to deal with life.[26]  When we contrast the rigidity
and superficiality of intellect with the fluidity, sympathy and intimacy
of intuition, we see at once wherein {119} lies the true creative power
of man.  Development, when carried too exclusively along the lines of
intellect, means loss of will-power; and we have seen how, not
individuals alone, but entire nations, may be crushed and destroyed by a
too rigid devotion to mechanical and stereotyped methods of thought.
Only life is adequate to deal with life.  Let us give free expression to
the intuitive and sympathetic force within us, 'feel the wild pulsation
of life,' if we would conquer the world and come to our own.  'The
spectacle,' says Bergson, 'of life from the very beginning down to man
suggests to us the image of a current of consciousness which flows down
into matter as into a tunnel, most of whose endeavours to advance . . .
are stopped by a rock that is too hard, but which, in one direction at
least, prove successful, and break out into the light once more.'[27]
But there life does not stop.

  'All tended to mankind,
  But in completed man begins anew
  A tendency to God.'[28]

This creative consciousness still pushes on, giving to matter its own
life, and drawing from matter its nutriment and strength.  The effort is
painful, but in making it we feel that it is precious, more precious
perhaps than the particular work it results in, because through it we
have been making ourselves, 'raising ourselves above ourselves.'  And in
this there is the true joy of life--the joy which every creator
feels--the joy of achievement and triumph.  Thus not only is the self
being created, but the world is being made--original and
incalculable--not according to a preconceived plan or logical sequence,
but by the free spontaneous will of man.

The soul is the creative force--the real productive agent of novelty in
the world.  The strange thing is that the soul creates not the world
only, but itself.  Whence comes this mystic power?  What is the origin of
the soul?  Bergson does not say.  But in one passage he suggests that
{120} possibly the world of matter and consciousness have the same
origin--the principle of life which is the great prius of all that is and
is to be.  But Bergson's 'elan vital,' though more satisfactory than the
first cause of the naturalist, or the 'great unknown' of the
evolutionist, or even than some forms of the absolute, is itself
admittedly outside the pale of reason--inexplicable, indefinable, and
incalculable.

The new 'vitalism' unfolds a living self-evolving universe, a restless,
unfinished and never-to-be-finished development--the scope and goal of
which cannot be foreseen or explained.  An infinite number of
possibilities open out; which the soul will follow no one can tell; why
it follows this direction rather than that, no one can see.  There seems
to be no room here for teleology or purposiveness; and though Bergson has
not yet worked out the theological and ethical implications of his
theory, as far as we can at present say the personality and imminence of
a Divine Being are excluded.  Though Bergson never refers to Hegel by
name, he seems to be specially concerned in refuting the philosophy of
the Absolute, according to which the world is conceived as the evolution
of the infinite mind.  If 'tout est donne,' says Bergson, if all is given
beforehand, 'why do over again what has already been completed, thus
reducing life and endeavour to a mere sham.'  But even allowing the force
of that objection, the idea of a 'world in the making,' though it appeals
to the popular mind, is not quite free from ambiguity.  In one sense it
states a platitude--a truth, indeed, which is not excluded from an
absolute or teleological conception of life.  But if it is implied that
the world, because it is in process of production, may violate reason and
take some capricious form, the idea is absurdly false, so long as we are
what we are, and the human mind is what it is.  The real must always be
the rational.  All enterprise and effort are based on the faith that we
belong to a rational world.  Though we cannot predict what form the world
will ultimately take, we can at least be sure that it can assume no
character which will {121} contradict the nature of intelligence.  Even
in the making of a world, if life has any moral worth and meaning at all,
there must be rational purpose.  There are creation and initiative in man
assuredly, but they must not be interpreted as activities which deviate
into paths of grotesque and arbitrary fancy.  Our actions and ideas must
issue from our world.  Even a poem or work of art must make its appeal to
the universal mind; any other kind of originality would wholly lack human
interest and sever all creation and life from their root in human nature.
But at least we must acknowledge that Bergson has done to the world of
thought the great service of liberating us from the bonds of matter and
the thraldom of a fatalistic necessity.  It is his merit that he has
lifted from man the burden of a hard determinism, and vindicated the
freedom, choice, and initiative of the human spirit.  If he has no
distinctly Christian message, he has at least disclosed for the soul the
possibility of new beginnings, and has shown that there is room in the
spiritual life, as the basis of all upward striving, for change of heart
and conversion of life.

5.  In the philosophy of Eucken there is much that is in harmony with
that of Bergson; but there are also important differences.  Common to
both is a reaction against formalism and intellectualism.  Neither claims
that we can gain more than 'the knowledge of a direction' in which the
solution of the problem may be sought.  It is not a 'given' or finished
world with which we have to do.  'The triumph of life is expressed by
creation,' says Eucken, 'I mean the creation of self by self.'  'We live
in the conviction,' he says again, 'that the possibilities of the
universe have not yet been played out,[29] but that our spiritual life
still finds itself battling in mid-flood with much of the world's work
still before us.'  While Bergson confines himself rigidly to the
metaphysical side of thought, Eucken is chiefly interested in the ethical
and religious aspects of life's problem.  Moreover, while there is an
absence of a distinctly teleological aim in Bergson, the purpose and
ideal {122} of life are prominent elements in Eucken.  Notwithstanding
his antagonism to intellectualism, the influence of Hegel is evident in
the absolutist tendency of his teaching.  Life for Eucken is
fundamentally spiritual.  Self-consciousness is the unifying principle.
Personality is the keynote of his philosophy.  But we are not
personalities to begin with: we have the potentiality to become such by
our own effort.  He bids us therefore forget ourselves, and strive for
our highest ideal--the realisation of spiritual personality.  The more
man 'loses his life' in the pursuit of the ideals of truth, goodness, and
beauty the more surely will he 'save it.'  He realises himself as a
personality, who becomes conscious of his unity with the universal
spiritual life.

Hence there are two fundamental principles underlying Eucken's philosophy
which give to it its distinguishing character.  The first is the
metaphysical conception of _a realm of Spirit_--an independent spiritual
Reality, not the product of the natural man, but communicating itself to
him as he strives for, and responds to, it.  This spiritual reality
underlies and transcends the outward world.  It may be regarded as an
absolute or universal life--the deeper reality of which all visible
things are the expression.  The second cardinal principle is the
_doctrine of Activism_.  Life is action.  Human duty lies in a world of
strife.  We have to contend for a spiritual life-content.  Here Eucken
has much in common with Fichte.[30]  But while Fichte starts with
self-analysis, and loses sight of error, care, and sin, Eucken starts
with actual conflict, and ever retains a keen sense of these hampering
elements.  The evil of the world is not to be solved simply by looking
down upon the world from some superior optimistic standpoint, and
pronouncing it very good.  The only way to solve it is the practical one,
to leave the negative standing, and press on to the deeper
affirmative--the positive truth, that beneath the world of nature there
exists a deeper reality of spirit, of which we become participators by
the freedom and activity of our lives.  We are here to acquire a new
spiritual world, but {123} it is a world in which the past is taken up
and transfigured.  Against naturalism, which acquiesces in the present
order of the universe, and against mere intellectualism, which simply
investigates it, Eucken never wearies of protesting.  He demands, first,
a fundamental cleavage in the inmost being of man, and a deliverance from
the natural view of things; and he contends, secondly, for a spiritual
awakening and an energetic endeavour to realise our spiritual resources.
Not by thought but by action is the problem of life to be solved.  Hence
his philosophy is not a mere theory about life, but is itself a factor in
the great work of spiritual redemption which gives to life its meaning
and aim.

That which makes Eucken's positive idealism specially valuable is his
application of it to religion.  Religion has been in all ages the mighty
uplifting power in human life.  It stands for a negation of the finite
and fleeting, and an affirmation of the spiritual and the eternal.  This
is specially true of the Christian religion.  Christianity is the supreme
type of religion because it best answers the question, 'What can religion
do for life?'  But the old forms of its manifestation do not satisfy us
to-day.  Christianity of the present fails to win conviction principally
for three reasons: (1) because it does not distinguish the eternal
substance of religion from its temporary forms; (2) because it professes
to be the final expression of all truth, thus closing the door against
progress of thought and life; and (3) while emphasising man's redemption
from evil, it forgets the elevation of his nature towards good.  There is
a tendency to depreciate human nature, and to overlook the joyousness of
life.  What is needed, therefore, is the expression of Christianity in a
new form--a reconstruction which shall emphasise the positiveness,
activity, and joy of Christian morality.[31]

While every one must feel the sublimity and inspiration in this
conception of a spiritual world, which it is the task of life to realise,
most people will be also conscious of a {124} certain vagueness and
elusiveness in its presentation.  We are constrained to ask what is this
independent spiritual life?  Is it a personal God, or is it only an
impersonal spirit, which pervades and interpenetrates the universe?  The
elusive obscurity of the position and function which Eucken assigns to
his central conception of the _Geistes-Leben_ must strike every reader.
Even more than Hegel, Eucken seems to deal with an abstraction.  The
spiritual life, we are told, 'grows,' 'divides,' 'advances'--but it
appears to be as much a 'bloodless category' as the Hegelian 'idea,'
having no connection with any living subject.  God, the Spirit, may
exist, indeed Eucken says He does, but there is nowhere any indication of
how the spiritual life follows from, or is the creation of, the Divine
Spirit.  Our author speaks with so great appreciation of Christianity
that it seems an ungracious thing to find fault with his interpretation
of it.  Yet with so much that is positive and suggestive, there are also
some grave omissions.  In a work that professes to deal with the
Christian faith--_The Truth of Religion_--and which indeed presents a
powerful vindication of historical Christianity, we miss any
philosophical interpretation of the nature and power of prayer,
adoration, or worship, or any account, indeed, of the intimacies of the
soul which belong to the very essence of the Christian faith.  While he
insists upon the possibility, nay, the necessity, of a new beginning, he
fails to reveal the power by which the great decision is made.  While he
affirms with much enthusiasm and frankness the need of personal decision
and surrender, he has nothing to say of the divine authority and power
which creates our choice and wins our obedience.  Nowhere does he show
that the creative redemptive force comes not from man's side, but
ultimately from the side of God.  And finally, his teaching with regard
to the person and work of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding its tender
sympathy and fine discrimination, does less than justice to the
uniqueness and historical significance of the Son of Man.  With profound
appreciation and rare beauty of language he depicts the life of Jesus.
'Seldom,' {125} says a recent writer, 'has the perfect Man been limned
with so persuasive a combination of strenuous thought and gracious
word.'[32] 'He who makes merely a normal man of Jesus,' he says, 'can
never do justice to His greatness.'[33]  Yet while he protests rightly
against emptying our Lord's life of all real growth and temptation, and
the claim of practical omniscience for His humanity (conceptions of
Christ's Person surely nowhere entertained by first-class theologians),
he leaves us in no manner of doubt that he does not attach a divine worth
to Jesus, nor regard Him in the scriptural sense as the Supreme
revelation and incarnation of God.  And hence, while the peerless
position of Jesus as teacher and religious genius is frankly
acknowledged, and His purity, power, and permanence are extolled--the
mediatorial and redemptive implicates of His personality are overlooked.

But when all is said, no one can study the spiritual philosophy of Eucken
without realising that he is in contact with a mind which has a sublime
and inspiring message for our age.  Probably more than any modern
thinker, Eucken reveals in his works deep affinities with the central
spirit of Christianity.  And perhaps his influence may be all the greater
because he maintains an attitude of independence towards dogmatic and
organised Christianity.  Professor Eucken does not attempt to satisfy us
with a facile optimism.  Life is a conflict, a task, an adventure.  And
he who would engage in it must make the break between the higher and the
lower nature.  For Eucken, as for Dante, there must be 'the penitence,
the tears, and the plunge into the river of Lethe before the new
transcendent love begins.'  There is no evasion of the complexities of
life.  He has a profound perception of the contradictions of experience
and the seeming paradoxes of religion.  For him true liberty is only
possible through the 'given,' through God's provenience and grace:
genuine self-realisation is only achievable through a continuous
self-dedication to, and {126} incorporation within, the great realm of
spirits; and the Immanence within our lives of the Transcendent.[34]

In styling the tendencies which we have thus briefly reviewed
non-Christian, we have had no intention of disparagement.  No earnest
effort to discover truth, though it may be inadequate and partial, is
ever wholly false.  In the light of these theories we are able to see
more clearly the relation between the good and the useful, and to
acknowledge that, just as in nature the laws of economy and beauty have
many intimate correspondences, so in the spiritual realm the good, the
beautiful, and the true may be harmonised in a higher category of the
spirit.  We shall see that the Christian ideal is not so much
antagonistic to, as inclusive of, all that is best in the teaching of
science and philosophy.  The task therefore now before us is to interpret
these general conceptions of the highest good in the light of Christian
Revelation--to define the chief end of life according to Christianity.



[1] Kasper Schmidt, _Der Einzige und sein Eigentum_.

[2] Haeckel, _op. cit._, chap. xix.

[3] Haeckel, _op. cit._, chap. xix. p. 140.

[4] Hobbes' _Leviathan_, chap. vi.

[5] Cf. Pringle-Pattison, _Philos. Radicals_, and J. Seth's _Eng.
Philosophers_, p. 240.

[6] _Utilitarianism_, chap. ii.

[7] _Idem_, chap. iii.

[8] Cf. Spencer, _Data of Ethics_, p. 275; also _Social Statics_.  In the
former work an attempt is made to exhibit the biological significance of
pleasure and the relation between egoism and altruism.

[9] See _First Principles_, p. 166 ff.

[10] See Kirkup, _An Inquiry into Socialism_, p. 19.

[11] See Luetgert, _Natur und Geist Gottes_, for striking chapter on
Goethe's _Ethik_, p. 121 f.

[12] Cf. Eucken, _Main Currents of Modern Thought_, p. 401 f.

[13] Macmillan, _The Crowning Phase of the Critical Philosophy_, p. 28.

[14] Hegel, _Phil. of Right_, p. 45.

[15] Bosanquet, _The Principles of Individuality and Value_.

[16] Bosanquet, _The Principles of Individuality and Value_.

[17] _Pragmatism_, p. 51.

[18] _Main Currents of Thought_, p. 78.

[19] _Pragmatism_, p. 278 f.; also _Varieties of Relig. Experience_, p.
525 f.

[20] _Idem_, p. 299.

[21] _Idem_, p. 290.

[22] The writer regrets that the work of the Italian, Benedetto Croce,
_Philosophy of the Practical, Economic and Ethic_ (Part II. of
_Philosophy of the Spirit_), came to his knowledge too late to permit a
consideration of its ethical teaching in this volume.  Croce is a thinker
of great originality, of whom we are likely to hear much in the future,
and whose philosophy will have to be reckoned with.  Though independent
of others, his view of life has affinities with that of Hegel.  He
maintains the doctrine of development of opposites, but avoids Hegel's
insistence upon the concept of nature as a mode of reality opposed to the
spirit.  Spirit is reality, the whole reality, and therefore the
universal.  It has two activities, theoretic and practical.  With the
theoretic man understands the universe; with the practical he changes it.
The Will is the man, and freedom is finding himself in the Whole.

[23] _Hibbert Journal_, April 1912.

[24] _Evol. Creat._, p. 161.

[25] _Idem_, p. 146.

[26] _Idem_, p. 165.

[27] _Hibbert Journal_.

[28] Browning.

[29] _Die Geistigen Stroemunyen der Gegenwart_, p. 10.

[30] Cf. _Problem of Life_.

[31] Cf. _Life's Basis and Life's Ideal_.

[32] Hermann, _Bergson und Eucken_, p. 103.

[33] _The Problem of Life_, p. 152.

[34] Cf. von Huegel, _Hibbert Journal_, April 1912.




{127}

