CHAPTER XI

VIRTUES AND VIRTUE

So far we have gained some conception of the Christian ideal as the
highest moral good, and have learned also how the Christian character is
brought into being.  We now enter upon a new section--the last stage of
our inquiry--and have to consider the 'new man'--his virtues, duties, and
relationships.

The business lying immediately before us in this chapter is to consider
the accepted standards in which the Christian good is exhibited--the
virtues recognised by the Christian consciousness.

What, then, are the particular forms or manifestations of character which
result from the Christian interpretation of life?  When we think of man
as living in relation to his fellows, and engaging in the common
activities of the world, what are the special traits of character which
distinguish the Christian?  These questions suggest one of the most
important, and at the same time one of the most difficult, tasks of
Christian Ethics--the classification of the virtues.  The difficulty
arises in the first instance from the ambiguity attaching to the term
'virtue.'  It is often loosely used to signify a meritorious act--as in
the phrase, 'making a virtue of a necessity.'  It is frequently employed
generally for a moral quality or excellency of character, and in this
respect is contrasted with vice.  Finally, virtues are sometimes
identified with duties.  Thus we speak of the virtue of veracity.  But
obviously we may also refer to the duty of veracity.  The word _arete_;
signifies 'force,' and was originally used as a property of bodies,
plants, or animals.  {184} At first it had no ethical import.  In Attic
usage it came to signify aptness or fitness of manhood for public life.
And this signification has shaped the future meaning of its Latin
equivalent--_virtus_ (from _vis_, strength, and not from _vir_, a man).

Plato gave to the term a certain ethical value in connection with his
moral view of the social life, so that Ethics came to be designated the
doctrine of virtues.  In general, however, both by the Greek and Roman
moralists, and particularly the Stoics, the word _virtus_ retained
something of the sense of force or capacity--a quality prized in the
citizen.  The English word is a direct transcript of the Latin.  The
German noun, _Tugend_ (from _taugen_, to fit) means capability, and is
related to worth, honour, manliness.  The word _arete_ does not
frequently occur in the New Testament.[1]  In the few passages in which
it appears it is associated with praiseworthiness.  In one passage[2] it
has a more distinctly ethical signification--'add to your faith
virtue'--where the idea is that of practical worth or manhood.

Virtue may be defined as the acquired power or capacity for moral action.
From the Christian point of view virtue is the complement, or rather the
outcome, of grace.  Hence virtues are graces.  In the Christian sense a
man is not virtuous when he has first appropriated by faith the new
principle of life.  He has within him, indeed, the promise and potency of
all forms of goodness, but not until he has consciously brought his
personal impulses and faculties into the service of Christ can he be
called truly virtuous.  Hence the Christian character is only
progressively realised.  On the divine side virtue is a gift.  On the
human side it is an activity.  Our Lord's figure of the vine and the
branches represents the relation in which Christian character stands to
Christ.  In like manner St. Paul regards the manifestations of the
Christian life as the fruit of the Spirit--the inevitable and natural
outgrowth of the divine seed of life implanted in the heart.  Hence
arises the importance of {185} cultivating the inner life of the spirit
which is the root of all moral excellency.  On the other hand it must be
remembered that Christian morality is not of a different sort from
natural morality, and the Christian virtues are not merely supernatural
qualities added on, but simply human virtues coloured and transfigured by
grace and raised to a higher value.  The power to act morally, the
capacity to bring all our faculties into the service of the spiritual
life, is the ground of Christian virtue just as it is of every natural
excellence.  From this it follows that the distinction sometimes made
between natural goodness and Christian goodness is unsound.  A virtue is
not a superlative act of merit, implying an excess of excellence beyond
the requirements of duty.  From the Christian standpoint there are no
works of supererogation, and there is no room in the Christian life for
excess or margin.  As every duty is a bounden duty, so every possible
excellence is demanded of the Christian.  Virtues prescribe duties;
ideals become laws; and the measure is, 'Be ye perfect as your Father in
heaven is perfect.'  The Stoic maxim, 'Nothing in excess,' is inadequate
in reference to moral excellence, and Aristotle's doctrine of the 'Mean'
can hardly be applied without considerable distortion of facts.  The only
virtue which with truth can be described as a form of moderation is
Temperance.  It has been objected that by his doctrine of the 'Mean'
Aristotle 'obliterates the awful and absolute difference between right
and wrong.'  If we substitute, as Kant suggested, 'law' for 'mean,' some
of the ambiguity is obviated.  Still, after all extenuation is made it
may be questioned whether any term implying quantity is a fit expression
for a moral attribute.[3]

At the same time the virtues must not be regarded as mere abstractions.
Moral qualities cannot be isolated from the circumstances in which they
are exercised.  Virtue is character in touch with life, and it is only in
contact with actual events that its quality can be determined.  Actions
are not simply good or bad in themselves.  They must {186} always be
valued both by their inner motives and intended ends.  Courage or
veracity, for example, may be exercised from different causes and for the
most various ends, and occasionally even for those of an immoral
nature.[4]

For these and similar reasons some modern ethical writers have regarded
the classification of the virtues as unsatisfactory, involving arbitrary
and illogical distinctions in value; and some have even discarded the use
of the word 'virtue' altogether, and substituted the word 'character' as
the subject of ethical study.  But inasmuch as character must manifest
itself in certain forms, and approximate at least to certain norms or
ideals of conduct, it may not be altogether superfluous to consider in
their relation and unity those moral qualities (whether we call them
virtues, graces, or norms of excellence) which the Christian aims at
reproducing in his life.

We shall consider therefore, first, the natural elements of virtue as
they have been disclosed to us by classical teachers.  Next, we shall
compare these with the Christian conception of life, showing how
Christianity has given to them a new meaning and value.  And finally, we
shall endeavour to reveal the unifying principle of the virtues by
showing that when transformed by the Christian spirit they are the
expressions or implicates of a single spiritual disposition or totality
of character.


I

_The Natural Basis of the Virtues_.--At a certain stage of reflection
there arises an effort not merely to designate, but to co-ordinate the
virtues.  For it is soon discovered that all the various aspects of the
good have a unity, and that the idea of virtue as one and conscious is
equivalent to the idea of the good-will or of purity of heart.  Thus it
was seen by the followers of Socrates that the virtues are but different
expressions of one principle, and that the ultimate good of character can
only be realised by the actual pursuit {187} of it in the recognised
virtues.  We do not sufficiently reflect, says Green, how great was the
service which Greek philosophy rendered to mankind.  From Plato and
Aristotle comes the connected scheme of virtues and duties within which
the educated conscience of Christendom still moves when it is impartially
reflecting on what ought to be done.[5]  Religious teachers may have
extended the scope of our obligations, and strengthened the motives which
actuate men in the performance of duty, but 'the articulated scheme of
what the virtues and duties are, in their difference and their unity,
remains for us now in its main outlines what the Greek philosophers left
it.'[6]

Among ancient moralists four virtues, Wisdom, Courage, Temperance,
Justice were constantly grouped.  They were already traditional in
Plato's time, but he adopts them as fundamental.  Aristotle retained
Plato's list, but developed from it some minor excellences.

Virtue, according to Plato, was the health or harmony of the soul; hence
the principle of classification was determined by the fitness of the soul
for its proper task, which was conceived as the attainment of the good or
the morally beautiful.  As man has three functions or aspects, a
cognitive, active, and appetitive, so there are three corresponding
virtues.  His function of knowing determines the primal virtue of Wisdom;
his active power constitutes the virtue of Courage; while his appetitive
nature calls for the virtue of Temperance or Self-control.  These three
virtues have reference to the individual's personal life.  But inasmuch
as a man is a part of a social organism, and has relations to others
beyond himself, justice was conceived by Plato as the social virtue, the
virtue which regulated and harmonised all the others.  For the Stoics
these four virtues embraced the whole life according to nature.  It may
be noticed that Plato and Aristotle did not profess to have created the
virtues.  Wisdom, fortitude, temperance, and justice were, as they
believed, radical principles of the moral nature; and all they professed
to do was to {188} awaken men to the consciousness of their natural
capacities.  If a man was to attain to fitness of life, then these were
the fundamental and essential lines on which his rational life must
develop.  In every conceivable world these are the basal elements of
goodness.  Related as they are to fundamental functions of personality,
they cannot be less or more.  They stand for the irreducible principles
of conduct, to omit any one of which is to present a maimed or only
partial character.  In every rational conception of life they must remain
the essential and desirable objects of pursuit.  It was not wonderful,
therefore, when we remember the influence of Greek thought upon early
Christianity, that the four classical virtues should pass over into
Christian Ethics.  But the Church, recognising that these virtues had
reference to man's life in relation to himself and his fellow-men in this
world alone, added to these the three Pauline Graces, Faith, Hope, and
Charity, as expressive of the divine element in man, his relation to God
and the spiritual world.  The first four were called natural, the last
three supernatural: or the 'Cardinal' (_cardo_, a hinge) and the
'Theological' virtues.  They make in all seven, the mystic perfect
number, and over against these, to complete the symmetry of life, were
placed the seven deadly sins.


II

_Their Christian Transformation_.--But now if we compare the cardinal
virtues with the conception of goodness revealed in Scripture, we are at
once conscious of a contrast.  We seem to move in a new atmosphere, and
to be confronted with a view of life in which entirely different values
hold.

1.  While in the New Testament many virtues are commended, no complete
description occurs in any single passage.  The beatitudes may be regarded
as our Lord's catalogue of the typical qualities of life, and a
development of virtuous life might be worked out from the Sermon on the
Mount.  Beginning with poverty of spirit, {189} humility, and meekness,
and rising up out of the individual struggle of the inner man, we attain
to mercifulness and peaceableness--the spirit which bears the poverty of
others, and seeks to make others meek and gentle.  Next the desire for
righteousness finds expression in a readiness to endure persecution, to
support the burden of duty in the midst of worldly conflict; and finally
in the highest stage the light of virtue shines through the clouds of
struggle and breaks forth spontaneously, irradiating all who come into
contact with it, and constituting man the servant of humanity, the light
of the world.[7]  Or we might turn to the apostle Paul, who regards the
virtues as the fruit of the Spirit, describing them in general as 'love,
joy, peace, long-suffering, goodness, faith, gentleness, humility.'[8]  A
rich cluster is also mentioned as 'the fruit of light'--goodness,
righteousness, truth.  A further enumeration is given in Colossians where
the apostle commends compassion, kindness, humility, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearance, and forgiveness.[9]  And once more there is
the often-quoted series in the Epistle to the Philippians, 'Whatsoever
things are true, reverent, just, chaste, lovely, and kindly spoken
of.'[10]  Nor must we forget the characteristics of love presented in the
apostle's 'Hymn of Charity.'[11]  To these descriptions of St. Paul there
ought to be added the remarkable passage in which St. Peter unfolds the
process of the moral life from its seed to the perfect flower.[12]
Though the authorship of this passage has been disputed, that fact does
not make the representation less trustworthy and typical as an exhibition
of early Christian morality.  According to this picture, just as in St.
Paul's view, the whole moral life has its root in faith, and character is
nothing else than the working out of the initial energy of the soul into
virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness,
and charity--all that makes life worthy and excellent.  Character is not
built like a house, by the addition of stone to stone.  It is evolved as
{190} a plant from a seed.  Given faith, there will ultimately emerge all
the successive qualities of true goodness--knowledge, temperance,
patience--the personal virtues, rising upwards to godliness or the love
of God, and widening out to brotherhood, and thence to charity or a love
of mankind--a charity which embraces the whole world, even those who are
not Christian: the enemy, the outcast, and the alien.

These descriptions are not formal or systematic, but are characterised by
a remarkable similarity in spirit and tone.  They all reflect the mind of
Christ, and put the emphasis where Jesus Himself invariably laid it--on
love.  But the point to which we desire to draw attention is the contrast
between the classical and the Christian type of virtue.  The difference
is commonly expressed by saying that the pagan virtues were of a bold
masculine order, whereas the Christian excellences are of an amiable and
passive nature.

Yet if we carefully examine the lists as given in Scripture, we shall see
that this is hardly a just distinction.  Certainly Christianity brings to
the front some virtues of a gentle type which are apparently wanting in
the Platonic catalogue.  But, on the other hand, the pagan virtues are
not excluded from the New Testament.  They have an acknowledged place in
Christian morality.  Fortitude and temperance, not to speak of wisdom and
justice, are recognised as essential qualities of the Christian
character.  Christianity did not come into the world as the negative of
all that was previously noble in human nature; on the contrary, it took
over everything that was good and true, and gave to it a legitimate
place.  Whatsoever things, says the apostle, are true and just and fair,
if there be any virtue or praise in them, think of these things.

Courage is not disparaged by Christianity.  In writing to Timothy Paul
gives to this virtue its original significance.  He only raises it to a
higher level, and gives to it a nobler end--the determination not to be
ashamed of bearing testimony, and the readiness to suffer hardship for
the Gospel's sake.  And though the apostle does not expressly {191}
commend courage in its active form in any other passage, we may gather
from the whole tenor of his life that bravery, fortitude, endurance,
occupied a high place in his esteem.  While he made no parade of his
sufferings his life was a continual warfare for the Gospel.  The courage
of a man is none the less real because it is evinced not on the
battlefield, but in the conflict of righteousness.  He who devotes
himself unnoticed and unrewarded, at the risk of his life and at the
sacrifice of every pleasure, to the service of the sick and the debased,
possesses courage the same in principle as that of the 'brave man'
described by Aristotle.  Life is a battle, and there are other objects
for which a man must contend than those peculiar to a military calling.
In all circumstances of his existence the Christian must quit himself as
a man, and without courage no one can fulfil in any tolerable degree the
duties of his station.

In like manner temperance or self-control is a truly Christian virtue,
and it finds repeated mention in Scripture.  When, however, we compare
the conception of temperance as formulated by Aristotle with the demand
of self-denial which the enlightened Christian conscience makes upon
itself we are struck with a difference both in the motive and the scope
of the principle.  Temperance as Aristotle conceived it was a virtue
exhibited only in dealing with the animal passions.  And the reason why
this indulgence ought to be checked was that the lusts of the flesh
unfitted a man for his discharge of the civic duties.  But, in view of
the Greek idea that evil resides in the physical constitution of man, the
logical deduction would be the total suppression of the animal passions
altogether.  But from the Christian standpoint the physical instincts are
not an evil to be crushed, but rather a legitimate element in man which
is to be disciplined and brought into the service of the spiritual life.
Temperance covers the whole range of moral activity.  It means the
practical mastery of self, and includes the proper control and employment
of hand and eye, tongue and temper, tastes and affections, so that they
may become effective instruments of righteousness.  The practice of {192}
asceticism for its own sake, or abstinence dictated merely by fear of
some painful result of indulgence, we do not now regard as a virtue.  The
true form of self-denial we deem to be only rendered when we forbid
ourselves the enjoyment of certain legitimate inclinations for the sake
of some higher interest.  Thus the scope of the virtue of temperance has
been greatly enlarged, and we present to ourselves objects of moral
loyalty, for the sake of which we are ready to abandon our desires in a
far greater variety of forms than ever occurred to the Greek.  An
indulgence, for example, which a man might legitimately allow himself, he
forgoes in consideration of the claims of his family, or fellow-workmen,
or for the good of mankind at large, in a way that the ancient world
could not understand.  Christian temperance, while the same in principle
with the ancient virtue, penetrates life more deeply, and is fraught with
a richer and more positive content than was contemplated by the Greek
demand.

And the same may be said of the virtues of Wisdom and Justice.  Wisdom is
a New Testament grace, but mere calculating prudence or worldly
self-regard finds no place in the Christian scheme of life.  We are
enjoined, indeed, to be wise as serpents and harmless as doves in our
relations with men; but what we are urged to cultivate is a mind for the
right interpretation of the things of God, that spiritual insight which
discerns the things of the Spirit; and, while recognising life as a
divinely given trust, seeks to obtain a wise understanding of our duties
toward God and man.

While the other virtues are to a certain extent self-regarding, Justice
is eminently social.  At the very lowest it means 'equal consideration'
for all, treating, as Kant would say, every man as an 'end,' and not as a
means.  Morally no man may disregard the claims of others.  It is said,
indeed, that we must be 'just before we are generous.'  But a full and
perfect conception of Justice involves generosity.  There is no such
thing as bare justice.  Righteousness, which is the New Testament
equivalent, demands more than negative goodness, and in Christian Ethics
{193} passes over into Charity, which finds and fulfils itself in others.
Love here and always is the fulfilling of the law, and mercy,
benevolence, kindness are the implicates of true justice.

2.  It is thus evident that the cardinal virtues are essential elements
of Christian character.  Christianity, in taking over the moral
conceptions of the ancient world, gave to them a new value and range by
directing them to new objects and enthusing them with new motives.  It
has been truly said that the religion of Jesus so profoundly modified the
character of the moral ideals of the past that they became largely new
creations.  The old moral currency was still kept in circulation, but it
was gradually minted anew.[13]  Fortitude is still the cool and steady
behaviour of a man in the presence of danger; but its range is widened by
the inclusion of perils of the soul as well as the body.  Temperance is
still the control of the physical passions; but it is also the right
placing of new affections, and the consecration of our impulses to nobler
ends.  Justice is still the suppression of conflict with the rights of
others; but the source of it lies in giving to God the love which is His
due, and finding in the objects of His thought the subjects also of our
care.  Wisdom is still the practical sense which chooses the proper
course of action; but it is no longer a selfish calculation of advantage,
but the wisdom of men who are seeking for themselves and others not
merely temporal good, but a kingdom which is not of this world.

The real reason, then, why Christianity seems by contrast to accentuate
the gentler graces is not simply as a protest against the spirit of
militarism and the worship of physical power, so prevalent in the ancient
world--not merely that they were neglected--but because they and they
alone, rightly considered, are of the very essence of that perfection of
character which God has revealed to man in Christ.  What Christianity has
done is not to give pre-eminence to one class over another, but _to make
human character complete_.  Ancient civilisation was one-sided in its
moral {194} development.  The pagan conceptions of virtue were merely
materialistic, temporal, and self-regarding.  Christ showed that without
the spirit of love even such excellences as courage, temperance, and
justice did not attain to their true meaning or yield their full
implication.  Paul, as we have seen, did not disparage heroism, but he
thought that it was exhibited as much, if not more, in patience and
forgiveness as in self-assertion and retaliation.  What Christianity
really revealed was a new type of manliness, a fresh application of
temperance, a fuller development of justice.  It showed the might of
meekness, the power of gentleness, the heroism of sacrifice.

3.  It is thus misleading to say that Christian Ethics differs from
ancient morality in the prominence it gives to what have been called 'the
passive virtues.'  Poverty of spirit, humility, meekness, mercifulness,
and peaceableness are indeed the marks of Christ's teaching.  But as
Christ conceived them they were not passive qualities, but intensely
active energies of the soul.  It has been well remarked that[14] there
was a poverty of spirit in the creed of the cynic centuries before
Christianity.  There was a meekness in the doctrine of the Stoic long
before the advent of Jesus.  But these tenets were very far from being
anticipations of Christ's morality.  Cynic poverty of spirit was but the
poor-spiritedness of apathy.  Stoic meekness was merely the indifference
of oblivion.  But the humility and lowliness of heart, the mercifulness
and peace-seeking which Christ inculcated were essentially powers of
self-restraint, not negative but positive attitudes to life.  The motive
was not apathy but love.  These qualities were based not on the idea that
life was so poor and undesirable that it was not worthy of consideration,
but upon the conviction that it was so grand and noble, something so far
beyond either pleasure or pain, as to demand the devotion of the entire
self--the mastery and consecration of all a man's powers in the
fulfilment and service of its divine end.

Hence what Christianity did was not so much to institute {195} one type
of character for another as to exhibit for the first time the complete
conception of what human life should be--a new creature, in whom, as in
its great Exemplar, strength and tenderness, courage and meekness,
justice and mercy were alike combined.  For, as St. Paul said, in Christ
Jesus there is neither male nor female, but all are as one.  And in this
character, as the same apostle finely shows, faith, hope, and charity
have the primary place, not as special virtues which have been added on,
but as the spiritual disposition which penetrates the entire personality
and qualifies its every thought and act.


III

_The Unification of the Virtues_.--While it is desirable, then, to
exhibit the virtues in detail, it is even more important to trace back
the virtues to virtue itself.  A man's duties are diverse, as diverse as
the various occasions and circumstances of life, and they can only come
into being with the various institutions of his time, Church and State,
home and country, commerce and culture.  But the performance of these may
be slowly building up in him a consistent personality.  It is in
character that the unity of the moral life is most clearly expressed.
There must be therefore a unity of character underlying the multiplicity
of characteristics, one single and commanding principle at work in the
formation of life of which every possible virtue is the expression.

1.  A unity of this kind is supplied by man's relation to God.  Religion
cannot be separated from conduct.  If it were true, as Epicurus said,
that the gods take no concern in human affairs, then not religion only,
but morality itself would be in danger.  As men's conceptions of God are
purified and deepened, they tend to exhibit the varied contents of
morality in their connection with a diviner order.  It is, then, the
thought of man's relation to God which gives coherence to the moral life,
and brings all its diverse manifestations into unity.

{196}

If we examine the Christian consciousness as presented in the New
Testament, we find three words of frequent occurrence repeatedly grouped
together, which may be regarded as the essential marks of Christian
character in relation to God--Faith, Hope, and Love.

So characteristic are these of the new life that they have been called
the theological virtues, because, as Thomas Aquinas says, 'They have God
for their object: they bring us into true relation to God, and they are
imparted to us by God alone.'[15]

2.  These graces, however, cannot be separated.  A man does not exercise
at one time faith, and at another time hope or love.  They are all of a
piece.  They are but different manifestations of one virtue.  Of these
love is the greatest, because it is that without which faith and hope
could not exist.  Love is of the very essence of the Christian life.  It
is its secret and sign.  No other term is so expressive of the spirit of
Christ.  It is the first and last word of apostolic Christianity.  Love
may be called the discovery of the Gospel.  It was practically unknown in
the ancient world.  _Eros_, the sensuous instinct and _philia_, the bond
of friendship, did exist, but _agape_ in its spiritual sense is the
creation of Christ.  In Christian Ethics love is primal and central.
Here we have got down to the bedrock of virtue.  It is not simply one
virtue among many.  It is the quality in which all the virtues have their
setting and unity.  From a Christian point of view every excellence of
character springs directly from love and is the manifestation of it.  It
is, as St. Paul says, 'the bond of perfectness.'  The several virtues of
the Christian life are but facets of this one gem.[16]

Love, according to the apostle, is indispensable to character.  Without
it Faith is an empty profession; {197} Knowledge, a mere parade of
learning; Courage, a boastful confidence; Self-denial, a useless
asceticism.  Love is the fruitful source of all else that is beautiful
and noble in life.  It not only embraces but produces all the other
graces.  It creates fortitude; it begets wisdom; it prompts
self-restraint and temperance; it tempers justice.  It manifests itself
in humility, meekness, and forgiveness:

  'As every hue is light,
  So every grace is love.'

Love is, however, closely associated with faith and hope.  Faith, as we
have seen, is theologically the formative and appropriating power by
which man makes his own the spirit of Christ.  But ethically it is a form
of love.  The Christian character is formed by faith, but it lives and
works by love.  A believing act is essentially a loving act.  It is a
giving of personal confidence.  It implies an outgoing of the self
towards another--which is the very nature of love.  Hope, again, is but a
particular form of faith which looks forward to the consummation of the
good.  The man of hope knows in whom he believes, and he anticipates the
fulfilment of his longings.  Hope is essentially an element of love.
Like faith it is a form of idealism.  It believes in, and looks forward
to, a better world because it knows that love is at the heart of the
universe.  As faith is the special counteragent against materialism in
the present, so hope is the special corrective of pessimism in regard to
the future.  Love supplies both with vision.  Christian hope, because
based on faith and prompted by love, is no easy-going complacence which
simply accepts the actual as the best of all possible worlds.  The
Christian is a man of hope because in spite of life's sufferings he never
loses faith in the ideal which love has revealed to him.  'Tribulation,'
says St. Paul, 'worketh patience, and patience probation, and probation
hope.'  Hope has its social aspect as well as its personal; like faith it
is one of the mighty levers of society.  Men of hope are the saviours of
the world.  In days of persecution and doubt it is their courage which
rallies the wavering hosts and gives others {198} heart for the struggle.
Every Christian is an optimist not with the reckless assurance that calls
evil good, but with the rational faith, begotten of experience, that good
is yet to be the final goal of ill.  'Thy kingdom come' is the prayer of
faith and hope, and the missionary enterprise is rooted in the confidence
begotten of love, that He who has given to man His world-wide commission
will give also the continual presence and power of His Spirit for its
fulfilment.

3.  Faith, hope, and charity are at once the root and fruit of all the
virtues.  They are the attributes of the man whom Christ has redeemed.
The Christian has a threefold outlook.  He looks upwards, outwards, and
inwards.  His horizon is bounded by neither space nor time.  He embraces
all men in his regard, because he believes that every man has infinite
worth in God's eyes.  The old barriers of country and caste, which
separated men in the ancient world, are broken down by faith in God and
hope for man which the love of Christ inspires.  Faith, hope, and love
have been called the theological virtues.  But if they are to be called
virtues at all, it must be in a sense very different from what the
ancients understood by virtue.  These apostolic graces are not elements
of the natural man, but states which come into being through a changed
moral character.  They connect man with God, and with a new spiritual
order in which his life has come to find its place and purpose.  They
were impossible for a Greek, and had no place in ancient Ethics.  They
are related to the new ideal which the Gospel has revealed, and obtain
their value as elements of character from the fact that they have their
object in the distinctive truth of Christianity--fellowship with God
through Christ.

These graces are not outward adornments or optional accomplishments.
They are the essential conditions of the Christian man.  They constitute
his inmost and necessary character.  They do not, however, supersede or
render superfluous the other virtues.  On the contrary they transmute and
transfigure them, giving to them at once their coherence and value.



[1] Phil. iv. 8; 1 Peter ii. 9.

[2] 2 Peter i. 5.

[3] Cf. Sir Alex. Grant, _Aristotle's Ethics_.

[4] Cf. Wundt, _Ethik_, p. 147.

[5] Green, _Proleg. to Ethics_, section 249.

[6] _Idem_.

[7] Matt. v. 1-16.

[8] Gal. v. 22-3.

[9] Col. iii. 12, 13.

[10] Phil. iv. 8.

[11] 1 Cor. xiii.

[12] 2 Peter i. 5.

[13] Strong, _Christian Ethics_.

[14] Mathieson, _Landmarks of Christian Morality_.

[15] _Summa_, I. ii.

[16] An interesting parallel might be drawn between the Pauline
conception of Love as the supreme passion of the soul and lord of the
emotions, and the Platonic view of Justice as the intimate spirit of
order alike in the individual and the state, expressing itself in, and
harmoniously binding together, the virtues of Temperance, Courage, and
Wisdom.




{199}

