CHAPTER VIII

THE CHRISTIAN IDEAL

The highest good is not uniformly described in the New Testament, and
modern ethical teachers have not always been in agreement as to the chief
end of life.  While some have found in the teaching of Jesus the idea of
social redemption alone, and have seen in Christ nothing more than a
political reformer, others have contended that the Gospel is solely a
message of personal salvation.  An impartial study shows that both views
are one-sided.  On the one hand, no conception of the life of Jesus can
be more misleading than that which represents Him as a political
revolutionist.  But, on the other hand, it would be a distinct narrowing
of His teaching to assume that it was confined to the aspirations of the
individual soul.  His care was indeed primarily for the person.  His
emphasis was put upon the worth of the individual.  And it is not too
much to say that the uniqueness of Jesus' teaching lay in the discovery
of the value of the soul.  There was in His ministry a new appreciation
of the possibilities of neglected lives, and a hitherto unknown yearning
to share their confidence.  It would be a mistake, however, to represent
Christ's regard for the individual as excluding all consideration of
social relations.  The kingdom of God, as we shall see, had a social and
corporate meaning for our Lord.  And if the qualifications for its
entrance were personal, its duties were social.  The universalism of
Jesus' teaching implied that the soul had a value not for itself alone,
but also for others.  The assertion, therefore, that the individual has a
value cannot mean that he has a value in isolation.  {128} Rather his
value can only be realised in the life of the community to which he truly
belongs.  The effort to help others is the truest way to reveal the
hidden worth of one's own life; and he who withholds his sympathy from
the needy has proved himself unworthy of the kingdom.

While the writers of the New Testament vary in their mode of presenting
the ultimate goal of man, they are at one in regarding it as an exalted
form of _life_.  What they all seek to commend is a condition of being
involving a gradual assimilation to, and communion with, God.  The
distinctive gift of the Gospel is the gift of life.  'I am the Life,'
says Christ.  And the apostle's confession is in harmony with his
Master's claim--'For me to live is Christ.'  Salvation is nothing else
than the restoration, preservation, and exaltation of life.

Corresponding, therefore, to the three great conceptions of Life in the
New Testament, and especially in the teaching of Jesus--'Eternal Life,'
'the kingdom of God,' and the perfection of the divine Fatherhood,
'Perfect as your Father in heaven is perfect'--there are three aspects,
individual, social, and divine, in which we may view the Christian ideal.


I

Self-realisation is not, indeed, a scriptural word.  But rightly
understood it is a true element in the conception of life, and may, we
think, be legitimately drawn from the ethical teaching of the New
Testament.[1]  Though the free full development of the individual
personality as we conceive it in modern times does not receive explicit
statement,[2] still one cannot doubt, that before every man our Lord does
present the vision of a possible and perfect self.  Christianity does not
destroy 'the will to live,' but only the will to live at all costs.  Even
mediaeval piety only inculcated self-mortification as a stage towards a
higher {129} self-affirmation.  Christ nowhere condemns the inherent
desire for a complete life.  The end, indeed, which each man should place
before himself is self-mastery and freedom from the world;[3] but it is a
mastery and freedom which are to be gained not by asceticism but by
conquest.  Christ would awaken in every man the consciousness of the
priceless worth of his soul, and would have him realise in his own person
God's idea of manhood.

The ideal of self-realisation includes three distinct elements:

1.  _Life as intensity of being_.--'I am come that they might have life,
and that they might have it more abundantly.'[4]  'More life and fuller'
is the passion of every soul that has caught the vision and heard the
call of Jesus.  The supreme good consists not in suppressed vitality, but
in power and freedom.  Life in Christ is a full, rich existence.  The
doctrine of quietism and indifference to joy has no place in the ethic of
Jesus.  Life is manifested in inwardness of character, and not in pomp of
circumstance.  It consists not in what a man has, but in what he is.[5]
The beatitudes, as the primary qualifications for the kingdom of God,
emphasise the fundamental principle of the subordination of the material
to the spiritual, and the contrast between inward and outward good.[6]
Self-mastery is to extend to the inner life of man--to dominate the
thoughts and words, and the very heart from which they issue.  A divided
life is impossible.  The severest discipline, even renunciation, may be
needful to secure that singleness of heart and strenuousness of aim which
are for Jesus the very essence of life.  'Ye cannot serve God and
mammon.'[7]  In harmony with this saying is the opposition in the
Johannine teaching between 'the world' and 'eternal life.'[8]  The
quality of life indeed depends not upon anything contingent or
accidental, but upon an intense inward realisation of blessedness in
Christ in comparison with which even {130} the privations and sufferings
of this world are but as a shadow.[9]  At the same time life is not a
mere negation, not simply an escape from evil.  It is a positive good,
the enrichment and intensifying of the whole being by the indwelling of a
new spiritual power.  'For me to live is Christ,' says St. Paul.  'This
is life eternal,' says St. John, 'that they may know Thee the only true
God, and Him whom Thou didst send, even Jesus Christ.'[10]

2.  _Life as Expansion of Personality_.--By its inherent power it grows
outwards as well as inwards.  The New Testament conception of life is
existence in its fullest expression and fruitfulness.  The ideal as
presented by Christ is no anaemic state of reverie or ascetic withdrawal
from human interest.  It is by the elevation and consecration of the
natural life, and not by its suppression, that the 'good' is to be
realised.  The natural life is to be transformed, and the very body
presented unto God as a living sacrifice.[11]  So far from Christianity
being opposed to the aim of the individual to find himself in a world of
larger interests, it is only in the active and progressive realisation of
such a life that blessedness consists.  Herein is disclosed, however, the
defect of the modern ideal of culture which has been associated with the
name of Goethe.  In Christ's ideal self-sufficiency has no place.  While
rightly interpreted the 'good' of life includes everything that enriches
existence and contributes to the efficiency and completeness of manhood,
mere self-culture and artistic expression are apt to become perverted
forms of egoism, if not subordinated to the spirit of service which alone
can give to the human faculties their true function and exercise.  Hence
life finds its real utterance not in the isolated development of the
self, but in the fullness of personal relationships.  Only in response to
the needs of others can a man realise his own life.  In answer to the
young ruler who asked a question 'concerning that which is good,' Christ
replied, 'If thou wilt enter into life keep the {131} commandments'; and
the particular duties He mentioned were those of the second table of the
Decalogue.[11]  The abundance of life which Christ offers consists in the
mutual offices of love and the interchange of service.  Thus
self-realisation is attained only through self-surrender.[13]  The
self-centred life is a barren life.  Not by withholding our seed but by
flinging it forth freely upon the broad waters of humanity do we attain
to that rich fruition which is 'life indeed.'

3.  _Life as Eternal Good_.--Whatever may be the accurate signification
of the word 'eternal,' the words 'eternal life,' regarded as the ideal of
man, can mean nothing else than life at its highest, the fulfilment of
all that personality has within it the potency of becoming.  In one sense
there is no finality in life.  'It seethes with the morrow for us more
and more.'  But in another sense, to say that the moral life is never
attained is only a half truth.  It is always being attained because it is
always present as an active reality evolving its own content.  In Christ
we have 'eternal life' now.  It is not a thing of quantity but of
quality, and is therefore timeless.

  'We live in deeds not years, in thoughts not breaths,
  In feelings, not in figures on a dial.'[14]

He who has entered into fellowship with God has within him now the
essence of 'life eternal.'

But the conception of life derived from, and sustained by, God involves
the idea of immortality.  'No work begun shall ever pause for death.'[15]
To live in God is to live as long as God.  The spiritual man pursues his
way through conflict and achievement towards a higher and yet a higher
goal, ever manifesting, yet ever seeking, the infinite that dwells in
him.  All knowledge and quest and endeavour, nay existence itself, would
be a mockery if man had 'no forever.' Scripture corroborates the
yearnings of the heart and represents life as a growing good which is to
attain to ever higher reaches and fuller realisations in the world to
{132} come.  It is the unextinguishable faith of man that the future must
crown the present.  No human effort goes to waste, no gift is delusive;
but every gift and every effort has its proper place as a stage in the
endless process.[16]

  'There shall never be lost one good!  What was shall live as
      before.'[17]


II

The foregoing discussion leads naturally to the second aspect of the
highest Good, the Ideal in its social or corporate form--_the kingdom of
God_.  Properly speaking, there is no such thing as an individual.  As
biologically man is only a member of a larger organism, so ethically he
can only realise himself in a life of brotherhood and service.  It is
only within the kingdom of God and by recognition of its social relations
that the individual can attain to his own blessedness.  Viewed in the
light of the mutual relation of its members the kingdom is a brotherhood
in which none is ignored and all have common privileges and
responsibilities; viewed in the light of its highest good it is the
entire perfection of the whole--a hierarchy of interests subordinated to,
and unified by, the sovereignty of the good in the person of God.[18]

1.  By reason of its comprehensiveness the doctrine of the kingdom has
been regarded by many as the most general conception of the ideal of
Jesus.  'In its unique and unapproachable grandeur it dwarfs all the
lesser heights to which the prophetic hopes had risen, and remains to
this day the transcendent and commanding ideal of the possible exaltation
of our humanity.'[19]  The principles implicitly contained in the
teaching of Jesus concerning the kingdom have become the common
possessions of mankind, and are moulding the thoughts and institutions of
the civilised world.  Kant's theory of a kingdom of ends, Comte's idea of
Humanity, and the modern conceptions of scientific and {133} historical
evolution are corroborative of the teaching of the New Testament.  Within
its conception men have found room for the modern ideas of social and
economic order, and under its inspiration are striving for a fuller
realisation of the aspirations and hopes of humanity.[20]

Though frequently upon His lips the phrase did not originate with Jesus.
Already the Baptist had employed it as the note of his preaching, and
even before the Baptist it had a long history in the annals of the Jewish
people.  Indeed the entire story of the Hebrews is coloured by this
conception, and in the days of their decline it is the idea of the
restoration of their nation as the true kingdom of God that dominates
their hopes.  When earthly institutions did not fulfil their promise, and
nothing could be expected by natural means, hope became concentrated upon
supernatural power.  Thus before Jesus appeared there had grown up a mass
of apocalyptic literature, the object of which was to encourage the
national expectation of a sudden and supernatural coming of the kingdom
of heaven.  Men of themselves could do nothing to hasten its advent.
They could only wait patiently till the set time was accomplished, and
God stretched forth His mighty hand.[21]

A new school of German interpretation has recently arisen, the aim of
which is to prove that Jesus was largely, if not wholly, influenced by
the current apocalyptic notions of His time.  Jesus believed, it is said,
in common with the popular sentiment of the day, that the end of the
world was at hand, and that at the close of the present dispensation
there would come suddenly and miraculously a new order into which would
be gathered the elect of God.  Johannes Weiss, the most pronounced
advocate of this view, maintains that Jesus' teaching is entirely
eschatological.  The kingdom is supramundane and still to come.  Jesus
did not inaugurate it; He only predicted its advent.  Consequently there
is no Ethics, strictly so called, in His {134} preaching; there is only
an Ethic of renunciation and watchfulness[22]--an _Interimsethik_.

The whole problem resolves itself into two crucial questions: (1) Did
Jesus expect a gradual coming of the kingdom, or did He conceive of it as
breaking in suddenly by the immediate act of God? and (2) Did Jesus
regard the kingdom as purely future, or as already begun?

In answer to the first question, while there are undoubtedly numerous and
explicit sayings, too much neglected in the past and not to be wholly
explained by mere orientalism, suggesting a sudden and miraculous coming,
these must be taken in connection with the many other passages implying a
gradual process--passages of deep ethical import which seem to colour our
Lord's entire view of life and its purposes.  And in answer to the second
question, while there are not a few utterances which certainly point to a
future consummation, these are not inconsistent with the immediate
inauguration and gradual development of the kingdom.

A full discussion of this subject is beyond the scope of this volume.[23]
There are, however, two objections which may be taken to the apocalyptic
interpretation of Christ's teaching as a whole.  (1) As presented by its
most pronounced champions, this view seems to empty the person and
teaching of Jesus of their originality and universality.  It tends to
reduce the Son of Man to the level of a Jewish rhapsodist, whose whole
function was to encourage His countrymen to look away from the present
scene of duty to some future state of felicity, which had no connection
with the world of reality, and no bearing upon their present character.
It would be surely a caricature to interpret the religion of the New
Testament from this standpoint alone to the exclusion of those directly
ethical and spiritual {135} principles in which its originality chiefly
appeared, and on which its permanence depends.[24]  As Bousset[25] points
out, not renunciation but joy in life is the characteristic thing in
Jesus' outlook.  He does not preach a gloomy asceticism, but proclaims a
new righteousness and a new type of duty.  He recognises the worth of the
present life, and teaches that the world's goods are not in themselves
bad.  He came as a living man into a dead world, and by inculcating a
living idea of God and proclaiming the divine Fatherhood gave a new
direction and inner elevation to the expectations of His age, showing the
true design of God's revelation and the real meaning of the prophetic
utterances of the past.  To interpret the kingdom wholly from an
eschatological point of view would involve a failure to apprehend the
spiritual greatness of the personality with which we are dealing.[26]
(2) This view virtually makes Christ a false prophet.  For, as a matter
of fact, the sudden and catastrophic coming of the kingdom as predicted
by the Hebrew apocalyptics did not take place.  On the contrary the
kingdom of God came not as the Jews expected in a sudden descent from the
clouds, but in the slow and progressive domination of God over the souls
and social relationships of mankind.  In view of the whole spirit of
Jesus, His conception of God, and His relation to human life, as well as
the attitude of St. Paul to the Parousia, it is critically unsound to
deny that Jesus believed in the presence of the kingdom in a real sense
during His lifetime.[27]

2.  If this conception of the kingdom of God be correct we may now
proceed to regard it under three aspects, Present, Progressive, and
Future--as a _Gift_ immediately bestowed by Jesus, as a _Task_ to be
worked out by man in the history of the world, and as a _Hope_ to be
consummated by God in the future.

{136}

(1) _The Kingdom as a Present Reality_.--After what has been already said
it will not be necessary to dwell upon this aspect.  It might be
supported by direct sayings of our Lord.[28]  But the whole tenor and
atmosphere of the Gospels, the uniqueness of Christ's personality, His
claim to heal disease and forgive sin, as well as the conditions of
entrance, imply clearly that in Jesus' own view the kingdom was an actual
fact inaugurated by Him and obtaining its meaning and power from His own
person and influence.  Obviously He regarded Himself as the bearer of a
new message of life, and the originator of a new reign of righteousness
and love which was to have immediate application.  Christ came to make
God real to men upon the earth, and to win their allegiance to Him at
once.  No one can fail to recognise the lofty idealism of the Son of Man.
He carries with Him everywhere a vision of the perfect life as it exists
in the mind of God, and as it will be realised when these earthly scenes
have passed away; yet it would be truer to say that His interests were in
'first things' rather than in 'last things,' and would be more justly
designated Protology than Eschatology.[29]  His mission, so far from
having an iconoclastic aim, was really to 'make all things new.'  He was
concerned with the initiation of a new religion, therefore with a
movement towards a regeneration of society which would be virtually a
reign of God in the hearts of men.  'The kingdom of God is within you.'
Not in some spot remote from the world, some beautiful land beyond the
skies, but in the hearts and homes, in the daily pursuits and common
relationships of life must God rule.  The beatitudes, while they
undoubtedly refer to a future when a fuller realisation of them will be
enjoyed, have a present reference as well.  They make the promise of the
kingdom a present reality dependent upon the inner state of the
recipients.  Not in change of environment but in change {137} of heart
does the kingdom consist.  The lowly and the pure in heart, the merciful
and the meek, the seekers after righteousness and the lovers of peace
are, in virtue of their disposition and aspiration, already members.

(2) The kingdom as a _gradual development_.--The inward gift prescribes
the outward task.  It is a power commanding the hearts of men and
requiring for its realisation their response.  It might be argued that
this call to moral effort presented to the first Christians was not a
summons to transform the present world, but to prepare themselves for the
destiny that awaited them in the coming age.[30]  It is true that
watchfulness, patience, and readiness are among the great commands of the
New Testament.[31]  But admitting the importance of these requirements,
they do not militate against the view that Christians were to work for
the betterment of the world.  Christ did not look upon the world as
hopeless and beyond all power of reclaiming; nor did He regard His own or
His disciples' ministry within it as without real and positive effects.
While His contemporaries were expecting some mighty intervention that
would suddenly bring the kingdom ready-made from heaven, He saw it
growing up silently and secretly among men.  He took his illustrations
from organic life.  Its progress was to be like the seed hidden in the
earth, and growing day and night by its own inherent germinating force.
The object of the parables of the sower, the tares, the mustard seed, the
leaven, was to show that the crude catastrophic conception of the coming
of the kingdom must give place to the deeper and worthier idea of
growth--an idea in harmony with the entire economy of God's working in
the world of nature.  In the parable of the fruit-bearing earth Jesus
shows His faith in the growth of the good, and hence in the adaptation of
the truth to the human soul.  In the parables of the leaven, the light,
and salt Jesus illustrates the gradual power of truth to pervade,
illumine, and purify the life of humanity.  His method of bringing about
this {138} good is the contagion of the good life.  His motive is the
sense of the need of men.  And His goal is the establishment of the
kingdom of love--a kingdom in which all the problems of ambition, wealth,
and the relationships of the family, of the industrial sphere, and of the
state, are to be transfigured and spiritualised.[32]

It is surely no illegitimate application of the mind of Christ if we see
in His teaching concerning the kingdom a great social ideal to be
realised by the personal activities and mutual services of its citizens.
It finds its field and opportunity in the realm of human society, and is
a good to be secured in the larger life of humanity.  This ideal, though
only dimly perceived by the early Church, has become gradually operative
in the world, and has been creative of all the great liberating movements
in history.  It lay behind Dante's vision of a spiritual monarchy, and
has been the inspiring motive of those who, in obedience to Christ, have
wrought for the uplifting of the hapless and the down-trodden.  It has
been the soul of all mighty reformations, and is the source of that
conception of a new social order which has begun to mean so much for our
generation.

Loyalty to the highest and love for the lowest--love to God and
man--these are the marks of the men of all ages who have sought to
interpret the mind of Christ.  Mutual service is the law of the kingdom.
Every man has a worth for Christ, therefore reverence for the personality
of man, and the endeavour to procure for each full opportunity of making
the most of his life, are at once the aim and goal of the new spiritual
society of which Christ laid the foundations in His own life and
ministry.  Everything that a man is and has, talents and possessions of
every kind, are to be used as instruments for the promotion of the
kingdom of God.

  'For life, with all it yields of joy and woe,
  And hope and fear . . .
  Is just our chance o' the prize of learning love.'

{139}

(3) But though the reign of God has begun, it has _yet to be
consummated_.--There is not wanting in the New Testament an element of
futurity and expectancy not inconsistent with, but rather complementary
to, the notion of gradual development.  The eschatological teaching of
Jesus has its place along with the ethical, and may be regarded not as
annulling, but rather reinforcing the moral ideals which He
proclaimed.[33]  There is nothing pessimistic in Christ's outlook.  His
teaching concerning the last things, while inculcating solemnity and
earnestness of life as become those to whom has been entrusted a high
destiny, and who know not at what hour they may be called to give an
account of their stewardship,[34] bids men look forward with certainty
and hope to a glorious consummation of the kingdom.  Though many of our
Lord's sayings with regard to His second coming are couched in figurative
language, we cannot believe that He intended to teach that the kingdom
itself was to be brought about in a spectacular or material way.  He bids
His disciples take heed lest they be deceived by a visible Christ, or led
away by merely outward signs.[35]  His coming is to be as 'the lightning
which cometh out of the east and shineth even unto the west'[36]--an
emblem not so much of suddenness as of illuminating and convincing, and
especially, of progressive force.  Not in a visible reign or personal
return of the Son of Man does the consummation of the kingdom consist,
but in the complete spiritual sovereignty of Christ over the hearts and
minds of men.  When the same love which He Himself manifested in His life
becomes the feature of His disciples; when His spirit of service and
sacrifice pervades the world, and the brotherhood of man and the
federation of nations everywhere prevail; then, indeed, shall the sign of
the Son of Man appear in the heavens, and then shall the tribes of {140}
the earth see Him coming in the clouds with power and glory.[37]

Jesus does not hesitate to say that there will be a final judgment and an
ingathering of the elect from all quarters of the earth.[38]  There will
be, as the parable of the Ten Virgins suggests, a division and a shut
door.[39]  But punishment will be automatic.  Sin will bring its own
consequences.  Those only will be excluded at the last who even now are
excluding themselves.  For Christ is already here, and is judging the
world every day.  By the common actions of their present life men are
being tried; and that which will determine their final relation to Christ
will not be their mere perception of His bodily presence, but their moral
and spiritual likeness to Him.

Amidst the imperfections of the present men have ever looked forward to
some glorious consummation, and have lived and worked in the faith of it.
'To the prophets of Israel it was the new age of righteousness; to the
Greek thinkers the world of pure intelligible forms; to Augustine and
Dante the holy theocratic state; to the practical thought of our own time
the renovated social order.  Each successive age will frame its own
vision of the great fulfilment; but all the different ideals can find
their place in the message of the kingdom which was proclaimed by
Jesus.'[40]

There is thus opened to our vision a splendid conception of the future of
humanity.  It stands for all that is highest in our expectations because
it is already expressive of all that is best in our present achievements
and endeavours.  The final hope of mankind requires for its fulfilment a
progressive moral discipline.  Only as Christ's twofold command--love to
God and love to man--is made the all-pervasive rule of men's lives will
the goal of a universally perfected humanity be attained.

{141}

III

The chief good may be regarded finally in its _divine_ aspect--as the
endeavour after God-likeness.  In this third form of the ideal the two
others--the personal and the social--are harmonised and completed.  To
realise the perfect life as it is revealed in the character and will of
God is the supreme aim of man, and it embraces all that is conceivably
highest for the individual and for humanity as a whole.  This aspiration
finds its most explicit expression in the sublime word of Christ--'Be ye
perfect even as your Father in heaven is perfect.'[41] This commandment,
unlike so many generalisations of duty, is no cold abstraction.  It is
pervaded with the warmth of personality and the inspiration of love.  In
the idea of Fatherhood both a standard and motive are implied.  Because
God is our Father it is at once natural and possible for us to be like
Him.  He who would imitate another must have already within him something
of that other.  As there is a community of nature which makes it possible
for the child to grow into the likeness of its parent, so there is a
kinship in man with God to which our Lord here appeals.

1.  Among the ethical qualities of divine perfection set forth in
scripture for man's imitation _Holiness_ stands preeminent.  God, the
perfect being, is the type of holiness, and men are holy in proportion as
their lives are Godlike.  This conception of holiness is fundamental in
the Old Testament.  It is summed up in a command almost identical with
that of our Lord: 'Be ye holy, for I am holy.'[42]  Holiness, as
Christianity understands it, is the name for the undimmed lustre of God's
ethical perfection.  God is 'the Holy one'--the alone 'good' in the
absolute sense.[43]

If God's character consists in 'Holiness,' then that quality determines
the moral end of man.  But holiness, as the most comprehensive name for
the divine moral perfection--the pure white light of God's Being--breaks
up into the {142} separate rays which we designate the special moral
attributes.  These have been grouped under 'Righteousness' (truth,
faithfulness, justice, zeal, etc.), and 'Love' (goodness, pity, mercy,
etc.), though they are really but expressions of one individual life.[44]

2.  In the New Testament _Righteousness_ is almost equivalent to
holiness.  It is the attribute of God which determines the nature of His
kingdom and the condition of man's entrance into it.  As comprising
obedience to the will of God and the fulfilment of the moral law, it is
the basal and central conception of the Christian ideal.[45]  It is the
keynote of the Pauline Epistles.  Life has a supreme sacredness for Paul
because the righteousness of God is its end.  While righteousness is the
distinctive note of the Pauline conception, it is also fundamental in the
Ethics of Jesus.  It is the ruling thought in the Sermon on the Mount.
To be righteous for Jesus simply means to be right and true--to be as one
ought to be.  But human standards are insufficient.  A man must order his
life by the divine standard.  Jesus is as emphatic as any Old Testament
prophet in insisting upon the need of absolute righteousness.  That, for
all who would share in the kingdom of the good, is to be their ideal--the
object of their hunger and thirst.  It is a 'good' which is essential to
the very satisfaction and blessedness of the soul.[46]  It is the supreme
desire of the man who would be at peace with God.  It involves poverty of
spirit, for only those who are emptied of self are conscious of their
need.  They who, in humility and meekness, acknowledge their sins, are in
the way of holiness and are already partakers of the divine nature.

Christ's teaching in regard to righteousness has both a negative and a
positive aspect.  It was inevitable that He should begin with a criticism
of the morality inculcated by the leaders of His day.  The characteristic
feature of Pharisaism was, as Christ shows, its _externalism_.  If a man
fulfilled the outward requirements of the law he was {143} regarded as
holy, by himself and others, whatever might be the state of his heart
towards God.  This outwardness tended to create certain vices of
character.  Foremost amongst these were (1) _Vanity_ or Ostentation.  To
appear well in the opinion of others was the aim of pharisaic conduct.
Along with ostentation appears (2) _Self-complacency_.  Flattery leads to
self-esteem.  He who loves the praise of man naturally begins to praise
himself.  As a result of self-esteem arises (3) _Censoriousness_, since
he who thinks well of himself is apt to think ill of others.  As a system
Pharisaism was wanton hypocrisy--a character of seeming righteousness,
but too often of real viciousness.

But Christ came not to destroy but to fulfil the law.[47]  His aim was to
proclaim the true principles of righteousness in contrast to the current
notions of it.  This He proceeds to do by issuing the law in its ideal
and perfected form.[48]  Hence Jesus unfolds its _positive_ content by
bringing into prominence the virtues of the godly character as opposed to
the pharisaic vices.  _Modesty_ and _humility_ are set over against
ostentation and self-righteousness.[49]  _Single-minded sincerity_ is
commended in opposition to hypocrisy.[50]  The vice of censoriousness is
met by the duty of _self-judgment_ rather than the judgment of others.[51]

The two positive features of the new law of righteousness as expounded by
Jesus are--_inwardness_ and _spontaneity_.  The righteousness of the
Gospel, so far from being laxer or easier of fulfilment, was actually to
exceed that of the Pharisees:[52] (_a_) in _depth and inwardness_.  It is
not enough not to kill or steal or commit adultery.  These commandments
may be outwardly kept yet inwardly broken.  Something more radical is
expected of the man who has set before him the doing of God's will, a
righteousness not of appearance but of reality.  (_b_) In _freedom and
spontaneity_.  It is to have its spring in the heart.  It is to be a
righteousness not of servile obedience, but of willing devotion.  The aim
of life is no longer the painful effort of the bondsman who {144} strives
to perform a distasteful task, but the gladsome endeavour of the son who
knows and does, because he loves, his father's will.  In the Ethics of
the Christian life there is no such thing as mere duty; for a man never
fulfils his duty till he has done more than is legally required of him.
'Whosoever shall compel you to go with him one mile, go with him
twain.'[53]  The 'nicely calculated less or more' is alien to the spirit
of him who would do God's will.  Love is the fulfilling of the law, and
love knows nothing of limits.

3.  Thus the holiness of God is manifested not in righteousness only, but
in the attribute of Love.  The human mind can attain to no higher
conception of the divine character than that which the word 'love'
suggests.  The thought is the creation of Christianity.  It was the
special contribution of one of the innermost circle of Jesus' disciples
to give utterance to the new vision of the divine nature which Christ had
disclosed--'God is love.'[54]  In our Lord's teaching the centre of
gravity is entirely changed.  The Jewish idea of God is enriched with a
fuller content.  He is still the Holy One, but the sublimity of His
righteousness, though fully recognised, is softened by the gentler
radiance of love.[55]  Jehovah the Sovereign is revealed as God the
Father.  Divine righteousness is not simply justice, but goodness
manifested in far-reaching activities of mercy and pity and benevolence.
A new note is struck in the Ethics of Jesus.  A new relationship is
established between God and man--a personal filial relationship which
entirely alters man's conception of life.  To be perfect as our Father in
heaven is perfect, to be, and embody in life all that love means, that is
the sublime aim which Jesus in His own person and teaching sets before
the world.  As God's love is universal, and His care and compassion
world-wide, so, says Christ, not by retaliation or even by the
performance of strict justice, but in loving your enemies, in returning
good for evil and extending your acts of helpfulness and charity to those
'who know not, care not, think {145} not, what they do,' shall ye become
the children of your Father, and realise something of that divine pattern
of every man which has been shown him on the holy mount.

If the view presented in this chapter of the ethical ideal of
Christianity be correct, then the doctrine of an _Interims-ethik_
advocated by modern eschatologists must be pronounced unsatisfactory as a
complete account of the teaching of Jesus.[56]  The three features which
stand out most clearly in the Ethics of Christ are, Absoluteness,
Inwardness, and Universality.  It is an ideal for man as man, for all
time, and for all men.  The personality of God represents the highest
form of existence we know; and the love of God is the sublimest attribute
we can conceive.  But because God is our Father there is a kinship
between the divine and the human; and no higher or grander vision of life
is thinkable than to be like God--to share that which is most distinctive
of the divine Fatherhood--His love of all mankind.  Hence Godlikeness
involves Brotherhood.[57]  In the ideal of love--high as God, broad as
the world--the other aspects of the chief good, the individual and the
social, are harmonised.  In Christian Ethics, the problem of philosophy
how to unite the one and the many, egoism and altruism, has been
practically solved.  The individual realises his life only as he finds
himself in others; and this he can only do as he finds himself in God.
The first and last word of all morality and religion is summed up in
Christ's twofold law of love: 'Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all
thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; and thou shalt
love thy neighbour as thyself.'[58]



[1] Cf. Troeltsch, _Die Sociallehren d. Christl. Kirchen_, vol. i. p.
37, where the idea of self-worth and self-consecration is worked out.

[2] Wernle, _Beginnings of Christianity_, vol. i. p. 76.

[3] Wernle, _Beginnings of Christianity_, pp. 76 f.

[4] John x. 10.

[5] Luke xii. 15, 16.

[6] Matt. v.

[7] Matt. vi. 24.

[8] 1 John ii. 15.

[9] Luke x. 21; Matt. xi. 28-30; Mark viii. 35; John iii. 15, x. 28,
xvii. 2.

[10] John xvii. 3.

[11] Rom. xii. 1.

[12] Matt. xix. 17.

[13] Luke xvii. 33; John xii. 25.

[14] Bailey, _Festus_.

[15] Browning.

[16] Jones, _Browning as a Philosophical and Religious Teacher_, p. 354.

[17] Abt Vogler.

[18] Cf. Balch, _Introd. to the Study of Christian Ethics_, p. 150.

[19] Newman Smyth, _Christian Ethics_, p. 97.

[20] Balch, _Introd. to the Study of Christian Ethics_, p. 150.

[21] See Apocalypses of Baruch, Esdras, Enoch, and Pss. of Solomon, and
also Daniel and Ezekiel.  Cf. E. F. Scott, _The Kingdom and the Messiah_,
for Apoc. literature.

[22] J. Weiss, _Die Predigt Jesu vom Reiche Gottes_.  Cf. also Wernle,
_Die Anfaenge unsurer Religion_, who is not so pronounced.  Bousset
rejects this view, and Titius, in his _N. T. Doctrine of Blessedness_,
regards the kingdom of God as a present good.  See also Moffatt, _The
Theology of the Gospels_.

[23] Cf. Dobschuetz, _The Eschatology of the Gospels_, also Schweitzer,
_op. cit._, and Sanday, _The Life of Christ in Recent Research_, E.
Scott, _The Kingdom of God and the Messiah_, and Moffatt, _op. cit._

[24] Cf. Barbour, _A Philos. Study of Chr. Ethics_, p. 184.

[25] 'Jesu predigt in ihrem Gegensatz zum Judenthum.'

[26] Cairns, _Christianity in the Mod. World_, p. 173.  See Schweitzer,
_The Quest of the Historical Jesus_, for advocates and opponents of this
view, pp. 222 ff.  Cf. also Troeltsch, _op. cit._, vol. i. p. 35.

[27] Cf. Moffatt, _op. cit._

[28] Luke iv. 21, xvii. 21; Matt. xii. 28, xi. 2-8, xi. 20; Luke xvi.
16.  Cf. also Matt. xiii. 16-17.

[29] Our Lord never uses the word 'final' or 'last' of anything
concerning the kingdom.  Only in the fourth Gospel do we find the phrase
'the last day.'  See art., _Contemporary Review_, Sept. 1912.

[30] The view of Weiss.

[31] Luke xii. 19; Matt xxiv. 13; Mark xiii. 13; 2 Tim. ii. 12.

[32] King, _The Ethics of Jesus_, p. 143.

[33] Mark xiii. 7-31 has been called the 'little Apocalypse' and the
hypothesis has been thrown out that a number of verses (fifteen in all)
form a document by themselves, 'a fly leaf put into circulation before
the fall of Jerusalem, and really incorporated by the Evangelist himself.
See Sanday, art., _Hibbert Journal_, Oct. 1911, and _Life of Christ in
Recent Research_.

[34] Matt. xxiv. 42.

[35] Matt. xxiv. 23.

[36] Matt. xxiv. 27.

[37] Matt. xxiv. 30.

[38] Matt. xxiv. 31.

[39] Matt. xxv.

[40] E. F. Scott, _The Kingdom and the Messiah_, p. 256.

[41] Matt. v. 48.

[42] Lev. iv. 11, xix. 2.

[43] Mark x. 18.

[44] Cf. Orr, _Sin as a Problem of To-day_, chap. iii.

[45] Cf. Jacoby, _Neu-testamentliche Ethik_, p. 1.

[46] Matt. v. 3 f.

[47] Matt. v. 17.

[48] Matt. v. 18.

[49] Matt. vi. 1-6.

[50] Matt. vi. 16-18.

[51] Matt. vii. 1-5.

[52] Matt. v. 20.

[53] Matt. v. 41.

[54] 1 John iv. 8, 16.

[55] John xvii. 11; Heb. x. 31; Rev. xv. 4.

[56] Cf. E. Digges La Touche, _The Person of Christ in Modern Thought_,
pp. 150 ff.

[57] 1 John iv. 21.

[58] Matt. xxii. 37.




{146}

