CHAPTER XIII

SOCIAL INSTITUTIONS

In last chapter we dealt with the rights and duties of the individual
as they are conditioned by his relation to himself, others, and to God.
In this chapter it remains to speak more particularly of the organised
institutions of society in which the moral life is manifested, and by
means of which character is moulded.  These are the Family, the State,
and the Church.  These three types of society, though distinguishable,
are closely allied.  At first, indeed, they were identical.  Human
society had its origin, most probably, in a primitive condition in
which domestic, political, and religious ends were one.  Even in modern
life Family, State, and Church do not stand for separate interests.  So
far from their aims colliding they are mutually helpful.  An individual
may be a member of all three at one time.  From a Christian point of
view each is a divine institution invested with a sacred worth and a
holy function, and ordained of God for the advancement of His kingdom.


I

_The Family_ is the fountain-head of all the other social groups, 'the
cell of the social organism.'  Man enters the world not as an isolated
being, but by descent and generation.  In the family each is cradled
and nurtured, and by the domestic environment character is developed.
The family has a profound value for the nation.  Citizenship rests on
the sanctity of the home.  When the fire on the hearth is quenched, the
vigour of a people dies.

{221}

1.  Investigations of great interest and value have been pursued in
recent years regarding the origin and evolution of the family.  However
far back the natural history of the race is carried, it seems scarcely
possible to resist the conclusion that some form of family relationship
is coeval with human life.  Widely as social arrangements differ in
detail among savage peoples, arbitrary promiscuity can nowhere be
detected.  Certain laws of domestication have been invariably found to
exist, based upon definite social and moral restrictions universally
acknowledged and rigidly enforced.  Two primitive conditions are
present wherever man is found--the tribe and the family.  If the family
is never present without the tribe, the tribe is never discovered
without 'those intra-tribal distinctions and sexual regulations which
lie at the bottom of the institution of the family.'[1]  Westermarck
indeed says that 'the evidence we possess tends to show that among our
earliest human ancestors the family and not the tribe formed the
nucleus of every social group, and in many cases was itself perhaps the
only social group.  The tie that kept together husband and wife,
parents and children, was, if not the only, at least the principal
factor in the earliest forms of man's social life.'[2]  If the family
had been an artificial convention called into being by human will and
ingenuity, it might conceivably be destroyed by the same factors.  But
whatever arguments may be adduced for the abolition of marriage and
family life to-day, the appeal to primitive history is not one of them.
On the contrary the earliest forms of society show that the family is
no invention, that it has existed as long as man himself, and that all
social evolution has been a struggle for the preservation of its most
valuable features.[3]

2.  If, even in early times, and especially among the Hebrews, Greeks,
and Romans, the family was an important factor in national development,
it has been infinitely more so {222} since the advent of Christianity.
Christ did not create this relationship.  He found it in existence when
He came to the earth.  But He invested it with a new ethical value.  He
laid upon it His consecrating touch, and made it the vehicle of all
that is most tender and true in human affection, so that among
Christian people to-day no word is fraught with such hallowed
associations as the word 'home.'  This He did both by example and
teaching.  As a member of a human family Himself, He participated in
its experiences and duties.  He spent His early years in the home of
Nazareth, and was subject unto His parents.  He manifested His glory at
a marriage feast.  By the grave of Lazarus He mingled His tears with
those of the sorrowing sisters of Bethany.  He had a tender regard for
little children, and when mothers brought their infants to Him He
welcomed them with gracious encouragement, and, taking the little ones
in His arms, blessed them, thus consecrating for all time both
childhood and motherhood.  Throughout His life there are indications of
His deep reverence and affection for her who was His mother, and with
His latest breath he confided her to the care of His beloved disciple.

There are passages indeed which seem to indicate a depreciation of
family relationships.[4]  The most important of these are the sayings
which deal with the home connections of those whom He called to special
discipleship.[5]  Not only are father and mother to be loved less than
He, but even in comparison with Himself are to be hated.[6]  Among the
sacrifices His servants must be ready to make is the surrender of the
home.[7]  But these references ought to be taken in conjunction with,
and read in the light of, His more general attitude to the claims of
kindred.  It was not His indifference to, but His profound regard for,
home ties that drew from Him these words.  He knew that affection may
narrow as well as widen the heart, and that our {223} tenderest
intimacies may bring our most dangerous temptations.  There are moments
in the history of the heart when the lesser claim must yield to the
greater.  For the Son of Man Himself, there were interests higher even
than those of the family.  Some men, perhaps even most, are able to
fulfil their vocation without a surrender of the joys of kinship.  But
others are called to a wider sphere and a harder task.  For the sake of
the larger brotherhood of man, Jesus found it necessary to renounce the
intimacies of home.  What it cost Him to do so we, who cannot fathom
the depth of His love, know not.  Even such an abandonment did He
demand of His first disciples.  And for the follower of Christ still
there must be the same willingness to make the complete sacrifice of
everything, even of home and kindred, if they stand in the way of
devotion to the kingdom of God.[8]

(1) Our Lord's direct statements regarding the nature of the family
leave us in no doubt as to the high place it holds in His conception of
life.  Marriage, upon which the family rests, is, according to Jesus,
the divinely ordained life-union of a man and woman.  In His quotation
from Genesis He makes reference to that mysterious attraction, deeply
founded in the very nature of man, by which members of the opposite sex
are drawn to each other.  But while acknowledging the sensuous element
in marriage, He lifts it up into the spiritual realm and transmutes it
into a symbol of soul-communion.  Our Lord does not derive the sanction
of wedded life from Mosaic legislation.  Still less does He permit it
as a concession to human frailty.  It has its ground in creation
itself, and while therefore it is the most natural of earthly
relationships it is of God's making.  To the true ideal of marriage
there are several features which our Lord regards as indispensable.
(_a_) It must be _monogamous_, the fusion of two distinct
personalities.  'They two shall be one flesh.'  Mutual self-impartation
demands that the union should be an exclusive one.  (_b_) It is a
_union of equality_.  Neither {224} personality is to be suppressed.
The wedded are partners who share one another's inmost thoughts and
most cherished purposes.  But this claim of equality does not exclude
but rather include the different functions which, by reason of sex and
constitution, each is enabled to exercise.  'Woman is not undeveloped
man but diverse.'  And it is in diversity that true unity consists.
Both will best realise their personality in seeking the perfection of
one another.  (_c_) It is a _permanent_ union, indissoluble till the
parting of death.  The only exception which Christ acknowledges is that
form of infidelity which _ipso facto_ has already ruptured the sacred
bond.[9]  According to Jesus marriage is clearly intended by God to
involve sacred and permanent obligations, a covenant with God, as well
as with one another, which dare not be set aside at the dictate of a
whim or passion.  The positive principle underlying this declaration
against divorce is the spirit of universal love that forbids that the
wife should be treated, as was the case among the dissolute of our
Lord's time, as a chattel or slave.  Nothing could be more abhorrent to
Christian sentiment than the modern doctrine of 'leasehold marriage'
advocated by some.[10]  It has been ingeniously suggested that the
record of marital unrest and divorce in America, shameful as it is, may
not be in many cases altogether an evil.  The very demand to annul a
union in which reverence and affection have been forfeited may spring
from a growing desire to realise the true ideal of marriage.[11]  (_d_)
Finally, it is a _spiritual_ union.  It is something more than a legal
contract, or even an ecclesiastical ordinance.  The State must indeed
safeguard the civil rights of the parties to the compact, and the
Church's ceremony ought to be sought as the expression of divine
blessing and approval.  But of themselves these do not constitute the
inner tie which makes the twain one, and binds them together amid all
the chances and changes of this earthly life.[12]  In the teaching of
both Christ and {225} the apostles marriage is presented as a high
vocation, ordained by God for the enrichment of character, and invested
with a holy symbolism.  According to St. Paul it is the emblem of the
mystic union of Christ and His Church, and is overshadowed by the
presence of God, who is the archetype of those sacred ideas which we
associate with the name of fatherhood.

(2) Though marriage is the most personal of all forms of social
intercourse, there are many varied and intricate interests involved
which require _legal recognition_ and adjustment.  Questions as to the
legitimacy of offspring, the inheritance of property, the status and
rights of the contracting parties, come within the domain of law.  The
State punishes bigamy, and forbids marriage within certain degrees of
consanguinity.  Many contend that the State should go further, and
prevent all unions which endanger the physical vigour and efficiency of
the coming generation.  It is undoubtedly true that the government has
a right to protect its people against actions which tend to the
deterioration of the race.  To permit those to marry who are suffering
from certain maladies of mind or body is to commit a grave crime
against society.  But care must be taken lest we unduly interfere with
the deeper spiritual sympathies and affections upon which a true union
is founded.  In agitating for State control in the mating of the
physically fit, the champions of eugenics are apt to exaggerate the
materialistic side of marriage, and overlook those qualities of heart
and mind which are not less important for the well-being of the race.
In the discipline of humanity weakness and suffering are assets which
the world could ill afford to lose.[13]

(3) In modern times the institution of marriage is menaced by two
opposite forces; on the one hand, by a revolutionary type of socialism,
and on the other, by the reactionary influence of self-interested
individualism.  (_a_) It is contended by some advanced socialists that
among {226} the poor and the toiling home life is practically
non-existent; indeed, under present industrial conditions, impossible.
Marriage and separate family life are insuperable barriers, it is said,
to corporate unity and social progress.  It is but fair to add that
this extreme view is now largely repudiated by the most enlightened
advocates of a new social order, who are contending, they tell us, not
for the abolition, but for the betterment, of domestic conditions.[14]
(_b_) The stability of social life is being threatened even more
seriously by a self-centred individualism.  Marriage is considered as a
merely temporary arrangement which may be terminated at will.  It is
contended that divorce should be granted on the easiest terms, and the
most trifling reasons are seriously put forward as legitimate grounds
for the annulling of the holiest of vows.  Without discussing these
disintegrating influences, it is enough to say that the trend of
history is against any radical tampering with the institution of
marriage, and any attempt to disparage the sanctity of the home or
belittle domestic obligations would be to poison at its springs the
moral life of man.

3.  The duties of the various members of the family are explicitly, if
briefly, stated in the apostolic epistles.  They are valid for all
times and conditions.  Though they may be easily elaborated they cannot
well be improved.  All home obligations are to be fulfilled _in_ and
_unto_ the Lord.  The fear of God is to inspire the nurture of
children, and to sanctify the lowliest services of the household.
Authority is to be blended with affection.  (1) _Parents_ are not to
provoke their children by harsh and despotic rule, nor yet to spoil
them by soft indulgence.  _Children_ are to render obedience, and, when
able, to contribute to the support of their parents.[15]  Masters are
to treat their servants with equity and respect.  Servants are exhorted
to show fidelity.  In short all the relationships of the household are
to be hallowed by the spirit of Christian love.

Many questions relative to the family arise, over which {227} we may
not linger.  One might speak of the effect of industrial conditions
upon domestic life, the employment of women and children in factories,
the evil of sweating, the problem of our city slums, and, generally, of
the need of improved environment in order that our labouring classes
may have a chance of a healthier and purer home existence.  Legislation
can do much.  But even law is ineffective to achieve the highest ends
if it is not backed by the public conscience.  The final solution of
the problem of the family rests not in conditions but in character, not
in environment but in education, in the kind of men we are rearing.

(2) This century has been called the _woman's_ century.  And certainly
there is an obvious trend to-day towards acknowledgment, in all
departments of life, of women's equality with men.  There is, however,
a difference of opinion as to what that equality should mean; and there
seems to be a danger in some quarters of overlooking the essential
difference of the sexes.  No people can achieve what it ought while its
wives and mothers are degraded or denied their rights.  For her own
sake, as well as for the weal of the race, whatever is needful to
enable woman to attain to her noblest womanhood must be unhesitatingly
granted.[16]

(3) But this is even more the _children's_ era.  A new sense of
reverence for the child is one of the most promising notes of our age,
and the problems arising out of the care and education of the young
have created the new sciences of pedagogy and child-psychology.  Regard
for child-life owes its inspiration directly to the teaching of Christ.
The child in the simplicity of its nature and innocence of its
dependence is, according to the Master, the perfect pattern of those
who seek after God.  It is true that in the art of antiquity child-life
was frequently represented.  But as Burckhardt says it was the drollery
and playfulness, even the quarrelsomeness and stealth, and above all
the lusty health and animal vigour of young life that was depicted.
Ancient art did not behold in the child the prophecy of a new and purer
world.  Moreover, it was aesthetic {228} feeling and not real sympathy
with childhood which animated this movement.  As time went on the
teaching of Christ on this subject was strangely neglected, and the
history of the treatment of the young is a tragic tale of neglect and
suffering.  Only now are we recovering the lost message of Jesus in
regard to the child, and we are beginning to realise that infancy and
youth have their rights, and demand of the world both care and
affection.  Ours sons and daughters are the nation's assets.  Yet it is
a parent's question even more than the State's.  In a deeper sense than
we imagine children are the creation of their parents.  It is the
effect of soul upon soul, the mother's touch and look, the father's
words and ways, that kindle into flame the dull material of humanity,
and begin that second birth which should be the anxiety and glory of
parenthood.  But if the parent makes the child, scarcely less true is
it that the child makes the parent.  In the give and take of home life
a new world is created.  When a father really looks into his child's
eye he is not as he was before.[17]  Indispensable as is the State's
education of the young, there is an important part which the community
cannot undertake, and there is a danger in curbing individuality by a
stereotyped method of instruction.  'All social enactments,' says
Harnack, 'have a tendency to circumscribe the activities of the
individual.  If we unduly fetter the free play of individual effort we
break the mainspring of progress and enterprise, and create a state of
social immobility which is the antecedent of national decay.'[18]
Youth ought to be taught self-reliance and strenuousness of will; and
this is a work which can only be done in the home by the firm yet
kindly influence of the parents.  But there is another aspect of the
home problem not less pressing.  The want of training in working-class
families is largely answerable for the waifs and strays with which our
cities team.  Even in middle-class households there are indications of
a lack not only of discipline, but of {229} that kindly sympathy and
affectionate counsel on the part of parents, and of reverence and
frankness in the children; with the result that the young people,
missing the attachment and interest which the home should supply, seek
their satisfaction outside the domestic circle, often with the most
disastrous results.  The problem of the family is thus the problem of
nurturing the very seeds of the moral life.  Within the precincts of
the nation's homes the future of the commonwealth is being determined.


II

1.  The _State_ is the supreme controller of social relationships.  As
distinguished from the family and the Church, it is the realm of
organised force working for social ends.  Its purpose is to secure the
conditions of life essential to order and progress, and it can fulfil
its function only as it is endowed with power to enforce its authority.
The interference of the State with the liberty of the individual has
created a reaction in two opposite quarters towards complete abrogation
of all State compulsion.  On the one side Tolstoy pleads for the
removal of force, because it violates the principle of love and
subverts the teaching of Jesus--'Resist not evil.'  Militant anarchism
as the other extreme demands the abrogation of authority, because it
believes that restraint hinders progress and happiness, and that if
governmental force were abolished individuals would be best able to
take care of themselves.  The aim of anarchism is to destroy force by
force; the aim of Tolstoy is to allow force to do its worst.  Such a
spirit of non-resistance would mean the overthrow of all security, and
the reversion to wild lawlessness.  It is an utter travesty of Christ's
teaching.  Extremes meet.  Violence and servility join hands.
Anarchism and Tolstoyism reveal the total bankruptcy of unrestricted
individualism.

The social order for which the State stands is not so much an
interference with the freedom of the subject as the condition under
which alone individual liberty can be preserved.  {230} The view,
however, that the State is an artificial relationship into which men
voluntarily enter in order to limit their selfish instincts and to
secure their mutual advantages--the theory of the 'social
contract'--has been discarded in modern times as a fiction of the
imagination.  It is not of his own choice that the individual becomes a
member of society.  He is born into it.  Man is not a whole in himself.
He is only complete in his fellows.  As he serves others he serves
himself.  But men are not the unconscious functions of a mechanical
system.  They are free, living personalities, united by a sense of
human obligation and kindredship.  The State is more than a physical
organism.  It is a community of moral aims and ideals.  Even law, which
is the soul of the State, is itself the embodiment of a moral
principle; and the commonwealth stands for a great ethical idea, to the
fulfilment of which all its citizens are called upon to contribute.

2.  The reciprocal duties of the State and its citizens receive
comparatively little prominence in the New Testament.  But they are
never treated with disparagement or contempt.  During our Lord's
earthly life the supreme power belonged to the Roman Empire.  Though
Jesus had to suffer much at the hands of those in authority, His
habitual attitude was one of respect.  He lived in obedience to the
government of the country, and acknowledged the right of Caesar to
legislate and levy taxes in his own province.  While giving all
deference to the State officials before whom He was brought, He did not
hesitate to remind them of the ideal of truth and justice of which they
were the chosen representatives.[19]  St. Paul's teaching is in harmony
with his Master's, and is indeed an expansion of it.[20]  'The powers
that be are ordained of God.  Render therefore to all their dues,
tribute to whom tribute.'  Beyond, however, enjoining the necessity of
work as a means of independence, and recommending that each should
remain in the sphere in which he has been placed, and perform
conscientiously the duties of his calling, we {231} find little direct
reference in the Epistles to the matter of citizenship.  But as has
been truly said 'the citizen has but to stand in his station, and
perform its duties, in order to fulfil the demands of citizenship.'[21]
St. Paul's insistence therefore upon the personal fidelity of every man
to the duties of his sphere goes far to recognise that spirit of
reciprocal service which is the fundamental idea of the commonwealth.

3.  Of the two extreme views as to the meaning of the State between
which the verdict of history has wavered--that of Augustine, who
regarded the State as the result of man's sinful condition and as the
direct antithesis of the kingdom of God; and that of Hegel, who saw in
it the highest ethical form of society, the realisation of the moral
ideal--the view of St. Paul may be said to have approximated more
nearly to the latter.  Writing to the Christians at Rome Paul does not
suggest that it was merely for prudence' sake that they should give to
the Imperial Power unquestioning obedience.  He appeals to the loftiest
motives.  All authority is of God in its origin and ultimate purpose.
What does it matter to him whether Nero be a devil or a saint?  He is
the prince upon the throne.  He is the symbol of divine authority, 'the
minister of God to thee for good.'  As a Christian Paul looks beyond
the temporal world-power as actually existing.  Whatever particular
form it may assume, he sees in the State and its rulers only the
expression of God's will.  Rome is His agent, oppressive, and, it may
be, unjust, but still the channel through which for the moment the
Almighty works for the furtherance of His purposes.[22]

The conception of the State as thus formulated involves a twofold
obligation--of the State towards its citizens, and of its citizens
towards the State.

(1) As the embodiment of public right the State owes protection to its
subjects, guarding individual privileges and prohibiting such actions
as interfere with the general {232} good.  Its functions, however, are
not confined to restrictive measures.  Its duty is not only to protect
the rights of the individual, but to create and maintain such
conditions of life as are essential to the development of personality.
In its own interests it is bound to foster the growth of character, and
to promote culture and social well-being.  In modern times we look to
the State not only to protect life and property, but to secure for each
individual and for all classes of men that basis of material well-being
on which alone life in its truest sense can be built up.  The
government must therefore strike some kind of balance between the
extremes of individualism and socialism.  While the old theory of
_laissez-faire_, which would permit every man to follow his own
individual bent without regard to the interests of others, has been
generally repudiated, there is still a class of politicians who
ridicule the 'night watchman' idea of the State as Lassalle calls it.
'Let there be as little State as possible,' exclaims Nietzsche.
According to such thinkers the State has only negative functions.  The
best government is that which governs least, and allows the utmost
scope to untrammelled individual enterprise.  But if there is a
tendency on the part of some to return to the individualistic
principle, the 'paternal' idea as espoused by others is being carried
to the verge of socialism.  The function of the State is stretched
almost to breaking point when it is conceived as the 'guardian angel'
who accompanies and guards with perpetual oversight the whole life of
the individual from the cradle to the grave.  Many of the more cautious
writers[23] of the day are exposing the dangers which lurk in the
bureaucratic system of government.  This tendency is apt to crush
individual enterprise, and cause men to place entire reliance upon
external aid and centralised power.  It is indeed difficult to draw a
fast line of demarcation between purely individual and social ends.
There are obviously primary interests belonging to society as a whole
which the State, if it is to be the instrument of the common good,
ought to control; certain {233} activities which, if permitted as
monopolies, become a menace to the community, and which can be
satisfactorily conducted only as departments of the State.  National
life is a unity, and it can only maintain its integrity as it secures
for all its constituents, justice, equity before the law, and freedom
of each to be himself.  The State ought to protect those who in the
competitive struggle of the modern industrial system find themselves at
a hopeless disadvantage.  It is the duty of the commonwealth to secure
for each the opportunity to become what he is capable of being, and to
fulfil the functions for which he is best fitted.  The State cannot
make men moral, but it can interfere with existing conditions so as to
make the moral life easier for its citizens.  Criminal law cannot
create saints, but it can punish evil-doers and counteract the forces
of lawlessness which threaten the social order.  It cannot legislate
within the domain of motive, but it can encourage self-restraint and
thrift, honesty and temperance.  It cannot actually intermeddle with
the sanctity of the home, or assume the role of paternal authority, but
it can insist upon the fulfilment of the conditions of decency and
propriety; it can condemn insanitary dwellings, suppress traffic in
vice, supervise unhealthy trades, protect the life and health of
workmen, and, generally, devise means for the culture and the
advancement, intellectually and morally, of the people.  The State in
some degree embodies the public conscience, and as such it has the
prerogative of awakening and stimulating the consciences of
individuals.  As a divine institution it is one of the channels through
which God makes His will known to man.  Law has an ethical import, and
the State which is founded upon just and beneficent laws moulds the
customs and forms the characters of its citizens.

(2) But if the State is to fulfil its ideal function it must rely upon
the general co-operation of its citizens.  The measure of its success
or failure will depend upon the extent to which an enlightened sense of
moral obligation prevails in the community.  Men must rise above their
{234} own immediate interests and realise their corporate being.
Government makes its will dominant through the voice of the people.  It
cannot legislate beyond the sympathies of its constituents.  As the
individuals are, so the commonwealth will be.  Civil duties vary
according to the qualifications and opportunities of individuals.  But
certain general obligations rest upon all.

(_a_) It is the duty of all to take an _interest in public affairs_.
What concerns us collectively is the concern of each.  Everything that
touches the public good should be made a matter of intelligent and
watchful interest by all.  (_b_) It is the duty of all to _conform to
the laws_ of the country.  It is possible that a particular enactment
may conflict with the dictates of conscience, and it may be necessary
to protest against what seems to be an injustice.  No rule can be laid
down for exceptional cases.  Generally it will be best to submit to the
wrong, while at the same time using all legitimate means to secure the
repeal of the obnoxious law.  And if they will revolt, martyrs must not
complain nor be unready to submit to the penalties involved.  (_c_) It
is the further duty of all to take some _personal part_ in the
government--if not by active service, at least by the conscientious
recording of one's vote.  Christians must not leave the direction of
the nation's affairs to non-Christians.  The spirit of Christ forbids
moral indifference to anything human.  All are not fitted for, or
called upon to take, public office; but it is incumbent upon every man
to maintain an intelligent public spirit, and to exercise all the
duties of good citizenship.  It has been truly said that they who give
most to the State get most from the State.  It is the men who play
their part as active citizens working for the nation's cause who enrich
their own lives and reap the harvest of a full existence.  Not by
withdrawal from social service, but in untiring labour for their
country's weal, shall men win for themselves and their brethren the
fruits of liberty and peace.  For nations as for men emancipation may
come with a stroke, but freedom can be earned only by strenuous and
united toil.

{235}

(3) Already these ideals have begun to take shape.  The most
significant feature of modern times is the growing spirit of democracy.
Men of all classes are awakening to their rights, and are accepting
their share in the task of social reconstruction.  'We know how the
masses,' says Eucken, 'are determined to form a mere dependent body of
the so-called higher classes no longer, but to take the problem of life
independently into their own hands.'[24]  But while the modern
democratic movement is not without its hopeful aspects, it is fraught
also with grave perils.  It is well that the people should awake to
their obligations, and realise the meaning of life, especially in its
social implications.  But there is a danger that culture may not
advance with emancipation, and while the masses demand their rights
they may not at the same time discern their duties.  For rights involve
duties, and emancipation, as we have seen, is not liberty.  The appeal
of the socialistic party is to the equality of all who bear human
features.  It sounds plausible.  But there never has been, nor never
can be, such equality.  Nature and experience alike reveal a pronounced
and insuperable inequality among men.  The law of diversity strikes
deep down into the very origin and constitution of mankind.  The
equality proclaimed by the French Revolutionists is now regarded as an
idle dream.  Not equality of nature but equity before the law, justice
for all, the opportunity for every man to realise himself and make the
most of the life and the gifts which God has given him--that is the
only claim which can be truly made.  'The only idea,' says Eucken,
'which can give to equality any meaning is the conviction that humanity
has spiritual relations, that each individual has a value for himself
and for the whole because he is a part of a larger spiritual world.'
Hence if democracy is truly to come to its own and fulfil its high
vocation, the Pauline figure of the reciprocal influence of the body
and its members must be proclaimed anew as the ideal of the body
politic--a unity fulfilling itself in difference--an organic life in
which the unit finds its {236} place of security-and-service in the
whole, and the whole lives in and acts through the individual parts.

If we are to awaken to the high vocation of the Christian state, to
realise the possibilities of our membership one with another, a new
feeling of manhood and of national brotherhood, a new pride in the
community of life, must take possession of our hearts.  We need, as one
has said, a baptism of religious feeling in our corporate
consciousness, a new sense that we are serving God in serving our
fellows, which will hallow and hearten the crusade for health and
social happiness, and give to every citizen a sense of spiritual
service.


III

Unlike the family and State the _Church_ is the creation of Jesus
Christ.  It is the witness of His Presence in the world.  In its ideal
form it is world-wide.  The Redemption for which it stands is a good
for all men.  Though in practice many do not acknowledge its blessing,
the Church regards no man beyond its pale of grace.  It is set in the
midst of the world as the symbol and pledge of God's universal love.

1.  The _Relation of Church and State_ is a difficult question with a
long history, and involving much controversy.  Whatever view may be
held as to their legal connection, their interests can never be
regarded as inimical.  The Church cannot be indifferent to the action
of the State, nor can the State ignore the work of the Church.  But
since their spheres are not identical nor their aims entirely similar,
the trend of modern opinion seems to indicate that, while working in
harmony, it is more satisfactory that they should pursue independent
paths.  There are spiritual ends committed to the Church by its Head
over which the civil power has no jurisdiction.  On the other hand
there are temporal concerns with which ecclesiastical courts have
neither the vocation nor the qualifications to deal.  Still, the
Church, as the organ of Christian thought {237} and activity, has
responsibilities with regard to civil matters.  While religion is the
chief agent in the regeneration of man, religion itself is dependent
upon all social means, and the Church must regard with sympathy every
effort made by the community for moral improvement.  The main function
of the Church in this connection is to keep before its members a high
ideal of social life, to create a spirit of fidelity in every sphere of
activity, and, particularly, to educate men for the tasks of
citizenship.  The State, on the other hand, as the instrument of civic
life, has obligations towards the Church.  Its duty is hardly exhausted
by observing an attitude of non-interference.  In its own interests it
is bound, not merely to protect, but encourage the Church in the
fulfilment of its immediate aims.  Parliament, however, must concede to
ecclesiastical bodies complete liberty to govern themselves.  The
Church, as the institution of Christ, claims full autonomy; and the
State goes beyond its province when it imposes hampering restrictions
which interfere with the exercise of its authority and discipline
within its own sphere.

2.  As a religious institution the Church exists for three main
purposes: (1) the _Worship_ of God and the Edification of its members;
(2) the _Witness_ of Christ to Mankind; (3) the _Evangelisation_ of the
World.

(1) The first of these objects has already been dealt with when
treating of the duties to God.  It is only needful to add here that the
Church is more than a centre of worship; it is the home of kindred
souls knit together by a common devotion to Christ.  It is the school
of character which seeks the mutual edification of its members 'by
provoking one another to love and to good works.'  Hence among
Protestants the duty of _Church Discipline_ is acknowledged, which
deals with such sins or lapses from rectitude as constitute 'offences'
or 'scandals,' and tend to bring into disrepute the Christian name and
profession.  In the Roman Church, the Confessional, through which moral
error is avowed, with its system of penances, has in view the same
object--viz., to reprove, correct, and reclaim {238} those who have
lapsed into sin--thus seeking to fulfil Christ's ideal 'to despair of
no man.'

(2) But the Church is also a rallying place of service.  Both in its
corporate capacity, and through the lives of its individual members,
the Church seeks to bear constant _witness to the mind of Christ_.  It
proclaims His living example.  It reiterates His will and embodies His
judgment, approving of what is good, condemning what is evil, and ever
more confronting the world with the high ideal of the divine Life and
Word.  Not all who bear the name of Christ are consistent witnesses.
But still the aim of the Church is to harmonise the profession and
practice of its members, and generally to spiritualise secular life by
the education of public opinion.  Before, however, Christians can hope
to make a profound impression upon the outside world, it is not
unnatural to expect that they should exhibit a _spirit of concord_,
among themselves, seeking to heal the unhappy schisms by which the
Church is rent.  But while our separations are deplorable--and we ought
not to cease our endeavour for the reunion of Christendom--we must not
forget that there may be harmony of spirit even amid diversity of
operation, and that where there is true brotherly sympathy between
Christians, there already is essential unity.[25]

(3) The special work of the Church to which it is constrained by the
express terms of its Master's commission, is to _preach the Gospel_ to
every creature and to bring all men into obedience to Christ.  A
distinction is commonly made between Home and Foreign Missions.  While
the distinction is useful, it is scarcely valid.  The work of the
Church at home and abroad is one.  The claims of the ignorant and
hapless of our own land do not exempt us from responsibilities to the
heathen world.  The Lord's Prayer for the coming of the Kingdom
requires of Christian men that they shall consecrate their gifts along
every line of effort to the fulfilment of the divine will upon the
earth.

3.  While all sections of the Church are convinced that {239} an honest
application of the principles of Jesus to the practical affairs of life
would speedily transform society, there is considerable diversity of
opinion as to the proper attitude of Christianity to _social problems_.
The outward reconstruction of social order was not, it must be
admitted, the primary aim of Jesus: it was rather the spiritual
regeneration of the individual.  But such could only become a reality
as it transformed the entire fabric of life.  (1) Christ's teaching
could not but affect the organisation of industry as well as every
other section of the social structure.  Though Jesus has many warnings
as to the perils of riches, there is no depreciation of wealth (in its
truest sense).  It is true He refuses to interfere in a dispute between
two brothers as to worldly property, and repudiates generally the
office of arbiter.  It is true also that He warns His disciples against
covetousness, and lays down the principle that 'a man's life consisteth
not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth.'  But these
sayings, so far from implying disapproval of earthly possessions, imply
rather that property and trading are the indispensable basis upon which
the outward fabric of the social order is built.  Christ does not
counsel withdrawal from the activities of the world.  He honours work.
He recognises the legitimacy of trading.  Many of His parables would
have no meaning if His attitude to the industrial system of His day had
been one of uncompromising hostility.  He has no grudge against riches
in themselves.  In the parable of the talents it is the comparatively
poor man who is censured while the rich is commended.  To sum up what
Jesus thought about wealth is not easy.  Many have thought that He
condemned the holding of property altogether.  But such a conclusion
cannot be drawn from His teaching.  Possessions, both outward and
inward, are rather to be brought to the test of His judgment.  His
influence would rather bring property and commerce under the control of
righteousness and brotherhood.  His ideal of life is to be attained
through learning the right use of wealth rather than through the
abolition of it.  Wealth {240} can be used for the kingdom of God, and
it is a necessary instrument in the Church's work.  It may be
consecrated like every other gift to the service of Christ.  But there
are mighty forces enlisted against its best usefulness, and only
through the fullness of Christian grace can its good work be done.
What Jesus does condemn however is the predatory instinct, that greed
of gain which embodies itself everywhere in the spirit of plunder,
exploitation, and the impulse to gambling.  He can have nothing but
condemnation for that great wave of money-love which has swept over
Christendom in our time, affecting all classes.  It has fostered
self-indulgence, stimulated depraved appetites, corrupted business and
politics, oppressed the poor, materialised our ideals, and weakened
religious influences.  'From this craze of the love of money the voice
of Jesus calls the people back to the sane life in Ethics and religion
in which He is leader.'[26]  What then ought to be the attitude of the
Church to the industrial questions of our day?  While some contend that
the social question is really a religious question, and that the Church
is untrue to its mission when it holds itself aloof from the economical
problems which are agitating men's minds, others view with suspicion,
if not with hostility, the deflection of religion from its traditional
path of worship, and deem it a mistake for the Church to interfere in
industrial movements.

A recent writer[27] narrates that in his boyhood he actually heard an
old minister of the Church of Scotland declare in the General Assembly,
'We are not here to make the world better: we have only to pass through
it on the way to glory.'  'No grosser travesty,' adds the author, 'was
ever uttered.  We _are_ here to make the world better.  We have a
commission to stamp out evil and to prevent men from falling into it.
If this is not Christian work, what is?'

At the same time a portion of the clergy have gone to the opposite
extreme, identifying the kingdom of God with social propaganda, and
thus losing sight of its spiritual {241} and eternal, as well as its
personal, significance.  There has been moreover a tendency on the part
of some to associate themselves with a political party, and to claim
for the Church the office of judge and arbitrator in industrial strife.
But surely it is one thing to degrade the Church to the level of a
secular society, and another, by witness and by effort, to make the law
of Christ dominant over all the relationships of life.  Men are
impatiently asking, 'Has the Church no message to the new demands of
the age?  Are Christians to stand apart from the coming battle, and
preach only the great salvation to individual souls?  _That_ the
Christian minister must never cease to do; but the Gospel, if it is to
meet the needs of men, must be read in the light of history and
experience, and interpreted by the signs of the times.

(2) The ground idea of Jesus' teaching was, as Troeltsch has pointed
out,[28] the declaration of the kingdom of God.  Everything indeed is
relative to union with God, but in God man's earthly life is involved.
Two notes were therefore struck by Jesus, a note of individualism and a
note of universalism--love to God and love to man.  These notes do not
really conflict, but they became the two opposite voices of the Church,
and gave rise to different ethical tendencies.  The first religious
communities consisted of the poor and the enslaved.  It never occurred
to them that they had civic rights: all they desired was freedom to
worship Christ.  Not how to transform the social world, but how to
maintain their own religious faith without molestation in the world of
unbelief and evil was their problem.

(3) In the early Catholic Church the spirit of individualism ruled.
With the Reformation a new type of life was developed, and a new
attitude to the social world was established.  But while Lutheranism
sought to exercise its influence upon social life through state
regulation, Calvinism was more individualistic, and sought rather to
{242} enforce its teaching by means of the personal life.  The attitude
of the various sects--Baptists, Pietists, Puritans--has been largely
individualistic, and instead of endeavouring to rectify the abuses of
industrial life they have been disposed rather to suffer the ills of
this evil world, finding in faith alone their compensation and solace.

In modern times the tendency of the Church, Romanist and Protestant
alike, has been toward social regeneration; and a form of Christian
Socialism has even appeared which however lacks unity of principle and
uniformity of action.  The mediaeval idea of a Holy Roman Empire, in
which all nations and classes were to be consolidated, is now admitted
to be a dream incapable of realisation, partly because the idea itself
is illusory, but principally because the hold of the Papacy upon the
people has been weakened.  The agitation, 'Los von Rom' on the one
hand, and the 'Modernist' movement on the other, have tended to
dissipate the unity and energy of Catholicism.  Nevertheless the
Church, which is really the society of Christian people, is coming to
see that it cannot close its eyes to questions which concern the daily
life of man, nor hold aloof from efforts which are working for the
social betterment of the world.  To bring in the kingdom of God is the
Church's work, and it is becoming increasingly evident that the
kingdom, if it is to come in any real and living sense, must come where
Jesus Himself founded it--upon the plane of this present life.

There are two considerations which make this work on the part of the
Church at once imperative and hopeful.  The first is that the Church is
specially called upon by the command and example of its Founder to
range itself on the side of the weak and helpless.  It is commanded to
bring the principles of brotherly love to bear upon the conditions of
life which press most heavily upon the handicapped.  It is called on in
the spirit of its Master to rebuke the greed of gain and the callous
selfishness which uses the toil, and even the degradation of others,
for its own personal enjoyment.  The Church only fulfils its function
when {243} it is not only the consoler of the suffering but also the
champion of the oppressed.  And the other consideration is that in
virtue of its nature and charter the Church is enabled to appeal to
motives which the State cannot supply.  It brings all social obligation
under the comprehensive law of love.  It exalts the principle of
brotherhood.  It lifts up the sacrifice of Christ, and seeks to make it
potent over the hearts of men.  It preaches the doctrine of humanity,
and strives to win a response in all who are willing to acknowledge
their common kinship and equality before God.  It appeals to masters
and servants, to employers and labourers, to rich and poor, and bids
them remember that they are sharers alike of the Divine Mercy,
pensioners together upon their Heavenly Father's love.

4.  Whatever shape the obligation of the Church may take in regard to
the social problems of the homeland, the duty of Christianity to the
larger world of Humanity admits of no question.  The ethical
significance of the missionary movement of last century has been
pronounced by Wundt,[29] the distinguished historian of morals, as the
mightiest factor in modern civilisation.  Speaking of humanity in its
highest sense as having been brought into the world by Christianity, he
mentions as its first manifestation the care of the sick, and then
adds, 'the second great expression of Christian humanity is the
establishment of missions.'  It is unnecessary to dwell upon this
modern form of unselfish enthusiasm.  It has its roots in the simple
necessity, on the part of the morally awakened, of sharing their best
with other people.  'Man grows with the greatness of his purposes,' and
no greater ideal task has ever presented itself to the imagination of
man than this mighty attempt to conquer the world for Christ, and give
to his brother men throughout the earth that which has raised and
enriched himself.[30]

'The two great forming agencies in the world's history,' says a
prominent political economist, 'have been the {244} religious and the
economic.'[31]  On the one hand the economic is required as the basis
of civilisation, but on the other the supreme factor is religion.  The
commercial impulse, carried on independently of any higher motive than
self-interest, has however not infrequently reacted favourably on the
moral life of the race.  Mutual understanding, the sense of a common
humanity, the virtues of honesty, fairness, and confidence upon which
all legitimate commerce is founded, have paved the way in no small
degree for the message of brotherhood and mercy.  The present hour is
the Church's opportunity.  Already the world has been opened up, the
nations of the earth are awakening to the greatness of life's
possibilities.  The danger is that the Oriental peoples should become
satisfied with the mere externals of civilisation, and miss that which
will assure their complete emancipation.  Christianity was born in the
East, though it has become the inheritance of the West.  It is adapted
by its genius to all men.  And undoubtedly the West has no better boon
to confer on the East than that on which its own life and hope are
founded--the religion of Jesus Christ.  If we do not give that, we are
unfaithful to our Master's call; we falsify our own history, and wholly
miss the purpose for which we have been entrusted with divine
enlightenment and power.



[1] Lofthouse, _Ethics of the Family_, p. 77.

[2] _Hist. of Human Marriage_, p. 538.

[3] The literature on this subject is enormous.  See specially works of
Westermarck, M'Lennan, Frazer, Hobhouse, Andrew Lang, and Ihering.

[4] See chap. vii. in Garvie's _Studies in Inner Life of Jesus_.

[5] Matt. viii. 21, 22; Luke ix. 59-62.

[6] Luke xiv. 26; Matt. x. 37.

[7] Mark x. 29, 30.

[8] Matt. xix. 12.

[9] Matt. v. 32, xix. 3-10; Mark x. 11, 12.

[10] See Forsyth, _Marriage: its Ethics and Religion_.

[11] King, _Ethics of Jesus_, p. 69.

[12] Stalker, _Ethics of Jesus_, p. 336.

[13] Though Nietzsche does not use the word he may be regarded as the
father of modern eugenics.

[14] Cf. Ramsay Macdonald, _Socialism_.

[15] Mark vii. 9-13.

[16] Cf. King, _The Moral and Religious Challenge of our Times_, pp. 42
f.

[17] Cf. W. Wallace, _Lects. and Addresses_, p. 114.

[18] _Aus Leben und Wissenschaft_.

[19] Matt. xii. 18-22; John xviii. 23, xix. 10 f.

[20] Rom. xiii.

[21] Sir H. Jones, _Idealism as a Practical Creed_, p. 123.

[22] Some sentences are here borrowed from author's _Ethics of St.
Paul_.

[23] _E.g._ Eucken, Kindermann, Mallock, and earlier H. Spencer.

[24] _Life's Ideal and Life's Basis_.

[25] Eph. iv. 3.

[26] Clarke, _Ideal of Jesus_, p. 258.

[27] Watson, _Social Advance_.

[28] _Die Soziallehren der Christlichen Kirchen und Gruppen_, a recent
work on social ethics of great erudition and importance.

[29] _Ethik_, vol. ii.

[30] King, _The Moral and Religious Challenge of our Times_, pp. 44 and
346.

[31] Marshall, _Principles of Economics_.




{245}

