CHAPTER X

THE DYNAMIC OF THE NEW LIFE

In the dynamic power of the new life we reach the central and
distinguishing feature of Christian Ethics.  The uniqueness of
Christianity consists in its mode of dealing with a problem which all
non-Christian systems have tended to ignore--the problem of translating
the ideal into life.  The Gospel not only sets before men the highest
good, but it imparts the secret of realising it.  The ideals of the
ancients were but visions of perfection.  They had no objective
reality.  Beautiful as these old-time visions of 'Good' were, they
lacked impelling force, the power to change dreams into realities.
They were helpless in the face of the great fact of sin.  They could
suggest no remedy for moral disease.

Christianity is not a philosophical dream nor the imagination of a few
visionaries.  It claims to be a new creative force, a power
communicated and received, to be worked out and realised in the actual
life and character of common men and women.

In this chapter we have to consider the means whereby man is brought
into a new spiritual relation with God, and enabled to live the new
life as it has been revealed in Christ.  This reconciliation implies a
twofold movement--a redemptive action on God's part, and an
appropriating and determinative response on the part of man.


I

THE DIVINE POWER

The urgent problem of the New Testament writers was, How can man
achieve that good which has been embodied {165} in the life and example
of Jesus Christ?  A full answer to this question would lead us into the
realm of dogmatic theology.  And therefore, without entering upon
details, it may be said at once that the originality of the Gospel lies
in this, that it not only reveals the good in a concrete and living
form, but discloses the power which makes the good possible in the
hitherto unattempted derivation of the new life from a new birth under
the influence of the spirit of God.  The power to achieve the moral
life does not lie in the natural man.  No readjustment of
circumstances, nor spread of knowledge, is of itself equal to the task
of creating that entirely new phenomenon--the Christian character.
There must be a cause proportionate to the effect.  'Nothing availeth,'
says Paul, 'but a new creature.'  This new condition owes its origin to
God.  It is a life communicated by an act of divine creative activity.

But while this regenerative energy is represented generally as the work
of God's spirit, it is more particularly set forth as operating through
Christ who is the power of God unto salvation.

There are three great facts in Christ's life with which the New
Testament connects the redemptive work of God.

1.  _The Incarnation_.--In Christ God shares man's nature, and thus
makes possible a union of the divine and human.  On its divine side the
incarnation is the complete revelation of God in human life, and on the
human side it is the supreme expression of the spiritual meaning of
human nature itself.  Christ saves not by a special act of atonement
alone, but emphatically by manifesting in Himself the union of God and
man.  In view of the fact of the world's sin, the Incarnation, as the
revelation of the divine life, includes a gracious purpose.  It
involves the sacrifice of God, which theologians designate by the
theory of _Kenosis_.  The Advent was not only the consummation of the
religious history of the race; it was also the inauguration of a new
era.  The Son of Man initiated a new type of humanity, to be realised
in increasing fullness as men entered into the meaning of the great
revelation.  'He {166} recapitulated in Himself the long unfolding of
mankind.'[1]  Hence in the very fact of the word becoming flesh
atonement is involved.  In Christ God is revealed in the reality of His
love and the persistence of His search for man, while man is disclosed
in the greatness of his vision and vocation.

2.  _The Death of Christ_.--Although already implied in the life, the
atonement culminates in the death of Christ.  Even by being made in the
likeness of men Jesus did not escape from, but willingly took up, the
burdens of humanity and bore them as the Son of Man.  But His passion
upon the cross, as the supreme instance of suffering borne for others,
at once illuminated and completed all that He suffered and achieved as
man's representative.  It is this aspect of Christ's redemptive work
upon which St. Paul delights to dwell.  And though naturally not so
prominent in our Lord's own teaching, yet even there the significance
of the Redeemer's death is foreshadowed, and in more than one passage
explicitly stated.[2]  Here we are in the region of dogmatics, and we
are not called upon to formulate a doctrine of the atonement.  All that
we have to do with is the ethical fact that between man and the new
life there lies the actuality of sin, the real source of man's failure
to achieve righteousness, and the stumbling-block which must be removed
before reconciliation with God the Father can be effected.  The act, at
once divine and human, which alone meets the case is represented in
Scripture as the Sacrifice of Christ.  In reference to the efficacy of
the sacrifice upon the cross Bishop Butler says: 'How and in what
particular way it had this efficacy, there are not wanting persons who
have endeavoured to explain; but I do not find that the Scripture has
explained it.'[3]  Though, indeed, the fact is independent of any
theory, the truth for which the cross stands must be brought by us into
some kind of intelligible relation with our view of the world,
otherwise it is a piece of magic lying outside of our experience, and
{167} having no ethical value for life.  At the same time no doctrine
has suffered more from shallow theorisings, and particularly by the
employment of mechanical, legal, and commercial analogies, than the
doctrine of the atonement.  The very essence of the religious life is
incompatible with the idea of an external transference of goodness from
one being to another.  Man can be reconciled to God only by an absolute
surrender of himself to God.  To assimilate this spiritual act to a
commercial or legal transaction is to destroy the very idea of the
moral life.  No explanation, however, can be considered satisfactory
which does not safeguard two ideas of a deeply ethical nature--the
voluntariness and the vicariousness of Christ's sacrifice.  We must be
careful to do justice, on the one hand, to the eternal relations in
which Christ stands to God; and on the other, to the intimate
association with man into which Jesus has entered.  It is the task of
theology to bring together the various passages of Scripture, and
exhibit their systematic connection and relative value for a doctrine
of soteriology.  For Ethics the one significant fact to be recognised
is that in a human life was fulfilled perfect obedience, even as far as
death, a perfect obedience that completely met and fully satisfied the
demand of the very highest, the divine ideal.

3.  _The Resurrection of Christ_.--If the Incarnation naturally issues
in the sacrifice unto death, that again is crowned and sealed by
Christ's risen life.  The Resurrection is the vindication and
completion of the Redeemer's work.  He who was born of the seed of
David according to the flesh was declared to be the Son of God by the
Resurrection.  It was the certainty that He had risen that gave to His
death, in the apostles' eyes, its sacrificial value.  This was the
ground of St. Paul's conviction that the old order had passed away, and
that a new order had been established.  'If Christ be not risen ye are
yet in your sins.'  In virtue of His ascended life Christ becomes the
indwelling presence and living power within the regenerate man.  It is
in no external way that the Redeemer exerts His influence.  He is the
principle of life working within the soul.  The key {168} to the new
state is to be found in the mystical union of the Christian with the
risen Lord.  The twofold act of death and resurrection has its analogy
in the experience of every redeemed man.  Within the secret sanctuary
of the human soul that has passed from death to life, the history of
the Redeemer is re-enacted.  In the several passages which refer to
this subject the idea is that the changed life is based upon an ethical
dying and rising again with Christ.[4]  The Christ within the heart is
the vital principle and dynamic energy by which the believer lives and
triumphs over every obstacle--the world, sin, sorrow, and death itself.
'I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.'[5]  All that makes life,
'life indeed'--an exalted, harmonious, and joyous existence--is derived
from union with the living Lord, who has come to be what He is for man
by the earthly experiences through which He has passed.  Thus by His
Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection He is at once the source and goal,
the spring and ideal of the new life.

  'Yea, thro' life, death, sorrow, and through sinning,
  He shall suffice me for He hath sufficed;
  Christ is the end, for Christ was the beginning;
  Christ the beginning, for the end is Christ.'[6]


Theology may seek to analyse the personality of Christ into its
elements--the incarnation, death, and resurrection of Jesus.  But after
all it is one and indivisible.  It is the whole fact of Christ, and not
any particular experience taken in its isolation, which is the power of
God unto salvation.  The question still remains after all our analysis,
What was it that gave to these events in the history of Jesus their
creative and transforming power?  And the answer can only be--Because
Christ was what He was.  It was the unique character of the Being of
whom these were but the manifestations which wrought the spell.  What
bound the New Testament Christians to the cross was that their Master
hung there.  They saw in that life lived among {169} men, and in that
sacrifice upon Calvary, the perfect consummation of the ideal manhood
that lived within their own hearts, and of the love, new upon the
earth, which made it possible.  The cross stood for the symbol of a
truth that pierced to the inner core of their souls.  'He bore our
sins.'  And thus down the centuries, in their hour of shame, and grief,
and death, men have lifted their eyes to the Man of Sorrows, and have
found in His life and sacrifice, apart from all theories of atonement,
their peace and triumph.  It is this note of absolute surrender towards
God and of perfect love for man which, because it answers to a deep
yearning of the human heart, has given to the mystery of the
Incarnation and the Cross its lifting and renewing power,


