II

THE HUMAN RESPONSE

Possession of power involves the obligation to use it.  The force is
given; it has to be appropriated.  The spirit of Christ is not offered
in order to free a man from the duties of the moral life.  Man is not
simply the recipient of divine energy.  He has to make it his own and
to work it out by his self-determinative activity.  Nevertheless the
relation of the divine spirit to the human personality is a subject of
great perplexity, involving the psychological problem of the connection
of the divine and the human in life generally.  If in the last resort
God is the ultimate source of all life, the absolute Being, who

  'Can rejoice in naught
  Save only in Himself and what Himself hath wrought';

that truth must be held in harmony with the facts of divine immanence
and human experience.  The divine spirit holds within His grasp all
reality, and by His self-communicating activity makes the world of
nature and of life possible.  But that being granted, how are we to
conceive the relation of that Spirit to man with his distinct
individuality, with {170} his sense of working out a future and a fate
in which the Absolute may indeed be fulfilling its purpose, but which
are none the less man's own achievement?  That is the crux of the
problem.  The outstanding fact which bears upon this problem is the
general character of our experience, the growth of which is not the
mere laying of additional material upon a passive subject by an
external power, but is a true development, a process in which the
subject is himself operative in the unfolding of his own
potentialities.  Without dwelling further upon this question it may be
well to bear in mind two points: (1) The growth of experience is a
gradual entrance into conscious possession of what we implicitly are
and potentially have from the beginning.  Duty, for example, is not
something alien from a man, something superimposed by a power not
himself.  It lies implicit in his nature as his ideal and vocation.
The moral life is the life in which a man comes to 'know himself,' to
apprehend himself as he truly is.  (2) In this development of
experience we ourselves are active and self-organising.  We are really
making ourselves, and are conscious, that even while we are the
instruments of a higher power, we are working out our own
individuality, exercising our own freedom and determination.[7]  The
teaching of the New Testament is in full accord with this position.
If, on the one hand, St. Paul states that every moral impulse is due to
the inspiration of God, no less emphatic is he in ascribing to man
himself full freedom of action.  'The ethical sense of responsibility,'
says Johannes Weiss,[8] 'the energy for struggle, and the discipline of
the will were not paralysed nor absorbed in Paul's case by his
consciousness of redemption and his profound spiritual experiences.'
Scripture lends no support to the idea which some forms of Augustinian
theology assume, that the divine spirit is an irresistible force acting
from without upon man and superseding his exertions.  It acts as an
immanent moral power, not compelling or crushing the will, but
quickening and inspiring its efforts.

{171}

If we inquire what constitutes the subjective or human element in the
making of the new life, we find that the New Testament emphasises three
main factors--Repentance, Faith, and Obedience.  These are
complementary, and together constitute what is commonly called
'conversion.'

1.  _Repentance_ is a turning away in sorrow and contrition from a life
of sin, a breaking off from evil because a better standard has been
accepted.  Our Lord began His ministry with a call to repentance.  The
first four beatitudes set forth its elements; while the parable of the
prodigal illustrates its nature.

Ethical writers distinguish between a negative and a positive aspect of
repentance.  On its negative side it is regarded as the emotion of
sorrow excited by reflection upon sin.  But sorrow, though accompanying
repentance, must not be identified with it.  Mere regret, either in the
form of bitterness over one's folly, or chagrin on account of
discovery, may be but a weak sentiment which exerts little or no
influence upon a man's subsequent conduct.  Even remorse following the
commission of wickedness may only deepen into a paralysing despair
which works death rather than repentance unto life.

(1) On its positive side repentance implies action as well as feeling,
and involves a determination of will to quit the past and start on a
new life.  A man repents not merely when he grieves over his misdeed,
but when he confesses it and seeks to make what amendment he can.  This
positive outlook upon the future, rather than the passive brooding over
the past, is happily expressed in the New Testament term _metanoia_,
change of mind, and is enforced in the Baptist's counsel, 'Bring forth
fruits meet for repentance.'[9]  The change of mind here indicated is
practically equivalent to what is variously called in the New Testament
'Conversion,'[10] 'Renewal,'[11] 'Regeneration,'[12]--words suggestive
of the completeness of the change.

(2) The variety of terms employed to describe conversion {172} would
seem to imply that the Scriptures recognise a diversity of mode.  All
do not enter the kingdom of God by the same way; and the New Testament
offers examples varying from the sudden conversion of a Saul to the
almost imperceptible transformation of a Nathaniel and a Timothy.  In
modern life something of the same variety of Christian experience is
manifest.  While what is called 'sudden conversion' cannot reasonably
be denied,[13] as little can those cases be ignored in which the truth
seems to pervade the mind gradually and almost unconsciously--cases of
steady spiritual growth from childhood upwards, in which the believer
is unaware of any break in the continuity of his inner history, his
days appearing to be 'bound each to each by natural piety.'

(3) The question arises, Which is the normal experience?  The matter
has been put somewhat bluntly by the late Professor James,[14] as to
whether the 'twice-born' or the 'once-born' present the natural type of
Christian experience.  Is it true, he asks, that the experience of St.
Paul, which has so long dominated Christian teaching, is really the
higher or even the healthier mode of approaching religion?  Does not
the example of Jesus offer a simpler and more natural ideal?  The moral
experience of the Son of Man was not a revolution but an evolution.
His own religion was not that of the twice-born, and all that He asked
of His disciples was the childlike mind.[15]  Paul, the man of cities,
feels a kindred turbulence within himself.  Jesus, the interpreter of
nature, feels the steady persuasiveness of the sunshine of God, and
grows from childhood in stature, wisdom, and favour with God and man.
It is contended by some that the whole Pauline conception of sin is a
nightmare, and rests upon ideas of God and man which are unworthy and
untrue.  'As a matter of fact,' says Sir Oliver Lodge, 'the higher man
of to-day is not worrying about his sins at all, still less about their
punishment; his mission, if he is good for anything, is to be up and
doing.'[16] {173} This amounts to a claim for the superiority of the
first of the two types of religious consciousness, the type which James
describes as 'sky-blue souls whose affinities are with flowers and
birds and all enchanting innocencies than with dark human passions;
. . . in whom religious gladness, being in possession from the outset,
needs no deliverance from any antecedent burden.'[17]  The second type
is marked by a consciousness, similar to St. Paul's, of the divided
self.  It starts from radical pessimism.  It only attains to religious
peace through great tribulation.  It is the religion of the 'sick soul'
as contrasted with that of 'healthy-mindedness.'  But, morbid as it may
appear, to be disturbed by past sin, it is really the 'twice-born' who
have sounded the depths of the human heart, and have been the greatest
religious leaders.  And so far from the sense of the need of repentance
being the sign of a diseased mind, the decreasing consciousness of sin
in our day may only prove the shallowness of the modern mind.  What men
need of religion is power.  And there is a danger of people to-day
losing a sense of the dynamic force of the older Gospel.[18]

But whether Paul's case is abnormal or the reverse, it is surely a
false inference that, because Christ grew up without the need of
conversion, His life affords in this respect a pattern to sinful men.
It is just His perfect union with God which differentiates Him entirely
from ordinary men; and that which may be necessary for sinful creatures
is unthinkable in His case.  What He was we are to become.  But before
we can follow Him, there is for us, because of sin, a preliminary
step--a breaking with our evil past.  And, in all His teaching our Lord
clearly recognises this.  His first call is a call to repentance.  It
is indeed the childlike mind He requires; but He significantly says
that 'except _ye turn_ and become as little children, ye shall in no
wise enter the kingdom of heaven.'[19]

The decision of will demanded of Jesus, while it may not {174}
necessarily involve a catastrophe of life or convulsion of nature, must
be none the less a deliberate and decisive turning from evil to good.
By what road a man must travel before he enters the kingdom, through
what convulsion of spirit be must pass, so frequently dwelt upon by St.
Paul and illustrated by his own life, Christ does not say.  In the
Fourth Gospel there is one reported saying describing a process of
spiritual agony, like that of physical child-birth, indicative that the
change must be radical, and that at some point of experience the great
decision must be made, a decision which is likely to involve deep
travail of soul.

There are many ways in which a man may become a Christian.  Some men
have to undergo, like Paul, fierce inward conflict.  Others glide
quietly, almost imperceptibly, into richer and ampler regions of life.
But when or how the transition is made, whether the renewal be sudden
or gradual, it is the same victory in all cases that must be won, the
victory of the spirit over the flesh, the 'putting off of the old man'
and the 'putting on of the new.'  Life cannot be always a compromise.
Sooner or later it must become an alternative.  He who has seen the
higher self can be no longer content with the lower.  The acts of
contrition, confession, and decision--essential and successive steps in
repentance--are the immediate effects of the vision of Christ.  Though
repentance is indeed a human activity, here, as always, the earlier
impulse comes from the divine side.  He who truly repents is already in
the grip of Christ.  'We love Him because He first loved us.'

2.  _Faith_.--If repentance looks back and forsakes the old, faith
looks forward and accepts the new.  Even in repentance there is already
an element of faith, for a man cannot turn away from his evil past
without having some sense of contrast between the actual and the
possible, some vision of the better life which he feels to be desirable.

(1) While there is no more characteristic word in the New Testament
than faith, there is none which is used in a greater variety of senses,
or whose import it is more difficult to determine.  It must not be
forgotten at the outset {175} that though it is usually regarded as a
theological term, it is a purely human act, and represents an element
in ordinary life without which the world could not hold together for a
single day.  We constantly live by faith, and in our common intercourse
with our fellows we daily exercise this function.  We have an
irresistible conviction that we live in a rational world in which
effect answers to cause.  Faith, it has been said, is the capital of
all reasoning.  Break down this principle, and logic itself would be
bankrupt.  Those who have denied the intelligibility of the universe
have not been able to dispense with the very organ by which their
argument is conducted.  Hence faith in its religious sense is of the
same kind as faith in common life.  It is distinguishable only by its
_special object_ and its _moral intensity_.

(2) The habitual relationship between Christ and His disciples was one
of mutual confidence.  While Jesus evidently trusts them, they regard
Him as their Master on whose word they wholly rely.  Ever invested with
a deep mystery and awe, He is always for His disciples the embodiment
of all that is highest and holiest, the supreme object of reverence,
the ultimate source of authority.  Peter but expresses the mind of the
company when he says, 'To whom can we go but unto Thee, Thou hast the
words of eternal life.'  Nor was it only the disciples who manifested
this personal trust.  Many others, the Syrophenician woman, the Roman
Centurion, Zacchaeus, Bartimaeus, also evinced it.  It was, indeed, to
this element in the human heart that Jesus invariably appealed; and
while He was quick to detect its presence, He was equally sensitive to
its absence.  Even among the twelve, when, in the face of some new
emergency, there was evidence of mistrust, He exclaimed, 'O ye of
little faith.'  And when, beyond His own immediate circle, He met with
suspicion and unbelief, it caused Him surprise and pain.[20]

From these and other incidents it is obvious that faith for Jesus had a
variety of meanings and degrees.

{176}

(_a_) Sometimes it meant simply _trust in divine providence_; as when
He bids His disciples take no thought for their lives, because He who
feeds the ravens and clothes the lilies cares for them.  (_b_) It meant
again _belief in His own divine power_; as when He assures the
recipients of His healing virtue that their faith hath made them whole.
(_c_) It is regarded by Jesus as _a condition of forgiveness and
salvation_.  Thus to the woman who had sinned He said, 'Thy faith hath
saved thee,' and to the man who was sick of the palsy, 'Son, thy sins
be forgiven thee.'[21]

The essential and vital mark in all Christ's references is the personal
appropriation of the good which He Himself had brought to man.  In His
various modes of activity--in His discourses, His works of healing and
forgiveness--it is not too much to say that Jesus regarded Himself as
the embodiment of God's message to the world; and to welcome His word
with confidence and joy, and unhesitatingly act upon it, was faith.
Hence it did not mean merely the mental acceptance of some abstract
truth, but, before all else, personal and intimate devotion to Himself.
It seems the more necessary to emphasise this point since Harnack has
affirmed 'that, while Christ was the special object of faith for Paul
and the other apostles, He did not enter as an element into His own
preaching, and did not solicit faith towards Himself.'[22]  It is
indeed true that Jesus frequently associated Himself with His Father,
whose immediate representative He claims to be.  But no one can doubt
that He also asserts authority and power on His own account, and
solicits faith on His own behalf.  Nor does He take pains, even when
challenged, to explain that He was but the agent of another.  On the
contrary, as we have seen, He acts in His own right, and pronounces the
blessings of healing and forgiveness in His own name.  Even when the
word 'Faith' is not mentioned the whole attitude and spirit of Jesus
impels us to the same conclusion.  There was an air of independence and
authority {177} about Him which filled His disciples and others, not
merely with confidence, but with wonder and awe.  His repeated word is,
'I say unto you.'  And there is a class of sayings which clearly
indicate the supreme significance which He attached to His own
personality as an object of faith.  Foremost among these is the great
invitation, 'Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are heavy-laden, and
I will give you rest.'

(3) If we turn to the epistles, and especially to the Pauline, we are
struck by the apparently changed meaning of faith.  It has become more
complex and technical.  It is no longer simply the receptive relation
of the soul towards Christ; it is also a justifying principle.  Faith
not only unites the believer to Christ, it also translates him into a
new sphere and creates for him a new environment.  The past is
cancelled.  All things have become new.  The man of faith has passed
out of the dominion of law into the kingdom of Grace.

The Pauline doctrine of Justification by Faith has received in the
history of the Church a twofold interpretation.  On the one hand, it
has been maintained that the sole significance of faith is that it
gives to the believer power, by God's supernatural aid, to realise a
goodness of which he is naturally incapable.  On the other hand, it is
held that the peculiarity of faith is that, though he himself is a
sinner deserving condemnation, it affords to the believer an assurance
of the favour with which a loving Father regards him, not on account of
his own attainments, but in virtue of the perfect obedience of the Son
of God with whom each is united by faith.  The former is the more
distinctively Roman view; the latter that of the Reformed Church.
While the Catholic form of the doctrine gives to 'works' a place not
less important than faith in justification, the Protestant exalts
'faith' to the position of priority as more in harmony with the mystery
of the atoning sacrifice of Christ as expounded by St. Paul.  Faith
justifies, because it is for the Christian the vision of an ideal.
What we admire in another is already implicitly within us.  We {178}
already possess the righteousness we believe in.  The moral beauty of
Christ is ours inasmuch as we are linked to Him by faith, and have
accepted as our true self all that He is and has achieved.  Hence faith
is not merely the sight of the ideal in Christ.  It is the energy of
the soul as well, by which the believer strives to realise that which
he admires.  According to the teaching of Scripture faith has thus a
threefold value.  It is a receptive attitude, a justifying principle,
and an energising power.  It is that by which the believer accepts and
appropriates the gift of Life offered by God in Christ.

3.  _Obedience_.--Faith contains the power of a new obedience.  But
faith worketh by love.  The soul's surrender to Christ is the crowning
phase of man's response.  The obedience of love is the natural sequel
of repentance and faith, the completing act of consecration.  As God
gives Himself in Christ to man, so man yields in Christ to God all he
is and all he has.

Without enlarging upon the nature of this final act of self-surrender,
three points of ethical value ought not to be overlooked.

(1) Obedience is an _activity_ of the soul by which the believer
appropriates the life of God.  Life is not merely a gift, it is a task,
an achievement.  We are not simply passive recipients of the Good, but
free and determinative agents who react upon what is given, taking it
up into our life and working it into the texture of our character.  The
obedience of love is the practical side of faith.  While God imparts
the energy of the Spirit, we apply it and by strenuous endeavour and
unceasing effort mould our souls and make our world.

(2) It is a consecration of the _whole personality_.  All the powers of
man are engaged in soul-making.  Religion is not a detached region of
experience, a province separate from the incidents and occupations of
ordinary existence.  Obedience must cover the whole of life, and
demands the exercise and devotion of every gift.  Not only is every
thought to be brought into subjection to the mind of {179} Christ, but
every passion and desire, every activity and power of body and mind are
to be consecrated to God and transformed into instruments of service.
'Our wills are ours to make them thine.'  But the will is not a
separate faculty; it is the whole man.  And the obedience of the will
is nothing less than the response of our entire manhood to the will of
God.

(3) Finally, obedience is a _growing power of assimilation_ to Christ.
We grow in the Christian life according to the measure of our faith and
the exercise of our love.  The spiritual world is potentially ours at
the beginning of the Christian life, but it has to be worked out in
daily experience.  Like every other form of existence spiritual life is
a growth which only attains to strength and fruition through continual
conflict and achievement.  The soul is not a finished product.  In
patience it is to be acquired.[23]  By trial and temptation, by toil
and expenditure, through all the hardships and hazards of daily life
its value is determined and its destiny shaped.  And according to the
measure in which we use these experiences, and transmute them by
obedience to the will of God into means of good, do we grow in
Christian character and approximate to the full stature of the perfect
Man.

To this self-determining activity Eucken has given the name of
'Activism.'  'The basis of a true life,' says this writer, 'must be
continually won anew.'[24]  Activism acquires ethical character
inasmuch as it involves the taking up of the spiritual world into our
own volition and being.  Only by this ceaseless endeavour do we advance
to fresh attainments of the moral life, and are enabled to assimilate
the divine as revealed to us in Christ.  Nor is it merely the
individual self that is thus enriched and developed by obedience to the
will of God.  By personal fidelity to the highest we are aiding the
moral development of mankind, and are furthering the advancement of all
that is good and true in the world.  Not only are we making {180} our
own character, but we are helping to build up the kingdom of God upon
the earth.

Repentance, Faith, and Obedience are thus the human factors of the new
life.  They are the moral counterparts of Grace.  God gives and man
appropriates.  By repentance we turn from sin and self to the true home
of our soul in the Fatherhood of God.  By faith we behold in Christ the
vision of the ideal self.  By obedience and the daily surrender of
ourselves to the divine will we transform the vision into the reality.
They are all manifestations of love, the responsive notes of the human
heart to the appeal of divine love.



[1] Irenaeus, _Contra Haereses_, III. xviii. 1.

[2] Matt. xx. 28; John xi. 51; Matt. xxvi. 28; Mark xiv. 8, 9.

[3] _The Analogy_, part II. chap. v.

[4] 2 Cor. v. 14 f.; Rom. vi.; Ephes. iii. 16, 17, v. 8.

[5] Gal. ii. 20.

[6] Meyers, _Saint Paul_.

[7] See Blewett, _The Christian View of the World_, pp. 88 ff., where
this subject is suggestively treated.

[8] _Christ and Paul_.

[9] Matt. iii. 8; Luke iii. 8.

[10] Acts xxvi. 20.

[11] Rom. xii. 12; Titus iii. 5.

[12] 2 Cor. v. 17; Gal. vi. 15.

[13] See Begbie, _Broken Earthenware_.

[14] _Varieties of Relig. Experience_.

[15] Mark x. 15.

[16] _Man and the Universe_, p. 220.

[17] _Varieties of Religious Experience_, p. 80.

[18] Cf. _Foundations: a Statement of Religious Belief by seven Oxford
men_, Essay VI., pp. 274 f.

[19] Matt. xviii. 3.

[20] Matt. xiii. 58; Mark vi. 5.

[21] Cf. Stalker, _The Ethic of Jesus_, p. 179.

[22] _Das Wesen des Christenthums_, p. 91, quoted by Stalker, _idem_,
p. 176.

[23] Luke xxi. 19.

[24] _Life's Basis and life's Ideal_, p. 255.




{181}

SECTION D

CONDUCT

{183}

