CHAPTER XII

THE REALM OF DUTY

We have now to see how the virtues issue in their corresponding duties
and cover the whole field of life.

Virtues and duties cannot be strictly distinguished.  As Paulsen
remarks, 'They are but different modes of presenting the same
subject-matter.'[1]  Virtues are permanent traits of character; duties
are particular acts which seek to realise virtues.

The word 'duty,' borrowed from Stoic philosophy, inadequately
describes, both on the side of its obligation and its joy, the service
which the Christian is pledged to offer to Christ.  For the Christian
the two moments of pleasure and duty are united in the higher synthesis
of love.

In this chapter we shall consider, first, some aspects of Christian
obligation; and, second, the particular duties which arise therefrom in
relation to the self, others, and God.


I

ASPECTS OF DUTY

1.  _Duty and Vocation_.--'While duty stands for a universal element
there is a personal element in moral requirement which may be called
vocation.'[2]  As soon as the youth enters upon the larger world he has
to make choice of a profession or life-work.  Different principles may
guide him in his selection.  First of all, the circumstances {200} of
life will help to decide the individual's career.  Our calling and
duties arise immediately out of our station.  Already by parental
influence and the action of home-environment character is being shaped,
and tastes and purposes are created which will largely determine the
future.  Next to condition and station, individual capacity and
disposition ought to be taken into account.  No good work can be
accomplished in uncongenial employment.  A man must have not only
fitness for his task, but also a love for it.  Proper ambition may also
be a determining factor.  We have a right to make the most of
ourselves, and to strive for that position in which our gifts shall
have fullest scope.  But the ultimate decision must be made in the
light of conscience.  Self-interest should not be our sole motive in
the choice of a vocation.  It is not enough to ask what is most
attractive, what line of life will ensure the greatest material gain or
worldly honour?  Rather should we ask, Where shall I be safest from
moral danger, and, above all, in what position of life, open to me, can
I do the most good?  It is not enough to know that a certain mode of
livelihood is permitted by law; I must decide whether it is permitted
to me as a Christian.  For, after all, underlying, and giving purpose
and direction to, our earthly vocation is the deeper calling of God
into His kingdom.  These cannot, indeed, be separated.  We cannot
divide our life into two sections, a sacred and a secular.  Nor must we
restrict the idea of vocation to definite spheres of work.  Even those
who are precluded by affliction from the activities of the world are
still God's servants, and may find in suffering itself their divinely
appointed mission.  There is a divinity which shapes our ends, and in
every life-calling there is something sacred.  'Saints,' says George
Eliot, 'choose not their tasks, they choose but to do them well.'

But the decisions of life do not cease with the choice of a calling.
At every moment of our career fresh difficulties arise, and new
opportunities open up which demand careful thought.  Our first
obligation is to meet faithfully the claims of our station.  But in the
complexity of life we are {201} being constantly brought into wider
relations with our fellow-men, which either modify the old, or create
entirely new situations.  While the rule is to do the duty that lies
nearest us, to obey the call of God at each moment, it needs no little
wisdom to discern one's immediate duty, and to know what the will of
God actually is.

2.  _Conflict of Duties_.--In the sphere of duty itself a three-fold
distinction, having the imprimatur of the Romish Church, has been made
by some moralists: (1) the problem of colliding interests; (2)
'counsels of perfection'; and (3) indifferent acts or 'Adiaphora,'
actions which, being neither commanded nor forbidden, fall outwith the
domain of Christian obligation.  It will not be necessary to discuss at
length these questions.  The Gospel lends no support to such
distinctions, and as Schleiermacher points out they ought to have no
place in Protestant Ethics.[3]

(1) With regard to the 'conflict of duties,' when the collision is
really, as it often is, a struggle between inclination and duty, the
question answers itself.  There are, of course, cases in which
perplexity must occur to an honest man.  But the difficulty cannot be
decided by drawing up a list of axiomatic precepts to fit all
conceivable cases.  In the dilemma, for example, between
self-preservation and self-sacrifice which may present itself in some
tragic experience of life, a host of considerations relative to the
individual's history and relationships enter in to modify the
situation, and the course to be taken can be _finally_ determined by a
man's _own_ conscience alone.  Ultimately there can be no collision of
duties as such.  Once a man recognises a certain mode of conduct to be
right for him there is really no choice.  In judgment he may err;
passion or desire may obscure the issue; but once he has determined
what he ought to do there is no alternative, 'er kann nicht anders.'

(2) Again, it is a complete misapprehension of the nature of duty to
distinguish between the irreducible minimum and acts of supererogatory
goodness which outrun duty.  {202} Goodness is one, and admits of no
degrees.  All duty is absolute.  An overplus is unthinkable, since no
man can do more than his duty.  A Christian can only do what he
recognises as his obligation, and this he ought to fulfil at every
moment and with all his might.  Love, which is the Christian's only
law, knows no limit.  Even when we have done our utmost we are still
unprofitable servants.

(3) Finally, the question as to whether there are any acts which are
indifferent, permissible, but neither enjoined nor forbidden, must also
be answered in the negative.  If the Christian can do no more than his
duty, because in every single action he seeks to fulfil the whole will
of God, it is clear that there can be no moment of life that can be
thought of not determined by the divine will.  There is no part of life
that is colourless.  There must be no dropped stitches in the texture
of the Christian character.

It is most frequently in the domain of amusement that the notion of the
'Permissible' is applied.  It has been contended that as recreation
really lies outwith the Christian sphere, it may be allowed to
Christian people as a concession to human weakness.[4]  But can this
position be vindicated?  Relaxation is as much a need of man as work,
and must, equally with it, be brought within the scope of Christian
conduct.  We have no business to engage in any activity, whether
involving pleasure or pain, that we cannot justify to our conscience.
Are not the joys of life, and even its amusements, among God's gifts
designed for the enriching of character?  And may not they, too, be
consecrated to the glory of God?  We are to use the world while not
abusing it, for all things are ours if we are Christ's.  Over every
department of life the law of Christ is sovereign, and the ultimate
principle applicable to all problems of duty is, 'Whatsoever ye do in
word or deed do all to the glory of God.'

3.  _Rights and Duties_.--The foregoing question as to the scope of
duty leads naturally to the consideration of the relation of duties and
rights.  It is usual to distinguish {203} between legal and moral
rights; but at bottom they are one.  The rights which I legally claim
for myself I am morally bound to grant to others.  A right is expressed
in the form of a permission; a duty, of an imperative.  I may or may
not demand my legal rights; morally, I must perform my duties.  But, on
the other hand, a right may be secured by legal compulsion; a duty, as
a moral obligation, can never be enforced by external power: it needs
our own assent.[5]

Strictly speaking rights and duties are correlative.  Every right
carries with it an obligation; not merely in the objective sense that
when one man has a right other men are under the obligation to respect
it, but also in the subjective sense that when a man has a right he is
bound to use it for the general good.  It is sometimes said, 'A man may
do what he likes with his own.'  Legally that may be true, but morally
he is under obligation to employ it for the general good just as
strictly as if it were another's.  A man's rights are not merely
decorations or ends in themselves.  They are opportunities,
instruments, trusts.  And when any man has them, it means that he is
placed on a vantage-ground from which, secure of oppression or
interference, he may begin to do his duty.[6]  But this moral aspect of
right is often lost sight of.  People are so enamoured of what they
call their rights that they forget that the real value of every right
depends upon the use to which they put it.  A man's freedom does not
consist in having rights, but in fulfilling them.  'After all,' says
Mazzini, 'the greatest right a man can possess or recognise--the
greatest gift of all--is simply the privilege and obligation to do his
duty.'[7]  This is the only Christian doctrine of rights.  It underlies
our Lord's teaching in the parable of the Talents.  We only have what
we use.

(1) Much has been written of the 'Natural rights of Man.'[8]  This was
the claim of a school of political philosophy of {204} which Paine was
the most rigorous exponent.  The contentions of Paine were met as
vigorously by the negations of Bentham and Burke.  And if it be
supposed that the individual is born into the world with certain
ready-made possessions, fixed and unalterable, the claim is untenable.
Such an artificial account of man ignores entirely the evolution of
moral nature, and denies the possibility of development in man's
conception of law and duty.  'It is,' as Wundt says, 'to derive all the
moral postulates that have been produced in our minds by previous moral
development from moral life as it actually exists.'[9]

(2) But while the 'natural rights of man' cannot be theoretically
vindicated, they may still be regarded as ends or ideals to be striven
after.  'Justifiable or unjustifiable in theory, they may still remain
a convenient form in which to couch the ultimatum of determined
men.'[10]  They give expression, at least, to a conviction which has
grown more clear and articulate with the advance of thought--the
conviction of the _dignity and worth of the individual_.  This thought
was the keynote of the Reformation.  The Enlightenment, with its appeal
to reason, as alike in all men, gave support to the idea of equality.
Descartes claimed it as the philosophical basis of man's nature.
Rousseau and Montesquieu were among its most valiant champions.  Kant
made it the point of departure for the enforcement of human right and
duty.  Fichte but elaborated Kant's view when he contended for 'the
equality of everything which bears the human visage.'[11]  And Hegel
has summed up the conception in what he calls 'the mandate of
right'--'Be a person, and respect others as persons.'[12]  Poets
sometimes see what others miss.  And in our country, at least, it is to
Wordsworth, Tennyson, and Browning, and still more, perhaps, to Burns,
that we are indebted for the insistence upon the native worth of man.

But if this claim has only gradually attained to articulate {205}
expression, and is only now being made the basis of social
reconstruction, it must not be forgotten that it is essentially a
Christian truth.  In Harnack's language, 'Jesus Christ was the first to
bring the value of every human soul to light, and what He did no one
can any more undo.'[13]

When, however, the attempt is made to analyse this ultimate principle
of manhood, opinions differ as to its constituents, and a long list of
'rights' claimed by different political thinkers might be made.  The
famous 'Declaration of Rights'[14] included Life, Liberty, Property,
Security, and 'Resistance of Oppression.'  To these some have added
'Manhood Suffrage,' 'Free Access to the Soil,' and a common
distribution of the benefits of life and means of production.  This is
a large programme, and certainly no community as yet has recognised all
its items without qualification.  Obviously they are not all of the
same quality, nor are they of independent validity; and at best they
but roughly describe certain factors, considered by various agitators
as desirable, of an ideal social order.

(3) We are on safer ground, and for Christian Ethics, at least, more in
consonance with ultimate Christian values, when we describe the primary
realities of human nature in terms of the revelation of life as given
by the Person and teaching of Jesus Christ.  The three great verities
upon which He constantly insisted were, man's value for himself, his
value for his fellow-men, and his value for God.  These correspond
generally to the three great ethical ideas of life--Personality,
Freedom, and Divine Kinship.  But although the sense of independence,
liberty and divine fellowship is the first aspect of a being who has
come to the consciousness of himself, it is incomplete in itself.  Man
plants himself upon his individuality in order that he may set out from
thence to take possession, by means of knowledge, action, and service,
of his larger world.  Man's rights are but {206} possibilities which
must be transmuted by him into achievements.

  'This is the honour,--that no thing I know,
  Feel, or conceive, but I can make my own
  Somehow, by use of hand or head or heart.'[15]

Rights involve obligations.  The right of personality carries with it
the duty of treating life, one's own and that of others, as sacred.
The right of freedom implies the use of one's liberty for the good of
the society of which each is a member.  And finally, the sense of
divine kinship involves the obligation of making the most of one's
life, of realising through and for God all that God intends in the gift
of life.

In these three values lies the Christian doctrine of man.[16]  Because
of their fullness of implication they open out to our vision the goal
of humanity--the principle and purpose of the whole process of human
evolution--the perfection of man.  Given these three Christian
truths--the Sacredness of Personality, the Brotherhood of Man, and the
Fatherhood of God--and all that is essential in the claim of the
'Natural Rights of Man' is implicitly contained.  The one thing needful
is that men become alive to their privileges and go forward to 'possess
their possessions.'


