CHAPTER IX

THE STANDARD AND MOTIVE OF THE NEW LIFE

In every system of Ethics the three ideas of End, Norm, and Motive are
inseparable.  Christian Ethics is unique in this respect that it presents
not merely a code of morals, but an ideal of good embodied in a person
who is at once the pattern and inspiration of the new life.  In this
chapter we propose to consider these two elements of the good.

_Christ as Example_.--The value of 'concrete examples' has been
frequently recognised in non-Christian systems.  In the 'philosopher
king' of Plato, the 'expert' of Aristotle, and the 'wise man' of the
Stoics we have the imaginary embodiment of the ideal.  A similar tendency
is apparent in modern theories.  Comte invests the abstract idea of
'Humanity' with certain personal perfections for which he claims homage.
But what other systems have conceived in an imaginative form only,
Christianity has realised in an actual person.

The example of Christ is not a separate source of authority independent
of His teaching, but rather its witness and illustration.  Word and deed
in Jesus are in full agreement.  He was what He taught, and every truth
He uttered flowed directly from His inner nature.  He is the prototype
and expression of the 'good' as it exists in the mind of God, as well as
the perfect representative and standard of it in human life.  In Him is
manifested for all time what is meant by the good.

{147}

1.  If Christ is the normative standard of life it is extremely important
to obtain a true perception of Him as He dwelt among men.  But too often
have theology and art presented a Christ embellished with fantastic
colours or obscured by abstract speculations.  Recently, however, there
has been a revival of interest in the actual life of Jesus.  Men are
turning wistfully to the life of the Master for guidance in practical
matters, and it is beginning to dawn upon the world that the highest
ideals of manhood were present in the Carpenter of Nazareth.  We must
therefore go back to the Gospels if we would know what manner of man
Jesus was.  The difficulty of presenting the Man Christ Jesus as the
eternal example to the world must have been almost insurmountable; and we
are at once struck with two remarkable features of the synoptics'
portrayal of Him.  (1) The writers make no attempt to produce a work of
art.  They never dream that they are drawing a model for all men to copy.
There is no effort to touch up or tone down the portrait.  They simply
reflect what they see without admixture of colours of their own.  Hence
the paradox of His personality--the intense humanness and yet the mystery
of godliness ever and anon shining through the commonest incidents of His
life.  (2) Even more remarkable than the absence of subjectivity on the
part of the evangelists is the unconsciousness of Jesus that He is being
portrayed as an example.  We do not receive the impression that the Son
of Man was consciously living for the edification of the world.  His
mental attitude is not that of an actor playing a part, but of a true and
genuine man living his own life and fulfilling his own purpose.  There is
no seeming or display.  Goodness to be effectual as an example must be
unconscious goodness.  We are impressed everywhere with the perfect
naturalness and spontaneity of all that Christ did and uttered.[1]

The character of Jesus has been variously interpreted, and it is one of
the evidences of His moral greatness that each age has emphasised some
new aspect of His {148} personality.  In a nature so rich and complex it
is difficult to fix upon a single category from which may be deduced the
manifold attributes of His character.  Two conceptions of Jesus have
generally prevailed down the centuries.  One view interprets His
character in terms of asceticism; the other in terms of aestheticism.[2]
Some regard Him as the representative of Hebrew sorrow and sacrifice;
others see in Him the type of Hellenic joy and geniality.  There are
passages in Scripture confirmatory of both impressions.  On the one hand,
there is a whole series of virtues of the passive order which are utterly
alien to the Greek ideal; and, on the other hand, there is equally
prominent a tone of tranquil gladness, of broad sympathy with, and keen
appreciation of, the beautiful in nature and life which contrasts with
the spirit of Hebrew abnegation.  But, after all, neither of these traits
reveals the secret of Jesus.  Joy and sorrow are but incidents in life.
They have only moral value as the vehicles of a profounder spiritual
purpose.  To help every man to realise the fullness and perfection of his
being as a child of God is the aim of His life and ministry, and
everything that furthers this end is gratefully recognised by Him as a
good.  He neither courts nor shuns pain.  Neither joy nor sorrow is for
Him an end in itself.  Both are but incidents upon the way of holiness
and love which He had chosen to travel.

2.  Everywhere there was manifest in the life and teaching of Jesus a
note of _self-mastery and authority_ which impressed His contemporaries
and goes far to explain and unify the various features of His personality
and influence.  It is remarkable to notice how often the word 'power' is
applied to Jesus in the New Testament.[3]  Whether we regard His attitude
to God, or His relation to others, it is this note of quiet strength, of
vital moral force which arrests our attention.  It will be sufficient to
mention in passing three directions in which this quality of power is
manifest.

{149}

(1) It is revealed in the consciousness of a _divine mission_.  He goes
steadily forward with the calmness of one who knows himself and his work.
He has no fear or hesitancy.  Courage, earnestness, and singleness of
purpose mark His career.  He is conscious that His task has been given
Him by God, and that He is the chosen instrument of His Father's will.
Life has a greatness and worth for Him because it may be made the
manifestation and vehicle of the divine purpose.

(2) His power is revealed again in the _realisation of Holiness_.
Holiness is to be differentiated, on the one hand, from innocence; and,
on the other, from sinlessness.  Innocence is untried goodness;
sinlessness is negative goodness; holiness is achieved and victorious
goodness.  It was not mere absence of sin that distinguished Jesus.  His
was a purity won by temptation, an obedience perfected through suffering,
a peace and harmony of soul attained not by self-suppression, but by the
consecration of His unfolding life to the will of God.

(3) His power is manifested once more in His _Sympathy with man_.  His
purity was pervasive.  It flowed forth in acts of love.  He went about
doing good, invading the world of darkness and sorrow with light and joy.
It is the wealth of His interests and the variety of His sympathy which
give to the ministry of the Son of Man its impressiveness and charm.
With gladness as with grief, with the playfulness of childhood and the
earnestness of maturity, with the innocent festivities and the graver
pursuits of His fellow-men, with the cares of the rich and the trials of
the poor, He disclosed the most intimate and tender feeling.  His
parables show that He had an open and observant eye for all the life
around Him.  To every appeal He responded with an insight and delicacy of
consideration which betokened that He Himself had sounded the depths of
human experience and knew what was in man.  Humour, irony, and pathos in
turn are revealed in His human intercourse.

But while Jesus delighted to give of Himself freely He knew also how to
withhold Himself.  There can be no true {150} sympathy without restraint.
The passive virtues--meekness, patience, forbearance--which appear in the
life of Christ are 'not the signs of mere self-mortification, they are
the signs of power in reserve.  They are the marks of one who can afford
to wait, who expects to suffer; and that not because he is simply meek
and lowly, but because he is also strong and calm.'[4]

The New Testament depicts Jesus as made in the likeness of men, whose
life, though unique in some of its aspects, was in its general conditions
normal, passing through the ordinary stages of growth, and participating
in the common experiences of mankind.  He had to submit to the same laws
and limitations of the universe as we have.  There was the same call, in
His case as in ours, to obedience and endurance.  There was the same
demand for moral decision.  Temptation, suffering, and toil, which mean
so much for man in the discipline of character, were factors also in the
spiritual development of Christ.  Trust, prayer, thanksgiving were
exercised by the Son of Man as by others; confession alone had no place
in His life.

3.  The question has been seriously asked, Can the example and teaching
of Jesus be really adopted in modern life as the pattern and rule of
conduct?  Is there not something strangely impracticable in His Ethics;
and, however admirably suited to meet the needs of His own time, utterly
inapplicable to the complex conditions of society to-day?  On the one
hand, Tolstoy would have us follow the example of Jesus to the letter,
and rigidly practise the precepts of the Sermon on the Mount, even to the
extent of refusing to resist wrong and possess property, and of holding
aloof from all culture and enterprise, and the interests of life
generally.  On the other hand, philosophers like Paulsen and Bradley,
perceiving the utter impracticableness of Tolstoy's contentions, yet at
the same time recognising his attitude as the only consistent one if the
imitation of Christ is to have vogue at all, are convinced that the
earthly life of Jesus is not the model of our {161} age, and that to
attempt to carry out His precepts consistently would be not only
impossible but injurious to all the higher interests of humanity.[5]

But this conclusion is based, it seems to us, upon a two-fold
misapprehension.  It is founded upon an inadequate interpretation of the
life and teaching of Christ; and also upon a wholly mechanical
understanding of the meaning and value of example.

(1) What was Christ's ideal of the Christian life?  Was it that of the
monk or the citizen?--the recluse who meditates apart on his own
salvation, or the worker who enters the world and contributes to the
betterment of mankind?  Is the kingdom of God a realm apart and separate
from all the other domains of activity?  Or has Christianity, according
to its essence, room within it for an application of its truth to the
complex relations and manifold interests of modern life?  Both views have
found expression in the history of the Church.  But there can be little
doubt as to which is the true interpretation of the mind of Jesus.[6]

(2) But, again, what is meant by the 'imitation of Christ' has been also
misconceived.  Imitation is not a literal mechanical copying.  To make
the character of another your model does not mean that you are to become
his mimic or echo.  In asking us to follow Him, Christ does not desire to
suppress our individuality, but to enrich and ennoble it.  When He says,
on the occasion of the feet-washing of His disciples, 'I have given you
an example, that ye should do as I have done to you,'[7] obviously it was
not the outward literal performance, but the spirit of humility and
service embodied in the act which He desired His disciples to emulate.
From another soul we receive incentives rather than rules.  No teacher or
master, says Emerson, can {152} realise for us what is good.[8]  Within
our own souls alone can the decision be made.  We cannot hope to
interpret the character of another until there be within our own breasts
the same moral spirit from which we believe his conduct to proceed.  The
very nature of goodness forbids slavish reproduction.  Hence there is a
certain sense in which the paradox of Kant is true, that 'imitation finds
no place at all in morality.'[9]  The question, 'What would Jesus do?' as
a test of conduct covers a quite inadequate conception of the intimate
and vital relations Christ bears to our humanity.  'It is not to copy
after Christ,' says a modern writer, 'but to receive His spirit and make
it effective--which is the moral task of the Christian.'[10]  Christ is
indeed our example, but He is more.  And unless He were more He could not
be so much.  We could not strive to be like Him if He were not already
within us, the Principle and Spirit of our life, the higher and diviner
self of every man.

What is meant, then, by saying that Christ is the ideal character or norm
of life is that He represents to us human nature in its typical or ideal
form.  As we behold His perfection we feel that this is what we were made
for, this is the true end of our being.  Every one may, in short, see in
Him the fulfilment of the divine idea and purpose of man--the conception
and end of himself.[11]


II

_The Christian Motive_.--Rightly regarded Christ is not only the model of
the new life, but its motive as well.  All the great appeals of the
Gospel--every persuasion and plea by which God seeks to awaken a
responsive love in the hearts of men--are centred in, and find expression
through, the Person and Passion of Christ.

1.  The question of motive is a primary one in Ethics.  {153} If,
therefore, we ask, What is the deepest spring of action, what is the
incentive and motive power for the Christian?  The answer is: (1) the
love of God, a love which finds its highest expression in _Forgiveness_.
Of all motives the most powerful is the sense of being pardoned.  Even
when it is only one human being who forgives another, nothing strikes so
deep into the human heart or evokes penitence so tender and unreserved,
or brings a joy so pure and lasting.  It not only restores the old
relation which wrong had dissolved; it gives the offender a sense of
loyalty unknown before.  He is now bound not by law but by honour, and it
would be a disloyalty worse than the original offence if he wounded such
love again.  Thus it is that God becomes the object of reverence and
affection, not because He imposes laws upon us but because He pardons and
redeems.  The consciousness of forgiveness is far more potent in
producing goodness than the consciousness of law.  This psychological
fact lay at the root of Christ's ministry, and was the secret of His hope
for man.  This, too, is the key to all that is paradoxical, and, at the
same time, to all that is most characteristic in St Paul's Gospel.  What
the Law could not do, forgiveness achieves.  It creates the new heart,
and with it the new holiness.  'It is not anything statutory which makes
saints out of sinful men; it is the forgiveness which comes through the
passion of Jesus.'[12]

(2) Next to the motive of forgiveness, and indeed arising from it, is the
new consciousness of the _Fatherhood of God_, and the corresponding idea
of sonship.  This was a motive to which Jesus habitually appealed.  He
invariably sought not only to create in men confidence in God by
revealing His fatherly providence, but also to lift them out of their
apathy and thraldom by kindling in their souls a sense of their worth and
liberty as sons of God.  The same thought is prominent also in the
epistles both of St. Paul and St. John.  As children of God we are no
longer menials and hirelings who do their work merely for pay, and
without {154} intelligent interest, but sons who share our Father's
possessions and co-operate with Him in His purposes.[13]

(3) Closely connected with the idea of Sonship is that of life as a
_Divine Vocation_.  Life is a trust, and as the children of God we are
called to serve Him with all we have and are.  The sense of the vocation
and stewardship of life acts as a motive: (_a_) in giving _dignity and
stability_ to character, saving us, on the one hand, from fatalism, and
on the other from fanaticism, and affording definiteness of purpose to
all our endeavours; and (_b_) in promoting _sincerity and fidelity_ in
our life-work.  Thoroughness will permeate every department of our
conduct, since whatsoever we do in word or deed we do as unto God.  All
duty is felt to be one, and as love to God becomes its motive the
smallest as well as the greatest act is invested with infinite worth.
'All service ranks the same with God.'

(4) Another motive, prominent in the Pauline Epistles, but present also
in the eschatological passages of the Synoptics, ought to be mentioned,
though it does not now act upon Christians in the same form--_the
Shortness and Uncertainty of life_.  Our Lord enjoins men to work while
it is day for the night cometh; and in view of the suddenness and
unexpectedness of the coming of the Son of Man He exhorts to watchfulness
and preparedness.  A similar thought forms the background of the
apostle's conception of life.  His entire view of duty as well as his
estimate of earthly things are tinged with the idea that 'the time is
short,' and that 'the Lord is at hand.'  Christians are exhorted,
therefore, to sit lightly to all worldly considerations.  Our true
citizenship is in heaven.  But neither the apostle nor his Master ever
urges this fact as a reason for apathy or indifference.  Life may be
brief, but it is not worthless.  The thought of life's brevity must not
act as an opiate, but rather as a stimulant.  If our existence here is
short, then there is all the greater necessity that its days should be
nobly filled, and its transient opportunities seized and turned into
occasions of strenuous service.

{155}

(5) To the considerations just mentioned must be added a cognate truth
which has coloured the whole Christian view of life, and has been a most
powerful factor in shaping Christian conduct--_the idea of Immortality_.
It is not quite correct to say that we owe this doctrine to Christianity
alone.  Long before the Christian era it was recognised in Egypt, Greece,
and the Orient generally.  But it was entertained more as a surmise than
a conviction.  And among the Greeks it was little more than the shadowy
speculation of philosophers.  Plato, in his _Phaedo_, puts into the mouth
of Socrates utterances of great beauty and far-reaching import; yet,
notwithstanding their sublimity, they scarcely attain to more than a
'perhaps.'  Even in Hebrew literature, as we have seen, while isolated
instances of a larger hope are not wanting, there is no confident or
general belief in an after-life.  But what was only guessed at by the
ancients was declared as a fact by Christ, and preached as a sublime and
comforting truth by the apostles; and it is not too much to say that
survival after death is at once the most distinctive doctrine of
Christianity and the most precious hope of Christendom.  The whole moral
temperature of the world, says Jean Paul Richter, has been raised
immeasurably by the fact that Christ by His Gospel has brought life and
immortality to light.  This idea, which has found expression, not only in
all the creeds of Christendom, but also in the higher literature and
poetry of modern times, has given a new motive to action, has founded a
new type of heroism, and nerved common men and women to the discharge of
tasks from which nature recoils.  The assurance that death does not end
existence, but that 'man has forever,' has not only exalted and
transfigured the common virtues of humanity; but, held in conjunction
with the belief in the divine Fatherhood and human brotherhood, given to
life itself a new solemnity and pathos.[14]

2.  But if these are the things which actuate men in their service of God
and man, can it be legitimately said that the Christian motive is pure
and disinterested?  It is {166} somewhat remarkable that two opposite
charges have been brought against Christian Ethics.[15]  In one quarter
the reproach has been made that Christianity suppresses every natural
desire for happiness, and inculcates a life of severe renunciation.  And
with equally strong insistence there are others who find fault with it
because of its hedonism, because it rests morality upon an appeal to
selfish interests alone.

(1) The first charge is sufficiently met, we think, by our view of the
Christian ideal.  We have seen that it is a full rich life which Christ
reveals and commends.  The kingdom of God finds its realisation, not in a
withdrawal from human interests, but in a larger and fuller participation
in all that makes for the highest good of humanity.  It is a caricature
of Christ's whole outlook upon existence to represent Him as teaching
that this life is an outlying waste, forsaken of God and unblessed, and
that the world is so hopelessly bad that it must be wholly renounced.  On
the contrary, it is for Him one of the provinces of the divine kingdom,
and the most trivial of our occupations and the most transient of our
joys and sorrows find their place in the divine order.  It is not
necessary to endorse Renan's idyllic picture of the Galilean ministry to
believe that for Jesus all life, its ordinary engagements and activities,
had a worth for the discipline and perfecting of character, and were
capable of being consecrated to the highest ends.  There are, indeed, not
a few passages in which the call to self-denial is emphasised.  But
neither Christ nor His apostles represent pain and want as in themselves
efficacious or meritorious.  Renunciation is inculcated not for its own
sake, but always as a means to fuller realisation.  Jesus, indeed,
transcends the common antithesis of life.  For Him it is not a question
as to whether asceticism or non-asceticism is best.  Life is for use.  It
is at once a trust and a privilege.  It may seem to some that He chose
'the primrose path,' but if he did so it was not due to an easy-going
good-nature.  We dare not forget the terrible issues {157} He faced
without flinching.  As Professor Sanday has finely said, 'If we are to
draw a lesson in this respect from our Lord's life, it certainly would
not be that

  "He who lets his feelings run
    In soft luxurious flow,
  Shrinks when hard service must be done,
    And faints at every woe."

It would be rather that the brightest and tenderest human life must have
a stern background, must carry with it the possibility of infinite
sacrifice, of bearing the cross and the crown of thorns.'[16]

(2) The second charge, the charge of hedonism, though seemingly opposed
to the first, comes into line with it in so far as it is alleged that
Christianity, while inculcating renunciation in this world, does so for
the sake of happiness in the next.  It is contended that in regard to
purity of motive the Ethics of Christianity falls below the Ethics of
philosophy.[17]  This statement, so often repeated, requires some
examination.

3.  While it may be acknowledged that unselfishness and disinterestedness
are the criterion of moral sublimity, it must be noted at the outset that
considerable confusion of thought exists as to the meaning of motive.
Even in those moral systems in which virtue is represented as wholly
disinterested, the motive may be said to reside in the object itself.
The maxim, 'Virtue for virtue's sake,' really implies what may be called
the 'interest of achievement.'  If virtue has any meaning it must be
regarded as a 'good' which is desirable.  Perseverance in the pursuit of
any good implies the hope of success; in other words, of the reward which
lies in the attainment of the object desired.  The reward sought may not
be foreign to the nature of virtue itself, but none the less, the idea of
reward is present, and, in a sense, is the incentive to all virtuous
endeavour.  This is, indeed, implied by a no less rigorous {168} moralist
than Kant.  For as he himself teaches, the question, 'What should I do?'
leads inevitably to the further question, 'What may I hope?'[18]  The end
striven after cannot be a matter of indifference, if virtue is to have
moral value at all.  It must be a real and desirable end--an end which
fulfils the purpose of a man as a moral being.

(1) But though Kant insists with rigorous logic that reverence for the
majesty of the moral law must be the only motive of duty, and that all
motives springing from personal desire or hope of happiness must be
severely excluded, it is curious to find that in the second part of his
_Critique of Practical Reason_ he proceeds, with a strange inconsistency,
to make room for the other idea, viz., that virtue is not without its
reward, and is indeed united in the end with happiness.  Felicity and
holiness shall be ultimately one, he says; and, at the last, virtue shall
be seen 'to be worthy of happiness,' and happiness shall be the crown of
goodness.[19]  Thus those philosophers, of whom Kant is typical, who
contend for the purity of the moral motive and the disinterested loyalty
to the good, bring in, at the end, the notion of happiness, which, as a
concomitant or consequence of virtue, cannot fail to be also an active
incentive.

(2) When we turn to Christian Ethics we find that here, not less than in
philosophical Ethics, the motive lies in the object itself.  The end and
the motive are really one, and the highest good is to be sought for
itself and not for the sake of some ulterior gain.  It is true, indeed,
that Christianity has not always been presented in its purest form; too
often have prudence, fear, other-worldliness been set forth as
inducements to goodness, as if the Gospel cared nothing for the
disposition of a man, and was concerned only with his ultimate happiness.
Even a moralist so acute as Paley bases morality upon no higher ground
than enlightened self-interest.  But the most superficial reader of the
Gospels must see at a glance the wide variance between such a view and
that of Christ.  Nothing could be further from the spirit of Jesus than
to estimate the {169} excellence of an action by the magnitude or the
utility of its effects rather than the intrinsic good of its motive.
Otherwise He would not have ranked the widow's mite above the gifts of
vanity, nor esteemed the tribute of the penitent, not so much for the
costliness of her offering, as for the sincerity of affection it
revealed.  Christ looked upon the heart alone, and the worth of an action
lay essentially for Him in its inner quality.  Sin resided not merely in
the overt act, but even more in the secret desire.  A man may be
outwardly blameless, and yet not really good.  He who remains sober or
honest simply because of the worldly advantages attaching to such conduct
may obtain a certificate of respectability from society; but, judged by
the standard of Christ, he is not truly a moral man.  In an age which is
too prone to make outward propriety the gauge of goodness, it cannot be
sufficiently insisted upon that the Ethic of Christianity is an Ethic of
the inner motive and intention, and that, in this respect, it does not
fall a whit behind the demand of the most rigid system of disinterested
morality.

(_a_) It must, however, be freely admitted that our Lord frequently
employs the sanctions both of rewards and penalties.  In the time of
Christ the idea of reward, so prominent in the Old Testament, still held
an important place in Jewish religion, being specially connected with the
Messianic Hope and the coming of the kingdom.  It was not unnatural,
therefore, that Jesus, trained in Hebrew religious modes of thought and
expression, should frequently employ the existing conceptions as vehicles
of His own teaching; but, at the same time, purifying them of their more
materialistic associations and giving to them a richer spiritual content.
While the kingdom of God is spoken of as a gift, and promised, indeed, as
a reward, the word 'reward' in this connection is not used in the
ordinary sense, but 'is rather conceived as belonging to the same order
of spiritual experience as the state of heart and mind which ensures its
bestowal.'[20]  Though Jesus does not {160} hesitate to point His
disciples to the blessings of heaven which they will receive in the
future, these are represented for the most part not as material benefits,
but as the intensification and enrichment of life itself.[21]

It was usually the difficulties rather than the advantages of
discipleship upon which Jesus first laid stress.  He would not that any
one should come to Him on false pretences, or without fully counting the
cost.[22]  Even when He Himself called His original disciples, it was of
service and not of recompense He spoke.  'Follow Me, and I will make you
fishers of men.'[23]  The privilege consisted not in outward eclat, but
in the participation of the Master's own purpose and work.  Still, all
service carries with it its own reward, and no one can share the mission
of Christ without also partaking of that satisfaction and joy which are
inseparable from the highest forms of spiritual ministry.[24]

There is, however, one passage recorded by all the Synoptists which seems
at first sight to point more definitely to a reward of a distinctly
material character, and to one that was to be enjoyed not merely in the
future, but even in this present life.  When Peter somewhat boastfully
spoke of the sacrifice which he and his brethren had made for the
Gospel's sake, and asked, 'What shall we have therefor?' Jesus replied,
'Verily, I say unto you, that no man that hath left home, or brethren, or
sisters, or mother, or father, or children, or lands, for My sake and the
Gospel's sake, but shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses
and brethren, sisters and mothers, and children and lands, with
persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life.'[25]  Now, while
this is a promise of wide sweep and large generosity, it is neither so
arbitrary nor material as it seems.  First, the words, 'with
persecutions,' indicate that suffering is not only the very condition of
the promise, but indeed an essential part of the reward--an element which
would of itself be a true test of the sincerity of the sacrifice.  {161}
But, second, even the promise, 'An hundredfold now in this time,' is
obviously not intended to be taken in a literal sense, but rather as
suggesting that the gain, while apparently of the same nature as the
sacrifice, will have a larger spiritual import.  For, just as Jesus
Himself looked upon all who shared His own devotion as His mother and
brethren; so, in the deepest sense, when a man leaves father and mother,
renouncing home and family ties for the sake of bringing his fellow-men
to God, he seems to be emptying his life of all affectionate
relationships, but in reality he is entering into a wider brotherhood;
and, in virtue of his ministry of love, is being knit in bonds stronger
than those of earthly kinship, with a great and increasing community of
souls which owe to him their lives.[26]  The promise is no arbitrary gift
or bribe capriciously bestowed; it is the natural fruition of moral
endeavour.  For there is nothing so productive as sacrifice.  What the
man who yields himself to the service of Christ actually gives is life;
and what he gets back, increased an hundredfold, is just life again, his
own life, repeated and reflected in the men and women whom he has won to
Christ.

In some of His parables Christ employs the analogy of the
work-engagement, in which labour and payment seem to correspond.  But the
legal element has a very subordinate place in the simile.  Jesus lifts
the whole relationship into a higher region of thought, and transforms
the idea of wages into that of a gift of love far transcending the legal
claim which can be made by the worker.  He who has the bondsman's mind,
and works only for the hireling's pay, will only get what he works for.
But he who serves from love finds in the service itself that which must
always be its truest recompense--the increased power of service, the
capacity of larger devotion[27]--'The wages of going on.'[28]  In his
latest volume Deissmann has pointed out that we can only do justice to
the utterances of the New Testament regarding work and wages by examining
them _in situ_, {162} amidst their natural surroundings.  Jesus and St.
Paul spoke with distinct reference to the life and habits of the common
people of their day.  'If you elevate such utterances to the level of the
Kantian moral philosophy, and reproach primitive Christianity with
teaching for the sake of reward, you not only misunderstand the words,
but tear them up by the roots.' . . . 'The sordid ignoble suggestions so
liable to arise in the lower classes are altogether absent from the
sayings of Jesus and His apostles, as shown by the parable of the
Labourers in the Vineyard, and the analogous reliance of St. Paul solely
upon grace.'[29]

The same inner relation subsists between Sin and Penalty.  But here,
again, the award of punishment is not arbitrary, but the natural
consequence of disobedience to the law of the spiritual life.  He who
seeks to save his life shall lose it.  He who makes this world his all
shall receive as his reward only what this world can give.  He who buries
his talent shall, by the natural law of disuse, forfeit it.  Not to
believe in Christ is to miss eternal life.  To refuse Him who is the
Light of the world is to remain in darkness.

(6) An examination of the Pauline epistles yields a similar conclusion.
St. Paul does not disdain to employ the sanctions of hope and fear.
'Knowing the terrors of the Lord' he persuades men, and 'because of the
promises' he urges the Corinthians 'to cleanse themselves and perfect
holiness.'  But in Paul's case, as in that of our Lord, the charge of
hedonism is meaningless.  For not only does the conception hold a most
subordinate place in his teaching, but the idea loses the sense of merit,
and is transmuted into that of a free gift.  And in general, in all the
passages where the hope of the future is introduced, the idea of reward
is merged in the yearning for a fuller life, which the Christian, who has
once tasted of its joy here, may well expect in richer measure
hereafter.[30]

Enough has been said to clear Christianity of the charge of hedonism.  So
far from Christian Ethics falling {163} below Philosophical Ethics in
regard to purity of motive, it really surpasses it in the sublimity of
its sanctions.  The Kantian idea of virtue tends to empty the obligation
of all moral content.  Goodness, as the philosopher himself came to see,
cannot be represented as a mere impersonal abstraction.  Virtue has no
meaning except in relation to its ultimate end.  And life in union with a
personal God, in whose image we have been made, is the end and purpose of
man's being.  Noble as it may be to live morally without the thought of
God, the man who so strives to live does not attain to such a high
conception of life as he who lives with God for his object.  Motives
advance with aims, and the higher the ideal the nobler the incentive.
Fear of future punishment and the desire for future happiness may prove
effective aids to the will at certain stages of moral development, but
ultimately the love of God and the beauty of holiness make every other
motive superfluous.  Indeed, the reward of the Christian life is such as
can only appeal to one who has come to identify himself with the divine
will.  The Christian man is always entering upon his reward.  His joy is
his Master's joy.  He has no other interest.  His reward, both here and
hereafter, is not some external payment, something separable from
himself; it is wholly conditioned by what he is, and is simply his own
growth of character, his increasing power of being good and doing good.
And if it be still asked, What is the great inducement?  What is it that
makes the life of the Christian worth living?  The answer can only
be--The hope of becoming what Christ has set before man as desirable, of
growing up to the stature of perfect manhood, of attaining to the
likeness of Jesus Christ Himself.  But so far from this being a selfish
aim, not to seek one's life in God--to be indifferent to all the inherent
blessings and joys involved--would be not the mark of pure
disinterestedness, but the evidence, rather, of a lack of appreciation of
what life really means.  The soul that has caught the vision of God and
been thrilled with the grace of the Son of Man cannot but yield itself to
the best it knows.



[1] Cf. Fairbairn, _The Phil. of the Ch. Religion_, pp. 358 ff.

[2] Peabody, _Christ and the Christian Character_, p. 44.

[3] Peabody, _op. cit._, pp. 53 f.

[4] Peabody, _op. cit._, p. 68.

[5] See Paulsen, _System der Ethik_, pp. 56 ff.; also Troeltsch, _op.
cit._, vol. ii. p. 847.

[6] Cf. Ehrhardt, _Der Grundcharacter d. Ethik. Jesu_, p. 110.  'The
ascetic element in the ethics of Jesus is its transient, the service of
God its permanent element.'  Cf. also Strauss, _Leben Jesu_, who speaks
of 'the Hellenic quality' in Jesus; also Keim, _Jesus of Nazareth, and
Troeltsch_, _op. cit._, vol. i. pp. 34 ff.

[7] John xiii. 15.

[8] _Conduct of Life_.

[9] _Metaphysics of Ethics_, sect. ii.

[10] Schultz, _Grundriss d. evang. Ethik_, p. 5.

[11] Cf. _Ecce Homo_, chap. x.

[12] This thought has been beautifully worked out by Prof. Denney in
_British Weekly_, Jan. 13, 1912.

[13] Luke xv.

[14] Cf. Knight, _The Christian Ethic_, p. 36.

[15] See Haering, _Ethics of the Christian Life_, p. 190.

[16] 'Apocalyptic Element in the Gospels,' _Hibbert Journal_, Oct. 1911.

[17] The question of rewards has been fully discussed by Jacoby,
_Neutestamentliche Ethik_, pp. 41 ff.; also Barbour, _op. cit._, pp.  226
ff.

[18] Cf. _Kritik d. prakt. Vernunft_, p. 143.

[19] Kant, _Idem_.

[20] Barbour, _op. cit._, p. 231.

[21] Matt. v. 12, xix. 21, xxv. 34; Luke vi. 23, xviii. 22; Mark x. 21.

[22] Mark viii. 19; Luke ix. 57.

[23] Mark i. 17, ii. 14.

[24] Luke xxii. 29 f.

[25] Mark x. 28-31; cf. Matt. xix. 27-30.

[26] This thought is finely elaborated by Barbour.

[27] Matt. xxv. 21; Luke xix. 17.

[28] Tennyson, _Wages_.

[29] Deissmann, _Light from the Ancient East_, pp. 316 ff.

[30] See also Eph. vi. 5-8; 1 Cor. iii. 14; Rom. v. 2-5, vi. 23, viii.
16.




{164}

