PART III.

How far our Happiness depends on Ourselves.




I. _Our Occupations, those of Necessity and those of Choice._


In one of his novels, Emile Zola describes a conversation between the
workwomen of a Parisian laundry. The subject was, what each would do
if she had ten thousand francs a year. They were all of one mind. They
would do just nothing at all!

This washerwoman’s ideal of happiness has also commended itself to
various philosophic minds. “I have often said,” writes Pascal, “that
all misfortunes befall men because they do not know enough to stay
quietly in their own rooms.” What puzzled him was that men will make
the most toilsome efforts to secure a period of repose; and as soon as
they obtain it, they weary of it and demand action. He might have
learned from this the fallacy of his own definition.

The genial Herder taught that simplicity and repose are the two valves
of the shell that secretes the pearl of human felicity; but he
neglected to add that it must be the simplicity of aims combined with
a multiplicity of means; and repose enjoyed merely as a preparation
for renewed activity.

The true doctrine is that Labor, systematic, effective, congenial
Labor, is not only a necessity, it is the source of the highest
enjoyment to men. The ancients were right when they said the gods sell
all pleasures at the price of toil. “Function in healthful action” is
the definition which the modern physiologist gives of the feeling of
pleasure; and he but translates into prose the poetic expression of
the old Greek. The elements of true happiness must be sought in
activity, not in repose; and it is high time that the world and the
wiseacres found it out, and ceased singing peans to idleness and
cursing the necessity of work.

Most men and a great many women have to work for their living. They
usually accept the necessity with discontent and with envy of those
who are idle or are in other pursuits. The farmer thinks he would have
done better to have gone to the city. The lawyer regrets that he did
not study medicine. As in Dr. Johnson’s story:――

“Surely,” said Rasselas, “the wise men to whom we listen with
reverence chose that mode of life for themselves which they thought
most likely to make them happy.”

“Very few,” replied the poet, “live by choice. Every man is placed in
his present condition by causes which acted without his foresight, and
with which he did not always co-operate.”

In this country most men select for themselves the occupation which
they pursue for a livelihood; but I doubt whether the freedom in their
choice makes them more contented with it. The root of their discontent
lies deeper than is suggested in Dr. Johnson’s philosophic tale, and
its removal, so indispensable to personal happiness, must be sought
for elsewhere than in still wider license of choosing.

So far as either happiness or success is concerned it makes no
difference, in nine cases out of ten, what business or profession a
young man adopts, so that it is suitable to his education and social
position. The rare exceptions are where there is some strong natural
bent or aptitude; and even then the pursuit of it is more likely to
bring enjoyment than money. Men are about equally fitted by nature for
all the ordinary avocations of life, and the choice of a business is
less important than is generally believed.

That is not where the secret of success and happiness lies. It lies in
learning to practice one’s trade or profession as an art, to like it
for its own sake, to derive a considerable portion of our pleasure
from its pursuit, to have, as the French say, our heart in it, _Avoir
le cœur au métier_. But how is this possible, one will ask, with the
drudgery of the counting house, or the mill, or the harvest field, or
the Court of Quarter Sessions? It is possible with any avocation, if
one will take the trouble to think about it as one of the manifold
branches of human industry, to study its relations to other branches
and to the lives and fates of human beings, to try to improve it, and
to learn its attractions for those who do like it, and endeavor to
enter into their feelings. Every occupation has some such attractions
and some such possibilities. Those who are willing to see and seize
them are those who derive both solid enjoyment and substantial rewards
from their work.

Another secret lies in the cultivation of a sort of analogy or harmony
between our mental disposition and the occurrences and surroundings in
which our obligatory labor places us. This is quite within our own
power to effect by the voluntary control of our thoughts. Why busy our
imaginations and disturb our minds with dreaming of the pleasures of
foreign travel when we know we have to stay at home and work ten hours
a day? Far better occupy ourselves with the interests around us and
the easily attainable pleasures within our reach. Have no fear that
this course is narrowing or lowering. There are no nobler games than
those which can be played on any village lawn, and the hyssop on your
garden wall, could you read it, would teach you the laws of all
organic nature.

The considerations which should have weight in the choice of avocation
are less those of capacity or inclination, since these differ little
and can readily be cultivated, than those referred to on an earlier
page which relate to health, bodily and mental. It is not necessary to
be very clever to succeed in business; only a little more clever than
those around you. But it is necessary to have your health; for in the
struggle for bread, the weak are thrust to the wall without remorse.
No one who chooses wisely will select a business which will aggravate
an hereditary or acquired malady. It is more satisfactory to be
honor-man of a lower class, than come in at the tail-end of a higher
one.

There are also certain mental disqualifications which apply especially
to the professions. William Hazlitt objected to all professions which
depend on reputation, because this is “as often got without merit as
lost without deserving;” but this is less the case now than it was
formerly. The point is rather a mental unfitness for the work
required, a state of things which may exist with plenty of ability.
The politician with an instinctive shrinking from publicity, the
lawyer who has an aversion to argument, the physician who is unable to
show sympathy and interest where he feels none, may succeed in his
profession, but he will scarcely enjoy it.

Intense application to an occupation is a common cause of distaste for
it and unhappiness in it. Such concentration is nearly always
needless, and is often fruitless. The most brilliant fortunes have not
been the products of hard work, but of shrewd planning. The sweetness
of the chimes does not depend on the violence of the ringing, but on
the skill of the bellman. I had a friend who was brought up a broker,
but remained a philosopher. He used to say that energy in business is
the most common cause of failures. He referred, of course, to that
exclusive and persistent zeal which is pretty sure to end by
enfeebling the body and exhausting the mind.

Dissatisfaction with one’s lot sometimes arises from over
conscientiousness,――a rare disease, I confess, in business circles,
but I have met a few cases of it. “Always try to do your best,” is one
of several hundred copy-book maxims which hypocrisy pretends are
necessary to success, but which common sense and practical life
quietly ignore. Very much less than your best will often answer the
purpose, and the rope that reaches is long enough. I have witnessed
considerable distress, especially among young men, because their books
of account were not so immaculate, or their press-articles so studied,
as they might have been by greater toil; yet they were good
enough,――and good enough is good.

At the best, making one’s living is often a sad affair. Business life
is like a dinner at a crowded third-rate hotel, ――one’s clothing is so
torn in the struggle for place, and there is so much dirt to eat
before the dessert is served, that either the appetite turns to
nausea, or its satisfaction is followed by indigestion. Hence so many
able men prefer permanent positions on small salaries to embarking in
affairs on their own account. Many a lawyer will give up a large
practice to become a judge on one-third of the income. Politics in the
United States is, as a business, notoriously unsafe, but the
attraction of fixed salaries overcrowds it with aspirants. The dream
of the Socialists is for all citizens to be salaried. Individual
effort, however, alone insures general progress; not to dispense with
it, but to favor its pleasurable development, is the real social
problem.

The true aim of Occupations of Necessity is to provide us time, not
for repose and inaction, as most moralists teach, but for Occupations
of Choice. We call these our recreations, amusements, pastimes,
favorite studies, hobbies, fads, if you please. In these lie the
mainsprings of our felicity; and their character reveals pretty
clearly the measure of our capacity for happiness, and the degree of
our mastery of its theory. If we pass our leisure in cultivating
delusions and pursuing inanities, our enjoyment is that of the insane
and the idiotic, and arises not from the health, but from the disease
or debility, of our minds. Yet how many men, skillful in securing the
means of pleasure, are witless in the use of it!

“Those are the best recreations,” says old Thomas Fuller, “which,
besides refreshing, enable men to some other good ends.” His words,
though they sound well, are only half-wise. To enjoy to the utmost any
favorite pastime or study, it should be pursued for itself alone, and
with no ulterior purpose or hope in view. “’Twere to cramp its use, to
hook it to some useful end.” Pleasure is nobler than profit, enjoyment
is higher than utility, whatever political economists or pulpit
orators say to the contrary. I know some men who always explain their
relaxations as a part of their serious lives; and others who, if
detected in an act of benevolence, hasten to show that it was prompted
by their self-interest; of the two, I admire the latter more.

       *     *     *     *     *

Success is another name for Perseverance. When Newton was asked how he
reached his great discovery, he replied, “By making it incessantly the
subject of my thoughts.”

       *     *     *     *     *

Happiness follows success, provided the latter is rightly achieved and
received.

       *     *     *     *     *

A contented spirit is merely one which pleases itself with little
effort. Contentment differs from Happiness, as repose from recreation.

       *     *     *     *     *

For most, it will be easier to learn to like what they have to do,
than to find the chance of doing what they like.

       *     *     *     *     *

To teach what they do not know, and to live by a trade that they do
not understand, are feats that many are surprised that they cannot
perform.

       *     *     *     *     *

All paths seem rough to the bare feet of those who are used to wearing
shoes.

       *     *     *     *     *

Would you have pleasant yesterdays and welcome to-morrows, let to-day
be busy and confident.

       *     *     *     *     *

You may pound away with the hammer, but if you are not driving a nail,
you will break instead of building.

       *     *     *     *     *

Most divers bring up mud; but few, pearls.

       *     *     *     *     *

The honey which we gather ourselves tastes the sweetest.

       *     *     *     *     *

The measure of value of work is the amount of play it provides for;
the measure of value of play is the amount of work there is in it.

       *     *     *     *     *

Play-time should be perfecting-time; the use of leisure hours is to
get rid of the lees of life.

       *     *     *     *     *

Before all days are made holidays, all men should become heroes.




II. _Money-making, its Laws and its Limits._


There are some prayers which belong to the universal Religion of
Humanity, and none more so than this, which is found in the oldest
prayer-book of the Aryan race, the Rig Veda,――“O Lord, prosper us in
the getting and the keeping!” “To make money” is certainly the “soul’s
sincere desire” of most citizens of the world at the present day, and
nowhere is it more fervently uttered than in this country.

This is no discredit. So far as we can trace the history of man from
the Old Stone Age upward, the one efficient motive to his progress has
been the acquisition and preservation of property. This has been the
immediate aim of all his arts and institutions and the chief incentive
to individual exertion. The time may come――indeed, there are signs of
its approach――when nations will consciously aim at some other than a
property career, and individuals will perceive that the purpose of
riches is something else than to offer facilities for their further
increase or for inglorious ease.

In this devotion to the accumulation of property men have not been led
astray by what Shakespeare so magnificently calls――

                      “The prophetic soul
  Of the wide world, dreaming on things to come.”

Material resources are the indispensable requisites to progress. The
miseries of poverty are manifest, and there are none greater. The
utterly poor man is condemned to servitude and suffering, the woman to
degradation. The imperative demands of the animal wants quench the
finer elements of character, and the brutal stamps out the human in
the desperate struggle for existence.

What wonder that the pauper turns in bestial fury against the rich,
who flaunt before him a superfluous luxury? But his passion springs
from his ignorance.

Wealth is no longer “spoils,” the product of robbery; rather may it be
called the reward paid by society for services rendered humanity. It
is frequently the booty won in some victory over the elements of
nature or of self, and by the practice of those maxims which make men
stronger and more useful to those around them. To the possessor it
supplies the leisure necessary to the cultivation of his nobler
faculties and to the highest of duties――self-development.

The terms “wealth” and “riches” are vague, and to understand the
relation of property to personal happiness, which is my present theme,
we must define them closer.

The time has gone by when either love is satisfied to live in “a cot
beside the hill,” or a philosopher in a tub. Both prefer to possess a
house in a city street and a cottage by the sea; which is a sign that
both the philosophy of love and the love of philosophy have improved.
The affectation of despising riches――which never was anything but an
affectation――is no longer good form, even among sages.

Let us count what riches give.

The list is short and it is pleasant reading. Riches supply us with
the food and drink we like, clothing, shelter, and surroundings to our
taste, means of warmth and light, the services and to some extent the
companionship of those we choose, and especially leisure and means to
pursue our “occupations of choice.”

These are the immediate benefits we derive from riches, and
practically there are none others. Political economists have therefore
called these “real” or “effective” riches, to distinguish them from
“potential” or “productive” riches, by which latter they mean property
or capital invested with the object of supplying “effective” riches,
without personal effort on the part of the owner.

In looking over the list of “effective” riches, one sees that they are
all very desirable, and perhaps, I may as well say, essential to
personal happiness. I am sure nine-tenths of the civilized world will
agree with me. About that, the discussion will be short; but about how
to obtain them, that inquiry is not to be disposed of so quickly.

We are now talking business. Let us be practical. _Les affaires avant
tout._ Just how much a year do I need to be rich? Here I make an
extraordinary discovery, comparable only to that of the Fortunate
Isles, where apple trees bore fruits of gold; or the valley of Sinbad
the Sailor, where the common pebbles were rubies and diamonds. On
turning to that list of “effective” riches, I perceive that very
little of it has to do with _things_, and very much of it with _me_.
It is based on what _I_ like, prefer, choose. If, like the Emperor
Nero, I cannot be satisfied with less than peacocks’ brains and
nightingales’ tongues for dinner, I must have the revenues of an
empire; but if I am content with bread and beans, with a shanty to
keep out the wind and a slop-shop suit for warmth, then a few
fifty-cent fees a day――I happen to be a doctor――will make me rich as a
Rothschild.

Marvelous discovery! beatific vision! only, at the moment of utmost
complacency, calm reflection, like a chill wind, “disencharms the late
enchantment.” My tastes are not my own. They belong to my parents and
my race. I cannot help it that I was born with a thin skin, which
requires fine silk next it to be comfortable; with a queasy stomach,
that demands delicate dishes; with a thirst for remote and useless
learning, which must have expensive books. So from this time forth I
flout at and deride that solemn prig of antiquity, whose name I am
glad to have forgotten, who taught that there are two ways of getting
rich, each equally satisfactory, but one much easier than the
other――the one to diminish our wants, the other to increase our
incomes. I have no better opinion of his teaching than had Malvolio of
the doctrine of Pythagoras, that “the soul of his grandam might haply
inhabit a partridge;” and, really, which of the two the antiquated
mentor thought the easier I cannot imagine. To me, it has been the
latter.

Money, therefore, we must have.

Her physician said of Cleopatra that she had “pursued conclusions
infinite, of easy ways to die.” The expression might be used of many a
modern schemer with reference to getting wealth. But alas! I am
afraid, of the thousands of schemes, that of the dry, unimaginative,
political economists is the only one worth mentioning; and that is
summed up in the hateful word――Economize! or, as they put it in their
stiff dialect,――“Diminish the consumption of your 'effective’ riches,
in order that you may add the surplus to your 'productive’ riches, or
invested capital.”

Some of them are even meddlesome enough to lay down exact rules as to
how much one should put aside from an annual income and securely
invest, in order to meet the demands of what they call “an enlightened
prudence.” This, they say, should be one-fourth of such income, and
they add that if this with its increment is continued for about
five-and-twenty years, the return from your “productive” riches will
then be sufficient to supply you with the amount of “effective” riches
to which you have been accustomed, without further labor on your part;
and you can quietly sit in the chimney corner and live in bliss all
the rest of your days, like the prince in the fairy story. This is a
page, therefore, good for young married people to read who are
starting out in life and have their fortunes to make, and want to
“retire” at their silver wedding.

Such slow work will not suit the energetic young man whose
determination is to get rich quick and have a good time while he is
about it. He has no occasion to go back to antiquity for his two ways
of succeeding, and he proposes to use them both as strings to his bow,
so that by one or the other he will drive his arrow into the bull’s
eye of fortune’s target. Speculation! Advertising! These are the words
of power with which he will enslave the spirits which guard the hidden
pots of gold. He is well aware that a bit of red flannel is bait
enough for many fishes, and that in angling false flies catch more
trout than real ones. The value of knowledge to him is measured by the
ability it gives to detect the ignorance of others and to take
advantage of it. His plans, like those of Cardinal de Retz, are so
laid that, though they fail, they will bring in some return. He will
manage to secure a commission even on the expenditures he makes for
his pleasures. Such a character, and there are many such in our
country, often enough succeeds in his ambitions.

I was in active business for twenty years, and I made the discovery
that the excellent precepts which all are taught in infancy and
continue to praise in after years undergo certain modifications when
it comes to practical life “in the street.” Once I amused myself by
writing them out as I found them really observed, and I am inclined to
insert a few specimens, which I will call


  NEW LAMPS FOR OLD.

  Not how business should be done, but how others do business, is
  the proper study.

  The brighter your virtues shine, the more fish will be
  attracted within reach of your gig.

  Always praise veracity and honesty; they are useful qualities
  in others.

  The louder you condemn dissimulation, the less you will be
  suspected of it.

  Be virtuous; nothing so enables you to appear superior to those
  around you.

  If you are stingy, do not pretend to be generous; the effort
  will betray you.

  When people express surprise at your meanness, it shows that
  you must have established a reputation for liberality.

  Punctuality is excellent; but the man who comes last to an
  engagement is the only one who is not kept waiting.

  The value of time is its value to yourself.

  The simplest device to capture other people’s money is to let
  them think that they can capture yours.

  Truth is bright and strong; too bright for most eyes, and too
  strong to be administered without dilution.

  The man who attends the funeral of his own reputation often has
  a jolly wake.

  Marry for love, work for your living; marry for money, work for
  your liberty.

But enough of these. It will ever hold true that competitive business
breeds deception and selfish greed. The business man who pretends
otherwise is either a hypocrite or of dull moral sense.

In this race for riches, whether along the peaceful avenue of economy
or jostling in the streets of speculation, where comes in the Pursuit
of Happiness? Riches, as I have shown, are and can be nothing more
than means to this end, and those who, through avarice, greed, or
rapacity, make them the end and aim of their aspirations, trade gold
for dross. Scarcely less is the error of those who are ever postponing
the hour of enjoyment until a certain sum is reached, and their
fortune can be rounded off with additional thousands. It is a general
tendency in human nature to live in the past or the future, although
the present alone is man’s. What to him is _now_, and _here_, is all
that he can ever possess or enjoy; and if you ask him, he will grant
it; but he is driven ever by what seems an irrational and demonic
power to seek his joy in what is somewhere else, far off, out of
reach, impossible of attainment, beyond his capacities.

The illusive pictures drawn by memory, by hope, and by imagination
have their proper place in the palace of Human Happiness; but the
majority fix their gaze steadily on these alone, and wander through
halls and chambers filled with rich stuffs and costly ware, through
corridors looking out on entrancing views and courts opening to the
starry heavens, their eyes fixed vacantly on the far distance, and
noting nothing of the beauties by which they are surrounded. To waken
them by some whisper of what they are missing, and to persuade them to
turn their eyes on what is around them, will be my purpose in the
chapters immediately to follow.

       *     *     *     *     *

Bishop Berkeley declared that he was the richest man in England,
because he had trained himself to the habit of mind of regarding
everything which gave him pleasure as his own. In our days, most
philosophers of that school reside in penitentiaries.

       *     *     *     *     *

The disappointments of the _nouveau riche_ are, that what he would
like to buy is not on sale, and what he expected to get for nothing,
he finds can only be had by paying for it.

       *     *     *     *     *

That you are rich, is nothing to me; but only whether you are willing
to spend your money.

       *     *     *     *     *

Many strive harder to appear happy than to be so. Ostentation is
wealth shamming happiness. Envy is the fool who does not see through
the sham.

       *     *     *     *     *

The rich have less advantage over the poor than the latter suppose.

       *     *     *     *     *

Not the inventory of your property, but that of your unsatisfied
wants, measures your fortune; not your annual income, but your annual
deficit or surplus, makes you rich or poor.

       *     *     *     *     *

After all, the worst of poverty is that it leaves us so little money
to give away.

       *     *     *     *     *

In Grecian legend, the apple of discord was made of gold.

       *     *     *     *     *

If you teach your son to love money well, you will have such success
that he will soon love it better than he does you.

       *     *     *     *     *

A miser has merry mourners.

       *     *     *     *     *

Youth saves for age, age for its heirs, and these for nobody.

       *     *     *     *     *

Do not starve your horse to save your hay.

       *     *     *     *     *

When you deliver a eulogy on a plutocrat, you had better dwell on his
millions than on his methods of getting them.




III. _The Pleasures we may Derive from our Senses._


The odious doctrine of the ascetics has been that whatever is
agreeable to man is offensive to God; and that to cultivate the
pleasurable sensations is to prepare one’s self for perdition.

Far more sane than they was that Mohammedan teacher quoted by Gibbon,
who, when asked to describe the true believers, replied,――“_They_ are
the elect of God, whose lives are devoted to the improvement of their
own natural faculties.”

As mistaken as the ascetics, are those wooden-souled disciplinarians
who maintain that we should not look for recreation in our daily work,
but put off the thoughts of it to holidays and vacations. These are
but one degree better than those hypocrites who will tell you that
benevolence should have no place in business, and who will offer you a
round sum for a public charity, while they squeeze the salaries of
their shop-girls down to the lowest quarter-of-a-dollar.

Down with such imposters! Each hour of our lives is the best hour for
enjoying ourselves and for providing others the means of enjoyment;
and there is no better way to accomplish both these objects than that
suggested by the pious Arab,――“The improvement of our own natural
faculties.”

These have been divided by experts in such matters into three
classes,――the Sensations, the Emotions, and the Intellect. I shall
consider the training of each with reference to the special pleasures
it can furnish. All are equally worth cultivating. The delights of one
are not lower than those of another, if accepted in the proper spirit.
He who has right self-culture will derive gratification from them all;
and will not be, like the French peasant in Halevy’s story, unable to
understand how heaven could be attractive unless his native village
were transported there.

Some general rules must be respected if the exercise of any of our
faculties is to yield the maximum of pleasure. These rules are derived
from the physiology of the nervous system; for it cannot be doubted
that this underlies, if it is not identical with, every feeling and
function of the mind.

I hasten to say this, lest the reader should suppose they are derived
from moral philosophy, or based on duty or virtue. I am well aware
they could expect a scant hearing were this the case. Men dislike as
much to be urged to their good, as to be forbidden what is hurtful.
Nor are they difficult to understand; but this helps little; it is
easy enough to learn and to teach wisdom; to apply it to our own
conduct is what is hard.

The first rule is that of Moderation. Restrain the indulgence in any
one pleasure. Immoderation is sure to be followed by exhaustion of the
nerve-fibres and subsequent painful reaction. We should not think
highly of a gardener who when he picks his flowers pulls his plants up
by the roots. Yet this is the fashion in which many men treat their
own faculties.

The second rule is that of Variety. Multiply the sources and kinds of
pleasure. Increase the susceptibility of all your faculties to its
sweet appeals. Seek it in all directions immediately around you. But
do not confound the love of variety with instability and freakishness;
nor imitate those prodigals who throw the bottle away after the first
sip of its contents:――

              “Ces buveurs de bière,
  Qui jette la bouteille après la première verre.”

There are other rules; but to recite them would make this page as dull
as a sermon, and it would have as little effect. These two are the
chief, and they supplement each other; for he who indulges moderately
in all his pleasures will have the capacity to indulge in many, and
will preserve those features which are the most desirable in
all,――fineness of Quality and persistence of Duration. He will deal
with his faculties as a good government with its subjects,――whose aim
is not to make a few extremely happy, but to provide for all a fair
share of enjoyment, without making any miserable.

The most general sense we possess is that which is called the
“muscular” sense. This it is which yields the pleasurable feeling in
exercise, in athletic sports, in rowing, riding, dancing, and what old
Thomas Fuller called “the descants on the plain air of walking.”
Through it we gain the sensation of buoyancy and elasticity, we “feel
good,” our personality is sharpened, and our appreciation of life and
what it has to offer is heightened. It is the synonym of healthful
activity, and thus becomes the most advantageous preparation for all
species of enjoyment.

By physiologists, this muscular sense is not included in the list of
“special” senses, because it cannot be localized in any one set of
nerves. It is nearest allied to the special sense of Touch, which is
centred in certain “tactile corpuscles,” distributed irregularly
beneath the skin, principally on the finger-tips. They are extremely
useful, but not prominently serviceable in the production of
pleasurable sensations. The stroking of soft and warm substances, such
as velvet and fur, excites agreeable impressions, but they are not
very keen. Irritations to the skin are a source of acute annoyance,
but their removal affords merely a negatively acceptable condition.

When we consider how slightly most sensations of touch excite
subjective states of mind, it is remarkable that in response to one
stimulant they are among the most powerful known in nature. This
stimulus is that of another personality. The most positive feelings of
both aversion and attraction are those excited by physical contact of
the naked flesh. This is why it has been accepted in so many countries
as a sign and proof of amity. The savage Africans touch noses and the
civilized European shakes hands or kisses the hand or the cheek. Such
actions are barren conventionalities, unaccompanied by either pleasure
or pain; but they are indeed unfortunate who cannot recall any moment
of heart’s utmost joy and triumph when “the spirits rushed together at
the touching of the lips.” Such moments are sacred, priceless gifts of
the gods, not to be had for gold nor secured by taking thought, so
their consideration has no place in this book.

In spite of the active business done at the perfumery counters, the
pleasures of the sense of Smell do not seem to come in for a large
share of admiration in the modern world. It was different in the days
of old. They were considered the most delightful of all, even to
Divinity itself. Among the earliest rites of religion was that of
burning aromatic incense to the gods; and in the books of Moses good
works are described as affording “a sweet savor of satisfaction” to
the Almighty. One of the Fathers of the Church speaks of a holy prayer
as “the perfume of a just soul” rising to Heaven; and when a good man
passed away he was said to die “in the odor of sanctity.” Such solemn
authorities should justify the cultivation of the pleasures of this
sense. They could be supported by abundant quotations from those
philosophers, the poets, who have much to say about “the spicy gales
of Araby the blest,” and other such odoriferous associations.

Some odors are as intoxicating as wine, and others cling to the memory
like the impressions of childhood. Yet it is rare for the insane to
have delusions of the olfactory sense; and I have found few persons
who dream of odors. Some writers who claim to be scientific have set
up “a gamut of scents,” and others pretend such a harmonic scale can
be made the basis of a sort of music of perfumes. This is riding
theory beyond sight of practice; but who does not inhale with
conscious joy the balsamic fragrance of the pines, the salt and
stimulating whiffs from old ocean, or the laden redolence from gardens
of roses?

Many writers attribute the pleasure which tobacco gives to its
influence on the sense of smell; but this, I am sure, will not explain
the intense satisfaction which it yields to men in all climes,
consuming it in so many varied ways. I know nothing in physiology more
surprising or more puzzling than the eager demand for this plant,
which sprang up throughout the world after its discovery in America. I
have been a smoker from boyhood, and am just as unable to analyze the
pleasure it gives me as to explain it in others.

That prince of epicures, Brillat-Savarin, spent some time in the
United States, and in his delightful volume on the _Physiology of the
Taste_ has a chapter on “cookery in America,”――which is filled with
nothing but asterisks and interrogation points!

A hundred years have passed since he was among us, and we have
reformed our cuisine indifferently, though not altogether. We have
been too much hampered by fatuous bigots preaching that we should eat
to live, and not live to eat; whereas we should most certainly live to
eat during two or three hours out of every twenty-four; and so doing
we shall be passing them more creditably than do most men, or probably
ourselves, the remainder of the day. The game of “beggar your
neighbor” has advocates enough and fervent disciples, so I shall have
something to say about eating for the fun of it and as a fine art.

All nations of culture have connected a certain solemn joy with the
act of taking food. To “break bread” with one is the expression of the
sweet sentiment of hospitality, and for the lovers to share the same
loaf before the High Priest was the simple and beautiful marriage-rite
among the ancient Romans. The “love feasts” of the early Christians
were the repetitions of the only ceremony which their Founder
prescribed; and science traces to appropriate nutrition the growth of
both physical and mental abilities. The devout Novalis called
meal-times the “flower-seasons of the day,” and claimed that all
spiritual joys can be expressed through the service of the table. Can
there be anything in it unworthy or debasing?

In the light of such declaration should we look on our food-taking,
and not merely as feeding and filling. Were the kitchen more of a
studio in American homes, we should see a higher style of art in the
drawing-rooms. The worst preparation for a day’s work is a poor
breakfast, and its shabbiest reward is a bad dinner. If our daughters
studied more diligently what the Italians call the _melodia_ _del
gusto_, their married lives would be attuned to a more harmonious
accord.

Consider the appointments and symmetry of a well-served dinner in that
high style of art which the French have brought to perfection. The
mere sight of the table awakens our esthetic feelings, disperses the
cares that have infested the day, and softens the asperities which its
rude conflicts have developed. The snowy cloth with its embroidered
centre-piece, bearing a vase of roses or restful green; the gay
triumphs of the potter’s skill, flanked by polished metal and
diaphanous crystal, whose varied forms hint of the manifold gifts of
the grape; the chairs, so disposed as to suggest how we should live
our whole lives――ever near to others, but not jostling them. Then how
rhythmical the progress of the repast! the cold, salt shellfish,
followed by the hot and spicy soup, harmonized by the neutral flavor
of the fish, its creamy sauce relieved by the bare suspicion of the
clean acid of the lemon; and so on through the courses, until the
aromatic coffee and the tiny glass of liqueur, redolent of wild herbs
or of Alpine flowers, remove both thoughts of food and sense of
satiety.

The sequence of such a repast is not a conventionality. Medical men as
well as epicures know that it is based on physiology. Once, with a
friend of like inquiring mind, I ordered a dinner at a restaurant of
renown, exactly reversing the usual sequence, beginning with
Chartreuse, coffee, and ice-cream, ending with soup, oysters, and
hock. The experiment convinced us that the received is the right
sequence, and we made no second attempt to put the wrong end foremost.

Many will cry that such a dinner as I describe is one for the
millionaire and not for the million. They are in error. In France I
have repeatedly partaken of such in families of very humble means.
They are, in fact, economical. At an ordinary American dinner I have
seen seven vegetables and two meats served at once. Half the number
would have set forth a much better repast, if served in the French
manner. Moreover, an elaborate dinner is not desirable daily; but to
have one, say weekly, is as improving as going to the opera, or
listening to a great poet read his own verses.

An essential precept of gastronomic culture is to cultivate a taste
for all customary dishes. Every locality has its own. Snails and
mussels and cockscombs are favorite dishes in Paris, but I have found
few Americans enlightened enough to be willing to like them. A broad
taste adds to one’s own pleasure and that of others. How disappointing
the guest who refuses dish after dish planned with an eye to his
pleasure!

Do not be ashamed of the enjoyments of life which are derived from
judicious eating and drinking. There are no more accurate standards of
a family than its table-manners, table-service, table-talk. Culture is
reflected in them as in a mirror. Care not if the bigots and Pharisees
call you a wine-bibber and a glutton. You will not be the first to
whom they have applied those epithets, and you need not be ashamed of
your company. In the city of Paris, where the art of cookery has its
home and the Prohibition party no adherents, dyspepsia is scarcely
heard of, and the arrests for drunkenness during the entire year of
1890 were――how many, think you?――just thirty-eight!

If I have dwelt with some emphasis on the pleasures of taste, it is
because they are little understood in this country and there is a
prevalent tendency to decry them. Those which are derived from the
sense of Hearing will need no defense. Many of them are matters of
constant and intelligent cultivation. We are said not to be a musical
nation, but certainly both vocal and instrumental artists are not
rare, and those from other countries find among us their most
profitable harvest-fields. The intensity and the value of the
enjoyment derived from music depend on individual peculiarities which
are little modified by cultivation. Of all the exalted pleasures it is
the one least communicable and least connected with other faculties.
One of the finest pianists in the United States is a negro idiot, and
intellectually an appreciative musical audience need not be above him.
But I have been told that I have no right to speak about this art. Six
generations of Quaker ancestors, who would not permit an instrument of
music in the house, have nearly extinguished the musical sense in me.

The music of nature is free to all and intelligible to all. No
instruction is demanded to listen with rapture to the blithesome carol
of the meadow-lark or the cheery notes of the wood-thrush, joyous
denizens of our American fields. The many voices of the wind, now
whispering secrets to the pines, now whistling impudently outside our
windows, now strident and threatening through the bare branches of
winter, bring us messages suited to all moods, and play melodies on
our hearts as though their strings were stretched on an Æolian harp.
On a sensitive mind the power of these sounds of the wind is
altogether peculiar, and appears to be owing to the fact that the
agency which produces them is hidden, veiled, and invisible. I would
liken it to the effect of distant church bells, heard through the
stillness of some Sabbath morn, soft, rhythmical, earnest, inviting us
to sweet societies and unseen shrines.

We appreciate too little the delight we almost unconsciously derive
from the sense of hearing through the power it gives us to have
unrestricted social intercourse in conversation, and to listen to
oratory, instruction, and public entertainments. When we observe how
even slight deafness circumscribes the life and reduces the number of
its sources of enjoyment, we first understand the extent of the
gratifications we owe to the faculty of audition, and how important to
our happiness are its enjoyment and cultivation.

But how vast is the capacity of man for happiness! How many sources of
joy would remain to one deprived of every sense but that of Sight! All
his life would not suffice to explore the boundless fields of
enjoyment which it alone throws open to him. He has but to cast his
eyes around him to revel in the ever-changing garb of earth, in the
sky with its majestic clouds sailing across the measureless blue
depths, in the splendors of sunrise and sunset, in the transient glory
of the rainbow, and in the immortal light of the stars. Stretched on
the strand, he may mark the far-off, many-hued, sparkling brine, or
elsewhere see great mountains lift their summits to eternal snow and
watch them bathed in the rosy glamour of the afterglow, seemingly
suspended in mid-air, when night obscures their base.

The beauties of form, line, color, and proportion are open to him, and
the treasures of joy which the noble arts of painting, sculpture,
architecture, drawing, and engraving have been laboring for thousands
of years to enrich the world with in their fullness belong to him. The
delicate suggestions of light-and-shade and the inexhaustible
fertility of the colorist supply him with storehouses from which he
can fill countless hours of gratification. Those elements in our
nature which respond to the amusing, the pleasing, the picturesque,
and the sublime are almost equally appealed to through the sense of
sight; and were we to devote ourselves to answering their fascinating
invitations, little leisure should we have left for occupation with
any other sense. Nor among these have I enumerated those crowning
delights to many minds, the faculty of acquainting themselves with the
thoughts of others through reading, and giving perhaps equal pleasure
to others by writing, both of which are chiefly conditioned on the
sense of sight.

What I have written is but an outline, a scatter of unfinished
suggestions, of the numerous enjoyments which we can obtain by the
proper cultivation of our senses. Their training, and the rational
development of all their functions, are just as essential to our
higher life as the cultivation of those which are sometimes, though
falsely, called our nobler faculties. There is no aristocracy in the
kingdom of nature, and the lowest of our powers, if appropriately
directed and educated, is as worthy to occupy the throne as any which
in popular repute is deemed the highest.

       *     *     *     *     *

Sensation is the sense of existence.

       *     *     *     *     *

There is no “order of excellence” in the faculties of man. One is as
excellent as another. The only difference is in the scope of their
activities. We should give play to all according to their strength.
This is the profound lesson of Walt Whitman’s writings.

       *     *     *     *     *

Sensation, Emotion, Intellect, all three, enter into every action. We
should conduct our lives as one plays a game of three-handed euchre,
where the two players who are behind constantly enter into
combinations against the one who is ahead.

       *     *     *     *     *

Quaff pleasure in sips, not gulps; let it fall like the manna in the
wilderness, a sufficiency daily, not a quantity at once.

       *     *     *     *     *

Healthy mirth has no reaction. Laughter is lightsome.

       *     *     *     *     *

Good fare, good manners, good company,――these are the three graces
which should preside over the dinner table. Then will the meal
include, in the words of Sydney Smith, “Everything of sensual and
intellectual gratification which a great nation can glory in
producing.”

       *     *     *     *     *

Table-talk,――the best of talk. Even Kant thought it not beneath him to
give rules for it: first, of the weather and the roads; next, the
current events of the day; then history, art, and philosophy. So did
Marsilius Ficinus: first, of divine things; then anecdotes; finally,
of art and music.

       *     *     *     *     *

The unthinking are prone to confine the meaning of Pleasure to
Sensation. The coarsest philosophy of life is the most popular,
because it is most easily understood, and because it appeals to the
universal, which are the merely animal, traits of human nature.




IV. _The Pleasures we may Derive from our Emotions._


The emotions are sensations translated into Memory and commented on by
the Imagination, with the usual distortion and falsification of the
original, characteristic of all translators and commentators.

The primary emotions of Hope and Fear are the recollections of
pleasure or pain projected into the future; the disappointment of hope
or the realization of fear brings sorrow, regret, or remorse, feelings
which are concerned with the past alone.

These reflections suggest how much our happiness has to do with Time.
If each could estimate for himself the relative value of the past, the
present, and the future, the pursuit of happiness would be a science
with results as certain as geometry. As it is, most men pass their
days, not in enjoying life, but in getting ready to enjoy it, or in
regretting they did not enjoy it; and those who think they are wiser,
and who boast that they cultivate the present alone, usually sow it
with the seed of thistles and tares to pester their later lives.

The folly of philosophies――and, I may add, religions――has been their
effort to divest man of these natural emotions.

“Expect nothing, and you will not be disappointed,” is the cheerful
advice of the pessimist and the Buddhist; “Fear nothing, for you are
in the hands of God,” says the Christian fatalist. “Regrets are vain,”
cries the opportunist; “live in the present, and let the dead past
bury its dead.”

In practical affairs, the best philosophy is common sense, which is
nothing else than the abstract and epitome of the experience of all
mankind through all time; and this arbiter condemns all three of the
above maxims as the words of folly and not of wisdom. Hope, fear, and
regret are equally necessary to the safe conduct of life with a view
to securing the greatest enjoyment from it, and the only point left to
consider is the relative extent in which each should be indulged.
About this I shall offer a few suggestions.

The skillful architect of his own career will not draw a plan which is
either too broad or too high for his means to construct. His hopes
will be neither too exalted nor too extended. To be as happy as
possible, we must never expect to be extremely happy. Complete
happiness is an ideal condition, and we are never farther from the
ideal than when we think we have it in our grasp. Nor will his plans
be elaborate. The larger the foundation, the more time and money it
takes to build the house. The chief enjoyment in life should be drawn
from a few, easily accessible sources; though this should not lead us
to neglect others that come in our way. One should not refuse a
bequest because he has a profitable business. Few understand the
limits of their own capacity for happiness. They do not know, as the
saying is, when they are well off, and, like a restless inventor,
spoil the machine by constantly seeking to improve it. They should
ponder on an epitaph on a tombstone in a London churchyard:――“I was
well; I would be better; I am here.”

Our hopes should not belong to the class called by physicians
“incompatibles;” that is, when the realization of one will certainly
or probably prevent that of the other. Few errors are more common than
this, and few are productive of greater disappointment. Reasonable
reflection and ordinary self-knowledge will generally suffice to
prevent it. If I set out in life to make a million dollars I cannot
expect also to become a distinguished Sanscrit scholar.

The fruition of our hopes should not be placed in a distant future.
Life is uncertain, but that is the least objection. What is certain
is, that we ourselves shall not be the same next year or next week
that we are to-day. Our tastes and moods will change, and it is quite
likely that we shall care nothing for the fruit of the plants we are
now so diligently cultivating.

This consideration leads up to the last and probably the most useful
of all the suggestions on this subject which I shall offer, that is,
that in planning for the future, it will, as a rule, repay us best to
devote our most earnest and constant attention to the avoidance of
pain or misfortune rather than to the preparation of projects of
pleasure. We know what we are about when we set to work to forestall a
danger or to prevent a disaster; we are by no means so sure as to what
course of action will yield us pleasure. The best laid schemes “gang
aft a-gley.”

Hope and Fear are both deceivers; but we like the company of Hope even
when we know she lies; and dislike that of Fear the more, the closer
we believe she tells the truth. Many temperaments are tortured more by
the dread of misfortune than by misfortune, and are constantly
sacrificing the happiness of the present for fear they may not enjoy
the future. To such as these would apply the pregnant maxim of Lord
Bacon,――“The only thing to be feared is fear.”

When in reason and in due proportion to its object, the emotion is
salutary and protective. To know what to fear, to take precautions and
thus to avoid dangers, are the very conditions of existence. Cowardice
is contemptible, but foolhardiness is senseless.

In modern life the most common forms of fear are worry and anxiety. To
a certain extent these also are wholesome; there may be good ground
for them, and so long as they act as stimulants to healthful activity,
they are not to be shirked; but when they lead to morbid states of
mind and body, they should be met with appropriate remedies.

The first of these is a deliberate and calm study of the situation and
the real causes for fear, if there are any. Spectres lose their
terrors by daylight, and most fears are vastly diminished by
reflection. What if the worst does come? The worst is never as bad as
we imagine it will be. We may also call to mind how useless are many
of our anxieties. Why worry about disasters which we cannot prevent?
Still less should we worry about those which we can prevent.

When reason and thought will not dispel our fears, we must fight the
devil with fire, and conquer one emotion with another. The opponent of
Fear is not so much Hope as Courage. Courage recognizes the danger and
meets it with a serene front. Confidence in one’s powers, the thought
of the prize to be won, the love of glory and reputation, a knowledge
of the means at our disposal, and a faith in fortune are the
considerations which strengthen courage, and if they are marshaled in
battle array and led by Enthusiasm, the fears which hovered over our
path will be routed like flocks of evil-boding birds.

An easier though less noble escape from fear is Apathy. In different
forms it appears as resignation to the will of God, or the inevitable,
indifference to results, and philosophic or religious fatalism. An
Arab proverb says there are two days on which it is needless to fear
death,――the day on which it is decreed we shall not die, and the day
on which it is decreed we shall die; and if death need not be feared,
what else should be? Modern science is inclined to the doctrine that
men’s doings are ruled by absolute necessity, and that free will is a
delusion. For one, I do not accept the doctrine; but he that does
should be released from fear if his logic has any validity.

As the future is clouded with fear and its congeners, so the past is
embittered with regret, if not with its gloomier fellows, the pains of
contrition and the agonies of remorse. Of all mental misery I have
ever witnessed, that of remorse for irreparable injuries done to
others was by far the acutest. No one who intimately sees such a
spectacle but will learn a lesson which will be a warning for a
lifetime. Suicide or insanity is its usual result. But for the lighter
forms of regret, reflection on their uselessness, willingness to make
reparation, intelligent study of the mistakes of the past as lessons
for the future, are remedies which we can always apply with benefit.
The keen regret which we feel at our own blunders and shortcomings
produces almost a distaste for life. But we may recall the homely
business proverb, that he who never makes mistakes never makes
anything; and it is something of a satisfaction to think that we did
not display the full measure of our capacities in a transaction, but
could do it much better had we to do it over again.

The emotions which I have been considering are passive in their
nature, and their presence does not markedly influence our external
lives. This is not the case with the emotion of Anger, the
manifestations of which are primarily external. This is why it is so
extremely detrimental to family and social happiness. A person who is
choleric, of a bad temper, or an irritable disposition, is heavily
handicapped for both the pursuit of happiness and the race for
success. I think I have seen more fine prospects ruined by this than
by any other single trait; and on the ruins promptly sprang up the
weeds of dejection, misanthropy, and moroseness. No other weakness so
frequently poisons the joys of married life as a “tempery”
disposition. Its control is always difficult, never impossible. The
simple precept is, to remain entirely silent and motionless for at
least a minute after every flash of anger or sense of irritability.
Lord Herbert of Cherbury tells of a splenetic friend of his, whose
face would flush almost purple at such moments, but who never broke
his self-imposed silence, and therefore never spoke a word which he
had to regret. A determined intention to control oneself, and steady
practice, will always give such self-mastery.

Anger, when it passes into the chronic form of Hatred, seeks its
satisfaction in Revenge. It is rather surprising to find such a calm
author as Professor Bain including revenge among the essentials of
happiness. In moments of anger the thirst for vengeance is keen, and
its gratification pleasant for the time; but from my own experience
and that of others whom I have asked, the vengeance which finally
appeases long hatred falls far short of affording the gratification we
expected, and is even associated with some dissatisfaction with self.
The game has not been worth the candle. The satisfaction is greater
when our enemy brings ruin on himself through the traits and acts we
abhor in him. We can then indulge in an unselfish joy in the
spectacle, as did the Israelites when the pride of the Pharaohs
was humbled by the consequences of their own arrogance and
stiff-neckedness.

The Imagination belongs to the emotional rather than the intellectual
faculties, as it has small regard for truth and casts on all things
the glamour of that light “which never was on sea or land.” Its
judicious cultivation adds to the higher enjoyments of life by lifting
the events and thoughts of our daily rounds into the mystic realm of
the ideal. It is cultivated by the perusal of works of poetry and
fiction, and by yielding to the sweet influences of music, song, and
the arts of pleasure. In the young it generally needs to be, not so
much curbed, as directed in the right road, and in the old to be
stimulated. The neglect of it so common in middle life is an unwise
preparation for those years which at the best can expect but scant
pleasure in watching the mirage of ideal anticipation.

Under the Esthetic Emotions we may class all those which arise from
the occupation with what is interesting or beautiful in nature or art.
They are perennial fonts of enjoyment to those who will cultivate them
in the right spirit――which is, to study them exclusively for the
pleasure they yield, and without ulterior aim of utility or didactic
purpose. True art acknowledges no allegiance either to utilitarianism
or morality――though it is never useless or immoral. Its right aim is
to excite within us the consciousness of ourselves by stirring our
imagination and feelings into agreeable activity. The emotions which
it inspires in the individual rise in value in proportion as they are
communicable to others, and thereby develop their contrast to the
pleasures of the senses, which are and always remain personal. On the
other hand, they differ from those of the intellect by their aim being
directed to exciting the faculties which are human. Their limits are
defined by these, while the intellect soars far beyond. In the
esthetic arts, Man is everything; all refers to him; in science he is
nothing, or, at most, a drop in the shoreless ocean of the Universe.

What justice can I render within the limit of a few sentences to the
pleasurable emotions excited by the contemplation of Nature? Volumes
have been written about and have not exhausted the catalogue of joys
offered by the solitary walk through forest and mead, surrounded by
that mysterious world in blade and leaf, in bird and insect, in brook
and bower, so tantalizingly open and yet so impenetrably closed to our
vision. We need no laborious learning, and require no Alps, or ocean,
or mighty cataracts, to surcharge our souls with that strange calm and
silent joy which Mother Nature ever has ready to pour into the wounds
of her returned and wounded sons. A stroll at sunset, through the
cow-pasture, by the stream, is all we need, if only our minds are open
to the voices and the pictures spread before us. Need I mention the
pleasures of gardening, or the charms of the training and
companionship of those humbler animals, our pets and favorites, to
whose sincerity and affection we so often turn with relief from
association with our own species?

Nor shall I go at any length into the obvious pleasure afforded by
even a slight acquaintance with painting, sculpture, architecture,
photographic reproductions, engraving, those avocations distinctively
called by some writers the “arts of pleasure.” The very purpose of
their creation was to increase the happiness of life, and those who
are content to live without understanding and to some extent
appreciating what they contribute to human enjoyment, may as well lay
down this book at this point, for its whole purpose is alien to them.
In some quarters there is a prejudice against these arts; in many more
a suspicion that they are frivolous or enervating. Far from it.
Goethe, who beyond any other man of this century studied the
strengthening of his faculties, recommended that each day we should
for at least a few minutes give our minds to the contemplation of some
fine work of art or beautiful natural object, were it but a careful
engraving, the reproduction of some masterpiece, a pot of natural
flowers, or a sunset from our windows. He had found this in his own
experience both strengthening and comforting, and none is so indigent
or so occupied that it is beyond his reach.

In museums and picture galleries, in the theatre and the opera, in
illustrated books and collections of photographs, we have abundant
resources to gratify our desire for observing art; and if we wish to
share the delights of practicing it, there are the numerous “minor
arts,” admirably set forth for self-instruction in excellent
manuals,――free-hand drawing, water-colors, china painting,
embroidery――who can remember all of them?

The finest fruit of the culture of the esthetic emotions, culled from
their sunniest sides and served as “human nature’s daily food,” is
what we call “good taste.” What an admirable faculty! It is the best
of good sense, and walks hand in hand with good manners and good
morals. It prunes away exaggerations and affectations, it erases
superlatives, it modifies antipathies, and lessens prejudices. The
modest home lighted by its fairy lamp shines with a radiance that the
luxury of the vulgar plutocrat can never approach. The damsel whose
simple garb has been hung by its unfaltering hands will please, when
the elaborate toilettes of fashion leave the heart untouched. How much
to be envied is the natural possessor of this charming quality! More
profitable than envying would be the effort to cultivate it, through
the study of the rules of art, the observations of the best models of
harmony, and the willingness to accept the opinions of others on
subjects where they are acknowledged authorities and to search the
reasons on which they are grounded.

The pleasure which we derive from the emotion which is called
“Plot-interest” is peculiar and popular. We see it in the avidity with
which we follow the adventures of imaginary characters in a novel or
drama. It evokes the liveliest sympathy and excitement. Tears follow
laughter in quick succession, and with as little real cause. We yield
ourselves willingly to the situation, and in the fancied sorrows of
the heroine forget our own, which are real.

Akin to those of plot-interest are the Emotions of Pursuit, which
impart such zest to hunting, fishing, and allied sports. We care
little for the quarry; a “paper chase” is almost as exciting as a lion
hunt; but it is the sense of the self-conscious and strenuous exertion
of our faculties which gives us the enjoyment. This explanation may
not be obvious in the case of the enthusiastic angler, who sits by a
dull canal under an umbrella all the afternoon, satisfied with a few
gudgeons; but this enthusiasm makes up for the lack of positive
exertion.

More obscure is the intense and absorbing pleasure which most derive
from the Emotions of Risk, which are excited by games, especially
those of chance, or where skill is so equally balanced that chance
comes in for a large share of the result. This is pre-eminently the
emotion which most men cultivate in their hours of recreation.
Billiards, chess, pool, cards, backgammon, horse-racing, athletic
games, and personal contests, where the opponents are as equally
matched as practicable, make up to most minds the definition of
Enjoyment. The various games of cards offer the most favorable types
of games, as when played fairly and well they have a large and
constant element of chance. They have been in ill odor, as being the
most convenient means for gambling. But to the one who really enjoys
the emotions of risk, the stakes are subordinate. Any one who
appreciates the charms of a rubber of whist, or the agreeable exercise
of a game of billiards, will not want the additional and often
unpleasant addition of a stake, and those who fail to appreciate, or
neglect to cultivate, these emotions as a source of pleasure in life,
deprive themselves of that which would cheer many a sad hour by
innocent and healthful employment.

When I glance back at what I have written, I see I have done little
more than catalogue, and that incompletely, the sources of enjoyment
offered by the Emotions. But if this superficial survey developed such
possibilities, how much of the pure gold of joy awaits the careful
prospector who will follow the veins and sift the sands of the region
thus thrown open to his energies?

       *     *     *     *     *

There is this peculiarity in both works of art and scenes of natural
beauty, that they impress us most vividly in periods of deepest
dejection or highest elation, and are thus incomparable aids in
restoring mental equilibrium.

       *     *     *     *     *

The painful, the hideous, and the shocking are legitimate inspirations
of art, as well as the beautiful and agreeable. The latter intimate
the direction we should go, the former the dangers we may have to
encounter and the existence of suffering which calls for our sympathy.

       *     *     *     *     *

Fear and Folly are the couple whose offspring is Distress.

       *     *     *     *     *

The emotion that does not incite to action, enfeebles.

       *     *     *     *     *

Activity does not mean excitement. Healthful action is uniform. The
wheel of most rapid revolution is the most regular in its motion.

       *     *     *     *     *

Nature soothes because she knows nothing of our conflicts. Like
Spinoza’s God, she loves no one and hates no one.

       *     *     *     *     *

Not nature, but nature’s infinite analogies, are what quicken the
heart and supply it with endless interpretations of its own
experiences.

       *     *     *     *     *

The sombre, the desolate, and the vast in nature appeal most strongly
to the educated spirit, because they typify what is measureless, and
therefore mournful, in its aspirations.




V. _The Pleasures we may Derive from the Intellect._


When I speak about billiards and fishing and opera-going as pleasures,
I am sure everybody understands me. But now that I have to refer to
the enjoyment derived from study and thinking and scientific research,
I fear the majority will prepare to stifle their yawns or skip the
chapter.

Yet I have heard of, and even known, men who turned to such
occupations for their highest felicity, and counted such joys above
gold or lust or glory or love,――because enemies might rob them of
these, but never of the treasures of the understanding. The one aim of
their lives was the Search for Truth; and to them all truths seemed
equally great, equally worthy devotion. One spent years in the study
of polyps and fungi, and by them learned to explain the laws which
have developed man and mind; another neglected his profession in order
to investigate the anatomy of a worm, and made a discovery which
restored thousands of his fellow-beings from wretched invalidism to
happy health.

Such exceptional beings are not to be set up as the pole stars for all
mariners over life’s ocean. A man cannot be happy beyond the tastes
and faculties which he has; and it is as absurd to expect all to enjoy
equally the pleasures of the intellect as it would be to look for all
to be pleased with the flavor of the same dish. Every man, however,
who is not idiotic or insane possesses an intellect, and can derive a
great deal of pleasure from its cultivation; and it is always to some
degree in his power to cultivate it in the right manner.

If he only knew the many advantages of these pleasures he would not
fail to give them his attention. Almost alone of enjoyments they leave
behind them no sense of exhaustion, no painful reaction or regrets.
They are as varied as our moods, suited as well to assuage our sadness
as to prolong our cheerful moments. At no period of the year are they
out of season, age does not wither them, nor does “custom stale their
infinite variety.” They are social or solitary as we choose to make
them, and they know no sense of satiety, as with them the appetite
grows by what it feeds on. They flatter our self-complacency by
showing us that we are growing wiser, and they stir within us sympathy
and appreciation for others. They are always at hand, for the
appreciative student carries between the covers of his Shakespeare
more pleasure than the millionaire can stow in his yacht. Finally, and
as the clinching argument in their favor, they are economical, doubly
economical, for they cost little or nothing, and they save us many a
broad piece which we should have had to spend for pleasures gratifying
the senses the same length of time; economical also of our lives, for
the student class are those who have the greatest longevity.

Especially would I urge women to pursue intellectual pleasures rather
than those of the emotions, to which they are now largely confined.
Some of the most promising marriages fail through lack of intellectual
sympathy in the wife. How sad it is to read these words of John Stuart
Mill in his essay on the liberty of women,――“Young men of the greatest
promise generally cease to improve as soon as they marry;” a result
which he attributes directly to the absence of sympathy in their wives
for that which constitutes the highest culture, and often a direct
opposition to it. His opinion is valid everywhere, though it should be
true nowhere. For the sake of her husband and her children, she should
resolutely turn to the cultivation of her mind as one of the firmest
holds on their affections.

One of the simplest forms of intellectual pleasure is that which is
derived from riddles, puzzles, conundrums, and rebuses. Children and
primitive nations are especially captivated by these agreeable
stimulants to their ingenuity. In French country towns they are highly
popular, and many of the cafés have _cercles_ who meet nightly to
solve the enigmas proposed in the weekly papers and forward the
solutions to the editor. Those which are successful receive a small
prize or an honorable mention. The placid bourgeois appear to derive
extraordinary enjoyment from this pastime.

Most people understand “cultivating the intellect” to mean reading.
Sometimes it has this result, but generally it is too desultory,
miscellaneous, and aimless. Were it directed to a more definite
purpose it could be made to yield more profit and more enjoyment. I do
not mean to the purpose of instruction, as probably the reader has
been in haste to suppose, but so as to endow the mind with a wider
range of interests and thus with more sources of pleasure.

Read what interests you and interest yourself in what you read――that
is the best rule. I have a small opinion of lists of the “hundred best
books,” or courses of reading cut and dried for you by large
societies. They may instruct, as do lessons appointed by a master; but
I am speaking of reading for pleasure; and really that is the only
kind worth mentioning. I have always liked reading, but I never could
bear to lay out a course for myself, still less follow any proposed by
another.

My own very satisfactory plan has been like that of the prospector for
minerals. He wanders aimlessly over the mountains till he finds the
sign of ore; then he ceases his roving and traces out the vein with
zeal and patience. You read an article in a magazine; on one point
mentioned you would like further information. Do not pass it by and
forget it, but go to the encyclopedia or the library and follow it up;
it will lead you to two or three volumes, not to be read, but to be
consulted; these will start several allied points of interest; look
them up in the same manner; and before you know it you will be
burrowing for hours among books with the greatest delight.

By adopting this plan you not only pursue the bent of your own
inclination and follow your own fancies, but without knowing it you
are obeying some of the most scholastic rules for reading laid down by
the learned.

One of these is to “distribute the attention;” by which they mean to
learn to pass easily from one subject to another. Do not become so
absorbed in one line that others have no charm for you. This is a
common error with students of specialties. The great Darwin regretted
that toward the close of his life his unremitted attention to science
had destroyed his power of appreciating poetry and the drama. Yet
neither should one hurry from book to book, or from topic to topic.
Each should be pursued up to the point of commencing fatigue; then the
volume should be laid down, and an effort made to recall the main
facts we have read, and arrange them in order in the mind. What looks
like desultory reading will not remain desultory long if pursued in
accordance with these suggestions.

As to what kind of books to read, the brief answer is, all kinds.
Variety is the guiding principle. Do not read in ruts. Some say we
should always have some main theme to which others should be
subordinate. The advice is good for those who have by nature some such
leading interest; only for them it is unnecessary; and for those who
have not, I believe it is useless, for such an interest can rarely be
created by the will. I doubt if one can say off-hand,――“From this out,
my chief interest shall be in the history of Ancient Egypt,” or
something of that kind. Disraeli once remarked that biography has a
greater interest than history, because it is life without theory; and
French writers are better than English, because they have fewer
ridiculous ideas of life. Some such plea could be entered for every
department of literature, and each would be just. Unquestionably, the
tendency at present is to read too exclusively works of the
imagination, novels, romances, dramas, and the like; the pleasure they
yield is ephemeral and is apt to disqualify for that which is more
persistent though less intense, derived from works based on objective
realities.

For one branch of literature I must, however, put in a special claim,
as it has been such a pleasure to me ever since I learned to read, and
that is Poetry. I have heard it sometimes said that this is a taste of
youth, and dies a natural death with advancing years. My own
experience is quite the contrary. The delight we derive from accurate
rhythm, melodious words, fine thoughts, and the depicting of deep
emotions, ought to increase as our experience of the world and wider
learning make us more familiar with them. This has been the result in
my own case and in that of others whom I know or have heard of; for
instance, Sir Henry Holland, writing his biography when about eighty
years of age, lays stress on the enjoyment the study of the poets
continued to afford him; and my mother, at eighty, derived much
pleasure in committing to memory and repeating new poems. There is a
sense of completeness, of perfection, which is given a fine thought by
appropriate expression in rhythmical language, which prose can never
equal, and which, through the potent magic of Form, lifts the mind out
of the material into the ideal world, and grants us a momentary
glimpse of the Infinite.

If we do not recall to mind and think over what we read we lose most
of the pleasure and all the profit of the action. This was what the
English philosopher Hobbes meant when he said,――“If I had read as many
books as some men, I should be as ignorant as they.” To read without
reflecting is like buying grain for food and never grinding it.
Through reflection on the images, incidents, and forms of expression
with which reading has stored the memory, the highest enjoyment from
the process is secured. The mind, like the body, is maintained in a
state of pleasurable activity, not by what it swallows, but by what it
digests and assimilates. Many people, however, are like dear Charles
Lamb, who artlessly confessed,――“I cannot sit and think――books think
for me;” and if they think for all to such good purpose as they did
for him, no one could complain.

In fact, reflection, meditation, though its pleasures have been
chanted by poets and sages for thousands of years, is probably that
form of intellectual activity which is least admired and least desired
of any. It is not the same as “studying out a subject,” or exerting
the creative faculty, as an inventor when he is devising a machine;
but the leisurely calling up from our memory of its various contents.
They may be from reading or from conversation or from our experience
of life. We may present these to ourselves as the pictures of a
gallery or as the scenes of a drama or as a series of connected
events; and we may endeavor to discern what relations they bore to
each other, or speculate on what would have been the results had they
occurred differently, or not at all. We may renew half-forgotten
pleasures, or smile at useless pains, or recall long since vanished
woes. Lessons for our guidance or knowledge of ourselves may
unexpectedly come to us as the results of such self-communing; or we
may cast our eyes to the future, and enjoy in prolonged anticipation
those pleasures which may never come, or, if they come, can last but a
moment. This is the nature of that reflection which, if we learn it
and cultivate it, will enable us to pass many a pleasant hour, when
otherwise we should be cut off from all sources of amusement, as in
some dreary waiting for a train or enforced and lonely vigil.

As solitude is thus relieved by exercise of our minds, society by the
same may have many an added charm. What a fund of rational enjoyment
is offered by reading circles, debating societies, literary coteries,
and associations for the purpose of studying Shakespeare or Browning
or Ibsen, or whatever other literary star may be in the ascendant!
There are some pretentious persons who profess to be above such
gatherings. They can well be dispensed with in them. The tendency to
be guarded against in order to make such schemes prosperous is that of
improving the mind. This should be entirely incidental and secondary.
When one joins a dining club, he expects a dinner which he likes, not
a special diet prescribed by his medical adviser; and so it should be
with literary clubs. Let the improvement take care of itself. It will
do so.

Alongside of reading and reflection we must place writing. Many will
need no explanation why this should be classed among the pleasures of
life; while to others it is always a distasteful drudgery. They escape
it whenever possible, and reduce it to its lowest terms, which means
letter-writing――and in their case always the writing of very middling
letters. A letter, indeed, is a great tell-tale, and tells the more
the less it says. A score of years in editorial work, during which the
competency of numerous writers had to be gauged by some quick
standard, taught me that the letter of transmittal is generally enough
to decide on the merits of the manuscript offered. To him who can
appreciate its revelations there is no more infallible test of general
culture than an ordinary letter.

Correspondence by some is classed among the lost arts. As an art, we
can let it go; but as one of the most agreeable of pleasures, it will
ever remain. Nature, not art, is what gives it its charm. The free
expressions of personal feelings, thoughts, and observations, the
intimacy and confidence which we can never find in books or magazines,
the household words and pet phrases which grow up between
correspondents, the tacit assumptions of common tastes and knowledge,
these are what endow correspondence with its boundless charms for
those who cultivate it.

Some writers have extolled the pleasure to be derived from keeping a
diary. They claim it gives one much delight to turn back to an
accurate record of what he did or heard or saw at a given period of
his past life. They add that it is also a judicious habit for our own
well-being, teaching us what errors we have made, what false opinions
harbored, what aims pursued fruitlessly, and the like. I believe what
these writers say, and commend their advice to those for whom it is
suited. As for myself, I never could follow it. The diaries which I
have occasionally begun, I have usually ended by throwing into the
fire. It seems to me a man must either progress very little, be
supernaturally wise to begin with, or have incredible self-complacency,
to read with satisfaction a diary of his own five years old which
contains anything but the most naked facts. Amiel’s diary is one of the
most attractive published of recent years; but it certainly could have
been no pleasure to his sensitive mind to have renewed its sorrows by
perusing its morbid reflections.

I have left to the last the consideration of the highest of all
intellectual joys,――the Pursuit of Truth. This should be the aim of
every thought, and the sole, conscious occupation of our
understandings. As our senses are satisfied only with pleasure, in
like manner our reason finds no rest until it attains to what is true.
That man is useless on the face of the earth, and wastes his life, who
devotes his time to anything else than the pursuit of happiness or the
search for truth.

They are not antagonistic. They are compatible one with the other;
perhaps they are identical, when both are clearly seen and correctly
understood. That great teacher who rejected the narrow prescriptions
of asceticism, and came eating meat and drinking wine, also taught
that the one comforter, the Paraclete, which should in future ages
complete the happiness of man, is “the Spirit of Truth.”

There need be no discussion as to what Truth is, nor need we, like
jesting Pilate, make the inquiry and “stop not to hear reply.” The
answer is as clear as it is brief. Truth is that which will bear
constant and free examination. Renewed observation, verification,
re-examination, investigation――whatever is true will bear all these
without diminution of its lustre; and any statement which men advance
as true, but are unwilling to submit to these tests, they know is more
or less of a lie.

The highest and clearest truths are to be found in the physical and
natural sciences. The latter especially offer unending pleasant vistas
to those who can interest themselves in them. The passion of
collecting in natural history is a rich source of enjoyment,
inexpensive, always open, exhaustless in extent. Whether it be
minerals, plants, insects, coins, weapons, or what not, their
accumulation occupies vacant hours and they furnish abundant materials
for thought, reading, study, and conversation. The man who has a
cabinet stocked by his own efforts is one who never complains of
ennui. The day for him is never too long.

As for the devotees of Science, there is no need for me to inform them
of the pleasure they derive from its pursuit. They are too well
acquainted with its joys, transcending any which wealth or popular
renown can offer, to care to read their eulogy. But this intense
devotion must be born with one or date from some early association,
and can rarely be acquired in mature years, so that it need not be
dwelt upon here.

       *     *     *     *     *

“Life according to reason,”――this was Aristotle’s definition of
happiness.

       *     *     *     *     *

The intellect is cold because it is unsympathetic. We must cultivate
with it the imagination, which by vividly portraying pain, develops
sympathy.

       *     *     *     *     *

Do you wish to improve your mind? Then read carefully what you do not
understand, and listen dispassionately to what you do not agree with.

       *     *     *     *     *

Error is more agreeable than truth, because the latter points out our
limitations and the former conceals them.

       *     *     *     *     *

An error actively advocated is healthier than a truth lazily accepted.
Thought becomes fecund only in action.

       *     *     *     *     *

A mistake is sooner corrected than a falsehood, because it is nobody’s
interest to maintain it.

       *     *     *     *     *

Novel-reading is the fashionable narcotic; opium, chloral, and
hasheesh together count fewer victims.

       *     *     *     *     *

All that is, is a prophecy of what will be; hence, to a philosopher,
the chief interest in things is their symbolical value.

       *     *     *     *     *

_Vivre caché, c’est vivre heureux._ This was Descartes’ motto. It
should be translated: “To be able to retire with pleasure to your own
thoughts, is to be happy.”

       *     *     *     *     *

What is the pleasure of being famous? That of being talked of by those
you do not know, who do not know you, and in whom you take no interest.




VI. _The Satisfaction of the Religious Sentiment._


After all, the only standard of value which we need apply to anything
is the amount and quality of Happiness it yields. This alone can
concern Man anywhere and at any time. His religions should be measured
by no other mete-yard. All were created by man, for the happiness of
man; though all claim another, a superhuman, origin, and pretend to
bear the sign-manual of the Divine.

They are right, and what seems a paradox is a sober fact. As much the
productions of human hands and brains as are the robes and paintings
in which they are bedecked, they have something in them which no
externals can represent, and which lifts them above their material
drapery. Human beyond all else that man has devised, for that very
reason they are superhuman.

The strange law of Evolution is, that nothing in nature reaches its
perfection but by becoming something else. The species in attaining
its utmost development is transformed into another species. Man would
not be the noblest product of the earth did he not feel himself too
noble for it; did not the presage and aura of a higher destiny forever
float around his thoughts, making themselves felt at the moments of
the utmost tension of his faculties; as when behind the parapet of
Chillon one rises on extreme tip-toe, and catches a glimpse of the
glittering lake and massive Alps beyond.

The vital principle, the motive power, which has created and
maintained all religions is the Ideal of Humanity. Each age has had
its own, each individual has his own, no two the same. Creeds and
churches do but formulate and endeavor to materialize the average
conceptions of a period or a class; but their labor is vain. Rejecting
the old, putting on the new, the race marches forward to loftier
ideals, the milestones of its progress being the wrecks of temples and
the ruins of churches. Religions rise and fall and disappear; but
Religion grows forever, because it is the inseparable associate, aye,
the very expression, of that mysterious impulse on which man’s future
development depends, and which makes him part and parcel of the
infinite Energy in which he lives and moves and has his being.

Time and Truth will reconcile all religions; but the time will be long
and the truth will be slow to make its way. The schools of dogmatic
doctrine claim to have embalmed in a creed and confined in a code the
whole truth necessary for the happiness of man; not perceiving that
they are like children to whom a magician hands a box in which he
seems to have shut a pigeon; they open it cautiously, to discover that
it is empty, and he points to the bird soaring up to the sky. Only
they take good care not to open the box. Their schools and teachers
resemble those feeble-minded folk who imagine they increase in
knowledge by constantly talking to themselves.

Always boasting of their devotion to truth, they steadily repudiate
it. That alone is true which will bear repeated, free, and unbiased
investigation; but dogmatists cry,――“Never discuss your faith; never
doubt your creed; for he that doubteth is damned.” What progress they
make is not from within, but is forced on them from without by the
free spirit of inquiry; and what they thus unwillingly accept, they
audaciously claim as the product of their own efforts. Everywhere the
spirit of ecclesiasticism is the secret or open foe of strict and
complete veracity; and yet no permanent alleviation of the sufferings
of mankind can come except from veracity. And from this it will come.
No matter what the weather is, this seed is sure to grow.

What unspeakable unhappiness religions have brought on the race!
Altars dripping with the blood of human victims, mothers casting their
babes into the fires of Moloch, teachers crucified by the rabble whom
they sought to instruct, millions perishing between the Crescent and
the Cross, hideous chambers of the Inquisition, Bruno burning alive in
Catholic Rome, and Legate in Protestant London,――a thousand such
historic events would give no notion of the miseries which religions
have inflicted on mankind, and continue to inflict.

Worse than these have been their blighting breath on individual minds,
darkening them with terrors of the supernatural, with racking doubts,
despair, and madness; destroying the natural and beautiful growths of
the affections; frowning on the attractions of the arts of beauty;
crushing the desire of knowledge and the love of investigation; urging
men in the ignoble egotism of self-salvation to sacrifice their own
happiness and that of those nearest and dearest to them. These
influences still exist; they are ever in the spirit of clericalism and
dogmatism, and are restrained from plunging mankind again into the
dark ages only by that higher and real religion which acknowledges
neither form nor creed nor dogma, but only the might and right of
Truth and Love.

I would ask what teachings do religions――and I have those in mind
which are prevalent in civilized countries to-day――impart, which in
any way compensate for the enormous unhappiness and intellectual
degradation thus caused?

Most sects calling themselves Christian will at once reply that the
happiness they promise is not of this world but of the next, and that
he who looks for enjoyment here will forfeit it hereafter. Yet when
the evidence for this daring statement is asked for, not an iota can
be offered on which there is unanimous concurrence among the sects
themselves.

What they do offer, and what gives them their real control over men’s
minds, may be summed up as follows: A belief in the Divine government
of the world and the paternal care of God over each believer in Him;
greater cheerfulness in the acceptance of the misfortunes of life as
the wise and ultimately beneficent decisions of His will; an
expectation of a life after death; the hope that sins will be
forgiven; and the improvement in morals which follows these
convictions.

These are undoubtedly valuable aids to human happiness. The question
is, what part of them belong to Religion and what to religions; in
other words, will not the religious sentiment itself, freed from the
shackles of dogmatic belief, yield to man all the happiness offered by
sectarian doctrines, relieved of the misery to which they condemn him?
When I think of the mental agony caused in millions of lives by the
pictures of hell, of eternal damnation, of the last judgment, and of a
cruel and merciless God, which most Christian teachers hold before
their congregations, I long for the time predicted by that apostle of
the new life, Giordano Bruno,――“When the gods shall lie in Orcus, and
the dread of everlasting punishment shall vanish from the world.”

Reason has no conflict with religion. Science is based on the
assumption that the order of the Universe is one of intelligence, and
of an intelligence identical with ours. All force is directed by
reasoning energy, which means that it is purposive. Why seek further?
Call it Energy or Force or God, the thought is the same.

Whether that share which we possess in the energy of the All remains
in personality after physical death, what dogma can prove? what
science deny? Enough that in the beautiful words of the burial service
of the Protestant Episcopal Church, we are justified in retaining “a
reasonable and holy hope” that the victory of the grave is not
eternal. Should it be so, what is the dread of it but a delusion of
the imagination, which pictures non-existence as felt in
non-existence?

The sense of sin, the story of the fall and its expiation by a divine
sacrifice; is it not strange that no one word that this was His
mission escaped the lips of Him who is said to have been the willing
victim? The notion of sin as taught in dogmatic belief has no
existence in the unwarped mind nor in scientific psychology. Men are
involved in a chain of cause and effect from which they have little
chance of escape; and even human justice revolts at administering
punishment for involuntary acts. _Tout comprendre, c’est tout
pardonner_; that infinite Mind, which sees before and after, asks the
blood of no victim to understand and to pardon the blind gropings of
the wretched children of men.

What abuse has been made of the doctrine of Faith! Its upas-shade has
harbored the grossest growths of superstition. Faith is either
laziness or cowardice. We accept the opinions of others to save
ourselves the trouble of forming our own, or to escape the pains of
doubt. But doubt is painful only to him who accepts on authority, not
to him who honestly seeks, truth through the efforts of his own
powers.

But piety, morality, how can these be secured without dogmatic
religions? This is the answer so often hurled as final in their
defense. The history of sectarianism shows anything but a clean bill
of morality, as I have already hinted; if there is any one
corner-stone to the edifice of ethics, it is the honest pursuit of
verifiable truth, and that no dogmatic religion dares to advocate.
History shows that every great reformer of the morals of his day has
been called a schismatic by the Churches.

The arch error is, however, not in these directions, but in the
universal assumption that the moral life, that piety, is the chief end
of man and an object in itself. Nothing of the kind. The moral law
neither exhausts nor completes the nature of man. It is but one strand
in the many-fibred thread of his existence; and to suspend his whole
life and destiny from this will always, as it always has in the past,
lead to the fall and the destruction of his noblest aspirations.
Piety, a devout morality, the culture of the religious sentiment,
these are only some and far from all of the means and steps to the
highest culture of the individual life.

They are not individual in the sense that their culture can be
successfully conducted in solitude or by mystical meditation. True
religion never isolates, but unites. Not the happiness of himself in
another world, but the happiness of others in this, is the aim of the
true believer. From theirs, he derives his own. The “Communion of
Saints,” the “Congregation of the Righteous,” the “Society of
Friends,”――these are the expressions which indicate the direction of
the religious sentiment in unimpeded activity. In such “solemn troops
and sweet societies,” it yields that joy to man which his nature is
capable of receiving only in its highest moments of exaltation, and
which it would be sad to think he could ever be deprived of.

But this we need not fear. A religion that is not afraid of free
investigation, but courts it; one that dismisses the supernatural
because it recognizes that no law can be higher than that of nature;
whose maxim is the utmost veracity in thought and action at all costs;
whose aim is to produce as much visible happiness and to prevent as
much misery as possible; which binds men together through united
sympathies for these aims; which constantly prompts to healthful and
fruitful activity; which is truly an inspiration, and sanctifies by
its presence the equally true inspirations of the highest art and the
purest science; and whose clearly recognized purpose is to promote the
ideal perfection of humanity as represented in the individual
man;――this is the Religion of the Future, and one that the future will
not allow to perish.

       *     *     *     *     *

The aim of science is the Real; of art, the Ideal; of action,
Happiness. It is for religion to unite this trinity into a unity in
each individual life.

       *     *     *     *     *

Man’s highest efforts in art or thought or life are in themselves
religious, because they represent elements in the better future life
of the race. This is what Michael Angelo meant when he said, “Who
strives after perfection in Art, strives after something Divine.”

       *     *     *     *     *

The divine is not the superhuman, but the ideally human. The infinite
must become incarnate to be intelligible. It is so in all great
religious acts and works.

       *     *     *     *     *

The ideally true is the potentially true.

       *     *     *     *     *

Physical science is opposed to both religion and metaphysics, and yet
is forever attracted toward them; because, struggle as it may, in them
alone can it find its own completion.

       *     *     *     *     *

The religious sect that condemns reason, condemns itself; and the
latter sentence is the only one which will be executed.

       *     *     *     *     *

The poetry of science will be the inspiration of the religion of the
future.

       *     *     *     *     *

Were there a religion other than human, it could not appeal to
humanity.

       *     *     *     *     *

The human cannot get along without the divine in some form. The least
religious men, such as gamblers, are the most superstitious. As
Novalis says, “Where the gods are not, ghosts take their place.”

       *     *     *     *     *

The aim of classic religions was the salvation of the State; of
Christianity, the salvation of certain individuals, the Elect; of the
religion of the future, the salvation of the whole race of man.

       *     *     *     *     *

A religious doctrine should compel belief, like a theorem in geometry.
Most doctrines are accepted because their believers know too much to
disturb their tranquillity by examining them, or too little to
comprehend them.

       *     *     *     *     *

As in dreams the impressions of childhood continue to recur, so in
modern religions conceptions belonging to the childhood of the race
are still urged upon us.

       *     *     *     *     *

The dogmatists prefer to frame rules, rather than give reasons;
because the latter will be judged on their merits, while the former
are accepted on authority.

       *     *     *     *     *

Half-true is harder to refute than wholly false. The defenders shield
themselves behind the part that is true. Not the mud at the bottom,
but the stain in the water, clouds the stream. This is why numerous
sects continue to survive, perpetuating many errors by means of a few
truths.

       *     *     *     *     *

There is something comical in a man making a business of religion,
levying a charge on this world for his services to the next. The
Quakers must have had a vein of humor in their opposition to all sorts
of paid priests.

       *     *     *     *     *

The priests of the Church of the Future will be the spiritual leaders
of their generation, those educators, poets, scientists, physicians,
journalists, and others, who practice their avocations with a view to
the interests of others as well as their own.

       *     *     *     *     *

Eating your dinner is as sacred as saying your prayers, and making
your living is as noble as dying for your faith.

       *     *     *     *     *

I heard Walt Whitman once say that life without immortality would be
like a railroad train made up entirely of engines. The forces of
individuality seemed to him too mighty, to conceive as possible their
limitation to this world.

       *     *     *     *     *

The spirit of Christ’s teachings is too democratic to be in hearty
sympathy with either science, philosophy, art, or the pursuit of
pleasure.

       *     *     *     *     *

Piety is sometimes merely the last passion; sometimes merely the last
fashion.

       *     *     *     *     *

The devout are the disappointed.

       *     *     *     *     *

Prayer refreshes and relieves the mind by strengthening the
confidence, by diverting the thoughts, and by admonishing the soul of
higher themes. The Jew prays to Jehovah, most Christians to the Virgin
or the Saints, the Buddhist to himself; all are consoled and
benefitted; equally so is he who meditates on the laws, the life, the
love, and the power, manifested in the universe of matter and mind
around him.




VII. _The Cultivation of Our Individuality._


When you tell a person that he resembles so-and-so, he is always
surprised. He does not see the slightest similarity. Were he to meet
his double in the street, he would pass him without recognition. It
would be the same with his mental counterpart; in fact, most men are
so slightly acquainted with themselves, and are so lost in the crowd,
that they no longer know the way home. They are merely composite
photographs of the people they have met. Unconscious actors, they
speak the words and imitate the feelings of those around them until
they lose the cue of their own proper parts.

This deplorable lack of Individuality is the fruitful cause of many a
failure and much unhappiness. It arises from a lack of self-knowledge,
self-confidence, and self-respect, and is constantly leading men
astray in their plans of life.

The complaint is often made that men deceive each other; but they
deceive themselves far more. They imagine they have talents which they
do not possess, and overlook those which are their own; they attempt
what is beyond their powers, and allow those they have to rust through
want of use. They believe that is their own which they have but
borrowed, and go forth to till imaginary fields, leaving their own
garden-plots lie fallow.

How much better to live one’s own life, to be oneself, to cultivate
what abilities we have rather than to waste time on those we have not,
to learn the limits of our own capacities and insure success by
working within them! The advice of the sages of all times has been to
swear by the words of no teacher, to call no man Master, to think our
own thoughts, to be true to ourselves, to make our own felicity, and
not to run about the world trying to share that of others by aping
their sentiments and actions.

The greatest teachers have not desired disciples, but friends. They
have never exerted authority, and where they could not persuade or
convince, they have sought no proselytes. To them the independance of
the individual mind has been of more importance than the dissemination
of any article of faith or element of instruction. Spinoza, Herder,
Wilhelm von Humboldt, our own Emerson, have all in spirit joined with
Goethe in singing that the secret of the highest happiness of man
rests in the preservation of his own free personality:――

  Höchstes Glück der Erdenkinder
  Sei nur die Persönlichkeit.

Peer in this august company, deeper than any in his devotion, speaking
at every hazard, I name my late friend, Walt Whitman, the “singer of
one’s self,” “chanter of Personality,” “self-balanced for all
contingencies,” holding creeds and schools in abeyance, ceasing not
till death.

The man of independent mind and strong personality is never trivial or
vulgar, no matter what his education or social position. The artist
who plays solo commands our attention. The plant which is indigenous
is alone strong and hardy; exotics are starvelings. Individuality is
contagious, and it is bracing and stimulating to meet such a
character. His presence is a benefit to a whole company, and a company
of such is worth a regiment of nonentities. The richest agricultural
community I ever saw was in France, where every peasant cultivated his
own little field; and the poorest was in our own country, where every
man was trying to feed his cattle on somebody else’s range.

The latter theory, however, is that which is popular to-day. Dreamers
are constantly devising schemes by which the idle and incompetent may
live off the proceeds of the diligent; labor unions deprive their
members of the liberty of speech and the liberty of work; socialism
would reduce all to a common level; syndicates and trusts break down
individual enterprise; sectarian colleges limit their calls to
professors who will echo their tenets; and thus in all directions the
free growth of the individual is hemmed in by the hedges of prejudice,
tradition, creed, and false theory.

Many people scarcely know what Individuality is. They think it means
to wear a straw hat in winter, or in some other way to make oneself
conspicuous. This is precisely what it does not mean. The man who is
himself is always simple and natural; he buys his hat at the hatter’s
and allows the tailor to make his clothes. To act otherwise is
affectation and singularity, not individuality. Simplicity is a
charming characteristic of the strongest minds. It is recorded of Sir
Isaac Newton that he was not distinguished from other men by any
peculiarity, either natural or affected; upon which Dr. Johnson makes
the excellent remark,――“Newton stood alone merely because he had left
the rest of mankind behind him, not because he deviated from the
beaten path.” Those who met Robert Browning for the first time were
agreeably surprised to find the great poet was in ordinary society
simply a gentleman. All forms of affectation are confessions that we
are not what we pretend to be, and are inconsistent with true
individuality.

Nor is it obstinacy and self-assertiveness, as others suppose. The man
who aims to be himself will wish others to remain themselves, and will
be the last to obtrude his personality in a disagreeable way upon
them. Obedience, voluntary subjection to the will of others, is part
of his self-training. He who cannot obey, cannot command. Nor is he
one who lives for himself, is solitary or selfish. The characters who
in history shine with the most marked individuality have been those
who moved most actively among their fellow men.

True individuality is that confidence in self which arises from a
knowledge of one’s own powers, their extent and their limitations.
This knowledge can be obtained only by experience, by testing the
powers, and by gauging their strength in the contest of life.

From how many vexations does a correct estimate of our capacities free
us? Envy, disappointed ambition, premature exhaustion, disgust of the
world, these arise from inadequate notions of our own abilities. On
the other hand, that life has always a large share of happiness which
is spent in the prosecution of some object to which our faculties are
equal, and which therefore we prosecute with success.

In judging of our own powers we are just as likely to under- as to
over-estimate them, and the results are equally painful.

How acute are the sufferings of a diffident, shy, self-distrustful,
over-sensitive disposition! Such a temperament is a sad make-weight in
the struggle of life. More men fail through ignorance of their
strength than through knowledge of their weakness. They are like a
farmer, who gathers scanty harvests all his life from fields covering
rich deposits of ore, which, did he but work them, would enrich him.
The fear of falling often hinders from climbing.

Let such remember that few score success, but after failures. Few
experiences are indeed more painful than to devote ourselves earnestly
to an undertaking and discover that it is beyond our powers; but the
failure teaches us the extent of our strength and increases it for the
next effort. We can never learn our own abilities but by trying for
what is beyond them; like the athlete, who lifts heavier and heavier
weights until he reaches those which he cannot move. Practice and
persistence are strong cards. “Time and I,” said Philip II, “against
any other two.”

Much of our sensitiveness, did we but know it, springs from concealed
vanity. We covertly fear that if we display our powers it will give
others the opportunity to take their measure; and this we mistrust
will not prove favorable to us. But there is a consolation in view. We
may call to mind that as the best of authors do not escape censure, so
the poorest do not lack admirers.

The over-estimation of one’s faculties leads to vanity and
self-conceit, traits not generally painful to the individual, and not
so injurious as excessive diffidence. It does a youth no harm to
believe that he was born to perform great deeds. It is easier to cut
back rank shoots than to fertilize sterile roots. He who is confident
that he can leap beyond the mark, will be pretty certain to reach it.
Attrition with the world usually reduces vanity to its proper limits.
Disappointed ambition is bitter, but some bitters are excellent
tonics.

That individuality is genuine which is confidence in self, based on
knowledge of self.

Nowhere does it show its worth more than when it comes into contact
with Opinion――that Queen of the World, as it has been called. How many
are its abject slaves, ordering their lives and measuring their
tastes, not by what they think right or desirable, but by what society
and the world around them dictate. Pitiable creatures! the only solid
ground of happiness is not what others think of you, but what you
think of yourself; not what they believe you to be, but what you know
you are.

On most subjects a sensible man will be extremely tolerant. He has
differed too often from himself in the course of his life to be
positive with others. He also knows that opinions may differ, yet not
be contradictory. Most questions have not only two sides, but many
sides; they are polygonal, and, like a table of that shape, can
accommodate many without elbowing. The value of anybody’s opinion on
any subject is much less than is popularly supposed. The fact, and not
the opinion based on it, is alone of supreme importance. For that
reason, what are called “fixed principles” and “settled convictions”
are signs of mental debility or indolence. I think it is Ruskin who
says that he would be ashamed of himself if he entertained the same
opinions on any subject which he did twenty years ago. It would be a
sign of ossification of the intelligence.

The characteristic of true individuality is a readiness to adopt the
views of others on proper evidence, and not obstinacy, as many think.
A certain flexibility of opinion strengthens personality; as the free
swaying to and fro of the branches of a tree toughens the fibres of
its trunk.

Obstinate asseveration is usually a sign of ignorance or falsehood.
The man who swears he is telling you the truth is generally lying.
When you see men in violent discussion about subjects of which they
cannot know much, such as religion or politics, take a seat and laugh.
They are the fools in the Comedy of Life, and the spectacle is
humorous.

It is proverbial that argument never convinces, but leaves each side
more strongly confirmed in its opinions. Not thus do the shrewd makers
of converts go about their work. They well know that the timely hint,
the insidious suggestion, the light touch, leaves the permanent
impression; like the brands of animals, which to be lasting must
scorch only the superficial layers of the skin, and if burnt deeper,
are obliterated by the healing of the wound.

That form of opinion which is called Advice has much to do with our
felicity. If a man fails, the usual explanation is that he refused to
take advice. Advice which is the expression of the general results of
human action――such as is supplied in such abundance in this volume――is
worthy of consideration; but that which is offered to meet particular
cases is generally worth about what it costs to give,――nothing. Advice
is never as wise as it seems. Usually it is claimed to be the fruit of
experience; but we may know the world ever so well to-day, and
to-morrow our knowledge will be out of date. Good advice usually loses
good opportunity. Even if by rejecting it we fail, the loss may not be
real. Sometimes the money we lose turns out to be that which was best
invested.

One of the choicest fruits of the culture of individuality is Decision
of Character. Nothing more constantly contributes to the happiness of
life. This has been so well shown by John Foster in his essay on the
subject that I shall do better by the reader to persuade him to peruse
it, than to enlarge on the subject here. The state of indecision,
vacillation, and uncertainty, in which many persons pass a good share
of their waking hours, is reason enough for the unhappiness of which
they complain. The habit of decision can be readily acquired by making
it a rule to decide promptly on small matters, and not allowing them
again to occupy the attention.

I do not esteem highly the spirit of that Arab proverb which
says,――“What you wish to conceal from your enemy, tell not to your
friend;” but there is a certain reserve which every person of strong
character instinctively observes toward even his intimates. It is not
secretiveness, and still less taciturnity or dissimulation. Rather it
is the sense of the sacredness of personality, and is the nucleus of
that lofty sense of Self-reverence, which is the worthiest feeling one
can entertain toward himself. There are certain recesses of the soul,
certain feelings, which belong imperiously to the Ego, such as are so
powerfully limned in Charlotte Bronte’s poem beginning,――

  “When thou sleepest lulled in night,
   Art thou lost in vacancy?”

which cannot be disclosed to others, though they may be divined by
them.

Such reticence in no wise interferes with Sincerity of character. This
is beyond all else the trait of the person of marked individuality. He
alone can be sincere; not that other, who borrows his opinions from
those around him, and is a mere dealer in other men’s goods, and hence
has none of his own to offer as security for what he says.

The casuists love to argue that veracity is a relative quality; that
half a lie often conveys a more correct impression than the whole
truth; that to show the seamy as well as the shiny side of great
characters is an injury to the community; that courtesy obliges us to
chicane with facts; that limping morality itself is much assisted by
the friendly hand of mendacity. These questions may be left to the
conscience of each to work out for himself; but about one kind of
veracity there should be no quibbling, and that is, veracity to
oneself. Deceive others if you will; but never try to persuade
yourself that you are what you are not, or have what you have not. How
can you expect to succeed in making yourself happy, if you studiously
attempt to remain ignorant of the nature, capacities, and qualities
which you aim to please?

Finally, the foundation of Individuality must be broad, if the edifice
is to be solid. One must constantly have in view the symmetrical
development of all the powers and faculties. He must seek
many-sidedness in his knowledge and in his sympathies. All the
facettes of his nature must be polished through use. Narrow views,
petty interests, routine, paucity of affections, these must be avoided
would he so develop his nature as to derive from it the utmost
enjoyment in life.

       *     *     *     *     *

The mission of the species is the perfecting of the individual.

       *     *     *     *     *

For all our power in the present, we are indebted to the past; for
future power――or weakness,――we shall owe the present.

       *     *     *     *     *

The man of strong personality is not apt to perceive how much he
differs from others, because he is quick to recognize the personality
in them. This trait always impressed me in Walt Whitman. He seemed to
take for granted that everybody had as much personality as himself.
They had,――to him.

       *     *     *     *     *

To Walt Whitman, Self was sacred,――and little else. He was intoxicated
with individuality.

       *     *     *     *     *

Distrust the current estimates of great men. They alone are not tried
by their peers.

       *     *     *     *     *

If you climb a height, you will be easier seen, but will look smaller.

       *     *     *     *     *

It is difficult to say which is the weaker: He who cultivates
self-admiration, or he whose chief aim is to elicit the admiration of
others. When Cromwell entered London as Lord Protector, a flatterer
called his attention to the crowds assembled to welcome him. “They
would come just the same to see me hanged,” was his reply.

       *     *     *     *     *

Self-complacency is a successful counterfeit of happiness. Were it the
genuine article, then the madman who believes himself Deity is the
happiest of mortals. But if he is cured?

       *     *     *     *     *

Singularity is not an effort to be oneself, but to be what others are
not.

       *     *     *     *     *

Some people cannot be blamed for affectation, for they have nothing of
their own to show.

       *     *     *     *     *

Some men, by pretending to be other than what they believe they are,
show themselves in their true character.

       *     *     *     *     *

Common minds like commonplaces. When the audience applauds, you have
probably said nothing worth hearing.

       *     *     *     *     *

It requires more courage to differ from public opinion in matters of
thought than in action.

       *     *     *     *     *

A man is apt to attribute his failure to having accepted advice; his
friends, to his having rejected it.

       *     *     *     *     *

Those listen most respectfully to advice who have resolved not to take
it.

       *     *     *     *     *

We are apt to discover the best reasons for our actions after
committing them.

       *     *     *     *     *

Most men do not base their opinions on reasoning; but their reasoning
on their opinions.

       *     *     *     *     *

Never revolt against the laws you make for yourself.

       *     *     *     *     *

Our worst disappointments are when we disappoint ourselves. This is
the feeling of Chagrin, the painful, inward acknowledgment that we
“have made fools of ourselves.” Few reflections are more bitter, or
less easily escaped.

       *     *     *     *     *

Our wisest warnings are often most applicable to ourselves. Steele,
deviled by duns, wrote of the disgrace of contracting debts which one
cannot pay; and Bacon scribbled wise saws about domestic economy at
one end of the room, while his steward was robbing him at the other.

       *     *     *     *     *

Individuality is anarchic and subversive; it accepts no institution
because it is old and reverend; it brings a jewel which fits into no
ready-made setting; it cries with Walt Whitman:――

  My call is the call of battle; I nourish active rebellion,
  He going with me must go well-armed.

       *     *     *     *     *

Individuality is the antithesis of egotism. He who is most himself
best appreciates and most respects the self of others.

       *     *     *     *     *

Self-distrust is nowhere more appropriate than in discussing difficult
questions, and nowhere less displayed.

       *     *     *     *     *

That we have not the ability to do, rather than that we have not the
opportunity to enjoy, is the source of most of our unhappiness.

       *     *     *     *     *

The misanthropy of the young is dissatisfaction with self; that of the
old is detestation of others. Youth hopes to find life a romance,
himself as its hero; age would like it a history which posterity would
prize. When disappointed, youth is despairing; age is resentful.




