The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pursuit of Happiness, by Daniel G. Brinton

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Pursuit of Happiness
       A Book of Studies and Strowings

Author: Daniel G. Brinton

Release Date: April 30, 2018 [EBook #57071]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS ***




Produced by Julia Miller, Carol Brown and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









  THE
  PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS

  A BOOK OF
  STUDIES AND STROWINGS

  BY
  DANIEL G. BRINTON, A.M., M.D., LL.D.

  AUTHOR OF “RACES AND PEOPLES,” “THE MYTHS OF THE NEW WORLD,” “ESSAYS
  OF AN AMERICANIST,” ETC., ETC.

  PHILADELPHIA
  DAVID MCKAY, PUBLISHER
  NO. 23 SOUTH NINTH STREET
  1893




  COPYRIGHT, 1892, BY D. G. BRINTON.




  WM. F. FELL & CO.,
  ELECTROTYPERS AND PRINTERS
  1220-24 SANSOM ST.,
  PHILADELPHIA.




  TO THE
  HON. GEORGE PIERCE ANDREWS,
  JUSTICE OF THE SUPREME COURT OF THE STATE OF NEW YORK,

  This Book is Inscribed,

  IN MEMORY OF A FRIENDSHIP WHICH HAS CONTINUED
  UNINTERRUPTED SINCE OUR EARLIEST
  COLLEGE DAYS.




“We hold these truths to be self-evident,――that all men are created
equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable
rights; that among these are life, liberty, and THE PURSUIT OF
HAPPINESS.”――_The Declaration of Independence of the United States of
America._


  “The sun and stars that float in the open air,
   The apple-shaped earth and we upon it, surely the drift of them is
        something grand,
   I do not know what it is except that it is something grand, and
        that it is Happiness.”
                                    _――Walt Whitman._




  CONTENTS.


  PART I.
  Happiness as the Aim of Life.

  I. _Is a Guide to Happiness Possible? And if Possible, is it
     Desirable?_

  Objections to the Pursuit of Happiness as a Low and Selfish
    Aim.――Answered by the Fact that we Cannot do Otherwise than Pursue
    it.――Enjoyment is not a Sin, but a Duty.――No One Can Impart
    Happiness who does not Possess it Himself.――It is Desirable,
    therefore, that Men be Taught How to become Happy.――Nor is this a
    Commendation of Selfishness,                             pp. 9-14

  II. _The Definition of Happiness._

  Happiness is not Pleasure, but is Built Upon it.――Explanation of
    Pleasure and Pain in Sensation.――Happiness Dependent on the Will
    and Self-consciousness.――Difference Between Self-feeling and
    Self-seeking.――Happiness is the Increasing Consciousness of
    Self.――It may be Derived from Other than Pleasurable
    Feelings.――The Yearning for Joy is a Cry of Nature.――It is the
    Secret of Evolution,                                     pp. 15-20

  III. _The Relative Value of Pleasures._

  All Pleasures are Inseparably Connected.――The Error of Religions and
    Philosophies which Condemn Any.――Escape from Pain the Lowest Form
    of Pleasure.――Indifference to Pleasure a Sign of Mental
    Failing.――Contentment is not Happiness.――Happiness means Expansion
    and Growth.――Practical Difficulty in Comparing Pleasures.――The
    Hierarchy of Enjoyments.――The Blunders of Asceticism.――The
    Equality of Pleasures, as Such,                          pp. 21-25

  IV. _The Distribution of Happiness._

  Relation of Happiness to the Means of Happiness.――Law of the “Rate
    of Pleasure.”――The Extremes of the Social Order Equally
    Unfavorable.――Civilization does not Increase Personal
    Enjoyment.――Social Evils Diminish, but Personal Sufferings
    Increase.――The Motive of the True Civilization.――Women Have Less
    Happiness than Men.――Partly through their Physical Nature, Partly
    through Social Impositions.――Pernicious, Legal and Ecclesiastical
    Restrictions.――The True and False Education of Women.――Man will
    Profit by Woman’s Improvement.――Childhood and Youth not the
    Happiest Periods of Life.――Enjoyment Should Increase with Mental
    and Physical Vigor.――Old Age is not the Period of Wisdom.――Spurious
    Enjoyments of the Aged.                                  pp. 26-35

  V. _Principles of a Self-Education for the Promotion of One’s Own
     Happiness._

  Happiness is the Reward of Effort.――The Greatest Efficiency is not
    the Greatest Happiness.――The Principles of a Self-Education:――I.
    The Multiplication of the Sources of Enjoyment――What these Sources
    Are――The Avoidance of Profitless Pain――The Value of Knowledge――The
    True End of Culture――Falsity of “Contentment with Little.”――The
    Kind of Knowledge Required:――1. Of Our Bodily Constitution――2. Of
    the Elements of the Sciences――3. Of the Nature of the Mind――4. Of
    the Principles of Business――5. Of the Value of Evidence.――II. The
    Maintenance of a Sensibility to Pleasure.――The Criteria of
    Pleasurable Sensations.――The Anatomy of Ennui.――III. The Search
    for Variety of Impressions.――Variety Necessary to High
    Pleasure.――Pleasure must be Remitted.――The Individual should Seek
    Novelty.――The Evil Effects of Habit.――IV. The Proper Proportion
    Between Desire and Pleasure.――The Wisdom of Counting the
    Cost.――Precepts for the Regulation of Desire.――V. Make all
    Pleasures a Part of Happiness.――All Pleasures are
    Excellent.――Error of the Contrary Doctrine.――All Pleasures should
    be Brought into Relation.――The Bond of Sense to what is Beyond
    Sense.――The Reality of the Ideal.

  STROWINGS                                                  pp. 36-56


  PART II.

  How Far Our Happiness Depends on Nature and Fate.

  I. _Our Bodily and Mental Constitutions._

  Life as a Synonym of Happiness.――Necessity and Chance the Arbiters
    of Life.――The Endowment of the Child.――The Laws of
    Heredity.――Hereditary and Congenital Traits.――The Heritage of the
    Race.――Family Jewels and Family Curses.――The Avenue of
    Escape.――Precepts for Self-training.――Words for Women.――Beauty and
    its Cult.――Its Perils and its Power.――The Ideal of the
    Beautiful.――The Four Temperaments.――Cheerfulness and its Physical
    Seat.――Diseases that are Cheerful and those that are Not.――What to
    do in an Attack of the Blues.――Old Age and its Attainment.――The
    Fallacious Bliss of Youth.――Men who Outlive Themselves.

  STROWINGS,                                                 pp. 57-80

  II. _Our Physical Surroundings._

  Clothing and its Objects.――The Dress of Women.――The Value of Good
    Clothes.――The Room and its Furniture.――Our Living Rooms.――Own Your
    Own House.――Foes to Fight in House-building.――A New Principle for
    Architects.――Love of Home and Homesickness.――How Climate
    Influences Cheerfulness.

  STROWINGS,                                                 pp. 81-91

  III. _Luck and its Laws._

  What Solon said about Happiness.――Destiny in Human Affairs.――The
    Calculation of Chances.――Results of the Laws of Luck.――They Cannot
    be Escaped.――Runs of Luck and their Results.――“A Fool for Luck,”
    and Why.――The Story of Polycrates and its Moral.――The Fetichism of
    Gamblers.――Luck Does Less Than Many Think.――The Miracles of
    Insurance.――The Dark Hand of Destiny.――Trifles Rule the World.――We
    Are the Slaves of Chance.――But What is Chance?

  STROWINGS,                                                pp. 92-108


  PART III.

  How Far Our Happiness Depends on Ourselves.

  I. _Our Occupations――Those of Necessity and those of Choice._

  The Washerwoman’s Ideal of Happiness.――Labor is the True Source of
    Enjoyment.――Selection of an Occupation.――How to Find Pleasure in
    Its Pursuit.――Fitness and Unfitness for Certain
    Occupations.――Dangers of Diligence in Business.――The Rare
    Complaint, Over-Conscientiousness.――Making a Living a Mean
    Business.――Occupations of Choice.――Reflections on Recreations.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 109-117

  II. _Money-making, Its Laws and Its Limits._

  The Universal Prayer.――Property the Foundation of Progress.――Wealth
    is Welcome to All.――What Riches Give.――“Effective” and
    “Productive” Riches.――The Author Discovers the Fortunate
    Isles.――But is Promptly Disenchanted.――How to Get Rich.――Another
    Way to Get Rich.――New Lamps for Old.――Riches and Happiness.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 118-127

  III. _The Pleasures we may Derive from Our Senses._

  The Elect of God are those who Improve their Faculties.――Division of
    the Faculties.――The Rules of Pleasure.――The Rule of
    Moderation.――The Rule of Variety.――Pleasures of the Muscular
    Sense.――Of the Sense of Touch.――Of the Sense of Smell.――Of Tobacco
    Using.――Eating as a Fine Art.――The Symmetry of a Well-served
    Dinner.――Gastronomic Precepts.――Pleasures of the Sense of
    Hearing.――Of the Sense of Sight.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 128-141

  IV. _The Pleasures we may Derive from Our Emotions._

  Hope and Fear.――The Folly of Philosophies.――Hopes which are
    Incompatibles.――A Most Useful Suggestion.――Fear is a
    Safeguard.――Worry and its Remedies.――Courage and Apathy.――Remorse
    and Regret.――Anger, Hatred, and Revenge.――The Imagination.――The
    Esthetic Emotions.――The Contemplation of Nature.――The Arts of
    Pleasure.――The Excellence of Good Taste.――Plot-Interest.――The
    Emotions of Pursuit.――The Emotions of Risk.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 142-155

  V. _The Pleasures we may Derive from Our Intellect._

  The Search for Truth.――Advantages of Intellectual
    Pleasures.――Especially to Women.――Riddles and Puzzles.――Reading,
    and Rules for It.――My Own Plan.――What Line to Read In.――A Plea for
    Poetry.――Thinking About Reading.――What Meditation Means.――Social
    Intellectual Pleasures.――Writing and Letter Writing.――Keeping a
    Diary.――The Pursuit of Truth.――What Truth Is.――The Study of
    Science.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 156-168

  VI. _The Satisfaction of the Religious Sentiment._

  Happiness the Only Standard of Value.――The Strange Law of
    Evolution.――The Ideal of Humanity.――The Position of Dogmatic
    Religion.-The Unhappiness Produced by Religions.――The Happiness
    Derived from Religions.――The Doctrine of Faith.――Morality and
    Religion.――Erroneous Estimate of the Moral Life.――True Religious
    Unity.――The Religion of the Future.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 169-180

  VII. _The Cultivation of Our Individuality._

  The Prevailing Lack of Individuality.――Examples of Great
    Teachers.――The Man of Strong Personality.――What Individuality Is
    and Is Not.――Value of Self-knowledge.――The Pains of
    Diffidence.――Dangers of Self-conceit.――The Tyranny of
    Opinion.――The Foolishness of Fixed Principles.――Obstinate
    Asseveration.――Giving and Taking Advice.――Decision of
    Character.――Importance of Reserve.――Sincerity is
    Essential.――Veracity at Least to Oneself.――Seek Many-sidedness of
    Character.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 181-193


  PART IV.

  How Far Our Happiness Depends on Others.

  I. _What Others Give Us: Safety, Liberty, Education._

  Man’s Dependence on Society for his Safety.――Security the Aim of
    Government.――Two Theories of Government.――Justice as the Aim of
    Government.――Freedom the Aim of Law.――Another Theory of
    Government.――Knowledge the Brother of Liberty.――Education a
    Necessity.――Defective Education of Women.――What it Should
    Be.――Study Should Be Made a Pleasure.――Man’s Dependence on Others.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 195-205

  II. _What we Owe Others: Morality, Duty, Benevolence._

  Happiness and Virtue are Independent Aims.――Morality and the Moral
    Sense not the Same.――What Morality Is.――No Universal Moral
    Precepts.――The Dualism of Morals.――The Sense of Duty.――The
    Pleasures of the Moral Sense.――What “A Clear Conscience”
    Means.――What is “The Chief End of Man.”――The Moral Sense Opposes
    Moral Laws.――The Benevolent Emotions.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 206-215

  III. _The Practice of Business and the Enjoyment of Society._

  The Value of Association.――Society Should Not Ask the Sacrifice of
    the Individual.――Maxims for Dealing with Men: First, Distrust;
    Second, Trust.――What “Society” is.――The Drawing-room as the Shrine
    of Civilization.――Good-will the Basis of Good Society.――Ordinary
    People are the Most Agreeable.――Maxim for Success in Society.――The
    Aim of Society.――Good Society Not Selfish.――The Power of
    Society.――What Politeness is.――Society Conversation.――The Expert
    in Small Talk.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 216-227

  IV. _On Fellowship, Comradeship, and Friendship._

  Man’s Highest Pleasure is in Humanity.――What Fellowship
    Means.――Mutuality of Interests the Basis of Social Progress.――But
    the Individual must be Respected.――Comradeship is Based on Tastes
    in Common.――It is a Substitute for Friendship.――Examples of
    it.――The Meaning of Friendship.――What Weakens and what Strengthens
    it.――It should be Carefully Cultivated.――Friendship Between Men
    and Women.――Examples of it.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 228-237

  V. _Love, Marriage, and the Family Relation._

  The Single Life Ever Incomplete.――The Holiness of Maternity.――The
    Emotion of Love Explained.――Love and Beauty.――Love Immortalized in
    Posterity.――The History of Marriage.――The Three Conditions of
    Marriage.――The Question of Divorce.――What True Marriage
    Means.――Opinions of Thinkers About Divorce.――The Family as the
    Object of Marriage.――The Family Tie Among Us.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 238-247


  PART V.

  The Consolations of Affliction.

  I. _The Removal of Unhappiness._

  Suffering is Unavoidable.――Where to Look for Consolation.――Two
    Consoling Reflections.――Advantage of a Multitude of Miseries.――The
    Habit of Unhappiness.――Some Require Ill Fortune.――Two Popular
    Methods of Consolation.――Talk It Over, and Why.――Our Strange Claim
    for Happiness.――The Tolerance of Suffering.――The Universal
    Panacea.――Look Before and After.――Deal Justly by Yourself.――How to
    Regard Incivility and Ingratitude.――Success Arising from
    Failures.――Resignation, Sympathy.――Remember Your
    Advantages.――Thoughts About Time and Death.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 248-280

  II. _The Inseparable Connection of Pleasure and Pain._

  Pleasure Requires Pain, and Joy Sorrow.――The Words of
    Socrates.――Physiological Relations of Pleasure and Pain.――Their
    Analogy to Joy and Sorrow.――The Oneness of the Pleasure-Pain
    Sensation.――The Rhythm of Sensations and Emotions.――Pleasure
    Derived from Pain, Joy from Sorrow.――Quotation from Leigh
    Hunt.――Quotation from Sir Richard Steele.――Sadness the Best
    Preparative for Gladness.――Influence of Time on Pleasures and
    Pains.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 263-272

  III. _The Education of Suffering._

  What is Suffering?――The Human Passion of Sorrow.――Sorrow as the
    Initiation into the Mysteries of Life.――The Noblest Prizes Won
    Only by Suffering.――It is the Highest Inspiration of Religion and
    Art.――It Alone Teaches the Elder Truths.――The Ministry of
    Grief.――The Sweetness of Departed Joys.――The Compensations of
    Loves that are Lost.――The Despair that is Divine.

  STROWINGS,                                               pp. 273-280




PART I.

Happiness as the Aim of Life.




I. _Is a Guide to Happiness Possible? And, if Possible, is it
Desirable?_


The pursuit of happiness,――the pursuit of one’s own happiness,――is it
a vain quest? and, if not vain, is it a worthy object of life?

There have been plenty to condemn it on both grounds. They have said
that the endeavor is hopeless; that to study the art of being happy is
like studying the art of making gold, which is the only art by which
gold can never be made. Nothing, they add, is so unpropitious to
happiness as the very effort to attain it.

They go farther. “Let life,” they proclaim, “have a larger purpose
than enjoyment.” They quote the mighty Plato, when he demands that the
right aim of living shall stand apart, and out of all relation to
pleasure or pain. They declare that the theory of happiness as an end
is the most dangerous of all in modern sociology――the tap-root of the
worst weeds in the political theories of the day, for the reason that
the individual pursuit of enjoyment is necessarily destructive of that
of society at large. Moreover, they urge, who dares write of it? For
he who has not enjoyed it, cannot speak wisely of it; and in him who
has attained it, ’twere insolence to boast of it.

Over against these stands another school, not, by any means, solely a
modern school. If that boasts Plato as its leader, this can claim
Aristotle as its master. It is with the single aim to become happier,
said that wise teacher, that we deliberately perform any act of our
lives. This is the final end of every conscious action of man. That
alone is the true purpose of existence, which, by itself, and not as a
means to something else, makes life worth living and desirable for its
own sake; and happiness――happiness alone――fulfills this requirement.

Through the ages this conflict has continued. We find the thoughtful
Pascal declaring that every free act of the will has, and can have, no
other end in view than the increase of the individual happiness, be it
so seemingly inconsistent as drowning or hanging oneself; while the
distinctively modern school of social philosophers, without any
exception, pin to their banners the maxim of their master, Jeremy
Bentham, “The common end of every person’s efforts is happiness;” and
they love to confound the ascetics by proclaiming, with Spencer, that
“Without pleasure there is no good in life;” or asserting, with Ward,
that the sole aim of a right sociology is the organization of
happiness. Nay, they have gone so far as to project a series of
sciences by which the human race is to reach a condition of entire
enjoyment. They give us “Eudæmonics,” or the art of the attainment of
well-being; “Hedonism,” or the theory of the securing of pleasure; and
even the “Hedonical Calculus,” by which we can to a nicety calculate
how much any object, if secured, will add to our felicity.

These excellent authorities have therefore answered the inquiry
whether the pursuit of happiness is a possible occupation, by showing
that in fact we cannot of our own wills do anything else; and though
we often pursue it blindly and by false routes, we can, by taking
thought and learning of others, follow it up successfully. So also
taught Aristotle, who tells us in his _Ethics_, “It is possible for
every man by certain studies and appropriate care to reach a condition
of happiness.”

Since the aim of enjoyment is thus natural, even thus necessary, to
man, since it is the motive of his every action, how important that it
should be guided by the dictates of wisdom, and not condemned and
discarded as evil! Have not those who declared it criminal smothered
the germ which they should have nursed?

Away with the cold and cruel doctrines which for ages have darkened
the lives of men by teaching them that enjoyment is folly and pleasure
a sin! If the reasoned pursuit of happiness conflicts with current
morality, so much the worse for that morality. Away with it, and in
the light of a younger day seek a better one. What is right is
reasonable, and what is reasonable is right. Enjoy yourself; it is the
highest wisdom. Diffuse enjoyment; it is the loftiest virtue. Not only
are the two compatible; they are inseparable; as the sage Rasselas
said to the Princess: “It is our business to consider what beings like
us may perform; each laboring for his own happiness by promoting
within his circle, however narrow, the happiness of others.”

All agree that we should strive for the happiness of others; it has
even been said that this is the only moral justification of any act of
our lives. But the cup which we are to proffer to all, we are,
forsooth, forbidden to taste ourselves! What is good for everybody
else is bad for oneself!

There is something radically wrong here, both in fact and logic.
Mental moods are contagious, and the man who enjoys little will prove
a kill-joy to others. Who are more disagreeable than those Philistines
and Pharisees who insist on making you happy against your will, and
contrary to your inclinations? I have noticed that the usual pretext
for annoying people is solicitude about their welfare. But, as a rule,
people are not happy whose pleasures are assigned them by others.
Nobody’s vegetables are so sweet as those from my own garden, and if
the whole world set to work to please me, I am sure I should be
discontented. These moralists put the cart before the horse. Before we
are qualified to make others happy we must compass happiness in some
degree for ourselves; and our success with others will be just to that
degree and no more. The quality and intensity of enjoyment which we
ourselves have is alone that which we are able to impart to others. To
assert, therefore, that we should make no effort to obtain or increase
this, is as illogical as can be.

Here some one may think I am caught in my own trap. For if people
cannot assign pleasures to others, is it not an impertinence to offer
instruction on the subject? Can anybody tell me better than myself
what I like and what I desire?

True, but the difference is wide between telling me what things should
please me, and telling me how I can best please myself; and the latter
is the aim of right instruction in this matter. That it is badly
needed, one who runs may read. Most people pursue unhappiness more
steadily than happiness. Only fools find life an easy thing; to the
wise it is a perpetual surprise that they get along at all. To them,
life is a lesson to be learned, and happiness is a science the first
axiom in which is to seek knowledge. To be happy one must work for it,
and not merely have the wish and possess the requisites; as Aristotle
so prettily expresses it, “As at the Olympic games, it is not the
strongest or handsomest who gain the crown, but only those who join in
the combat.”

There is boundless need for a clear statement of the true theory of
personal happiness. It has been neglected, misconceived, and decried
long enough, and countless lives have been darkened in consequence.
Such a theory, to be true, must be applicable to all men, of all sorts
and conditions, because the desire of happiness is the common motive
of all. Has it yet been discovered? That is the object of the present
inquiry――for it is little more than an inquiry; but be sure that when
it is discovered and set forth, it will come not as something new or
strange, but like some half-forgotten, long familiar truth.

Not only, therefore, is it desirable, it is the bounden duty of every
man to consider his own highest happiness, to learn what that is, and
to go to work to secure it. It is his duty to his neighbors as well as
to himself; more than that, it is his first duty to his kind. It is
incumbent on every generation to transmit an increased store of social
and personal felicity to posterity. This is the only good reason for
the continuance of the race. But a generation does nothing except
through its individual members; hence, it all comes back to the
personal effort for happiness.

But the moralist will object, Is not this doctrine one of absolute
egotism, of stark selfishness?

This objection is what has nullified and cast into disfavor every
essay ever written, from the Nichomachean Ethics downward, which
attempted a reasoned and practical art of increasing personal
happiness. They have all been frowned down as selfish and, therefore,
immoral.

It is time for this opposition to cease. It rests on a misunderstanding
of terms, on a confusion of different sensations, on the bad books of
some writers, but mostly on ancient prejudice and an ignorance of
facts. Let the subject be approached with a mind free from bias; let
the false beacons hung out by some schools be disregarded; above all,
let a clear understanding of what happiness consists in be gained; and
this potent objection will be dismissed from the case.

Let us turn, then, to the definition of happiness.




II. _The Definition of Happiness._


In science a definition is not a resting-place, but a stepping-stone.
It is needless, therefore, to call the catalogue of obsolete and
obscure definitions of happiness. Some, indeed, say that the
definition, like the thing itself, is still unfound.

I do not think this is so. Between the physiologists and the
psychologists, I believe we are in a position to explain what
happiness is; and if in parts the explanation is a trifle subtle, it
is not really obscure.

Happiness is not the same as pleasure, but it is generally built upon
or grows out of pleasurable feelings. We must begin, therefore, our
analysis with these, and with their opposites――the painful feelings.

Pleasure and pain are both ultimate and undefinable experiences of the
mind. We cannot resolve them further; but we can note certain
unfailing relations they bear to the organism, which explain their
significance. Pleasure characterizes the normal and unimpeded exercise
of physiological functions of all kinds. There are as many elementary
pleasures as there are sensations. Pain is present only in the reverse
conditions. Modern physiologists have established, therefore, the
fundamental law, that pleasure connects itself with vital energy, pain
with its opposite; in which they have not gone beyond, even if they
have caught up to, the maxim of Spinoza: “Pleasure is an affection
whereby the mind passes to a greater perfection; pain is an affection
whereby it passes to a lesser perfection.”

Such is the meaning of pleasure or of pleasurable feelings; and there
is no lack of writers, and weighty ones, too, who maintain that
happiness is merely the excess of pleasure over pain; or the utmost
pleasure we are capable of; or the aggregate of continued pleasurable
feelings. All such phrases are wide of the mark. They confound
distinct things, and ignore the boundaries between the different
realms of mental action.

We must leave the physiologists and turn to profound analysts of
purely mental action, such as Hume and Kant, for the right
understanding of the meaning of happiness. For these, its inseparable
factors, are the Will and Self-consciousness. As Kant expresses
it,――“The Desire of Happiness is the general title for all subjective
motives of the Will.” Desire is really stimulated, not by the image of
past pleasure, as Locke and his followers teach, but by the conception
of Self. The satisfaction of desire is not merely such, but is the
satisfaction of the Self, in thus reaching a greater perfection, to
use Spinoza’s phrase. Only by discriminating the object from the Self
can the pleasure of the subject become an end in itself. Hence the
real aim of the pleasure-seeker, though he is rarely intellectually
conscious of it, is to feel his own Self, his own being, more keenly.
Aristotle expressed this when he wrote,――“Pleasure is the feeling
which accompanies Self-realization.”

To the extent, therefore, that pleasure develops the sense of
Self-consciousness it partakes of a higher nature than mere sensation,
which man shares in common with the brutes; and to that extent it can
claim the name of Happiness, a feeling inseparable from free will and
conscious individuality. In man a true pleasure must always be a
pleasure in something else than the pleasure itself; that is, it must
heighten the sense of personal existence.

It is only the conception of Self as a permanent subject to be
pleased, that stimulates man to fresh endeavors, that makes him seek
knowledge and freedom, that lifts him above the beast, contented with
the satisfaction of its appetites. This is what Fichte meant when he
said that the consciousness of Self alone enables us to understand
life and enjoy it. Nothing is truer than the motto, “_Être heureux,
c’est vivre_,”――to be happy is to live.

Here, again, some uneasy moralist will point the finger and raise the
cry of “selfishness.” It is time to have done with this purblind, this
high-gravel-blind moralist, who refuses to distinguish between
self-feeling and self-seeking. There are two self-loves. The one is
inseparable from personal existence, the necessary point of departure
of every conscious action, whose activity and whose end are alike in
the object outside of the self; the other is that egoism which directs
both the action and its end toward itself. The former is fecund,
ennobling, inspiring; the latter is sterile and enfeebling. Rightly
understood, nothing is so admirable as self-love; but love yourself,
not for what you are, but for what you may be. The wisest of teachers
set no higher mark for duty than, “Love thy neighbor _as thyself_.” It
was a modern and unphilosophical derogation which substituted for it,
“_Vivre pour autrui_.” In living the best for ourselves, we live the
best for others.

The conclusion which we have now arrived at, that happiness is the
increasing consciousness of Self, leads us to reflect whether this
mental state is brought about solely by what is generally known as
“pleasures,” or whether some other feeling, not usually classed as
such, may not have the same effect. Man can enjoy only through action,
and all his happiness depends on action; but there may be a great deal
and very intense activity in spheres of experience to which the terms
pleasure and pain, in their physiological sense, do not apply. Indeed,
such activities may be present along with physical pain and mental
suffering, and yet the law hold good: that if these are of a nature to
exalt the consciousness of self, they may be a well-spring of
happiness under circumstances the most unfavorable. This explains a
passage of Epictetus which I thought over a long time before I
mastered its significance,――“Happiness is an _equivalent_ for all
troublesome things;” not that it excludes or abolishes them, but that
it is a compensation for them. This puts the whole art of happiness in
a different light. It may teach us to avoid some pains and troubles,
and this is well; but the best of it will ever be to give us an
_equivalent_ for the many that remain. Any text-book of felicity which
leaves this out of account may as well be burned by Monsieur de Paris.

Now we can understand what Plato meant when he said that the right aim
of living should stand out of relation to pleasure or pain. He had in
mind these other activities which give in some natures an intenser
sense to self-consciousness than any mere nerve reaction. The ancient
ideal was the greatness of the individual, the richness of his
imagination, the reach of his intellect, the strength of his will, the
firmness of his friendship, the devotion of his patriotism, the
singleness of his life and purpose in some noble aim. This it was that
floated before the intellectual vision of Plato and led him to scorn
the pleasures of the sense and the charms of tranquillity.

Let us applaud him; for we moderns are not ignorant of the luxury of
toil and the joy of strong endeavor; we too, like Othello, “do agnize
an alacrity for hardness;” with Seneca we can say, “_Res severa est
verum gaudium_.” But we hold it needless and unwise to leave any sunny
field uncultured on whose soil may be trained to bloom the fragrant
flower of pleasure.

The yearning for joy is a cry of nature which can never be stifled.
Give heed to it and obey it. It calls you to wider horizons, to warmer
sympathies, to a fuller growth, to a completer development. It holds
the secret of Evolution. It is the incessant prompter to a higher form
of existence. Biologists have discovered that the avoidance of painful
and the search for pleasurable sensations are the first principles of
organic animal life, and are those which have developed the amœba into
the man. In him, this general consciousness has blossomed into
Self-consciousness, and to this he owes all the growth of his higher
nature, his essentially human powers. To the extent that this is
brought into harmony with the sum of his faculties and with his
surroundings, he wins that something greater than pleasure which we
call happiness. From the culture of this, if from any source, he must
look for the advent of those new spirit-powers which more fortunate
generations in the hereafter may enjoy. Who knows but those, our dear
children of after days, may gain a still higher form of consciousness,
one through which they will be brought into harmony with the perfect
working of the Cosmos, and the ancient fable be realized, of men who
walked the earth as gods?




III. _The Relative Value of Pleasures._


The learned have established what they call “a hierarchy of the
sciences,” a scheme which shows the relative value and scope of the
various departments of knowledge, and how the one rises upon the
other. So in the Science of Happiness there is a series of degrees, a
_gradus ad gaudium_, which measures the relative value of human
enjoyments and the dependence of the higher upon the lower.

The ignorance or the disregard of this fact has led to the ruin of
more individual lives, and to more fatal misfortunes to the race, than
any other error whatsoever. The poison of all false religions and
philosophies lies either in condemning pleasure or in commending low
forms of it; and the one is as hurtful as the other. The religion
which to-day numbers more believers than any other, Buddhism, aims its
loftiest aspirations to the extinction of all desire and the abolition
of all enjoyment. These are the words of Buddha himself:――

     “Let no man look for what is pleasant; for not to find it is
     pain.

     “Let no man love anything; for the loss of the beloved is
     sorrow.

     “After pleasure follows grief, and from affection comes
     fear.

     “I have run through many births, and painful it is to be
     born again and again; but now, O Thou Builder of this house,
     Thou hast been seen, and not again shalt Thou rebuild it.
     The mind has attained to the extinction of all desire.”

This is the ideal of happiness that four hundred millions of human
beings hold before their minds to-day. If there is any truth in the
modern philosophy which teaches that pleasure lies in functional
activity, no more pernicious message could be commended to mankind
than that which Buddha brought.

He is far from the only preacher of such a gospel. “To rest in peace,”
“to sleep in the Lord,”――is not this the religious hope and aspiration
of millions of Christians? It is not a whit higher than the Nirvana of
the Buddhist.

The avoidance of pain is the lowest form of happiness; more correctly,
it is its mere negative, and scarcely deserves to rank as one of its
grades. Yet, alas! to how many millions is it the highest form
imagined! To how many is the only escape from unhappiness to forget
themselves! This is the cause of that thirst for intoxicants and
narcotics which undermines and infects modern society. Dr. Johnson
would still find the multitude agree with him in his opinion, that a
man is never happy except when he is drunk!

Those Quietists who preach tranquillity and contentment as the goal
which all should seek are but one step higher. Indifference to
pleasure, or a reduction of the number of pleasures, is a sign of
weakening of the reason and of a retrogression in development. No man
has a right to be happy because he is contented; though he may well be
contented because he is happy. To be “void of strong desire,” set free
from hope and fear, snugly harbored from all storms of feeling, so far
from being the condition of the sage, is the aspiration of the fool.
Keen sensations awaken the sentiments, emotions fertilize the
intellect, passions educate the reason. The brute goes through life
without a smile or a tear; man’s proud privilege is to weep and to
laugh.

The ancients taught that philosophical happiness is to want little,
and that it is the error of the vulgar to want much and to enjoy many
things. The truer doctrine is that happiness is expansion and growth,
the enriching of our natures by manifold experiences, and the securing
this by the multiplication of our desires. The avoidance of pain and
the limitation of our hopes to our powers are sometimes valuable
preliminaries to the pursuit of happiness, but are not always
essential to it, and in many instances an over-solicitude about them
destroys all chance for a higher felicity. Happiness does not come of
itself. It has to be worked for, fought for; and courage and endurance
are as necessary in this as in any other struggle. In the path of
every pilgrim to the Celestial City stand from time to time the giant
figures of Death and Pain, and shake their spears, saying, “Wilt thou
dare?”

The sources of pleasure should, therefore, be multiplied to the
utmost, and they should be classified, so that undue value should not
be assigned any one class. Theoretically, there is nothing troublesome
about this; practically, it is often an insurmountable difficulty. The
pleasures of the senses are inferior to those of the emotions, and
these in turn are ranked by the enjoyments which pertain to the
exercise of the intellectual powers. No one of these can wholly
exclude the others. They are all inseparably united in the individual
entity; but the individual can enjoy only with the faculties he
possesses, and in proportion to their relative strength. It is as
absurd to ask more of him, as it were to invite the gouty to a foot
race, or the blind to admire the colors in a painting.

It is well to establish and to recognize this hierarchy of enjoyments,
beginning with those of the sensations common to animal life
everywhere and culminating in those of pure reason, whose crowning
felicity is the pursuit of truth; it has been done, and well done, by
many writers; but what has been generally overlooked is that this
scheme can have small practical application to the conduct of life if
it is not fully recognized that no one of these roads to happiness can
be successfully pursued while the others are neglected, or branded
with the sign, “Entrance forbidden.”

This is where Asceticism has committed its fatal blunder, and for
thousands of years has made miserable the lives of millions. Instead
of self-control, it has demanded self-abnegation; instead of the due
and proportioned exercise of all the powers, it has ordered the
absolute disuse of some of them; quite as often of the highest as of
the lowest, of reason as often as lust. Under this baleful doctrine
nations have become misshapen in mind, atrophied in culture, distorted
from honest nature’s rule, mean, miserable, and inefficient. Yet this
same doctrine is preached to-day from thousands of pulpits in lands of
highest civilization. Is it not time for the common sense of most to
rise in protest against such a survival from the Dark Ages of the life
of the race? Reason blushes only for pleasures which she cannot
explain, and he who acquaints himself with the whole nature of man
knows that all his powers and faculties have their appropriate use.
The ascetic may claim a happiness all his own; but so do the
extravagant and the vicious; both stand condemned before the results
of their own successes.

The intellect has no right to chide the enjoyments of the senses.
Pleasures differ in degree and permanence, but not in kind. _As
pleasures_ they are on a par, whether derived from objects of sense,
from the emotions, or from the understanding. Such analysts of mind as
Kant and Epictetus agree that there is no _essential_ distinction
between the most refined and the coarsest gratifications. “It is one
and the same vital force expressing itself in the Desires, which is
affected by all objects which cause Pleasure.”




IV. _The Distribution of Happiness._


Having reached an understanding about what happiness means, and some
notion as to its various grades, it will next be worth while to study
its distribution in the several classes of society, in contrasting
grades of civilization, in the two sexes, and at various ages. This
will be dealing with the subject according to the methods of natural
science, and it ought to lead to some interesting conclusions.

One might expect to find a general agreement as to the main facts. Far
from it. The common belief is that happiness increases with the means,
or at least with the capacity, for happiness. It is this belief which
inspires men to labor for the means and improve their capacities. But
the philosophers nowise concede its correctness. Hume argued that all
who are happy are equally happy; and Paley maintained that happiness
is about equally distributed among all orders of the community; that
the plowman gets as much real enjoyment out of life as the
philosopher, and the beggar at the gate as much as the monarch on the
throne. To which Dr. Johnson replied that a small glass and a large
one might be equally full, but the latter holds more. The capacity, he
justly argued, of the philosopher to receive a multiplicity of
agreeable impressions is greater than that of the peasant, and
therefore, other things being equal, the quantity of his enjoyment
will be greater.

The learned Doctor, indeed, sometimes insisted that felicity increases
directly with the means of enjoyment. Representing the latter by
money, he would say that a man with six thousand pounds a year should
be ten times as happy as the one with six hundred a year; and if he is
not, it is because he is an ass.

Here he was certainly wrong. Some of the main elements of ordinary
happiness are in the possession of every class of society, high and
low, poor and rich; such as the means of self-preservation, family
ties, friendship, amusement, and repose. What wealth and power add to
this common stock becomes less and less at each remove. This
consideration led Bentham to question whether the prince is twice as
happy as the laborer, and to doubt whether ten thousand times the
wealth brings with it twice the enjoyment. His followers have
attempted to frame the relation in a mathematical formula, and have
expressed it in the maxim, “The rate of increase of pleasure decreases
as its means increase.”

The conclusion is a satisfactory one for several reasons, and appears
to be borne out by the experience of mankind. Gibbon quotes the saying
of the potent Sultan Abderrahman, who at the close of his brilliant
reign of forty years asserted that during the whole of that time he
had had but fourteen days of happiness; on which the historian
comments that he himself could claim many more than the famous Prince.

The moral of the story is, that it is not the multiplication of the
_means_, but of the _sources_ of pleasure which is the secret of
happiness.

The extremes of the social conditions are almost equally unfavorable,
the one through the privations it entails, the other through the
burdens it imposes and the distractions it brings. Both are
unpropitious to self-culture, and this alone lays substantial
foundations for a considerable enjoyment of life.

A similar debate has taken place in reference to the distribution of
happiness in the different grades of civilization. Rousseau and his
followers never tired of portraying the delights of the savage state.
Like the ancient Greeks, he placed the Golden Age in some Arcadia of
untutored shepherds and lawless huntsmen. It is the fashion to smile
at his notion as the vagary of a crank; but the scientist of our own
day whose studies of the conditions of savage tribes stand ahead of
all others, has deliberately expressed almost the same opinion as the
result of his long researches. “Civilization,” writes Dr. Theodore
Waitz, “has proved itself impotent to increase the sum of human
enjoyment.”

What a sad conclusion to reach! And what a comment on the jubilant
shouts of those optimistic philosophers who have been telling us how
vastly better off we are than any of our ancestors!

Yet these also are right in a certain sense. The most careless reader
of history must hug himself for joy to think of the multitude of
miseries and oppressions which have disappeared from society in the
last few centuries. The inquisition, slavery, trial by torture, the
press gang, are but a few of them. At that time the fate and the
happiness of the individual were in the hands of priests and kings and
nobles; now, thank Heaven! in most countries, especially in our own,
they are chiefly in the control of the individual himself.

Nevertheless, it is quite possible in a given state of society that
general evils may diminish while personal suffering increases, owing
to an undue exaltation of sensitiveness, a sort of moral
hyperesthesia, together with the multiplication of desires beyond the
means of satisfying them. This is, in fact, the condition of modern
society; and these traits, together with its instability and rapid
changes, and the bitter competition instigated by its enlarged
freedom, have unquestionably very greatly diminished the amount of
happiness which might have been expected from the ameliorations of the
last few centuries.

There is but one remedy which will be of permanent avail, and that is
to educate the individual into some other ideal of happiness than that
which is filled by the acquisition of property or the gratification of
the senses. The main purpose of all social institutions which have
been created up to the present time has been the getting and the
keeping of property; the motive of the higher civilization which is to
come will be the preparation of the race for a life which will be
filled and sustained by its intellectual and spiritual contents.

The Greek philosopher thanked the gods especially for two
blessings,――that they had created him a Greek and not a barbarian, and
a man and not a woman. Evidently he held strongly to the opinion that
in his own country, at least, the men had the better part in life.

Though woman held an honorable position in Greek society, it was
inferior to what she enjoys in the United States to-day; yet the
philosopher, were he among us, would probably repeat his thanks. It is
quite certain that in the distribution of happiness the stronger sex
has seized the lion’s share.

To be sure, there are certain advantages in the struggle for life
which a woman seems to be conceded, and others which she by nature
possesses. She is less exposed to dangers than men; she escapes
avocations of the greatest hardship and risk; she is generally
supported by the labor of others, and she is allowed privileges in
many small matters of daily life which are denied the other sex. Of
her own nature she is less the slave of passion, less reckless, less
of an egotist, less inclined to deeds of violence and crime. In all
civilized countries the convictions of women for criminal offenses are
less than one-third those of men.

These points are in favor of her securing a larger share of happiness;
but they are checked by many and serious countervails. She is born an
invalid. Her periodic sickness, the burden of pregnancy, the pains of
childbed, the years of distress at her climacteric age, place her for
the best part of her life at a fearful disadvantage. Enter the library
of a physician and turn the leaves of his thick volumes on obstetrics
and the diseases of women if you would have your sympathies harrowed
by a long list of dreadful maladies of which men know nothing.

Another thought disables a woman, and must lessen and darken the
enjoyment of her life in every rank and condition of society. Unless
under immediate protection, she is always exposed to the possibility
of insult and assault, and no general safeguards will ever entirely
remove this danger.

Outside of these inevitable disabilities, the unfortunate elements in
the modern condition of women are owing to the legal and religious
tyranny of men. The dogmas of Christianity distinctly lowered her
position compared to what it was in the Roman Republic or the cities
of Etruria. At Delphi, the thoughts of the gods found expression
through the mouth of the priestess; but the founder of Christian
institutions forbade women to speak in the churches. The ancient Greek
prayed to the goddesses, Minerva, Aphrodite, and Demeter, as the
givers of the good things of life, of wisdom, of love, and the fruits
of the field; but to the Christian, evil and death and pain were what
the first mother of the race brought as a dower to her husband and
left as a legacy to her children.

These pernicious teachings led to a steady oppression of woman in all
ages of Christianity, our own included. So thoroughly did they become
ingrained in the minds of men that the most liberal scarcely
recognized their presence. The priest laid on the bride the obligation
of obedience to her husband; and the philosopher, Rousseau, servile in
this to the ideas of his time, when he has completed the education of
his Emile, contents himself with saying to Sophie, “This is the man
whom it is your duty _to endeavor to please_!” Not until a man arose
emancipated from all tradition, did the teaching of Plato that the
sexes should be socially and politically equal find a modern
philosopher to echo it; that was when John Stuart Mill wrote his essay
on the freedom of woman; though it would be unfair to the growth of
religious thought not to add that he had been anticipated in most
practical points by the despised dissenter, George Fox. Only when the
spirit of teachers such as these will have permeated the institutions,
the religions, and the social traditions of the day, will women have a
fair chance with men at the common stock of happiness possible for the
race.

Most fatal of all measures to the happiness of woman has been the
unceasing effort of ecclesiasticism to make marriage, for her, an
indissoluble sacrament of servitude, instead of an equal civil
contract, in which no obligation is assumed on the one side which is
not as fully accepted on the other. Mill well remarks that the
miseries produced in the lives of individual women by subjection to
individual men are simply incalculable. Guarantee the wife every right
and every privilege that the husband has, and the increased happiness
of both will be sure to crown the concession.

The remedy for this state of things is the proper education of girls
and women. But it is a remedy not likely to be administered soon, in
spite of the talk about it. Men prefer ignorance in women, as women
admire blind devotion in men; because these enable each sex to cheat
the other more easily. Nothing is more essential to her happiness than
that she should be taught the hygiene of her sex early in life; but
the popular voice says ignorance means innocence, and thousands of
women are condemned to life-long misery in consequence. I had a
medical friend who wrote a volume of excellent advice to mothers, and
his profession almost ostracized him for it. Beyond all things, a
girl’s education should be directed toward manual training and
exercises of the understanding; instead of that, she is taught the
fine arts and regaled with poetry and fiction. Her imagination is
fostered by lectures on esthetics, and her memory crammed with moral
platitudes which have no place in real life; while the principles of
business and the maintenance of her own rights are left out of her
training. I cannot but attribute to this the most common and fatal
defect of the female mind,――its lack of the sense of abstract justice.

Men are so selfish and ignorant that they do not understand how much
they themselves forfeit by thus reducing the position of woman. In my
studies of ethnology, I first inquire the position occupied by woman
in a given tribe or nation; for I have discovered no better common
measure of civilization. The profoundest thinkers of the age have
recognized the principle here involved. Goethe closes the second part
of Faust――which is a poetic presentation of the evolution of European
culture――with the significant words,――“The forever feminine leads us
onward.” His friend, Wilhelm von Humboldt, expressed a double fact in
the phrase,――“The Woman stands nearer the ideal of Humanity than the
Man; but she more rarely attains it.” She does not, because she is
prevented by prejudice, by dogmas, and by laws. Until these weeds are
scorched to ashes by the growing flame of free intelligence, neither
will she secure the meed of happiness which is her due, nor will man
have found the right road to his best prosperity.

Plato proposed to banish poets from his ideal Republic because they
are such liars. The prevalent notion that childhood and youth are the
happiest periods of life is largely owing to this mendacious crew. I
have rarely met an intelligent person of years who held the opinion.
It arises from forgetfulness of early sorrows, from false pictures of
youthful joys, and from undue attention to present pains. Most of
those who really feel such regret are the moral or literal prodigals,
who have wasted their substance in riotous living, and bewail, not the
lost happiness, but their inability to repeat their follies.

The rule of honest nature is that enjoyment should steadily increase
up to the full maturity of the powers, mental and physical. This,
under favorable circumstances, is between forty-five and fifty years
of age. After that, physical decadence sets in, and only by
exceptional strength or by increased effort can its fatal progress be
for a while stayed. From inquiry of many persons, I am persuaded that
the rule of the increase of enjoyment up to this turning-point is on
the average correct.

That old age is synonymous with wisdom is a comical deception which
the graybeards have palmed off on the world, because by laws and
customs they hold most of the property, and want most of the power as
well. In fact, diminution of the physical powers means decay all
round. “As we grow old,” observes Thoreau, “we cease to obey our finer
instincts.” It is an error to talk of the accumulated wisdom of years.
The experience of youth serves but to lead old age astray; and this is
seen nowhere so plainly as when an old man pretends a zest for the
pleasures of the young. “No fool like an old fool” is the proverb.
Such men are “out of their class,” as a trainer of athletes would say.
Every age has pleasures sufficient, which are appropriate to it, and
these alone should be sought for. To those who know and respect these
laws of nature, old age is very tolerable. It brings many
compensations for its inevitable losses; and though not likely to be
so happy as the best of middle life, it should be and often is
superior in this respect to youth. Probably it would generally be so
were it more willing to learn the lessons appropriate to it.
Bonstetten goes so far as to say, “No one can be happy till he is past
sixty;” but the proverb of the ancient Rabbis holds forever good,――“He
who teacheth the old, is like one who writes on blotted paper.”




V. _Principles of a Self-Education for the Promotion of One’s Own
Happiness._


The purpose of this chapter is not to enter into practical details of
an education for happiness――that is the mission of the rest of the
book,――but to establish certain general theoretical principles on
which such an education must be carried out in order to be successful.

And first, I must repeat what I have already intimated, that any
permanent and even moderate stock of happiness does not fall into the
open mouth, like the roasted quails in the fairy story, but can be
obtained only by methodical pursuit and constant watchfulness. Eternal
vigilance is said to be the price of liberty; and liberty is only one
of the necessary elements of happiness. Meditation, forethought, and
the formation of a clearly defined Plan of Life are all required, and
even then success is far from certain.

At the outset, I must attack as unsound a maxim which has been
assiduously disseminated by the school of economists of which Herbert
Spencer is the leader. It is put in the form,――“The greatest
efficiency is the greatest happiness.” It would be a calamity if this
were true. The pursuit of happiness would be hopelessly circumscribed,
as but few in the world can attain maximum efficiency in anything.
Fortunately, it is historically false. Those men who have won fame by
their enormous personal capacity have certainly not been the happiest
of their kind. Far from it. They have been men of one idea, absorbed
by some “ruling passion,” to which they have sacrificed all else, and
consequently, so far from gaining happiness, have usually ended by
wrecking their own and others’. It is not the reach of a man’s
abilities, but the use he makes of them, that decides his fortune.
Spencer’s maxim is precisely the reverse of the principle which should
govern an education intended to secure the utmost enjoyment for the
individual and those around him. Such an education should not be
concentrated on one faculty of the mind nor on one subject of study,
but should extend in all directions, be broad and many-sided. It is an
education within the reach of every one, which requires no
schoolmaster but oneself; and yet confers a degree on its graduates
more valuable than any university can bestow.

Its leading theoretical principles may be grouped under five
propositions:――

I. The multiplication of the sources of pleasure and the diminution of
those of pain.

II. The maintenance of a high sensibility to pleasurable impressions.

III. The search for novelty and variety of impressions.

IV. The establishment of a proper relation between desires and
pleasures.

V. The subjection of all pleasures to the increase of happiness.

These principles are not speculative or doctrinal, but are based on
the physiology of the nervous system and the constitution of the human
mind.

I. Let us begin with the first, for it is the basis of the whole Art
of Pleasure. Differently expressed, it means that the sum of our
enjoyment must be enlarged by increasing our sources of enjoyment. In
other words, we must set to work to acquire tastes in addition to
those which we already have by nature or previous education. The most
useful instruction is that which teaches us to profit by all our
chances. People are never so unhappy as they think they are, because
at the moment they forget how many sources of pleasure remain for
them.

Review the field. Take an “account of stock.” Most people have five
senses in tolerably good order. How many have seriously calculated the
number of different gratifications each of these senses is capable of
yielding? Beyond these lie the inviting fields of the Agreeable
Emotions, whose prolific soil needs but to be stirred to teem with
flower and fruit; and still beyond, but in easy reach, the uplands of
Reason and Thought rise into the purer air, and offer perspectives of
entrancing beauty.

All these resources are, to some extent, open to every one. But most
sit like a peasant at the table of a prince, refusing to taste the
choice viands which are before him, because he cares only for the
beans and hodge-podge of his daily fare.

Along with the multiplication of the sources of enjoyment must go the
studied avoidance of profitless pain. I say _profitless_ pain, because
there is pain which is profitable, and to avoid that would be to miss
the best of life, as I shall try to show on a later page,――a
distinction too often forgotten by those political economists who are
preparing the race for the era of universal happiness.

All pain is profitless which is incurred by a deliberate violation of
natural law, such as needless neglect of health or disregard of social
custom. When we confess that we have “made fools of ourselves,” we
suffer what our knowledge could have prevented, and we recognize it.
The part of wisdom is to avoid such suffering.

Here lies the incalculable value of knowledge in this pursuit. I do
not mean extensive learning or erudition, but knowledge of ourselves,
of our immediate natural surroundings, and of our own sphere of
probable activity. The chief value of Knowledge, says Epictetus, is
that it destroys Fear. We do not dread the known, but the unknown. Its
worth does not stop there. It enables us to escape disasters, to
lessen pain, to mitigate suffering in ourselves and others, and to
secure many joys. Three verbs, observes the philosophical Littré,
express the ideal perfection of human happiness――to know, to love, and
to serve.

The true end of what is called “culture,” or a “liberal education,” is
not to store the mind with a variety of facts useful in managing men
or in making money, but to expand our sympathies, to bring us in touch
with all that is beautiful and enjoyable in our lives; it is to
increase the sensitiveness of our finer instincts, so that they will
respond more readily to the delicate stimuli of pleasurable
impressions. Thoreau, walking behind the farmer’s cart, claimed to
have stolen the best part of the load of apples when he inhaled the
fragrant aroma from the fruit. To him it was more gratifying than to
have filled his stomach with the acid pippins.

Of all false maxims for happiness, that to be “content with little” is
the falsest. We should want immensely, but want wisely. To supply such
wants there is no need of the revenue of a kingdom or the lore of a
pedagogue. Not one man in a thousand exhausts the means of wise
enjoyment which are daily within the reach of his hand. Why go far
a-field to seek the treasure buried neath his own hearth-stone? What
he needs is to study himself and his environment, so as to protect
himself from the dangers to which he is exposed, and to draw from such
circumstances as he is placed in, and from such faculties as he is
possessed of, the maximum of gratification which they can render him.
If all persons acted consistently on this principle, the general sum
of human happiness would be indefinitely increased.

The kind of knowledge which is most serviceable to this end is by no
means difficult to acquire. It falls within the range of a common
school education, and ought to be made a part of it, with the definite
aim of promoting personal happiness. Professor Alexander Bain, who
belongs to the Scotch common-sense school of philosophers, and who
treats all questions in a business-like manner, has drawn up a scheme
of such an education, which any one can carry out for himself. It is
so excellent that I present its main features, with amplifications of
my own.

_a._ A Knowledge of the Bodily Constitution.

This means an acquaintance with the outlines of anatomy and
physiology, the rules of personal and general hygiene, some
understanding of the most prevalent diseases in the locality in which
we live and those to which we are individually most liable, and the
simplest means for their prevention and treatment; what best to do in
cases of sudden accidents and emergencies; and last, though not least,
the precepts for training, strengthening, and beautifying the body and
the features.

_b._ The Elements of the principal Physical and Chemical Sciences.

Even a rudimentary knowledge of the sciences of chemistry, geology,
geography, astronomy, of mechanics, steam, electricity, etc., such as
can be acquired from primary text-books, increases wonderfully our
interest in the world around us and in what we see and hear every day
of our lives, and thus furnishes a thousand sources of enjoyment,
besides being certain to find numerous practical applications of
utility.

_c._ The Study of the Mind.

This is at once a delightful pastime and an indispensable art for
success in many lines of business. It means an acquaintance with the
motives which actuate men in their decisions, the personal traits
which make up their characters, their passions and their ambitions,
their weaknesses and their prejudices. Men distinguished for what is
called “executive ability,” statesmen, diplomatists, promoters and
managers of great enterprises, all either possess by nature or have
acquired by study this insight, and to it they owe their success. To
some degree, all can attain it by observation of those around them,
and by the perusal of works which explain the constitution of the mind
and the dominant motives of human action. To this should be added an
unprejudiced reading of modern politics and history, especially of
one’s own country and State.

_d._ A Knowledge of the Principles of Business.

Worry about business affairs is probably the commonest cause of
unhappiness. A great deal of it is inevitable; but a large share of it
would be prevented were both sexes taught early in life the general
rules and customs of business, and those principles of financial
management, investment, prudence, and economy, which are nearly as
fixed in their operation as those of the motions of the stars. There
are many popular handbooks on this subject, and one such ought to be
in every household.

_e._ A Study of the Value of Evidence.

A remarkable writer, De Senancour, who under the name of Obermann
composed some strange books early in this century, maintained that if
men would tell the truth and could predict the weather, nearly all the
sufferings which afflict humanity would disappear. There is a great
deal in his opinion. At present, all men have a rooted aversion to
truth, and neither wish to tell it nor to hear it beyond a strictly
limited amount. But as a knowledge of facts is essential to right
action, the estimation of evidence and the calculation of
probabilities are necessary to a prosperous life. A man who has this
faculty is said to be gifted with “sound judgment,” but it is quite as
much an acquirement as a gift. There are well-known principles by
which the value of testimony is balanced and the weight of evidence
decided. They are in daily application in our courts, and can be
applied at least as successfully to affairs outside.

Such are the outlines of an education directed toward increasing the
sources of enjoyment and diminishing the causes of suffering; and what
remains to be said is little more than an extension of the principles
thus laid down.

II. The second principle is the maintenance of a high sensibility to
pleasurable impressions.

To reach the right meaning of this we must begin with physiology. All
impressions of the nervous system, that is to say, all feelings, may
be compared or studied with reference to three criteria, their
Quality, their Intensity, and their Persistence. Feelings of the same
quality, as a rule, heighten each other’s intensity, but persistence
is usually inversely to intensity. The keener the sensation, the
shorter its duration. The story is told of a French scholar who, for
suspected heresy, was subjected to judicial torture on the rack. When
the instrument was extended the first time, dislocating several of his
joints, he uttered a cry of agony; but at the second extension he
burst into laughter. “At my own ignorance,” he explained, “to suppose
that I could feel such suffering twice.”

It is essential to anything like a constant flow of pleasurable
feelings that we maintain a high state of vigor in the organs of
sensibility; and this can only be accomplished by a careful limitation
of intensity in favor of persistence of feeling. Occasional nervous
impressions of a very high degree of intensity are not only consistent
with health, but increase it; but their frequent repetition, and
especially the determined effort to maintain them for long periods,
inevitably result in a deadening of the sensibility and a lack of
response to ordinary and healthful stimuli.

The ignorance or disregard of these physiological laws explains some
of the most disastrous and conspicuous failures to attain happiness
where every circumstance seems propitious. The neglect of them is the
origin of that morbid condition of the mind which has been called “the
disease of the century,” _la maladie de la siècle_,――Ennui.

The bitter pessimist, Schopenhauer, delighted to show the
worthlessness of life, whose only variety is from the toil of pursuit
to the ennui of possession; while the sweet mystic, Pascal,
discovering in the same feeling the greatest misery of man, saw in it
that which would prove his salvation, for it would lead him to
renounce the vanities of the world and give himself unto God. The one
opinion is worth as much as the other.

If we make an anatomy of Ennui, as Burton made an anatomy of
Melancholy, we shall find that two different, though allied, mental
conditions have been grouped under the name.

The one is that sense of immeasurable boredom which we feel when
placed in uncongenial conditions, especially such as ought to be
welcome to us, as listening to good advice, or hearing instructive
lectures, or reading useful books,――like this one. We are driven to
any revolt by such inflictions. The scholar will turn gypsy and the
virtuous youth a vagrant to escape them. As a boy, at stiff company
dinners, I used to suffer from a keen desire to throw a plate through
the window, or commit some other outrageous breach of decorum.

What is the meaning of this innate revolt against conventionalism and
formality and respectability? The divines are ready to tell you that
it is a clear case of original sin. It is nothing of the kind. It is
the inherited and unquenchable thirst for freedom in the human heart,
and in some temperaments the strength of this passion for liberty is
such that any sacrifice is cheap to purchase it.

Perhaps these have not the worst of the bargain. “Who is the happiest
man in France?” some one asked the academician, D’Alembert. _Quelque
misérable_, “Some wretched fellow,” he replied. There is infinite
philosophy in his answer. Browning, in _Fifine at the Fair_, discusses
the question with amazing insight into human motive. He demands,――

  “What compensating joy, unknown and infinite,
   Turns lawlessness to law, makes destitution――wealth,
   Vice――virtue, and disease of mind and body――health?”

He finds the answer in the “frenzy to be free” which is the ruling
passion in such characters as he describes. He is right, for ennui of
this kind is unknown in conditions of the largest personal freedom, as
in the savage state and among the vagabonds of society.

The other form of ennui arises not from external conditions, but from
those which are within. It is a species of dissatisfaction with self.
A man is generally his own stupidest companion. According to the
proverb, “Poor company is better than none;” because the poorest of
all is oneself. A curious paradox that has been noted is that the more
a man thinks about himself, the less he cares to be alone with
himself! We no longer shun solitude from the dread of bandits or
ghosts, but to escape the sight of the specters which arise within
ourselves. How many of us can boast of the “sessions of sweet silent
thought” which the poet praises as the crown of felicity? Amid the gay
throng of pleasure-seekers at Ranelagh, Dr. Johnson felt himself
distressed by the reflection, “That there was not one in all that
brilliant circle who was not afraid to go home and think.”

There is a moral virtue which the Roman philosophers called
_sufficientia_ and the Germans _Selbstgenügsamkeit_, which terms are
not at all translated by the English “self-sufficiency.” Let the word
go; the thing is what is needed. Make yourself an agreeable companion
to yourself, and this form of ennui will be known to you no longer.
This can only be accomplished by the constant and well-directed
exercise of your personal activities, and by the maintenance of a high
degree of sensibility to pleasurable impressions.

III. The search for novelty and variety of impressions.

The Art of Happiness prescribes that instead of cultivating a limited
number of pleasurable impressions up to a high degree of intensity, we
should seek a large variety, diverse in quality, moderate in
intensity, considerable in persistence. This precept, properly
understood, is consistent not only with a high, but perhaps with the
highest degree of gratification, for it is supported by another
physiological law of the greatest interest. This is, that the utmost
zest of pleasure is invariably conditioned on the entire novelty of
the sensation. This fact is so familiar that it is embalmed in common
proverbs, as that “Variety is the spice of life,” and the like. But
the deep significance and the manifold applications of these sayings
are rarely considered.

Entire novelties are within the reach of few, and come of themselves
but seldom. Fortunately, their agreeable effect can be closely
imitated by influences quite within our own control; that is, by the
remission and alternation of the pleasures already our own. This alone
will maintain the efficacy of any pleasure, for it is a sad fact that
in impressions on the nervous system, persistence can never become
permanence. Remission and reaction in all sensations are demanded by
that eternal and infinite law of Periodicity, or Rhythmical
Recurrence, which is the last and highest in the Universe of mind or
matter. This in turn enforces on us the importance of aiming for a
multiplicity of sources of pleasure, so that we may heighten their
impressions by frequent variety.

Here again we come into conflict with that cherished delusion which
makes contentment and tranquillity the chief elements of happiness.
With political economists, it often arises from a confusion of the
spheres of the State and the Individual. The State properly aims at
peace, established order, routine, and material ends; but the
Individual should seek variety and activity, he should try untrodden
paths and risk unknown crises. This alone will make him a many-sided,
strong character, responsive up to the full measure of his powers to
all impressions of natural enjoyment.

The foe he has to guard against in this joyous quest is Habit. This is
the tyrant whose iron scepter enslaves most men. The promptings of
pleasure and pain are far from being the only incentives; probably
they are by no means the most numerous or potent. The “ruling motives”
of most persons are simply the associations, customs, ideas, and aims
with which they have been longest in contact. A given mental tendency
soon becomes predominant, its easy yoke becomes adjusted to the neck,
and the man pursues his way in life without more resistance than the
ox to the wain. Vain the attempt to break his fetters and sever the
bonds of his habits. He is satisfied to reply, as the Arab to the
visitor, who would teach him a better agriculture――“Thus did my father
before me and thus my mother taught me; and in this manner shall I
continue.”

All attempts to make men happier on a large scale have been shattered
against the rock of this stubborn conservatism. Only at rare intervals
has it been riven by the shock of some mighty emotion which has swept,
tornado-like, over the soul of a nation, uprooting the tangled growths
of bigotry and routine. The only hope is that here and there an
individual will arise and say to himself, “I shall believe nothing
merely because those around me believe it; I shall do nothing merely
because I am accustomed to do it; I shall render to myself a reason
for my every decision and act.”

If some one asks, Why this invective against Habit, easy Habit, soft
as a padded chair, comfortable as an old shoe? the answer must come
from an analysis of mind. I have before shown that all true motives of
the Will are directed toward the avoidance of pain or the attainment
of pleasure. These alone are clearly conscious motives, distinguishing
between Self and Object, and therefore heightening to the sense of
individual life. Whatever we do “by habit,” on the other hand, we do,
in a greater or less degree, by what physiologists call “unconscious
cerebration,” and through the involuntary action of our nervous and
muscular systems. This automatic action of our organism is constantly
encroaching on our consciousness, submerging it, like the tide the
shore; darkening it, like the night the landscape; swallowing it inch
by inch, like the boa his prey. The struggle against Habit, therefore,
and all that Habit means, prejudice, bias, bigotry, authority, is a
struggle for life, and the nation, the society, the individual, who
succumbs in the contest is, by the very fact, bound hand and foot and
cast into utter darkness.

IV. The establishment of a proper proportion between desire and
pleasure.

Through the mouth of Hamlet Shakespeare makes the philosophical
reflection――“There is nothing either good or bad but _thinking_ makes
it so;” in other words, the value of anything reckoned in the currency
of enjoyment, lies not in the thing itself but in the strength of our
wish for it. Most of the aims of effort are like curios, whose price
is gauged entirely by the anxiety of the amateur to obtain them, and
not by any intrinsic quality.

In life there is no more useful faculty than to be able to put the
right price on pleasures. The best of prudential maxims is “Count the
cost.” The outlay of effort should be in a just relation to the return
which can be reasonably reckoned upon. A given pleasure should be
sought with an energy strictly in proportion to the gratification
which it can actually yield,――not in proportion to a false ideal of
that gratification as portrayed by the exaggerations of passion or
morbid desire. When infatuation or fascination or an over-heated
imagination leads the chase, horse and rider will be soon landed in
the ditch. Pain and disappointment ever follow an end sought in excess
of its real value. Again to quote the great dramatist, the “expense of
passion” is sure to be succeeded by “a waste of shame.”

The precept of education which is thus enforced is the regulation of
desire by reflection and deliberation. Proceed to an appraisement, as
in business affairs. Ask yourself the grounds of your desire. Is it
from experience, or merely on hearsay, and from a groundless imagining
of what the object might yield if attained? If it is from experience,
and the tasted sweet whets anew the appetite, recall the reaction and
the consequences, and if they were unpleasant, present them fully
before the bar of your judgment. If imagination alone influences you,
remember that you are playing the children’s game of “swapping in the
dark,” and are liable to exchange solid value for dross. “Depraved
affections,” observes Lord Bacon, “are false valuations.”

V. The last of the five principles stated is the crown of all of
them,――Make all pleasures a part of happiness.

I have already explained the difference between mere pleasurable
sensation and happiness in the true sense of the term. While the
former belongs to man’s animal nature, the latter is intimately
associated with the consciousness of Self. The power of
discriminating one’s Self from the rest of the universe, and
making one’s Self the subject of one’s own observation is a
faculty peculiar to man alone. There is nothing which lends him
more potent aid to accomplish this than his pleasurable
sensations. This alone imparts to them any real value in the
history of the individual or the race, and through this their
value becomes inestimable.

This has always been recognized as true of some of them; but the error
of most teachers has been that they have refused to acknowledge the
value of all pleasure to this end, the excellence of all enjoyment,
when it is brought into relation to the full nature of man. Some have
claimed that the charms derived from the esthetic and benevolent
emotions are enough to fill our lives; others advocate intellectual
joys; many preach that the religious sentiment offers all that man
needs; while counselors of an opposite tendency cry, “Eat, drink, and
be merry, for to-morrow ye die.”

All are wrong. The spirit of sound culture will recognize the whole
nature of man and the solidarity of all his parts, and will insist on
respecting that unity, if his true development is to be accomplished.
For this reason it will strive to render the pleasures of the senses
and emotions as intellectual as possible; and with not less
earnestness will aim to keep the pleasures of the intellect in touch
with the emotions and the senses. Its principle will be that the more
intimately the gratifications of sense are infused with emotion and
thought, the more they will be both purified and strengthened; and the
closer the web into which we can weave the austere joys of the reason
along with the emotions and the feelings, the more sympathetic,
wide-reaching, and ennobling will those joys become. As the ancient
mason mingled water from the sky with clay from the earth to make the
bricks wherewith to build the temple, so the permanent structure of
human progress can be erected only by combining in due proportion the
extremes of man’s delights.

A real though mysterious bond unites sense with that which is above
and beyond sense. Toward this Unknown it is ever striving, though
blindly and unconsciously. In lower forms of life this has led to that
marvelous series of transformations which, at last, have reached their
culmination in man. In him the struggle no longer expends itself in
physical changes, but frames the ideals which float before his mind,
constantly spurring him to attempt the impossible. Rest assured that
the analogy which holds good throughout all organic nature fails not
in him, its most perfect production. Somehow, by unknown ways and
under the guidance of unseen laws, his unwearying effort to discover
the invisible in the visible, the permanent in the transient, the
ideal in the real, will infallibly lead him in triumph to the final
goal of all Life. Whenever, without ulterior aim and for its own sake,
we give ourselves up to the admiration of some grand scene in nature
or masterful production of human art, we feel and recognize how near
to us, how much a part of us, is that invisible and ideal world in
which are set up the goals of man’s noblest aspirations. To unite
these opposites, to illuminate the pleasures of sense with the light
of the ideal, and, on the other hand, to capture its evanescent rays
by entangling them in material enjoyments, is the final precept of the
Art of Happiness.

       *     *     *     *     *

Anthropology, the Science of Man, is the point of convergence of all
the other sciences; and the one aim of the Science of Man is the
Happiness of man; thus the Pursuit of Happiness is the end of all
pursuits. Pope displayed the inspiration of the poet when he devoted
the final epistle of the Essay on Man to a discussion of,

  “Happiness, our being’s end and aim.”

       *     *     *     *     *

The study of Philosophy, said Socrates, is the studying how to die. I
add, that the study of Happiness is the studying how to live; and that
he who acquires either, possesses both.

       *     *     *     *     *

Rules for happiness are worth studying, even if they are no better
than the rules for writing poetry: which are said to prevent ill
poets, if they never make good ones.

       *     *     *     *     *

Fortunately, happiness is a tree with many roots. It does not depend
entirely on outward circumstances; nor entirely on temperament or
health; nor entirely on ourselves or on others; nor entirely on
prudence or study. By cultivating any one of these, the tree will bear
some fruit. So bounteous are the gifts of nature, that if we simply
reduce the evils of life to something manageable, our happiness will
often take care of itself.

       *     *     *     *     *

All history teaches that those who renounce pleasure for themselves
are least scrupulous about inflicting pain on others.

       *     *     *     *     *

Genuine pleasure has this unique trait: the more you get for yourself,
the more you provide for others.

       *     *     *     *     *

Pleasure and pain are common to all animals; and man’s most exalted
joys and sorrows bear a family likeness to these universal sensations.

       *     *     *     *     *

In a certain sense, every pleasure is a victory, every pain a defeat;
the former is allied to movements of attack, the latter to those of
defense or submission.

       *     *     *     *     *

Pains are pains to all; while there are many pleasures which are such
to but a few; though there is no reason but ignorance why they are not
shared by the many.

       *     *     *     *     *

The bliss of ignorance consists in not knowing how much we never had,
and in living unaware of the worst of our mistakes.

       *     *     *     *     *

Spiritualize your senses; the lowest of them may become first in the
kingdom of culture. Sensualize your intellect; only thus can you
attain the companionship of those noble brethren, Humanity and
Urbanity.

       *     *     *     *     *

Our happiest moments are those in which we believe we can realize our
ideals.

       *     *     *     *     *

Those who condemn the pursuit of Happiness reveal the baseness of
their own conception of it.

       *     *     *     *     *

The doctrine that we should get rid of our wants by extinguishing our
desires is suited to the clown in the story, who cut off his ears
because they were cold.

       *     *     *     *     *

Self-realization is widely different from self-manifestation.

       *     *     *     *     *

An error that persuades us we are happy is more welcome than a truth
which shows us we are not.

       *     *     *     *     *

Life is a sphere with an infinite number of sides; but, like the
terrestrial globe, to each individual it seems a plain, bounded by his
own horizon, with himself in its center.




