CHAPTER II

ON THE DIFFERENTIATION OF THE HUMAN FROM THE ANTHROPOID MIND


§ 1. HEREDITY, ADAPTATION, ACCOMMODATION

Following the general belief that Man is descended from a stock nearly
allied to the greater anthropoids—Orang, Chimpanzee, Gorilla—we may
assume that his mental endowments were once much the same as theirs;
and that, so far as they are still the same, _heredity_ sufficiently
explains his having them. Thus the senses, perception, the simpler
forms of comparison and inference, the appetites and many of the
instincts and emotions are common to us with the apes, are seen in
our children under three years old, and (in short) constitute that
generic consciousness (as I have called it) from which the human
mind in general and the peculiar traits of races and individuals are
differentiated.

So much for heredity; but the differences of the human from the
anthropoid mind, alike in intelligence and in character, are enormous,
and must be accounted for in some other way. Allowing for some original
specific difference which we can hardly hope to discover, the changes
that have taken place may be considered as the result of _adaptation_
to those habits of life under which our species (now ranking
zoologically as a Family) has been developed. And this adaptation I
shall assume to have been brought about under conditions of natural
selection: human races, as we now see them, being the survivors of
many variations, more or less successful, and the others having been
destroyed. For good judges are of opinion that, amongst the discovered
remains of ancient specimens of the human family, some that exhibit
marked deviations from the modern type—Neanderthalensis, Eoanthropus,
Pithecanthropus—should be regarded not as belonging to our ancestral
line, but rather as representing distinct species that have failed in
the struggle for existence.[28]

But besides the innate dispositions of human nature determined by
heredity and natural selection, which are found in some measure
universally, because they are adaptations to conditions that, at one
time and not long ago, weighed upon the ancestors of all of us, there
are numerous traits (some of them quite superficial) that vary from
country to country and from age to age, according to the economic or
political type of the society in which a man lives, his place therein,
geographical circumstances, religious institutions and the countless
causes that govern manners and customs. In the lives of most men these
traits are not necessary; they may be adopted and cast aside more than
once in an individual’s career: they are temporary _accommodations_
due to education, imitation, tradition; and, in fact, are often the
disguises of human nature. Still, as society grows more and more
complex, orderly and stable, there is, no doubt, again some natural
selection of those individuals who are capable of undergoing the
requisite accommodations. Those that cannot endure the restraints of
civilisation, wander away; the extremely lazy, improvident, dishonest,
or aggressive, in considerable numbers, perish.


§ 2. THE ORIGINAL STOCK AND THE CONDITIONS OF DIFFERENTIATION

To the original mentality of man we can only seek a clue in the
higher Primates, and especially in the extant anthropoids. No doubt,
during the long millennia that have elapsed since the separation of
our own stock from those of other genera and species, they also have
undergone some evolution, but probably much less change than we have.
Unfortunately, our knowledge of their habits and abilities is still
deplorably limited. It seems certain, however, that their intelligence
is much greater than that of any other kind of animal. They must have
extensive knowledge of their habitat, of all the forest can yield for
food or shelter, and of its other denizens dangerous or otherwise.
They construct for themselves some sort of sleeping-place, not much
inferior to the Australians’ “lean-to,” by piling branches together
in the trees. Toward men, anthropoids seem to be unaggressive, and
usually retreat from them; but, when attacked, defend themselves with
fury. From other animals the male gorilla has nothing to fear, and he
defends his family against leopards; the chimpanzee is said to fight
leopards with varying success; and, as for the orang, Dyak chiefs told
Wallace that no animals dare attack him, except crocodiles and pythons,
and that he kills both of them.[29] The food of these apes is chiefly
fruit and the tender shoots of trees and bamboos; but they sometimes
eat eggs and young birds; and the gorilla is said to eat small mammals:
in confinement they all take cooked flesh freely. Socially, they
hardly get beyond family life. Orangs male and female are even seen
alone, and young ones together without parents; gorillas are seen in
family parties; chimpanzees in families, and occasionally three or
four families in company. It is said that gorillas and chimpanzees
have been seen together in a large band. I have met with no report of
these animals fighting amongst themselves, except that male gorillas
sometimes fight for a wife. Gorillas have also been said, upon very
slight evidence, to be polygamous; chimpanzees and orangs seem to be
monogamous.[30] Their family life is probably, as amongst all the other
Primates, affectionate: the long youth of their children implies much
parental care. Whilst the smaller anthropoids—siamang and gibbon—go
in troops, as also do the baboons and most monkeys of both hemispheres,
the less sociability of the great anthropoids may be understood to
result (_a_) from the limited supply of the right sort of food for
them, even in the tropical forest to which they are confined—since
animals of their bulk must consume a great deal; and (_b_) from their
having no need of combining for the purpose of defence.

From the type thus outlined the mentality of the human race has
departed so widely that some even of those who believe that our bodies
have been derived from some simian stock (_e. g._ Wallace) hesitate to
admit that our minds can have had a similar history. But as everywhere
else in the animal kingdom mind and body constitute one organism, it is
reasonable to consider whether the differentiation of the mind of man
may not be understood to have taken place under the same conditions as
those which determined the transformation of his body. What were these
conditions?

(_a_) In the foregoing chapter I have collected a number of facts and
arguments pointing to the probability that the chief cause of the
evolution of the human Family was the adoption by some anthropoid (or
allied form) of the life of the hunter in order to obtain animal food.
That the change from a frugivorous to a carnivorous diet may itself
have had some effect upon our temperament and activity is possible;
but I lay no stress upon that. Most monkeys are almost exclusively
frugivorous; the only Primate, except man, that depends a good deal
upon animal food is, I believe, the crab-eating macaque (_Macacus
cynomolgus_), of the Burmese and Malay littoral; yet monkeys are the
most alert and active of animals; some of them are amongst the most
courageous; anthropoids are amongst the most powerful. A carnivorous
diet alone would not explain any changes in the shape and proportions
of our trunk and limbs, nor the upright gait, nor the gregarious habit,
nor the development of the brain, nor the invention of weapons, nor the
use of fire, nor any of the mental and emotional characteristics that
distinguish man from the other Primates; but all these things readily
follow from our remote ancestor’s adoption of the life of the hunter.

Sociologists, surveying extant peoples, have usually distinguished
four stages of culture, the hunting, pastoral, agricultural and
manufacturing; and some have indicated what they suppose to have been a
still earlier stage, the “collecting,” such as may be seen, _e. g._,
amongst the Fuegians. But the collecting state is plainly degenerate,
the resource of tribes fallen into distress; it cannot have been the
first stage, because it implies no conditions that tend in any way to
develop body or mind or society. That hunting came first is a true
intuition: and, to understand the development of human nature, we
need only refer the hunting-life back to the very origin of the human
stock.[31]

(_b_) The great anthropoids are all confined to the equatorial forests;
and it is obvious that, with their diet, it is impossible to pass out
of tropical or (at furthest) sub-tropical regions. But the adoption
of a flesh diet enabled the human stock to extend the range of its
hunting (allowing for gradual adaptation to climate or accommodation
by clothing) to any country that supplied the requisite prey; and,
accordingly, in course of time, it wandered to every part of the world.
The settling of various off-shoots of the original stock in certain
regions long enough for them to undergo adaptation to local conditions
is (as we have seen) the simplest explanation of existing races.

(_c_) Whilst none of the great anthropoids has advanced socially beyond
family life, man is everywhere (with few and doubtful exceptions)
gregarious—living at the lowest grade in tribes or bands of about
fifty; and the gregarious life is one of the most important conditions
of his peculiar development. Possibly, he may originally have been
more gregarious than any extant anthropoid, in spite of his not
needing society for defence, and of its seeming to be for so large a
frugivorous animal inconvenient in relation to nutrition. Moreover,
if the great anthropoids and our own ancestors were descended from
some stock of the lower monkeys, such as always go in troops, the
gregarious instinct may have remained with them as a latent character.
Still, it is my conjecture that man became gregarious, or recovered
the social habit, because of the utility of co-operative hunting; so
that he became at first a sort of wolf-ape. This will be discussed in
the next section. I observe here, however, that the hypothesis helps
us to understand why man is still imperfectly sociable; the purpose
of the hunting-pack, each wolf-ape seeking prey, was unfavourable to
social life in other relations. That in human life group-consciousness
preceded self-consciousness is a groundless and fantastic notion:
all known savages are fully self-conscious, as their sentiments and
behaviour imply; and even the higher brutes are (in my judgment)
self-conscious in their relations with others. Current speculations
about fashion, imitation, tradition, crowd-psychology, are in danger of
exaggeration, and overlook the patent facts of individualism, as shown
by the hypocrite, the criminal, the vagrant, the contra-suggestible,
the hermit, the sceptic, the saint. Some people—without being in any
way morbid—find that a good deal of solitude is necessary to the
complete life: by nature the student and the pioneer escape from the
crowd.

(_d_) The later stages of human development have been considerably
modified by certain imaginary conditions peculiar to Man; for he—we
know not at what date—invented them. These may be summed up under the
names of Magic and Animism; and in subsequent chapters they will be
discussed, with their astonishing vagaries and still more astonishing
reactions upon human life.

The chief conditions, then, to which man has been adapted, and thereby
differentiated in body and mind from the anthropoid stock, I take to be
four: the hunting life; geographical circumstances; social life; and
his own imaginations.


§ 3. PRIMAL SOCIETY

In looking for the probable form of the earliest human or (rather)
prehuman society, one naturally makes a survey of other mammalian
societies; and the task is soon accomplished. It is surprising how
few and simple the types of them are, in contrast with the elaborate
polities of some hymenoptera and of the termites: these have much
greater superficial resemblance to modern human societies; but, in
fact, they are families rather than societies; their interesting
activities will one day probably be traced to relatively simple
mechanisms; and in every way they are too remote from us for any useful
comparison. As for mammalian societies, even using the term to include
families, they may be classified under four or five types:

(1) Families: (_a_) Monogamous: of which the best examples seem to
be found in some monkeys. Many of the cats are believed to pair
monogamously; but it is doubtful whether, or in what measure, the male
takes part in the rearing of the whelps.

(_b_) Polygamous: characteristic of many species of deer;—after the
breeding-season, the stags often wander away by themselves.

(2) Associations of families without apparent structure or
organisation, such as those of the vizcacha and the beaver. They
have no leaders, and make no attempt at mutual defence; but their
inco-ordinated activities, in making their burrows, dams, etc., have
results which, especially in the case of the beavers, look as if the
animals had worked upon a common, premeditated plan. Gregariousness
exists widely in the animal kingdom without any utility in attack or
defence, but merely for convenience of breeding, or for the advantage
of signalling the approach of danger, from any direction, to the whole
flock.

(3) Troops or herds, comprising several families. This type is common
amongst monkeys: generally the families are monogamous, and both
parents care for the offspring; they have leaders, and combine in
mutual defence. This is especially effective with the baboons—who,
however, are polygamous. A very similar type is characteristic of
cattle; who also have leaders as the result of battle between the
bulls, each trying to control and keep together as many cows as he can;
and they often combine their forces against beasts of prey.

(4) Hunting-packs—most noticeable with wolves and wild dogs: they
have leaders, and probably an order of precedence determined by
battle. In the breeding-season (February to August) a pack of wolves
breaks up into pairs; but whether their pairing is for life or merely
seasonal is disputed; and it is also doubtful whether the male takes
any share in caring for the puppies; such habits may vary in different
localities.[32] The numbers of the pack depend on circumstances, and
are now much smaller in Canada than in Russia.

Was our own primitive society, then, like any of these? Since direct
evidence cannot be obtained, we must be guided in forming our
hypothesis by two considerations: (_a_) what type of society gives
the best explanation of human nature as we now find it? and (_b_) for
which type can we give the best reason why it should have been adopted?
So I point out (_a_) that man, in character, is more like a wolf or
dog than he is like any other animal; and (_b_) that for the forming
of a pack there was a clear ground in the advantage to be obtained by
co-operative hunting.[33]

It must be admitted that Darwin, discussing sexual selection in man,
suggests a different hypothesis. He says: “Looking far enough back in
the stream of time, and judging from the social habits of man as he now
exists, the most probable view is that he aboriginally lived in small
communities, each with a single wife, or if powerful with several, whom
he jealously guarded against all other men. Or he may not have been a
social animal, and yet have lived with several wives, like the gorilla;
for all the natives ‘agree that but one adult male is seen in a band;
when the young male grows up, a contest takes place for mastery, and
the strongest, by killing and driving out the others, establishes
himself as the head of the community.’ The younger males, being thus
expelled and wandering about, would, when at last successful in finding
a partner, prevent too close inter-breeding within the limits of the
same family.”[34] The information concerning the polygamy of the
gorilla, quoted here from Dr. Savage, who wrote in 1845, has not since
(I believe) been confirmed, except by Prof. Garner.[35]

Naturally, the above passage has attracted the attention of
anthropologists; and I am sorry to expose myself to the charge of
immodesty in venturing to put forward a different view. Atkinson in
his essay on _Primal Law_, edited with qualified approval by Andrew
Lang, starts from Darwin’s hypothesis, and merely modifies it by urging
that the young males, when driven off by their father, did not wander
away, but kept near the family, always on the watch to murder their
father. This amendment he makes, because he had observed the same
habits in cattle and horses. Then, through a row of hypotheses with
little evidence or rational connection, he arrives at an explanation of
certain savage laws of avoidance, exogamy, etc. More recently, Prof.
Freud has produced a most ingenious and entertaining essay on _Totem
und Tabu_, in which he builds upon the same foundations. You easily
see how the “Œdipus complex” emerges from such a primitive state of
things, but will hardly, without reading the work, imagine the wealth
of speculation it contains or its literary attractiveness. Atkinson
probably relied upon the supposed parallel case of wild cattle and
horses, because those animals resemble the apes in being vegetarian:
though the diets are, in fact, very different. But even if such a
comparison indicates a possible social state of our original ape-like
stock, what is there in such a state that can be supposed to have
introduced the changes that made our forebears no longer ape-like?
Supposing those changes to have already taken place, what evidence is
there that the same social state endured? None: for it was assumed
to have been the social state of our forebears on the ground of their
resemblance in diet and family economy to the gorilla.

Returning, then, to our hypothesis as to the chief cause of human
differentiation, namely, that a certain Primate, more nearly allied
to the anthropoids than to any other, became carnivorous and adopted
the life of a hunter, there are (as I have said) two ways in which
this may have happened: either by such a variation on the part of our
ancestor that he felt a stronger appetite for animal food than the
gorilla does—strong enough to make him hunt for prey; or by such a
change of climate in the region he inhabited—say from sub-tropical to
temperate—as to make his former diet scarce, especially in winter,
so that he became a hunter to avoid starvation. Every one admits that
he became a hunter at some time: why not at the earliest? Nothing
less than some great change of life, concentrating all his powers
and straining every faculty, can possibly account for the enormous
differentiation of Man. The adoption of the hunting life is such a
change; and the further back we put it, the better it explains the
other changes that have occurred in our physical and mental nature.

From the outset, again, our ancestor may have attacked big game,
probably Ungulates—to whom he owed much; for not only did they provide
prey, but by clearing the forest over wide areas compelled him to run
in pursuit remote from his native trees, thus giving great selective
advantage to every variation of legs and feet adapted to running:
though at the very first there may have been little need to run, as
he was not yet an object of terror; “we must remember that if man was
unskilful, animals were unsuspicious.”[36] I suppose him, at first, to
have fallen to with hands and teeth: combining with others in a hungry,
savage onslaught. By attacking big game advantage was given to those
individuals and families who co-operated in hunting: thus forming the
primal society of the human stock; a society entirely different from
that of any of the Primates, or of cattle, and most like that of the
dogs and wolves—a hunting-pack.

As in the course of generations the hunting-pack developed, no doubt,
it had recognised leaders, the most powerful males, one perhaps
pre-eminent. But it was not subject to one old male who claimed all
the females; for the more adult males it comprised, the stronger it
was; and, for the same reason, pairing, as among wolves, was the most
efficient form of sexual relationship. But, in my judgment, it is
altogether vain to try to deduce from this form of society, which may
have existed three or four million years ago, any of the known customs
of savages concerning marriage, such as avoidance, totemism, exogamy;
which would be of comparatively recent date if we put back their origin
500,000 years. Many such rules can only have arisen when there was
already a tradition and a language capable of expressing relationships.


§ 4. PSYCHOLOGY OF THE HUNTING-PACK

Possibly our ape-like ancestor was more sociable than any of the
anthropoids; but sociability in ape-life would in no way account for
our present character as men: nothing accounts for it, except the early
formation of the hunting-pack. Since, however, we can know nothing of
that institution directly, we must try to learn something about it
from the parallel case of dogs and wolves. Galton remarks how readily
the proceedings of man and dog “are intelligible to one another. Every
whine or bark of the dog, each of his fawning, savage, or timorous
movements is the exact counterpart of what would have been the man’s
behaviour, had he felt similar emotions. As the man understands the
thoughts of the dog, so the dog understands the thoughts of the man, by
attending to his natural voice, his countenance, and his actions.”[37]
No more, if as much, could be said of the terms upon which we stand
with a tame chimpanzee, in spite of greater physical and facial
resemblance and nearer kinship. What can connect us so closely in mind
with an animal so remote from us in lineage and anatomy as the dog is?
Adaptation to the same social conditions, the life of the hunting-pack.


(1) The master-interest of every member of the pack lies in the
chase, because success in it is necessary to life. To show how this
passion actuates ourselves, I quote Mr. F. C. Selous; who, during an
expedition in Canada, roused a caribou stag within twenty yards, saw
“the dreadful terror” in his eyes, and shot him. “Did I feel sorry for
what I had done? it may be asked. Well! no, I did not. Ten thousand
years of superficial and unsatisfying civilisation have not altered
the fundamental nature of man, and the successful hunter of to-day
becomes a primeval savage, remorseless, triumphant, full of a wild,
exultant joy, which none but those who have lived in the wilderness,
and depended on their success as hunters for their daily food, can ever
know or comprehend.”[38] To the hunter my paradox must seem a truism.
And that the hunter temporarily released from civilised restraints,
who suffers such intoxication, merely renews old savage raptures is
shown by the following curious parallel: a Bushman, returning from a
successful hunt to the wagons of the traveller Baines—“Behold me!”
he shouted, “the hunter! Yea, look on me, the killer of elephants
and mighty bulls! Behold me, the big elephant, the lion! Look on
me, ye Damaras and Makalaka; admire and confess that I am a great
Bull-calf.”[39]

Again, since the interest of the chase culminates in the kill—for this
is the condition of making a meal—to kill becomes, in some predatory
animals, a passion that is often gratified without regard to their
needs. Wolves often slay many more sheep than they devour: a sheep-dog
that undergoes reversion kills by night the sheep on neighbouring farms
without any call of hunger; and, says Mr. Thompson Seton (writing of
the natives of North Canada), “the mania for killing that is seen in so
many white men, is evidently a relic of savagery; for all these Indians
and half-breeds are full of it.”[40] They fired at everything they saw.
The manners of my own pack—now long dispersed—were very similar to
the Indians’; and the sport of pigeon- or of pheasant-shooting has
been reduced to its last element—skilful slaying.

The disposition to slay is reinforced, when prey makes serious
resistance, by anger; and generally by a distinct tendency, sometimes
called “destructiveness,” perhaps a latent character derived from the
monkeys, and which I take to be partly a play-impulse and partly an
expression of curiosity.

(2) The gregariousness of the pack is variable; probably, amongst
wolves, it was much greater anciently than it is to-day. There are
conflicting statements about the gregariousness of wolves that have
been studied in different countries. Couteulx de Canteleu (France)
says: “The wolf is an enemy of all society; when they assemble it is
not a pacific society, but a band of brigands.”[41] Thompson Seton
(Canada) says: “Wolves are the most sociable of beasts of prey; they
arrange to render one another assistance. A pack seems to be an
association of personal acquaintances, and would resent the presence
of a total stranger.”[42] Gregariousness of wolves must be reduced by
failure of game (as by the destruction of bison in North America), and
still more by the encroachments of civilisation (as in France). The
primitive human pack, probably, was more constantly gregarious than
wolves are: (_a_) because its individuals, having no instinctive or
traditionary knowledge of hunting, were more dependent on co-operation;
and (_b_) because the long youth of children made it necessary for
parents to associate with the pack during their nurture—else no pack
could have existed; for whilst wolves are nearly full-grown at eighteen
months, apes are not mature until the eighth or ninth year. At a later
period, after the invention of effective weapons, an individual became,
for many kinds of game, less dependent on co-operation; but by that
time, the hunting-grounds of a pack were circumscribed by those of
other hostile packs; so that no one dared go far alone.

(3) With gregariousness went, of course, (_a_) perceptive
sympathy—every animal read instantly in the behaviour of others
their feelings and impulses; (_b_) contagious sympathy—the impulses
of any animal, expressed in its behaviour, spread rapidly to all the
rest; and (_c_) effective sympathy, so far (at least) as that all
united to defend any associate against aggression from outside the
pack. Perceptive and contagious sympathy, however, extend beyond the
limits of the pack or the species. Most of the higher mammalia can
read the state of mind of others, though of widely different kinds,
in their expression and behaviour; and many are liable to have their
actions immediately affected by signs of the emotional impulses of
others, especially fear. These modes of sympathy, therefore, though
liveliest amongst gregarious animals, are not dependent on specific
gregariousness.

(4) The pack has a disposition to aggression upon every sort of
animal outside the pack, either as prey or as a competitor for prey:
limited no doubt by what we should call considerations of prudence or
utility; which must vary with the size of the pack, the prowess of its
individuals, the possession of weapons, etc. After the invention of
weapons and snares, many savage tribes can kill every sort of animal in
their habitat, as the palæolithic Europeans did many thousands of years
ago. From the outset the human pack must have come into competition
with the true carnivores, must have defended itself against them, may
have discovered that attack was the safest defence, and may have been
victorious even without weapons. Mr. G. P. Sanderson writes: “It is
universally believed by the natives (of South India) that the tiger is
occasionally killed by packs of wild dogs.... From what I have seen of
their style of hunting, and of their power of tearing and lacerating, I
think there can be no doubt of their ability to kill a tiger.... Causes
of hostility may occasionally arise between the tiger and wild dogs
through attempted interference with each other’s prey.”[43]

(5) A hunting-pack, probably, always claims a certain territory. This
is the first ground of the sense of property, so strongly shown
by domestic dogs: the territorial claims of the half-wild dogs of
Constantinople are well known. To nourish a pack the hunting-grounds
must be extensive. Mr. Thompson Seton says that in Canada the wolf
has a permanent home-district and a range of about fifty miles.[44]
Very many generations must have elapsed before the deviation of our
forebears from anthropoid habits resulted in the formation of so many
packs as to necessitate the practical delimitation of hunting-grounds.
Then the aggressiveness of the pack turned upon strangers of its own
species; the first wars arose, and perhaps cannibalism on the part of
the victors. It is certain that, in North America, wolves kill and eat
foxes, dogs, coyotes; and it is generally believed that wolves will eat
a disabled companion; though, according to Mr. W. H. Hudson, a wolf
will only eat another when it has killed that other, and then only as
the carrying out of the instinct to eat whatever it has killed.[45] It
may be so.

(6) A pack must have a leader, and must devotedly follow him as long as
he is manifestly the best of the pack; and here we have a rudimentary
loyalty.

(7) Every individual must be subservient to the pack, as long as it
works together; and this seems to be the ground of the “instinct of
self-abasement” (McDougall), so far as the attitudes involved in such
subserviency are due to a distinct emotional impulse, and are not
rather expressive of fear or of devotion.

(8) The members of the pack must be full of emulation; in order that,
when the present leader fails, others may be ready to take his place.

(9) For the internal cohesion of the pack, there must be the equivalent
of a recognised table of precedence amongst its members; and this is
reconciled with the spirit of emulation, by fighting until each knows
his place, followed by complete submission on the part of the inferior.
Mr. Th. Roosevelt says of a pack of dogs employed in bear-hunting,
“at feeding-time each took whatever his strength permitted, and each
paid abject deference to whichever animal was his known superior
in prowess.”[46] Mr. W. H. Hudson writes of dogs on cattle-breeding
establishments on the pampas, that he presumes “they are very much like
feral dogs and wolves in their habits. Their quarrels are incessant;
but when a fight begins the head of the pack, as a rule, rushes to
the spot,” and tries to part the combatants—not always successfully.
“But from the foremost in strength and power down to the weakest
there is a gradation of authority; each one knows just how far he can
go, which companion he can bully when in a bad temper or wishing to
assert himself, and to which he must humbly yield in his turn.”[47]
The situation reminds one of a houseful of schoolboys, and of how
ontogeny repeats phylogeny. Where political control is very feeble,
as in mining camps or backwoods settlements, civilised men revert to
the same conditions. Fifty years ago, “all along the frontier between
Canada and the United States, every one knew whom he could lick, and
who could lick him.”[48] Amongst Australian aborigines, we are told
that “precedence counts for very much.”[49]

(10) A pack of wolves relies not merely upon running down its prey,
but resorts to various stratagems to secure it: as by surrounding it;
heading it off from cover; driving it over a precipice; arranging
relays of pursuers, who take up the chase when the first begin to flag;
setting some to lie in ambush while the rest drive the prey in their
direction. Such devices imply intelligent co-operation, some means of
communicating ideas, patience and self-control in the interests of the
pack and perseverance in carrying out a plan. Failure to co-operate
effectually is said to be punished with death. Primitive man, beginning
with more brains than a wolf, may be supposed soon to have discovered
such arts and to have improved upon them.

(11) When prey has been killed by a pack of wolves, there follows a
greedy struggle over the carcass, each trying to get as big a meal as
possible. Mr. Th. Roosevelt writes of dogs used in hunting the cougar
(puma): “The relations of the pack amongst themselves (when feeding)
were those of wild beast selfishness.... They would all unite in the
chase and the fierce struggle which usually closed it. But the instant
the quarry was killed, each dog resumed his normal attitude of greedy
anger or greedy fear toward the others.”[50] As this was a scratch
pack of hounds, however, we cannot perhaps infer that a naturally
formed pack of wolves is equally discordant, or that the human pack
was ever normally like that. Galton, indeed, says: “Many savages are
so unamiable and morose as to have hardly any object in associating
together, besides that of mutual support;”[51] but this is by no means
true of all savages. At any rate, the steadier supply of food obtained
by our race since the adoption of pastoral or agricultural economy,
with other circumstances, has greatly modified the greedy and morose
attitude in many men and disguised it in others; though it reappears
under conditions of extreme social dislocation, and it is a proverb
that “thieves quarrel over their plunder.” In the original pack such
a struggle over the prey may have subserved the important utility of
eliminating the weak, and of raising the average strength and ferocity.
But some custom must have been established for feeding the women and
children. No doubt when fruits were obtainable, the women and children
largely subsisted upon them. But the strong instinct of parental care
in Primates, the long youth of children, and the greater relative
inferiority of females to males (common to anthropoids and savages)
than is found amongst dogs and wolves, must have made the human pack
from the first differ in many ways from a pack of wolves.

So much, then, as to the traits of character established in primitive
man by his having resorted to co-operative hunting: they all plainly
persist in ourselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

On our intelligence life in the hunting-pack had just as revolutionary
an influence, as already explained in the first chapter. The whole art
of hunting had to be learned from its rudiments by this enterprising
family. With them there was no inherited instinct or disposition, and
no tradition or instruction, as there is with the true carnivores: they
depended solely on observation, memory, inference. With poor olfactory
sense (as usual in apes) prey must be followed and inconvenient
enemies outwitted, by acquiring a knowledge of their footprints and
other visible signs of neighbourhood, and by discrimination of all
the noises they make. The habits and manners of prey and of enemies,
their favourite lairs, feeding-grounds and watering-places, their
paths through forest, marsh, thicket and high grass, must all be
learnt: so must their speed, endurance, means and methods of attack
and defence. The whole country within the range of the pack must be
known, its resources and its difficulties; and whenever new territory
was entered, new lessons in all these matters had to be learned. This
must have entailed a rapid natural selection of brains. Only a rapidly
developing, plastic brain could have been capable of the requisite
accommodation of behaviour in such conditions: a mechanism was required
by which more and more new lines of specialised reaction were related
to numerous newly observed and discriminated facts.

The very crudest weapons may be handled with variable dexterity; the
best handling must be discovered and practised; and this had a high
selective value for the hands as well as for the brain. Probably crude
weapons were very early used; for some monkeys (and baboons generally)
throw sticks or stones, or roll stones down upon an enemy. In Borneo,
Wallace came upon a female orang who, “as soon as she saw us, began
breaking off branches and the great spiny fruits [of the durian]
with every appearance of rage, causing such a shower of missiles as
effectually kept us from approaching too near the tree. This habit of
throwing down branches has been doubted; but I have, as here narrated,
observed it myself on three separate occasions.”[52] The importance
of the observation consists in its proving the existence in an
anthropoid of the impulse to use missiles under the occasional stress
of anger; so that it might be expected rapidly to develop under the
constant pressure of hunger. The use of clubs and stones induced the
discrimination of the best materials for such weapons, and where they
could be found; and, in process of time, brought in a rough shaping of
them, the better to serve their purposes. Then came the invention of
snares and pitfalls and the discovery of poisons.

Thus the primitive human, or prehuman mind, was active in many
new directions; and depending for its skill, not upon instinct or
imitation, but upon observation and memory and inference, it was
necessary for it to arrange ideas in a definite order before acting
upon them, as in making weapons or planning a hunt; indefiniteness
or confusion in such matters was fatal. The contrast between growing
memory of the past and present experience, between practical ideas and
the actions realising them that had been suspended until the right
moment came, furthered the differentiation of self-consciousness amidst
the world; the contrasts of co-operation and greed, of emulation
and loyalty and submission, of honour and shame, furthered the
differentiation of self-consciousness amidst the tribe.

       *       *       *       *       *

If it be asked—how much of all this development attributed to the
hunting-pack might have been brought about just as well by the
formation of a defensive herd, such as we see in cattle and horses?—a
definite answer can be given. The herd is, of course, marked by (2)
gregariousness, (3) perceptive and contagious sympathy and sometimes
effective sympathy in common defence, (7) recognition of leaders (all
herds that travel have leaders), (8) emulation, (9) precedence; but not
by (1) interest in the chase and in killing, nor (4) aggressiveness,
nor (10) strategy and perseverance in attack, nor (11) greed; and
herd-life affords no conditions for the development of intelligence
and dexterity, nor for any of the physical characters that distinguish
man. Herd-life does not involve the great and decisive change which
is implied in the evolution of human nature. We must conceive, then,
of the primitive human mind as a sort of chimpanzee mind adapted to
the wolfish conditions of the hunting-pack. Wolves themselves have
undergone no great development, compared (say) with cats, for want of
hands and other physical advantages which we had to begin with. If some
species of baboon had taken to the hunting-life, there might have been
very interesting results.


§ 5. THE WOLF-TYPE OF MAN ESTABLISHED BY NATURAL SELECTION

The differentiation of the human from the anthropoid stock must have
begun a long time ago; as to when it began there is no direct evidence;
and even if fossil remains of the earlier stages of our evolution had
been discovered, we could only judge from the strata in which they
occurred what must have been their relative antiquity. When it comes
to reducing the chronology of past ages to figures, geologists either
decline to make any estimate, or the results of their calculations
may differ as 1 to 10. Since my own studies give me no claim to an
opinion on such matters, whilst it is helpful to have clear ideas,
however tentative, I shall adopt the views of Dr. Arthur Keith in his
work on _The Antiquity of Man_, based on estimates published by Prof.
Sollas.[53] On turning to p. 509 of that work, a genealogical tree
will be found, showing the probable lines of descent of the higher
Primates. The separation of the human from the great anthropoid stock
is represented as having happened at about the last third of the
Oligocene period—say 2,000,000 years ago (or, according to the later
estimate, 3,500,000). Pithecanthropus (of Java) branched off as a
distinct genus about the middle of the Miocene. Neanderthal man (_Homo
Neanderthalensis_) and Piltdown man (_Eoanthropus Dawsoni_) separated
as distinct species (or genera) from the stock of modern man (absurdly
named _Homo sapiens_) early in the Pliocene, and became extinct
respectively (say) 20,000 and 300,000 years ago. The races of modern
man began to differentiate near the end of the Pliocene (say) 500,000
years from the present time. Such is the “working hypothesis.”

The skull capacity of the great anthropoids averages 500 c.c.; that of
Pithecanthropus is estimated at 900 c.c.; the Australian native average
is 1200 c.c.; Eoanthropus, according to Dr. Keith, rises to 1400;[54]
a Neanderthal skull has been measured at 1600 c.c.; the modern English
average is under 1500 c.c. Of course, mental power depends not on size
of the brain only, but also on its differentiation, which may have
recently advanced.

As to culture, the Neolithic period extends in Western Europe from
about 2000 to 10,000 B.C.: and to that age is usually attributed the
introduction of agriculture, the domestication of animals, pottery,
weaving, permanent constructed dwellings, and monuments requiring
collective labour; but some of these improvements may be of earlier
date. In other parts of the world, _e. g._ in the Eastern Mediterranean
region, such culture is probably older, but still comparatively recent.
What is known as the Palæolithic stage of culture is often supposed
to have begun early in the second quarter of the Pleistocene period,
giving us a retrospect of (say) 300,000 years. But if we include
under “Palæolithic” all unpolished stone-work that shows clear signs
of having been executed according to an idea or mental pattern (and
this seems a reasonable definition), the “rostro-carinate” implements
must be so called, and then the beginning of this culture must be
pushed back into the Pliocene.[55] In Pliocene (and perhaps Miocene)
deposits have further been discovered numerous “eoliths”: stones so
roughly chipped that they do not imply an idea-pattern; so that, whilst
many archæologists accept them as of human workmanship, some experts
dispute their claim to be considered artefacts. Of course, there must
be eoliths; the only question is whether we have yet unearthed any
of them. Our forefathers cannot have begun by shaping stones to a
definite figure and special purpose. Beginning with stones taken up
as they lay, they discovered that a broken stone with a sharp edge
inflicted a worse wound than a whole one; then broke stones to obtain
this advantage; used sharp fragments to weight clubs; and very slowly
advanced to the manufacture of recognisable axes and spear-heads,
meanwhile discovering other uses for flaked stones; and it seems to
have needed at least 1,400,000 (or 2,800,000) years to arrive at the
poorest of known palæoliths. This strikingly agrees with the law,
often stated, that the progress of culture is, by virtue of tradition,
cumulative, and flows, as a stone falls, with accelerating velocity: in
spite of the ebb, to which from age to age we see it to be liable. At
any one time, moreover, the art of stone-working was, probably, even in
adjacent tribes, at different stages of advancement; it depends partly
upon the kind of stone obtainable; but it has been only recently that
such contrasts could occur as Herodotus[56] describes among the hosts
of Xerxes: when, beside the well-accoutred Persians and Medes, marched
Libyans and Mysians armed with wooden javelins hardened in the fire,
and Ethiopians with stone-tipped arrows and spears headed with the
sharpened horns of antelopes.

The moral of all this is that there was abundant time before the
rise of Neolithic culture (which may be called the beginning of
civilisation) for the complete adaptation of mankind everywhere, by
natural selection, to the life of hunters; and that, since then, there
has not been time for the biological adaptation of any race to the
civilised state. We shall see that natural selection has probably had
some civilising influence; but any approach to complete adaptation has
been impossible, not only for want of time, but also because of rapid
changes in the structure of civilisation, the social protection of some
eccentrics, the persistence of the hunting-life as a second resource
or as a pastime, and by the frequent recurrence of warfare—that
is to say, man-hunting. To civilisation we are, for the most part,
merely accommodated by experience, education, tradition and social
pressure. A few people seem to be adapted to civilised life from their
birth, and others to the slavish life; but all inherit, more or less
manifestly, the nature of the hunter and warrior. This is a necessary
basis of general and social psychology; and perhaps tribal or national
characters (so far as distinguishable) may be understood by assigning
the conditions under which they have, in various directions, been
modified from this type.

To avoid the appearance of overlooking an obvious objection, I may add
that the life of the hunter does not imply an exclusively carnivorous
diet, but merely that hunting is the activity upon which his faculties
are bent and upon which his livelihood chiefly depends. It is most
unlikely that a cousin of the frugivorous anthropoids should entirely
give up his ancestral food, immediately, or perhaps at any time. Even
the diet of the wolf, in North-East Canada, includes “much fruit,
especially the uva-ursi”; and the coyote there also eats berries;[57]
so does the jackal in India. Savage women everywhere subsist largely
on roots and fruits. Dr. Keith says the teeth and jaws of the
Neanderthal species were adapted to a coarse vegetable diet.[58] Yet
the Neanderthal burials at La Ferrasie, La Chapelle aux Saints, Jersey
and Krapina, with their implements and animal remains, leave no doubt
that the species hunted the biggest game. At Krapina, besides mammoth
and rhinoceros, “the cave-bear occurred abundantly, it was evidently
a favourite article of diet”: the inhabitants were not fanatical
vegetarians.


§ 6. SOME FURTHER CONSEQUENCES OF THE HUNTING-LIFE

Between the remote age when our hypothetical ancestor became a hunter
and the time to which probably belong the remains of the oldest known
men, there lies a gap of (say) one (or two) and a half million years,
concerning which we have not only no direct evidence but not even
any parallel in the world by means of which to apply the comparative
method. Just at the beginning, the parallel of the wolf-pack sheds some
light upon our path; but the light soon grows faint; for the primitive
human, from the first more intelligent than wolves, and inheriting
from the ape-stock qualities of character which the new life greatly
modified but could not extirpate, must under pressure of selection have
become, after not many ages, an animal unlike any other. Just at the
end, again, something concerning those who lived many thousand years
before the beginning of history may be inferred from the parallel of
existing savage customs; from their rock-dwellings, drawings, tools,
weapons, hearths, something about their way of life; from evidence of
their burial-customs, something of their beliefs. But what can be said
of our ancestors during all those years that intervene between the
beginning and the end?

Having been a hunter at the first and at the last, we may reasonably
suppose that he had been so all the time. But, with our present
knowledge, our chief guide as to other matters seems to be the fact
that the most backward of existing savages possess powers of body and
mind, and forms and products of culture, which must have been acquired
gradually through a long course of development from no better origins
than are traceable in apes and wolves. As the use of good stone weapons
by living savages and the occurrence of stone weapons in deposits
of various age in the Pleistocene—less and less perfectly made the
further we go back—justify us in assuming that there must have been
eoliths of even cruder workmanship at remoter dates, so the possession
by savages of extensive languages, intricate customs, luxuriant myths,
considerable reasoning powers and even humane sentiments, compel us to
imagine such possessions as belonging to our prehistoric ancestors,
in simpler and simpler forms, as we go back age by age toward the
beginning. A tentative reconstruction of the lost series of events may
sometimes be supported by what has been observed of the individual
development of our children.

(_a_) For example, the constructive impulse, slightly shown by
anthropoids that make beds and shelters in the trees, was called into
activity in man especially in the making of weapons, tools and snares,
and became an absorbing passion; so that a savage (often accused of
being incapable of prolonged attention!) will sit for days working at
a spear or an axe: they are inattentive only to what does not interest
them. Many children from about the sixth year come under the same sort
of fascination—digging, building, making bows and arrows, boats and
so forth. This is a necessary preparation for all the achievements
of civilised life; and it is reasonable to suppose that the stages
of growth of such interest in construction are indicated by the
improvement of ancient implements.

(_b_) As to language—in the most general sense, as the communication
of emotions and ideas by vocal sounds—the rudiments of it are
widespread in animal life. A sort of dog-language is recognised, and
monkeys seem to have a still greater “vocabulary.” Hence, a number of
emotional vocal expressions was probably in use among the primitive
human stock. And the new hunting-life was favourable to the development
of communicative signs; for it depended on co-operation, which is
wanting in ape-life, and in the lower extant savages hardly exists,
except in hunting, war, and magical or religious rites. Hunting,
moreover, is (as I have said) especially encouraging to onomatopœic
expression in imitating the noises of animals, etc. It was still more
favourable, perhaps, to the growth of gesture-language in imitating
the behaviour of animals and the actions involved in circumventing
and attacking them. Increasing powers of communication were extremely
useful, and the pack must have tried to develop them. Without the
endeavour to communicate, there could never have been a language better
than the ape’s; nor could there have been the endeavour without the
need. That gesture alone was very helpful may be assumed; and it must
have assisted in fixing the earliest vocal signs for things and actions
and qualities, and probably determined the earliest syntax; but when,
in hunting, members of the pack were hidden from one another, or when
their hands were occupied, gesture was not available, and communication
depended on the voice. The speech of children similarly emerges from
emotional noises and impulsive babbling, assisted by gesture.

Passing to later ages, we cannot expect to learn much about the
speech of prehistoric men, whom we know only by a few bones. As to the
Java skull, Dr. Keith observes that “the region of the brain which
subserves the essentially human gift of speech, was not ape-like in
Pithecanthropus. The parts for speech are there; they are small, but
clearly foreshadow the arrangement of convolutions seen in modern
man.” On the other hand, “the higher association areas ... had not
reached a human level.”[59] The jaw of this skull not having been
found, nothing can be said of its fitness for carrying out the process
of articulation. As to Eoanthropus, “if our present conception of
the orbital part of the third frontal convolution is well founded,
namely, that it takes part in the mechanism of speech, then we have
grounds for believing that the Piltdown man had reached that point
of brain-development when speech had become a possibility. When one
looks at the lower jaw, however, and the projecting canine teeth,
one hesitates to allow him more than a potential ability.”[60] The
jaw had not undergone the characteristic changes which in modern man
give freedom to the tongue in the articulation of words.[61] But Dr.
Keith “cannot detect any feature in the frontal, parietal or occipital
areas which clearly separate this brain-cast from modern ones.”[62]
Eoanthropus, therefore, must have had a good deal to say and, being a
social animal, must have felt the need of expression; and, though he
was not a direct ancestor of ours, it can hardly be doubted that at
some period the jaws of our own ancestors were no better adapted than
his to articulate speech. May we not infer that articulate speech,
meeting a need of the stock, arose very gradually, and was slowly
differentiated from some less definite and structural connection of
expressive and onomatopœic vocables, such as we have seen may naturally
have arisen amongst the earliest hunters? _Pari passu_ the jaw was
modified.

(_c_) All savages live by custom; gregarious animals have their
customs; and in the primitive hunting-pack customs must have been
early established as “conditions of gregariousness.” M. Salomon
Reinach, indeed, thinks that the anthropoid probably became human
as the result of inventing taboos, especially in sexual relations;
there was economy of nervous energy in the direction of the senses,
and consequent enrichment of the intellect.[63] His hypothesis does
not carry us far, perhaps, into the particulars of human form and
faculty; but it contains this truth, that without the growth of customs
there could have been no progress for human nature; and it certainly
points to the probability that some custom was early established with
regard to marriage. In Prof. Westermarck’s opinion our species was
originally monogamous.[64] Supposing this to have been the custom,
as it is amongst many Primates, could it have persisted after the
formation of the hunting-pack? According to Mr. Thompson Seton,
wolves pair “probably for life”;[65] but this is disputed; and so it
is whether or no the male of a seasonal pair takes part in caring
for the puppies.[66] Of the primitive human stock one may say that
whilst, on the one hand, the association of many males and females in
the same pack may have tended to break up the family, on the other
hand, the long youth of the children and the parental care generally
characteristic of Primates would have tended to preserve it; that the
practice of pairing requires the largest number of males (setting aside
polyandry), and lessens quarrelling, and is therefore favourable to the
strength of the pack; and that any custom may have been established
that was most favourable to the species in its new life. The least
probable of all conditions is promiscuity; for the rearing of children
with their ever-lengthening youth must have been difficult, taxing the
care of both parents.

(_d_) The claim to property is instinctive in most animals—claim
to a certain territory, or to a nest, or lair, or mate. Each early
human pack probably claimed a certain hunting-range; and each family
its lair, which it guarded, as our domestic dog guards the house. In
Australia “every tribe has its own country, and its boundaries are
well known; and they are respected by others”;[67] and the Bushmen,
who retained the ancient hunting-life more perfectly than any other
known people, are said to have been formerly divided into large tribes
with well-defined hunting-grounds.[68] As weapons or other implements,
charms, or ornaments came into use, the attitude toward the territory
or lair will have been extended to include them; indeed, it seems to be
instinctive even in lower Primates. “In the Zoological Gardens,” says
Darwin, “a monkey, which had weak teeth, used to break open nuts with a
stone; and I was assured by the keepers that, after using the stone, he
hid it in the straw, and would not let any other monkey touch it. Here,
then, we have the idea of property.”[69] Among the half-wolf train-dogs
of Canada, the claims of one to property seem to be recognised by
others; for a dog will defend its _cache_ of food against another that
ordinarily it fears; and “the bigger dog rarely presses the point.”[70]
The utility of keeping the peace within the tribe, no doubt, led to the
growth of customs concerning property, and to their protection by the
social sanction, and later by the taboo.[71] For taboo cannot be the
origin of respect for property or for any custom: it implies a custom
already existing, which it protects by the growth of a belief in some
magical penalty that is effective even when there are no witnesses. The
same utility of order must have established customs of dividing the
kill of the pack: later also protected by taboo, as we still see in
many savage tribes.

The attitude towards property is very variable amongst the tribes now
known to us. Still, considering how early and strongly it is manifested
by children, we may infer with some plausibility its antiquity in
the race. The urgent desire of property, and tenacity in holding it,
displayed by many individuals, though not an amiable, has been a highly
useful trait, to which is due that accumulation of capital that has
made possible the whole of our material and much of our spiritual
civilisation. Amongst barbarians it may be a necessary condition
of social order. Had not wealth been highly prized amongst our own
ancestors, it is hard to see how revenge could ever have been appeased
by the wergeld. The payment, indeed, was not the whole transaction;
it implied an acknowledgment of guilt and of the obligation to make
amends; but these things would not have mollified an enemy nurtured in
the tradition of the blood-feud, if silver had not been dear to him.
It is still accepted as compensation for injuries that seem difficult
to measure by the ounce. Wealth gives rank, and gratifies not only the
greed but also the emulative spirit of the pack. Acquisitiveness is an
essential trait of aristocracy, and adhesiveness of its perpetuity.
Homespun prudence belongs, in our ancestry, to a more recent stratum
of motives; we see it as a blind instinct in squirrels and beavers, a
quasi-instinctive propensity in dogs and wolves (who hide food that
they cannot immediately devour); but it is not known in any anthropoid,
and is acquired at some stage by some human races—not by all; for
it is not found in many extant savages. The only occasion on which
Australian tribes show prudential foresight as to food is on the
approach of the season of magical rites, when they lay in a stock of
food before giving themselves up for weeks or months body and soul
to thaumaturgy.[72] Prudence is not, however, merely a function of
foresight or intelligence, or else the Irish would be as prudent as the
Scotch.

(_e_) The first wars, probably, were waged for hunting-grounds; and
this may have been a revival, for the carnivorous anthropoid pack,
of a state of affairs that existed amongst their ancestors at a much
earlier date; for battles for a feeding-ground have been witnessed
between troops of the lower Primates. Such a battle between two bands
of langur (_Semnopithecus entellus_) has been described;[73] and Darwin
relates after Brehm how “in Abyssinia, when baboons of one species (_C.
gelada_) descend in troops from the mountains to plunder the fields,
they sometimes encounter troops of another species (_C. hamadryas_),
and then a fight ensues. The Geladas roll down great stones, which
the Hamadryas try to avoid, and then both species, making a great
uproar, rush furiously against each other.”[74] As packs of the
wolf-ape increased in numbers and spread over the world, they no doubt
generally came to regard one another as rivals upon the same footing
as the great cats and packs of dogs, and every attempt at expansion or
migration provoked a battle. Wars strengthened the internal sympathies
and loyalties of the pack or tribe and its external antipathies, and
extended the range and influence of the more virile and capable tribes.

It is true that neighbouring tribes of savages are not now always
mutually hostile. In Australia, we are told, local groups and adjacent
tribes are usually friendly;[75] but with them the age of expansion
seems to have closed some time ago, and a sort of equilibrium has been
established. On the other hand, it is a shallow sort of profundity that
insists upon interpreting every war as a struggle for nutrition, an
effort to solve the social problem. Aggressiveness and insatiable greed
are characteristic of many tribes—passions always easily exploited by
their leaders, as in the civilised world by dynasts and demagogues.
Plethora is more insolent than poverty. Lust of power, of glory, of
mere fighting is a stronger incentive than solicitude for the poor.

However, in the development of society nothing has been so influential
as war: an immense subject, for the outlines of which I refer to
Herbert Spencer’s _Political Institutions_.[76]

(_f_) Most of the amusements as well as the occupations of mankind
depend for their zest upon the spirit of hunting and fighting, which
they gratify and relieve, either directly or in a conventionalised
and symbolical way, and at the same time keep alive. Sports and games
involve the pursuit of some end by skill and strategy, often the
seizing upon some sort of prey, or slaying outright, and they give
scope to emulation. Emulation is a motive in the race for wealth, in
every honourable career, even in addiction to science and learning:
though here the main stress is upon an instinct older than the
pack—curiosity, a general character of the Primates. That children
at first play alone, later play together, and then “make up sides,”
repeats the change from the comparatively solitary life of anthropoids
to the social life and combined activities of the hunting-pack. From
the interest of the chase and the aggressiveness that is involved in it
must be derived all that we call “enterprise,” whether beneficent or
injurious: a trait, certainly, which there is little reason to regard
as inherited from the anthropoid stock.

(_g_) The great amusement and pastime of feeding has, no doubt,
descended to us in unbroken tradition, through harvest and vintage
festivals, from the unbridled indulgence that followed a successful
hunt. And I offer the conjecture that the origin of laughter and
the enjoyment of broad humour (so often discussed) may be traced to
these occasions of riotous exhilaration and licence. We may suppose,
indeed, that these conditions began to prevail not in the earliest
days of the ravenous pack, but after some advance had been made in the
customs of eating. Savages usually cram to repletion when possible,
and with huge gusto, for there may not soon be another opportunity.
If uproarious feasting was advantageous physically and socially (as
till recently we all thought it was), addiction to the practice was a
ground of survival; and laughter (a discharge of undirected energy, as
Spencer says), being its natural expression and enhancement, shared in
its perpetuation. This social origin agrees with the infectiousness
of laughter, with its connection with triumph and cruelty, and with
the quality of the jokes that still throughout the world excite
most merriment—practical jokes and allusions to drunkenness, the
indecorous, the obscene. Sir Robert Walpole preferred such humour as
the most sociable; because in that everybody could take part. Many
refinements have been introduced in polite circles; but it is in vain
that one begins a theory of laughter with an analysis of the genius of
Molière.

Similarly, I suppose that weeping, lamentation and the facial and
bodily expressions of grief were developed by the social utility of
common mourning in tribal defeat and bereavement.


§ 7. MORALISATION OF THE HUNTERS

We are left to speculate about the earliest growth of magnanimity,
friendliness, compassion, general benevolence and other virtues.
They cannot be explained merely by the hunting-life, which so easily
accounts for greed, cruelty, pride and every sort of aggressiveness.
Robert Hartmann writes: “It is well known that both rude and civilised
peoples are capable of showing unspeakable and, as it is erroneously
termed, inhuman cruelty towards each other. These acts of cruelty,
murder and rapine are often the result of the inexorable logic of
national characteristics and, unhappily, are truly human, since nothing
like them can be traced in the animal world. It would, for instance,
be a grave mistake to compare a tiger with a bloodthirsty executioner
of the Reign of Terror, since the former only satisfies his natural
appetite in preying on other animals. The atrocities of the trials
for witchcraft, the indiscriminate slaughter committed by the Negroes
on the coast of Guinea, the sacrifice of human victims by the Khonds,
the dismemberment of living men by the Battus, find no parallel in the
habits of animals in their savage state. And such a comparison is,
above all, impossible in the case of anthropoids, which display no
hostility toward men or other animals unless they are first attacked.
In this respect the anthropoid ape stands upon a higher plane than
many men.”[77] Are we, then, to explain the more amiable side of human
nature, partly at least, by derivation from the frugivorous Primates,
extensively modified by our wolfish adaptation, but surviving as latent
character?

(_a_) Several further considerations may be offered to account for the
growth of what we call humanity, (i) The long non-age of human children
is favourable to the attachments of family life, and such attachments
may under certain conditions be capable of extension beyond the
family; but I cannot trace the whole flood of altruistic regard to the
sole source of maternal or parental love. (ii) Friendliness and the
disposition to mutual aid are so useful to a hunting-pack that is not
merely seasonal but permanent (as I take ours to have been), both to
individuals and to the pack as a whole, within certain limits (as that
the wounded, sick, or aged must not amount to an encumbrance), that we
may suppose natural selection to have favoured the growth of effective
sympathy, not merely in mutual defence, but so far as it is actually
found at present in backward tribes. It nowhere seems to be excessive;
and its manifestation in some civilised races seems to depend not
upon a positive increase of benevolence in the generality, but (iii)
upon the breaking down here and there of conditions that elsewhere
oppose and inhibit it. Thus the generosity, mercy and magnanimity that
constitute the chivalrous ideal, depend (I believe) upon the attainment
by a class of such undisputed superiority that there is no occasion
for jealousy or rivalry in relation to other classes; for should the
superiority be disputed, these virtues quickly disappear. Similarly,
what have been called the “slavish virtues” of charity, humility,
long-suffering may arise amongst those who are free from rivalry,
because they have no hope of aggrandisement in wealth or honour,
and who have indeed suffered long. With the interfusion of classes,
their virtues interfuse; for they have a common root, and are active,
provided that circumstances do not inhibit them.

(iv) But since in individuals our complex nature varies in all
directions, and amongst the rest in the direction of benevolence; and
since any organ or quality that varies is apt to continue to do so,
and may go on varying even beyond the limits of biological utility;
why in human life may not this happen with benevolence (or with any
other passion or virtue); so that in some men it expands with wonderful
richness and beauty even to the sacrifice of themselves—nay, by
excessive clemency or generosity, even to the injury of the tribe or of
the race?

(_b_) The moral sense or conscience has been discussed by Darwin[78]
“exclusively from the side of natural history”; so as this is the way
of considering human nature in the present book, I shall epitomise his
account of it; which seems to be true, and to which I see little to
add. He finds four chief conditions of the growth of a moral sense:
(_a_) the social instincts lead an animal to take pleasure in the
society of its fellows, to sympathise with them and to help them.
(_b_) When the mind is highly developed, images of past actions and
motives continually recur; “and that feeling of dissatisfaction or even
misery which invariably results ... from any dissatisfied instinct
would arise as often as it was perceived that the enduring and always
present social instinct had yielded to some other instinct, at the time
stronger, but neither enduring in its nature nor leaving behind it a
very vivid impression”—as with anger or greed. (_c_) After language
has been acquired, public opinion can be expressed, and becomes the
paramount guide of action; though still “our regard for the approbation
and disapprobation of our fellows depends on sympathy.” (_d_) Social
instinct, sympathy and obedience to the judgment of the community are
strengthened by the formation of habit. Darwin then proves successively
these four positions.

Seeing the stress here laid upon sympathy, it may make the matter
clearer if we observe that the word occurs in different senses—for
the participation in another’s satisfaction or distress (emotional
sympathy) and readiness to help (effective sympathy); and these are the
meanings under (_a_), the first of the above heads: and, again, for the
knowledge that there are ideas or judgments in another’s mind together
with approval or disapproval of our actions; and this is the meaning
under (_c_), the third head. But knowledge of another’s thoughts is
not sympathy, except so far as, being accompanied with assent to
his judgment, there is participation in his feelings of approval or
disapproval; and, if we dissent from his judgment, there may, indeed,
be perceptive sympathy as to his feelings, but there is no emotional
sympathy or participation in them—there is rather fear or resentment.
It is necessary to bear in mind that perception of another’s feelings,
participation in them and impulse to help or relieve are separable
processes, and that perceptive sympathy is as active in cruelty as in
generosity or mercy.

It may be added that (_b_), the second of the four conditions assigned
by Darwin as determining the growth of the moral sense or conscience,
accounts more especially for “remorse of conscience”; and that (_c_),
the third condition, explains that tone of authority attaching to
conscience on which Bishop Butler laid so much stress.[79]

How early the moral sense began to form itself in our stock cannot be
estimated because it must have been a very gradual process. Probably
the rudiments of it appeared in the family life of the ape even before
our differentiation; and the authoritative character of conscience
established itself under the discipline of the hunting-pack before
there was much development of mind (for dogs know what theft is), and
under pressure of a public opinion that managed to express itself
without language. In an original and suggestive book[80] Mr. Trotter
has shown that a herd (pack, tribe or nation) necessarily approves
of whatever actions are done in its interests as good or right, and
disapproves of the contrary actions as bad or wrong. Confident that
its beliefs and customs are good and right, the pack persecutes
dissenters and nonconformists. “Good” is a relative idea. “‘The good
are good warriors and hunters,’ said a Pawnee chief; whereupon the
author who mentions the saying remarks that this would also be the
opinion of a wolf if he could express it.”[81] Hence we may guess the
principal contents of the primitive categorical imperative. The study
of Ethnology and History enables us to trace the modification and
enrichment of those contents under varying conditions of culture, and
for the results of such study I refer to Edward Westermarck’s _Origin
and Development of Moral Ideas_.

(_c_) After the introduction of agriculture, the stress of natural
selection was in certain directions altered. At first, indeed, most
agricultural work, probably, was done by women; but in its progress it
fell extensively into the hands of men; and then advantage accrued to
those tribes that were capable of steady industry and prudence. The new
employment decreased aggression on the principle that “had Alexander
been holding the plough, he could not have run his friend Clitus
through with a spear.” The sick and aged were now less an encumbrance
than they had been to hunters. Those who could not endure a settled
life wandered away in their old pursuits. The more aggressive clans
slaughtered one another in the vendetta. Social pressure and hanging
eliminated many of the more idle, improvident, dishonest and unruly,
whose instincts resisted “accommodation.” The more neighbourly and
co-operative tended to predominate. As civilisation intensifies, the
numerous ways of getting a livelihood, which (as we have seen) derive
their motive-force from the spirit of the pack, gratify that spirit
under so many disguises and with so little direct personal collision,
as to be compatible with a great deal of friendliness and benevolence;
and co-operation, direct or indirect, steadily increases.

(_d_) Increasing capacity of forming ideas of remote ends and of
co-ordinating many activities in their pursuit, implies the inhibition
of many aggressive or distracting impulses, and constitutes an
automatic control. And although it is now fashionable to depreciate
the power of intelligence in human life, surely, its development has
had great influence. As men come to foresee the many consequences
of action they learn to modify and regulate it, as each foreseen
consequence excites some impulse, either reinforcing or inhibiting
action. Reflection upon our lot has done much to ameliorate it. The
“conditions of gregariousness” (to use W. K. Clifford’s definition
of morality) have been expounded by the more penetrating and
comprehensive minds—prophets, poets, philosophers; and some disciples
have understood them and have persuaded many to believe. Nor have
such luminaries arisen only in the later phases of culture when their
writings have been delivered or their sayings recorded. Probably it
was some one man who first pointed out to a tribe that had ignored
the fact, that whether a wrong had been done by accident or on
purpose affected the agent’s guilt and ought to affect the penalty
exacted. Some one man, probably, first saw what injustice is often
disguised by the specious equality of the _lex talionis_; another
first tried to assuage the bitterness of a vendetta by appointing
compensation; another, perhaps first proposed to substitute animal
for human sacrifice, or a puppet for a slave. And when we read the
lists of sagacious proverbs that have been collected from many savage
tribes, we must consider that it was by eminent individuals that those
sayings were first uttered one by one: individuals with the gifts of
insight and expression to summarise the experience of a whole tribe in
memorable words, rude forerunners of our prophets and philosophers.


§ 8. INFLUENCE OF THE IMAGINARY ENVIRONMENT

The necessity of learning the whole art of hunting from its rudiments,
without the help of instinct or tradition, by sheer observation, memory
and inference, put extraordinary stress upon the brain. At first by
knowledge, strategy, co-operation and persistence of will, later by
devising weapons and snares, evolving language and discovering the ways
of making and utilising fire, man found means of entirely changing the
conditions of his life; but this would have been impossible without
a great development of his brain; and, accordingly, it appears that
Eoanthropus, at the beginning of the Pleistocene, had a skull with
three times the cubic capacity of the anthropoids. With the growth of
the brain came a continually increasing fecundity of ideas. “Piltdown
man saw, heard, felt, thought, and dreamt much as we do.”[82] The use
of ideas is to foresee events and prepare for them beforehand: the
great advantage of distance-senses over contact-senses, is to give an
animal time to adapt its actions to deferred events; and ideas give
this power in a vastly higher degree. So far the utility of brains and
ideas seems obvious. But in order that ideas may be useful in this
way, they must (one would suppose) represent and anticipate the actual
course of events. If they falsely indicate the order of nature, or
even beings and actions that do not exist at all, ideas may seem to be
worse than useless.

Now, when we turn to the lowest existing savages, they are found to
possess, in comparison with apes, a considerable fecundity of ideas;
constituting, on the one hand, a good stock of common sense, or
knowledge of the properties and activities of the things and animals
around them, and of how to deal with them, which enables them to carry
on the affairs of a life much more complex and continuous than any
animal’s: but including, on the other hand, a strange collection of
beliefs about magic and spirits, which entirely misrepresent the course
of nature and the effective population of the world. These latter
beliefs, or imaginative delusions, hamper them in so many ways, waste
so much time, lead them sometimes into such dark and cruel practices,
that one may be excused for wondering whether their bigger brains
can have been, on the whole, of any biological advantage to them in
comparison with the anthropoids. The anthropoids live by common sense.
So do savages, and they have much more of it; but the anthropoids seem
not to be troubled by magic and animism. We must suppose that the
common sense of primitive man increased age by age, as he became more
and more perfectly adapted to the hunting-life, and that at some stage
his imagination began to falsify the relations of things and the powers
of nature. It seems that imagination-beliefs depend chiefly upon the
influence of desire and fear, suggestibility, hasty generalisation, and
the seduction of reasoning by analogy. At what stage imaginations, thus
divorced from reality, began to influence human life, it is impossible
to say; but it cannot be less than half a million years ago, if (as Dr.
Keith says) Eoanthropus, 400,000 years ago, “thought and dreamt much as
we do.” Why did not such delusions hinder our development? Or did they
promote it?

The first consideration is, that biological adaptation is nearly always
a compromise: if any organ or faculty be useful on the whole, in spite
of some disutility, its increase favours the survival of those in
whom it increases; and this is true of the brain and its thinking.
The second is, that nearly all the magical and animistic beliefs and
practices that are socially destructive, probably belong to a stage
of human life that is attained long after our differentiation has
been established, and when some progress has been made in arts and
customs. Savages of the lowest culture have few beliefs that can be
called positively injurious. Talismans and spells, not by themselves
relied upon, but only adscititious to common-sense actions, give
confidence without weakening endeavour. To curse, or to “point the
bone,” does not create but merely expresses a malevolent purpose; and,
although sometimes fatal by suggestion, is on the whole better than
to assassinate. Taboos do more good by protecting person and property
and custom than they do harm by restricting the use of foods. Belief
in imaginary evils waiting upon secret sins exerts, whilst supported
by social unanimity, a control upon all kinds of behaviour: it is the
beginning of the “religious sanction,” and one sort of conscience. The
dread of spirits that prowl at night keeps people in the family-cave
or by the camp-fire; and that is the best place for them. Many rites
and observances are sanitary. Totemism rarely does any harm, and may
once have usefully symbolised the unity of social groups. Totemic and
magical dances give excellent physical training, promote the spirit
of co-operation, are a sort of drill; and (like all art), whilst
indulging, they also restrain imagination by imposing upon it definite
forms. For a long time there was no special profession of wizard or
priest, with whose appearance most of the evil of magic and animism
originates; though probably even they generally do more good than
harm by their courage and sagacity, by discovering drugs and poisons,
by laying ghosts, and by their primitive studies in medicine and
psychology.

The wizard, however, and the priest, who could never have existed but
for the prevalent beliefs in Magic and Animism, have a further and far
more important function in human life, namely, the organisation, or
rather reorganisation of society. The organisation of the hunting-pack
described above was liable through several causes to fall asunder.
Some of these causes are obvious: (_a_) The improvement of weapons
and snares and discovery of poisons made very small parties, or even
single families, self-sufficing—as among the Bushmen (though they
sometimes assembled for a grand hunt).[83] (_b_) Failure of game from
desiccation, as in Australia, or because the tribe has been driven into
a poor country like Tierra del Fuego; so that a small population is
scattered over a wide area, and reduced to a greater or less dependence
on “collecting.” (_c_) The adoption of even a primitive agricultural
or pastoral life may make hunting a secondary interest. In such cases
the natural leaders of a clan are no longer (as in the old pack)
plainly indicated; and if society is to be saved from anarchy, some
new control must establish itself for the preservation of tradition
and custom. Conceivably this happened in several ways; but in fact
(I believe) we know of only one, namely: First, the rule of wizards,
who are chiefly old men credited with mysterious power that makes
the boldest tribesman quail, such as the headmen and elders of an
Australian tribe. In New Guinea, too, and much of Melanesia, the power
of rulers, even though recognised as of noble birth, depends chiefly
upon their reputation for Magic. And among the Bushmen secrets about
poisons and antidotes and colours for painting (probably considered
magical) were heirlooms in certain families of chiefs, and gave them
caste.[84] Secondly, at a later stage, as the belief in ghosts more
and more prevails, and ancestral ghosts are worshipped, and ghosts
of heroes or chiefs become veritable gods, the priests who celebrate
their worship strengthen the position of chiefs or kings descended
from these gods, and help to maintain more comprehensive and coherent
governments than those established upon Magic only; though to these
later forms, also, and to Religion itself magical beliefs contribute
their support. The inevitable development of illusory imaginations
along with common sense, then, assisted early and also later culture,
because they preserved order and cohesion by re-arousing the ancient
submission and loyalty of the pack. For common sense is always limited
to present conditions, it could never have foreseen the dependence of
human life upon order and the necessity of maintaining cohesion even
at great immediate sacrifices. These interests were, therefore, served
indirectly through delusions; natural selection must, within certain
limits, have favoured the superstitious. Excessively imaginative
and superstitious tribes may sometimes have been eliminated; for
common sense also has biological utility. But, perverse as it may
seem, imaginations utterly false have had their share in promoting
“progress”: co-operating with agriculture and trade, magic, religions
and the fine arts have, by supporting government and civil order,
helped in accommodating us, and even in some measure adapting us, to
our present condition, such as it is.

FOOTNOTES:

[28] See _The Antiquity of Man_, by Arthur Keith.

[29] _Malay Archipelago_, pp. 46-7.

[30] According to R. L. Garner, however, both gorillas and chimpanzees
are polygamous. See _Gorillas and Chimpanzees_, pp. 54 and 214.

[31] This view is not opposed to the suggestion I have somewhere
seen that the collecting activities of women, whilst men hunted,
may, at some stage, have led to property and domestication of plants
and animals. Again, the pastoral and agricultural states are not
necessarily successive: it depends upon local conditions. For an
excellent survey of the gradual rise of primitive culture and the
difficulties it encountered, see H. Spencer’s _Industrial Institutions,
Principles of Sociology_, Vol. III.

[32] It is certainly believed by fox-hunters that a fox feeds his vixen
when she is occupied with their family, and that “if the vixen is
killed he will bring up the family by himself.”—Thomas F. Dale, _The
Fox_, pp. 12, 13.

Nothing incredible in this—nor of wolves. Can the vixen provide for
herself and litter alone? If not, the dog must do it: else there could
be no foxes or wolves.

However, de Canteleu denies that the he-wolf takes any part in rearing
the young (_La Chasse du Loup_, p. 30).

[33] W. P. Pycraft, in his entertaining _Courtship of Animals_, after
assuming that Man became a hunter for the sake of the excitement such
a life afforded, goes on (p. 23): “A little later the advantages of
neighbourliness were borne in on him, largely for the sake of the
greater ease wherewith the animals of the chase could be captured by
their combined efforts; but this begat comradeship and some of the
graces that follow therefrom.”

[34] _Descent of Man_, ch. xx.

[35] See above, footnote on p. 32.

[36] Avebury, _Prehistoric Times_, 7th ed., p. 580.

[37] _Inquiries into Human Faculty_, p. 262.

[38] _Hunting Trips in North America_, p. 349.

[39] G. W. Stone, _Native Races of South Africa_, p. 91.

[40] _The Arctic Prairies_, p. 20.

[41] _La Chasse du Loup_, p. 21.

[42] _Life Histories of Northern Animals_, p. 755.

[43] _Wild Beasts of India_, pp. 275-6. Cf. Casserly, _Life on an
Indian Outpost_, pp. 94-5. Brehm says, in _Thierleben_, that in Russia
wolves attack and kill the bear.

[44] _Life Histories of Northern Animals_, p. 754.

[45] _Naturalist in La Plata_, p. 346.

[46] _Outdoor Pastimes of an American Hunter_, p. 70.

[47] _Op. cit._, pp. 336-7.

[48] Hiram S. Maxim, _My Life_, p. 57.

[49] Spencer and Gillen, _Across Australia_, p. 388.

[50] _Op. cit._, pp. 6-7.

[51] _Op. cit._, p. 78.

[52] _Malay Archipelago_, p. 43.

[53] See the _Report of the British Association_, 1900, pp. 711-30. The
author has since then revised his estimates, assigning much greater
depth to the Pliocene and Miocene deposits and proportionally more
time for their formation. See the _Quarterly Journal of the Geological
Society_, LXV. (1909).

[54] Dr. Smith Woodward’s reconstruction gives the skull of Eoanthropus
a capacity of about 1300 c.c.

[55] See Ray Lankester’s _Description of the Test-Specimen_. R.A.I.,
_Occasional Papers_, No. 4.

[56] Book VII. chs. 69, 71, 74.

[57] E. Thompson Seton, _The Arctic Prairies_, pp. 304 and 352.

[58] _Op. cit._, pp. 151, 239, 476.

[59] _Antiquity of Man_, p. 268.

[60] A. Keith, _op. cit._, p. 408.

[61] _Op. cit._, p. 452.

[62] _Op. cit._, p. 414.

[63] _Cultes, Mythes et Religion_, III. p. 430.

[64] _Primitive Marriage_, ch. iii.

[65] _Life Histories of Northern Animals_, p. 757.

[66] See above, § 3 (4), footnote, p. 37.

[67] Spencer and Gillen, _Across Australia_, p. 198.

[68] G. W. Stone, _Native Races of South Africa_, p. 33.

[69] _Descent of Man_, ch. iii.

[70] E. Thompson Seton, _Life Histories of Northern Animals_, p. 769.

[71] E. Westermarck, _Origin and Development of Moral Ideas_, II. p. 52.

[72] Spencer and Gillen, _Native Tribes of Northern Territory of
Australia_, p. 27.

[73] _Royal Natural History_, I. pp. 72-3.

[74] _Descent of Man_, ch. iii.

[75] Spencer and Gillen, _Across Australia_, p. 200.

[76] _Principles of Sociology_, Vol. II.

[77] _Anthropoid Apes_, pp. 294-5.

[78] _Descent of Man_, ch. iv.

[79] _Sermons on Human Nature._

[80] _The Herd Instinct._

[81] Tylor, _Primitive Culture_, II. p. 89.

[82] A. Keith, _op. cit._, p. 429.

[83] G. M. Theal, _History and Ethnology of South Africa_, p. 11.

[84] G. W. Stone, _Native Races of South Africa_, p. 76.




