CLXXIII.

[133] T. C. Hodson, _The Naga Tribes of Manipur_, p. 88.

[134] _Reports of the Cambridge Expedition to the Torres Straits_, V.
p. 271.

[135] A. E. Crawley, _J.A.I._, XXIV. p. 123.

[136] _Development of Moral Ideas_, I, c. 26.

[137] Carl Lumholtz, _New Trails in Mexico_, p. 350.

[138] _Life of a South African Tribe_, p. 528.

[139] See the exhaustive treatment of this subject in Frazer’s _Taboo
and the Perils of the Soul_.

[140] A “barn” is a small spindle-shaped stick, supposed to be
thrown in a magical attack by wizards. Howitt, _The Native Tribes of
South-East Australia_, p. 377.

[141] Hose and McDougall, _Pagan Tribes of Borneo_, I. p. 110.

[142] Quoted by Frazer, _Spirits of the Corn and of the Wild_, I. p.
105.

[143] _The Sacred Shrine_, pp. 33-9.

[144] _Life of a South African Tribe_, p. 340.

[145] Sioux Cults, _Am. B. of Ethn._, XI. p. 484.

[146] _New Trails in Mexico_, p. 61.

[147] Skeat, _Malay Magic_, p. 48.

[148] Quoted by Frazer, _Belief in Immortality_, p. 268.

[149] _Reports of the Cambridge Expedition to the Torres Straits_, V.
p. 325.

[150] W. Grube, _Rel. u. K. d. Chinese_, p. 153.

[151] In the _B. of Am. Ethn._, XIII. p. 374, F. H. Cushing, describing
“Zuñi Creation Myths,” says the dramaturgic tendency is to suppose that
Nature can be made to act by men, if “they do first what they wish the
elements to do,” according “as these things were done or made to be
done by the ancestral gods of creation.” The last clause is, perhaps,
an animistic gloss of the Zuñis’, who were, of course, very far from
primitive thought.

[152] _The Psychological Study of Religion_, p. 165.

[153] Cf. S. H. Ray, “People and Language of Lifu,” _J.R.A.I._
(XLVII.), p. 296, who says, a woman whose son or husband was away at
war would place a piece of coral to represent him on a mat, move it
about with her right hand as he might move in fight, and with her left
brush away imaginary evils. This protected him (evidently by exemplary
Magic).

[154] W. H. R. Rivers, _The Disappearance of Useful Arts_, also
_History of Melanesian Society_, II. p. 445; and in Turner’s _Samoa_
(p. 145) we are told that the practice of embalming died out with the
family of embalmers.




CHAPTER V

ANIMISM


§ 1. WHAT IS ANIMISM?

If, when the cohesion of the hunting-pack had weakened, belief in Magic
by giving authority to elders became very influential and useful in
primitive societies, still greater in subsequent evolution has been
the power of Animism. For belief in ghosts led in time to the worship
of ancestors, and then especially to the worship of the ancestors of
chiefs or heroes, some of whom became gods; and the belief in gods
strengthened the authority of chiefs and kings who were descended from
them, and helped to maintain the unity of the tribe or nation from
generation to generation and from age to age.

In anthropology, the term Animism is usually employed to denote the
proneness of savages and barbarians, or people of unscientific culture,
to explain natural occurrences, at least the more remarkable or
interesting—the weather, the growth of crops, disease and death—as
due to the action of spirits: (1) ghosts (that is, spirits that have
formerly been incarnate); (2) dream-spirits, that have temporarily
quitted some body during sleep or trance; (3) invisible, living,
conscious beings that have never been incarnate. This may be called
Hyperphysical Animism. Sometimes, however, “Animism” is used to denote
a supposed attitude of savages and children toward all things, animate
and inanimate, such that they spontaneously and necessarily attribute
to everything a consciousness like our own, and regard all the actions
and reactions of natural objects as voluntary and purposive. And this
may be called Psychological Animism. These two meanings of “Animism”
are entirely different: it is one thing to regard an object as moved
by its own mind, another to attribute its movement or influence to a
separable agent which for the time possesses it; it is one thing to
regard an object as having an anthropomorphic consciousness, another
to believe that that consciousness is a distinct power capable of
quitting it and sometimes returning, or of surviving its destruction,
or of existing independently. Even if the doctrine of Animism in the
second sense were granted, it would remain to be shown how men came to
conceive that the consciousness of a thing can be separated from it,
and exist and act by itself, and even with greater powers than it had
before—contrary to the opinion of Don Juan,

      “that soul and body, on the whole,
    Were odds against a disembodied soul.”

Savages do not always regard a separable spirit as necessarily
belonging even to human nature. Dr. Seligman writes that, among the
Veddas, a few old men “were by no means confident that all men on their
death became _yaku_” (veridical ghosts). Influential men and mediums
would do so; but for the rest, at Godatalawa it was determined by
experiment. The ordinary man was invoked soon after death, and desired
to give good success in hunting; and if much game was then obtained,
he had become a _yaka_.[155] Messrs. Spencer and Gillen tell us that,
according to the Guanjis, a woman has no _moidna_ (spirit part).[156]
Major C. H. Stigand says “the Masai have no belief in a future state
for any but chiefs”; the common dead are not even buried, but merely
thrown out into the bush.[157] Among the Omaha, though each person has
a spirit that normally survives the body, still, a suicide ceases to
exist.[158] In Tonga the souls of the lowest rank of the people (Tooas)
died with their bodies.[159] The human spirit, then, is not necessarily
believed to enter upon a life after death; still less is the spirit of
an animal. On the other hand, it is held by many tribes that something
inherent in weapons, utensils, food and other objects, a “soul” or
soul-stuff, may be separable from them and go to Hades or serve as the
food of spirits, although the things themselves are not regarded as
having a spirit or intelligent life.


§ 2. PSYCHOLOGICAL ANIMISM

Andrew Lang described savages as existing in “a confused frame of
mind to which all things, animate and inanimate, ... seem on the
same level of life, passion and reason.”[160] Children and other
immature people are often supposed to be in the same condition. As
to children, it is pointed out how deeply concerned they are about
dolls and rocking-horses, how passionately they turn to strike a table
after knocking their heads against it. But probably it is now admitted
that impulsive retaliation, on a table or bramble or shirt-stud (not
unknown to civilised men), implies not any belief in the malignity
or sensitiveness of those objects. Animals behave in the same way.
Th. Roosevelt reports that an elephant was seen to destroy in rage a
thorn tree that had pricked its trunk;[161] and that in America he
himself saw a bear that was burying a carcass, and lost hold of it
and rolled over, strike it a savage whack, like a pettish child.[162]
Moreover, in children, such behaviour is in large measure due to
suggestion; inasmuch as the setting of them to beat the table, or what
not, is an easy way of diverting them from their own pain. And, of
course, the dealing with dolls, or rocking-horses, or walking-sticks,
as if alive, is play. Such play involves intense imaginative belief,
which, at first, is not clearly differentiated from earnest. But this
stage corresponds with the play of the young of the higher animals,
whilst they are still physically incapable of completing the preluded
actions; and the engrossing interest of their play expresses the
biological necessity of it as a means of developing their mental and
bodily faculties. By the time that children are at all comparable with
savages, their play has become a temporary attitude, compatible with
brusque transition to matter-of-fact, or even with actions which at
the height of play show that the illusion is incomplete.

In savages, likewise, much of the behaviour that is supposed to betray
an illusionary animism, even in their simple apprehension of things,
is really an acquired way of acting, in a temporary attitude, under
the influence of imagination-belief, and is compatible with other
actions that show how incomplete is the illusion. Andrew Lang, after
the passage above quoted, appears to limit the scope of it by the words
“when myth-making”: no doubt, when myth-making and in practising many
rites, savages speak or act as if they believed in the full sense that
the objects dealt with are sensitive intelligent beings; and yet their
effective conduct toward them is entirely positive. They may, for
example, feed the growing rice-plant with pap; in harvesting it, speak
a secret language that the rice may not understand them and be alarmed,
and proceed to cut it with knives concealed in their palms: but they
do cut it. They carry it home and garner it with honour, and come from
time to time to take a portion for food with solemn observances: but
then they cook and eat it.[163] Their animistic attitude, therefore,
is not primitive, spontaneous, necessary illusion, but an acquired,
specialised way of imagining and dealing with certain things. Were
it not possible to combine in this way the imaginative with the
practical, all wizardry and priestcraft would be nothing but the sheer
cheating which it often seems to be to superficial observers. Normally,
imagination-beliefs that have only indirect biological utility (say, in
maintaining customs in order to ensure the tribe’s welfare) are unable
to overcome immediate biological needs (say, for food and shelter); but
often they do so within certain limits, or in certain directions, as in
innumerable taboos of food, customs of destroying a man’s property at
his death, starving or maiming tribesmen on the war-path. A universal
taboo on rice is not inconceivable. For these are social-pathological
cases; like the self-destructive beliefs of individuals and sects
amongst ourselves, such as the faith-healers, who in sickness call upon
their god instead of a physician.

Children, savages and ourselves, in some degree, attribute
spontaneously to _some_ inanimate things, in our mere apprehension of
them (for this has nothing to do with the metaphysics of Pampsychism),
something more than external existence: regarding them as force-things
and, by empathy, as experiencing effort and quiescence, strain and
relief, and sometimes emotion and pain. It is for this attitude toward
nature that I adopt Mr. Marett’s term “animatism”: as not ascribing
to inanimate things, or to plants, in general, anything like a human
personal consciousness; but merely an obscure, fragmentary, partial
consciousness, enough to correspond with our occasional experiences
in dealing with them. Perhaps those observers who report in strong
terms universal Animism as the tenet of a tribe, mean no more than
this; for example, the author above quoted as writing in the _American
Bureau of Ethnology_, who says (p. 433) that according to the Dakotas,
everything—“the commonest sticks and clays”—has a spirit that may
hurt or help and is, therefore, to be propitiated. It would be unjust
to the adherents of psychological Animism to accuse them of believing
that savages have universally made so much progress in “faculty
Psychology” as to distinguish personality, will, passion and reason;
especially as they add that savages project these powers into all
natural objects through incapacity for discrimination and abstraction;
and, at the same time, know very well that in some languages of the
most animistic tribes (e. g. Algonquin and Naga) the distinction of
animate and inanimate is the ground of grammatical gender.

We find, accordingly, that some explorers explicitly deny that, in
their experience, savages regard all things as on the same level of
life, passion and reason. Dr. Coddrington says that, in the Banks’
Islands, yams and such things are not believed to have any _tarunga_
(spirit)—“they do not live with any kind of intelligence”;[164]
and that Melanesians do not fail to distinguish the animate and the
inanimate. Messrs. Skeat and Blagden report that with the Semang of the
Malay Peninsula there is very little trace of animistic beliefs; and
they relate a folk-tale of how a male elephant tells a female that he
has found a live stone (pangolin rolled into a ball): “Swine,” said
the female, “stones are never alive.”[165] Messrs. Hose and McDougall
tell us that the Kayans hang garments and weapons on a tomb, and seem
to believe that shadowy duplicates of these things are at the service
of the ghost, but that such duplicates are inert (relatively) and not
to be confused with the principle of intelligence.[166] “Soul” does not
imply personality.

To be clear about Animism, it is necessary to bear in mind several
modes of belief: (1) Hyperphysical Animism, that certain things
have, or are possessed by a conscious spirit, and that this spirit
is a separable entity; (2) that things are themselves conscious (or
semi-conscious), but their consciousness is not a separable entity;
(3) that things are not conscious, but are informed by a separable
essence, usually called soul (better, soul-stuff), which may be eaten
by spirits, or may go to ghost-land with them; (4) the extension or
limitation of these beliefs to more or fewer classes of things. Unless
these distinctions are recognised, any report upon savage beliefs can
hardly be clear and adequate; but generally we may take it that when
a traveller tells us that such and such things are not believed to
have souls, and says nothing of any belief as to their consciousness,
he means (except with regard to animals) to deny that anything like
human consciousness is attributed to them. And when Mr. Torday writes
that, according to the Bahuana of the Upper Congo, there are two
incorporeal parts—_doshi_, common to man, animals and fetiches, and
_bun_, peculiar to man—he seems to leave it as a matter of course
that plants and inanimate things have neither of these, and are not
conscious beings; though probably some of them have soul-stuff, since
clothes, weapons and food are buried with a corpse.[167] The Rev.
J. H. Weeks says that the Bakongo of the Lower Congo attribute a
spirit only to the _nkasa_ tree (from whose bark the ordeal poison is
derived) amongst plants;[168] and, similarly, the Baloki, further up
the river, attribute a spirit only to the _nka_ tree.[169] Since many
things are buried by these people in a grave, or broken above it, the
things may be supposed to have soul-stuff; but from the denying of
spirits to plants, and from silence as to psychological Animism, it
may be inferred that neither plants nor inanimate things are regarded
as conscious beings. Sir E. F. im Thurn tells us that material things
of all sorts are believed by the natives of Guiana to have each a body
and a spirit—evidently a conscious and malicious spirit; “and that
not all inanimate objects have this dual nature avowedly attributed to
them, is probably only due to the chance that ... the spirit has not
yet been noticed in some cases.”[170] Even with these Guiana Indians,
then, whose Animism, in every sense, is unusually active and extensive,
their attitude is an acquired, specialised way of imagining and dealing
with things that draw their attention and excite their suspicions, not
a primitive, necessary illusion; else there could be no exceptions.

The reasonable view, therefore, is that savages distinguish between
themselves and certain animals, on the one hand, and, on the other, the
remaining animals, plants and inanimate things; and raise the second
class to the rank of the first, as conscious agents, only when there
are special incentives to do so. To find all the causes that excite the
animistic attitude toward things would be a difficult task, but some
of them may be indicated. Beginning from Animatism, which really is a
primitive and necessary illusion, it is reasonable to expect:

(_a_) That any plant or inanimate thing adopted as a Totem should, by
that very fact, be endowed with human consciousness; though the savage
mind is too inconsistent for us to infer that this must always happen.

(_b_) That whatever seems to move or act spontaneously, like the winds
and streams and echoes, the sun, moon, planets, and shooting stars,
should be felt as a spiritual agency; especially if it cry out with
empathetic reverberation, as winds and cataracts do, trees tormented
by the storm, waves, fire, and the ice-floe when it breaks up in
spring; or if it excite fear by being extraordinary and dangerous, as
thunder and lightning are, whirlwinds and whirlpools, waterspouts and
volcanoes. Dr. Speisser writes that at Ambrym, when the volcano is
active, the natives climb to the top and bring sacrifices to appease
it, throwing coco-nuts and yams into the crater.[171]

(_c_) That whatever has been regarded as having magical force should
be treated—after the rise of the ghost-theory (supposing this to be
of later origin) has given vogue to a new principle of explanation—as
owing its virtue to a spirit, either by immanence or possession (two
modes of actuation which may or may not be distinguished), and so
become a fetich, instead of being merely an amulet or talisman.

(_d_) That whatever is much used in ritual, especially if often
addressed in spells or incantations, should become an object of
reverence, apt to be personified and raised to, or even above, the
human level as a conscious agent: for example, padi and rice in
Indonesia, the ordeal tree on the Congo, already mentioned. Fire-sticks
used in the ritual of sacrifice are often deified. In India, the conch,
having for ages been used in religious rites, “the people gradually
came to revere the instrument itself and to adore and invoke it.”[172]
“A strange religious feature [of the _Rigveda_] pointing to a remote
antiquity is the occasional deification and worship even of objects
fashioned by the hand of man, when regarded as useful to him. These
are chiefly sacrificial implements.”[173] The practice now extends in
India to nearly every tool and utensil. Amongst the very few inanimate
gods of the Cherokees are the Stone, invoked by the Shaman when seeking
lost goods by means of a pebble suspended by a string; and the Flint,
invoked when about to scarify a patient with an arrow-head before
rubbing in medicine.[174] By the Apache, heddontin (pollen of the
cat-tail rush) is used as the sacrificial powder in nearly all rites,
and is personified and prayed to.[175] When spells are addressed to
any object, the analogy of address to human beings tends to cause that
object to be thought of as humanly conscious.

(_e_) Stocks and stones have been worshipped, as the dwelling-place of
spirits in many parts of the world; having superseded in the mind of
their devotees the ghost of the men whose burial-place they formerly
marked, but who themselves have been forgotten; and probably, on the
analogy of these stones, others that no ghost ever haunted.

(_f_) Where Animism is active amongst a timid and suspicious people,
whatever injures a man is believed to act of malice: as amongst the
Indians of Guiana, who are so timid that rather than go hunting alone
they will take a woman or a child along with them.[176]

Under such conditions as these a sort of acquired psychological
Animism is very widely though very irregularly diffused; but were it
universal and uniform, it could not of itself account for hyperphysical
Animism—the doctrine that men (or some men), some animals, plants,
things, places, are possessed or informed by spirits that are capable
of separate existence.


§ 3. THE GHOST THEORY

Hyperphysical Animism may be easiest understood as having arisen with
the belief in human ghosts. The causes of this belief have been fully
set forth by Herbert Spencer[177] and Sir E. B. Tylor[178] in a way
that to my mind is convincing. Amongst those causes dreams predominate;
wherein the dead are met again as in the flesh. The living body having
always been for the savage a conscious force-thing, at death the
conscious force leaves the thing or corpse. This might be accepted by
him as a fact of the same kind as the loss of its virtue by a talisman
or amulet (which is known sometimes to happen), were it not for dreams
in which the dead still live. That this conscious force that has left
the body is not visible except in dreams need excite little wonder,
since many forces natural and magical are invisible.

A dream not being common to two men at the same time, the things that
are seen in it cannot be pointed out, nor therefore directly named (in
this resembling subjective experiences). It was for ages impossible to
narrate a dream as a dream: there was no way of distinguishing it from
external events, either for the dreamer himself or (were that possible)
in reporting it to another. He was far away and met his father, yet had
lain by the fire all night! Hence to find names with which to describe
such things men turned to other ways in which they seemed to have a
double existence, to shadows and reflections: which in their sudden
appearance and disappearance, and sometimes faint, sometimes distorted
outlines, bear some resemblance to dream-images; and probably it is
felt to be significant that shadows and reflections disappear at night,
just when dreams occur. Shadows and reflections are not necessarily
identified with the ghost derived from the dream-image, because their
names are given to it; but sometimes they certainly are; so that a
man who, on looking into water, happens not to see his reflection may
believe that his spirit has gone away, and that he himself must be
ill, and accordingly he becomes ill; or if at noon near the equator he
notices that he has no shadow, he may think his soul is gone, and run
to a medicine-man to get it back; and dead bodies may be believed to
have no shadows.[179] Inasmuch as a body even lying on the ground casts
a shadow, except at tropical noon, the belief that it does not do so
at any time implies an acquired inability to see what is before one’s
eyes; as sometimes happens in hypnosis and other conditions of negative
hallucination.

The idea of a separable conscious personal force, or spirit, that
leaves the body at death, serves also, as it gathers strength, to
explain sleep, fainting, epilepsy; and sometimes every sickness is
attributed to the partial detachment or desertion of the spirit; which,
therefore, it is the doctor’s business to plug in, or to catch and
restore; or (if I rightly remember a report of Miss Kingsley’s) he may
even supply another one from a basketful of souls kept at hand for such
exigencies.

That the ghost theory arises not only from dreams, but is also
suggested by hallucinations and hypnagogic visions is very probable.
In various parts of the world savages have been described as having
visions of remarkably coherent and convincing vividness that seem not
to have been dreams.[180] But such experiences, even when artificially
induced by fasting or drugs (as happens among many tribes), are rare
in comparison with dreams; and to the influence of dreams upon these
savage beliefs there is abundant testimony. With some tribes dreams are
treated as part of their objective experience; so that to be injured
by your neighbour in a dream is just ground for avenging yourself as
soon as you wake; and to see a dead man in a dream is, therefore, clear
proof of his continued existence, and that either he has come to the
dreamer or the dreamer has gone to visit him.

Thus Sir Everard im Thurn says of the native of Guiana, his dreams are
as real as any events of his waking life; his dream-actions are done
by his spirit: in dreams he continues to see the dead—that is, their
spirits.[181] Similarly, the Lengua Indians (W. of R. Paragua) have
great faith in dreams; wherein the spirit is believed to leave the body
and to do in fact what is dreamed.[182] According to the Cherokees, to
dream of being bitten by a snake requires the same treatment as actual
snake-bite; else (perhaps years later) the same inflammation will
appear in the wounded spot, with the same consequences.[183] The Motu
hold that _sua_ (ghosts or spirits) are seen in dreams, and that when
a man sleeps his own _sua_ leaves his body.[184] “The Lifuans believe
in the reality of what is seen in a dream, and are influenced by it.
Their dead ancestors appeared in dreams.”[185] And the Polynesians of
Manatuki thought that “dreams were occasioned by the spirit going to
the places seen in them.”[186] Many more of such witnesses might be
cited.

It is recognised by psychologists that dreams, as immediate experience,
have more the character of perception than of imagination. Children are
apt to confuse dreams with reality. It can only have been gradually,
with the growing knowledge of continuity and coherence in the course
of events, and therewith the demand for corroboration of testimony,
that dreams were distinguished from the waking life. When no longer
supposed to be all of them real, some are still so regarded: the Dieri,
amongst lower savages, distinguish between visions, as revelations made
by Kutchi (an evil Spirit), and ordinary dreams, as mere fancies.[187]
But so impressive are dreams to many people, in their eagerness to know
more than sense and philosophy can tell them, that they persist in
hoping, and therefore believing, that dreams, if they give no knowledge
of this world, may still be revelations of another, perhaps more
real; or if not revelations, adumbrations by way of allegory, which
some learned or inspired Daniel may interpret; or, at least, omens
of good or evil, which the ancient science of Oneiromancy undertakes
to explain. There is now a new and more promising Oneiromancy that
interprets dreams as indicating not the future, but one’s own past,
chiefly a forgotten past, and teaches to know oneself: more promising;
for what but experience can possibly be the source of dreams—at least,
of dream-elements? Some of the new principles of interpretation,
however, may compare for obscurity with the ancient.

That the dead are seen alive in dreams is, then, for the savage a fact
of observation; and, therefore, the continued existence of the dead
is, for him, not in the first place supernatural; although it may be
called hyperphysical, because it is experienced only in dreams and not
by daylight, and is exempt from ordinary conditions of time and place.
But it gradually becomes supernatural, as the capricious incidents
of dream-life are felt to be “uncanny,” as that which occurs only at
night is involved in the fears of the night, and as a great cloud of
imaginations accumulates about the dead and obscures the simple facts
of dream-perception in which the belief originated. This cloud of
imaginations, by its mysterious character and by various alliances
with Magic, spreads and deepens until it overshadows the whole of
human life; is generally, indeed, dispersed here and there by the
forces of biological necessity, often by subterfuges laughable enough;
which have, however, the merit of saving mankind from destruction: but
sometimes it extinguishes the last ray of common sense, impoverishes
the believer, enfeebles him, fills his days and nights with terror,
gives him over to practices the most cruel or the most disgusting,
leads him to slay his own tribesmen, his own children, his own parents,
and to offer up himself in the sure hope of resurrection.


§ 4. EXTENSION OF THE GHOST THEORY TO ANIMALS

Spirits, having once been conceived of as explaining the actions of
men and surviving their bodily death, may by analogy be conceived to
explain the action of any other things in circumstances that suggest
a motive for the action, and therefore to possess or inhabit such
things, and to be capable of separating from them, like ghosts. Other
things are already, by Magic and Animatism, force-things, in some
degree conscious, whose forces may be capable of acting invisibly at
a distance; and at the death of a man it is his conscious force that
leaves the body and becomes a ghost. Since, then, there is hardly any
natural object whose action may not in some circumstances seem to be
interpretable by motives, especially amongst a timid and suspicious
people, how can we assign any necessary limits to the spread of
Animism? Moreover, the causes most influential in establishing the
ghost theory for man directly require its extension to other things.
For not human beings only are seen in dreams, but also their clothes,
weapons and utensils, and also animals, plants, localities. If,
then, the dead, because they are seen in dreams, are inferred still
to live under conditions in which they are not visible by daylight
to ordinary men, how can the inference be avoided that all sorts
of things, artefacts, animals, plants, localities, share in that
mode of existence—that all have their doubles? And “Why not?” the
savage might ask, since it is literally true of all things, without
exception, that they are sometimes visible, sometimes invisible.[188]
Similar inferences seem to be justifiable from the alliance of ghosts
with shadows and reflections, and the fact that not man only but
everything else has a shadow and a reflection, and that their shadows
and reflections disappear at night, just when the things themselves
sometimes appear in dreams. Moreover, so far as the breath, the pulse,
the shining of the eye, which cease in the human corpse, are sometimes
identified with the departed spirit, the same processes likewise cease
at the death of animals; though, it is true, there is here no analogy
with inanimate things, and the breathing and circulation of plants are
beyond the savage’s observation. Therefore, although Animism is an
inferential construction, were the construction entirely due to the
logic of analogy, there would be nothing surprising in the discovery
that the belief “that everything has a ghost” is just as universal and
uniform in the human race as if it had been an innate or primitive
belief. That, on the contrary, Animism prevails very irregularly
amongst the tribes of men; that, in all directions, inferences that
are analogically specious fail to be drawn; that instead of a general
system of Animism every tribe has its own Animism; this is surprising
and needs to be explained. The extension of the theory is easier to
understand than its irregular limitation.

Bearing in mind that we are at present considering Animism as a belief
in ghosts, not in spirits generally (to which we shall come in Sec.
6), I venture to think that, although dreams, shadows and reflections
certainly suggest a double existence of everything, yet savages never
assign a true ghost to anything inanimate, nor to plants, nor even to
animals, unless there is a special reason for doing so; because only
in the case of human beings is the suggestion interesting enough to
take hold of the social imagination. Hence, even though other things
appear in the ghost-world, they have no significance there, except in
relation to human ghosts (or ghostlike spirits) on whom they attend.
Accordingly, human ghosts have a place in the beliefs of every tribe,
because human beings excite affection, admiration and fear, have
well-marked individuality; are therefore remembered and have stories
told of them; and if they are seen after death, it is, of course,
reported. The evidence makes it only too plain that the paralysis of
attention by fear is the chief (though not the only) emotional factor
of belief in ghosts; and what other thing in all nature is to be feared
in comparison with one’s fellow-man?

The belief in ghosts, escaped and roaming independent of any normally
visible body, as a social belief, is involved in the practice of
reporting and discussing dreams, which becomes the same thing as
telling ghost-stories—the first and most persistent motive of
literature. Stories can only be told effectively of things generally
interesting; and, at first, such things must have been recognisable by
the hearers and must have had some individuality. Hence—

(_a_) Animals that attain to such individuality may have ghosts: (i)
An animal that occasions widespread fear, such as a man-eating tiger.
We must distinguish from such cases the frequent beliefs that tigers,
wolves, sharks, snakes, etc., are, or are possessed by, the spirits or
ghosts of men. (ii) An animal that comes to be upon terms of special
intimacy with men; such as the very tame dogs and pigs that come when
they are called among the Bakongo;[189] or hunting dogs that have been
specially doctored among the Baloki.[190]

(_b_) Animals slain at funeral feasts to accompany the dead have ghosts
so far as necessary for that purpose; but, wanting individuality and
personal interest, they make no further figure in ghost-lore; they do
not “walk” or revisit the glimpses of the moon. Thus the Tanghouls say
that ghosts, on reaching Kazairam (their Hades), find the gates barred
against them by the deity Kokto; so at the burial feast of a rich man
a buffalo is killed, that his mighty ghost may burst open the massive
gates of that abode. Poor ghosts must wait about outside, till a rich
one comes up with his buffalo; when they all rush in behind him.[191]
But we hear nothing further of the buffalo. In the Banks’ Islands, pigs
killed at a funeral feast have no true ghosts to follow the dead to
Panoi, but only a sort of wraith; because they only go for show, that
their master may be well received there.[192]

(_c_) Animals that are important prey to a hunting tribe are often
believed to have ghosts that may be hunted by dead tribesmen; or that
must be propitiated when one of them is slain: the ghosts, for example,
of seals and bears are bribed by the Esquimo to entice other seals and
bears to come and be killed. A seal desires above everything, they
say, a drink of fresh water; so as soon as one is brought ashore a
dipperful is poured into his mouth; else the other seals will not allow
themselves to be caught. The polar bear (male) desires crooked knives
and bow-drills, or (female) women’s knives and needle-cases. Hence,
when a bear is killed, its ghost accompanies its skin into the hunter’s
hut; and the skin is hung up with the appropriate tools for four or
five days. Then the bear-ghost is driven out by a magic formula, takes
with it the souls of the tools, and reports well of the hunter in
bear-soul land. Whilst in the hut, as an honoured guest, nothing is
done that it dislikes in human customs.[193]

(_d_) In the development of mythology, animals and monsters of various
kinds may be found inhabiting shadow-land; but these are not true
ghosts of any particular things that once died in this world.

This list of the ways in which animals may come to have ghosts is not
offered as exhausting all the cases.


§ 5. GHOSTS AND SOUL-STUFF

A ghost is a disembodied soul, having a consciousness and power at, or
generally (because it is feared) above, the human level; but there may
be disembodied souls, or souls capable of disembodiment, that have no
consciousness, or none above the level of Animatism. Even if a living
thing have a consciousness, its post-mortem apparition may not; like
the Banks’ Islanders’ pig, which, though “a distinguished animal and
acknowledged to be intelligent,” has no true ghost. Among nearly all
tribes, whatever is offered in sacrifice to gods or left in, or at,
the tombs of men deceased, is believed to have some sort of soul;
because, plainly, spirits do not eat or consume the visible food or
utensils; yet it is necessary to the success of the rites to suppose
that the spirits are satisfied; they must, therefore, take the souls of
the offerings. And what can be more plausible reasoning than to argue
that, as solid men eat solid food, ghosts eat ghostly food? “Soul” thus
appears as a sort of ghost-substance, or ghost-body. For, in dreams,
the departed are seen as if in the flesh; and moreover analogy requires
that the ghost consciousness and ghost-force shall have a body of some
sort, and, of course, one that will maintain in ghost-land the same
relations to other things that the mortal body did in this world. In
ghost-land, or shadow-land, or dream-land, the substance of all things
is this soul-stuff. Sometimes the force of analogy requires a tribe to
believe that, in order that the souls of things (such as earthen pots
or weapons) may be released to accompany a ghost to the underworld,
the things themselves must be “killed,” that is to say, broken; but
other tribes are not such consistent logicians; and in some cases where
things left exposed at a grave (not buried) are broken, it may be to
prevent their being stolen.

Anything, then, may have “soul” after its kind: relatively inert
things have relatively inert souls, but never true ghosts; some
animals may have ghosts, especially if they have attained to a certain
individuality, but generally only in so far as they are imagined to
attend upon human ghosts or spirits. Inasmuch as the word “soul”
is often used as equivalent to “ghost,” it would be convenient
always to speak of the soul which is ghost-food, or ghost-body, “as
soul-stuff.”[194] Soul-stuff is conceived of as material, though subtle
and normally invisible. A man’s soul-stuff may be regarded not only
as permeating his body, but also as infecting everything he possesses
or touches: no doubt by analogy with his odour; for a man’s odour is
a personal quality, distinguishable by dogs and (I believe) by some
savages and hypnotic subjects; and the stench of his putrefying corpse
may be supposed to convey his courage and skill to those who inhale
it.[195] And the savour of a burnt-offering is food for gods. Indeed,
Ellis says explicitly that, in Tahiti, food was put to the mouth of a
chieftain’s corpse; because, they said, there was a spiritual as well
as a material part of food, a part which they could smell.[196]

Savage ideas are generally so little thought out, and are so
irregularly thought out by different tribes, that the relation of
a thing to its soul-stuff varies widely from one tribe to another.
In many cases the extraction by ghost or god of the soul-stuff from
an offering may affect it so little, that the devotee or the priest
proceeds to feast upon it; and I have nowhere met with the notion
(which logic requires) that such metaphysically eviscerated food can
only nourish a man’s body and not his soul. However, since the eating
of the sacrifice may be an act of communion with the ghost, he then
naturally extracts the goodness only from his own share. In other
cases, the breaking of weapons and utensils buried with a corpse
implies an intimate unity between the wholeness of an object and its
soul-stuff; and the Rev. J. H. Weeks says of the considerable wealth
put into a grave by the Bakongo, that only the shell or semblance of
anything is supposed to remain there.[197]

This conception of soul-stuff may have been an important contribution
to metaphysics. The doctrine of material substance is reached by
abstracting all the qualities of things; but then there would be
nothing left, were it not for this venerable idea of something
invisible and intangible in things in which qualities may “inhere,”
or which may serve as a “support” to them; so that, when it is taken
away there is only a shell or semblance of anything left. But such a
tenet is uncommon. Along another line of speculation this soul-stuff
may become the Soul of the World. When by philosophers spirits are
no longer conceived to have bodies, but to be the very opposite of
bodies, a spiritual substance must be invented to support their
qualities, in order to put them upon an equal footing of reality with
corporeal things; but as there is no spirit-stuff ready made by the
wisdom of our forefathers, this concept remains uncomfortably empty.
To appear as ghosts and to have mechanical energy, spirits may be
invested with “soul-stuff” as a spiritual body; but this is only subtle
matter. Their own substance must be correlative with their proper
attributes as pure conscious beings, the very opposite of bodies; and,
therefore, immaterial, unextended, simple, self-identical, according
to the “paralogisms of Rational Psychology.” But such speculations
are confined to philosophers and theologians: some of whom, however,
maintain (as if reverting to the original savage idea) that spirit is
the true substance of material things, at least that material things
depend upon a spirit, or spirits, for their existence. Monists, again,
say there is one substance of both matter and mind, which is not either
of these any more than it is the other. Locke very honestly calls it “a
supposed I know not what.”

In writing of Magic, I have indicated the origin of the notion of
force; and if my view is justifiable, it appears that those celebrated
abstractions “force” and “matter,” form and substance, spirit and body,
may be traced to the savage mind. That savages are incapable of general
and abstract ideas we have seen to be an illusion. They are necessary
to economy in the organisation of the mind. When a tribe bases its
grammatical gender on the distinction of Animate and Inanimate, has
it in no sense corresponding ideas? But an abstract idea results from
a long process of dissociative growth from its concrete sources, and
must exist in some manner at all stages of that growth, before its
distinctness is completed by an appropriate name; and it is reasonable
to suppose that at every stage of growth it functions and influences
the course of thought. Accordingly, it is plain that from very early
times thought has been greatly influenced by ideas of force, form,
spirit and the rest of them.


§ 6. GHOSTS AND SPIRITS

Whilst of some tribes (for example the Indians of Guiana) it is said
that there is nothing to indicate that they “know of any spirits,
except such as are, or once were, situated in material bodies,”[198]
amongst others we are often told that not only ghosts are known but
also spirits that are declared never to have been incarnate. An extreme
form of the ghost-theory maintains that all spirits were once ghosts
whose incarnation has been forgotten; but this is needless, and seems
not to be true. It is enough that probably the original inhabitants of
the spirit-world were ghosts; that some of those now believed not to
have been ghosts were once really so; and that those spirits that were
never ghosts are later immigrants, who have obtained domicile by having
been imagined in analogy with ghosts. The following list indicates more
or less probable reasons why (_A_) ghosts have sometimes come to be
regarded as non-human spirits, and (_B_) why certain non-human things
have come to be regarded as spirits, or as possessed by spirits, more
or less resembling the human.

_A._ Spirits that were formerly ghosts, but are now declared not to
have been:

(_a_) Ghosts whose former life has been forgotten by mere lapse of
time. The memory of the dead amongst many tribes does not extend
beyond three or four generations. If then the ghost of some unusually
impressive personality happens to be remembered, when all his relatives
and contemporaries have been forgotten, he seems to be separated
from the human race. And if his name was that of some natural object,
his ghost, according to Spencer’s hypothesis, may now be regarded as
the spirit of that phenomenon. But as to Spencer’s hypothesis,[199]
although it gives such a plausible explanation of much nature-worship
by real facts as to the working of savage language and thought that it
seems to me unreasonable to doubt that it has had some of the effects
he traces to it, yet it presses upon me more and more that most cases
of nature-worship are to be explained by more particular causes.

(_b_) To dissociate a ghost from mankind is especially easy if his
tomb has been forgotten, or if he has no tomb. As the drowned have no
tombs, they easily become water-demons. Tombs must often be forgotten
in consequence of migrations. In Central Melanesia both ghosts and
spirits are recognised; but in the west worship is directed chiefly
to ghosts, in the east chiefly to spirits. As migration has been from
west to east, the tombs of ancestors can no longer be pointed out by
the eastern islanders, and so their ghosts may have become spirits.
In Tumloo (northern New Guinea) there are temples of spirits (all
female) distinct from ancestral ghosts, and on the banisters of ladders
leading up to these temples there are ornamental figures of ape-like
animals; the architecture of the temples points to a former superior
culture.[200] As there are no apes in New Guinea, these figures and
temples may indicate a former residence under better conditions in
Java or Borneo; and the spirits with which they are associated may
be ancestral ghosts whose tombs and other earthly vestiges have been
forgotten in the migration.

(_c_) We may see another way in which a ghost may become a pure spirit,
if we suppose that as a ghost he had attained to some measure of
worship, but that with the rise of new gods (by conquest, or by the
reputation of being more helpful), or by his being himself too good
to be worth worshipping, his rites have been neglected and his legend
forgotten. Then he is no longer remembered as a ghost, or ancestor.

(_d_) It may be thought honourable to a god to deny that he was ever a
man.

(_e_) The construction of a world-myth makes it necessary to begin
somewhere with some one; and whoever becomes the first being, it
is necessary to deny that he was ever begotten. But there may be
inconsistent stories: the supreme being of the central Esquimo is
a woman, Sedna, who created all things that have life; but other
traditions give her a human origin.[201] Similarly, in drawing up the
genealogy of ancestral gods, we come at last to one who was never
begotten. Such is Unkulunkulu of the Zulus, generally said to have
sprung from a bed of reeds.[202]

_B._ Spirits that were never incarnate, but have been imagined by
analogy with ghosts already propitiated:

(_f_) A Totem may become a spirit; whilst, having himself no human
antecedents, he can hardly be a ghost as of an ordinary mortal. Nothing
can be more irregular than the life of Totemism: with some tribes it
seems to die out early, or leaves few and doubtful vestiges; with
others traces of it seem to remain even amidst conditions of high
culture. Apparently, where it survives, the Totem tends gradually to
lose his bestial or vegetal properties, or most of them, and to become
an anthropomorphic spirit with his myths, in analogy with heroic or
patriarchal ancestors. He has attained to a considerable degree of
individuality; yet, by association and tradition, may still confer more
or less sacredness upon his animal kindred (cf. chap. ix. § 8).

(_g_) To address any object with a spell, as a man is addressed
in summons or command, is (as said above) an approach toward its
personification. Hence corn, rice, padi, nkasa, or whatever has been
the object of tribal rites and spells—the sun and moon, the earth,
fire, wind, clouds and rain—having perhaps long been influenced and
reinforced by Magic—are apt, when Animism has gained control of man’s
imagination, to become first the embodiment and then the possession
of spirits; the spells become prayers, and the rites religious
ceremonies or mysteries. Such spirits, at first locally honoured, may
with the evolution of the tribe or nation, the increasing intercourse
of its villages, and the centralisation of its culture in some city,
be released from local conditions and generalised into transcendent
gods, either each of its own kind—corn or wine—or of still wider
sway over agriculture or the weather. The meteorological gods are not
impaired in strength by even wide migrations; for they are found to
rule everywhere; and this may be a reason of their predominance in the
higher religions. Plants from which intoxicants are obtained, such
as soma or the vine, bringing men to a condition resembling insanity
or the ravings of a sorcerer who is supposed to be possessed, are
especially easy to understand as sources of inspiration. A belief in
vegetation spirits, having originated in any way, may be extended
according to the circumstances and mentality of a tribe, until every
wood is populous with dryads.

(_h_) Natural objects that have, at first, been regarded with awe
and therefore endowed with magical powers—mountain-tops, ravines,
whirlpools, ancient trees—under Animism, become the abode of spirits;
and these, again, may, by analogy with others, cease to be conceived as
merely local. Among the Moors, “the _jnūn_, which form a special race
of beings created before Adam, are generally supposed to be active on
occasions or in places which give rise to superstitious fear, and in
many cases they are personifications of some mysterious qualities in
persons or lifeless objects.”[203]

In each of these cases, (_f_), (_g_), (_h_), however, an Euhemerist
explanation may be offered. As to (_f_), Spencer, of course, argued
that the Totem-ancestor is always a man, who bore the name of an
animal, and was confounded with it after death; and Dr. Rivers has
suggested that some gods who seem to have been derived from Totems may
really represent heroes who had such Totems.[204] As to (_g_), Grant
Allen suggested that the spirit of the corn or vine is always at first
the spirit of the man upon whose grave the plant grew.[205] And as
to (_h_), the spirit of a mountain may be the ghost of a man who was
buried on the top of it; and the spirit of a whirlpool the ghost of
a man who was drowned in it. Indeed some spirits may have originated
in one of these ways, others in another way; and what happened in any
particular case can only be determined, if at all, by examination of
its particular circumstances.

(_i_) Abstract ideas may, at a very early stage of culture, be
personified and treated as spirits. The Semang, according to Messrs.
Skeat and Blagden, personify Death, Hunger, Disease;[206] and the
Beloki, according to the Rev. J. H. Weeks, attribute all personal
qualities to the aid of spirits; so that if one man wrestles better
than another, it is because the spirit Embanda is in him.[207] The
modern Greeks of Macedonia personify and propitiate Lady Small
Pox.[208] In the tenth and latest book of the _Rigveda_, “the
deification of purely abstract ideas, such as Wrath and Faith, appears
for the first time.”[209] At a higher stage of culture we find Fides,
Fortuna, Concordia and many others. Such things are conceived of as
mysterious powers, and they have names; and so far they resemble
demons. Why, then, should they not be personified and propitiated like
demons?

(_j_) Various ways have been pointed out in which the grammatical
structures of language, metaphors and other figures of speech may
influence the growth of mythology.

(_k_) Animism having been generally adopted, spirits may be freely
invented in explanatory myths. The Kalinis believe that thunder
and lightning are the clang and flash of bracelets on the arms of
Kidilumai, a girl who dances in heaven, as formerly on earth, for joy
of the welcome rain.[210] It would be absurd to suppose that she must
once have lived on earth. Some amongst the Ekoi say that Thunder is a
giant marching across the sky; others that Thunder is the enemy of
Lightning and, on seeing it, growls to drive it away.[211] If free
invention may originate myths, it may modify old ones, with results
that cannot always be interpreted upon general principles.

Finally, any spirits that have been anthropomorphised in analogy with
ancestor-ghosts may be further disguised by giving them mythical family
connections with the ancestors and with one another, as happened to
Bacchus and Demeter.


§ 7. HOW GHOSTS AND SPIRITS ARE IMAGINED

Ghosts and spirits have the same qualities and characters, eat the
same food, appear in dreams, possess men and animals, help sorcerers,
give diseases, determine the success of hunting or agriculture. At
first, they are solid things, not truly incorporeal, merely invisible
to ordinary people by daylight; though dogs or pigs may see them even
then. A ghost is so associated with its corpse, that it is not always
clear which it is that escapes from the grave and walks; and one may
judge whether a dead man has yet gone to Hades or still haunts the
neighbourhood, by observing whether in the morning there are footprints
around his grave; and to keep the ghost from walking, one may fill
the belly of the corpse with stones, or break its limbs, or bury it
deep and pile the earth upon it; or one may burn it. In South-East
Australia, ghosts can be heard at night jumping down from the trees or
from the sky.[212] They may be heard to speak or sing, usually with
thin voices, like bats: as

                      “the sheeted dead
    Did squeak and gibber in the streets of Rome.”

Spirits may have all the appurtenances of an animal body; for two of
them waylaid an Australian, and made a wizard of him by taking out
his entrails and filling up the cavity with the entrails of one of
themselves.[213] They may marry mortals, as a devil begat Caliban upon
a witch; and not long ago the “incubus” was very troublesome throughout
Europe. In short, a ghost or spirit can act physically, just as a
man can, because he has the same organs; but with greater power,
because mysterious and more feared. And such beliefs persist amongst
people whose culture is much higher than the Australian, as in Jacob’s
wrestling with something at the ford Jabbok, and Grettir’s slaying of
the ghost of Glam at Thorhallstad;[214] and Euthymus, the boxer, having
put on his armour, defeated the ghost of Lycas at Temesa.[215] To this
day, in Macedonia, there are vampires, or animated corpses (chiefly
Turks), that walk, and throttle people and suck their blood.[216] “The
Moslem corpse,” says R. Burton, “is partly sentient in the tomb.”[217]
The Karok of California consider it the highest crime to utter the
name of the dead; for it makes the mouldering skeleton turn in its
grave and groan.[218] In fact, it is difficult to think of one’s own
future corpse as entirely inanimate, and this adds some discomfort
to one’s thoughts of death. According to Wundt, the Körperseele, as
eine Eigenschaft des lebenden Körpers, is a starting-point of Animism
independent of, and probably prior to, the breath and the dream, which
suggest the idea of a free separable soul.[219] This confusion of ideas
in popular Animism seems to me due to (1) the strong association of the
ghost with the corpse, and the performance of rites (which must take
place somewhere, if at all) naturally at the grave or in connection
with relics; (2) the manifestation of ghosts as visible, speaking,
tangible bodies in dreams; (3) the difficulty of imagining spirits
to live and act except in the likeness of the body (though non-human
forms—usually animal—are sometimes substituted); (4) the convenience
of such imaginations to the story-teller; (5) the convenience of
them to sorcerers and purveyors of mysteries, who rely upon such
imaginations in producing illusion by suggestion. For ages a confusion
of ghost with corpse may exist in the popular mind along with the
more refined notion of soul-stuff in which a ghost becomes manifest,
whilst there is no attempt to reconcile these imaginations; and it
is only by metaphysical subtilties about “mind” and “matter,” or by
mystical aversion to sensuosity, that the notion of pure incorporeal
spirit without even spatial limitations is at last freed from these
primitive associations, partially and amongst a few people. A tendency
to abstract conception of the spirit is set up, indeed, in the ordinary
way of “dissociation” by the belief in transmigration. For if a spirit
may “possess” all sorts of bodies—men, plants, animals, etc.—it is
independent of any particular body; though it may still be thought to
need _some_ body. Where the idea of pure spirit has been established
amongst educated people, it becomes necessary for those who believe
in ghosts and have forgotten their soul-stuff to explain how a spirit
can manifest itself to eye, ear, nose, hand, without a physical body,
by “materialising” itself, as invisible vapour (say one’s own breath
on a frosty morning) condenses into a cloud or into dew; for the power
of analogy as an aid to thought, or as a substitute for it, is not yet
exhausted.

The varieties of belief that occur here and there in the world cannot
be explained without a much fuller knowledge of local circumstances
than is usually available. The Semang say that souls are red, like
blood, and no bigger than a grain of maize;[220] the Malays that they
are vapoury, shadowy, filmy essences, about as big as one’s thumb;[221]
in both cases shaped like the owner. Elsewhere in the Indian
Archipelago, “the animating principle is conceived of, not as a tiny
being confined to a single part of the body, but as a sort of fluid or
ether diffused through every part.”[222] The less educated classes in
Japan consider the soul as a small, round, black thing that can leave
the body during sleep.[223] Amongst the Ekoi, the soul is a small thing
dwelling in the breast, whilst a man lives; but at death expands into
the body’s full stature.[224] The difficulty of finding the soul in the
body leads some thinkers to suppose it must be very small, others very
attenuated—thin as a shadow and as breath invisible.

Whilst many savages believe, like ourselves, that the body entertains
one soul and gives up one ghost, the Ekoi believe in two, one animating
a man’s body, the other possessing, or changing into, some animal in
the bush. Three souls, the vegetative, sensitive and rational, are
well known to European philosophy. The Mandans thought that a man has
one black, one brown, and one light-coloured soul; but that only the
last returned to the Lord of Life.[225] The observer who tells us
this also reports (p. 484) that some of the Dakotas assign to each
man four spirits: one that dies with the body; one that remains with,
or near, it; one that accounts for its deeds and at death goes to
the spirit-world; and one that lingers with the small bundle of the
deceased’s hair, which is kept by relatives until they can throw it
into an enemy’s country to become a roving, hostile demon. In West
Africa, too, Miss Kingsley found four souls: one that survives the
body; one that lives with some animal in the bush; one, the body’s
shadow, that lies down every night in the shadow of the great god,
and there recovers its strength; and, finally, the dream-soul. Some
natives hold that the three last are functions of the first or true
soul; but the witch-doctor treats all four separately.[226] The
shadow of a man, his reflection, his name, his totem, his breath, his
dream-wraith, his blood, his corpse, supply natural starting-points
for such speculations. Some Chinese philosophers held that “each of
the five viscera has its own separate male soul.”[227] I have found
no belief in six souls; but in Siberia the Altaians distinguish six
parts or (rather) conditions or stages of the soul; and this probably
is only another attempt to convey the same meaning.[228] Mr. Skeat
reports that, probably, in the old Animism of the Malays, each man
had seven souls; though now they talk of only one; except in using
spells, when the souls are addressed separately.[229] In the religion
of Osiris there seems to have been a still greater number of souls:
as of the name, the shape, the strength, the shadow, etc.: all
reuniting with the immortal counterpart of a man’s mummy, if justified
at the last judgment. Prof. Wiedemann suggests that these beliefs
may have been collected from different local sources, and preserved
for fear of losing anything that might be true.[230] Whereas, then,
the prescientific mind is often accused of confusing things that are
separate, we see here the opposite tendency to reify abstract aspects,
and to separate things that are in nature united; and one probable
cause of this is the practical interest of treating, and therefore of
attending to and addressing, separately, certain aspects of a man in
rites of exorcism, lustration, summoning, reinforcing, propitiation.

The belief in an external soul that exists apart from oneself (though
identified with oneself for good or evil) in an animal, in the bush,
or where not, may have arisen from the connecting of the soul with the
shadow or reflection. The shadow is, indeed, attached to a man by the
feet (except when he leaps), if the whole is seen; but it goes away
at night: it stretches, as the sun declines, far across the plain,
and then disappears. The reflection is quite separate, and is seen
_within_ a pool (as in a mirror), not on the surface, approaching us
when we advance, and withdrawing when we retire: whence it is easy to
understand that to take a man’s photograph may be to take away his
soul. If this kind of soul may be some feet distant, why may it not
be much further off, if there be any motive (such as the desire of
secrecy) to wish or think it so? If it may reside within a pool, why
not within anything else? What, in fact, becomes of it when we turn
away? That it should be in an animal in the bush is reasonable enough,
if one’s Totem (even though imperfectly remembered as such) is an
animal in the bush, and if oneself is in some sort that animal.


§ 8. ORIGIN AND DESTINY OF SOULS

Beliefs as to the origin of souls sometimes bear the character of
fanciful explanation myths. The Semang say that souls grow upon a
soul-tree in the world of Kari (their chief god); whence they are
brought by birds, which are killed and eaten by an expectant mother:
souls of fishes and animals are also obtained by the mothers’ eating
certain fungi and grasses.[231] Here the analogy of the growth of
fruits is adopted: being so familiar as to need no further explanation.
Leibnitz’s suggestion that monads are _fulgurations continuelles de la
Divinité_,[232] is at about the same level of thought. In other cases,
we see the struggling to birth of ideas that still seem plausible:
such is the widespread tenet that every present human soul is the
reincarnation of an ancestor, which we find in Australia, Melanesia,
Borneo, Manipur, on the Congo, in North America and elsewhere. The
Bakongo seem to base their belief in reincarnation partly on personal
resemblance; upon which ground a child may be thought to have the
soul even of a living man; so that to point out such a resemblance is
displeasing, since it implies that, the child having his soul, he must
soon die.[233] Another reason they give for their belief is that the
child speaks early of things its mother has not taught it, and that
this must be due to an old soul talking in a new body. But Bakongo
albinos are incarnations of water-spirits, and greatly feared. Possibly
in some cases people began by naming children after their ancestors,
and later inferred that those who bore the same name must be the same
persons. Plato thought that, by a sort of law of psychic conservation,
there must always be the same number of souls in the world:[234] there
must, therefore, be reincarnation. That nothing absolutely begins to
be, or perishes, though first explicit in the Ionian philosophy, is
generally assumed in savage thinking; so why should it not be true of
souls?

As to the destiny of souls there seems to exist amongst the tribes
of men even greater variety of belief than as to their origin. They
may pass through more than one stage of development: as in the western
isles of Torres Straits one becomes at death, first a _mari_, and later
a _markai_ with a more definite status;[235] or as with the Veddas, one
is at first called, without much confidence, “the living one,” and only
a few days later becomes, after trial of one’s virtue, a _yaka_,[236]
or authentic ghost. Often the dead will be reincarnated, but the
interval between death and rebirth may be passed in an underworld, or
in a city in the forest, or indefinitely in a land of ancestors. They
may turn into plants; as among the Mafulu old people’s ghosts become
large funguses growing in the mountains:[237] but more frequently into
animals; perhaps their Totems, or (with seeming caprice) into such
things as termites or wild pigs; or (because wings seem to suit the
spirit) into a butterfly or bee; or into owls or bats that haunt the
night and dwell in caves that may be tombs; or into deer or bear-cats,
because these are seen in the clearings near tombs; or into snakes,
because these are seen to come out of tombs, and often come into huts
as if returning to their homes, and, moreover, cast their skins and so
typify the renewal of life. They may also become stars, or shooting
stars, or mere naked demons, or white men.

It is only after ages of thought concerning the fate of our souls that
there arises in any systematic form the doctrine of metempsychosis,
which now prevails over great part of southern and eastern Asia, and
was formerly known in Egypt and even in Greece. But in the widely
diffused doctrines of reincarnation in men or in animals, or even in
plants, and in the general belief that a soul may wander and possess
any kind of body, we see the sources from which this vast flood of
superstition collected its waters. The Buddhist belief that not the
soul wanders, but its _karma_ (or character) creates a new body, may be
considered as a retrogression from Animism to Magic; for what is it but
a law of the action of an occult force or virtue?

Though the ghost survive the body, and it may be said (as by the
Ekoi) that it cannot perish, and the reason may even be given (as in
the Bismarck Archipelago), that it is of different nature from the
body,[238] it is by no means always immortal. It may die, as it were a
natural death, by oblivion; or, the next world being just like this,
ghosts may fight together and kill one another;[239] according to the
Tongans a ghost may be killed with a club; amongst the Bakongo it may
be destroyed by burning its corpse.[240] It has been thought that
to suppress the ghost was the original motive of cremation; but the
western Tasmanians cremated their dead, and can hardly have done so to
be rid of such mild Animism as seems to have been entertained by the
eastern tribes, who buried their dead or abandoned them.[241] However,
they seem to have been rid of it; whereas, in general, ghosts survive
cremation, because this process cannot put an end to dreams; and it may
then come to be believed that burning is necessary in order to set the
soul free from its body; and, therefore, the wife of Periander, tyrant
of Corinth, complained to him of being cold in the ghost world, because
her clothes had been only buried in her tomb and not burnt.[242]
According to the Egyptians, the ghost participated in every mutilation
of the body, and perished with its dissolution. It may be held that
even the gods die if neglected, and depend for their immortality upon
the perpetuation of their rites and sacrifices.[243]

Whilst the ghost’s life endures, its dwelling may be in the earth
or sky, sea or forest, or in the land of the setting sun, or in the
land of ancestors whence the tribe remembers to have migrated. Before
departing to that undiscovered country, it may haunt the grave or the
old home, till burial, or till the flesh decays, or till the funeral
feast, or till death has been avenged; or it may roam the country, a
resentful demon, if its funeral rites be not duly celebrated. There
may be one place for all ghosts, or two, or more, according to their
age, or rank, or qualities (as sociable or unsociable), or whether
or not their noses were bored; or according to the manner of their
death, by violence, or suicide, or sorcery. It is late before our
posthumous destiny is thought to depend on moral character (as it does
in metempsychosis); and even then varies with the local conception
of the good man, as observing custom or religious rites or, finally,
the dictates of conscience.[244] I remember how puzzling it was in
childhood to make out from sermons how far “going to heaven” depended
on being good (conscientious) or on faith. Both seemed very desirable;
yet there was a shadow of opposition between them, and to be good was
a little dangerous. But faith was indispensable, and apparently the
more difficult of the two, needing more elucidation, exhortation and
reiteration.

The journey of ghosts to their own world may be short or long, an
unadorned migration or rich in details of adventure. They may begin
the new life exactly as they finished this one, or the old may be
rejuvenated. As to their manner of life there, oftenest it is a
repetition of their earthly state, perhaps better, or even much
better, perhaps worse. And this conception is historically of the
utmost importance: for (1) it seems to give the greatest confidence
in a hereafter. Hume ascribes what seemed to him the incredulity of
men with regard to a future life “to the faint idea we form of our
future condition, derived from its want of resemblance to the present
life.”[245] And (2) from this conception proceeds the development of
ghostly polities: presided over, according to tribes that have no
chiefs, by a headman, such as Damarulum, or by the greatest known
hunt-leader, like Kande Yaka of the Veddas; under advancing political
structures, by chieftains, amongst whom one may be paramount, and
so become a king or lord of all. These ghostly politics support the
earthly ones they imitate. It is everywhere an edifice built by hope
and fear, under the guidance of analogy, and sometimes decorated by
caprice, if this find acceptance with the tribe.


§ 9. THE TREATMENT OF GHOSTS

The behaviour of men toward the ghosts of their dead is chiefly
governed by fear. The human power that has left the corpse is now
invisible; that power, rarely quite trustworthy whilst in the body,
especially when unobserved, retains its desires, caprices and hatreds
that were partially controlled by social influences. What controls
them now that the man is exempt from observation? How shall one defend
oneself against him, or procure his neutrality, or even (as sometimes
in the flesh) his help? The fear of ghosts has peculiar qualities:
the invisibility of a spiritual enemy produces a general objectless
suspicion and a sense of helplessness; associations with the physical
conditions of the corpse and with darkness excite feelings very much
like those aroused by snakes and reptiles. This fear explains why
savages, such as the Australians, may believe in ghosts for ages
without ever venturing to pray even to father or mother deceased; for
to pray is to invoke, and they will come, and, on the whole, they are
not wanted. Fear may make the survivors quit the neighbourhood of the
dead; sometimes makes them adopt means to induce the ghost to leave,
and invent stories of how and whither he goes, which are believed by
biological necessity; because, unless they can be rid of the ghost and
the dread of him, or establish in some way the _pax deorum_, it is
impossible to go on living.

The Yerkla-mining never bury their dead, nor in any way dispose of
them. On seeing death approaching a tribesman, they make up a good fire
for him, and leave the neighbourhood, not to return for a considerable
time.[246] The Sakai, having buried the dead affectionately with
necklaces, wallets, etc., say to him: “Do not remember any more your
father, mother, or relations. Think only of your ancestors gone to
another place. Your living friends will find food.” They then burn his
house and desert the settlement, even abandoning standing crops.[247]
Among the Kikuyu, “if a person dies in a village, that village is
often burnt, and the people trek off and build elsewhere,” though much
labour may have been spent on the surrounding fields. Sick people are
often deserted.[248] Where land is closely settled such flight becomes
impossible, and in any case it is very inconvenient; so that if any one
can believe it possible to deceive the ghost, or to frighten him away
by shouting at him, beating the air with boughs or firebrands, letting
off arrows or guns, or to restrain him from walking by breaking the
corpse’s legs, or by placing loaded “ghost-shooters” (straws filled
with gunpowder) around the grave, so much the better. Many such plans
are adopted, and they _must_ be believed in.[249]

Affection, however, has its part in the treatment of the dead: it is
reasonable to attribute to affection the beginnings of the practices
of leaving food at the tomb, burying weapons or ornaments with the
corpse, celebrating funerary rites with lamentations; though in time
this motive may be mixed with, or superseded by, fear of the ghost,
or by fear of being suspected of having murdered the deceased by
sorcery, should rites be neglected or maimed. It is not uncommon to
carry about some bones of the departed, to hang round one’s neck the
skulls of infants untimely dead. The wild Veddas, though, having
covered a corpse with boughs, they avoid the place for a long time
for fear of being stoned, nevertheless have a strong feeling of good
fellowship for the spirits of their dead.[250] In the eastern isles
of Torres Straits, the Miriam perform an eschatological mystery, in
which the recently deceased reappear on their way to the other world.
The women and children take it for reality: their affections are said
to be gratified; and at the same time their fears are allayed by the
conviction that the ghosts, having been seen on their way to Hades,
will no longer haunt them.[251] The old Norsemen believed that the
dead were still united with the living by intense sympathy.[252] As
rites begun in affection may become propitiatory through fear, and
after prayer has been instituted may be further extended to obtain the
aid of spirits or gods in hunting, war, revenge, love, agriculture,
trade, or any undertaking for subsistence, riches or power, every
passion in turn seeks its gratification through Animism.

Extravagance in funerary rites, often ruinous to the family, may
sometimes be checked by considerations of economy or convenience.
Thus some tribes of South Australia may burn all the property of the
deceased except their stone axes, which are too valuable to be lost to
the survivors. The Nagas bury with the body the things most closely
associated with the dead; but things of small value, never the gun
or the cornelian necklace.[253] The Todas, who burn their dead, lay
the body on a bier with many valuable offerings and swing it three
times over the fire; they then remove the money and the more valuable
ornaments and burn the rest with the corpse. They say that the dead
still have the use of everything that was swung over the fire; and tell
a story to explain the ceremony; but Dr. Rivers observes that “this
symbolic burning has the great advantage that the objects of value
are not consumed, and are available for use another time.”[254] The
Araucanians buried many things with the dead, and at the grave of a
chief slew a horse. But for all valuables—silver spurs and bits and
steel lance-heads—they left wooden substitutes. As for the horse, the
mourners ate it, and the ghost got nothing but the skin and the soul
of it.[255] Economy may also induce the belief that ghosts are easily
deceived, or are unaccountably stupid in some special way: as in the
widespread practice of carrying a corpse out of its house through a
hole in the wall; trusting that, the hole having been immediately
repaired, the ghost can never find his way back; so soon does he
forget the familiar door. This is cheaper than to burn the house
down. Superstitious practices may be carried out with self-destructive
infatuation, or restricted at will: in Florida (Melanesia), in a
certain stream, a very large eel was taken for a ghost; no one might
bathe in, or drink at, the stream—“except at one pool, which for
convenience was considered not to be sacred.”[256] A conflicting desire
creates a limiting belief. Whilst often the most painful or disgusting
rites are endured for fear of ghosts, at other times they are assumed
to be so dull that we are tempted to say: “Whatever is convenient is
credible.”

If we desire to know the future, ghosts are so wise that we consult
their oracles and pay handsome fees to their inspired priests; but if
we dread their presence, it is easy to accept any suggestion that they
are obtuse or infatuated. They may (_e. g._) be afflicted with what
psychiatrists call “arithmomania.” Returning from a funeral, strew the
ground with millet-seed: then the ghost can never overtake you, for he
must stop to count them. Or hang a sieve outside your window: he cannot
enter until he has counted all the holes; moreover, his system of
numeration does not reach beyond “two.” You can always block his path
by drawing a line across it and pretending to jump over the line as if
it were a stream of water: of course, he cannot pass that. Or blaze
through the wood a circular trail, beginning at his grave and returning
to it: he must follow it around for ever, always ending at the same
cold grave. Alas, poor thin, shivering thing, that would go back to the
old hearth and sit close amongst the kinsmen by the fire, and laugh at
the old jokes and listen to the old stories—chiefly about ghosts—have
you forgotten all the tricks that can be played upon your kind? Such is
the homœopathy of superstition: imagination creates the fear of ghosts,
and imagination cures it.

Imagination-beliefs, being swayed by moods and passions, are
necessarily inconsistent. Natives of the Bismarck Archipelago are
cannibals and greatly fear the ghosts of those they devour. Whilst
feasting they hang up a slice for the ghost himself, and afterwards
make an uproar to scare him away. Nevertheless they keep his skull and
jawbone, which the ghost might be supposed especially to haunt; so
easily do other passions overcome fear. Of the fear of ghosts sometimes
seems true that which Bacon says of the fear of death, that there is
no passion in the mind of man so weak but it mates and masters it.
Sacrilegious miscreants have always robbed tombs, even the tombs of
Pharaohs who were gods; and timid lovers have kept tryst in graveyards.
The Sia Indians of North Mexico had a masterful way of dealing with
the ghost of a slain enemy: they annexed him together with his scalp;
for this having been brought to the village, a shaman offered a long
prayer, and thus addressed the ghost: “You are now no longer an enemy;
your scalp is here; you will no more destroy my people.”[257] To
capture and enslave the ghost of an enemy is said to have been the
chief motive of head-hunting in Malaya. Compare the conduct of the
Romans in carrying off Juno from Veii and establishing her at Rome.
The inconsistency (sometimes met with) of supposing a man’s personal
qualities to go with his ghost, and yet eating some part of his body to
obtain those qualities, may be due to the latter practice having been
magical, and having persisted after the rise of Animism. Some of the
Esquimo have such control over ghosts by Magic, that they fear them
very little. After a death, the ghost remains peaceably in the house
four days (if a man) or five (if a woman), and is then dismissed by
a ceremony to the grave, to wait there until a child is born in the
village, when it is recalled to be the child’s tutelary spirit.[258]


§ 10. EVOLUTION AND DISSOLUTION OF ANIMISM

Animism, originating in the belief in ghosts of men, tends to spread
as the explanation of whatever had formerly been attributed to Magic
(if we take this to have been earlier); although it is far from
occupying the whole region that thus lies open to it. We have seen
that the extent of its prevalence as an explanatory principle, and
consequently as the basis of cults, differs greatly amongst different
peoples. But more interesting than the spread of belief as to the
agency of spirits so as to include more and more objects, is the
gradual differentiation of some of them from common ghosts in power,
character and rank, and their integration into families and polities,
such as we see in the _Edda_ and the _Iliad_. A process, going on for
ages and varying with every people, cannot be briefly described: the
work of E. B. Tylor, Herbert Spencer, W. Wundt and others in this
department is well known. In general it may be said that, allowing for
the influences of geographical conditions and tradition and foreign
intercourse, the chief cause of the evolution of a spirit-world is
the political evolution of those who believe in it; so that the
patriarchies, aristocracies, monarchies and despotisms of this world
are reflected in heaven. Tribes of the lowest culture—some African
Pygmies, Fuegians, Mafulu, Semangs, Veddas—have the least Animism;
at successive grades—Australians, Melanesians, Congolese, Amerinds,
Polynesians—Animism increases and grows more systematic; and it
culminates in the barbaric civilisations of Egypt, Babylonia and India,
and of Mexico and Peru. But in civilisations of our modern type it
rapidly loses ground.

The cause of such differences in the extension and elaboration of the
animistic hypothesis cannot be that some tribes have had more time
than others to think it out; since they have all had an equally long
past. Animism is known to be very ancient, and there is no reason
to think that some races adopted it later than others. That, in the
lower grades of culture, men want brains to think it out, is not a
satisfactory explanation; because, on contact with superior races,
backward peoples show themselves capable of much more than could have
been inferred from their original state. Improvement in culture depends
upon much besides native brains, namely, opportunities afforded by the
resources of their habitat, and communication with other peoples. The
most backward peoples are the most isolated peoples. The development
of Animism is entirely a matter of operating with ideas; and it seems
to me that before men can build with ideas they must build with their
hands; there must be occupations that educate, and give advantage
to, constructive power, as in the making of boats and the building
of houses and temples; for to this day a nation’s material edifices
are always, in clearness of plan, coherence and serviceableness, much
in advance of their systems of theology and philosophy; because they
must “work,” as the Pragmatists say. If you have ever gone over a
battleship, compare her with the _Kritik d. r. Vernunft_. Secondly,
a suitable model for the edifice of ideas must be presented in the
world of fact; and this, as we have seen, is supplied by the tribe’s
social and political structure; which, again, is clearly correlated
with the improvement of architecture in building the houses of chiefs
and gods. Thirdly, a favourable condition of the working out of any
theory is to have the means of recording, either in oral literature or
(still better) in writing, the advances already made; and, fourthly—a
condition historically involved in the foregoing—the growth of a
class of men, generally a priestly caste or order, sometimes poets,
who have time to think, and the education and vocation to bring the
accumulating masses of animistic—now religious—ideas into greater
order and consistency. Hence there are two stages in the development
of Animism—of course, not sharply separated: first, a long period of
irregular growth in the tribal mind; and, secondly, a much shorter
period, in which the extension of animistic theory depends more or less
upon quasi-philosophical reflection.

With the differentiation of superior beings—heroic, ancestral or
other gods—from common ghosts, Religion arises. As to the meaning of
the word “religion,” indeed, there is no agreement: some lay stress
upon the importance of beliefs concerning supernatural beings; others
upon prayer, sacrifice and other rites of worship; still others upon
the emotions of awe and mystery. To define “religion” (as a tribal
institution) by all three of these characters seems to me the most
convenient plan, and the most agreeable to common usage. That, on
the one hand, pure Buddhism (if it ever was a living faith outside
of a coterie of philosophers and saints), and, on the other hand,
the spiritual condition of a few savages, may be wanting in one or
other mark, is no serious objection. The former case is, in fact,
exceptional and aberrant, and the latter rudimentary; not to give them
the name of “religion” in a technical sense is no wrong to anybody.
Thus understood, then, Religion brings to the development and support
of Animism many social utilities and other influences; especially the
influence of dynasties supposed to have descended from the gods; and of
priesthoods, whose sustentation and authority depend upon the supposed
necessity of their intervention in worship. In their hands the free
popular development of animistic ideas comes to an end, and gives place
to the co-ordination of ideas by reflection, and to the dictation of
tenets and rites by policy. The simple motives of hope and fear that
actuated popular Animism are now supplemented by dynastic and priestly
interests and ambitions; beneath which lies, faintly recognised and ill
served, the interest of society in order.

This later sophisticated Animism, so far as it obtains a hold upon the
people, is imposed upon them by suggestion, authority and deception;
but being superimposed upon ancient popular traditions that are never
obliterated, it still appeals to the sentiments of awe, consolation,
hope and enthusiastic devotion. The part of deception in the history
of Animism, indeed, begins at the beginning, preceded, perhaps, and
prepared for by the devices of Magic-mongers. Amongst the Arunta,
women and children are taught that the noise of the bull-roarer during
initiation ceremonies is the voice of the spirit Twanyirika.[259] Near
Samoa Harbour, at harvest, they offer some of the firstfruits in a bowl
to the ghosts; and, whilst the family feasts on the remainder, “the
householder will surreptitiously stir the offerings in the bowl with
his finger, and then show it to the others in proof that the souls
of the dead have really partaken.”[260] So early is the end supposed
to justify the means. Animism, like Magic, strives to maintain its
imaginations by further stimulating the imagination; and, in both
cases, such practices are, with many men, compatible with firm belief
on the part of the practitioner; who is merely anxious to promote the
public good by confirming the weaker brethren: himself weak in the
perception of incongruities. But I am concerned chiefly with origins,
and will pursue this nauseous topic no further.

Parallel with the development of Religion, a change takes place in
the emotions connected with Animism. As the gods emerge from the
shadow of night and the grave, and are cleansed from the savour of
corruption, and withdraw to the summit of the world, they are no longer
regarded with the shuddering fear that ghosts excite; as they acquire
the rank of chiefs and kings, the sentiments of attachment, awe,
duty, dependence, loyalty, proper to the service of such superiors,
are directed to them; and since their power far exceeds that of
kings, and implies the total dependence of man and nature upon their
support and guidance, these sentiments—often amazingly strong toward
earthly rulers—may toward the gods attain to the intensest heat of
fanaticism. Extolled by priests and poets, the attributes of the gods
are exaggerated, until difficulties occur to a reflective mind as to
how any other powers can exist contrary to, or even apart from, them:
so that philosophical problems arise as to the existence of evil and
responsibility, and the doctors reason high—

   “Of providence, foreknowledge, will and fate,
    Fixed fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
    And find no end, in wandering mazes lost.”

This is one cause of the dissolution of Animism: the power that
comprehends all powers ceases to be an object, and becomes the
immanence of all things, good and evil. Another cause is the complexity
of theogonies, or of spiritual kingdoms with their orders and degrees:
found too fanciful, when hierarchic despotisms, that furnished the
analogues, give place to the simpler social structure of democracies;
or, to a certain type of democrat, even insulting, a provocative
disparagement of the sovereignty of the people. And Animism has other
enemies in the growth of Positivism, and sometimes in the resurgence of
Magic.

FOOTNOTES:

[155] _The Veddas_, pp. 126-7.

[156] _Northern Tribes of Central Australia_, p. 170.

[157] _The Land of Zing_, p. 219.

[158] J. O. Dorsey, _American Bureau of Ethnology_, 1889-90, XI. p. 419.

[159] Mariner’s _Tonga_, p. 105.

[160] _Myth, Ritual and Religion_, p. 48.

[161] _African Game Trails_, p. 333.

[162] _Outdoor Pastimes_, p. 77.

[163] Frazer, _Spirits of the Corn and the Wild_, I. p. 183.

[164] _The Melanesians_, pp. 249 and 356.

[165] _Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula_, II. p. 222.

[166] _Pagan Tribes of Borneo_, II. p. 3.

[167] _Camp and Tramp in African Wilds_, p. 174.

[168] _The Primitive Bakongo_, p. 283.

[169] _Among Congo Cannibals_, p. 275.

[170] _Among the Indians of Guiana_, p. 355.

[171] _Two Years with the Natives of the West Pacific_, p. 199. As
to waterspouts and shooting stars, see the _Reports of the Cambridge
Expedition to Torres Straits_, VI. p. 252.

[172] J. Hernell in the _Quarterly Journal of the Mythical Society_
(Bangalore), IV. No. 4, p. 158.

[173] A. A. Macdonell, _Sanskrit Literature_, p. 112.

[174] J. Mooney in _Reports of the American Bureau of Ethnology_,
1885-6, VII. p. 341.

[175] J. E. Bourke in the _Reports of the American Bureau of
Ethnology_, 1887-8, IX. pp. 499-507.

[176] E. F. im Thurn, _Among the Indians of Guiana_, pp. 288, 354.

[177] _Principles of Sociology_, Vol. I. chs. viii.-xii.

[178] _Primitive Culture_, chs. xi., xii.

[179] J. H. Weeks, _Among Congo Cannibals_, pp. 262-3. My friend, Mr.
Torday, tells me this belief is very common in Africa.

[180] See, _e. g._, A. W. Howitt, _Native Tribes of South-East
Australia_, p. 406; and P. A. Talbot, _In the Shadow of the Bush_, pp.
83-8.

[181] _Indians of Guiana_, p. 344.

[182] S. H. C. Hawtrey, “The Lengua Indians,” _J.A.I._, 1901.

[183] J. Mooney, “Sacred Formulas of the Cherokees,” _Am. B. of Ethn._,
VII. p. 352.

[184] C. G. Seligman, _Melanesians of British New Guinea_, pp. 190-91.

[185] S. H. Ray, “People and Language of Lifu,” _J.R.A.I._, LXVII. p.
296.

[186] Turner, _Samoa_, p. 277.

[187] A. W. Howitt, _op. cit._, p. 358.

[188] Spencer, _Principles of Sociology_, § 53.

[189] J. H. Weeks, _The Primitive Bakongo_, p. 238.

[190] J. H. Weeks, _Among Congo Cannibals_, p. 233.

[191] T. C. Hodson, _The Naga Tribes of Manipur_, p. 160.

[192] Coddrington, _The Melanesians_, p. 269.

[193] V. Stefànson, _My Life with the Eskimo_, p. 57.

[194] Hose and McDougall, _Pagan Tribes of Borneo_, II. p. 3.

[195] J. G. Frazer, _Belief in Immortality_, p. 403.

[196] _Polynesian Researches_, I. p. 523.

[197] _The Primitive Bakongo_, p. 371.

[198] E. im Thurn, _op. cit._, p. 363.

[199] _Principles of Sociology_, §§ 165-93.

[200] J. G. Frazer, _Belief in Immortality_, p. 220.

[201] Franz Boas, _American Bureau of Ethnology_, VI. 1884-5, p. 583.

[202] Callaway, _Religious System of the Amazulu_, pp. 1 and 40. Cf.
Coddrington, _The Melanesians_, p. 150: Koevasi, a spirit, was never
human, yet in some way the originator of the human race.

[203] E. Westermarck, _Marriage Ceremonies in Morocco_, p. 343.

[204] _J.R.A.I._, 1909, p. 163.

[205] See his ingenious speculations in _The Evolution of the Idea of
God_, ch. xiii.

[206] _Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula_, II. iii. ch. vi.

[207] _Among Congo Cannibals_, p. 272.

[208] G. F. Abbott, _Macedonian Folklore_, p. 236.

[209] A. A. Macdonell, _Sanskrit Literature_, p. 44.

[210] T. C. Hodson, _The Naga Tribes of Manipur_, p. 126.

[211] P. A. Talbot, _In the Shadow of the Bush_, p. 73.

[212] Howitt, _Native Tribes of South-East Australia_, p. 437.

[213] Spencer and Gillen, _Northern Tribes of Central Australia_, p.
483.

[214] _Grettir Saga_, ch. xxxv.

[215] _Pausanias_, VI. p. 6.

[216] G. F. Abbott, _Macedonian Folklore_, p. 217.

[217] _First Footsteps in East Africa_, p. 52 note.

[218] _American Bureau of Ethnology_, I. p. 200.

[219] _Mythus und Religion_, 2º ed., p. 78.

[220] _Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula_, I. p. 194.

[221] _Malay Magic_, p. 47.

[222] _Spirits of the Corn and the Wild_, I. p. 183.

[223] W. G. Aston, _Shinto_, p. 50.

[224] _In the Shadow of the Bush_, p. 230.

[225] J. O. Dorsey, “Siouan Cults” in the _American Bureau of
Ethnology_, 1889-90, XI. p. 512.

[226] _West African Studies_, p. 200.

[227] J. G. Frazer, _Balder the Beautiful_, II. pp. 196-208; where are
reported other beliefs in a plurality of souls; in one case thirty, in
another thirty-six.

[228] M. A. Czaplicka, _Aboriginal Siberia_, p. 282.

[229] _Malay Magic_, p. 48.

[230] _Religion of the Ancient Egyptians_, ch. ix.

[231] _Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula_, I. p. 194.

[232] _Monadologie_, 47.

[233] _The Primitive Bakongo_, p. 115.

[234] _Republic_, 611_a_.

[235] Haddon, _Cambridge Expedition to the Torres Straits_, Vol. V. p.
355.

[236] C. G. Seligman, _The Veddas_, p. 133.

[237] R. W. Williamson, _The Mafulu_, p. 266.

[238] J. G. Frazer, _Belief in Immortality_, p. 396.

[239] C. G. Seligman, _The Melanesians_, p. 658.

[240] J. H. Weeks, _The Primitive Bakongo_, p. 224.

[241] Ling Roth, _The Aborigines of Tasmania_, pp. 57-61.

[242] Herodotus, V. p. 93.

[243] On the mortality of gods, see Frazer, _The Dying God_, ch. i.

[244] _Primitive Culture_, II. pp. 75-96.

[245] _Treatise_, B. I., Part III. § 9.

[246] Howitt, _Native Tribes of South-East Australia_, p. 450.

[247] Skeat and Blagden, _Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula_, II.
pp. 95-9. For similar formulæ of dismission (which, of course, are
constraining spells) see W. Ellis, _Polynesian Researches_, I. p. 522;
and J. O. Dorsey, “Siouan Cults,” _American Bureau of Ethnology_, X. p.
420.

[248] Stigand, _The Land of Zing_, p. 250.

[249] For the practice of appointing certain seasons at which the whole
tribe or nation unites in driving out ghosts or demons by force of arms
(sometimes with the help of cannon and elephants), as obtaining at all
levels of culture, from Australian savagery to the enlightenment of
China and Peru, and with more decorum at Athens and Rome, see Frazer,
_The Scapegoat_, ch. iii. § 2.

[250] C. G. Seligman, _The Veddas_, p. 131.

[251] _Cambridge Expedition to Torres Straits_, VI. p. 253.

[252] Vigfussen and Powell, _Corpus Poeticum Boreale_, I. p. 417. For
further examples of affectionate interest in ghosts, see _Primitive
Culture_, II. pp. 31-3.

[253] Hodson, _The Naga Tribes of Manipur_, p. 100.

[254] _The Todas_, p. 363.

[255] E. R. Smith, _The Araucanians_, p. 172.

[256] Coddrington, _The Melanesians_, p. 177.

[257] Miss M. C. Stevenson, “The Sia” in _American Bureau of
Ethnology_, 1889-90, XI. p. 121.

[258] Stefànson, _My Life among the Eskimo_, p. 397.

[259] Spencer and Gillen, _Northern Tribes of Central Australia_, p.
497.

[260] Frazer, _Belief in Immortality_, p. 259.




