
  THE ORIGIN OF MAN AND OF
  HIS SUPERSTITIONS




  CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
  C. F. CLAY, MANAGER
  LONDON: FETTER LANE, E.C. 4

  [Illustration]

  NEW YORK: THE MACMILLAN CO.
  BOMBAY   }
  CALCUTTA } MACMILLAN AND CO., LTD.
  MADRAS   }
  TORONTO: THE MACMILLAN CO.
  OF CANADA, LTD.
  TOKYO: MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHA

  ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




  THE ORIGIN OF MAN
  AND OF HIS SUPERSTITIONS

  BY

  CARVETH READ, M.A.

  LECTURER ON COMPARATIVE PSYCHOLOGY (FORMERLY GROTE PROFESSOR
  OF PHILOSOPHY) IN UNIVERSITY COLLEGE, LONDON

  CAMBRIDGE
  AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS
  1920




  PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY
  RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LIMITED,
  BRUNSWICK ST., STAMFORD ST., S.E. 1,
  AND BUNGAY, SUFFOLK.




PREFACE


The volume now published explains in its first part an hypothesis that
the human race has descended from some ape-like stock by a series
of changes which began and, until recently, were maintained by the
practice of hunting in pack for animal food, instead of being content
with the fruits and other nutritious products of the tropical forest.
The hypothesis occurred to me many years ago, and was first published
(in brief) in _The Metaphysics of Nature_ (1805), Chap. XIII., and
again in _Natural and Social Morals_ (1909); but all it implied did not
become clear until, in lecturing on Comparative Psychology, there was
forced upon me the necessity of effecting an intelligible transition
from the animal to the human mind, and of not being satisfied to say
year after year that hands and brains were plainly so useful that
they must have been developed by Natural Selection. Then one day
the requisite ideas came to light; and an outline of the hypothesis
was read at the Meeting of the British Association (Section H) at
Birmingham in 1913, and printed in _Man_, November 1914. The Council
of the Anthropological Institute has kindly consented to my using the
substance of that article in the first chapter here following.

The article in _Man_ dealt chiefly with the physical changes which our
race has undergone. The correlative mental changes were explained in
the _British Journal of Psychology_ in an article which supplies the
basis of the second chapter of this book.

The hunting-pack, then, was the first form of human society; and in
lecturing on Ethnopsychology two questions especially interested me:
(1) Under what mental conditions did the change take place from the
organisation of the hunting-pack (when this weakened) to the settled
life of the tribe or group? and (2) Why is the human mind everywhere
befogged with ideas of Magic and Animism? They seemed at last to have
the same answer: these superstitions were useful and (apparently) even
necessary in giving to elders enough prestige to preserve tradition
and custom when the leader of the hunt was no longer conspicuous in
authority. A magic-working gerontocracy was the second form of society;
and the third form was governed by a wizard-king or a priest-king,
or by a king supported by wizards or priests. One must, therefore,
understand the possibility of these beliefs in Magic and Animism, and
how they arose and obtained a hold upon all tribes and nations; and
hence the second part of this volume—on Superstition.

Some results of inquiry into these matters were also published in the
_British Journal of Psychology_ (namely, much of the substance of
Chaps. III., IV., V., VI., and VIII.) and are here reproduced, with
the editor’s consent, enlarged and, for the most part, rewritten: the
least altered are Chaps. VI. and VIII. Chaps. VII., IX. and X. have not
hitherto been printed; but part of Chap. X. was read at the Meeting of
the British Association at Bournemouth last year.

Messrs. Williams and Norgate have given permission to use the diagram
in the footnote to p. 3, based on one of Prof. Keith’s in his
_Antiquity of Man_.

Extensive use has, of course, been made of the works of Darwin, Herbert
Spencer and E. B. Tylor, and (among living authors) of the volumes
of Sir J. G. Frazer and Prof. Ed. Westermarck. I am grateful to my
friends and colleagues, Prof. Spearman, Prof. J. P. Hill and Prof.
Arthur Keith for assistance in various ways. Mr. Pycraft, too, of the
Natural History Museum has given me important information; and my old
friend, Mr. Thomas Whittaker, has helped me, as usual, when my need was
greatest.

      CARVETH READ.

  _University College, London.
    July 1920_




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I
                                                                    PAGE
  ON THE DIFFERENTIATION OF MAN FROM THE ANTHROPOIDS                   1

    § 1. _The Hypothesis._—That Man was differentiated from
          the anthropoid stock by becoming a hunter; perhaps in
          the Oligocene period                                       1-3

    § 2. _What the Hypothesis Explains._—World-wide range;
          why the earliest known men were hunters; the erect
          gait; specialisation of hands; reduction of arms;
          and of teeth and jaws; modification of skull; social
          co-operation; rudiments of speech; intelligence;
          control of fire                                           4-13

    § 3. _Minor and Secondary Consequences._—Alimentary
          canal; loss of seasonal marriage; naked skin;
          cannibalism; division into races; Nordic sub-race        13-21

    § 4. _Prey and Competitors._—Climate and landscape
          in Oligocene and Miocene; animals, herbivorous;
          anthropoids and their stature in late Oligocene;
          carnivorous contemporaries                                21-8

    § 5. _Conclusion._—Summary                                     28-9


CHAPTER II

  ON THE DIFFERENTIATION OF THE HUMAN FROM THE ANTHROPOID MIND        30

    § 1. _Heredity, Adaptation, Accommodation_                     30-31

    § 2. _The Original Stock and the Conditions of
          Differentiation._—Mind of the higher apes the best
          clue to that of the original stock. Conditions of
          differentiation: the hunting life; geographical
          diffusion; social life; imaginations concerning Magic
          and Animism                                               31-5

    § 3. _Primal Society._—Forms of gregariousness amongst
          Mammalia; the hunting-pack most likely original of
          human society. Other conjectures                         35-40

    § 4. _Psychology of the Hunting-pack._—Interest in the
          chase and in killing; gregariousness; various modes
          of sympathy; aggressiveness; claim to territory;
          recognition of leaders, submission to the pack,
          emulation, precedency; strategy and persistence;
          struggle to share the prey; intelligence. Different
          mentality of the herbivorous herd                        40-49

    § 5. _The Wolf-type of Man established by Natural
          Selection._—Keith’s hypothesis as to epoch of
          differentiation. Slow progress of culture; full
          adaptation to hunting life prior to Neolithic culture    49-52

    § 6. _Some further Consequences of the
          Hunting-life._—Growth of constructiveness; language;
          customs—marriage; property; war; sports and games;
          laughter and lamentation                                 52-61

    § 7. _Moralisation of the Hunters._—Character of
          Anthropoids; human benevolence; moral sense; effect
          of industry; of growing intelligence                      61-6

    § 8. _Influence of the Imaginary Environment._—Belief in
          Magic and Spirits often injurious; but on the whole
          advantageous; especially by establishing government      66-70


CHAPTER III

  BELIEF AND SUPERSTITION                                             71

    § 1. “_Superstition._”—Here used merely to include Magic
          and Animism as imagination-beliefs                        71-2

    § 2. _Imagination._—Various uses of the word; mental
          “images”; in connection with reasoning; and
          with literary fiction. Here means unverifiable
          representation                                            72-6

    § 3. _Belief._—Nature of belief; degrees of probability;
          tested by action; play-belief                             76-9

    § 4. _Causes and Grounds of Belief._—Derived from
          perception. Evidentiary causes, or grounds,
          raising some probability; and non-evidentiary
          causes which are not grounds. Memory, testimony,
          inference so far as unverifiable are imagination.
          Influence of apperceptive masses and of methodology.
          Non-evidentiary causes have their own apperceptive
          masses—derived from bad observation, memory,
          testimony; influenced by emotion, desire and
          voluntary action; by sympathy and antipathy, and by
          suggestibility                                           79-85

    § 5. _The Beliefs of Immature Minds._—Non-evidentiary
          causes more influential than with us;
          picture-thinking more vivid; no common standard of
          truth; feeble power of comparison, due perhaps to
          undeveloped brain                                        85-92

    § 6. _The Reasoning of Immature Minds._—Fallacies
          of induction; ignorance of the minor premise in
          deduction; reasoning by analogy                           92-8

    § 7. _General Ideas at the Savage Level._—Savages have
          general ideas, though often not recognised or named;
          force; relations of causation and equality              99-103

    § 8. _The Weakness of Imagination-beliefs._—Superficial
          resemblance to perception-beliefs; more nearly allied
          to play-belief                                           103-7


CHAPTER IV

  MAGIC                                                              108

    § 1. _Antiquity of Magic_                                      108-9

    § 2. _What is Magic?_—Magic defined; imaginary impersonal
          force contrasted with power of spirits; its action
          uniform like laws of nature. Kinds of Magic             109-12

    § 3. _The Beginnings of Magic._—A matter of speculation.
          The earliest were probably the simplest, and the
          kinds that have prevailed most widely by tradition
          and hereditary predisposition. The chief source of
          belief in Magic is the mistaking of coincidence for
          causation                                               112-19

    § 4. _Magical Force and Primitive Ideas of
          Causation._—Idea of magical force derived from
          physical force (empathy, Animatism, invisible action
          at a distance, mana). How Animism and Magic corrupt
          the ideas of causation                                  119-24

    § 5. _Magic and Mystery_                                       124-6

    § 6. _Volitional Magic._—A relatively late idea               126-8

    § 7. _The Evolution of Magic—Direct Magic._—Growth and
          differentiation; four stages; spells and charms; taboo  128-34

    § 8. _Indirect or “Sympathetic” Magic._—Principles
          of Sympathetic Magic—mimesis and participation;
          connection with Animism. Exemplary Magic                134-42

    § 9. _The Dissolution of Magic_                                143-4


CHAPTER V

  ANIMISM                                                            145

    § 1. _What is Animism?_—Hyperphysical and psychological
          Animism. Not all savages think that every man has a
          separable soul                                           145-7

    § 2. _Psychological Animism._—That everything is animated
          not an universal or primitive illusion. Animatism.
          Causes of the treatment of some inanimate things as
          living or sentient                                      147-53

    § 3. _The Ghost Theory._—Originated chiefly by dreams;
          which are regarded as objective experience               153-7

    § 4. _Extension of the Ghost Theory to
          Animals._—Influence of shadows and reflections.
          Generally, only things individually interesting have
          ghosts. Examples                                        157-60

    § 5. _Ghosts and Soul-stuff._—Separated spirits need
          bodies and food, that is, soul-stuff. Abstract ideas
          of “spirit,” “force,” etc.                               161-4

    § 6. _Ghosts and Spirits._—Ghosts first imagined, and
          other spirits on their model. Some spirits, formerly
          ghosts, now declared not to have been; others never
          incarnate                                                164-9

    § 7. _How Ghosts and Spirits are imagined._—Have the same
          attributes, and not at first immaterial; confused
          with the corpse. Various conceptions. Number of souls
          to each body. External souls                            169-73

    § 8. _Origin and Destiny of
          Souls._—Reincarnation—Transmigration—Liable to
          second death. Place of the departed. Importance of
          next life resembling the present                         174-7

    § 9. _The Treatment of Ghosts._—Results partly from fear,
          partly from affection. Funerary rites—extravagance
          and economy. Simplicity of ghosts. Inconsistent
          behaviour toward them                                   178-82

    § 10. _Evolution and Dissolution of Animism._—Popular
          and priestly Animism. Different emotions excited by
          ghosts and by gods                                       182-6


CHAPTER VI

  THE RELATIONS BETWEEN MAGIC AND ANIMISM                            187

    § 1. _The Question of Priority._—Wundt’s theory of
          Animism and of the derivation from it of Magic.
          Reasons for dissenting. Origins of Magic and of
          Animism independent                                     187-93

    § 2. _Magic and Religion._—Frazer’s hypothesis as to
          the superseding of Magic by Religion. Reasons for
          dissenting. Alternative hypothesis. Caprice of
          spirits the essential distinction of Animism             193-7

    § 3. _Ideas and Practices of Magic adopted by
          Animism._—Invisible force. Power of charms ascribed
          to spirits. Omens first magical, then spiritual
          warnings. Spells become prayers. Magical rites become
          religious ceremonies                                   197-203

    § 4. _Retrogradation._—Wundt’s theory explains the loss
          in many cases of animistic ideas; Fetiches; Omens;
          Prayers; religious ceremonies                            203-7

    § 5. _Spirits know Magic, teach it, and inspire
          Magicians._—Examples of spirits knowing and teaching
          Magic. Inspiration and possession                       207-12

    § 6. _Spirits operate by Magic._—Possession; smiting;
          metamorphosis; charms and spells                        212-16

    § 7. _Spirits are controlled by Magic._—Biological
          necessity of controlling spirits—by fear—or by
          Magic. Analogy with politics. The higher barbaric
          religions. Magico-legal control of gods. Idea of
          Fate. Free-will and uniformity                          216-24


CHAPTER VII

  OMENS                                                              225

    § 1. _The Prevalence of Omens_ everywhere, in all ages.
          Examples                                                 225-6

    § 2. _Omens and Natural Signs._—Natural signs
          all-important to hunters; and Omens are imaginary
          signs                                                    226-7

    § 3. _Some Signs Conceived of as Magical._—By coincidence
          some events become signs of others by a mysterious
          and infallible tie. Moods of elation or depression
          favour belief in Omens; their validity may depend
          upon acceptance. Antiquity of subjective Omens.
          Whatever causes elation or depression is ominous.
          Coincidence and analogy                                 227-32

    § 4. _Differentiation of Omens from General Magic._—Omens
          are classed with charms, rites and spells, but
          distinguished by being signs only, not causes. Other
          differences                                              232-4

    § 5. _Omens Interpreted by Animism._—Omens resemble
          warnings—at first given by friendly animals, then by
          spirits, hence connected with Oracles and Dreams         234-8

    § 6. _Natural and Artificial Omens_—Natural Omens
          not being always at hand, means are discovered
          for obtaining them at any time; _e. g._ Dice,
          Hepatomancy, Astrology                                  238-40

    § 7. _Divination and Oracles._—Diviners and the art of
          Divination. Power of Diviners and Oracles. Ways of
          obtaining oracles and of being inspired derived from
          low savagery                                            240-45

    § 8. _Apparent Failure of Omens_—ascribed to faulty
          observation or interpretation; frustration by
          spirits, or by superior Magic; or by having been
          symbolically fulfilled                                   245-7

    § 9. _Apology for Omens._—The Diviner or oracular person
          tries to be well-informed. The Stoics and Divination.
          Omens involved in Fate. Conditional and unconditional
          Omens                                                   247-61


CHAPTER VIII

  THE MIND OF THE WIZARD                                             252

    § 1. _The Rise and Fall of Wizardry._—At first no
          professionals. Early professionals unpaid; except
          by influence; which enables them to maintain order.
          Animism gives rise to sorcerers and priests. Priests
          suppress sorcery and black Magic, and absorb white
          Magic in religious rites. Societies of wizards           252-7

    § 2. _The Wizard’s Pretensions._—Control of Nature;
          shape-changing and flying; the causing and curing of
          diseases; Divination; control of ghosts and spirits.
          General trust in them                                    257-9

    § 3. _Characteristics of the Wizard_—Intelligence and
          knowledge; force of will and daring (initiation);
          motives—attraction of mystery, reputation, power;
          distinctive costume and demeanour of a “superman”;
          jealousy of rivals; histrionic temperament;
          hysterical diathesis. Suggestibility of his clients     259-76

    § 4. _The Wizard and the Sceptic._—Social delusion and
          imposture. Scepticism frequent amongst chiefs and the
          higher social ranks, and also amongst the people,
          because of common sense. Still more difficult for
          Wizards to maintain self-delusion                       276-83

    § 5. _The Wizard’s Persuasion._—Honesty and fraud. The
          Wizard by vocation. Fascination of Black Wizardry.
          Artifices professionally necessary seem justified by
          social utility. His belief strengthened by effects
          of natural causes set going by himself or by his
          clients, and by coincidences                            284-92


CHAPTER IX

  TOTEMISM                                                           293

    § 1. _Meaning and Scope of Totemism._—Frazer’s
          definitions. The Clan-Totem, and observances
          connected with it                                        293-6

    § 2. _Of the Origin of Totemism._—Totemism not universal.
          Totemic names sometimes recent, generally ancient.
          Totemism has not the psychological necessity of Magic
          and Animism. Originates with the names of individuals
          or of groups?                                            296-9

    § 3. _The Conceptional Hypothesis of Frazer._—Belief in
          Totems derived from the fancies of women as to cause
          of pregnancy. Criticisms                               299-304

    § 4. _Lang’s Hypothesis._—Names of animals or plants
          given to groups probably by other groups.
          Circumstances of origin having been forgotten,
          explanatory myths are invented with corresponding
          observances. Comments                                    304-7

    § 5. _Totemism and Marriage._—Exogamy, Totemism and
          Marriage Classes. Westermarck’s hypothesis as to
          Exogamy                                                 307-11

    § 6. _The Clansman and his Totem_—perhaps believed to
          have the same soul                                      312-14

    § 7. _Totemism and Magic._—Magical properties of names.
          Transformation. Penalties on breach of observances.
          Control of Totems                                       314-19

    § 8. _Totemism and Animism._—Totems in Australia
          give warnings; are sometimes invoked in aid; the
          Wollunqua. Fusion of Totem with spirit of hero in
          Fiji; in Polynesia. Propitiation of guardian spirits,
          “elder brothers,” species-gods in North and South
          America. Zoolatry in Africa; in Egypt                   319-25


CHAPTER X

  MAGIC AND SCIENCE                                                  326

    § 1. _Their Common Ground._—Both assume uniformity of
          action. Differentiated in opposite directions from
          common-sense                                             326-8

    § 2. _The Differentiation._—The Wizard a
          physician—genuine and magical drugs; a surgeon with
          some knowledge of Anatomy—effective remedies and
          the sucking-cure; of Psychology and suggestion; his
          Physiological Psychology. Knowledge of natural signs;
          Natural signs and Omens; Astronomy and Astrology.
          Rain-rites and Meteorology                              328-37

    § 3. _Why Magic seems to be the Source of
          Science._—Conducted for ages by the same people, and
          develops faster                                        337-340

    § 4. _Animism and Science._—Naturally opposed as caprice
          to uniformity; but, indirectly, Animism is the great
          nurse of Science and Art. Animism and Philosophy.
          Conclusion                                              340-42

  INDEX                                                              345




THE ORIGIN OF MAN AND OF HIS SUPERSTITIONS




CHAPTER I

ON THE DIFFERENTIATION OF MAN FROM THE ANTHROPOIDS


§ 1. THE HYPOTHESIS

That the human species as we now see it, with its several races,
Mongolian, Negro, Mediterranean, etc., represents a Family of the
Primates is generally agreed; and there is evidence that the Family
formerly comprised other species that have become extinct. Our nearest
surviving zoological relatives are the Gorilla, Chimpanzee and Orang,
and (at a further remove) the Siamang and Gibbons; and in spite of the
fundamental anatomical resemblance between those apes and ourselves,
the difference is so great that some explanation of how it came about
is very desirable.

The differences between Man and his nearest relatives are innumerable;
but taking the chief of them, and assuming that the minor details are
correlated with these, it is the hypothesis of this essay that they
may all be traced to the influence of one variation operating amongst
the original anthropoid conditions. That variation was the adoption
of a flesh-diet and the habits of a hunter in order to obtain it.
Without the adoption of a flesh-diet there could have been no hunting;
but a flesh-diet obtained without hunting (supposing it possible)
could have done nothing for the evolution of our stock. The adoption
of the hunting-life, therefore, is the essential variation upon which
everything else depends. We need not suppose that a whole ancestral
species varied in this way: it is enough that a few, or even one, of
the common anthropoid stock should have done so, and that the variation
was advantageous and was inherited.

Such a variation _must_ have occurred at some time, since Man is
everywhere more or less carnivorous; the earliest known men were
hunters; weapons are among the earliest known artefacts. And it
is not improbable that the change began at the anthropoid level;
because although extant anthropoids are mainly frugivorous, yet they
occasionally eat birds’-eggs and young birds; the gorilla has been said
to eat small mammals; and other Primates (cebidæ, macaques and baboons)
eat insects, arachnids, crabs, worms, frogs, lizards, birds; and the
crab-eating macaque collects a large portion of its food on the Malay
littoral. Why, then, should not one ape have betaken itself to hunting?

We need not suppose that our ancestors were ever exclusively
carnivorous: that is very unlikely. A mixed diet is the rule even
amongst hunting tribes, and everywhere the women collect and consume
fruits and roots. But if at first nearly omnivorous, our ancestor
(it is assumed) soon preferred to attack mammals, and advanced at a
remote date to the killing of the biggest game found in his habitat.
Everywhere savage hunters do so now: the little Semang kills the tiger,
rhinoceros, elephant and buffalo; and many thousands of years ago, in
Europe men slew the reindeer and the mammoth, the horse and the bison,
the hyæna and the cave-bear. It is true they had weapons and snares,
whilst the first hunter had only hands and teeth.

The change from a fruit-eating to a hunting life subserved the great
utility of opening fresh supplies of food; and, possibly, a failure
of the normal supply of the old customary food was the direct cause
of the new habit. If our ape lived near the northern limits of the
tropical forest, and a fall of temperature there took place, such as to
reduce (especially in winter) the yield of fruit and other nutritious
vegetation on which he had subsisted, famine may have driven him
to attack other animals;[1] whilst more southerly anthropoids, not
suffering from the change of climate, continued in their ancient manner
of life. A large anthropoid (_Dryopithecus_) inhabited Central Europe
in the Miocene, for his bones have been found; there may have been
others; and during that period the climate altered from sub-tropical
to temperate, with corresponding changes in fauna and flora. Hence it
formerly occurred to me that perhaps the decisive change in the life of
our Family happened there and then. It seems, however, that good judges
put the probable date of the great differentiation much earlier, in the
Oligocene;[2] and since I cannot find that any extensive alteration
of climate is known to have happened during that period, it seems
necessary to fall back upon “spontaneous” variation (as one must in
many other cases); that is to say, from causes which are at present
beyond our vision, the fateful ape did, in fact, prefer animal food
so decidedly as to begin a-hunting for it. That being granted, the
rest of the history was inevitable. The new pursuit was of a nature to
engross the animal’s whole attention and co-ordinate all his faculties;
and to maintain and reinforce it, his structure in body and mind may
reasonably be supposed to have undergone rapid modification by natural
selection; because those individuals that were in any organ or faculty
best adapted to the new life had an advantage, which was inherited and
gradually intensified.[3]


§ 2. WHAT THE HYPOTHESIS EXPLAINS

Let me run rapidly through the chief differences between Man and his
nearest congeners: some of them are obvious and can be stated very
briefly; others I shall return to in the next chapter. We shall see
that they all follow naturally from the above hypothesis.

(1) The anthropoids are never found out of the tropical forests of
Africa and Malaya (including Borneo and Sumatra). They feed chiefly on
the fruits and other highly nutritious vegetable products that, all
the year round, are only there obtainable. Although often coming to
the ground, especially the chimpanzee and gorilla, they are adapted
to living in the trees: that is their home. In contrast with their
habits, Man is at home on the ground, with unlimited range over the
whole planet from beyond the Arctic Circle to Tasmania and Tierra
del Fuego; because on the ground (chiefly) he everywhere finds his
food in the other animals whom he hunts and slays. This, then, is the
condition of his emancipation from the tropical forest. It is, indeed,
conceivable that a frugivorous animal, originally of the forest, should
obtain a wider range by taking to a coarser diet of roots and herbage,
such as suffices the Ungulates, browsing or grazing or digging with
their snouts; but this would not have led to the upright gait, or the
big brain, or any of the marks that distinguish Man. Not advance but
retrogression must have followed such a change.

(2) That the earliest men of whose condition of life we have any
knowledge were hunters agrees with the hypothesis. Any other view
of Man’s origin must explain how and when he became a hunter. There
seems to be no reason to put the change of habits (which certainly
occurred at some time) anywhere nearer than the beginning of our
differentiation. The further we put it back the better it explains
other modifications.

(3) The erect attitude was reached by the apes in the course of
adaptation to arboreal life;[4] but the erect gait as the normal mode
of progression is (if we neglect the gibbons’ imperfect performance)
peculiar to ourselves; and such a gait was attained because the
most successful hunters followed their prey afoot upon the ground.
The feeble ineffective shuffle of the anthropoids upon the ground,
supporting themselves with their arms where there are no overhanging
boughs to swing by and help themselves along, could not have served
the hunter, especially if he was to leave the forest. We may, indeed,
suppose that at first prey was sometimes attacked by leaping upon it
from the branch of a tree, as leopards sometimes do; but the less our
ancestor in his new career trusted to trees the better for him. Such
simple strategy could not make him a dominant animal throughout the
world; nothing could do this but the gradual attainment of erect gait
adapted to running down his prey. Hence the numerous modifications of
structure necessary to it, whenever from time to time they occurred,
were preserved and accumulated by natural selection: namely, the
curving of the vertebral column, the balancing of the head upon a
relatively slender neck, changes in the joints, bones and muscles of
the legs, the lengthening of the leg and the specialisation of the foot
(in which the heel is developed more than in the gorilla, and the great
toe is lengthened and lies parallel with the other toes).

(4) The specialisation of the legs and feet, as it proceeded, made
possible the specialisation of the hands: being gradually rid of the
task of assisting locomotion, whether in trees or on the ground, they
were used in grappling with prey, seconded by massive jaws and powerful
canine teeth. In course of time they brought cudgels and stones to the
encounter, and after many ages began to alter such means of offence
into weapons that might be called artefacts. These simple beginnings
probably occupied an immense time, perhaps more than half of the total
period down to the present. The utility and consequent selection of
hands had been great throughout; but their final development may be
referred to the making and using of weapons fashioned according to a
mental pattern. Those who had the best hands were selected because they
made the best weapons and used them best; but we know from remains of
several palæolithic stages of the art of manufacturing implements how
very slowly the art improved.

(5) Along with specialisation of the hands went a reduction in
the length and massiveness of the arms; and this must have been
disadvantageous in directly grappling with prey. But it was necessary
to the runner in order to lessen the weight and cumbersomeness of
the upper part of the body and to improve his balance and agility.
The change may also have been beneficial by affording physiological
compensation for the lengthening and strengthening of the legs. And as
soon as unwrought stones and clubs came into use there was mechanical
compensation for the shortening of the arms. The result is an adaptive
co-ordination of the total structure to the life of a two-footed hunter.

(6) Darwin says: “The early male forefathers of Man were, as previously
stated, probably furnished with great canine teeth; but as they
gradually acquired the habit of using stones, clubs, or other weapons,
for fighting with their enemies or rivals, they would use their jaws
and teeth less and less. In this case the jaws, together with the
teeth, would become reduced in size, as we may feel almost sure from
numerous analogous cases.”

(7) Hence the profile began to approach the orthognathous type; and it
progressed further in that direction on account of accompanying changes
in the skull. The skull became less thick and rough, (_a_) because, as
the hands (using weapons) superseded the teeth in fighting, jaws and
neck grew less massive, and their muscles no longer needed such solid
attachments; (_b_) because the head was less liable to injury when no
longer used as the chief organ in combat. At the same time the skull
slowly increased in capacity and became vaulted to make room for the
brains of an animal, which (as we shall see) acquired much knowledge
(parietal association area) and lived by the application of its
knowledge to the co-ordination of increasingly complex and continuous
activities (anterior association area).[5]

(8) Monkeys of most species, whether in the New World or in the Old,
are social, living in bands of from ten to fifty or more, and may
co-operate occasionally in mutual defence or in keeping watch. Baboons,
indeed, are seen in herds of several hundreds; and they are credibly
reported to co-operate in raiding plantations, and in defending
themselves against leopards, other baboons and even human hunters.[6]
Gibbons, again, are social, going in bands to the number of fifty. But
the large anthropoids live only in families—the male orang being even
of a somewhat solitary habit; three or four families of chimpanzees may
for a time associate together. Man, however, is everywhere—with a few
doubtful exceptions, probably degenerate—both social and co-operative;
and the purpose of his co-operation at the level of the Australian
or the Semang is instructive. It is not, as we might suppose, in
industry, but in hunting, war, or tribal ceremonies that tribesmen work
together—the last no doubt of comparatively recent origin: so that a
few thousand years ago there was no co-operation except hunting and war
(which come to the same thing).

That the large anthropoids are neither gregarious nor co-operative
follows from their having no task in which co-operation would be
useful, no common purpose: they are able alone to defend themselves
and their families; and when families range apart through the woods
their food is in better supply. But the ancestor of Man found an object
for association and co-operation in the chase. Spencer, indeed, says
that a large carnivore, capable of killing its own prey, profits by
being solitary; and this may be true where game is scarce: in the
Oligocene and Miocene periods game was not scarce. Moreover, when our
ape first pursued game, especially big game (not being by ancient
adaptation in structure and instinct a carnivore), he may have been,
and probably was, incapable of killing enough prey single-handed; and,
if so, he will have profited by becoming both social and co-operative
as a hunter, like the wolves and dogs—in short, a sort of wolf-ape
(_Lycopithecus_). The pack was a means of increasing the supply of food
per unit; and gregariousness increased by natural selection up to the
limit set by utility. Hence (as will be shown at length in the next
chapter) Man is in character more like a dog or a wolf than he is like
any other animal.

(9) Some development of the rudiments of speech may be confidently
traced to social co-operation. The gibbon, most social, is also
the most vocal of anthropoids; but having no common task in which
united action is necessary, he uses his remarkable power of voice
(apparently) merely to express his feelings and to keep the troop
together. The chimpanzee and the gorilla enjoy probably a close and
affectionate family life, but one that makes little or no demand
for concerted effort. Hence their vocalisation is very rudimentary.
According to R. L. Garner, it is true speech: a chimpanzee (he says)
knows the meaning of the sounds he makes, and intends to convey it
to some definite individual at whom he looks. But he has at command
very few sounds, and those mainly expressive of natural wants.[7] If
it be urged that anthropoids do not talk because their lower jaw and
tongue have not the special adaptation to speech that is found in
Man, it should be considered (_a_) that if such structure had been
useful to them it would have been acquired, as at some time it must
have been by Man himself; and (_b_) that even without any change they
might have jabbered well enough to convey a good many discriminated,
objective meanings if they had needed to do so: for Man must have
begun in that way; he cannot have waited for the development of
physical structure before trying to talk. Sufficient intelligence is
not wanting to chimpanzees; for in captivity they learn to understand
a good deal that is said to them. What they wanted was a sufficient
motive for persistently trying to communicate, such that those who
made any progress in the art had a living advantage over others. Man
had such a motive; because co-operation was necessary to him, not (as
we have seen) in industry, but in hunting. In hunting, in planning
and directing the hunt, speech is plainly useful; and it is better
than gesture, which probably preceded, and generally accompanied it;
because, as speech became independent of gesture, it could go on
whilst the hands and body were otherwise employed, or where comrades
could not see one another—transferring, by a very profitable division
of labour, the whole business of expression to organs not otherwise
needed. It may not be much more than very simple beginnings of
articulate speech that can be traced to early co-operative hunting;
but in the beginning lies the whole difficulty. And the situation was
particularly favourable to the beginning of language by onomatopœia,
imitating the characteristic noises of different animals and of the
weapons and actions employed in pursuing and slaying them.

(10) The intelligence and extensive knowledge (compared with
anthropoids) that distinguish Man in his lowest known condition are
clearly accounted for by his adoption of the hunting life. Already
(as we may assume) the most intelligent of living animals, with great
knowledge of the forest, he had everything to learn about the world
beyond the forest as soon as he ventured into it, and everything to
learn about the art of hunting. Depending chiefly upon sight and
hearing, he had to learn by observation, and to remember, and to apply
all and more than all that the carnivore knows and does instinctively,
or learns by following its mother. He must have learned to discriminate
all sorts of animals, many of them new in a strange country; their
reactions to himself, manner of flight, or of attack, or defence; the
spoor of each and its noises; its habits and haunts, where it reposed
or went to drink, where to set snares or lie in wait for it. Advancing
to the use of weapons, he must have adapted them to his prey; he must
have discovered the best materials—wood, or stone, or bone—for making
weapons, the best materials for snares, and where to find such things.
He must have fixed in his mind this series: game, weapons, the making
of them, materials, where found; and must have learned to attend to
the items of the series in the necessary order without impatience or
confusion: a task far beyond the power of any other animal.

Further, the hunting life supplied a stimulus that had formerly been
wanting to our ape. There is some difficulty in comprehending why
the anthropoid should be as intelligent as he is; and, similarly, it
seemed to Wallace that the savage has intelligence above his needs—“in
his large and well-developed brain he possesses an organ quite
disproportionate to his actual requirements.”[8] This illusion results
from our not reflecting that the first task of increasing intelligence
is to deal appropriately with details in greater and greater number
and variety, and that the details of their life, with both savage and
anthropoid, are just what we cannot appreciate. Still, the anthropoid
seems to have a rather lazy time of it: especially, he seems to have
hardly any occasion for following out a purpose needing some time for
its accomplishment. This powerful stimulus the hunting life applies
to carnivores, above all to dogs and wolves; and in the same way it
affected our ape: compelling him to combine many activities for a
considerable period of time, along with his fellows, and direct them
to one end in the actual hunting, and (later) to prosecute still other
activities for a longer period in preparing weapons and snares to make
the hunting more effective. Add to these considerations the development
of gesture and rudiments of speech, exacting intelligence for their
acquisition and increasing intelligence by their attainment, and the
superiority of the lowest savage to an anthropoid is sufficiently
explained. Severe must have been the selection of those that were
capable of such progress, and correspondingly rapid the advance and
differentiation of the species.

(11) Using stones as weapons, and finding that broken stones do most
damage, and breaking them for that purpose, the progressive hunter
necessarily makes some sparks fly; and if these fall amongst dry
leaves or grass, he may light a fire. “In making flint implements
sparks would be produced; in polishing them it would not fail to be
observed that they became hot; and in this way it is easy to see how
the two methods of making fire may have originated.”[9] But if the
production of fire by friction had been suggested by the polishing of
flints, it could hardly have been discovered before the neolithic
stage; whereas hearths are known of much earlier date. And it may have
happened earlier whilst some one was polishing an arrow or a spear
with another piece of wood: a supposition which dispenses with the
long inference from a warm flint to a flaming stick. It is a curious
fact that to this day in Australia fire is sometimes made by rubbing
a spear-thrower upon a shield;[10] but I lay no stress upon this, as
if such a practice must be traditionary from the earliest discovery
of the method. Either in the chipping of flints or in the polishing
of spears it is far easier, and a more probable way, to learn the art
of making fire than by observing that dried boughs or bamboos driven
together by the wind sometimes catch fire; because those processes
include the very actions which the art employs: imitation of nature is
not called for. It is true that the natives of Nukufetan in the South
Seas explain the discovery of fire by their having seen smoke arise
from two crossed branches of a tree shaken in the wind;[11] but this,
probably, is merely the speculation of some Polynesian philosopher.
Volcanoes, too, have been pointed out as a possible source of fire;
and, in the myth, Demeter is said to have lit her torches at the crater
of Ætna—an action fit for a goddess. But were such an origin of fire
conceivable with savages, it would not show how they came to make it
themselves. Fire at first must have excited terror. Until uses were
known for fire no one could have ventured to fetch it from a volcano,
nor to make it by imitating the friction of boughs in the wind. Fires
were accidentally lit by man again and again, and much damage done,
before he could learn (_a_) the connection of events, (_b_) the uses
of fire, (_c_) purposely to produce it, (_d_) how to control it. The
second and fourth of these lessons are much more difficult than the
mere making of fire; they are essential, yet generally overlooked.
It seems necessary to suppose a series of accidents at each step, in
order to show the effects of fire in hardening wood, hollowing wood,
cooking game, baking and (later) glazing clay, and so forth. Perhaps
a prairie-fire disclosed the advantages of cooking game, and many a
prairie was afterwards burnt to that end before a more economical plan
was discovered. As to the effect of fire on clay, Lord Avebury observes
that clay-vessels may have been invented by (1) plastering gourds or
coco-nuts with clay to resist the fire when boiling water in them; (2)
observing the effect of fire on the clay; (3) leaving out the vegetable
part.[12] This must have been a comparatively recent discovery; though
there is some evidence of pottery having been made by palæolithic man.
It is impossible to say when fire was discovered; but it was certainly
known to the Mousterian culture—say, 50,000 years ago: probably very
much earlier; and it was made by hunters.


§ 3. MINOR AND SECONDARY CONSEQUENCES

(1) The extensive adoption by Man of a flesh-diet many hundreds
of thousands of years ago might be expected to have shortened his
alimentary canal in comparison with that of the anthropoids; but not
much evidence of it is obtainable. Topinard, giving a proportionate
estimate, says that in Man it is about six times the length of the
body, in the gibbon about eight times. Dr. Arthur Keith, in a private
communication with which he has favoured me, says that the adult
chimpanzee’s intestine is slightly longer than the adult man’s, but
that the measurements are for certain reasons unsatisfactory, and that
there have not been enough measurements of adult chimpanzees. We must
remember that, on the one hand, the chimpanzee is not exclusively
frugivorous, and that, on the other hand, it is not likely that Man has
been at any time exclusively carnivorous; though the return of large
populations to a vegetarian diet by means of agriculture is recent.

(2) Man has lost the restraint of seasonal marriage, common to the
anthropoids with other animals, as determined by food-supply and
other conditions of infantile welfare; though, according to Prof.
Westermarck, traces of it may still be found in a few tribes.[13]
That our domestic carnivores have also lost this wholesome restraint
on passion and population points, probably, to some condition of a
steadier food-supply as determining or permitting the change amongst
ourselves. No growth of prudence, however, or habit of laying up stores
can explain the steadier supply of food; since the lower savages have
no prudence and no stores. On the whole, the change may be attributed
(_a_) to an omnivorous habit being more steadily gratified than one
entirely frugivorous or carnivorous; (_b_) to our ancestors having
wandered in quest of game from country to country in which the seasons
varied, so that the original correspondence of birth-time with
favourable conditions of welfare was thrown out. There may also have
been causes that kept down the normal numbers of the pack, so as to
be equivalent, in scarce seasons, to more abundant food: the hunter’s
life, whilst securing a richer normal diet, involved many destructive
incidents. And this (by the way) was favourable to rapid selection
and adaptation; though if the destruction had been great enough to
counterbalance the advantages of animal food, it must have frustrated
the whole experiment.

(3) There is one characteristic difference of Man from the anthropoids
which his hunting habits do not clearly explain—his relatively naked
skin. Darwin attributed this condition to sexual selection.[14] He
argued that, on the one hand, so far as Man has had the power of
choice, women have been chosen for their beauty; and that, on the other
hand, women have had more power of selection, even in the savage state,
than is usually supposed, and “would generally choose not merely the
handsomest men, according to their standard of taste, but those who
were at the same time best able to defend and support them.” Hence,
if a partial loss of hair was esteemed ornamental by our ape-like
progenitors, sexual selection, operating age after age, might result in
relative nakedness. “The faces of several species of monkey and large
surfaces at the posterior end of the body have been denuded of hair;
and this we may safely attribute to sexual selection.” The beard of
the male, and the great length of the hair of the head in some races,
especially seem due to this cause. The greater hairiness of Europeans,
compared with other races, may be a case of reversion to remote
ancestral conditions. But as all races are nearly naked, the common
character was probably acquired before the several races had diverged
from the common stock.

The species of monkey that have lost the hair on various parts of their
bodies, and the beard of males (together with the longer head-hair of
women) of our own race are cases that strongly support the ascription
of such secondary sexual characters to sexual selection. Yet, going
back to the time before the division of modern Man into races (say,
600,000 years), it seems incredible that any women then went unmarried,
hair or no hair, if they were healthy (and the unhealthy soon ceased
to exist); or that any man went unmarried, if he could do his share
in the hunting-field (and, if not, he also soon ceased to exist). No
facts observed amongst extant savages—the choice exerted by women, or
the polygamy of chiefs—throw much light upon that ancient state of
affairs. There were then no chiefs: the hunt-leader of pack or clan
had no authority but his personal prowess, no tradition of ancestry or
religion, nor probably the prestige of magic, to give him command of
women. Unless, at that time, relative nakedness was strongly correlated
with personal prowess in the male and efficiency in the female, it is
difficult to understand how it can have been preserved and increased
by sexual selection. Forgive me for adding an unkind remark: if the
selection of women for their beauty has gone on for hundreds of
thousands of years, and has had a cumulative effect upon the race,
is not the result disappointing? Go into the street and look. That
“women have become more beautiful, according to the general opinion,
than men,” is not an objective, truly æsthetic judgment, but one
determined by causes of which “general opinion” is falsely unconscious.
Schopenhauer[15] thought that men are better looking than women; and of
average specimens this seems to be true; though, to be sure, he was a
sort of misogynist.

Another explanation of Man’s nakedness was suggested by Thomas Belt,
based on the parallel case of certain races of naked dogs, namely,
that he is the better able to free himself from parasites.[16] Darwin
mentions this hypothesis and, in a footnote, cites in its favour “a
practice with the Australians, when the vermin get troublesome, to
singe themselves”; but he says, in the text, “whether this evil is of
sufficient magnitude to have led to the denudation of the body through
natural selection, may be doubted, since none of the many quadrupeds
inhabiting the tropics have, as far as I know, acquired any specialised
means of relief.”[17] It appears, too, that against the probability
of such a result must be set the actual disadvantage of nakedness,
as insisted upon by Wallace, who says that savages feel the want of
protection and try to cover their backs and shoulders.[18] Still, the
disadvantage implied in occasionally feeling the want of protection
would not prevent the loss of hair, if this would deliver the race
from serious dangers from vermin; and the force of the argument from
the condition of other tropical quadrupeds depends, at least in some
measure, upon whether or not there is something peculiar in the case of
naked dogs and men.

Belt argues that the naked dogs with dark, shining skins, found in
Central America and also in Peru,[19] and which were found there at
the Spanish conquest, have probably acquired their peculiar condition
by natural selection, because they are despised by the natives, and no
care is taken of their breeding, and yet they do not interbreed with
the common hairy varieties, as usually happens with artificial stocks.
The advantage of a naked skin being the greater freedom it gives from
ticks, lice and other vermin, the advantage is especially great for a
domestic animal living in the huts of savages, where, because they are
inhabited year after year, vermin are extraordinarily abundant. The
naked dog, then, differs from tropical quadrupeds which are adapted
from a dateless antiquity to such vermin as infest them, by having been
thrown by human companionship amongst not only strange vermin, but
vermin in extraordinarily dense aggregation. Belt would have guarded a
weak point in his case, had he explained why naked races of dogs are so
scarce. Hairy races may have been more recently domesticated, or bred
for their hairiness, or less addicted to an indoor life.

The case of our own forefather also differs somewhat from that of
other tropical mammalia; because, by hypothesis, he underwent pretty
rapidly such an extraordinary change of life; which may have brought
him into circumstances where vermin, formerly negligible, became highly
injurious. “Monkeys,” as Belt observes, “change their sleeping-places
almost daily”; the Orang is said to construct a fresh nest every
night; this is also reported of the Gorilla. Not improbably, then,
daily change of locality was the practice of the original anthropoid
stock, whence we also are descended: thereby avoiding the accumulation
of vermin. Did the hunting life introduce a new habit? In the old
frugivorous forest life, the custom was to get up into some tree for
the night, and within a short radius there were hundreds equally
suitable; and, therefore, there was nothing to check the natural
preference for a fresh one. When, however, the hunting pack began to
make its lair on the ground, there was no such wide choice amongst
caves, rock-shelters, or thickets: one might be better than any
other for miles around. If, then, they settled down there as in a
common lair, the circumstances were, for the time, favourable to the
multiplication of vermin, and therefore to nakedness of skin, in order
the more easily to be rid of them. Perhaps, then, this difference of
Man from the anthropoids may be referred to one common cause with all
the others—the hunting life. There, too, the defilement of blood made
fur inconvenient to animals not apt to cleanse themselves, like those
in the true carnivorous heredity and tradition.

When we consider how injurious some insects are to vertebrate life,
being suspected of having caused in some cases the extinction of
species, can it be said that facility in ridding oneself of such vermin
as lice and ticks is an inadequate cause of human nakedness, or not one
that might outweigh the drawbacks of cold and wet? It is not, however,
incompatible with the action of sexual selection, tending to the same
result; nor, again, with the preferential destruction of hairy children
if ever infanticide was practised. A further possible ground of
deliberate selection may have been the mere ambition of differing from
other animals; for a tribe on the Upper Amazons is reported to depilate
to distinguish themselves from the monkeys, and the wish to be superior
to other animals led a tribe in Queensland to pretend that they, unlike
kangaroos, etc., have no fathers according to the flesh.[20] Admitting
that this last motive can hardly have been primitive, still, our
nakedness may be a resultant of several causes.

(4) Cannibalism, where it has been found amongst extant peoples, or
is known to have been formerly practised, was often justified by
certain magical or animistic ideas, but sometimes frankly by dietetic
taste, or by the satisfaction of revenge or of emphatic triumph
over an enemy. Was it an ancient and perhaps general custom? The
excavations at Krapina in Croatia disclosed along with remains of the
Neanderthal species, which seems to have had a habitation there, those
of rhinoceros and cave-bear and of some other kind of Man; and “some
of the human bones had been apparently split open: on that slender
basis the Krapina men have been suspected of cannibalism.”[21] If the
suspicion is valid, the practice existed (say) 50,000 years ago in one
species of Man; and perhaps much earlier, if we consider how it was
merely an extension of the practice of devouring game to include the
slain members of a hostile pack; for as primitive Man, or Lycopithecus,
his pre-human forebear, no doubt regarded other animals as upon the
same level as himself, so he will have regarded human enemies as upon
the same footing with other animals. That true carnivores are not
generally cannibals may be put down to their more ancient and perfect
adaptation to a predatory life. For them persistent cannibalism would
have been too destructive, and for us it belongs to the experimental
stage of history; though, of course, even in recent times, under stress
of famine, reversion to the practice is not unknown to civilised men.

(5) The extraordinary variability of modern Man (considered as one
species) in stature, shape of skull, size and power of brain, colour,
hairiness, quality of hair, and other characters, physical and mental,
may be referred chiefly to his having become adapted to various local
conditions upon settling here or there for long periods of time after
wandering over the world in quest of game. The settling of offshoots
of the original stock in certain regions long enough for them to
undergo adaptation to local circumstances is the simplest explanation
of existing races: the Negro adapted to equatorial Africa; the Asiatic
stock (“Mongolian”) to Central Asia; the Mediterranean race to the
neighbourhood of the sea after which it is named. As to the Nordic
sub-race (of the Mediterranean, we may suppose), with its fair hair
and skin, it has the appearance of an Arctic beast of prey, like the
Polar bear. The snow-leopard of the Himalaya is found at a midway
stage of such adaptation. Some geologists and zoologists now believe
that, during the Glacial Period, the climate of Northern Europe was
not everywhere such as necessarily to destroy the local fauna and
flora, and in that case our ancestors may for ages have maintained
themselves there; or, if that was impossible (as the absence of
palæolithic remains in Scandinavia seems to indicate), they may have
roamed for many ages along the borders of glaciation, perhaps as far
as the Pacific Coast. Chinese annals refer to fair tribes in Eastern
Siberia 200 years before the Christian era;[22] and it seems requisite
to imagine some extensive reservoir of mankind in order to explain the
origin of the vast hordes which in prehistoric as in historical times
again and again invaded Europe—hordes

                    “which the populous North
    Poured ever from her frozen loins, to pass
    Rhene or the Danau; when her barbarous sons
    Came like a deluge on the South, and spread
    Beneath Gibraltar to the Libyan sands.”

That the race was formerly fairer than it is now may be inferred from
the whiteness of its children’s hair: the trait has outlived its
utility. The occurrence of a fair complexion in some mountain tribes,
in the Alps, _e. g._, has occasioned the conjecture that it may be due
in some way to mountainous conditions,[23] of which snow might be one;
but, if we suppose that the Nordic race extended during the Glacial
Period into Western Europe (having already acquired its distinctive
characters), a fair complexion in the Alps may be understood by
supposing that, whilst the greater number of them followed the
ice-sheet back to the north-east, some followed it southward up into
the mountains—if the complexion is really ancient there.

Two objections to this hypothesis will occur to every one: (i) Why are
not the Esquimo fair? Because, I suppose, they are much more recent
immigrants into the Arctic regions, and perhaps were fully clothed when
they arrived there. (ii) Could the Nordic people have existed in such
circumstances unclothed? Whether this was possible physiologists must
judge. We see the Fuegians maintain themselves, practically naked,
under very inclement conditions. And it is not necessary to assume that
the Nordic hunters were entirely naked; since the correlation between
the hair, eyes and all parts of the skin is such that, if the whitening
of any part (say the hair) was sufficiently advantageous to determine
natural selection, the remainder of the body would be similarly
affected. And, no doubt, the Mediterranean race was always whitish.

The Amerinds seem to have been derived chiefly from the Asiatic race.
Pygmies and Australians may represent separate and still older stocks.
But, as a result of migrations and conquests, most peoples are of mixed
descent; and hence (i) individuals in the same locality sometimes
vary greatly, because they inherit the blood of different strains in
different proportions; and (ii) classification is difficult, so that
whilst some observers are content to find half a dozen races, Deniker
enumerates twenty-nine.

Besides general racial differences, there exist within each race and
within each national group further differences between individuals in
their physical, and still more in their mental, stature and ability. As
it was necessary that Man should vary greatly in undergoing adaptation
to the hunting life (as well as to different local environments), he
was in an organic condition favourable to further variation.[24] And
this has been utilised in his adaptation to a certain special condition
of his gregariousness, namely, life in the hunting-pack; for this
requires a difference of personality between leaders and followers,
first in the chase and later in war. A good democrat may think it would
have been a better plan to make all men equal from the first; and I
would it had been so; for then the head of the race would not have had
to drag along such an altogether disproportionate tail: a tail so huge
and unwieldy that one may doubt whether it can ever be extricated from
the morass of barbarism. But in the early days of gregariousness, a
pack could not have held together, or have hunted efficiently, if all
had been equal and each had exercised the right of private judgment.
So in successful packs one led and the rest followed; as they still
do, and will continue to do, of whatever kind may be the leader. And
of all structures that make up a human being the most variable is the
brain: the differences between men in stature and physique are trifling
compared with those in mental power. Whatever feat of strength your
Samson can perform, half a dozen ordinary men can also accomplish; but
in every generation tasks are carried out by intellectual athletes,
toward which all the ordinary men in the world, uniting their efforts,
could do nothing—absolutely nothing.


§ 4. PREY AND COMPETITORS

If we suppose the differentiation of the _Hominidæ_ from the
_Anthropoidea_ to have begun in the Upper Oligocene, and that the
decisive change was initiated by some ape that adopted the life of a
hunter, it is interesting to consider what the world was like in which
he lived, what sort of animals surrounded him, what animals probably
became his prey, and what were his rivals in the chase.[25]

The surface of the planet was less mountainous than at present; in
Europe the Pyrenees had risen, but the Alps were only beginning to
rise; and in Asia the Himalayas began to dominate the world only in
the middle of the next epoch, the Miocene. The distribution of land
and water, too, was very different in the Oligocene from that which
we now see: Europe was divided from Asia by a broad gulf stretching
from the Indian Ocean to the Arctic Circle, and an arm of this gulf
toward the west submerged a great part of Central Europe; Asia was
broadly connected with North America, where now the sea penetrates
between Siberia and Alaska; Africa had no connection with either
Europe or Asia; North and South America were separated—perhaps at
Panama. In the Miocene, Europe, Asia and Africa became united. These
physiographic changes may have affected climate; for during the Eocene
tropical conditions prevailed far to the north, and coal-beds were laid
down in Alaska; but from the Oligocene onwards there was a gradual
fall of temperature, slow at first, but ending (for the present) in
the cataclysms of the Glacial Period. There was also a decrease in
some regions of atmospheric moisture, which determines the density of
vegetation. In its general character the vegetation was similar to
that which now prevails in tropical, subtropical and temperate regions
of the world. The species of plants now existing had not yet arrived;
but of the same genera and families as those we see, conifers, palms
and dicotyledonous flowering plants crowded the forests and overhung
the rivers. The forests were more extensive and continuous than ours
outside the tropics; for by degrees browsing animals, feeding down
the young trees, check the renovation of forests and clear open
spaces, where grasses grow; changes of temperature limit the northern
or southern extension of certain kinds of plants, and a failure of
humidity starves all the larger kinds; converting, at successive
stages, forest into steppe and steppe into desert.

Animals, especially mammalia, with which chiefly we are concerned,
were, at the close of the Oligocene, very different from any that now
roam the lands; all the species, most genera, many families and some
whole orders have since disappeared. But there were plenty to eat and a
good many to dread. Until we know the neighbourhood in which our ape’s
adventures began, nothing precise can be said of his circumstances.
Probably it was somewhere in the Old World, and probably it was in
Asia. Unfortunately, we know nothing of the zoological antiquities of
Asia until the early Miocene, and even then a very small selection
of what must have existed, because geologists have hitherto explored
a very small part of the continent—a few beds in north-western and
northern India and in Burmah. But there is so much evidence of the
migrations of animals in successive ages of the Tertiary Period, that
any remains from the Oligocene and Miocene will help us to understand
what sort of neighbours our remote ancestors had to live amongst.

For prey there was great variety of birds and reptiles (everywhere
eaten by savages) and fishes; but we are most concerned with the
mammalia, which he may be supposed to have pursued afoot. Of these
the most important are the hoofed animals, which fall into two great
groups, perhaps not closely connected—the odd-toed (Perissodactyls)
and the even-toed (Artiodactyls). During the Oligocene there lived in
Europe, or in North America, or in both—and, therefore, probably in
Asia—numbers of the odd-toed group: tapirs; rhinoceroses of several
species, some without horns, some with, some amphibious (Amynodonts),
all smaller than their modern representatives; chalicotheres, strange
beasts something like horses, but instead of hoofs they had claws
on their toes—perhaps survived in China into the Pleistocene;
small predecessors of the horse with three toes on each foot;
titanotheres, hugest animals of their age, extinct in the middle of
it—something like the rhinoceros and nearly as big as an elephant
(_Brontotherium_). Of the even-toed group, pig-like animals abounded,
and some true pigs appeared; entelodonts, or giant-pigs, were common;
anthracotheres, somewhat pig-like in size and shape; ancestral camels
about the size of sheep were to be had in North America; oreodonts,
unfinished-looking creatures of many species; primitive deer and other
ruminants, small in size and not having yet grown any horns. In Europe,
during the Upper Oligocene, cœnotheres, small and graceful animals,
lived in large herds around the lakes. There were also primitive
proboscidia about half the size of modern elephants; many insectivores;
and, amongst rodents, beavers and tailless hares. Generally, animals
of this age that have left descendants were smaller than their modern
representatives; and notably their brains were smaller.

In the Lower and Middle Miocene there appeared also horned cervuline
deer, chevrotaines, and horned antelopes; dinotheres and mastodons,
probably from Africa; primitive hedgehogs, moles and shrews; and in the
Upper Miocene, hipparion, true hares, several varieties of hornless
giraffe, true deer, and ancestral sheep. True horses and cattle are
first known from Pliocene beds; but it is needless to follow the story
further: the fauna becomes more and more modern in its character, and
uncouth forms die out.

Anthropoids are first met with in the Miocene and in Europe:
pliopithecus, allied to the gibbons, in the Lower; and dryopithecus,
related to the chimpanzee, in the Middle Miocene; but they are believed
to have come from Asia. There, in Pliocene beds of the Siwaliks
(southern foot-hills of the Himalayas), occur the orang and chimpanzee,
besides macaques, langurs and baboons. Since the orang is now found
only in Borneo and Sumatra, and the chimpanzee only in Africa,
southern Asia seems to have been the centre from which the anthropoids
dispersed; and this seems to be the chief positive ground for believing
that the human stock began to be differentiated in that region. Since,
again, by the Middle Miocene a chimpanzee form had already migrated
into Europe, it may be assumed that the orang was already distinct from
it (and perhaps had spread eastward): the differentiation of these
genera must, therefore, have happened earlier; and, therefore, also the
differentiation of the human stock; so that this event cannot be put
later than some time in the Oligocene.

How big was Lycopithecus to begin with? The answer to this question
must affect our view of his relations both to prey and to enemies.
Inasmuch as the three extant anthropoids and Man are all of about the
same size, there is a presumption that their common ancestor was in
stature superior to the gibbons and to the largest monkeys—in fact,
a “giant” ape (to borrow a term from Dr. Keith). Dryopithecus “was
smaller than the chimpanzee, but much larger than the gibbon.”[26]
Awaiting further evidence of fossils, which is much to be desired,
it is probable, on the whole, that Lycopithecus weighed less on the
average than modern man, but more than the wolf.

As to competitors and aggressive enemies, there were snakes and
crocodiles; but, confining our attention to carnivorous mammals, the
time seems to have been favourable to the enterprise of a new hunter.
By the middle of the Oligocene, the ancient Creodonts (primitive
flesh-eaters which had flourished in the Eocene) were nearly extinct,
represented in the deposits by their last surviving family, the
Hyœnodonts. Ancestors of the modern carnivores, such as may be called
by anticipation dogs and cats, derived (according to Prof. Scott) from
the Creodont Family of the Miacidæ, were becoming numerous, but for the
most part were still of small size. Apparently, the primitive dogs and
their allies must, for some time, have been more formidable adversaries
than the primitive cats, especially if we suppose them to have already
begun to hunt in pack; and this is not improbable, both on account of
their structure and because several distinct varieties and even genera,
now extant, have that habit—such as wolf, jackal, dingo, dhole, Cape
hunting-dog, etc. In the Upper Oligocene of North America, occurs a
dog as big as a large modern wolf, and in Europe the bear-like dog,
Amphicyon, of about the same size, but said to have been clumsy and
slow-moving. There were several other dog-like species; they continue
in the Miocene, and some of them increase in bulk; but true modern dogs
or wolves (_Canis_) do not appear before the Pliocene. Then, too, first
occur true bears (_Ursus_); hyænas in the Upper Miocene. “Cats” belong
to two sub-families: (i) the true felines, our modern species and
their ancestors; and (ii) the machærodonts, or sabre-toothed cats. The
latter first appear in North America in the Lower Oligocene; the former
in Europe in the Middle Oligocene. The sabre-tooths are so called from
their thin, curved upper canines; which were so long (3 to 6 inches)
that it is not easy to understand how they could open their mouths
wide enough to bite with them. That they were effective in some way
is proved by the fact that machærodonts, first appearing in the Lower
Oligocene, increased in numbers and diversity of species for ages, and
some of them in bulk. In North America, in the Upper Oligocene, one
species was as large as a jaguar, and some of the biggest and most
terrifying were contemporary with Man, and only became extinct in the
Pleistocene. Their limbs were relatively shorter and thicker than those
of the _Felinæ_. These, the true cats, at first progressed more slowly
than the _Machærodontidæ_; but in the Siwalik deposits (Pliocene)
there occur, along with machærodonts, forms resembling the leopard
and the lynx, with others as large as tigers. The largest of all this
group seems to have been the cave-lion, perhaps a large variety of
the common African lion, which also lived with Man in Europe in the
Pleistocene. These were serious competitors in the hunting-life of
Lycopithecus and of primitive Man; and the effect of such competition
in exterminating inferior forms is shown by the fate of the carnivorous
marsupials of South America (allied to _Thylacinus_), which were the
predatory fauna of that region, until in the Pliocene, North and South
America having become united by continuous land, cats and dogs came
in from the northern continent and put an end to them; and also by
the fate of the creodonts, which in the Oligocene seem everywhere to
have been exterminated by the new carnivores. In both cases the beaten
competitors were very inferior in the size and complexity of their
brains; and if Man has succeeded in the struggle for life against the
same foes, in spite of his inferior bodily adaptation, it is probably
due to his very superior brains. This may also be the reason why
modern Man (_Homo sapiens!_), wandering everywhere over the world,
has everywhere exterminated such experiments in human nature as
Pithecanthropus, Eoanthropus, and Neanderthalensis; as others are soon
to follow them into the Hades of extinct species.

These few pages give a ridiculously faint sketch of the animal world
amidst which our remote ancestors began their career. But it may
serve to indicate that there was always plenty to eat if you could
kill it, and plenty of rivals who wanted their share. After the
disappearance of the dinosaurs at the close of the Cretaceous period,
the mammalia, already numerous, developed rapidly, and spread in ever
multiplying numbers and diverging shapes over the whole area of the
land. We may take it that from the Middle Eocene (at least) onwards
the earth has always been as full of wild beasts as it would hold. To
understand what it was like in the Middle Oligocene, one should read
the adventures of hunters in South Africa seventy or eighty years
ago (their verisimilitude is vouched for by Livingstone),[27] before
a gun in the hands of every Kaffir had begun to thin the vast herds
that then covered the whole landscape, and in whose numbers the wild
hunters and the lions could make no appreciable diminution. The little
Bushmen regarded themselves and the lions as joint owners and masters
of all the game. The masters fought one another, indeed; but there was
no necessity to fight, for there was more than enough for both: lions
were then sometimes met in gangs of ten or a dozen. Game throughout
the Cainozoic ages was abundant and of all sizes: many small, many
middle-sized and some prodigious. Even in the Eocene, some of the
Amblypoda (_Dinoceras_, Am.) and of the Barypoda (_Arsinotherium_,
Af.) were as big as rhinoceroses; in the Oligocene, Titanotheres not
much smaller than elephants; in South America, in Miocene and Pliocene
times, the Toxodonts; in the Pleistocene, Ground-sloths of huge
bulk, and Glyptodonts. Of Families still represented amongst living
animals, dinotheres and mastodons occur in the Miocene; and elephant,
rhinoceros, hippopotamus, giraffe have abounded from the Pliocene to
recent times, in many species, over most of Africa and the northern
hemisphere. Even the marsupials in Australia produced a species
(_Diprotodon_) as large as a rhinoceros with a skull three feet long.
Any one of these would have been a meal for a whole pack of hunters, if
they could kill it—as we may be sure they could.


§ 5. CONCLUSION

From the addiction of some ancestral ape to animal food, and to
the life of a hunter in order to obtain it, then, the special
characteristics of Man seem to be natural consequences. The
hypothesis from which everything follows is exceptionally simple and
moderate. It is generally admitted that our ancestor was a large
anthropoid—possibly more gregarious than others, possibly more apt to
live upon the ground; but neither of these suppositions is requisite.
He was adapted to his life, as the chimpanzee and gorilla are to
theirs: in which, probably, they have gone on with little change for
ages. But into his life a disturbing factor entered—the impulse to
attack, hunt and eat animals, which extensively replaced his former
peaceable, frugivorous habit. The cause of this change may have been a
failure in the supply of his usual diet, or an “accidental variation”
of appetite. Not a great number need have shared in the hunting
impulse; it is enough that a few should have felt it, or even one. If
advantageous and inheritable, it would spread through his descendants.
It was advantageous (_a_) in enlarging their resources of nutrition,
and (_b_) in enabling them to escape from the tropical forest. On
the other hand, to those least fit for the new life it brought the
disadvantages of more strenuous exertion and of competition with other
carnivorous types. But with hands and superior intelligence, those
that had the requisite character succeeded. There was rapid selection
of those whose variations of structure, character, activity were most
effective in dealing with game and with enemies; especially of those
who combined and co-operated, and learned to direct co-operation by
some rudimentary speech.

But, again, the hunting impulse here assumed to have possessed some
anthropoid was not something entirely new; anthropoids and many
other Primates are known to seize and devour birds, lizards and even
small mammals when chance offers an easy opportunity. It is merely a
greater persistence in this behaviour that turns it into hunting.
How very improbable that such a change should _not_ sometimes occur!
Is it not likely to have occurred often, and with many failures?
Similarly, of the resulting changes: the differentiation of our hands
and feet is only an advance upon what you see in the gorilla; as for
our ground-life, can the adult male gorilla be fairly called arboreal?
Several Primates use unwrought weapons; most of them lead a gregarious
life, to which our own is a return; they are co-operative at least in
defence; like many other animals, they communicate by gestures and
inarticulate vocal cries. Co-operative hunting, indeed, seems to be
new in our Order; but since wolves and dogs, or their ancestors, fell
in with it some time or other, why should it be beyond the capacity of
apes? On second thoughts, is the co-operative raiding of plantations
by baboons something altogether different from hunting in pack? Thus
at each occasion of change in structure or function, Lycopithecus
merely carried some tendency of the other Primates a little further,
and a little further; until, certainly, he went a long way. The whole
movement can be distinctly pictured throughout, and it has an air of
being natural or even inevitable. Few hypotheses ask us to grant less
than this one.

Moreover, if the story is not true, Man is an exception to the rule
of animal life, that the structure of every organism is made up
of apparatus subserving its peculiar conditions of nutrition and
reproduction. Indeed, conditions of nutrition are the ground of the
differentiation of animals and plants. Conditions of reproduction need
not here be considered, as the apparatus is the same in the anthropoids
and in ourselves. With many species to avoid being eaten and to mate
are the reasons for some secondary characters, such as protective
armour or coloration, fleetness with its correlative structures,
nuptial plumage, and so forth. But to avoid being eaten and to mate,
it is first of all necessary to eat and live; and accordingly, for
each sort of animal, starting from the organisation of some earlier
stock, its structure and activities are determined by the kind of food
it gets, and the conditions of getting it: in our case, the hunting of
game afoot.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] This was suggested to me by Mr. G. A. Garfitt.

[2]

[Illustration]

Estimated duration of the Cainozoic Period, assuming that the thickness
of the deposits is about 63,000 feet, and that deposits accumulate at
the rate of 1 foot in 100 years. Drawn to the scale of 1 mm. to 100,000
years. The estimate is given and explained by Prof. Sollas in the
_Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society_, LXV. (1909). The “tree”
is based on that given by Dr. A. Keith in _The Antiquity of Man_, p.
509.

If we suppose the differentiation of the _Hominidæ_ to have begun
before the close of the Oligocene, about (say) 3,500,000 years are
allowed for the evolution of the existing species of Man. All these
reckonings are provisional.

[3] That Man was from the first a hunter has been suggested by several
authors; but the consequences of the assumption have never (as far as I
know) been worked out. A. R. Wallace, in _Darwinism_ (p. 459), has the
following passage: “The anthropoid apes, as well as most of the monkey
tribe, are essentially arboreal in their structure, whereas the great
distinctive character of man is his special adaptation to terrestrial
locomotion. We can hardly suppose, therefore, that he originated in a
forest region, where fruits to be obtained by climbing are the chief
vegetable food. It is more probable that he began his existence on the
open plains on high plateaux of the temperate or subtropical zone,
where the seeds of indigenous cereals, numerous herbivora, rodents,
game-birds, with fishes and molluscs in the lakes and rivers and seas
supplied him with an abundance of varied food. In such a region he
would develop skill as a hunter, trapper or fisherman, and later as a
herdsman and cultivator—a succession of which we find indications in
the palæolithic and neolithic races of Europe.”

Prof. MacBride, in his popular introduction to _Zoology_ (p. 84), also
traces the specialisation of Man to the hunting life.

My friend Mr. Thomas Whittaker has sent me the following extract
from Comte’s _Politique Positive_, I. pp. 604-5: “L’obligation de se
nourrir d’une proie qu’il faut atteindre et vaincre, perfectionne à
la fois tous les attributs animaux, tant intérieurs qu’extérieurs.
Son influence envers les sens et les muscles est trop évidente pour
exiger ici aucun examen. Par sa réaction habituelle sur les plus
hautes fonctions du cerveau, elle développe également l’intelligence
et l’activité, dont le premier essor lui est toujours dû, même chez
notre espèce. A tous ces tîtres, cette nécessité modifie aussi les
races qui en sont victimes, d’après les efforts moins énergiques, mais
plus continus, qu’elle y provoque pour leur défense. Dans les deux
cas, et surtout quant à l’attaque, elle détermine même les prémières
habitudes de co-opération active, au moins temporaire. Bornées à
la simple famille chez les espèces insociables, ces ligues peuvent
ailleurs embrasser quelquefois de nombreuses troupes. Ainsi commencent,
parmi les animaux, des impulsions et des aptitudes qui ne pouvaient se
développer que d’après la continuité propre à la race la plus sociable
et la plus intelligente. Enfin, la condition carnassière doit aussi
être appreciée dans sa réaction organique. Une plus forte excitation,
une digestion moins laborieuse et plus rapide, une assimilation
plus complète produisant un sang plus stimulant: telles sont ses
propriétés physiologiques. Toutes concourent à développer les fonctions
supérieures, soit en augmentant l’énergie de leurs organes, soit en
procurant plus de temps pour leur exercice.”

[4] F. Wood Jones, _Arboreal Man_, pp. 117-22.

[5] On these paragraphs—(3), (4), (5), (6), (7)—see Darwin’s _Descent
of Man_, 2nd ed., pp. 49-54: whence, of course, I have freely borrowed.

[6] Numerous references might be given, from which I select Hagenbeck,
_Beasts and Men_, p. 63.

[7] R. L. Garner, _Gorillas and Chimpanzees_, ch. vi.: where
mention is made of such meanings as “food,” “calling to some one,”
“affection,” “good” (said, I suppose, of food), “warning cries,” “cold
or discomfort,” “drink,” “illness,” “dead”: the entire vocabulary,
perhaps, not more than twenty signs. The value of Garner’s work is
disputed.

[8] _Natural Selection_, p. 193.

[9] Avebury, _Prehistoric Times_, 7th ed., p. 578.

[10] Spencer and Gillen, _Northern Tribes of Central Australia_, p. 619.

[11] Turner’s _Samoa_, p. 285.

[12] _Op. cit._, p. 579.

[13] _Primitive Marriage_, ch. ii.

[14] _Descent of Man_, 2nd ed., pp. 595-604.

[15] _Parerga and Paralipomena_, B. II, Kap. 27.

[16] _A Naturalist in Nicaragua_, ch. xi.

[17] _Op. cit._, p. 57.

[18] _Natural Selection_, pp. 195-7.

[19] Naked races of dogs have also been reported to exist in China,
Manila and South Africa; but I can learn no particulars of them.

[20] W. E. Ling Roth, _North Queensland Ethnology_, Bulletin V. § 81.

[21] A. Keith, _The Antiquity of Man_, p. 134.

[22] M. A. Czaplicka, _My Siberian Year_, p. 230.

[23] Ripley, _The Races of Europe_, pp. 76-7.

[24] Darwin, _Animals and Plants under Domestication_, Pop. ed., II. p.
308.

[25] The contents of this section lie outside my own studies, and have
been taken from various books of Geology and Palæontology: I must
especially mention Prof. Osborne’s _Age of Mammals_ (1910) and Prof.
Scott’s _Land Mammals in the Western Hemisphere_ (1913). I have also
profited by inspecting the Palæontological Gallery at South Kensington
with the help of its excellent Guide-Book.

[26] A. Keith, _The Human Body_, p. 58.

[27] _Travels and Researches in Western Africa_, ch. vii.




