CHAPTER IV

MAGIC

  “The histories I borrow, I refer them to the consciences of those I
  take them from.”—_Montaigne_, I. 20.


§ 1. ANTIQUITY OF MAGIC

Magic, until recently, was somewhat neglected by those who treated of
savage ideas. In Sir E. B. Tylor’s _Primitive Culture_ only one chapter
is given to Magic, against seven to Animism (belief in the agency of
spirits). In Spencer’s _Sociology_, Part I. is almost wholly devoted
to the genesis and development of Animism, without a single chapter on
Magic. The importance of early Animism became such an obsession, that
travellers observed and reported upon it wherever they went, making
only casual references to Magic—much to our loss. The tradition of
this way of thinking seems to run back to Hume’s _Natural History
of Religion_, where he traces the development of religion from a
primitive belief that all natural activities are like our own, and
that everything is possessed and actuated by a spirit. This idea was
adopted by Comte, and elaborated in his celebrated law of the three
stages of the explanation of Nature as determining the growth of human
culture: Fetichism, which ascribes all causation to the particular will
of each object, and which by generalisation leads through polytheism to
monotheism; Metaphysics, which, giving up the notion of personal will,
attributes the activities of things to abstract forces; and Positivism,
which, discarding the variety of forces that can never be known, turns
to the exact description of the order of phenomena. Mill, in turn,
adopted these doctrines from Comte, and gave them currency amongst us,
as part of the extraordinary influence which for many years he exerted
upon all our thoughts. Hence the priority of Animism to every other
theory of things seemed at that time a matter of course.

Recently there have been signs that this conception of primitive
thought is giving way to another, namely, that Animism was preceded
by Magic. Sir J. G. Frazer puts it, that the idea of Magic is simpler
than that of Animism; that Magic is found in full force amongst people
whose Animism is feebly developed, and that its beliefs are more
uniform throughout the world.[101] Substantially—with qualifications
that will appear hereafter—this view of the matter is here accepted.
When one comes to argue it, to produce the primitive facts is, of
course, impossible. It must even be admitted that such evidence as we
have amongst the few facts collected of late years concerning ancient
races of men, gives the earlier date to animistic ideas; for if some of
the cave-paintings of Aurignacian origin, in which, for example, wild
cattle are shown pierced with arrows, may be interpreted as of magical
significance; on the other hand, the burial at Le Moustier, still more
ancient, shows a regard for the corpse, in the disposal of it and in
the things left with it, such as usually goes with the ghost-theory.
These discoveries take us back some thousands of years before Menes;
but probably leave us far from the beginning of human ideas concerning
the supernatural.

If Magic preceded Animism, we must insert a stage of thought at
the beginning of Comte’s series, making four instead of three; and
the suggestion may perhaps be made to appear plausible, that the
Metaphysical stage, the reign of occult forces in explanation, is not
a mere residue of Fetichism after the spirit has departed, but rather
the re-emergence into daylight of magical ideas of force, that always
persisted, but for ages were kept in comparative obscurity by the vogue
of Animism.


§ 2. WHAT IS MAGIC?

In his _Development of Moral Ideas_ (II. 47) Prof. Westermarck observes
that savages distinguish two classes of phenomena; the natural or
familiar, and the supernatural or mysterious. The latter again are
divided into the mechanical (Magic) and the volitional (Animism).
This seems to be true: it corrects the notion, still common, that the
savage explains all natural activities by Animism; recognises that
he takes some phenomena as a matter of course, as the animals do;
and, as to events that are not a matter of course, rightly marks the
distinction between his conceptions of them as either mechanical (due
to some uniformly acting force) or volitional (that is, arbitrary or
capricious). With the savage, then, there are ongoings of things around
him that are _perceived_ to be regular and continuous; and there are
others between which connections are _imagined_ to take place, and
these either regularly or capriciously: for thus I venture to interpret
the difference between the natural and the supernatural; it is the
difference between perception-belief and imagination-belief. Common
sense, Magic, Animism—these are the three great congeries of ideas
that compete for the control of his thoughts and in his interpretation
of the world.

Magic may be defined as a connexion of events imagined to be constant
and to depend upon the agency of some thing or activity possessing an
efficacious quality or force (in fact unreal), and not to depend (as a
connexion) upon the will of any particular person.

Whether Magic is ever wrought by the bare wish or will of a human
being will be discussed below (§ 6). Here, the proviso that a magical
connexion does not depend upon the will of a person, is meant to
exclude Animism. For pure Animism involves the belief that a ghost,
spirit, or god (though he may work by Magic) can produce an effect by
his direct action, without using any visible or invisible means other
than his own spiritual body and force. This is not what a magician
does: he works by means of a connexion of events known (so he thinks)
to himself and often to others. The magical implement (talisman or
spell) that he uses has qualities that are magical facts, just as
the qualities of his spear are physical facts. He can make a stone
spear-head by means of another stone; and he may be able to make a
talisman by means of a spell; but the powers of the talisman or of the
spell are their own; he cannot create Magic, but only discover and use
it. Whether he shall use it, depends upon his choice; but its powers
do not; they are inherent, like physical forces. Faust can conjure
the devil; but so can Wagner, if he knows the spell: the power of the
spell is indifferent to the conjuror. A man may, indeed, be a source of
magical power because he is a chief, or has the evil eye, or is taboo
for unpurged homicide; but these things do not depend upon his will; he
is in the same class with impersonal things that are magical.

A rule of Magic, as describing a uniform connexion of events, resembles
what we call a law of nature; and further in this, that it is not
supposed to be absolute or unconditional, but a tendency, subject to
counteraction by hostile Magic or (perhaps) by demonic force. But it
differs from a law of nature in being wholly imaginary and incapable of
verification.

To practise Magic is to use some such rule in order to obtain an end
desired. This can be attempted by any man, so far as his knowledge
reaches; and the greater his knowledge the greater his power, provided
he have the courage to act upon it. All stages of proficiency may be
traced from the simple layman who swings a bull-roarer to raise the
wind, to the wizard who lives by his art, and is feared by all his
tribe and far beyond it, or to the erudite magician who controls the
demons and vies with the gods.

Magical things, objects or actions, in their simplest forms, are
charms, spells and rites; and since the ends for which they can be used
are either to protect oneself or to exert power over other persons
or things, each of these kinds of magic-thing may be defensive or
offensive. A defensive charm is called an amulet; an offensive charm is
a talisman. For a defensive spell (say, against sickness or accident)
there is, I believe, no appropriate name; offensive spells (say, to
control the weather or to curse an enemy) may be called incantations
(but the usage is not fixed). Rites (that is, any magic actions that
are not spells) may also be defensive (as to touch wood), or offensive
(as to point at a man); but we have no names for these different
intentions. From these simplest beginnings the whole learning and
mystery of Magic seems to have developed.


§ 3. THE BEGINNINGS OF MAGIC

The quest of origins is fascinating, because, if successful, it will
help us to frame that outline of the history of the world which the
philosophic mind regards as a necessary of life. To discuss the
beginnings of Magic must necessarily be, in some measure, a speculative
undertaking; because the facts are lost. If Magic was practised in the
Aurignacian culture (say) 20,000 years ago, how can we get to the back
of it? But speculation is not guess-work, if we always keep in view
such facts as we have; if we are careful to give notice whenever the
facts fail us; if we guide ourselves by scientific principles; and if
we make no assumptions merely to suit our case, but only such as are
generally admitted in all departments. For example:

(1) We may reasonably assume that the simplest magical beliefs and
practices are of the earliest type: and nothing can be simpler than the
belief in charms, rites and spells. It is, indeed, difficult to find
many of these practices—though some can be produced—in their simplest
forms in our records of backward peoples; partly because they have
not been enough observed; partly because Magic is apt everywhere to
become saturated with Animism; partly because charms, rites and spells
are generally, for greater efficacy, compounded with one another. But
these considerations do not affect the simplicity of the idea involved
in the magical beliefs; which is merely this, that a certain object by
its presence, or that an action, or an utterance, by merely entering
into the course of events, will serve our purpose. A bare uniformity
of connexion—if _A_, then _B_—in accordance with the familiar
ongoings of Nature and our common activities, is all that is assumed.
Many kinds of obstacles stop an arrow or a dart; carrion collects the
vultures: so a patterned comb in one’s hair stops the demon of disease;
a patterned quiver, or a certain song, brings the monkeys down from
the tree-tops.[102] A spell assumes merely that certain objects,
or animals, or spirits, must always comply with a wish or command
expressed in words, just as another human being often does. It is their
supposed uniform coerciveness that makes the words magical. If any
form of words ever seems to have been successful, it must be repeated;
because to have the same effect the action must be the same. Immersed
in an indefinite mass of experiences, the postulate that we call “cause
and effect” (unformulated, of course) underlies every action, and
therefore underlies Magic; it is the ground of all expectation and of
all confidence.

(2) The types of Magic that are the most prevalent are probably the
earliest; and these are charms, rites and spells. They are found not
only amongst savages, but the world over: even in civilised countries
most of the uneducated, many of the half-educated, and not a few of
those who have “finished their education,” employ them; whereas more
complicated magical practices, except such as have been taken up
into religious celebrations, are apt to fall into desuetude. What is
universal must be adapted to very simple conditions of existence; these
beliefs, therefore, to mental wants and proclivities that are probably
primitive; and what conditions can be more simple, or more primitive,
or more universal than ignorance of our fate and eagerness to clutch at
anything that may give us confidence.

And not only are charms, rites and spells in all ages and everywhere
employed in their simplest forms; but analysis of the most elaborate
ritual and of nominally animistic practices will discover the same
beliefs at the bottom of them. The idea of the amulet or the talisman
is found in fetiches, beads, praying-wheels, and equally in a long
mimetic dance or a passion-play; whose central purpose always is to
avert some evil or to secure some good—success in hunting, or war, or
agriculture. Similarly, the spell is involved in all rites, so far as
verbal formulæ are used in them; and in all curses or prayers, so far
as their efficacy depends upon a sound form of words.

The persistence of magical beliefs amongst civilised people is, in some
measure, due to tradition; though the tradition could not continue
effective if there were not in every generation a predisposition to
accept it; and how far it is due to tradition, how far to a spontaneous
proclivity, in any one who is inclined to believe in charms, rites
and spells, he himself must judge as best he can. Superstition having
been at one time extremely useful socially, there is some presumption
that tribes addicted to it (within limits) had an advantage, and that
the disposition became hereditary. It is a recent acquisition compared
with the love of climbing; but once ingrained, it must remain till
disutility breeds it out. Meanwhile, it is a stain on the human soul.
So much of one’s early life is always forgotten that no one can be sure
that he was not inoculated with such notions in childhood; especially
when we consider that religious practices, taught before they can be
well understood, must often wear a magical habit to a child; and that
medicines, whose operations nobody used to understand, were on the
same foot with Magic. For my own part, bating the last considerations,
I cannot remember ever to have heard in childhood any sort of Magic
spoken of except with amusement; yet magical beliefs have always
haunted me. With Animism it was otherwise. When six or seven years old,
I was told by a nursemaid—a convinced adherent of one of the many
little sects that have ramified out of Wesleyanism in Cornwall—the
most appalling ghost-stories; and these stories, exciting no doubt
an ancient disposition, and reinforced by a visualising faculty that
nightly peopled the darkness with innumerable spectres, entirely
overpowered the teachings of those whom there was better reason to
trust, that ghosts are a superstition from which true religion has
for ever set us free. The effects lasted into middle age. Andrew Lang
said of ghosts that “he did not believe, but he trembled”; and that
precisely describes my own state of mind for many years. Now, as to
Magic, my impression is that had it been suggested to me in a serious
way, and not merely by casual allusions to “luck,” the experience
would have stuck in my memory. The first time that I can remember
practising rites, I was between ten and eleven years old, living at a
small boarding-school. To keep off a dreaded event, I used to go every
morning to the pump, fill my mouth with water and spurt it out in a
violent stream—three times. This went on for some weeks. To the best
of my recollection, the impulse was spontaneous, and I cannot remember
why the particular rite was adopted: to spout water out of the mouth
may have been symbolic of a pushing away of what was feared; but I do
not think I was conscious of that meaning. Nothing further of the kind
recurs to me until about the age of fifteen, when, at another school,
the master-passion of my life was cricket; and I always practised some
rite before going on the field, and carried a charm in my pocket; but I
cannot recall what they were. At present, a day rarely passes without
my experiencing some impulse to practise Magic. In lighting my first
pipe in the morning (for example), if I remember how I lit it, where I
struck the match, etc., yesterday, and if no misfortune has happened
since, I feel an unmistakable impulse to “light up” again in the same
way. No reason is distinctly present to me for acting so, and therefore
it is hazardous to analyse the attitude; but it is not merely incipient
habit: to the best of my judgment it is this, that such a way of
lighting my pipe was one amongst the antecedents of a quiet time, and
that it will be well to reinstate as many of them as possible. It is
more comfortable to do it than to alter it: one feels more confident.

Inquiry amongst my friends shows that some have similar experiences,
and others (both men and women) have not. A _questionnaire_ on such
a point might be useful; but difficult to arrange without giving
suggestion or exciting bias.[103]

(3) There are causes originating the belief in charms, rites and spells
so simple that nothing could be more natural to the primitive human
mind. What is more universally powerful in producing belief in the
connexion of events, and consequent expectancy of repetition, than an
interesting coincidence? If, says Sir E. F. im Thurn,[104] a Carib
sees a rock in any way abnormal or curious, and if shortly afterwards
any evil happens to him, he regards rock and evil as cause and effect,
and perceives in the rock a spirit. This is animistic; but the same
tendency to be impressed by coincidence underlies Magic. For example:
A hunting party of Esquimos met with no game. One of them went back
to the sledges and got the ham-bone of a dog to eat. Returning with
this in his hand, he met and killed a seal. Ever afterwards he carried
a ham-bone in his hand when hunting.[105] The ham-bone had become a
talisman. Such a mental state as the Esquimo’s used to be ascribed
to the association of ideas; but it is better to consider it as an
empirical judgment. Other circumstances of the event may have been
associated in his mind; but as to the ham-bone and the kill, he thinks
of them together, and judges that they are connected. Then, having
judged that the ham-bone influenced the kill, he carries it with him in
future in order to repeat the conditions of success.

We may perhaps discern the moment when Magic first fastened upon the
human mind by considering how the use of weapons and snares by the
primitive hunter impaired his sense of the mechanical continuity of
the work. In a struggle with prey body to body, success or failure
was thoroughly understood; but with the use of weapons and snares it
became conditional upon the quality of these aids and upon his skill
with them: more and more conditional as the number of steps increased
between the first preparation and the event; at any one of which
unforeseen occurrences might frustrate his plans. Hence an irresistible
desire to strengthen and insure every step of his task; and to gratify
this desire Magic arose.

That Magic should depend upon the assumption that “things connected
in thought are connected in fact” seems unintelligible, until we
consider that the thought in which they are connected is a judgment
concerning the facts. But how is it possible to judge so foolishly?
Absurd association is intelligible; it cannot be helped; but judgment
is not a passive process. Well: a logician might interpret the case
as a fallacy in applying the inductive canons: the Esquimo had two
instances: (_a_) no ham-bone, no seal; (_b_) ham-bone, seal: or, again,
into the circumstances of his expedition he introduced a ham-bone,
and the seal followed. Therefore, the carrying of a ham-bone was the
cause of getting a seal. He had not read Mill, and did not know what
precautions should be taken before adopting such conclusions. The mind
must have begun in this way; and after many thousands of years, the
opportunities of error in empirical judgment began to be appreciated,
and the canons were formulated. The experience of every man at every
stage of life, personal or social (probably evoking an inherited
disposition), continually impresses him with the belief in some
connexion of antecedent and consequent, that each event arises out of
others. But what it is in the antecedent that determines the event can
never, in practical affairs, be exactly known. In definite cases, where
method is applicable, we may analyse the consequent into the tendencies
of forces in amount and direction; or we may sometimes reproduce it by
an experiment exactly controlled. But where these resources fail us, as
they often do in practical affairs, we are little confident of grasping
all, or even the chief conditions of any event that interests us. The
savage knows nothing of method, and, therefore, feels less distrust.
He learns something of the conditions of success in hunting; this is
biologically necessary to him as it is to a tiger; only those survive
that learn them. He knows that he must have weapons as efficient as
possible, must go to the habitat of his prey, must not be heard, or
seen, or smelt. But with all precautions he sometimes fails; therefore
there must be some other condition which he does not understand. Hence
anything observed, or any word or action, that happens to be followed
by success, may have been a means to that success.

And if it once has been, it always will be: not that he thinks of
it in this general way. But even animals, as soon as they have
learnt a sequence, trust to it. Dogs and cats learn faster than
guinea-pigs; monkeys faster than dogs and cats; man quicker still.
But in no case would there be any use in learning, if it did not
lead to action as if the experience had been generalised. There is
no mystery in generalisation; it is spontaneous, and only waits for
language to express itself; the difficult thing to acquire is caution.
In default of method, the only test of truth is relative constancy
in experience—_per enumerationem simplicem_—faulty but broadly
effective; which requires time and practice. Primitive Magic is an
incautious, unexpressed generalisation; and the conditions are such
that the error cannot be easily detected. As long as a savage follows
the instinctive, traditionary and acquired knowledge that he has of
hunting, practices based on wrong judgments, but not interfering with
the traditionary art, such as the carrying about of a bone, or a
crystal, or having a special pattern on his quiver, cannot impair his
success; may add to it by increasing his confidence: so that as long as
success lasts there is nothing to suggest the falsity of the judgment.
A series of failures may make the hunter throw away his talisman, or
(at a later stage of Magic) take it to a medicine-man to be redoctored.
How many thousands of times may Magic have begun in this way and lost
its hold again, before the human mind became chronically infected with
it!

Similarly with amulets, anything unusual that a man happens to have
about him, when attacked by a leopard or snake, from which he escapes,
may be kept as a safeguard against future perils. And with rites:
any gesture or action, however irrelevant, that happens to precede
a successful effort, may be repeated in order to reinstate all the
antecedents of success. So, too, with the origin of spells. It is a
common impulse, and quite spontaneous, to accompany an action with
words, incentive or expletive. If a hunter does so in driving home
his spear successfully, he will next time repeat the words: they then
become a spell.[106] First, then, there are practices of carrying
about charms, repeating words, repeating actions; next, along with
these practices, beliefs grow up as to the nature of their efficacy,
their virtue; and much later it is discovered that some of the
practices seem to involve certain common principles which the savage
had never thought of.

In trying to imagine ourselves in the place of such a man, we must not
omit the emotional excitement that determines his judgment. It is the
intensity of his desire for success, his anxiety about it, that makes
him snatch at, and cling to, whatever may possibly be a means to it: he
does not see how it acts, but will take no risks by omitting it. Since
what is true of primitive hunting is true of all undertakings—that
we know some conditions of success but far from all—and since we are
all of us frequently in this position—the wonder is that we resort so
little to Magic. That many people do so in London is notorious.


§ 4. MAGICAL FORCE AND PRIMITIVE IDEAS OF CAUSATION

Magic is a uniform connexion of events, depending on some impersonal
force that has no real existence. What causes make men believe in such
force? In the first place, everything is necessarily conceived of by
everybody (and probably in some dim way by the higher animals) as a
centre of forces. Its weight, when we try to lift it; inertia, when
we push it, or when it is moving and we try to stop it; degree of
hardness, when we strike or grasp it; elasticity, when the bent bough
of a tree recoils; the sway of torrents and the lift of waves; falling
trees, avalanches, water-spouts, hurricanes: all these things a man
must think of, as he does of other men and animals, in comparison with
his own strength or impotence. Into their actions and reactions he
reads such tension and effort as he himself feels in struggling with
them, or in grappling one of his own hands with the other; and as
their action is full of surprises he does not suppose himself to know
all that they can do.

But, further, the strain exhibited by some objects, especially trees;
the noises they make, creaking and groaning in the wind; the shrieking
and moaning of the wind itself, the threatening and whispering of the
sea, thunder and the roar of torrents: all excite _Einfühlung_ or
empathy, illusory sympathy with things that do not feel. Their voices,
more than anything else, I believe, endow them for our imaginations
with an inward life, which Mr. Marett has well called Animatism,[107]
and which must not be confounded with the Animism that used to be
attributed to all children and all savages—the belief that every
object is actuated by a spirit, or even that it has a consciousness
like our own. What truth there was in that doctrine is fully covered by
Animatism.

Again, the savage is acquainted with invisible forces some of which
seem to act at a distance. The wind is the great type of invisible
force; heat, sound, odour are also invisible, and act at a distance;
the light of the camp-fire acts at a distance, spreading across the
prairie or into the recesses of the forest; and lightnings issue from
the clouds. In dreams, one visits some remote hunting-ground and
returns instantly; distance and time are distorted or annihilated; and
if you can act where you dream, why not where you intensely imagine
yourself?

Hence there are abundant analogues in experience by which the savage
can conceive of his talisman as a force-thing that acts invisibly and
acts at a distance. Australian medicine-men “threw their joïas (evil
magic) invisibly, ‘like the wind,’ as they said.”[108] The talisman
acts at a distance, like a missile; it acts for the person who owns it
as his spear does, and is dangerous to others who have not practised
with it. Sometimes, indeed, magic things have no owners, and are
dangerous to everybody: malignant influence radiating from them, like
the heat of a fire or the stench of a corpse. Such are two stones
described by Messrs. Spencer and Gillen[109] as marking the place
where an old man and two women died for breaking a marriage-taboo.
“They are so full of evil magic that if any but old men go near, it
kills them. Now and then a very old man goes and throws stones and
bushes upon the spot to keep down the evil magic.” It is as if one
covered up a fire or a corpse. And, further, magical force may exist
in a diffused way, like darkness, heat, cold, epidemic disease, tribal
unrest, without necessarily attaching to any particular thing. In the
Western Isles of Torres Straits[110] mishaps may be signs of an unlucky
state of things in general. A fisherman, usually successful, having
once failed at his task, was depressed; but on two women dying in his
village soon after, he was consoled; since this showed that failure
was not his fault. Currents of this magical force, favourable or
unfavourable to things in general, may be seen in the flow and ebb of
the tide, the waxing and waning of the moon, and in the course of the
seasons. From this way of thinking it is but a step to the conception
of _mana_, as it is called in Melanesia:[111] _orenda_ of the Iroquois,
_manitou_ of the Algonquin, _wakanda_ of the Omaha.[112] It is the
power of the wonderful and mysterious in the world, which becomes
especially manifest in Magic and in the agency of spirits. Similar
notions are found in many regions at various stages of culture, but
nowhere (I believe) at the lowest stages; so that it is unreasonable to
treat it as the first source of ideas of the supernatural. It is too
comprehensive a generalisation to find expression amongst savages. The
Arunta have got as far as the generalisation of evil Magic under the
name of _arungquiltha_.[113] But _mana_ is a generalisation of all the
imaginary forces of superstition, vague and mysterious; as “cause,” in
popular use, is a generalisation of all the supposed “forces” of nature.

Rites also act at a distance by invisible force; for this power belongs
to gesture-language, and the simplest rites are gestures. And so do
spells; for wishes, commands, threats expressed in words, act upon
men at a distance by invisible force; and spells are nothing but
such expressions conceived of in a particular way, as having that
uniform efficacity which is Magic. Spells, being thought of as forces,
are reified; so that blessings or curses cling to their objects like
garlands, or like contaminating rags.

Magical force, then, is a notion derived from experience of natural
forces and employed to account for events that are unusual, wonderful,
mysterious, not to be interpreted by that common sense which is the
cumulative result of usual occurrences. It is superimposed upon the
older and wider presumption of causation, and is expected to manifest
itself with the same uniformity; so that, if the laws of it can be
discovered, it supplies a basis for the Art of Magic. So far is Magic
from being the source of the belief in causation! But I have spoken
of the “older and wider _presumption_ of causation”; for (as has been
shown) the definite postulate that all the ongoings of the world may be
analysed upon the principal of cause and effect, can never come into
the minds of primitive men; and even to ourselves it rarely occurs,
except in scientific discussions or logical exercises; but we always
act as if we trusted in it, and so does a savage, and so does a dog.
The presumption is reinforced by every moment’s ordinary experience;
and without it no consistency of life is possible. This ungeneralised
presumption determines all thoughts and actions, mechanical, animistic,
or magical. That the forces implied in superstition are generalised
in such concepts as _mana_ before the principle of causation obtains
expression, is due to the prepotency of the unusual, wonderful,
mysterious in attracting attention.

In our modern analysis of mechanical causation there are four
requirements: (1) every event has a cause; (2) causation is uniform;
(3) the cause is the assemblage of the indispensable conditions of the
effect (and no others); (4) the cause is proportional to the effect. In
the savage’s mind these requirements are also obscurely recognised: (1)
he seeks a cause for everything: (2) he expects it to act uniformly:
(3) he believes in reinstating all the conditions of the effect, as
appears from his preparations for hunting, or war, or marriage, or
whatever he may have in hand; but he is much more ignorant than we are
as to what conditions are indispensable and decisive: (4) he knows
vaguely that the cause is proportional to the effect; for (_a_) he
succeeds in making effective weapons, etc., by mechanical means; (_b_)
he is very susceptible to the “size-weight illusion,” twice as much as
we are,[114] and this implies the adjustment of effort to a supposed
weight; (_c_) he repeats a spell in order to strengthen it, or unites
a talisman, a rite and a spell in one assault, implying that greater
force must be directed against greater resistance; and so on.

Causation, then, is universally assumed: how do Animism and Magic
influence the latent conception? As to Animism, (1) it palters with the
uniformity of causation; for though the ghost or spirit acts from human
motives, no one knows exactly what its motives are. It may be cajoled,
implored, even threatened; but the result does not always answer
desire: there is apparent caprice or free will, with consequent loss of
confidence, and an uncomfortable feeling that leads to a reaction in
favour of controlling the god, or ghost, by Magic. (2) The ghost is at
first merely a man-force disengaged from the visible body, but still
having its own body through which it can produce various effects. But
the fear of a ghost immediately endows it with superhuman power; and in
course of time it becomes more and more powerful, even to omnipotence;
so that it can of itself bring about any event; and, therefore, the
“assemblage of conditions” becomes unnecessary to causation: there
need be no visible conditions: miracles occur; creation out of nothing
is possible. (3) For such a power the “proportionality of cause and
effect” becomes almost meaningless; but not quite, for there are
degrees of spirit-force; and what one cannot do a stronger can.

As to Magic, it has the great merit of (1) preserving the uniformity
of causation. But (2) it vitiates the presumption of causation by
including in the total antecedent unreal conditions, namely, the forces
of rites and spells; and by generating a frame of mind that makes
it impossible to eliminate them. The hunter uses all the resources
of his art in hunting; he also practises rites and spells. To which
does he owe his success? We might suggest that he should try the
hunting without the rites; but he is afraid to; and should he try, his
positivism would probably break down at the first failure to kill.
Well, then, let him try the rites without the hunting; but he is not
such a fool: and, if he were, the medicine-man would tell him that,
of course, he must “use the means.” (3) Magic impairs the sense of
proportionality between cause and effect, by recognising antecedents
which are, in their nature, immeasurable. In their admirable work, _The
Pagan Tribes of Borneo_, Messrs. Hose and McDougall remark[115] that
it is sometimes said, that people of lowly culture have “no conception
of mechanical causation, and that every material object is regarded by
them as animated”; but they do not think that this could be truthfully
said about any of the peoples of Borneo. In the construction of houses,
boats, weapons, traps, they have a nice appreciation of the principles
involved. Yet we find[116] that these skilled artisans believe that
they can retard an enemy’s boat by hanging under one of its benches a
quartz pebble. Similarly, the Boloki of the Congo, having made a good
canoe, before launching, strike it on the stern with an axe “to take
away the weight.”[117] And the Fijians, still better boat-builders,
believe that to put a basket of bitter oranges on a canoe reduces its
speed.[118]

Inasmuch as the possibility of action at a distance is still in debate,
the savage cannot perhaps upon that tenet be confidently corrected.

If there is any truth in the foregoing account of the latent ideas, or
presumptions, of savages concerning causation, it is plain that Magic
(and likewise Animism) did not help, but hindered the development of
these ideas. Notwithstanding (or, perhaps, because of) certain specious
resemblances to science, Magic is, and always has been, the enemy of
science.


§ 5. MAGIC AND MYSTERY

Magic begins with ignorance of some of the conditions of a desired
event, and the adoption (on account of coincidence) of anything that
fixes one’s attention as contributing to the total antecedent. As
the supposed conditions of events grow more and more miscellaneous,
the disposition increases to regard anything as a possible cause of
anything else. Hence unbounded suspicion whenever an interesting event
occurs whose antecedents are not familiar and manifest. The more
unusual any occurrence, the more it must excite attention and be apt to
arouse suspicion; and the first arrival of travellers or missionaries
amongst a wild tribe is an event so unprecedented, that it is likely
enough to occasion exaggerated suspicions and behaviour which, when
reported, misrepresent the tribe’s normal attitude of mind. For this
allowance should be made.

However, in Magic the causation is never traceable; therefore it
becomes mysterious. The sense of mystery arises when something excites
wonder, wonder gives place to curiosity, curiosity is baffled, and
wonder returns with fear. The magical power of an inert object, such
as a black pebble or a shark’s tooth, or of a bone that is pointed
towards a victim, or of a spear that is swung but not thrown, and
nevertheless inflicts a wound, though an invisible one, is something
unknown, or mysterious. That is to say, it is a merely imagined action
which remains obscure and inscrutable, in comparison with the perceived
action of a spear thrown at a deer and slaying it with a visible wound.
The savage has adequate practical knowledge of the latter process; of
the former only a vague analogical image. He feels the difference, and
that the Magic is mysterious; and mystery, being common to all magical
processes, and deeply impressive (especially in black Magic), becomes
what we call a “fundamental attribute” of Magic, pervading the whole
apperceptive mass that is formed by a man’s magic-beliefs. Therefore
whatever excites the sense of mystery tends to be assimilated[119]
by this apperceptive mass and confirmed as magical; just as the mass
of our scientific knowledge assimilates and confirms any proposition
that has the attributes of a scientific law. Hence the savage accepts
the mysterious remedies of an European doctor as magical; and he is
ready to regard as magical, and to fear, anything—a rock, tree, or
water-spout—that by any trait excites his sense of mystery. Magic,
then, does not arise from mystery; but having come into existence, it
appeals to the feeling of mystery; and then whatever else is mysterious
tends to become magical.[120]

Magic being mysterious, the more mysterious the more powerful it must
be. Hence foreign Magic is more dreaded than the home-made; ancient
Magic is more powerful than modern; muttered spells, or formulæ in
a strange language, or in one whose meaning has been lost, are more
efficacious than intelligible speech; written characters and numbers
have a subduing prestige; verse is more subtle than prose (for poets
are everywhere respected); a wizard is more impressive in a mask than
when bare-faced, in a fit than when sober; and operations in the dark,
that ought to excite scepticism, enhance credulity.

Masses of ideas having this mysterious quality form relatively
dissociated systems, which offer resistance to all ideas that want it,
and therefore to what we call “explanation.” Hence the conservative,
inexpugnable character of Magic and its easy alliance with Mysticism.
Resistance to explanation may go the length of denying present
experience; as when a man is seen to be slain by a weapon or by a
falling tree, and yet his death is ascribed to sorcery: the fear of
sorcery having become a fixed idea.


§ 6. VOLITIONAL MAGIC

Magical power inheres in things, rites and spells without regard to the
man who uses them; they may be sold or taught, and then serve the new
possessor. But much the greater part of all known magical operation
depends upon the agency of some person, man or spirit, who sets it
going; and rites and spells are from the first, by their nature,
personal actions.

In the later stages of Magic, no doubt, it is held that a mere wish or
volition may be efficacious: in Cornwall they still tell you, when you
are cold or tired, that you “look wisht,” that is, as if you had been
ill-wisht and were pining away (this meaning is generally forgotten).
But it seems to me improbable that such an idea should be primitive.
People who, in inflicting penalties, do not discriminate between
accidental and intentional offences, cannot be supposed to ascribe
power to a mental process as such; and I have not been able to find
in reports of very backward tribes any case of wish-magic unsupported
by magical implements. Dr. Haddon says[121] that, among the eastern
islanders of Torres Straits, the power of words and the projection of
the will are greatly believed in. A youth who makes love procures a
piece of black lava shaped significantly, and anoints it with coco-nut
oil, etc.; he also anoints his own temples, and thinks as intently as
possible about the girl, and repeats a spell whenever he sees her,
using the names of Sagaro and Pikaro, wife and mistress of the hero
Sida. Now, with this complex apparatus of talisman, rite and spell,
how much is left to wishing or the projection of the will? He thinks
hard about the girl, no doubt; but that needs no voluntary effort: at
least, in this climate, voluntary effort is soon exhausted in trying to
think of anything else. Mr. Weeks, in his book _Among Congo Cannibals_,
describing a people of somewhat higher culture, and much more advanced
Animism than the natives of Torres Straits, explains the nervousness
in the poison ordeal even of those who are innocent of any nefarious
practices, by asking—“For who has not at some time wished another’s
death?”—and by the admitted doctrine that a man may be full of evil
magic without knowing it. From this it seems to be inferable that a
mere wish may be effective. But not justly; for a man full of evil
magic is an incarnate talisman; and such a man may operate without
wishing, as often happens with the evil-eye. At any rate, these casual
Congo wishes do not amount to volition; the faintest velleity is enough
for the hair-trigger of such explosive personalities. In Japan, too,
the angry spirit of a living person may inflict a curse unknown to
himself.[122]

Still, with the progress of Magic, deliberate wishes may acquire
independent power. A man practising evil Magic, and desiring secrecy,
has a strong motive to believe (that is, there is a cause of his
believing) that his tacit wish has the power of invisible action at
a distance; and the way by which he arrives at that belief is quite
clear: for a spell is a magical force; it is also an expressed wish or
command; and, if muttered, is more rather than less powerful than when
uttered aloud. Why not, then, “sub-muttered,” or merely thought?

From this degenerate notion of will-work we must distinguish the
personal power of an accomplished wizard in his whole magical activity.
Whatever a man does with a talisman or a spell, as it were with a
tool or a weapon, may be done with more or less concentration of
energy and proficiency in the performance; and one man will be plainly
superior to another. Success depends upon doing one’s best; therefore
upon the will. And Magic often needs courage and resource; but in the
development of the art it depends still more upon knowledge; wherein
the magician is wont to boast himself. For wizardry is the most
reputable faculty of primitive scholarship: to know all spells and
rites, the arts of divination and medicine, the ancestry and true name
of all dangerous things, which gives control over them: and it is a
universal belief that knowledge is power.


§ 7. THE EVOLUTION OF MAGIC—DIRECT MAGIC

From the simple beginnings thus described, Magic, like everything
else in the world, proceeds to grow and differentiate. It grows by
the lengthening of spells from the briefest wish or command to many
verses;[123] by the extension of rites from the waving of a bough
to raise the wind to the Australian Intichiuma ceremonies that go on
for many days; by the accumulating of charms by the bagful; by the
compounding of rites with spells, and by repetition of them three
times or some other sacred number. It differentiates by being applied
and adapted to more and more purposes: from hunting (if we suppose
it to begin there) to war and love; to birth, marriage and death; to
the giving of diseases and the curing of them; to the protection of
property and to the discovery (or concealment) of theft; to navigation,
building, agriculture, the care of flocks and herds, the procuring of
rain, renewing the vigour of the sun and binding the influence of the
Pleiades. At the same time Magic, originally practised (we may presume)
by individuals, comes to engage the concern and co-operation of
families, clans and tribes; and a distinction grows up between what we
call “white” and “black” Magic: practices that are for the welfare of
the tribe, or of some portion of it, and practices designed to gratify
private passions without regard to their effect upon the community.

One may notice certain stages (not always serial) in the development
of Magic: First, the simple and direct defence of oneself or fellows
against other persons or things, storms, diseases, etc.; or, again,
direct attack upon such hostile powers—by means of charms, spells or
rites. Secondly, indirect or dramatic Magic, operating not upon persons
or things themselves, but (expecting the same effect) upon imitations
of them, or upon detached parts or appurtenances; as in the well-known
device of making a waxen figure of a man and melting it in the fire to
his destruction. Thirdly, the alliance of Magic with Animism, leading
to sorcery, exorcism and ceremonies associated with Religion—discussed
below in the sixth and seventh chapters. Fourthly, the confusion of
Magic with Science, as in Astrology and Alchemy—referred to in the
seventh and tenth chapters.

Direct magical rites begin in very simple ways, probably with gestures:
as to point at a man in threatening; to throw out the open hand in
warding off evil; to claw the air behind a man’s back, as Australian
women do. It becomes more and more elaborate as the result of much
study devoted to a matter of supreme interest: especially after the
rise of a professional class of medicine-men, with whom inventions
accumulate and become traditionary. Similarly, spells are at first
merely wishes, or commands, or warnings. An Australian Wind-doctor
cries, “Let the west wind be bound.”[124] The southern Massim of New
Guinea have a spell to open a cave—“O rock, be cleft!” and, again,
to shut the cave—“O rock, be closed!”[125] Nothing can be simpler.
How spells rise into poetry and are combined with rites and charms is
shown by a Polynesian example: a man being ill with consumption, which
is called _Moomoo_, a medicine-man is sent for. He comes, sits by the
patient, and sings—

   “O Moomoo, O Moomoo!
    I’m on the eve of spearing you.”

Then, rising, he flourishes his spear over the patient’s head, and goes
away. No one dares speak or smile.[126]

As to charms, the simplest, and perhaps the earliest, are small
pebbles, such as the Australian “bulks,” or crystals.[127] In Papua
there are quartz charms so powerful that it is not safe for even the
owner to touch them. In that country the qualities that make a thing
suitable for a charm are: (1) similarity in contour, or in other ways,
to the object to be influenced; (2) rarity; (3) unusual shape in not
very uncommon objects:[128] in short, whatever arrests attention. Dr.
Codrington says: “A stone takes a man’s fancy; it is like something,
clearly not a common stone; there must be _mana_ in it: puts it in his
garden; and a good crop proves he was right.”[129] Among the Esquimo,
strange or curious objects never before seen are sometimes considered
to bring success to the finder; and charms are carried shaped like
the animals hunted.[130] Such a taste is very ancient, if the same
purpose was served by those animal-shaped stones, retouched to increase
the resemblance, which have been found in considerable numbers in
France and England.[131] In the bag of a West African sorcerer may be
seen a bit of leopard skin, of snake’s skin, hawk’s talons, bone of a
dead man, leaves of certain plants, etc.; each having its own virtue,
and uniting their powers in the interest of the formidable owner.
The _Chanson de Roland_ describes a talisman to which the chief of
Charlemagne’s peers must have owed no small part of his prowess—his
famous sword:—

   “Ah! Durendal, most holy, fair indeed!
    Relics enough thy golden hilt conceals:
    Saint Peter’s Tooth, the Blood of Saint Basile,
    Some of the Hairs of my lord, Saint Denise,
    Some of the Robe, was worn by Saint Mary.”[132]

I cannot call it fair fighting, and wonder that, thus armed, he should
ever have been mortally wounded by the miscreant hordes of Mahum and
Tervagant, however numerous.

An influential outgrowth of primitive Magic is the taboo. Taboo is the
dangerousness of a person, or thing, or action, or word, conceived of
as a motive for not touching or uttering or meddling therewith. The
dangerousness may either lie in the nature of a person or thing, or
be imposed upon it. A chief, for example, and everything belonging to
him, is generally taboo by inherent sacredness: he is, like Mr. Weeks’s
Congolese, full of evil magic. The idea of the talisman has thus been
extended to include certain men. In many tribes it includes all women;
but since to make them always taboo is too much for human nature, they
are treated as such only periodically, or when a man is about to be
exposed to some further danger, which will be the more likely to injure
him when already contaminated by evil magic.[133] This is very clear in
a case reported by Prof. Seligman:[134] at Yam warriors were forbidden
to sleep with their wives before battle; else “bow and arrow belong
other fellow he smell you, he shoot you, you no got luck.” Still,
physical consequences (which may explain the superstition) are also
considered: a diver for pearl-shell must similarly abstain; because,
else, “man he sleepy.” The continence required of women to ensure the
safety of their husbands when away at war or hunting may be due to a
belief in a “sympathy” or “participation,” as if husband and wife were
in some mysterious _rapport_; but, deeper, there may have been a fetch
of policy. When magical taboos are generally recognised and feared,
it becomes possible to use them for social purposes: one cannot be
sure that every magical observance had its origin in magical belief.
Thus the food-rules of Australian tribes consist of taboos upon the
enjoyment of certain foods by women and young men, and are plainly
devised in the interests of the gerontocracy: so why should not a
fiction be founded on Magic in the interest of absent husbands?

The sanctity or dangerousness of the chief is probably due, first,
to his being really dangerous; but, secondly, to the biological
advantage to a tribe of respecting him, which leads to a selection of
those tribes amongst whom respect for the chief arises. As biological
adaptation is never more than a moving, oscillating equilibrium, this
feeling sometimes becomes excessive, even to the point of insanity.
Everything the chief touches becomes taboo; only a few sacred servants
can approach him; he may be thus reduced to helplessness. It is one
of Nature’s checks upon tyranny. Such is the force of taboo, that a
Maori tribesman, being hungry, seeing some food by the wayside, and
eating it, on learning that it was the remains of the meal of a sacred
chief, immediately fell ill, and died. The offence was fatal—as soon
as it was known. The dangerousness of women has been referred to their
weakness; association with them must be weakening, and is therefore
forbidden when exertion is needed.[135] Prof. Westermarck traces it
to a “horror of blood”;[136] very probably; but other things may
co-operate towards it. The life of women separates them from men, and
brings them into a freemasonry and community of interests, to which men
are not admitted; differentiates their mentality, until the result is
mysterious and therefore magical: the sexual orgasm, being more like
pain than anything that is not pain, at once attractive and revulsive,
acquires the same character. Homicides and mourners, again, are liable
to be taboo, either because there clings to them the mysterious quality
and taint of death (a magical motive), or because they are followed by
the ghosts of the departed.

There are unlucky words which it is a social offence to utter: words
of ill-omen, but especially names of dead people, demons and sometimes
gods; for people are apt to come when they are called, and, if the call
is conceived of according to Magic, come they certainly will. There
are likewise many actions that seem to us entirely innocent, yet in
one or another tribe must be avoided by all who desire a prosperous or
only a tranquil life. The Papagoe Indians of Mexico forbid a girl at a
certain time to scratch her head, or even to touch her hair with her
hand; for which there may be an excuse in the sacredness of the head;
but her brother comes at the same time under the same restriction.[137]
The case seems to be a type of many taboos, as being due wholly to
suspicion and anxiety: an anxious mother who sees her boy scratch
his head is reminded of his sister who must not do so; her fears are
excited, and she prohibits the action that excites her fear: it is
taboo. Writing of a Bantu tribe, M. Jounod says, “Most often taboos are
inexplicable.”[138] So are the penalties that await the breach of them:
the punishment rarely fits the crime. Premature baldness, failure in
hunting or fishing, boils, lameness, dysentery—may avenge the eating
of wild duck or marriage within the forbidden circle. And if any such
thing happens to a man, he is liable to be accused of having broken a
taboo; and that proves the truth of the belief in taboo.

Besides things that are in their magical nature dangerous, and
therefore taboo, things inoffensive in themselves can sometimes be made
taboo by merely declaring them to be so, or by setting up a symbolic
notice that they are so, or by laying a conditional curse upon anybody
who meddles with them. They have then become dangerous. This is the
common case of making a talisman by means of a spell, transferring to
it invisible power. Such practices, especially common in Melanesia, are
often useful as a cheap defence of property (in gardens, for instance),
but are also a means of exaction and tyranny. The prevalence of taboo
amongst savages, by the way, enables them readily to appreciate our
great commandment to do no work on Sunday.[139]


§ 8. INDIRECT OR “SYMPATHETIC” MAGIC

The use of charms, rites and spells, having been established in one
department—say, hunting—may be extended to others by analogy, and is
confirmed there in the same way, namely, by still doing one’s best.
Having obtained the charms and learnt, or invented, the rites and
spells, one applies them, but at the same time makes war or love as
cunningly as one can, cultivates one’s garden, drives a bargain, and so
forth, and ascribes all good results to the Magic. At first, I suppose,
all such action was direct, discharged at the person or thing to be
influenced. To slay an enemy a bone of a dead man was pointed, or a
crocodile’s tooth hurled, in his direction (though, probably, not in
his sight). To keep off evil Magic a wish was expressed—“Never sharp
barn catch me”;[140] or to drive away a pest a command was issued, as
in Borneo: “O rats, sparrows and noxious insects, go feed on the padi
of people down river.”[141] But a time came when Magic began also to be
carried out by practices indirect and purely dramatic, rites performed
and spells recited not at the person or thing to be affected, but upon
some substitute, or representative, or symbol; and this must have
happened pretty early; for dramatic Magic is met with in Australia.
To this sort of Magic belong the widely-diffused methods of operating
upon the image of a man or anything assigned to stand for him, or upon
hair-clippings, remains of food, or footprints instead of himself; or
of tying knots to bind, or untying them to release a curse. With spells
the indirect method is less common, but remarkable examples of it occur
at a low level of culture. The Yabim of New Guinea, to promote the
growth of their taro, tell a story: “Once upon a time, a man labouring
in his field complained that he had no taro-shoots. Then came two doves
flying from Paum. They had devoured much taro, and they perched upon a
tree in the field, and during the night vomited up all the taro. Thus
the man got so many shoots that he was even able to sell some of them
to other people.”[142] Here, then, a mere story of a wish fulfilled is
substituted, as a spell, for the wish itself, and expected to have the
same effect upon the crop; and as that is, indeed, true, any failure
of it is no more liable to be detected. But such practices seem to us
sillier and less promising even than direct Magic. What can be the
meaning of them?

The indirectness of a rite makes it more mysterious and magical, and
that is a recommendation. Moreover, its dramatic character gives
an imaginative satisfaction, which must suffice to initiate such
pantomime again and again. Amongst ourselves many people are prone to
dramatise every situation of their lives; to act in imagination their
loves, their revenges, their opportunities of self-display, and to
derive satisfaction from such imaginations even to the weakening of
their will—satisfaction without effort or danger. But although this
impulse may initiate pantomimic magic, it can hardly maintain it in
the absence of any deeper satisfaction. The belief in its efficacy,
again, once established, the effect of suggestion upon a victim of
black Magic (who by some means is acquainted with what has been done
against him) may have consequences that seem to verify the rites; but
this can only happen when a belief in the efficacy of such practices
already prevails. The power of suggestion depends upon the belief;
it cannot create the belief. We must fall back upon coincidence.
If, indeed, immediate and complete coincidence were requisite, if,
when one practised on an enemy’s life, nothing less than his speedy
death would do, coincidences might be too rare to give the requisite
confirmation. But if some less injury will be acceptable, and if it
need not follow immediately; if a delay of not merely two or three
days, but two or three months will bring the event within the limits
of satisfaction; and if the degree of injury may vary from death to
a bad fall, or some failure in hunting on the victim’s part, or a
quarrel with his wife; if even (as often happens) a misfortune to any
one of his family may suffice—the confirmatory coincidences will be
tolerably frequent. There must, of course, be many disappointments; but
these count for little, because the particular practice is supported
by a general belief in Magic; because men desire to believe and are
afraid to disbelieve; because failures are explained by some error in
performing the rites, or by the counteraction of superior Magic, or by
the intervention of hostile spirits.

Special reasons for practising and believing in indirect operations of
black Magic are their greater secrecy and, therefore, greater safety,
and greater gratification of the love of cunning: which last (I think)
explains much of the elaboration that marks these performances.

In the development of indirect Magic, very many of its practices seem
to involve one or other of the assumptions often called the principles
of sympathetic Magic, namely, Mimesis and Participation: (1) that to
operate upon a likeness or representation, or by analogy, affects the
person, or object, or process imitated or represented as if it were
directly assailed; and (2) that a part or appurtenance of any one may,
in any magical undertaking, be substituted for the whole. Among savages
these principles (as has already been said) are only latent forms of
procedure, tacitly assumed, not formulated, and cannot have been the
source of the practices, but must gradually have been established by
them; but when notions of scientific arrangement came into vogue,
they were discovered and explicitly stated by the early physicians
and alchemists, in whose thoughts Magic and Science were not clearly
differentiated.

It has been supposed that these principles are natural consequences of
the laws of the association (or reproduction) of ideas. According to
the “law of similarity,” an idea of one thing often makes us think of
another that resembles it: hence the thought of an enemy is supposed
to make me think of an image of him, or the sight of his image makes
me think of him. According to the law “of contiguity,” any two things
having been seen or thought of together, thereafter the thought or
sight of one of them makes me think of the other: hence the thought of
an enemy makes me think of his footprint, or his footprint reminds me
of him. Possibly. But must there not have been a long preparation of
ideas before the thought of an enemy awakens in me these particular
associations rather than many others? And if they should occur to me,
how do the laws of association explain my astonishing belief that to
put his image in the fire, or to thrust a thorn into his footprint, or
to dig it up, carry it home and put it in the oven, will make him lame
or afflict him with some wasting disease? There must be some system of
ideas to determine these particular judgments.

Some, again, suppose that savages cannot distinguish similarity from
identity, part from whole; so that an image appears to them to be
in earnest the same thing as a man, or his nail-parings the same as
himself. Yet it is certain that in their work-a-day life they do make
these distinctions, and that otherwise they could not get on at all.
If, then, in certain cases, and in Magic (which is all that concerns
us now), they act or speak as if unable to draw such distinctions, it
must be from an acquired incapacity in that connection; just as in some
cases they suffer from an acquired incapacity to recognise that their
beliefs are contradicted by experience; that is to say, some fixed
idea or dissociation prevents them from comparing the facts; though
sometimes it may be merely that customary forms of speech hinder the
expression of distinctions that really exist among their ideas.

It has been suggested that the supposed force of mimetic Magic rests
upon the belief that as a man’s shadow or reflection implies his
presence, so does his image. And we shall see that, in some cases,
this explanation is not far from the mark, though it cannot serve for
all cases; inasmuch as the image operated upon in any rite need not be
a likeness (of course it never is)—a stick will serve, if declared
to stand for the victim; and, moreover, his presence is not needed in
carrying out rites that act at a distance. What truth there is in this
view has been better expressed by Prof. Yrjö Hirn:[143] namely, that a
unity or solidarity exists between all persons and things that stand
to one another in a relationship of contact or similarity, on account
of a certain magical virtue; and that this solidarity is not destroyed
by any breach of physical continuity. To take away a man’s cloak,
or a lock of his hair, or a remnant of his food, does not interrupt
the magical continuity which contact has established with the man:
something of him, his virtue, remains with it. And in the same way an
image of him contains something of his virtue; for to the immature
mind, images or pictures are nothing but radiations or decortications
of the thing itself, an efflux, like the Epicurean εἴδωλα. Hence the
bones of a saint and his picture convey his virtue to a devotee by the
same process: both are conductors of some emanation from himself. There
is much truth in this theory.

When Animism is called in to explain Magic, this virtue or emanation
of a man is apt to be explained as his soul, or part of it. A savage
dislikes being photographed, lest you should take away his soul.
M. Jounod says the Bantu regard a photograph as “an unsheathing of
soul”;[144] Mr. Dorsey says no Dakota would have his portrait taken
lest one of his souls [out of four] should remain in the picture,
instead of going after death to spirit-land;[145] Mr. Carl Lumholtz
says the Papagoes refused to be photographed, lest part of themselves
should be taken away, and remain behind after death.[146] And it is
a trick with some sorcerers to keep a looking-glass, in which they
pretend to catch the souls of their dupes; and, of course, shadows and
reflections are frequently confounded with the soul. So if the use
of an image in Magic does not imply the presence of the man himself,
generally it does imply the presence of a very important part of him.
And this explanation is strengthened by an apparent exception; for some
Malays, when they make an image of an enemy to compass his destruction,
think it necessary before operating to coax his soul into it by a
potent spell.

   “Hither, Soul, come hither!
    Hither, little one, come hither!
    Hither, bird, come hither!
    Hither, filmy one, come hither!”[147]

Must we not infer that these Malays have in some way lost the common
belief, and so are put to this extra trouble?

If it be asked how this account of the matter can justify the use of
a stick or stone instead of a man’s image, merely assigning it to
represent him, the reply (I think) is that the stick is a symbol. Since
images are never much like the man, and may be unlike in all degrees,
the stick is a sort of limiting case. A symbol is always the remainder,
or reminder, of something that once had intrinsic value, as an image,
shadow, or reflection has by being or participating in the man’s
soul. Besides, it is perhaps a tacit assumption of Magic (as in other
departments of life—including Philosophy), “that whatever for one’s
purpose it is necessary to assume, is real or true”: the situation
demands it.

As to the magical continuity between a man and whatever has been
in contact with him, the belief in it may with some confidence be
derived from the fact that it retains his odour; and when an animistic
explanation is required, it is naturally thought that this odour is his
soul or soul-stuff, as the savour of a burnt-offering is its soul-stuff
that regales the gods.

Belief in the participation of an image, or part or appurtenance of a
man in the man himself, or in his virtue, or in his soul, must give to
rites of black Magic a great deal of the subjective satisfaction which
is a secret motive of all Magic. The images, or nail-parings, or what
not, identify the man to be attacked; they fix the wizard’s attention,
vivify his imagination, direct the spell whom to strike (as a dog is
set upon a trail), and heighten the joy of imaginary revenge.

There are, however, many cases usually classed as “sympathetic
Magic” that cannot without great violence be explained in this way;
and I complain of the epithet “sympathetic,” as applied to all
indirect Magic, that it implies this explanation. Consider the Mandan
buffalo-dances, the hunting dance and the mating dance; these are
imitations or dramatic representations of the hunting of buffaloes and
of their mating, which they are designed to prosper: can such dances
be interpreted as the efflux or decortications of the future hunt or
mating? Or, again, the story of the muræna (quoted above, p. 101)
and its resuscitation by the rising tide—is this a radiation of the
budding of the taro which it is expected to expedite? Such cases, which
are pretty numerous, must be understood upon some other ground than
“participation.”

Many rites and observances seem to depend upon the notion of favourable
or unfavourable currents of invisible power, which may be taken
advantage of, or influenced, to obtain one’s ends, in hunting, or in
obtaining rain, or in fertilisation of animals or crops. It is good
to plant seed, or begin any undertaking, when the moon is waxing, or
the tide rising; for these events show that the set of the current
is favourable to increase or prosperity. Again, one may incite the
current or strengthen it, as in bringing on rain by throwing water
in the air, or by leaping to help the crops to grow. To instigate or
assist in such ways the ongoings of Nature is not the same thing as
to cause the event: a rain-wizard does not pretend to procure rain
in the dry season; the times of ploughing, sowing, reaping (whatever
rites may accompany them) are not decided by Magic. Much pantomimic
Magic may be best understood as attempting to set up such currents of
causation rather than as directly causative. Since instances of cause
and effect are observed to repeat themselves, a pantomimic murder, or
a hunting dance, or fertility-rites, may be considered as setting an
example which Nature is expected to follow: the muræna-spell promotes
vitality by merely describing an example of reinvigoration. The Kai of
N.E. New Guinea hold that if a man, by falling on a stump of bamboo in
the path, wounds himself to death, it is because a sorcerer, having
obtained something infected with his victim’s soul-stuff, has spread it
over a pile stuck in the ground, and pretended to wound himself upon
it and to groan with pain.[148] The belief implies that such practices
are in vogue; and they seem to rely upon the assumption that “what
happens once will happen again”; and that who shall repeat the disaster
is determined by the presence, among the conditions, of something
belonging to the victim in default of himself. It is not by sympathy
or participation that the “something infected with his soul-stuff”
acts; but by contributing to reinstate as far as possible all the
circumstances of a cause like the cause of the man’s death.

In other cases an exemplary cause may be constituted by the
substitution of similars that do not imply participation. Dr. Haddon
tells us that in the western islands of Torres Straits[149] the Kuman
vine breaks up in dry weather, and the segments look like human bones;
hence they are employed in Magic. Similarly red ochre or some other
stain may be used instead of blood, so that a skeleton may be coloured
with it as a means of keeping it alive. In Chinese popular religion,
before setting up a new idol, it is first carried to the temple of
an older one, who is besought to let a portion of his soul-stuff
transmigrate into the new one; then, carried to its own temple and
enthroned, its hands, feet, eyes, mouth, nose and ears are smeared
with blood, _or with red paint_, to open its senses and bring its
soul into relation with the outer world.[150] Such a substitution of
similars is true in one sense; red paint is a substitute for blood as
colour: Magic requires that it shall also be a substitute in other
ways; and, therefore, it is so. Thus, down and feathers thrown into
the air in Australian rain-rites are a substitute for clouds; in
Mandan hunting-rites, men disguised in buffalo-skins are a substitute
for buffaloes; and thus, by substitution, a cause can always be
constituted which, once having been set to work, Nature is constrained
to repeat the operation.

Ought we not, then, to recognise two kinds of indirect Magic—the
sympathetic, and what may be called the exemplary?[151]

       *       *       *       *       *

The rise of the wizard as a professional authority introduces many
changes into magical practice, and decisively alters its social
importance. He sometimes experiments in new rites and spells or in
new versions of the old ones; he decides some matters arbitrarily,
as in imposing taboos on food; generally, he develops the art in the
direction of his professional interests, learning to conjure, act,
ventriloquise, suggest, hypnotise, and to provide excuses for failure;
he begins to train novices, form a school and establish a tradition
which influences the whole life of his tribe. How far arbitrary
elements enter into rites it is impossible to say, until some one
shall discover (as some one may) marks by which to distinguish them.
Meanwhile, there may be many rites, or ritual elements, that cannot be
explained on any known principles of Magic, because in fact they are
arbitrary: still, such things must usually be an imitation of other
magical practices. Prof. Leuba suggests, probably enough, that rites
may sometimes be adopted to relieve excitement, such as the dancing
of women when the men are at war.[152] It was the custom (_e. g._) of
Araucanian women; and as they danced, they swept the dust away with
their fans, and sang: “As we sweep the dust away, so may our husbands
scatter the enemy.” If this was arbitrarily invented, it was by analogy
with much mimetic Magic: they set an example of what should happen and
confirmed it with a spell.[153]


§9. THE DISSOLUTION OF MAGIC

In spite of the human mind’s strong proclivity to Magic, the art, after
rising to a maximum power and reputation, in course of time loses
its influence, and is to be found festering only in the backwater
and stagnant pools of society. Its power is not at the zenith in
primitive society, but much later, when there are men in command of
great wealth who feel insecure, and turn for confidence to diviners and
thaumaturgists, whom they bribe heavily to give what they most desire.
But by that time Magic is confused with Animism. As civil order and
material civilisation prevail, Magic is no longer invoked to increase
one’s confidence, because this is ensured by the regularity of ordinary
affairs. As positive methods in war, building, commerce are learnt and
practised, the magical accompaniments of such undertakings, without
being wholly disused, may become less and less important—what we call
“survivals,” such as the breaking of a bottle of wine on the bows when
launching a ship (it is forgotten that the wine must be red). Or they
may be lost altogether without injury to industry; whereas in savage
economy there is some risk that a most useful craft, such as pottery,
weaving, or canoe-building, may be entirely discontinued, if by the
extinction of some group of men or women the rites and songs are
forgotten with which such labour had always been made good.[154] For
who would trust a pot or a canoe unconsecrated?

The great systematisations of Oneiromancy, Alchemy, Cheiromancy,
Astrology, necessarily come forward late in the day, because they
involve the constitution of science; but for that reason they are
soon discredited by being confronted with the positive sciences;
when, without being forgotten, they are relegated to what may be
euphemistically called “select circles.”

With the growth of Animism, again, pure Magic becomes comparatively
rare; its observances are interpreted according to the fashionable
creed, no longer as setting occult, quasi-mechanical forces to work,
but as requiring the intervention of a spirit or a god. They become
symbolic: ritual now does nothing of itself, but is a sign of what the
god does, or is desired to do. Yet Magic often has its revenge upon
Animism: enchaining by mysterious uniformities the god himself.

In its own nature Magic comprises qualities that tend to weaken it
(at least, to weaken each particular form of it) and to bring about
its decline. Magical rites and spells, on whatever scale performed,
are things to be repeated, and what is repeated is mechanised and
ceases to live. Custom can maintain a practice whilst dispensing with
its meaning; slowly the practice (spell or ritual) is slurred and
corrupted. Economy, “least effort,” is the enemy of all ceremonial.
There is also a tendency to the attenuation of rites on the principle
(unconscious, of course) that “the sign of a sign is a sign of the
thing signified”; whereby a meaning may be disguised in a symbol
for the sake of secrecy, or even for politeness. Prof. Westermarck
has shown how, in Morocco, the full rite for averting the evil eye
is to throw forward the hand with outspread fingers and to exclaim,
“Five in your eye.” But as this is too insulting for common use, you
may instead casually mention the number “five”; or if even that be
too plain-spoken, you can refer to “Thursday,” which happens to be
the fifth day of the week. In this process there is great risk of
forgetting the original meaning of the rite or spell; and when this
comes to pass, we are left with the empty shells of superstition, such
as a dread of “thirteen,” “Friday,” salt-spilling, walking under a
ladder; for hardly a soul knows what they mean.

FOOTNOTES:

[101] _History of the Kingship_, p. 38; cf. also _The Magic Art_, I. p.
235, and footnote: “faith in magic is probably older than a belief in
spirits.”

[102] Skeat and Blagden, _Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula_, I. p.
417.

[103] In the _American Journal of Psychology_, p. 83 (1919), E. S.
Conkling has an instructive article on _Superstitious Belief and
Practice among College Students_. Of a large group examined 53 per
cent. entertained some superstition (40 per cent. M., 66 per cent.
F.). At some time, now or formerly, 82 per cent. had been so affected
(73 per cent. M., 90 per cent. F.). Half assigned their former
superstitions to the age from twelve to sixteen. Twenty-two per cent.
attributed the disposition to the suggestion of elders, 47 per cent. to
social suggestion, 15 per cent. to social inheritance, and 15 per cent.
to emotions and feelings beyond the control of reason.

[104] _Among the Indians of Guiana_, p. 354.

[105] Quoted by Ames, _Psychology of Religious Experience_, p. 60.

[106] Charms (and possibly rites and spells) are sometimes revealed in
dreams (Howitt, _The Native Tribes of South-East Australia_, p. 378;
and Hose and McDougall, _Pagan Tribes of Borneo_, I. p. 110). But this
can only happen either where the belief in charms already exists (as in
the cases cited), or by the coincidence of the dream with good or bad
fortune. The connexion of events must first of all present itself as
something observed: whether waking or dreaming is indifferent.

For further illustrations of the influence of coincidences in
establishing a belief in Magic, see ch. viii. § 5.

[107] R. R. Marett, _Preanimistic Religion, Folk-Lore_, 1900.

[108] A. W. Howitt, _The Native Tribes of South-East Australia_, p. 371.

[109] _Northern Tribes of Central Australia_, p. 472.

[110] A. C. Haddon, _Reports of the Cambridge Expedition to Torres
Straits_, V. p. 361.

[111] Coddrington, _The Melanesians_, pp. 118-19.

[112] For a comparison of these allied notions see E. S. Hartland’s
_Ritual and Belief_, pp. 36-51.

[113] Spencer and Gillen, _Native Tribes of Central Australia_, p. 548.

[114] W. McDougall, _Reports of the Cambridge Expedition to Torres
Straits_, II. p. 199.

[115] Vol. II. p. 2.

[116] Vol. II. p. 124.

[117] Weeks, _Among Congo Cannibals_, p. 311.

[118] Thomas Williams, _Fiji and the Fijians_, p. 79.

[119] _Tends to be_ assimilated—for if the presentation have some
special character of Animism, it will be assimilated to the animistic
system; or if Animism be the more active and fashionable theory in a
man’s social group.

[120] It has been thought strange that such a thing as a whirlwind
may excite in the savage either fear or anger. To explain this we
must consider the nature of wonder: it is an imaginative expansion
of surprise, temporary paralysis of the imagination, with emotional
disturbance, but no progressive instinct of its own. It either subsides
helplessly, or gives place to curiosity, or passes into some other
emotion that is connected with an instinct. Accordingly, it usually
passes into curiosity or else fear, but sometimes into anger: which of
these emotions shall be aroused depends, partly, upon the character of
the person who wonders, partly, upon circumstances.

[121] _Reports of the Cambridge Expedition to Torres Straits_, VI. p.
321.

[122] W. G. Aston, _Shinto_, p. 52.

[123] One may trace this process in the interesting collection of
spells in Skeat’s _Malay Magic_.

[124] Howitt, _The Native Tribes of South-East Australia_, p. 397.

[125] Seligman, _Melanesians of British New Guinea_, p. 376.

[126] Turner, _Samoa_, p. 138. For further development of the spell,
see (besides Skeat, _op. cit._) the collected examples at the end of
Sayce’s _Religion of the Ancient Babylonians_.

[127] Parker, _The Euahlayi_, p. 26.

[128] Seligman, _The Melanesians of British New Guinea_, pp. 173-5.

[129] _The Melanesians_, pp. 118-19.

[130] Turner, _Ethnology of the Ungava District_, Am. B. of Ethn., XI.
p. 201; and Murdoch, Ethnology of Point Barrow, _Am. B. of Ethn._, IX.
p. 434.

[131] W.M. Newton, On Palæological Figures of Flint, _Journ. of B.
Arch. Ass._, March 1913.

[132] _The Song of Roland_, done into English by C. Scott Moncrieff,
