CHAPTER IV

"SESAME AND LILIES" (1864)


Wider aims and weaker health had not put an end to Ruskin's connection
with the Working Men's College, though he did not now teach a
drawing-class regularly. He had, as he said, "the satisfaction of
knowing that they had very good masters in Messrs. Lowes Dickinson,
Jeffery and Cave Thomas," and his work was elsewhere. He was to have
lectured there on December 19th, 1863; but he did not reach home until
about Christmas; better than he had been; and ready to give the promised
address on January 30th, 1864. Beside which he used to visit the place
occasionally of an evening to take note of progress, and some of his
pupils were now more directly under his care.

It was from one of these visits to the College, on February 27th, that
he returned, past midnight, and found his father waiting up for him, to
read some letters he had written. Next morning the old man, close upon
seventy-nine years of age, was struck with his last illness; and died on
March 3rd. He was buried at Shirley Church, near Addington, in Surrey,
not far from Croydon; and the legend on his tomb records: "He was an
entirely honest merchant, and his memory is, to all who keep it, dear
and helpful. His son, whom he loved to the uttermost, and taught to
speak truth, says this of him."

Mr. John James Ruskin, like many other of our successful merchants, had
been an open-handed patron of art, and a cheerful giver, not only to
needy friends and relatives, but also to various charities. For example,
as a kind of personal tribute to Osborne Gordon, his son's tutor, he
gave £5,000 toward the augmentation of poor Christ-Church livings. His
son's open-handed way with dependants and servants was learned from the
old merchant, who, unlike many hard-working money-makers, was always
ready to give, though he could not bear to lose. In spite of which he
left a considerable fortune behind him,--considerable when it is
understood to be the earnings of his single-handed industry and steady
sagacity in legitimate business, without indulgence in speculation. He
left £120,000 with various other property, to his son. To his wife he
left his house and £37,000, and a void which it seemed at first nothing
could fill. For of late years the son had drifted out of their horizon,
with ideas on religion and the ordering of life so very different from
theirs; and had been much away from home--he sometimes said, selfishly,
but not without the greatest of all excuses, necessity. And so the two
old people had been brought closer than ever together; and she had lived
entirely for her husband. But, as Browning said,--"Put a stick in
anywhere, and she will run up it"--so the brave old lady did not faint
under the blow, and fade away, but transferred her affections and
interests to her son. Before his father's death the difference of
feeling between them, arising out of the heretical economy, had been
healed. Old Mr. Ruskin's will treated his son with all confidence in
spite of his unorthodox views and unbusiness-like ways. And for nearly
eight years longer his mother lived on, to see him pass through his
probation-period into such recognition as an Oxford Professorship
implied, and to find in her last years his later books "becoming more
and more what they always ought to have been" to her.

At the same time, her failing sight and strength needed a constant
household companion. Her son, though he did not leave home yet awhile
for any long journeys, could not be always with her. Only six weeks
after the funeral he was called away for a time to fulfil a
lecture-engagement at Bradford. Before going he brought his pretty young
Scotch cousin. Miss Joanna Ruskin Agnew, to Denmark Hill for a week's
visit. She recommended herself at once to the old lady, and to Carlyle,
who happened to call, by her frank good-nature and unquenchable spirits;
and her visit lasted seven years, until she was married to Arthur
Severn, son of the Ruskins' old friend, Joseph Severn, British Consul at
Rome. Even then she was not allowed far out of their sight, but settled
in the old house at Herne Hill: "nor virtually," said Ruskin in the last
chapter of "Præterita," "have she and I ever parted since."

All through that year he remained at home, except for short necessary
visits, and frequent evenings with Carlyle. And when, in December, he
gave those lectures in Manchester which afterwards, as "Sesame and
Lilies," became his most popular work, we can trace his better health of
mind and body in the brighter tone of his thought. We can hear the echo
of Carlyle's talk in the heroic, aristocratic, Stoic ideals, and in the
insistence on the value of books and free public libraries,[10]--Carlyle
being the founder of the London Library. And we may suspect that his
thoughts on women's influence and education had been not a little
directed by those months in the company of "the dear old lady and ditto
young" to whom Carlyle used to send his love.

[Footnote 10: The first lecture, "Of Kings' Treasuries," was given,
December 6th, 1864, at Rusholme Town Hall, Manchester, in aid of a
library fund for the Rusholme Institute. The second, "Queens' Gardens,"
was given December 14th, at the Town Hall, King Street, now the Free
Reference Library, Manchester, in aid of schools for Ancoats.]

In 1864 a new series of papers on Art was begun, the only published
work upon Art of all these ten years. The papers ran in _The Art
Journal_ from January to July, 1865, and from January to April. 1866,
under the title of "The Cestus of Aglaia," by which was meant the
Girdle, or restraining law, of Beauty, as personified in the wife of
Hephaestus, "the Lord of Labour." Their intention was to suggest, and to
evoke by correspondence, "some laws for present practice of art in our
schools, which may be admitted, if not with absolute, at least with a
sufficient consent, by leading artists." As a first step the author
asked for the elementary rules of drawing. For his own contribution he
showed the value of the "pure line," such as he had used in his own
early drawings. Later on, he had adopted a looser and more picturesque
style of handling the point; and in the "Elements of Drawing" he had
taught his readers to take Rembrandt's etchings as exemplary. But now he
felt that this "evasive" manner, as he called it, had its dangers. And
so these papers attempted to supersede the amateurish object lesson of
the earlier work by stricter rules for a severer style; prematurely, as
it proved, for the chapters came to an end before the promised code was
formulated. The same work was taken up again in "The Laws of Fésole";
but the use of the pure line, which Ruskin's precepts failed to enforce,
was, in the end, taught to the public by the charming practice of Mr.
Walter Crane and Miss Greenaway.

A lecture at the Camberwell Working Men's Institute on "Work and Play"
was given on January 24th, 1865; which, as it was printed in "The Crown
of Wild Olive," we will notice further on. Various letters and papers on
political and social economy and other subjects hardly call for separate
notice: with the exception of one very important address to the Royal
Institution of British Architects, given May 15th, "On the Study of
Architecture in our Schools."




