CHAPTER VIII

SIR ROGER NEWDIGATE'S PRIZE (1837-1839)


Of all the prizes which Oxford could bestow, the Newdigate used to be
the most popular. Its fortunate winner was an admitted poet in an age
when poetry was read, and he appeared in his glory at Commemoration,
speaking what the ladies could understand and admire. The honour was
attainable without skill in Greek particles or in logarithms; and yet it
had a real value to an intending preacher, for the successful reciter
might be felt to have put his foot on the pulpit stairs. John Ruskin was
definitely meant for the Church, and he went to Oxford in the avowed
hope of getting the Newdigate, if nothing else. His last talk with Mr.
Dale was chiefly about ways and means to this end; and before he went up
he had begun "The Gipsies" for March, 1837.

The prize was won that year by Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, afterwards Dean
of Westminster. Our candidate and his old schoolfellow, Henry Dart, of
Exeter College, set to work on the next subject, "The Exile of St.
Helena," and after the long vacation read their work to each other,
accepting the hints and corrections of a friendly rivalry.

Meantime his old nurse Anne (it is trivial, but a touch of nature),
being at Oxford in attendance on the ladies, and keen, as she always
was, for Master John's success, heard from the keeper of the
Reading-room of criticisms on his published verses. She brought the news
to his delighted mother. "He was pleased," she writes, "but says that he
forms his own estimate of his poems, and reviews don't alter it; but
'How my father will be delighted! How he will crow!'" Which historiette
repeated itself many a time in the family annals.

In Lent term, 1838, he was hard at work on the new poem. He wrote:


     "I must give an immense time every day to the Newdigate, which I
     must have, if study will get it. I have much to revise. You find
     many faults, but there are hundreds which have escaped your notice,
     and many lines must go out altogether which you and I should wish
     to stay in. The thing must be remodelled, and I must finish it
     while it has a freshness on it, otherwise it will not be written
     well. The old lines are hackneyed in my ears, even as a very soft
     Orleans plum, which your Jewess has wiped and re-wiped with the
     corner of her apron, till its polish is perfect, and its
     temperature elevated."

In this March he got through his "Smalls."


     "Nice thing to get over; quite a joke, as everybody says when
     they've got through with the feathers on. It's a kind of
     emancipation from freshness--a thing unpleasant in an egg, but
     dignified in an Oxonian--very. Lowe very kind; Kynaston ditto--nice
     fellows--urbane. How they _do_ frighten people! There was one man
     all but crying with mere fear. Kynaston had to coax him like a
     child. Poor fellow! he had some reason to be afraid; did his logic
     shockingly. People always take up logic because they fancy it
     doesn't require a good memory, and there is nothing half so
     productive of pluck; they _never_ know it. I was very cool when I
     got into it; found the degree of excitement agreeable; nibbled the
     end of my pen and grinned at Kynaston over the table as if _I_ had
     been going to pluck _him_. They always smile when they mean pluck."

The Newdigate for 1838, for all his care and pains, was won by Dart. He
was, at any rate, beaten by a friend, and with a poem which his own
honourable sympathy and assistance had helped to perfect.

Another trifling incident lets us get a glimpse of the family life of
our young poet. The Queen's coronation in June, 1838, was a great event
to all the world, and Mr. Ruskin was anxious for his son to see it. Much
correspondence ensued between the parents, arranging everything for him,
as they always did--which of the available tickets should be accepted,
and whether he could stand the fatigue of the long waiting, and so
forth. Mrs. Ruskin did not like the notion of her boy sitting perched on
rickety scaffolding at dizzy altitudes in the Abbey. Mr. Ruskin,
evidently determined to carry his point, went to Westminster, bribed the
carpenters, climbed the structure, and reported all safe to stand a
century, "though," said he, "the gold and scarlet of the decorations
appeared very paltry compared with the Wengern Alp." But he could not
find No. 447, and wrote to the Heralds' Office to know if it was a place
from which a good view could be got. Blue-mantle replied that it was a
very good place, and Lord Brownlow had just taken tickets for his sons
close by. Then there was the great question of dress. He went to Owen's
and ordered a white satin waistcoat with gold sprigs, and a high
dress-coat with bright buttons, and asked his wife to see about white
gloves at Oxford--a Court white neck-cloth or a black satin would do.

Picture, then, the young Ruskin in those dressy days. A portrait was
once sent to Brantwood of a dandy in a green coat of wonderful cut,
supposed to represent him in his youth, but suggesting Lord Lytton's
"Pelham" rather than the homespun-suited seer of Coniston. "Did you ever
wear a coat like that?" I asked. "I'm not so sure that I didn't," said
he.

After that, they went to Scotland and the North of England for the
summer, and more fine sketches were made, some of which hang now in his
drawing-room, and compare not unfavourably with the Prouts beside them.
In firmness of line and fulness of insight they are masterly, and mark a
rapid progress, all the more astonishing when it is recollected how
little time could have been spared for practice. The subjects are
chiefly architectural--castles and churches and Gothic details--and one
is not surprised to find him soon concerned with the Oxford Society for
Promoting the Study of Gothic Architecture. "They were all reverends,"
says a letter of the time, "and wanted somebody to rouse them."

Science, too, progressed this year. We read of geological excursions to
Shotover with Lord Carew and Lord Kildare--one carrying the hammer and
another the umbrella--and actual discoveries of saurian remains; and
many a merry meeting at Dr. Buckland's, in which, at intervals of
scientific talk, John romped with the youngsters of the family. After a
while the Dean took the opportunity of a walk through Oxford to the
Clarendon to warn him not to spend too much time on science. It did not
pay in the Schools nor in the Church, and he had too many irons in the
fire.

Drawing, and science, and the prose essays mentioned in the last
chapter, and poetry, all these were his by-play. Of the poetry, the
Newdigate was but a little part. In "Friendship's Offering" this autumn
he published "Remembrance," one of many poems to Adèle, "Christ Church,"
and the "Scythian Grave." In this last he gave free rein to the morbid
imaginations to which his unhappy _affaire de coeur_ and the mental
excitement of the period predisposed him. Harrison, his literary
Mentor, approved these poems, and inserted them in "Friendship's
Offering," along with love-songs and other exercises in verse. One had a
great success and was freely copied--the sincerest flattery--and the
preface to the annual for 1840 publicly thanked the "gifted writer" for
his "valuable aid."

At the beginning of 1839 he went into new rooms vacated by Mr. Meux, and
set to work finally on "Salsette and Elephanta." He ransacked all
sources of information, coached himself in Eastern scenery and
mythology, threw in the Aristotelian ingredients of terror and pity, and
wound up with an appeal to the orthodoxy of the examiners, of whom Keble
was the chief, by prophesying the prompt extermination of Brahminism
under the teaching of the missionaries.

This third try won the prize. Keble sent for him, to make the usual
emendations before the great work could be given to the world with the
seal of Oxford upon it. John Ruskin seems to have been somewhat
refractory under Keble's hands, though he would let his fellow-students,
or his father, or Harrison, work their will on his MSS. or proofs; being
always easier to lead than to drive. Somehow he came to terms with the
Professor, and then the Dean, taking an unexpected interest, was at
pains to see that his printed copy was flawless, and to coach him for
the recitation of it at the great day in the Sheldonian (June 12, 1839).

And now that friends and strangers, publishers in London and professors
in Oxford, concurred in their applause, it surely seemed that he had
found his vocation, and was well on the high-road to fame as a poet.




