BOOK III

HERMIT AND HERETIC

(1860-1870)




CHAPTER I

"UNTO THIS LAST" (1860-1861)


At forty years of age Ruskin finished "Modern Painters." From that time
art was sometimes his text, rarely his theme. He used it as the
opportunity, the vehicle, so to say, for teachings of wider range and
deeper import; teachings about life as a whole, conclusions in ethics
and economics and religion, to which he sought to lead others, as he was
led, by the way of art.

During the time when he was preaching his later doctrines, he wished to
suppress the interfering evidences of the earlier. He let his works on
art run out of print, not for the benefit of second-hand booksellers,
but in the hope that he could fix his audience upon the burden of his
prophecy for the time being. But the youthful works were still read;
high prices were paid for them, or they were smuggled in from America.
And when the epoch of "Fors" had passed, he agreed to the reprinting of
all that early material. He called it obsolete and trivial; others find
it interestingly biographical--perhaps even classical.

This year, then, 1860, the year of the Italian Kingdom, of Garibaldi,
and of the beginning of the American war, marks his turning point, from
the early work, summed up in the old "Selections," to the later work.

Until he was forty, Mr. Ruskin was a writer on art; after that his art
was secondary to ethics. Until he was forty he was a believer in English
Protestantism; afterwards he could not reconcile current beliefs with
the facts of life as he saw them, and had to reconstruct his creed from
the foundations. Until he was forty he was a philanthropist, working
heartily with others in a definite cause, and hoping for the amendment
of wrongs, without a social upheaval. Even in the beginning of 1860, in
his evidence before the House of Commons Select Committee on Public
Institutions, he was ready with plans for amusing and instructing the
labouring classes, and noting in them a "thirsty desire" for
improvement. But while his readiness to make any personal sacrifice, in
the way of social and philanthropic experiment, and his interest in the
question were increasing, he became less and less sanguine about the
value of such efforts as the Working Men's College, and less and less
ready to co-operate with others in their schemes. He began to see that
no tinkering at social breakages was really worth while; that far more
extensive repairs were needed to make the old ship seaworthy.

So he set himself, by himself, to sketch the plans for the repairs.
Naturally sociable, and accustomed to the friendly give-and-take of a
wide acquaintance, he withdrew from the busy world into a busier
solitude. During the next few years he lived much alone among the Alps,
or at home, thinking out the problem; sometimes feeling, far more
acutely than was good for clear thought, the burden of the mission that
was laid upon him. In March, 1863, he wrote from his retreat at Mornex
to Norton:


     "The loneliness is very great, and the peace in which I am at
     present is only as if I had buried myself in a tuft of grass on a
     battlefield wet with blood--for the cry of the earth about me is in
     my ears continually, if I do not lay my head to the very ground."

And a few months later:


     "I am still very unwell, and tormented between the longing for rest
     and lovely life, and the sense of this terrific call of human crime
     for resistance and of human misery for help, though it seems to me
     as the voice of a river of blood which can but sweep me down in the
     midst of its black clots, helpless."

Sentences like these, passages here and there in the last volume of
"Modern Painters," and still more, certain passages omitted from that
volume, show that about 1860 something of a cloud had been settling over
him,--a sense of the evil of the world, a horror of great darkness. In
his earlier years, his intense emotion and vivid imagination had enabled
him to read into pictures of Tintoret or Turner, into scenes of nature
and sayings of great books, a meaning or a moral which he so vividly
communicated to the reader as to make it thenceforward part and parcel
of the subject, however it came there to begin with. It is useless to
wonder whether Turner, for instance, consciously meant what Ruskin found
in his works. A great painter does not paint without thought, and such
thought is apt to show itself whether he will or no. But it needs
imaginative sympathy to detect and describe the thought. And when that
sympathy was given to suffering, to widespread misery, to crying wrongs;
joined also with an intense passion for justice, which had already shown
itself in the defence of slighted genius and neglected art; and to the
Celtic temperament of some highstrung seer and trance-prophesying bard;
it was no wonder that Ruskin became like one of the hermits of old, who
retreated from the world to return upon it with stormy messages of
awakening and flashes of truth more impressive, more illuminating than
the logic of schoolmen and the state-craft of the wise.

And then he began to take up an attitude of antagonism to the world, he
who had been the kindly helper and minister of delightful art. He began
to call upon those who had ears to hear to come out and be separate
from the ease and hypocrisy of Vanity Fair. Its respectabilities, its
orthodoxies, he could no longer abide. Orthodox religion, orthodox
morals and politics, orthodox art and science, alike he rejected; and
was rejected by each of them as a brawler, a babbler, a fanatic, a
heretic. And even when kindly Oxford gave him a quasi-academical
position, it did not bring him, as it brings many a heretic, back to the
fold.

In this period of storm and stress he stood alone. The old friends of
his youth were one by one passing away, if not from intercourse, still
from full sympathy with him in his new mood. His parents were no longer
the guides and companions they had been; they did not understand the
business he was about. And so he was left to new associates, for he
could not live without some one to love,--that was the nature of the
man, however lonely in his work and wanderings.

The new friends of this period were, at first, Americans; as the chief
new friends of his latest period (the Alexanders) were American, too.
Charles Eliot Norton, after being introduced to him in London in 1855,
met him again by accident on the Lake of Geneva--the story is prettily
told in "Præterita." Ruskin adds:


     "Norton saw all my weaknesses, measured all my narrownesses, and,
     from the first, took serenely, and as it seemed of necessity, a
     kind of paternal authority over me, and a right of guidance.... I
     was entirely conscious of his rectorial power, and affectionately
     submissive to it, so that he might have done anything with me, but
     for the unhappy difference in our innate, and unchangeable,
     political faiths."

So, after all, he stood alone.

Another friend about this time was Mrs. H. Beecher Stowe, to whom he
wrote on June 18th, 1860, from Geneva:


     "It takes a great deal, when I am at Geneva, to make me wish myself
     anywhere else, and, of all places else, in London; nevertheless, I
     very heartily wish at this moment that I were looking out on the
     Norwood Hills, and were expecting you and the children to breakfast
     to-morrow.

     "I had very serious thoughts, when I received your note, of running
     home; but I expected that very day an American friend, Mr.
     Stillman, who, I thought, would miss me more here than you in
     London, so I stayed.

     "What a dreadful thing it is that people should have to go to
     America again, after coming to Europe! It seems to me an inversion
     of the order of nature. I think America is a sort of 'United'
     States of Probation, out of which all wise people, being once
     delivered, and having obtained entrance into this better world,
     should never be expected to return (sentence irremediably
     ungrammatical), particularly when they have been making themselves
     cruelly pleasant to friends here. My friend Norton, whom I met
     first on this very blue lake water, had no business to go back to
     Boston again, any more than you....

     "So you have been seeing the Pope and all his Easter performances!
     I congratulate you, for I suppose it is something like 'Positively
     the last appearance on any stage.' What was the use of thinking
     about _him_? You should have had your own thoughts about what was
     to come after him. I don't mean that Roman Catholicism will die out
     so quickly. It will last pretty nearly as long as Protestantism,
     which keeps it up; but I wonder what is to come next. That is the
     main question just now for everybody."

W.J. Stillman had been a correspondent about 1851,--"involved in
mystical speculations, partly growing out of the second volume of
'Modern Painters,'" as he said of himself in an article on "John Ruskin"
in the _Century_ Magazine (January, 1888). With him Ruskin spent July
and August of 1860 at Chamouni. He did but little drawing, and in the
few sketches that remain of that summer there is evidence that his mind
was far away from its old love of mountains and of streamlets. His
lonely walks in the pinewoods of the Arveron were given to meditation on
a great problem which had been set, as it seemed, for him to solve, ever
since he had written that chapter on "The Nature of Gothic." Now at
last, in the solitude of the Alps, he could grapple with the questions
he had raised; and the outcome of the struggle was "Unto this Last."

The year before, from Thun and Bonneville and Lausanne (August and
September, 1859) he had written letters to E.S. Dallas, suggested by the
strikes in the London building trade. In these he appears to have
sketched the outline of a new conception of social science, which he was
now elaborating with more attempt at system and brevity than he had been
accustomed to use.

These new papers, painfully thought out and carefully set down in his
room at the Hôtel de l'Union, he used--as long before he read his daily
chapter to the breakfast party at Herne Hill--to read to Stillman: and
he sent them to the _Cornhill Magazine_, started the year before by
Smith and Elder. Ruskin had already contributed to it a paper on "Sir
Joshua and Holbein," a stray chapter from Vol. V., "Modern Painters."
His reputation as a writer and philanthropist, together with the
friendliness of editor and publisher, secured the insertion of the first
three,--from August to October. The editor then wrote to say that they
were so unanimously condemned and disliked, that, with all apologies, he
could only admit one more. The series was brought hastily to a
conclusion in November: and the author, beaten back as he had never been
beaten before, dropped the subject, and "sulked," so he called it, all
the winter.

It is pleasant to notice that neither Thackeray, the editor nor Smith,
the publisher quarrelled with the author who had laid them open to the
censure of their public,--nor he with them. On December 21st, he wrote
to Thackeray, in answer apparently, to a letter about lecturing for a
charitable purpose: and continued:


     "The mode in which you direct your charity puts me in mind of a
     matter that has lain long on my mind, though I never have had the
     time or face to talk to you of it. In somebody's drawing-room,
     ages ago, you were speaking accidentally of M. de Marvy.[8] I
     expressed my great obligation to him; on which you said that I
     could prove my gratitude, if I chose, to his widow,--which choice I
     then not accepting, have ever since remembered the circumstance as
     one peculiarly likely to add, so far as it went, to the general
     impression on your mind of the hollowness of people's sayings and
     hardness of their hearts. The fact is, I give what I give almost in
     an opposite way to yours. I think there are many people who will
     relieve hopeless distress for one who will help at a hopeful pinch;
     and when I have the choice I nearly always give where I think the
     money will be fruitful rather than merely helpful. I would lecture
     for a school when I would _not_ for a distressed author; and would
     have helped De Marvy to perfect his invention, but not--unless I
     had no other object--his widow after he was gone. In a word, I like
     to prop the falling more than to feed the fallen."

[Footnote 8: Louis Marvy, an engraver, and political refugee after the
French Revolution of 1848. He produced the plates, and Thackeray the
text, of "Landscape Painters of England, in a series of steel
engravings, with short Notices."]

The winter passed without any great undertaking. G.F. Watts proposed to
add Ruskin's portrait to his gallery of celebrities; but he was in no
mood to sit. Rossetti did, however, sketch him this year. In March he
presented eighty-three Turner drawings to Oxford, and twenty-five to
Cambridge. The address of thanks with the great seal of Oxford
University is dated March 23rd, 1861; the Catalogue of the Cambridge
collection is dated May 28th.

On April 2nd he addressed the St. George's Mission Working Men's
Institute, and shortly afterwards, though at this time in a much
enfeebled state of health, gave a lecture before "a most brilliant
audience," as the _London Review_ reported, at the Royal Institution
(April 19th, 1861). Carlyle wrote to his brother John:


     "Friday last I was persuaded--in fact had inwardly compelled myself
     as it were--to a lecture of Ruskin's at the Institution, Albemarle
     Street, Lecture on Tree Leaves as physiological, pictorial, moral,
     symbolical objects. A crammed house, but tolerable even to me in
     the gallery. The lecture was thought to 'break down,' and indeed it
     quite did '_as a lecture_'; but only did from _embarras de
     richesses_--a rare case. Ruskin did blow asunder as by gunpowder
     explosions his leaf notions, which were manifold, curious, genial;
     and in fact, I do not recollect to have heard in that place any
     neatest thing I liked so well as this chaotic one."

Papers on "Illuminated Manuscripts" (read before the Society of
Antiquaries on June 6th) and on "The Preservation of Ancient Buildings"
(read to the Ecclesiological Society a fortnight later) show that old
interests were not wholly forgotten, even in the stress of new pursuits,
by this man of many-sided activity.

During May, 1861, he paid a visit to the school girls at Winnington, in
June and July he took a holiday at Boulogne with the fisher folk, in
August he went to Ireland as guest of the Latouches of Harristown,
County Kildare, and in September he returned to the Alps, spending the
rest of the year at Bonneville and Lucerne.




