CHAPTER IX

"THE QUEEN OF THE AIR" (1869)


In spite of a "classical education" and the influence of Aristotle upon
the immature art-theories of his earlier works, Ruskin was known, in his
younger days, as a Goth, and the enemy of the Greeks. When he began
life, his sense of justice made him take the side of Modern Painters
against classical tradition. Later on, when considering the great
questions of education and the aims of life, he entirely set aside the
common routine of Greek and Latin grammar as the all-in-all of culture.
But this was not because he shared Carlyle's contempt for classical
studies.

In "Modern Painters," Vol. III., he had followed out the indications of
nature-worship, and tried to analyse in general terms the attitude of
the Greek spirit towards landscape scenery, as betrayed in Homer and
Aristophanes and the poets usually read. Since that time his interest in
Greek literature had been gradually increasing. He had made efforts to
improve his knowledge of the language; and he had spent many days in
sketching and studying the terra-cottas and vases and coins at the
British Museum. He had also taken up some study of Egyptology, through
Champollion, Bunsen and Birch, in the hope of tracing the origin of
Greek decorative art. Comparative mythology, at that time, was a
department of philology, introduced to the English public chiefly by Max
Müller. Under his influence Ruskin entered step by step upon an inquiry
which afterwards became of singular importance in his life and thought.

In 1865 he had told his hearers at Bradford that Greek Religion was not,
as commonly supposed, the worship of Beauty, but of Wisdom and Power.
They did not, in their great age, worship "Venus," but Apollo and
Athena. And he regarded their mythology as a sincere tradition,
effective in forming a high moral type, and a great school of art. In
the "Ethics of the Dust" he had explained the myth of Athena as parallel
to that of Neith in Egypt; and in his fable of Neith and St. Barbara he
had hinted at a comparison, on equal terms, of Ancient and Mediæval
mythology. He ended by saying that, though he would not have his young
hearers believe "that the Greeks were better than we, and that their
gods were real angels," yet their art and morals were in some respects
greater, and their beliefs were worth respectful and sympathetic study.
The "Queen of the Air" is his contribution to this study.

On March 9th, 1869, his lecture at University College, London, on "Greek
Myths of Cloud and Storm," began with an attempt to explain in popular
terms how a myth differs from mere fiction on the one hand and from
allegory on the other, being "not conceived didactically, but didactic
in its essence, as all good art is." He showed that Greek poetry dealt
with the series of Nature-myths with which were interwoven ethical
suggestions; that these were connected with Egyptian beliefs, but that
the full force of them was only developed in the central period of Greek
history, and their interpretation was to be read in a sympathetic
analysis of the spirit of men like Pindar and Æschylus. "The great
question," he said, "in reading a story is, always, not what wild hunter
dreamed, or what childish race first dreaded it; but what wise man first
perfectly told, and what strong people first perfectly lived by it. And
the real meaning of any myth is that which it has at the noblest age of
the nation among whom it was current."

In the next chapter he worked out, as a sequel to his lecture, two
groups of Animal-myths; those connected with birds, and especially the
dove, as type of Spirit, and those connected with the serpent in its
various significances. These two studies were continued, more or less,
in "Love's Meinie" and in the lecture printed in "Deucalion," as the
third group, that of Plant-myths, was carried on in "Proserpina." The
volume contained also extracts from the lecture on the Architecture of
the Valley of the Somme, and two numbers of the "Cestus of Aglaia," and
closed with a paper on The Hercules of Camarina, read to the South
Lambeth Art School on March 15th. This study of a Greek coin had already
formed the subject of an address at the Working Men's College, and
anticipated the second course of Oxford Lectures. For the rest, "The
Queen of the Air" is marked by its statement, more clearly than before
in Ruskin's writing, of the dependence of moral upon physical life, and
of physical upon moral science. He speaks with respect of the work of
Darwin and Tyndall; but as formerly in the Rede Lecture, and afterwards
in the "Eagle's Nest," he claims that natural science should not be
pursued as an end in itself, paramount to all other conclusions and
considerations; but as a department of study subordinate to ethics, with
a view to utility and instruction.

Before this book was quite ready for publication, and after a sale of
some of his less treasured pictures at Christie's he left home for a
journey to Italy, to revisit the subjects of "Stones of Venice," as in
1868 he had revisited those of the "Seven Lamps." At Vevey, on the way,
he wrote his preface (May 1st).

By quiet stages he passed the Simplon, writing from Domo d'Ossola, 5th
May, 1869:


     "I never yet had so beautiful a day for the Simplon as this has
     been; though the skin of my face is burning now all over--to keep
     me well in mind of its sunshine. I left Brieg at 6 exactly--light
     clouds breaking away into perfect calm of blue. Heavy snow on the
     col--about a league--with the wreaths in many places higher than
     the carriage. Then, white crocus all over the fields, with
     Soldanelle and Primula farinosa. I walked about three miles up, and
     seven down, with great contentment; the waterfalls being all in
     rainbows, and one beyond anything I ever yet saw; for it fell in a
     pillar of spray against shadow behind, and became rainbow
     altogether. I was just near enough to get the belt broad, and the
     down part of the arch: and the whole fall became orange and violet
     against deep shade. To-morrow I hope to get news of you all, at
     Baveno."

     "BAVENO, _Thursday, 6th May_, 1869.

     "It is wet this morning, and very dismal, for we are in a ghastly
     new Inn, the old one being shut up; and there is always a re-action
     after a strong excitement like the beauty of the Simplon yesterday,
     which leaves one very dull. But it is of no use growling or mewing.
     I hope to be at Milan to-morrow--at Verona for Sunday. I have been
     reading Dean Swift's life, and 'Gulliver's Travels' again. Putting
     the delight in dirt, which is a mere disease, aside, Swift is very
     like me, in most things:--in opinions exactly the same."

At Milan, next day, he went to see the St. Catherine of Luini which he
had copied, and found it wantonly damaged by the carelessness of masons
who put their ladders up against it, just as if it were a bit of common
whitewashed wall.

On the 8th he reached Verona after seventeen years' absence, and on the
10th he was in Venice. There, looking at the works of the old painters
with a fresh eye, and with feelings and thoughts far different from
those with which he had viewed them as a young man, in 1845, he saw
beauties he had passed over before, in the works of a painter till then
little regarded by connoisseurs, and entirely neglected by the public.
Historians of art like Crowe and Cavalcaselle[16] had indeed examined
Carpaccio's works and investigated his life, along with the lives and
works of many another obscure master: artists like Hook and Burne-Jones
had admired his pictures; Ruskin had mentioned his backgrounds twice or
thrice in "Stones of Venice." But no writer had noticed his
extraordinary interest as an exponent of the mythology of the Middle
Ages, as the illustrator of poetical folk-lore derived from those
antique myths of Greece, and newly presented by the genius of
Christianity.

[Footnote 16: Their "History of Painting in North Italy," containing a
detailed account of Carpaccio, was published in 1871.]

This was a discovery for which Ruskin was now ripe, He saw at once that
he had found a treasure-house of things new and old. He fell in love
with St. Ursula as, twenty-four years earlier, he had fallen in love
with the statue of Ilaria at Lucca; and she became, as time after time
he revisited Venice for her sake, a personality, a spiritual presence, a
living ideal, exactly as the Queen of the Air might have been to the
sincere Athenian in the pagan age of faith. The story of her life and
death became an example, the conception of her character, as read in
Carpaccio's picture, became a standard for his own life and action in
many a time of distress and discouragement. The thought of "What would
St. Ursula say?" led him--not always, but far more often than his
correspondents knew--to burn the letter of sharp retort upon stupidity
and impertinence, and to force the wearied brain and overstrung nerves
into patience and a kindly answer. And later on, the playful credence
which he accorded to the myth deepened into a renewed sense of the
possibility of spiritual realities, when he learnt to look, with those
mediæval believers; once more as a little child upon the unfathomable
mysteries of life.

But this anticipates the story; at the time, he found in Carpaccio the
man who had touched the full chord of his feelings and his thoughts,
just as, in his boyhood, Turner had led him, marvelling, through the
fire and cloud to the mountain-altar; and as, in his youth, Tintoret had
interpreted the storm and stress of a mind awakening to the terrible
realities of the world. It was no caprice of a changeful taste, nor love
of startling paradox, that brought him to "discover Carpaccio;" it was
the logical sequence of his studies, and widening interests, and a view
of art embracing far broader issues than the connoisseurship of "Modern
Painters," or the didacticism of "Seven Lamps," or the historical
research of "Stones of Venice."

Soon after the "Queen of the Air" was published Carlyle wrote:


     "Last week I got y'r 'Queen of the Air,' and read it. _Euge,
     Ettge._ No such Book have I met with for long years past. The one
     soul now in the world who seems to feel as I do on the highest
     matters, and speaks _mir aus dem Herzen_, exactly what I wanted to
     hear!-As to the natural history of those old myths I remained here
     and there a little uncert'n; but as to the meanings you put into
     them, never anywhere. All these things I not only 'agree' with, but
     w'd use Thor's Hammer, if I had it, to enforce and put in action on
     this rotten world. Well done, well done!--and pluck up a heart, and
     continue ag'n and ag'n. And don't say 'most g't tho'ts are dressed
     _in shrouds_': many, many are the Phoebus Apollo celestial arrows
     you still have to shoot into the foul Pythons, and poisonous
     abominable Megatheriums and Plesiosaurians that go staggering ab't,
     large as cathedrals, in our sunk Epoch ag'n...."



