CHAPTER X

"MODERN PAINTERS" CONCLUDED (1838-1860)


Oxford and old friends did not monopolise Ruskin's attention: he was
soon seen at Cambridge--on the same platform with Richard Redgrave,
R.A., the representative of Academicism and officialism--at the opening
of the School of Art for workmen on October 29th, 1858. His Inaugural
Address struck a deeper note, a wider chord, than previous essays; it
was the forecast of the last volume of "Modern Painters," and it
sketched the train of thought into which he had been led during his tour
abroad, that summer.

The battles between faith and criticism, between the historical and the
scientific attitudes, which had been going on in his mind, were taking a
new form. At the outset, we saw, naturalism overpowered respect for
tradition--in the first volume of "Modern Painters;" then the historical
tendency won the day, in the second volume. Since that time, the
critical side had been gathering strength, by his alliance with liberal
movements and by his gradual detachment from associations that held
him to the older order of thought. As in his lonely journey of 1845
he first took independent ground upon questions of religion and social
life, so in 1858, once more travelling alone, he was led by his
meditations,--freed from the restraining presence of his parents--to
conclusions which he had been all these years evading, yet finding at
last inevitable.

He went abroad for a third attempt to write and illustrate his History
of Swiss Towns. He spent part of May on the Upper Rhine between Basle
and Schaffhausen, June and half of July on the St. Gothard route and at
Bellinzona. In reflecting over the sources of Swiss character, as
connected with the question of the nature of art and its origin in
morality, he was struck with the fact that all the virtues of the Swiss
did not make them artistic. Compared with most nations they were as
children in painting, music and poetry. And, indeed, they ranked with
the early phases of many great nations--the period of pristine
simplicity "uncorrupted by the arts."

From Bellinzona he went to Turin on his way to the Vaudois Valleys,
where he meant to compare the Waldensian Protestants with the Swiss.
Accidentally he saw Paul Veronese's "Queen of Sheba" and other Venetian
pictures; and so fell to comparing a period of fully ripened art with
one of artlessness; discovering that the mature art, while it appeared
at the same time with decay in morals, did not spring from that decay,
but was rooted in the virtues of the earlier age. He grasped a clue to
the puzzle, in the generalisation that Art is the product of human
happiness; it is contrary to asceticism; it is the expression of
pleasure. But when the turning point of national progress is once
reached, and art is regarded as the laborious incitement to
pleasure,--no longer the spontaneous blossom and fruit of it,--the
decay sets in for art as for morality. Art, in short, is created _by_
pleasure, not _for_ pleasure. The standard of thought, the attitude of
mind, of the Waldensians, he now perceived to be quite impossible for
himself. He could not look upon every one outside their fold as heathens
and publicans; he could not believe that the pictures of Paul Veronese
were works of iniquity, nor that the motives of great deeds in earlier
ages were lying superstitions. He took courage to own to himself and
others that it was no longer any use trying to identify his point of
view with that of Protestantism. He saw both Protestants and Roman
Catholics, in the perspective of history, converging into a primitive,
far distant, ideal unity of Christianity, in which he still believed;
but he could take neither side, after this.

The first statement of the new point of view was, as we said, the
Inaugural Lecture of the Cambridge School of Art. The next important
utterance was at Manchester, February 22nd, 1859, where he spoke on the
"Unity of Art," by which he meant--not the fraternity of handicrafts
with painting, as the term is used nowadays--but that, in whatever
branch of Art, the spirit of Truth or Sincerity is the same. In this
lecture there is a very important passage showing how he had at last got
upon firm ground in the question of art and morality: "_I do_ NOT _say
in the least that in order to be a good painter you must be a good man_;
but I do say that in order to be a good natural painter there must be
strong elements of good in the mind, however warped by other parts of
the character." So emphatic a statement deserves more attention than it
has received from readers and writers who assume to judge Ruskin's views
after a slight acquaintance with his earlier works. He was well aware
himself that his mind had been gradually enlarging, and his thoughts
changing; and he soon saw as great a difference between himself at forty
and at twenty-five, as he had formerly seen between the Boy poet and the
Art critic. He became as anxious to forget his earlier books, as he had
been to forget his verse-writing; and when he came to collect his
"Works," these lectures, under the title of "The Two Paths," were (with
"The Political Economy of Art") the earliest admitted into the library.

After this Manchester lecture he took a driving tour in
Yorkshire--posting in the old-fashioned way--halting at Bradford for the
lecture on "Modern Manufacture and Design" (March 1st), and ending with
a visit to the school at Winnington, of which more in a later chapter.

In 1859 the last Academy Notes, for the time being, were published. The
Pre-Raphaelite cause had been fully successful, and the new school of
naturalist landscape was rapidly asserting itself. Old friends were
failing, such as Stanfield, Lewis, and Roberts: but new men were growing
up, among whom Ruskin welcomed G.D. Leslie, F. Goodall, J.C. Hook,--who
had come out of his "Pre-Raphaelite measles" into the healthy naturalism
of "Luff Boy!"--Clarence Whaite, Henry Holiday, and John Brett, who
showed the "Val d'Aosta." Millais' "Vale of Rest" was the picture which
attracted most notice: something of the old rancour against the school
was revived in the _Morning Herald_, which called his works
"impertinences," "contemptible," "indelible disgrace," and so on. It was
the beginning of a transition from the delicacy of the Pre-Raphaelite
Millais to his later style; and as such the preacher of "All great art
is delicate" could not entirely defend it. But the serious strength of
the imagination and the power of the execution he praised with
unexpected warmth.

He then started on the last tour abroad with his parents. He had been
asked, rather pointedly, by the National Gallery Commission, whether he
had seen the great German museums, and had been obliged to reply that he
had not. Perhaps it occurred to him or to his father that he ought to
see the pictures at Berlin and Dresden and Munich, even though he
heartily disliked the Germans with their art and their language and
everything that belonged to them,--except Holbein and Dürer. By the end
of July the travellers were in North Switzerland; and they spent
September in Savoy, returning home by October 7th.

Old Mr. Ruskin was now in his seventy-fifth year and his desire was to
see the great work finished before he died. There had been some attempt
to write this last volume of "Modern Painters" in the previous winter,
but it had been put off until after the visit to Germany had completed a
study of the great Venetian painters--especially Titian and Veronese.
Now at last, in the autumn of 1859, he finally set to work on the
writing.

The assertion of Turner's genius had been necessary in 1843, but Turner
was long since dead; his fame was thoroughly vindicated; his bequest to
the nation dealt with, so far as possible. Early Christian Art was
recognised--almost beyond its claims. The Pre-Raphaelites and
naturalistic landscapists no longer needed the hand which "Modern
Painters" had held out to them by the way. Of the great triad of Venice,
Tintoret had been expounded, Veronese and Titian were now taken up and
treated with tardy, but ample recognition.

And now, after twenty years of labour, Ruskin had established himself as
the recognised leader of criticism and the exponent of painting and
architecture. He had created a department of literature all his own. He
had enriched the art of England with examples of a new and beautiful
draughtsmanship, and the language with passages of poetic description
and eloquent declamation, quite, in their way, unrivalled. He had built
up a theory of art, so far uncontested; and thrown new light on the
Middle Ages and Renaissance, illustrating, in a way then novel, their
chronicles by their remains. He had beaten down opposition, risen above
detraction, and won the prize of honour--only to realise, as he received
it, that the fight had been but a pastime tournament, after all; and to
hear, through the applause, the enemy's trumpet sounding to battle. For
now, without the camp, there were realities to face; as to Art--"the
best in this kind are but shadows."




