CHAPTER IV

MOUNTAIN-WORSHIP (1830-1835)


Critics who are least disposed to give Ruskin credit for his artistic
doctrines or economical theories unite in allowing that he taught his
generation to look at Nature, and especially at the sublime in
Nature--at storms and sunrises, and the forests and snows of the Alps.
This mission of mountain-worship was the outcome of a passion beside
which the other interests and occupations of his youth were only toys.
He could take up his mineralogy and his moralizing and lay them down,
but the love of mountain scenery was something beyond his control. We
have seen him leave his heart in the Highlands at three years old; we
have now to follow his passionate pilgrimages to Skiddaw and Snowdon, to
the Jungfrau and Mont Blanc.

They had planned a great tour through the Lakes and the North two years
before, but were stopped at Plymouth by the news of Mrs. Richardson's
death. At last the plan was carried out. A prose diary was written
alternately by John and Mary, one carrying it on when the other tired,
with rather curious effect of unequally-yoked collaboration. We read how
they "set off from London at seven o'clock on Tuesday morning, the 18th
May," and thenceforward we are spared no detail: the furniture of the
inns; the bills of fare; when they got out of the carriage and walked;
how they lost their luggage; what they thought of colleges and chapels,
music and May races at Oxford, of Shakespeare's tomb, and the
pin-factory at Birmingham; we have a complete guide-book to Blenheim and
Warwick Castle, to Haddon and Chatsworth, and the full itinerary of
Derbyshire. "Matlock Bath," we read, "is a most delightful place"; but
after an enthusiastic description of High Tor, John reacts into bathos
with a minute description of wetting their shoes in a puddle. The cavern
with a Bengal light was fairyland to him, and among the minerals he was
quite at home.

Then they hurried north to Windermere. Once at Lowwood, the excitement
thickens, with storms and rainbows, mountains and waterfalls, boats on
the lake and coaching on the steep roads. This journey through Lakeland
is described in the galloping anapæsts of the "Iteriad," which was
simply the prose journal versified on his return, one of the few
enterprises of the sort which were really completed.

To readers who know the country it is interesting as giving a detailed
account in the days when this "nook of English ground" was "secure from
rash assault." One learns that, even then, there were jarring sights at
Bowness Bay and along Derwentwater shore, elements unkind and bills
exorbitant. Coniston especially was dreary with rain, and its inn--the
old Waterhead, now destroyed--extravagantly dear; "_but_," says John,
with his eye for mineral specimens, "it contains several rich
coppermines." An interesting touch is the hero-worship with which they
went reverently to peep at Southey and Wordsworth in church; too humble
to dream of an introduction, and too polite to besiege the poets in
their homes, but independent enough to form their own opinions on the
personality of the heroes. They did not like the look of Wordsworth at
all; Southey they adored. The dominant note of the tour is, however, an
ecstatic delight in the mountain scenery; on Skiddaw and Helvellyn all
the gamut of admiration is lavished.

On returning home, John began Greek under Dr. Andrews, and was soon
versifying Anacreontics in his notebooks. He began to read Byron for
himself, with what result we shall see before long; but the most
important new departure was the attempt to copy Cruikshank's etchings to
Grimm's fairy tales, his real beginning at art. From this practice he
learnt the value of the pure, clean line that expresses form. It is a
good instance of the authority of these early years over Ruskin's whole
life and teaching that in his "Elements of Drawing" he advised young
artists to begin with Cruikshank, as he began, and that he wrote
appreciatively both of the stories and the etchings so many decades
afterwards in the preface to a reprint by J.C. Hotten.

His cousin-sister Mary had been sent to a day-school when Mrs. Ruskin's
lessons were superseded by Dr. Andrews, and she had learnt enough
drawing to attempt a view of the hotel at Matlock, a thing which John
could not do. So, now that he too showed some power of neat
draughtsmanship, it was felt that he ought to have her advantages. They
got Mr. Runciman the drawing-master, chosen, it may be, as a relative of
the well-known Edinburgh artist of the same name, to give him lessons,
in the early part of 1831. His teaching was of the kind which preceded
the Hardingesque: it aimed at a bold use of the soft pencil, with a
certain roundness of composition and richness of texture, a conventional
"right way" of drawing anything. This was hardly what John wanted; but,
not to be beaten, he facsimiled the master's freehand in a sort of
engraver's stipple, which his habitual neatness helped him to do in
perfection. Runciman soon put a stop to that, and took pains with a
pupil who took such pains with himself--taught him, at any rate, the
principles of perspective, and remained his only drawing-master for
several years.

A sample of John Ruskin's early lessons in drawing, described by him in
letters to his father, may be not without interest. On February 20,
1832, he writes:


     "... You saw the two models that were last sent, before you went
     away. Well, I took my paper, and I fixed my points, and I drew my
     perspective, and then, as Mr. Runciman told me, I began to invent a
     scene. You remember the cottage that we saw as we went to Rhaidyr
     Dhu (_sic_), near Maentwrog, where the old woman lived whose
     grandson went with us to the fall, so very silently? I thought my
     model resembled that; so I drew a tree--such a tree, such an
     enormous fellow--and I sketched the waterfall, with its dark rocks,
     and its luxuriant wood, and its high mountains; and then I examined
     one of Mary's pictures to see how the rocks were done, and another
     to see how the woods were done, and another to see how the
     mountains were done, and another to see how the cottages were done,
     and I patched them all together, and I made such a lovely
     scene--oh, I should get such a scold from Mr. Runciman (that is, if
     he ever scolded)!"

After the next lesson he wrote, February 27, 1832:


     "You know the beautiful model drawing that I gave you an account of
     in my last. I showed it to Mr. Runciman. He contemplated it for a
     moment in silence, and then, turning, asked me if I had copied. I
     told him how I had patched it up; but he said that that was not
     copying, and although he was not satisfied with the picture, he
     said there was something in it that would make him totally change
     the method he had hitherto pursued with me. He then asked Mary for
     some gray paper, which was produced; then inquired if I had a
     colour-box; I produced the one you gave me, and he then told me he
     should begin with a few of the simplest colours, in order to teach
     me better the effects of light and shade. He should then proceed
     to teach me water-colour painting, but the latter only as a basis
     for oil; this last, however, to use his own words, all in due
     time.... Oh, if I could paint well before we went to Dover! I
     should have such sea-pieces...."

In March 1834, Runciman was encouraging him in his oil-painting; but a
year later he wrote to his father:

    "I cannot bear to paint in oil,
    C. Fielding's tints alone for me!
    The other costs me double toil,
    And wants some fifty coats to be
    Splashed on each spot successively.
    Faugh, wie es stinckt! I can't bring out,
    With all, a picture fit to see.
    My bladders burst; my oils are out--
    And then, what's all the work about?"

After a few lessons he could rival Mary when they went for their summer
excursion. He set to work at once at Sevenoaks to draw cottages; at
Dover and Battle he attempted castles. It may be that these first
sketches are of the pre-Runciman period; but the Ruskins made the round
of Kent in 1831, and though the drawings are by no means in the master's
style, they show some practice in using the pencil.

The journey was extended by the old route, conditioned by business as
before, round the South Coast to the West of England, and then into
Wales. There his powers of drawing failed him; moonlight on Snowdon was
too vague a subject for the blacklead point but a hint of it could be
conveyed in rhyme:

    "Folding like an airy vest,
    The very clouds had sunk to rest;
    Light gilds the rugged mountain's breast,
    Calmly as they lay below;
    Every hill seemed topped with snow,
    As the flowing tide of light
    Broke the slumbers of the night."

Harlech Castle was too sublime for a sketch, but it was painted with
the pen:

    "So mighty, so majestic, and so lone;
    And all thy music, now, the ocean's murmuring."

And the enthusiasm of mountain glory, a sort of ecstacy of
uncontrollable passion, strives for articulate deliverance in the
climbing song, "I love ye, ye eternal hills."

It was hard to come back to the daily round, the common task, especially
when, in this autumn of 1831, to Dr. Andrews' Latin and Greek, the
French grammar and Euclid were added, under Mr. Rowbotham. And the new
tutor had no funny stories to tell; he was not so engaging a man as the
"dear Doctor," and his memory was not sweet to his wayward pupil. But
the parents had chosen for the work one who was favourably known by his
manuals, and capable of interesting even a budding poet in the
mathematics; for our author tells that at Oxford, and ever after, he
knew his Euclid without the figures, and that he spent all his spare
time in trying to trisect an angle. An old letter from Rowbotham informs
Mr. J.J. Ruskin that an eminent mathematician had seen John's attempt,
and had said that it was the cleverest he knew. In French, too, he
progressed enough to be able to find his way alone in Paris two years
later. And however the saucy boy may have satirized his tutor in the
droll verses on "Bedtime," Mr. Rowbotham always remembered him with
affection, and spoke of him with respect.

In spite of these tedious tutorships, he managed to scribble
energetically all this winter, writing with amazing rapidity, as his
mother notes: attempts at Waverley novels, which never got beyond the
first chapter, imitations of "Childe Harold" and "Don Juan" and scraps
in the style of everybody in turn. No wonder his mother sent him to bed
at nine punctually, and kept him from school, in vain efforts to quiet
his brain. The lack of companions was made up to him in the friendship
of Richard Fall, son of a neighbour on "the Hill," a boy without
affectation or morbidity of disposition whose complementary character
suited him well. An affectionate comradeship sprang up between the two
lads, and lasted, until in middle life they drifted apart, in no
ill-will, but each going on his own course to his own destiny.

Some real advance was made this winter (1831-32) with his Shelleyan
"Sonnet to a Cloud" and his imitations of Byron's "Hebrew Melodies,"
from which he learnt how to concentrate expression, and to use rich
vowel-sounds and liquid consonants with rolling effect. A deeper and
more serious turn of thought, that gradually usurped the place of the
first boyish effervescence, has been traced by him to the influence of
Byron, in whom, while others saw nothing more than wit and passion,
Ruskin perceived an earnest mind and a sound judgment.

But the most sincere poem--if sincerity be marked by unstudied phrase
and neglected rhyme--the most genuine "lyrical cry" of this period, is
that song in which our boy-poet poured forth his longing for the "blue
hills" he had loved as a baby, and for those Coniston crags over which,
when he became old and sorely stricken, he was still to see the morning
break. When he wrote these verses he was nearly fourteen, or just past
his birthday. It had been eighteen months since he had been in Wales,
and all the weary while he had seen no mountains; but in his regrets he
goes back a year farther still, to fix upon the Lakeland hills, less
majestic than Snowdon, but more endeared, and he describes his
sensations on approaching the beloved objects in the very terms that
Dante uses for his first sight of Beatrice:

    "I weary for the fountain foaming,
     For shady holm and hill;
    My mind is on the mountain roaming,
     My spirit's voice is still.

    "The crags are lone on Coniston
     And Glaramara's dell;
    And dreary on the mighty one,
     The cloud-enwreathed Sea-fell...."

    "There is a thrill of strange delight
     That passes quivering o'er me,
    When blue hills rise upon the sight,
     Like summer clouds before me."

Judge, then, of the delight with which he turned over the pages of a new
book, given him this birthday by the kind Mr. Telford, in whose carriage
he had first seen those blue hills--a book in which all his mountain
ideals, and more, were caught and kept enshrined--visions still, and of
mightier peaks and ampler valleys, romantically "tost" and sublimely
"lost," as he had so often written in his favourite rhymes. In the
vignettes to Rogers' "Italy," Turner had touched the chord for which
John Ruskin had been feeling all these years. No wonder that he took
Turner for his leader and master, and fondly tried to copy the wonderful
"Alps at Daybreak" to begin with, and then to imitate this new-found
magic art with his own subjects and finally to come boldly before the
world in passionate defence of a man who had done such great things for
him.

This mountain-worship was not inherited from his father, who never was
enthusiastic about peaks and clouds and glaciers, though he was
interested in all travelling in a general way. So that it was not
Rogers' "Italy" that sent the family off to the Alps that summer; but,
fortunately for John, his father's eye was caught by the romantic
architecture of Prout's "Sketches in Flanders and Germany," when it came
out in April, 1853, and his mother proposed to make both of them happy
in a tour on the Continent. The business-round was abandoned, but they
could see Mr. Domecq on their way back through Paris, and not wholly
lose the time.

They waited to keep papa's birthday on May 10, and early next morning
drove off--father and mother, John and Mary, Nurse Anne, and the
courier Salvador. They crossed to Calais, and posted, as people did in
the old times, slowly from point to point; starting betimes, halting at
the roadside inns, where John tried to snatch a sketch, reaching their
destination early enough to investigate the cathedral or the citadel,
monuments of antiquity or achievements of modern civilisation, with
impartial eagerness; and before bedtime John would write up his journal
and work up his sketches just as if he were at home.

So they went through Flanders and Germany, following Prout's lead by the
castles of the Rhine; but at last, at Schaffhausen one Sunday
evening--"suddenly--behold--beyond!"--they had seen the Alps.
Thenceforward Turner was their guide as they crossed the Splügen, sailed
the Italian lakes, wondered at Milan Cathedral, and the Mediterranean at
Genoa, and then roamed through the Oberland and back to Chamouni. All
this while a great plan shaped itself in the boy's head, no less than to
make a Rogers' "Italy" for himself, just as he tried to make a "Harry
and Lucy" or a "Dictionary of Minerals." On every place they passed he
would write verses and prose sketches, to give respectively the romance
and the reality or ridicule; for he saw the comic side of it all,
keenly; and he would illustrate the series with Turneresque vignettes,
drawn with the finest crowquill pen, to imitate the delicate engravings.
By this he learnt more drawing in two or three years than most amateur
students do in seven. For the first year he had the "Watchtower of
Andernach" and the "Jungfrau from Interlaken" to show, with others of
similar style, and thenceforward alternated between Turner and Prout,
until he settled into something different from either.

But Turner and Prout were not the only artists he knew; at Paris he
found his way into the Louvre, and got leave from the directors, though
he was under the age required, to copy. The picture he chose was a
Rembrandt.

Between this foreign tour and the next, his amusement was to draw these
vignettes, and to write the poems suggested by the scenes he had
visited. He had outgrown the evening lessons with Dr. Andrews, and as he
was fifteen, it was time to think more seriously of preparing him for
Oxford, where his name was put down at Christ Church. His father hoped
he would go into the Church, and eventually turn out a combination of a
Byron and a bishop--something like Dean Milman, only better. For this,
college was a necessary preliminary; for college, some little schooling.
So they picked the best day-school in the neighbourhood, that of the
Rev. Thomas Dale (afterwards Dean of Rochester), in Grove Lane, Peckham.
John Ruskin worked there rather less than two years. In 1835 he was
taken from school in consequence of an attack of pleurisy, and lost the
rest of that year from regular studies.

More interesting to him than school was the British Museum collection of
minerals, where he worked occasionally with his Jamieson's Dictionary.
By this time he had a fair student's collection of his own, and he
increased it by picking up specimens at Matlock, or Clifton, or in the
Alps, wherever he went, for he was not short of pocket-money. He took
the greatest pains over his catalogues, and wrote elaborate accounts of
the various minerals in a shorthand he invented out of Greek letters and
crystal forms.

Grafted on this mineralogy, and stimulated by the Swiss tour, was a new
interest in physical geology, which his father so far approved as to
give him Saussure's "Voyages dans les Alpes" for his birthday in 1834.
In this book he found the complement of Turner's vignettes, something
like a key to the "reason why" of all the wonderful forms and marvellous
mountain-architecture of the Alps. He soon wrote a short essay on the
subject, and had the pleasure of seeing it in print, in Loudon's
_Magazine of Natural History_ for March, 1834, along with another bit
of his writing, asking for information on the cause of the colour of the
Rhine-water.

He had already some acquaintance with J.C. Loudon, F.L.S., H.S., etc.,
and he was on the staff of that versatile editor not long afterwards,
and took a lion's share of the writing in the _Magazine of
Architecture_. Meanwhile he had been introduced to another editor, and
to the publishers with whom he did business for many a year to come. The
acquaintance was made in a curious, accidental manner. His cousin
Charles Richardson, clerk to Smith, Elder, and Co., had the opportunity
of mentioning the young poet's name to Thomas Pringle, editor of the
"Friendship's Offering" which John had admired and imitated. Mr. Pringle
came out to Herne Hill, and was hospitably entertained as a brother
Scot, as not only an editor, but a poet himself--not _only_ a poet, but
a man of respectability and piety, who had been a missionary in South
Africa. In return for this hospitality he gave a good report of John's
verses, and, after getting him to re-write two of the best passages in
the last tour, carried them off for insertion in his forthcoming number.
He did more: he carried John to see the actual Samuel Rogers, whose
verses had been adorned by the great Turner's vignettes.

After the pleurisy of April, 1835, his parents took him abroad again,
and he made great preparations to use the opportunity to the utmost. He
would study geology in the field, and took Saussure in his trunk he
would note meteorology: he made a cyanometer--a scale of blue to measure
the depth of tone, the colour whether of Rhine-water or of Alpine skies.
He would sketch. By now he had abandoned the desire to make MS. albums,
after seeing himself in print, and so chose rather to imitate the
imitable, and to follow Prout, this time with careful outlines on the
spot, than to idealize his notes in mimic Turnerism. He kept a prose
journal, chiefly of geology and scenery, as well as a versified
description, written in a metre imitated from "Don Juan," but more
elaborate, and somewhat of a _tour de force_ in rhyming. But that
poetical journal was dropped after he had carried it through France,
across the Jura, and to Chamouni. The drawing crowded it out, and for
the first time he found himself as ready with his pencil as he had been
with his pen.

His route is marked by the drawings of that year, from Chamouni to the
St. Bernard and Aosta, back to the Oberland and up the St. Gothard; then
back again to Lucerne and round by the Stelvio to Venice and Verona, and
finally through the Tyrol and Germany homewards. The ascent of the St.
Bernard was told in a dramatic sketch of great humour and power of
characterization, and a letter to Richard Fall records the night on the
Rigi, when he saw the splendid sequence of storm, sunset, moonlight, and
daybreak, which forms the subject of one of the most impressive passages
of "Modern Painters."

It happened that Pringle had a plate of Salzburg which he wanted to
print in order to make up the volume of "Friendship's Offering" for the
next Christmas. He seems to have asked John Ruskin to furnish a copy of
verses for the picture, and at Salzburg, accordingly, a bit of rhymed
description was written and re-written, and sent home to the editor.
Early in December the Ruskins returned, and at Christmas there came to
Herne Hill a gorgeous gilt morocco volume, "To John Ruskin, from the
Publishers." On opening it there were his "Andernach" and "St. Goar,"
and his "Salzburg" opposite a beautifully-engraved plate, all hills,
towers, boats, and figures moving picturesquely under the sunset, in
Turner's manner more or less, "Engraved by E. Goodall from a drawing by
W. Purser." It was almost like being Mr. Rogers himself.




