CHAPTER VII

THE WORKING MEN'S COLLEGE (1854-1855)


Philanthropic instincts, and a growing sense of the necessity for social
reform, had led Ruskin for some years past towards a group of liberal
thinkers with whom he had little otherwise in common. At Venice, in
1852, he had written several articles on education, taxation, and so
forth, with which he intended to plunge into active politics. His
father, like a cautious man of business who knew his son's powers and
thought he knew their limitations, was strongly opposed to this
attempt, and used every argument against it. He appealed to his son's
sensitiveness, and assured him that he would be "flayed" unless he
wrapped himself in the hide of a rhinoceros. He assured him that,
without being on the spot to follow the discussions of politicians, it
was useless to offer them any opinions whatsoever. And he ended by
declaring that it would be the ruin of his business and of his peace of
mind if the name of Ruskin were mixed up with Radical electioneering:
not that he was unwilling to suffer martyrdom for a cause in which he
believed, but he did not believe in the movements afoot--neither the
Tailors' Cooperative Society, in which their friend F.J. Furnivall was
interested, nor in any outcome of Chartism or Chartist principles. And
so for a time the matter dropped.

In 1854, the Rev. F.D. Maurice founded the Working Men's College. Mr.
Furnivall sent the circulars to John Ruskin; who thereupon wrote to
Maurice, and offered his services. At the opening lecture on October 31,
1854, at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, Furnivall distributed to all
comers a reprint of the chapter "On the Nature of Gothic," which we have
already noticed as a statement of the conclusions drawn from the study
of art respecting the conditions under which the life of the workman
should be regulated. Ruskin thus appeared as contributing, so to say,
the manifesto of the movement.

He took charge from the commencement of the drawing-classes--first at 31
Red Lion Square, and afterwards at Great Ormond Street; also
super-intending classes taught by Messrs. Jeffery and E. Cooke at the
Working Women's (afterwards the Working Men and Women's) College, Queen
Square.

In this labour he had two allies; one a friend of Maurice's, Lowes
Dickinson, the well-known artist, whose portrait of Maurice was
mentioned with honour in the "Notes on the Academy"; his portrait of
Kingsley hangs in the hall of the novelist-professor's college at
Cambridge. The other helper was new friend.

To people who know him only as the elegant theorist of art, sentimental
and egotistic, as they will have it, there must be something strange,
almost irreconcilable, in his devotion, week after week and year after
year, to these night-classes. Still more must it astonish them to find
the mystic author of the "Blessed Damozel," the passionate painter of
the "Venus Verticordia," working by Ruskin's side in this rough
navvy-labour of philanthropy.

It was early in 1854 that a drawing of D.G. Rossetti was sent to Ruskin
by a friend of the painter's. The critic already knew Millais and Hunt
personally, but not Rossetti. He wrote kindly, signing himself "yours
respectfully," which amused the young painter. He made acquaintance, and
in the appendix to his Edinburgh Lectures placed Rossetti's name with
those of Millais and Hunt, especially praising their imaginative power,
as rivalling that of the greatest of the old masters.

He did more than this. He agreed to buy, up to a certain sum every year,
any drawings that Rossetti brought him, at their market price; and his
standard of money-value for works of art has never been niggardly. This
sort of help, the encouragement to work, is exactly what makes progress
possible to a young and independent artist; it is better for him than
fortuitous exhibition triumphs--much better than the hack-work which
many have to undertake, to eke out their livelihood. And the mere fact
of being bought by the eminent art-critic was enough to encourage other
patrons.

"He seems in a mood to make my fortune," said Rossetti in the spring of
1854; and early in 1855 Ruskin wrote:


     "It seems to me that, of all the painters I know, you on the whole
     have the greatest genius; and you appear to me also to be--as far
     as I can make out--a very good sort of person, I see that you are
     unhappy, and that you can't bring out your genius as you should.
     It seems to me then the proper and _necessary_ thing, if I can, to
     make you more happy; and that I shall be more really useful in
     enabling you to paint properly, and keep your room in order, than
     in any other way."

He did his best to keep that room in order in every sense. Anxious to
promote the painter's marriage with Miss Siddal--"Princess Ida," as
Ruskin called her--he offered a similar arrangement to that which he had
made with Rossetti; and began in 1855 to give her £150 a year in
exchange for drawings up to that value. Rossetti's poems also found a
warm admirer and advocate. In 1856, "The Burden of Nineveh" was
published anonymously in the _Oxford and Cambridge Magazine_; Ruskin
wrote to Rossetti that it was "glorious" and that he wanted to know who
was the author,--perhaps not without a suspicion that he was addressing
the man who could tell. In 1861 he guaranteed, or advanced, the cost of
"The Early Italian Poets," up to £100, with Smith and Elder; and
endeavoured, but unsuccessfully, to induce Thackeray to find a place for
other poems in _The Cornhill Magazine._

Mr. W.M. Rossetti, in his book on his brother "as Designer and Writer"
and in his "Family Letters," draws a pleasant picture of the intimacy
between the artist and the critic. "At one time," he says, "I am sure
they even loved one another." But in 1865 Rossetti, never very tolerant
of criticism and patronage, took in bad part his friend's remonstrances
about the details of "Venus Verticordia." Eighteen months later, Ruskin
tried to renew the old acquaintance. Rossetti did not return his call;
and further efforts on Ruskin's part, up to 1870, met with little
response. But the lecture on Rossetti in "The Art of England" shows that
on one side at least "their parting," as Mr. W.M. Rossetti says, "was
not in anger;" and the portrait of 1861, now in the Oxford University
Galleries, will remain as a memorial of the ten years' friendship of the
two famous men.

At Red Lion Square, during Lent term, 1855, the three teachers worked
together every Thursday evening. With the beginning of the third term,
March 29, the increase of the class made it more convenient to divide
their forces. Rossetti thenceforward taught the figure on another night
of the week; while the elementary and landscape class continued to meet
on Thursdays under Ruskin and Lowes Dickinson. In 1856 the elementary
and landscape class was further divided, Mr. Dickinson taking Tuesday
evenings, and Ruskin continuing the Thursday class, with the help of
William Ward as under-master. Later on, G. Allen, J. Bunney, and W.
Jeffrey were teachers. Burne-Jones, met in 1856 at Rossetti's studio,
was also pressed into the service for a time.

There were four terms in the Working Men's College year, the only
vacation, except for the fortnight at Christmas, being from the
beginning of August to the end of October. Ruskin did not always attend
throughout the summer term, though sometimes his class came down to him
into the country to sketch. He kept up the work without other
intermission until May, 1858, after which the completion of "Modern
Painters" and many lecture-engagements took him away for a time. In the
spring of 1860 he was back at his old post for a term; but after that he
discontinued regular attendance, and went to the Working Men's College
only at intervals, to give addresses or informal lectures to students
and friends. On such occasions the "drawing-room" or first floor of the
house in which the College was held would be always crowded, with an
audience who heard the lecturer at his best; speaking freely among
friends out of a full treasure-house "things new and old"--accounts of
recent travel, lately-discovered glories of art, and the growing burden
of the prophecy that in those years was beginning to take more definite
shape in his mind.

As a teacher, Ruskin spared no pains to make the work interesting. He
provided--Mr. E. Cooke informs me that he was the first to
provide--casts from natural leaves and fruit in place of the ordinary
conventional ornament; and he sent a tree to be fixed in a corner of the
class-room for light and shade studies. Mr. W. Ward in the preface to
the volume of letters already quoted says that he used to bring his
minerals and shells, and rare engravings and drawings, to show them.

"His delightful way of talking about these things afforded us most
valuable lessons. To give an example: he one evening took for his
subject a cap, and with pen and ink showed us how Rembrandt would have
etched, and Albert Dürer engraved it. This at once explained to us the
different ideas and methods of the two masters. On another evening he
would take a subject from Turner's 'Liber Studiorum,' and with a large
sheet of paper and some charcoal, gradually block in the subject,
explaining at the same time the value and effect of the lines and
masses."

And for sketching from nature he would take his class out into the
country, and wind up with tea and talk. "It was a treat to hear and see
him with his men," writes Dr. Furnivall.

His object in the work, as he said before the Royal Commission on
National Institutions, was _not to make artists_, but to make the
workmen better men, to develop their powers and feelings,--to educate
them, in short. He always has urged young people intending to study art
as a profession to enter the Academy Schools, as Turner and the
Pre-Raphaelites did, or to take up whatever other serious course of
practical discipline was open to them. But he held very strongly that
everybody could learn drawing, that their eyes could be brightened and
their hands steadied, and that they could be taught to appreciate the
great works of nature and of art, without wanting to make pictures or to
exhibit and sell them.

It was with this intention that he wrote the "Elements of Drawing" in
1856, supplemented by the "Elements of Perspective" in 1859; the
illustrations for the book were characteristic sketches by the author,
beautifully cut by his pupil, W.H. Hooper, who was one of a band of
engravers and copyists formed by these classes at the Working Men's
College. In spite of the intention not to make artists by his teaching,
Ruskin could not prevent some of his pupils from taking up art as a
profession; and those who did so became, in their way, first-rate men.
George Allen as a mezzotint engraver, Arthur Burgess as a draughtsman
and wood-cutter, John Bunney as a painter of architectural detail, W.
Jeffery as an artistic photographer, E. Cooke as a teacher, William Ward
as a facsimile copyist, have all done work whose value deserves
acknowledgment, all the more because it was not aimed at popular effect,
but at the severe standard of the greater schools. But these men were
only the side issue of the Working Men's College enterprise. Its real
result was in the proof that the labouring classes could be interested
in Art; and that the capacity shown by the Gothic workman had not
entirely died out of the nation, in spite of the interregnum, for a full
century, of manufacture. And the experience led Ruskin forward to wider
views on the nature of the arts, and on the duties of philanthropic
effort and social economy.




