CHAPTER VIII

AGATES, AND ABBEVILLE (1868)


Of less interest to the general reader, though too important a part of
Ruskin's life and work to be passed over without mention, are his
studies in Mineralogy. We have heard of his early interest in spars and
ores; of his juvenile dictionary in forgotten hieroglyphics; and of his
studies in the field and at the British Museum. He had made a splendid
collection, and knew the various museums of Europe as familiarly as he
knew the picture-galleries. In the "Ethics of the Dust" he had chosen
Crystallography as the subject in which to exemplify his method of
education; and in 1867, after finishing the letters to Thomas Dixon, he
took refuge, as before, among the stones, from the stress of more
agitating problems.

In the lecture on the Savoy Alps in 1863 he had referred to a hint of
Saussure's that the contorted beds of the limestones might possibly be
due to some sort of internal action, resembling on a large scale that
separation into concentric or curved bands which is seen in calcareous
deposits. The contortions of gneiss were similarly analogous, it was
suggested, to those of the various forms of silica. Ruskin did not adopt
the theory, but put it by for examination in contrast with the usual
explanation of these phenomena, as the simple mechanical thrust of the
contracting surface of the earth.

In 1863 and 1866 he had been among the Nagelflüh of Northern
Switzerland, studying the puddingstones and breccias. He saw that the
difference between these formations, in their structural aspect, and the
hand-specimens in his collection of pisolitic and brecciated minerals
was chiefly a matter of size; and that the resemblances in form were
very close. And so he concluded that if the structure of the minerals
could be fully understood a clue might be found to the very puzzling
question of the origin of mountain structure.

Hence his attempt to analyze the structure of agates and similar banded
and brecciated minerals, in the series of papers in the _Geological
Magazine_;[15] an attempt which though it was never properly completed,
and fails to come to any general conclusion, is extremely interesting as
an account of beautiful and curious natural forms till then little
noticed by mineralogists.

[Footnote 15: August and November, 1867, January, April and May, 1868,
December, 1869, and January, 1870, illustrated with very fine mezzotint
plates and woodcuts.]

A characteristic anecdote of this period is preserved in "Arrows of the
Chace."

"The _Daily Telegraph_ of January 21st, 1868, contained a leading
article upon the following facts. It appeared that a girl, named Matilda
Griggs, had been nearly murdered by her seducer, who, after stabbing her
in no less than thirteen places, had then left her for dead. She had,
however, still strength enough to crawl into a field close by, and there
swooned. The assistance she met with in this plight was of a rare kind.
Two calves came up to her, and disposing themselves on either side of
her bleeding body, thus kept her warm and partly sheltered from cold
and rain. Temporarily preserved, the girl eventually recovered, and
entered into recognizances, under a sum of forty pounds, to prosecute
her murderous lover. But 'she loved much,' and failing to prosecute,
forfeited her recognizances, and was imprisoned by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer for her debt. 'Pity the poor debtor,' wrote the _Daily
Telegraph_, and in the next day's issue appeared the following letter,
probably not intended for the publication accorded to it. 'Sir,--Except
in 'Gil Blas,' I never read of anything Astræan on the earth so perfect
as the story in your fourth article to-day. I send you a cheque for the
Chancellor. If forty, in legal terms, means four hundred, you must
explain the farther requirements to your impulsive public.

"'I am, Sir, your faithful servant, 'J. RUSKIN.'"

The writer of letters like this naturally had a large correspondence,
beside that which a circle of private friends and numberless admirers
and readers elicited. About this time it grew to such a pitch that he
was obliged to print a form excusing him from letter-writing on the
ground of stress of work. And indeed, this year, though he did not
publish his annual volume, as usual, he was fully occupied with frequent
letters to newspapers, several lectures and addresses, a preface to the
reprint of his old friend Cruikshank's "Grimm," and the beginning of a
new botanical work, "Proserpina," in addition to the mineralogy, and a
renewed interest in classical studies. Of the public addresses the most
important was that on "The Mystery of Life and its Arts," delivered in
the theatre of the Royal College of Science, Dublin (May 13th), and
printed in "Sesame and Lilies."

After this visit to Ireland he spent a few days at Winnington; and late
in August crossed the Channel, for rest and change at Abbeville. For the
past five years he had found too little time for drawing; it was twenty
years since his last sketching of French Gothic, except for a study (now
at Oxford), of the porch at Amiens, in 1856. He took up the old work
where he had left it, after writing the "Seven Lamps," with fresh
interest and more advanced powers of draughtsmanship as shown in the
pencil study of the Place Amiral Courbet, now in the drawing school at
Oxford.

The following are extracts from the usual budget of home letters;
readers of "Fors" will need no further introduction to their old
acquaintance, the tallow-chandler.


     "ABBEVILLE, _Friday, 18th Sept._, 1868

     "You seem to have a most uncomfortable time of it, with the
     disturbance of the house. However, I can only leave you to manage
     these things as you think best--or feel pleasantest to yourself. I
     am saddened by another kind of disorder, France is in everything so
     fallen back, so desolate and comfortless, compared to what it was
     twenty years ago--the people so much rougher, clumsier, more
     uncivil--everything they do, vulgar and base. Remnants of the old
     nature come out when they begin to know you. I am drawing at a nice
     tallow-chandler's door, and to-day, for the first time had to go
     inside for rain. He was very courteous and nice, and warned me
     against running against the candle-ends--or bottoms, as they were
     piled on the shelves, saying--'You must take care, you see, not to
     steal any of my candles'--or 'steal _from_ my candles,' meaning not
     to rub them off on my coat. He has a beautiful family of cats--papa
     and mamma and two superb kittens--half Angora."

     "_22nd Sept._

     "I am going to my cats and tallow-chandler.... I was very much
     struck by the superiority of manner both in him and in his two
     daughters who serve at the counter, to persons of the same class in
     England. When the girls have weighed out their candles, or written
     down the orders that are sent in, they instantly sit down to their
     needlework behind the counter, and are always busy, yet always
     quiet; and their father, though of course there may be vulgar
     idioms in his language which I do not recognize, has entirely the
     manners of a gentleman."

     _30th Sept_.

     "I have the advantage here I had not counted on. I see by the
     papers that the weather in England is very stormy and bad. Now,
     though it is showery here, and breezy, it has always allowed me at
     some time of the day to draw. The air is tender and soft,
     invariably--even when blowing with force; and to-day, I have seen
     quite the loveliest sunset I ever yet saw,--one at Boulogne in '61
     was richer; but for delicacy and loveliness nothing of past sight
     ever came near this."

Earlier on the same day he had written:


     "I am well satisfied with the work I am doing, and even with my own
     power of doing it, if only I can keep myself from avariciously
     trying to do too much, and working hurriedly. But I can do _very_
     little quite _well_, each day: with that however it is my bounden
     duty to be content.

     "And now I have a little piece of news for you. Our old Herne Hill
     house being now tenantless, and requiring some repairs before I can
     get a tenant, I have resolved to keep it for myself, for my rougher
     mineral work and mass of collection; keeping only my finest
     specimens at Denmark Hill. My first reason for this, is affection
     for the old house:--my second, want of room;--my third, the
     incompatibility of hammering, washing, and experimenting on stones
     with cleanliness in my stores of drawings. And my fourth is the
     power I shall have, when I want to do anything very quietly, of
     going up the hill and thinking it out in the old garden, where your
     greenhouse still stands, and the aviary--without fear of
     interruption from callers.

     "It may perhaps amuse you, in hours which otherwise would be
     listless, to think over what may be done with the old house. I have
     ordered it at once to be put in proper repair by Mr. Snell; but for
     the furnishing, I can give no directions at present: it is to be
     very simple, at all events, and calculated chiefly for museum work
     and for stores of stones and books: and you really must not set
     your heart on having it furnished like Buckingham Palace.

     "I have bought to-day, for five pounds, the front of the porch of
     the Church of St. James. It was going to be entirely destroyed. It
     is worn away, and has little of its old beauty; but as a remnant of
     the Gothic of Abbeville--as I happen to be here--and as the church
     was dedicated to my father's patron saint (as distinct from mine)
     I'm glad to have got it. It is a low arch--with tracery and
     niches, which ivy, and the Erba della Madonna, will grow over
     beautifully, wherever I rebuild it."

At Abbeville he had with him as usual his valet Crawley; and as before
he sent for Downes the gardener, to give him a holiday, and to enjoy his
raptures over every new sight. C.E. Norton came on a short visit, and
Ruskin followed him to Paris, where he met the poet Longfellow (October
7). At last on Monday, 19th October, he wrote:


     "Only a line to-day, for I am getting things together, and am a
     little tired, but very well, and glad to come home, though much
     mortified at having failed in half my plans, and done nothing
     compared to what I expected. But it is better than if I were
     displeased with all I _had_ done. It isn't Turner--and it isn't
     Correggio--it isn't even Prout--but it isn't bad."

Returning home, he gave an account of his autumn's work in the lecture
at the Royal Institution, January 29th, 1869, on the "Flamboyant
Architecture of the Valley of the Somme." This lecture was not then
published in full: but part of the original text is printed in the third
chapter of the work we have next to notice, "The Queen of the Air."




