CHAPTER III

PERFERVIDUM INGENIUM (1826-1830)


The first dated "poem" was written a month before little John Ruskin
reached the age of seven. It is a tale of a mouse, in seven octosyllabic
couplets, "The Needless Alarm," remarkable only for an unexpected
correctness in rhyme, rhythm, and reason.

His early verse owes much to the summer tours, which were prolific in
notes; everything was observed and turned into verse. The other
inspiring source was his father--the household deity of both wife and
child, whose chief delight was in his daily return from the city, and in
his reading to them in the drawing-room at Herne Hill. John was packed
into a recess, where he was out of the way and the draught; he was
barricaded by a little table that held his own materials for amusement,
and if he liked to listen to the reading, he had the chance of hearing
good literature, the chance sometimes of hearing passages from Byron and
Christopher North and Cervantes, rather beyond his comprehension, for
his parents were not of the shockable sort: with all their religion and
strict Scotch morality, they could laugh at a broad jest, as
old-fashioned people could.

So he associated his father and his father's readings with the poetry
of reflection, as he associated the regular summer round with the poetry
of description. As every summer brought its crop of description, so
against the New Year (for, being Scotch, they did not then keep our
Christmas) and against his father's birthday in May he used always to
prepare some little drama or story or "address" of a reflective nature,
beginning with the verses on "Time," written for New Year's Day, 1827.

That year they were again at Perth, and on their way home some early
morning frost suggested the not ungraceful verses on the icicles at
Glenfarg. By a childish misconception, the little boy seems to have
confused the real valley that interested him so with Scott's ideal
Glendearg, and, partly for this reason, to have found a greater pleasure
in "The Monastery," which he thereupon undertook to paraphrase in verse.
There remain some hundreds of doggerel rhymes; but his affection for
that particular novel survived the fatal facility of his octosyllabics,
and reappears time after time in his later writings.

Next year, 1828, their tour was stopped at Plymouth by the painful news
of the death of his aunt Jessie, to whom they were on their way. It was
hardly a year since the bright little cousin, Jessie of Perth, had died
of water on the brain. She had been John's especial pet and playfellow,
clever, like him, and precocious; and her death must have come to his
parents as a warning, if they needed it, to keep their own child's brain
from over-pressure. It is evident that they did their best to "keep him
back"; they did not send him to school for fear of the excitement of
competitive study. His mother put him through the Latin grammar herself,
using the old Adam's manual which his father had used at Edinburgh High
School. Even this old grammar became a sort of sacred book to him; and
when at last he went to school, and his English master threw the book
back to him, saying, "that's a Scotch thing," the boy was shocked and
affronted, as which of us would be at a criticism on _our_ first
instrument of torture? He remembered the incident all his life, and
pilloried the want of tact with acerbity in his reminiscences.

They could keep him from school, but they did not keep him from study.
The year 1828 saw the beginning of another great work, "Eudosia, a Poem
on the Universe"; it was "printed" with even greater neatness and
labour; but this, too, after being toiled at during the winter months,
was dropped in the middle of its second "book." It was not idleness that
made him break off such plans, but just the reverse--a too great
activity of brain. His parents seem to have thought that there was no
harm in this apparently quiet reading and writing. They were extremely
energetic themselves, and hated idleness. They appear to have held a
theory that their little boy was safe so long as he was not obviously
excited; and to have thought that the proper way of giving children
pocket-money was to let them earn it. So they used to pay him for his
literary labours; "Homer" was one shilling a page; "Composition," one
penny for twenty lines; "Mineralogy," one penny an article.

The death of his aunt Jessie left a large family of boys and one girl to
the care of their widowed father, and the Ruskins felt it their duty to
help. They fetched Mary Richardson away, and brought her up as a sister
to their solitary son. She was not so beloved as Jessie had been, but a
good girl and a nice girl, four years older than John, and able to be a
companion to him in his lessons and travels. There was no sentimentality
about his attachment to her, but a steady fraternal relationship, he, of
course, being the little lord and master; but she was not without
spirit, which enabled her to hold her own, and perseverance, which
sometimes helped her to eclipse, for the moment, his brilliancy. They
learnt together, wrote their journals together, and shared alike with
the scrupulous fairness which Mrs. Ruskin's sensible nature felt called
on to show. And so she remained his sister, and not quite his sister,
until she married, and after a very short married life died.

Another accession to the family took place in the same year (1828); the
Croydon aunt, too, had died, and left a dear dog, Dash, a brown and
white spaniel, which at first refused to leave her coffin, but was
coaxed away, and found a happy home at Herne Hill, and frequent
celebration in his young master's verses. So the family was now
complete--papa and mamma, Mary and John and Dash. One other figure must
not be forgotten, Nurse Anne, who had come from the Edinburgh home, and
remained always with them, John's nurse and then Mrs. Ruskin's
attendant, as devoted and as censorious as any old-style Scotch servant
in a story-book.

The year 1829 marked an advance in poetical composition. For his
father's birthday he made a book more elaborate than any, sixteen pages
in a red cover, with a title-page quite like print: "Battle of Waterloo
| a play | in two acts | with other small | Poems dedicated to his
father | by John Ruskin | 1829 Hernhill _(sic)_ Dulwich."

To this are appended, among other pieces, fair copies of "Skiddaw," and
"Derwentwater." A recast of these, touched up by some older hand, and
printed in _The Spiritual Times_ for February, 1830, may be called his
first appearance in type.

An illness of his postponed their tour for 1829, until it was too late
for more than a little journey in Kent. He has referred his earliest
sketching to this occasion, but it seems likely that the drawings
attributed to this year were done in 1831. He was, however, busy writing
poetry. At Tunbridge, for example, he wrote that fragment "On Happiness"
which catches so cleverly the tones of Young--a writer whose orthodox
moralizing suited with the creed in which John Ruskin was brought up,
alternating, be it remembered, with "Don Quixote."

Coming home, he began a new edition of his verses, on a more
pretentious scale than the old red books, in a fine bound volume,
exquisitely "printed," with the poems dated. This new energy seems to
have been roused by the gift from his Croydon cousin Charles, a clerk in
the publishing house of Smith, Elder, and Co., of their annual
"Friendship's Offering." Mrs. Ruskin, in a letter of October 31, 1829,
finds "the poetry very so-so"; but John evidently made the book his
model.

He was now growing out of his mother's tutorship, and during this autumn
he was put under the care of Dr. Andrews for his Latin. He relates the
introduction in "Præterita," and, more circumstantially, in a letter of
the time, to Mrs. Monro, the mother of his charming Mrs. Richard Gray,
the indulgent neighbour who used to pamper the little gourmand with
delicacies unknown in severe Mrs. Ruskin's dining-room. He says in the
letter--this is at ten years old: "Well, papa, seeing how fond I was of
the doctor, and knowing him to be an excellent Latin scholar, got him
for me as a tutor, and every lesson I get I like him better and better,
for he makes me laugh 'almost, if not quite'--to use one of his own
expressions--the whole time. He is so funny, comparing Neptune's lifting
up the wrecked ships of Æneas with his trident to my lifting up a potato
with a fork, or taking a piece of bread out of a bowl of milk with a
spoon! And as he is always saying [things] of that kind, or relating
some droll anecdote, or explaining the part of Virgil (the book which I
am in) very nicely, I am always delighted when Mondays, Wednesdays, and
Fridays are come."

Dr. Andrews was no doubt a genial teacher, and had been a scholar of
some distinction in his University of Glasgow; but Mrs. Ruskin thought
him "flighty," as well she might, when, after six months' Greek, he
proposed (in March, 1831) to begin Hebrew with John. It was a great
misfortune for the young genius that he was not more sternly drilled at
the outset, and he suffered for it through many a long year of
struggles with deficient scholarship.

The Doctor had a large family and pretty daughters. One, who wrote
verses in John's note-book, and sang "Tambourgi," Mrs. Orme, lived until
1892 in Bedford Park; the other lives in Coventry Patmore's "Angel in
the House." When Ruskin, thirty years later, wrote of that
doubtfully-received poem, that it was the "sweetest analysis we possess
of quiet, modern, domestic feeling," few of his readers could have known
all the grounds of his appreciation, or suspected the weight of meaning
in the words.




