CHAPTER V

PRE-RAPHAELITISM (1851-1853)


The _Times_, in May 1851, missed "those works of inspiration," as Ruskin
had at last taught people to call Turner's pictures. But the
acknowledged mouthpiece of public opinion found consolation in
castigating a school of young artists who had "unfortunately become
notorious by addicting themselves to an antiquated style and an affected
simplicity in painting.... We can extend no toleration to a mere servile
imitation of the cramped style, false perspective, and crude colour of
remote antiquity. We want not to see what Fuseli termed drapery 'snapped
instead of folded'; faces bloated into apoplexy, or extenuated into
skeletons; colour borrowed from the jars in a druggist's shop, and
expression forced into caricature.... That morbid infatuation which
sacrifices truth, beauty, and genuine feeling to mere eccentricity
deserves no quarter at the hands of the public."

Ruskin knew nothing personally of these young innovators, and had not at
first sight wholly approved of the apparently Puseyite tendency of
Rossetti's "Ecce Ancilla Domini," Millais' "Carpenter's Shop," and
Holman Hunt's "Early Christian Missionary," exhibited the year before.
All these months he had been closely kept to his "Sheepfolds" and
"Stones of Venice"; but now he was correcting the proofs of "Modern
Painters," vol. i., as thus:


     "Chapter the last, section 21: _The duty and after privileges of
     all students_.... Go to Nature in all singleness of heart, and walk
     with her laboriously and trustingly, having no other thoughts but
     how best to penetrate her meaning, and remember her instruction;
     rejecting nothing, selecting nothing, and scorning nothing;
     believing all things to be right and good, and rejoicing always in
     the truth."

And at Coventry Patmore's request he went to the Academy to look at the
pictures in question. Yes; the faces were ugly: Millais' "Mariana" was a
piece of idolatrous Papistry, and there was a mistake in the
perspective. Collins' "Convent Thoughts"--more Popery; but very
careful--"the tadpole too small for its age"; but what studies of
plants! And there was his own "Alisma Plantago," which he had been
drawing for "Stones of Venice" (vol. i., plate 7) and describing: "The
lines through its body, which are of peculiar beauty, mark the different
expansions of its fibres, and are, I think, exactly the same as those
which would be traced by the currents of a river entering a lake of the
shape of the leaf, at the end where the stalk is, and passing out at its
point." Curvature was one of the special subjects of Ruskin, the one he
found most neglected by ordinary artists. The "Alisma" was a test of
observation and draughtsmanship. He had never seen it so thoroughly or
so well drawn, and heartily wished the study were his.

Looking again at the other works of the school, he found that the one
mistake in the "Mariana" was the only error in perspective in the whole
series of pictures; which could not be said of any twelve works,
containing architecture, by popular artists in the exhibition; and that,
as studies both of drapery and of every other minor detail, there had
been nothing in art so earnest or so complete as these pictures since
the days of Albert Dürer.

He went home, and wrote his verdict in a letter to _The Times_ (May 9,
1851). Next day he asked the price of Hunt's "Two Gentlemen of Verona,"
and Millais' "Return of the Dove." On the 13th his letter appeared in
_The Times_, and on the 26th he wrote again, pointing out beauties, and
indications of power in conception, and observation of Nature, and
handling, where at first he, like the rest of the public, had been
repelled by the wilful ugliness of the faces. Meanwhile the
Pre-Raphaelites wrote to tell him that they were neither Papists nor
Puseyites. The day after his second letter was published he received an
ill-spelt missive, anonymously abusing them. This was the sort of thing
to interest his love of poetical justice. He made the acquaintance of
several of the Brethren. "Charley" Collins, as his friends
affectionately called him, was the son of a respected R.A., and the
brother of Wilkie Collins; himself afterwards the author of a delightful
book of travel in France, "A Cruise upon Wheels." Millais turned out to
be the most gifted, charming and handsome of young artists. Holman Hunt
was already a Ruskin-reader, and a seeker after truth, serious and
earnest in his religious nature as in his painting.

The Pre-Raphaelites were not, originally, Ruskin's pupils, nor was their
movement, directly, of his creation. But it was the outcome of a general
tendency which he, more than any man, had helped to set in motion; and
it was the fulfilment, though in a way he had not expected, of his
wishes.

His attraction to Pre-Raphaelitism was none the less real because it was
sudden, and brought about partly by personal influence. And in
re-arranging his art-theory to take them in, he had before his mind
rather what he hoped they would become than what they were. For a time,
his influence over them was great; their first three years were their
own; their next three years were practically his; and some of them, the
weaker brethren, leaned upon him until they lost the command of their
own powers. No artist can afford to use another man's eyes; still less,
another man's brain and heart. Ruskin, great as an exponent, was in no
sense a master of artists; and if he cheered on the men, who, he
believed, were the best of the time, it did not follow that he should be
saddled with the responsibility of directing them.

The famous pamphlet on "Pre-Raphaelitism" of August, 1851, showed that
the same motives of Sincerity impelled both the Pre-Raphaelite Brethren
and Turner and, in a degree, men so different as Prout, old Hunt, and
Lewis. All these were opposed to the Academical School who worked by
rule of thumb; and they differed among one another only in differences
of physical power and moral aim. Which was all perfectly true, and much
truer than the cheap criticism which could not see beyond superficial
differences, or the fossil theories of the old school. But
Pre-Raphaelitism was an unstable compound, liable to explode upon the
experimenter, and its component parts to return to their old antithesis
of crude naturalism on the one hand, and affectation of piety or poetry
or antiquarianism, on the other. And _that_ their new champion did not
then foresee. All he knew was that, just when he was sadly leaving the
scene, Turner gone and night coming on, new lights arose. It was really
far more noteworthy that Millais and Rossetti and Hunt were _men of
genius_, than that the "principles" they tried to illustrate were sound,
and that Ruskin divined their power, and generously applauded them.

Immediately after finishing the pamphlet on "Pre-Raphaelitism," he left
for the Continent with his wife and friends, the Rev. and Mrs. Daniel
Moore; spent a fortnight in his beloved Savoy, with the Pritchards; and
then crossed the Alps with Charles Newton. On the 1st of September he
was at Venice, for a final spell of labour on the palaces and churches.
After spending a week with Rawdon Brown he settled at Casa Wetzler,
Campo Sta. Maria Zobenigo, and during the autumn and winter not only
worked extremely hard at his architecture, but went with his wife into
Austrian and Italian society and saw many distinguished visitors. One of
them, whom he lectured on the shortcomings of the Renaissance, was Dean
Milman. "I am amused at your mode of ciceronizing the Dean of St.
Paul's," wrote his father, who kept up the usual close correspondence,
and made himself useful in looking up books of reference and consulting
authorities like Mr. James Fergusson--for these chapters of easy
eloquence were not written without a world of pains. The engravers and
the business department of the new publications also required his
co-operation, for they were now becoming large ventures. During the
three and a half years preceding the summer of 1851 Ruskin seems to have
spent £1,680 of profits from his books, making by his writings at this
period only about a third of his annual outlay; so that the estimated
cost of these great illustrated volumes, some £1,200, was a matter of
anxiety to his father, who, together with the publisher, deprecated
large plates and technical details, and expressed some impatience to
see results from this visit to Venice. He looked eagerly for every new
chapter or drawing as it was sent home for criticism. Some passages,
such as the description of the Calle San Moise ("Stones of Venice," II.
iv,) were unfavourably received by him. Another time he says, "You have
a very great difficulty now in writing any more, which is to write up to
yourself": or again,--"Smith reports slow sale of 'Stones of Venice'
(vol. I.) and 'Pre-Raphaelitism.' The times are sorely against you. The
Exhibition has impoverished the country, and literature of a saleable
character seems chiefly confined to shilling books in green paper, to be
had at railway stations. Smith will have an account against us." He
always sent adverse press-notices, on the principle that it was good for
John: and every little discouragement or annoyance was discussed in
full.

The most serious news, threatening complete interruption of the work
rapidly progressing in spite of all, was of Turner's death (December 19,
1851). Old Mr. Ruskin heard of it on the 21st, a "dismal day" to him,
spent in sad contemplation of the pictures his son had taught him to
love. Soon it came out that John Ruskin was one of the executors named
in the will, with a legacy of _£20_ for a mourning ring:--"Nobody can
say you were paid to praise," says his father. It was gossipped that he
was expected to write Turner's biography--"five years' work for you,"
says the old man, full of plans for gathering material. But when one
scandal after another reached his ears, he changed his tone, and
suggested dropping personal details, and giving a "Life of his Art," in
the intended third and final volume of "Modern Painters." Something of
the sort was done in the Edinburgh Lectures and at the close of vol. v.
of "Modern Painters": and the official life was left to Walter
Thornbury, with which Mr. Ruskin perhaps did not wish to interfere. But
he collected a mass of then unpublished material about Turner, which
goes far to prove that the kindly view he took of the strange man's
morbid and unhappy life was not without justification. At the time, so
many legal complications developed that Ruskin was advised to resign his
executorship; later on he was able to fulfil its duties as he conceived
them, in arranging Turner's sketches for the National Gallery.

Others of his old artist-friends were now passing away. Early in January
Mr. J.J. Ruskin called on William Hunt and found him feeble: "I like the
little Elshie," he says, nicknaming him after the Black Dwarf, for Hunt
was somewhat deformed:


     "He is softened and humanized. There is a gentleness and a greater
     _bonhomie_--less reserve. I had sent him 'Pre-Raphaelitism.' He had
     marked it very much with pencil. He greatly likes your notice of
     people not keeping to their last. So many clever artists, he says,
     have been ruined by not acting on your principles. I got a piece of
     advice from Hunt,--never to commission a picture. He could not have
     done my pigeon so well had he felt he was doing it for anybody."

The pigeon was a drawing he had just bought; in later years at
Brantwood.

In February 1852 a dinner-party was given to celebrate in his absence
John Ruskin's thirty-third birthday.


     "On Monday, 9th, we had Oldfield (Newton was in Wales), Harrison,
     George Richmond, Tom, Dr. Grant, and Samuel Prout. The latter I
     never saw in such spirits, and he went away much satisfied.
     Yesterday at church we were told that he came home very happy,
     ascended to his painting-room, and in a quarter of an hour from his
     leaving our cheerful house was a corpse, from apoplexy. He never
     spoke after the fit came on. He had always wished for a sudden
     death."

Next year, in November, 1853, he tells of a visit paid, by John's
request, to W.H. Deverell, the young Pre-Raphaelite, whom he found "in
squalor and sickness--with his Bible open--and not long to live--while
Howard abuses his picture at Liverpool."

Early in 1852 Charles Newton was going to Greece on a voyage of
discovery, and wanted John Ruskin to go with him. But the parents would
not hear of his adventuring himself at sea "in those engine-vessels." So
Newton went alone, and "dug up loads of Phoenician antiquities." One
cannot help regretting that Ruskin lost this opportunity of
familiarizing himself with the early Greek art which, twenty years later
he tried to expound. For the time he was well enough employed on the
"Stones of Venice." He tells the story of this ten months' stay in a
letter to his venerable friend Rogers the poet, dated June 23 (1852).


     "I was out of health and out of heart when I first got here. There
     came much painful news from home, and then such a determined course
     of bad weather, and every other kind of annoyance, that I never was
     in a temper fit to write to anyone: the worst of it was that I lost
     all _feeling_ of Venice, and this was the reason both of my not
     writing to you and of my thinking of you so often. For whenever I
     found myself getting utterly hard and indifferent I used to read
     over a little bit of the 'Venice' in the 'Italy' and it put me
     always into the right tone of thought again, and for this I cannot
     be enough grateful to you. For though I believe that in the summer,
     when Venice is indeed lovely, when pomegranate blossoms hang over
     every garden-wall, and green sunlight shoots through every wave,
     custom will not destroy, or even weaken, the impression conveyed at
     first; it is far otherwise in the length and bitterness of the
     Venetian winters. Fighting with frosty winds at every turn of the
     canals takes away all the old feelings of peace and stillness; the
     protracted cold makes the dash of the water on the walls a sound of
     simple discomfort, and some wild and dark day in February one
     starts to find oneself actually balancing in one's mind the
     relative advantages of land and water carriage, comparing the Canal
     with Piccadilly, and even hesitating whether for the rest of one's
     life one would rather have a gondola within call or a hansom."

He then goes on to lament the decay of Venice, the idleness and
dissipation of the populace, the lottery gambling; and to forebode the
"destruction of old buildings and erection of new" changing the place
"into a modern town--a bad imitation of Paris." Better than that he
thinks would be utter neglect; St. Mark's Place would again be, what it
was in the early ages, a green field, and the front of the Ducal Palace
and the marble shafts of St. Mark's would be rooted in wild violets and
wreathed with vines:


     "She will be beautiful again then, and I could almost wish that the
     time might come quickly, were it not that so many noble pictures
     must be destroyed first.... I love Venetian pictures more and more,
     and wonder at them every day with greater wonder; compared with all
     other paintings they are so easy, so instinctive, so natural;
     everything that the men of other schools did by rule and called
     composition, done here by instinct and only called truth.

     "I don't know when I have envied anybody more than I did the other
     day the directors and clerks of the Zecca. There they sit at inky
     deal desks, counting out rolls of money, and curiously weighing the
     irregular and battered coinage of which Venice boasts; and just
     over their heads, occupying the place which in a London
     countinghouse would be occupied by a commercial almanack, a
     glorious Bonifazio--'Solomon and the Queen of Sheba'; and in a less
     honourable corner three _old_ directors of the Zecca, very
     mercantile-looking men indeed, counting money also, like the living
     ones, only a little _more_ living, painted by Tintoret; not to
     speak of the scattered Palma Vecchios, and a lovely Benedetto Diana
     which no one ever looks at. I wonder when the European mind will
     again awake to the great fact that a noble picture was not painted
     to be _hung_, but to be _seen_? I only saw these by accident,
     having been detained in Venice by soma obliging person who
     abstracted some [of his wife's jewels] and brought me thereby into
     various relations with the respectable body of people who live at
     the wrong end of the Bridge of Sighs--the police, whom, in spite of
     traditions of terror, I would very willingly have changed for some
     of those their predecessors whom you have honoured by a note in the
     'Italy.' The present police appear to act on exactly contrary
     principles; yours found the purse and banished the loser; these
     _don't_ find the jewels, and won't let me go away. I am afraid no
     punishment is appointed in Venetian law for people who steal
     _time_."

Mr. Ruskin returned to England in July, 1852, and settled next door to
his old home on Herne Hill. He said he could not live any more in Park
Street, with a dead brick wall opposite his windows. And so, under the
roof where he wrote the first volume of "Modern Painters," he finished
"Stones of Venice." These latter volumes give an account of St. Mark's
and the Ducal Palace and other ancient buildings; a complete catalogue
of Tintoret's pictures--the list he had begun in 1845; and a history of
the successive styles of architecture, Byzantine, Gothic, and
Renaissance, interweaving illustrations of the human life and character
that made the art what it was.

The kernel of the work was the chapter on the Nature of Gothic; in which
he showed, more distinctly than in the "Seven Lamps," and connected with
a wider range of thought, suggested by Pre-Raphaelitism, the doctrine
that art cannot be produced except by artists; that architecture, in so
far as it is an art, does not mean mechanical execution, by
unintelligent workmen, from the vapid working-drawings of an architect's
office; and, just as Socrates postponed the day of justice until
philosophers should be kings and kings philosophers, so Ruskin postponed
the reign of art until workmen should be artists, and artists workmen.




