CHAPTER V

THE GERM OF "MODERN PAINTERS" (1836)


He was now close upon seventeen, and it was time to think seriously of
his future. His father went to Oxford early in the year to consult the
authorities about matriculation. Meantime they sent him to Mr. Dale for
some private lessons, and for the lectures on logic, English literature,
and translation, which were given on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays at
King's College, London. John enjoyed his new circumstances heartily.
From voluminous letters, it is evident that he was in high spirits and
in pleasant company. He was a thorough boy among boys--Matson,
Willoughby, Tom Dale and the rest. He joined in their pranks, and
contributed to their amusement with his ready good-humour and unflagging
drollery.

Mr. Dale told him there was plenty of time before October, and no fear
about his passing, if he worked hard. He found the work easy, except
epigram-writing, which he thought "excessively stupid and laborious,"
but helped himself out, when scholarship failed, with native wit. Some
of his exercises remain, not very brilliant Latinity; some he saucily
evaded, thus:

    "Subject: _Non sapere maximum est malum._

    "Non sapere est grave; sed, cum dura epigrammata oportet
     Scribere, tunc sentis præcipue esse malum."

In Switzerland and Italy, during the autumn of 1835, he had made a great
many drawings, carefully outlined in pencil or pen on gray paper, and
sparsely touched with body colour, in direct imitation of the Prout
lithographs. Prout's original coloured sketches he had seen, no doubt,
in the exhibition; but he does not seem to have thought of imitating
them, for his work in this kind was all intended to be for illustration
and not for framing. The "Italy" vignettes likewise, with all their
inspiration, suggested to him only pen-etching; he was hardly conscious
that somewhere there existed the tiny, coloured pictures that Turner had
made for the engraver. Still, now that he could draw really well, his
father, who painted in water-colours himself, complied with the demand
for better teaching than Runciman's, went straight to the President of
the Old Water-Colour Society, and engaged him for the usual course of
half a dozen lessons at a guinea a piece. Copley Fielding could draw
mountains as nobody else but Turner could, in water-colour; he had
enough mystery and poetry to interest the younger Ruskin, and enough
resemblance to ordinary views of Nature to please the elder. So they
both went to Newman Street to his painting-room, and John worked through
the course, and a few extra lessons, but, after all, found Fielding's
art was not what he wanted. Some sketches exist, showing the influence
of the spongy style; but his characteristic way of work remained for him
to devise for himself.

At the Royal Academy Exhibition of 1836 Turner showed the first striking
examples of his later style in "Juliet and her Nurse," "Mercury and
Argus," and "Rome from Mount Aventine." The strange idealism, the
unusualness, the mystery, of these pictures, united with evidence of
intense significance and subtle observation, appealed to young Ruskin as
it appealed to few other spectators. Public opinion regretted this
change in its old favourite, the draughtsman of Oxford colleges, the
painter of shipwrecks and castles. And _Blackwood's Magazine_, which the
Ruskins, as Edinburgh people and admirers of Christopher North, read
with respect, spoke about Turner, in a review of the picture-season,
with that freedom of speech which Scotch reviewers claim as a heritage
from the days of Jeffrey. Young Ruskin at once dashed off an answer.

The critic had found that Turner was "out of nature"; Ruskin tried to
show that the pictures were full of facts, but treated with poetical
license. The critic pronounced Turner's colour bad, his execution
neglected, and his chiaroscuro childish; in answer to which Ruskin
explained that Turner's reasoned system was to represent light and shade
by the contrast of warm and cold colour, rather than by the opposition
of white and black which other painters used. He denied that his
execution was other than his aims necessitated, and maintained that the
critic had no right to force his cut-and-dried academic rules of
composition on a great genius; at the same time admitting that:


     "The faults of Turner are numerous, and perhaps more egregious than
     those of any other great existing artist; but if he has greater
     faults, he has also greater beauties.

     "His imagination is Shakespearian in its mightiness. Had the scene
     of 'Juliet and her Nurse' risen up before the mind of a poet, and
     been described in 'words that burn,' it had been the admiration of
     the world.... Many-coloured mists are floating above the distant
     city, but such mists as you might imagine to be ethereal spirits,
     souls of the mighty dead breathed out of the tombs of Italy into
     the blue of her bright heaven, and wandering in vague and infinite
     glory around the earth that they have loved. Instinct with the
     beauty of uncertain light, they move and mingle among the pale
     stars, and rise up into the brightness of the illimitable heaven,
     whose soft, sad blue eye gazes down into the deep waters of the sea
     for ever--that sea whose motionless and silent transparency is
     beaming with phosphor light, that emanates out of its sapphire
     serenity like bright dreams breathed into the spirit of a deep
     sleep. And the spires of the glorious city rise indistinctly bright
     into those living mists, like pyramids of pale fire from some vast
     altar; and amidst the glory of the dream there is, as it were, the
     voice of a multitude entering by the eye, arising from the
     stillness of the city like the summer wind passing over the leaves
     of the forest, when a murmur is heard amidst their multitudes.

     "This, O Maga, is the picture which your critic has pronounced to
     be 'like models of different parts of Venice, streaked blue and
     white, and thrown into a flour-tub'!"

Before sending his reply to the editor of _Blackwood_, as had been
intended, it was thought only right that Turner should be consulted. The
MS. was enclosed to his address in London, with a courteous note from
Mr. John James Ruskin, asking his permission to publish. Turner replied,
expressing the scorn he felt for anonymous attacks, and jestingly
hinting that the art-critics of the old Scotch school found their
"meal-tub" in danger from his "flour-tub"; but "he never moved in such
matters," so he sent on the MS. to Mr. Munro of Novar, who had bought
the picture.

Ten days or so after this episode John Ruskin was matriculated at Oxford
(October 18, 1836). He told the story of his first appearance as a
gownsman in one of his gossiping letters in verse:

    "A night, a day past o'er--the time drew near--
    The morning came--I felt a little queer;
    Came to the push; paid some tremendous fees;
    Past; and was capped and gowned with marvellous ease.
    Then went to the Vice-Chancellor to swear
    Not to wear boots, nor cut or comb my hair
    Fantastically--to shun all such sins
    As playing marbles or frequenting inns;
    Always to walk with breeches black or brown on;
    When I go out, to put my cap and gown on;
    With other regulations of the sort, meant
    For the just ordering of my comportment.
    Which done, in less time than I can rehearse it, I
    Found myself member of the University!"

In pursuance of his plan for getting the best of everything, his father
had chosen the best college, as far as he knew, that in which social and
scholastic advantages were believed to be found in pre-eminent
combination, and he had chosen what was thought to be the best position
in the college; so that it was as gentleman-commoner of Christ Church
that John Ruskin made his entrance into the academic world.

After matriculation, the Ruskins made a fortnight's tour to Southampton
and the coast, and returned to Herne Hill. John went back to King's
College, and in December was examined in the subjects of his lectures.
He wrote to his father on Christmas Eve about the examination in English
literature:


     "The students were numerous, and so were the questions; the room
     was hot, the papers long, the pens bad, the ink pale, and the
     interrogations difficult. It lasted only three hours. I wrote
     answers in very magnificent style to all the questions except three
     or four; gave in my paper and heard no more of the matter: _sic
     transeunt bore-ia mundi_."

He went on to mention his "very longitudinal essay," which, since no
other essays are reported in his letters about King's College, must be
the paper published in 1893, in answer to the question. "Does the
perusal of works of fiction act favourably or unfavourably on the moral
character?"

At his farewell interview with Mr. Dale he was asked, as he writes to
his father, what books he had read, and replied with a pretty long list,
including Quintilian and Grotius. Mr. Dale inquired what "light books"
he was taking to Oxford: "Saussure, Humboldt, and other works on natural
philosophy and geology," he answered. "Then he asked if I ever read any
of the modern fashionable novels; on this point I thought he began to
look positive, so I gave him a negative, with the exception of Bulwer's,
and now and then a laughable one of the Theodore Hook's or Captain
Marryat's." And so, with much excellent advice about exercise and sleep,
and the way to win the Newdigate, he parted from Mr. Dale.

This Christmas was marked by his first introduction to the scientific
world. Mr. Charlesworth, of the British Museum, invited him to a meeting
of the Geological Society (January 4, 1837), with promise of
introduction to Buckland and Lyell. The meeting, as he wrote, was
"amusing and interesting, and very comfortable for frosty weather, as
Mr. Murchison got warm and Mr. Greenau _(sic)_ witty. The warmth,
however, got the better of the wit."

The Meteorological Society also claimed his attention, and in this month
he contributed a paper which "Richard [Fall] says will frighten them out
of their meteorological wits, containing six close-written folio pages,
and having, at its conclusion, a sting in its tail, the very agreeable
announcement that it only commences the subject."




