CHAPTER III

"THE SEVEN LAMPS"


"Have you read an Oxford Graduate's letters on art?" wrote Miss Mitford,
of "Our Village," on January 27, 1847. "The author, Mr. Ruskin, was here
last week, and is certainly the most charming person that I have ever
known." The friendship thus begun lasted until her death. She encouraged
him in his work; she delighted in his success; and, in the grave
reverses which were to befall him, he found her his most faithful
supporter and most sympathetic consoler. In return, "his kindness
cheered her closing days; he sent her every book that would interest and
every delicacy that would strengthen her, attentions which will not
surprise those who have heard of his large and thoughtful
generosity."[2]

[Footnote 2: "The Friendships of Mary Russell Mitford," edited by the
Rev. A.G. L'Estrange.]

It was natural that a rising man, so closely connected with Scotland,
should be welcomed by the leaders of the Scottish school of literature.
Sydney Smith, a former Edinburgh professor, had praised the new volume.
John Murray, as it seems from letters of the period, made overtures to
secure the author as a contributor to his Italian guide-books. Lockhart
employed him to write for the _Quarterly Review_.

Lockhart was a person of great interest for young Ruskin, who worshipped
Scott; and Lockhart's daughter, even without her personal charm, would
have attracted him as the actual grandchild of the great Sir Walter. It
was for her sake, he says, rather than for the honour of writing in the
famous _Quarterly_, that he undertook to review Lord Lindsay's
"Christian Art."

He was known to be a suitor for Miss Lockhart's hand. His father, in
view of the success he desired, had been in February looking out for a
house in the Lake District; hoping, no doubt, to see him settled there
as a sort of successor to Wordsworth and Christopher North. In March,
John Ruskin betook himself to the Salutation at Ambleside, with his
constant attendant and amanuensis George, for quiet after a tiring
winter in London society, and for his new labour of reviewing. But he
did not find himself so fond of the Lakes as of old. He wrote to his
mother (Sunday, March 28, 1847):


     "I finished--and sealed up--and addressed--my last bit of work,
     last night by ten o'clock--ready to send by to-day's post--so that
     my father should receive it with this. I could not at all have done
     it had I stayed at home: for even with all the quiet here, I have
     had no more time than was necessary. For exercise, I find the
     rowing very useful, though it makes me melancholy with thinking of
     1838,--and the lake, when it is quite calm, is wonderfully sad and
     quiet:--no bright colours--no snowy peaks. Black water--as still as
     death;--lonely, rocky islets--leafless woods,--or worse than
     leafless--the brown oak foliage hanging dead upon them; gray
     sky;--far-off, wild, dark, dismal moorlands; no sound except the
     rustling of the boat among the reeds.

     "_One o'clock._--I have your kind note and my father's, and am very
     thankful that you like what I have written, for I did not at all
     know myself whether it were good or bad."

In the early summer he went to Oxford, for a meeting of the British
Association. He said (June 27, 1847):


     "I am not able to write a full account of all I see, to amuse you,
     for I find it necessary to keep as quiet as I can, and I fear it
     would only annoy you to be told of all the invitations I refuse,
     and all the interesting matters in which I take no part. There is
     nothing for it but throwing one's self into the stream, and going
     down with one's arms under water, ready to be carried anywhere, or
     do anything. My friends are all busy, and tired to death. All the
     members of my section, but especially (Edward) Forbes, Sedgwick,
     Murchison, and Lord Northampton--and of course Buckland, are as
     kind to me as men can be; but I am tormented by the perpetual sense
     of my unmitigated ignorance, for I know no more now than I did when
     a boy, and I have only one perpetual feeling of being in
     everybody's way. The recollections of the place, too, and the being
     in my old rooms, make me very miserable. I have not one moment of
     profitably spent time to look back to while I was here, and much
     useless labour and disappointed hope; and I can neither bear the
     excitement of being in the society where the play of mind is
     constant, and rolls _over_ me like heavy wheels, nor the pain of
     being alone. I get away in the evenings into the hayfields about
     Cumnor, and rest; but then my failing sight plagues me. I cannot
     look at anything as I used to do, and the evening sky is covered
     with swimming strings and eels. My best time is while I am in the
     Section room, for though it is hot, and sometimes wearisome, yet I
     have nothing to _say_,--little to do,--nothing to look at, and as
     much as I like to hear."

He had to undergo a second disappointment in love; his health broke down
again, and he was sent to Leamington to his former doctor, Jephson, once
more a "consumptive" patient. Dieted into health, he went to Scotland
with a new-found friend, William Macdonald Macdonald of Crossmount. But
he had no taste for sport, and could make little use of his
opportunities for distraction and relaxation. One battue was enough for
him, and the rest of the visit was spent in morbid despondency, digging
thistles, and brooding over the significance of the curse of Eden, so
strangely now interwoven with his own life--"Thorns a also and
Thistles."

At Bower's Well, Perth, where his grandparents had spent their later
years, and where his parents had been married, lived Mr. George Gray, a
lawyer, and an old acquaintance of the Ruskin family. His daughter
Euphemia used to visit at Denmark Hill. It was for her that, some years
earlier, "The King of the Golden River" had been written. She had grown
up into a perfect Scotch beauty, with every gift of health and spirits
which would compensate--the old folk thought--for his retiring and
morbid nature. They were anxious, now more than ever, to see him
settled. They pressed him, in letters still extant, to propose. We have
seen how he was situated, and can understand how he persuaded himself
that fortune, after all, was about to smile upon him. Her family had
their own reasons for promoting the match, and all united in hastening
on the event.

In the Notes to Exhibitions added to a new edition of "Modern Painters,"
then in the Press, the author mentions a "hurried visit to Scotland in
the spring" of 1848. This was the occasion of his marriage at Perth, on
April 10. The young couple spent rather more than a fortnight on the way
South, among Scotch and English lakes, intending to make a more extended
tour in the summer to the cathedrals and abbeys.

The pilgrimage began with Salisbury, where a few days' sketching in the
damp and draughts of the cathedral laid the bridegroom low, and brought
the tour to an untimely end. In August, the young people were seen
safely off to Normandy, where they went by easy stages from town to
town, studying the remains of Gothic building. In October they returned
and settled in a house of their own, at 31, Park Street, where during
the winter he wrote "The Seven Lamps of Architecture," and, as a bit of
by-work, a notice of Samuel Prout for the _Art Journal._

This was Ruskin's first illustrated volume. The plates were engraved by
himself in soft-ground etching, such as Prout had used, from drawings he
had made in 1846 and 1848. Some are scrappy combinations of various
detail, but others, such as the Byzantine capital, the window in
Giotto's Campanile, the arches from St. Lo in Normandy, from St. Michele
at Lucca, and from the Ca' Foscari at Venice, are effective studies of
the actual look of old buildings, seen as they are shown us in Nature,
with her light and the shade added to all the facts of form, and her own
last touches in the way of weather-softening, and settling-faults, and
tufted, nestling plants.

Revisiting the Hôtel de la Cloche at Dijon in later years, Ruskin showed
me the room where he had "bitten" the last plate in his wash-hand basin,
as a careless makeshift for the regular etcher's bath. He was not
dissatisfied with his work himself; the public of the day wanted
something more finished. So the second edition appeared with the
subjects elaborately popularized in fashionable engraving. More recently
they have undergone reduction for a cheap issue. But any book lover
knows the value of the original "Seven Lamps" with its San Miniato cover
and autograph plates.

As to its reception, or at least the anticipation of it. Charlotte
Bronte bears witness in a letter to the publishers.

"I congratulate you on the approaching publication of Mr. Ruskin's new
work. If 'The Seven Lamps of Architecture' resemble their predecessor,
'Modern Painters,' they will be no lamps at all, but a new
constellation,--seven bright stars, for whose rising the reading world
ought to be anxiously agape."

The book was announced for his father's birthday, May 10, 1849, and it
appeared while they were among the Alps. The earlier part of this tour
is pretty fully described in "Præterita," II. xi., and "Fors," letter
xc., and so the visit of Richard Fall, the meeting with Sibylla Dowie,
and the death of cousin Mary need not be dwelt on here. From the letters
that passed between father and son we find that Mr. John had been given
a month's leave from July 26 to explore the Higher Alps, with Coutet his
guide and George his valet. The old people stayed at the Hôtel des
Bergues, and thought of little else but their son and his affairs,
looking eagerly from day to day for the last news, both of him and of
his book.

Mr. Ruskin, senior, writes from Geneva on July 29:


     "Miss Tweddale says your book _has made a great sensation._" On
     August 4: "The _Spectator_, which Smith sets great value on, has an
     elaborate favourable notice on 'Seven Lamps,' only ascribing an
     _infirmity_ of temper, quoting railroad passage in proof. Anne was
     told by American family servant that you were in American Paper,
     and got it for us, the _New York Tribune_ of July 13; first article
     is your book. They say they are willing to be learners from, rather
     than critics of, such a book, etc. The _Daily News_ (some of the
     _Punch_ people's paper) has a capital notice. It begins: 'This is a
     masked battery of seven pieces, which blaze away to the total
     extinction of the small architectural lights we may boast of, etc.,
     etc.'" On August 5: "I have, at a shameful charge of ten francs,
     got August magazine and Dickens, quite a prohibition for parcels
     from England. In _British Quarterly_, under æsthetics of Gothic
     architecture they take four works, you first.... As a critic they
     almost rank you with Goethe and Coleridge, and in style with Jeremy
     Taylor."

The qualified encouragement of these remarks was further qualified with
detailed advice about health; and warnings against the perils of the
way, to which Mr. John used to answer on this wise:


     "CORMAYEUR, _Sunday afternoon (July_ 29, 1849).

     "MY DEAREST FATHER,

     "(Put the three sheets in order first, 1, 2, 3, then read this,
     front and _back_, and then 2, and then 3, front and back.) You and
     my mother were doubtless very happy when you saw the day clear up
     as you left St. Martin's. Truly it was impossible that any day
     could be more perfect towards its close. We reached Nant Bourant at
     twelve o'clock, or a little before, and Coutet having given his
     sanction to my wish to get on, we started again soon after one--and
     reached the top of the Col de Bonhomme about five. You would have
     been delighted with that view--it is one upon those lovely seas of
     blue mountain, one behind the other, of which one never
     tires--this, fortunately, westward--so that all the blue ridges and
     ranges above Conflans and Beaufort were dark against the afternoon
     sky, though misty with its light; while eastward a range of snowy
     crests, of which the most important was the Mont Iseran, caught the
     sunlight full upon them. The sun was as warm, and the air as mild,
     on the place where the English travellers sank and perished, as in
     our garden at Denmark Hill on the summer evenings. There is,
     however, no small excuse for a man's losing courage on that pass,
     if the weather were foul. I never saw one so literally pathless--so
     void of all guide and help from the lie of the ground--so
     embarrassing from the distance which one has to wind round mere
     brows of craggy precipice without knowing the direction in which
     one is moving, while the path is perpetually lost in heaps of
     shale or among clusters of crags, even when it is free of snow.
     All, however, when I passed was serene, and even beautiful--owing
     to the glow which the red rocks had in the sun. We got down to
     Chapiu about seven--itself one of the most desolately-placed
     villages I ever saw in the Alps. Scotland is in no place that I
     have seen, so barren or so lonely. Ever since I passed Shapfells,
     when a child, I have had an excessive love for this kind of
     desolation, and I enjoyed my little square chalet window and my
     chalet supper exceedingly (mutton with garlic)."

He then confesses that he woke in the night with a sore throat, but
struggled on next day down the Allée Blanche to Cormayeur.


     "I never saw such a mighty heap of stones and dust. The glacier
     itself is quite invisible from the road (and I had no mind for
     extra work or scrambling), except just at the bottom, where the ice
     appears in one or two places, being exactly of the colour of the
     heaps of waste coal at the Newcastle pits, and admirably adapted
     therefore to realize one's brightest anticipations of the character
     and style of the Allée _Blanche_.

     "The heap of its moraine conceals, for the two miles of its extent,
     the entire range of Mont Blanc from the eye. At last you weather
     the mighty promontory, cross the torrent which issues from its
     base, and find yourself suddenly at the very foot of the vast slope
     of torn granite, which from a point not 200 feet lower than the
     summit of Mont Blanc, sweeps down into the valley of Cormayeur.

     "I am quite unable to speak with justice--or think with
     clearness--of this marvellous view. One is so unused to see a mass
     like that of Mont Blanc without any snow that all my ideas and
     modes of estimating size were at fault. I only felt overpowered by
     it, and that--as with the porch of Rouen Cathedral--look as I
     would, I could not _see_ it. I had not mind enough to grasp it or
     meet it. I tried in vain to fix some of its main features on my
     memory; then set the mules to graze again, and took my sketch-book,
     and marked the outlines--but where is the use of marking contours
     of a mass of endless--countless--fantastic rock--12,000 feet sheer
     above the valley? Besides, one cannot have sharp sore-throat for
     twelve hours without its bringing on some slight feverishness; and
     the scorching Alpine sun to which we had been exposed without an
     instant's cessation from the height of the col till now--i.e., from
     half-past ten to three--had not mended the matter; my pulse was now
     beginning slightly to quicken and my head slightly to ache--and my
     impression of the scene is feverish and somewhat painful; I should
     think like yours of the valley of Sixt."

So he finished his drawing, tramped down the valley after his mule, in
dutiful fear of increasing his cold, and found Cormayeur crowded, only
an attic _au quatrième_ to be had. After trying to doctor himself with
gray pill, kali, and senna, Coutet cured his throat with an alum gargle,
and they went over the Col Ferret.

The courier Pfister had been sent to meet him at Martigny, and bring
latest news and personal report, on the strength of which several days
passed without letters, but not without a remonstrance from
headquarters. On August 8 he writes from Zermatt:


     "I have your three letters, with pleasant accounts of critiques,
     etc., and painful accounts of your anxieties. I certainly never
     thought of putting in a letter at Sion, as I arrived there about
     three hours after Fister left me, it being only two stages from
     Martigny; and besides, I had enough to do that morning in thinking
     what I should want at Zermatt, and was engaged at Sion, while we
     changed horses, in buying wax candles and rice. It was unlucky that
     I lost post at Visp," etc.

A few days later he says:


     "On Friday I had such a day as I have only once or twice had the
     like of among the Alps. I got up to a promontory projecting from
     the foot of the Matterhorn, and lay on the rocks and drew it at my
     ease. I was about three hours at work as quietly as if in my study
     at Denmark Hill, though on a peak of barren crag above a glacier,
     and at least 9,000 feet above sea. But the Matterhorn, after all,
     is not so fine a thing as the aiguille Dru, nor as any one of the
     aiguilles of Chamouni: for one thing, it is all of secondary rock
     in horizontal beds, quite rotten and shaly; but there are other
     causes of difference in impressiveness which I am endeavouring to
     analyze, but find considerable embarrassment in doing so. There
     seems no sufficient reason why an isolated obelisk, one-fourth
     higher than any of them, should not be at least as sublime as they
     in their dependent grouping; but it assuredly is not. For this
     reason, as well as because I have not found here the near studies
     of primitive rock I expected,--for to my great surprise, I find the
     whole group of mountains, mighty as they are, except the
     inaccessible Monte Rosa, of secondary limestones or slates,--I
     should like, if it were possible, to spend a couple of days more on
     the Montanvert, and at the bases of the Chamouni aiguilles,
     sleeping at the Montanvert."

And so on, apologetically begging (as other sons beg money) for _time_,
to gather the material of "Modern Painters," volume iv.

"I hope you will think whether the objects you are after are worth risks
of sore throats or lungs," replied his father, for he had "personified a
perpetual influenza" until they got him to Switzerland, and they were
very anxious; indeed, Pfister's news from Martigny had scared his
mother--not very well herself--into wild plans for recapturing him.
However, Osborne Gordon was going to Chamouni with Mr. Pritchard, and so
they gave him a little longer; and he made the best use of his time:


     "_Monday evening (August_ 20, 1849).

     "MY DEAREST FATHER,

     "I have to-night a packet of back letters from Viège ... but I have
     really hardly time to read them to-night, I had so many notes to
     secure when I came from the hills. I walk up every day to the base
     of the aiguilles without the slightest sense of fatigue; work there
     all day hammering and sketching; and down in the evening. As far as
     days by myself can be happy they are so, for I love the place with
     all my heart. I have no over-fatigue or labour, and plenty of time.
     By-the-by, though in most respects they are incapable of
     improvement, I recollect that I thought to-day, as I was breaking
     last night's ice away from the rocks of which I wanted a specimen,
     with a sharpish wind and small pepper and salt-like sleet beating
     in my face, that a hot chop and a glass of sherry, if they were to
     be had round the corner, would make the thing more perfect. There
     was however nothing to be had round the corner but some Iceland
     moss, which belonged to the chamois, and an extra allowance of
     north wind."

This next is scribbled on a tiny scrap of paper:


     "GLACIER or GREPPOND, _August_ 21.

     "MY DEAREST FATHER,

     "I am sitting on a gray stone in the middle of the glacier, waiting
     till the fog goes away. I believe I _may_ wait. I write this line
     in my pocket-book to thank my mother for hers which I did not
     acknowledge last night. I am glad and sorry that she depends so
     much on my letters for her comfort. I am sending them now every day
     by the people who go down, for the diligence is stopped. You may
     run the chance of missing one or two therefore. I am quite well,
     and very comfortable--sitting on Joseph's knapsack laid on the
     stone. The fog is about as thick as that of London in
     November,--only white; and I see nothing near me but fields of
     dampish snow with black stones in it."

And then:


     "MONTANVERT, _August_ 22.

     "I cannot say that on the whole the aiguilles have treated me well.
     I went up Saturday, Monday and Tuesday to their feet, and never
     obtained audience until to-day, and then they retired at twelve
     o'clock; but I have got a most valuable memorandum."

The parental view was put thus:


     GENEVA, _Monday, August_ 20, 1849.

     "MY DEAREST JOHN,

     "I do not know if you have got all my letters, fully explaining to
     you in what way the want of a _single_ letter, on two occasions,
     did _so_ much mischief--made such havoc in our peace. I think my
     last Thursday's letter entered on it. We are grateful for many
     letters--that have come. It was merely the accident of the moment
     when first by illness and then by precipices we were most
     anxious--being exactly the moment the letters took it into their
     heads to be not forthcoming. Not writing so often would only keep
     us more in the dark, with little less anxiety. Please say if you
     get a letter every day...."

Space can hardly be afforded for more than samples of this voluminous
correspondence, or interesting quotations might be given about the
"ghost-hunt yesterday and a crystal-hunt to-day," and life at the
Montanvert, until at last (August 28):


     "I have taken my place in diligence for Thursday, and hope to be
     with you in good time. But I quite feel as if I were leaving home
     to go on a journey. I shall not be melancholy, however, for I have
     really had a good spell of it.... Dearest love to my mother. I
     don't intend to write again.

     "Ever, my dearest father,

     "Your most affectionate son,

     "J. RUSKIN."



