CHAPTER IV

"STONES OF VENICE" (1849-1851)


A book about Venice had been planned in 1845, during Ruskin's first long
working visit. He had made so many notes and sketches both of
architecture and painting that the material seemed ready to hand;
another visit would fill up the gaps in his information; and two or
three months' hard writing would work the subject off, and set him free
to continue "Modern Painters." So before leaving home in 1849, he had
made up his mind that the next work would be "The Stones of Venice,"
which, on the appearance of "The Seven Lamps," was announced by the
publishers as in preparation.

He left home again early in October; by the end of November he was
settled with his wife at Hôtel Danieli, Venice, for the winter. He
expected to find without much trouble all the information he wanted as
to the dates, styles and history of Venetian buildings; but after
consulting and comparing all the native writers, it appeared that the
questions he asked of them were just the questions they were unprepared
to answer, and that he must go into the whole matter afresh. So he laid
himself out that winter for a thorough examination of St. Mark's and the
Ducal Palace and the other remains--drawing, and measuring, and
comparing their details.

His father had gone back to England in September out of health, and the
letters from home did not report improvement. His mother, too, was
beginning to fear the loss of her sight; and he could not stay away from
them any longer. In February, 1850, he broke off his work in the middle
of it, and returned to London. The rest of the year he spent in writing
the first volume of "Stones of Venice," and in preparing the
illustrations, together with "Examples of the Architecture of Venice," a
portfolio of large lithographs and engravings in mezzotint and line, to
accompany the work. It was most fortunate for Ruskin that his drawings
could be interpreted by such men as Armytage and Cousen, Cuff and Le
Keux, Boys and Lupton, and not without advantage to them that their
masterpieces should be preserved in his works, and praised as they
deserved in his prefaces. But these plates for "Stones of Venice" were
in advance of the times. The publisher thought them "caviare to the
general," so Mr. J.J. Ruskin told his son; but gave it as his own belief
that "some dealers in Ruskins and Turners in 1890 will get great prices
for what at present will not sell."

Early in 1850, his father, at his mother's desire, and with the help of
W.H. Harrison, collected and printed his poems, with a number of pieces
that still remained in MS., the author taking no part in this revival of
bygones, which, for the sake of their associations, he was not anxious
to recall--though his father still believed that he _might_ have been a
poet, and _ought_ to have been one. This is the volume of "Poems J.R.,
1850," so highly valued by collectors.

Another resurrection was "The King of the Golden River," which had lain
hidden for the nine years of the Ars Poetica. He allowed it to be
published, with woodcuts by the famous "Dicky" Doyle. The little book
ran through three editions that year. The first issue must have been
torn to rags in the nurseries of the last generation, since copies are
so rare as to have brought ten guineas apiece instead of the six
shillings at which they were advertised in 1850.

A couple of extracts from letters of 1850 will give some idea of
Ruskin's impressions of London society and the Drawing Room:


     "MY DEAREST MOTHER,

     "Horrible party last night--stiff--large--dull--fidgety--strange,
     --run-against-everybody-know-nobody sort of party. Naval people.
     Young lady claims acquaintance with me--I know as much of her as
     of Queen Pomare--Talk: get away as soon as I can--ask who she
     is--Lady (----);--as wise as I was before. Introduced to a black
     man with chin in collar. Black man condescending--I abuse
     different things to black man: chiefly the House of Lords. Black
     man says he lives in it--asks where I live--don't want to tell
     him--obliged--go away and ask who he is--(----); as wise as I was
     before. Introduced to a young lady--young lady asks if I like
     drawing--so away and ask who she is--Lady(----). Keep away, with
     back to wall and look at watch. Get away at last. Very sulky this
     morning--hope my father better--dearest love to you both."


     "PARK STREET, _4 o'clock, (May, 1850)_.

     "MY DEAREST FATHER,

     "We got through gloriously, though at one place there was the most
     awkward crush I ever saw in my life--the pit at the Surrey, which I
     never saw, may perhaps show the like--nothing else. The floor was
     covered with the ruins of ladies' dresses, torn lace and fallen
     flowers. But Effie was luckily out of it, and got through
     unscathed--and heard people saying 'What a beautiful dress!' just
     as she got up to the Queen. It was fatiguing enough but not so
     _awkward_ as I expected....

     "The Queen looked much younger and prettier than I expected--very
     like her pictures, even like those which are thought to flatter
     most--but I only saw the profile--I could not see the front face as
     I knelt to her, at least without an upturning of the eyes which I
     thought would be unseemly--and there were but some two or three
     seconds allowed for the whole affair....

     "The Queen gave her hand very graciously: but looked bored; poor
     thing, well she might be, with about a quarter of a mile square of
     people to bow to.

     "I met two people whom I have not seen for many a day, Kildare and
     Scott Murray--had a chat with the former and a word with Murray,
     but nothing of interest...."

As one of the chief literary figures of the day, Ruskin could not avoid
society, and, as he tells in "Præterita," he was rewarded for the
reluctant performance of his duties by meeting with several who became
his lifelong friends. Chief among these he mentions Mr. and Mrs.
Cowper-Temple, afterwards Lord and Lady Mount Temple. The acquaintance
with Samuel Rogers, inauspiciously begun many years before, now ripened
into something like friendship; Monckton Milnes (Lord Houghton) and
other men of letters were met at Rogers' breakfasts. A little later a
visit to the Master of Trinity, Whewell, at Cambridge, brought him into
contact with Professer Willis, the authority on Gothic architecture, and
other notabilities of the sister University. There also he met Mr. and
Mrs. Marshall of Leeds (and Coniston); and he pursued his journey to
Lincoln, with Mr. Simpson, whom he had met at Lady Davy's, and to
Farnley for a visit to Mr. F.H. Fawkes, the owner of the celebrated
collection of Turners (April, 1851).

In London he was acquainted with many of the leading artists and persons
interested in art. Of the "teachers" of the day he was known to men so
diverse as Carlyle--and Maurice, with whom he corresponded in 1815 about
his "Notes on Sheepfolds"--and C.H. Spurgeon, to whom his mother was
devoted. He was as yet neither a hermit, nor a heretic: but mixed freely
with all sorts and conditions, with one exception, for Puseyites and
Romanists were yet as heathen men and publicans to him; and he noted
with interest, while writing his review of Venetian history, that the
strength of Venice was distinctly Anti-Papal, and her virtues Christian
but not Roman. Reflections on this subject were to have formed part of
his great work, but the first volume was taken up with the _à priori_
development of architectural forms; and the treatment in especial of
Venetian matters had to be indefinitely postponed, until another visit
had given him the opportunity of gathering his material.

Meanwhile, his wide sympathy had turned his mind toward a subject which
then had received little attention, though since then loudly
discussed--the reunion of (Protestant) Christians.

He put together his thoughts in a pamphlet on the text "There shall be
one fold and one Shepherd," calling it, in allusion to his architectural
studies, "Notes on the Construction of Sheepfolds." He proposed a
compromise, trying to prove that the pretensions to priesthood on the
high Anglican side, and the objections to episcopacy on the
Presbyterian, were alike untenable; and hoped that, when once these
differences--such little things he thought them--were arranged, a united
Church of England might become the nucleus of a world-wide federation of
Protestants, a _civitas Dei_, a New Jerusalem.

There were many who agreed with his aspirations: he received shoals of
letters from sympathizing readers, most of them praising his aims and
criticising his means. Others objected rather to his manner than to his
matter; the title savoured of levity, and an art-critic writing on
theology was supposed to be wandering out of his province. Tradition
says that the "Notes" were freely bought by Border farmers under a
rather laughable mistake; but surely it was no new thing for a Scotch
reader to find a religious tract under a catching title. There were a
few replies; one by Mr. Dyce, who defended the Anglican view with mild
persiflage and the usual commonplaces. And there the matter ended, for
the public. For Ruskin, it was the beginning of a train of thought
which led him far. He gradually learnt that his error was not in asking
too much, but in asking too little. He wished for a union of
Protestants, forgetting the sheep that are not of _that_ fold, and
little dreaming of the answer he got, after many days, in "Christ's Folk
in the Apennine."

Meanwhile the first volume of "Stones of Venice" had appeared, March,
1851. Its reception was indirectly described in a pamphlet entitled
"Something on Ruskinism, with a 'Vestibule' in Rhyme, by an Architect"
complaining bitterly of the "ecstasies of rapture" into which the
newspapers had been thrown by the new work:

    "Your book--since reviewers so swear--may be rational,
    Still, 'tis certainly not either loyal or national;"

for it did not join in the chorus of congratulation to Prince Albert and
the British public on the Great Exhibition of 1851, the apotheosis of
trade and machinery. The "Architect" finds also--what may surprise the
modern reader who has not noticed that many an able work has been
thought unreadable on its first appearance--that he cannot understand
the language and ideas:

    "Your style is so soaring--and some it makes sore--
    That plain folks can't make out your strange mystical lore."

He will allow the author to be quite right, when he finds something to
agree upon; but the moment a sore point is touched, then Ruskin is
"insane." In one respect the "Architect" hit the nail on the head:
"Readers who are not reviewers by profession can hardly fail to perceive
that Ruskinism is violently inimical to _sundry existing interests_."

The best men, we said, were the first to recognise Ruskin's genius. Let
us throw into the opposite scale an opinion of more weight than the
"Architect's," in a transcript of the original letter from Carlyle.


     "CHELSEA, _March_ 9, 1851.

     "DEAR RUSKIN,

     "I did not know yesterday till your servant was gone that there was
     any note in the parcel; nor at all what a feat you had done! A loan
     of the gallant young man's Memoirs was what I expected; and here,
     in the most chivalrous style, comes a gift of them. This, I think,
     must be in the style _prior_ to the Renaissance! What can I do but
     accept your kindness with pleasure and gratitude, though it is far
     beyond my deserts? Perhaps the next man I meet will use me as much
     below them; and so bring matters straight again! Truly I am much
     obliged, and return you many hearty thanks.

     "I was already deep in the 'Stones'; and clearly purpose to hold on
     there. A strange, unexpected, and I believe, most true and
     excellent _Sermon_ in Stones--as well as the best piece of
     schoolmastering in Architectonics; from which I hope to learn much
     in a great many ways. The spirit and purport of these critical
     studies of yours are a singular sign of the times to me, and a very
     gratifying one. Right good speed to you, and victorious arrival on
     the farther shore! It is a quite new 'Renaissance,' I believe, we
     are getting into just now: either towards new, _wider_ manhood,
     high again as the eternal stars; or else into final death, and the
     (marsh?) of Gehenna for evermore! A dreadful process, but a needful
     and inevitable one; nor do I doubt at all which way the issue will
     be, though which of the extant nations are to get included in it,
     and which is to be trampled out and abolished in the process, may
     be very doubtful. God is great: and sure enough, the changes in the
     'Construction of Sheepfolds' as well as in other things, will
     require to be very considerable.

     "We are still labouring under the foul kind of influenza here, I
     not far from emancipated, my poor wife still deep in the business,
     though I hope past the deepest. Am I to understand that you too are
     seized? In a day or two I hope to ascertain that you are well
     again. Adieu; here is an interruption, here also is the end of the
     paper.

     "With many thanks and regards."

     [Signature cut away.]

As soon as the first volume of "Stones of Venice" and the "Notes on the
Construction of Sheepfolds" were published, Ruskin took a short Easter
holiday at Matlock, and set to work at a new edition of "Modern
Painters." This was the fifth reprint of the first volume, and the third
of vol. ii. They were carefully and conscientiously revised, and the
Postscript indulged in a little triumph at the changed tone of public
criticism upon Turner.

But it was too late to have been much service to the great artist
himself. In 1845--after saying good-bye and "Why _will_ you go to
Switzerland? there will be such a _fidge_ about you when you're
gone"--Turner lost his health, and was never himself again. The last
drawings he did for Ruskin (January, 1848), the "Brünig" and the
"Descent from the St. Gothard to Airolo," showed his condition
unmistakably; and the lonely restlessness of the last, disappointing
years were, for all his friends, a melancholy ending to a brilliant
career. Ruskin wrote:


     "This year (1851) he has no picture on the walls of the Academy;
     and the _Times_ of May 3 says: 'We miss those works of
     INSPIRATION'!"

     "_We_ miss! Who misses? The populace of England
     rolls by to weary itself in the great bazaar of Kensington,[3]
     little thinking that a day will come when those veiled vestals and
     prancing amazons, and goodly merchandise of precious stones and
     gold, will all be forgotten as though they had not been; but that
     the light which has faded from the walls of the Academy is one
     which a million Koh-i-noors could not rekindle; and that the year
     1851 will, in the far future, be remembered less for what it has
     displayed, than for what it has withdrawn."

[Footnote 3: The Great Exhibition in Hyde Park.]




