CHAPTER VI

THE EDINBURGH LECTURES (1853-1854)


By the end of June, 1853, "Stones of Venice" was finished, as well as a
description of Giotto's works at Padua, written for the Arundel Society.
The social duties of the season were over; Ruskin and his wife went
north to spend a well-earned holiday. At Wallington in Northumberland,
staying with Sir Walter and Lady Trevelyan, he met Dr. John Brown at
Edinburgh, author of "Pet Marjorie" and other well-known works, who
became his lifelong friend. Ruskin invited Millais, by this time an
intimate and heartily-admired friend,[4] to join them at Glenfinlas.
Ruskin devoted himself first to foreground studies, and made careful
drawings of rock-detail; and then, being asked to give a course of
lectures before the Philosophical Society of Edinburgh, he was soon busy
writing once more, and preparing the cartoon-sketches, "diagrams" as he
called them, to illustrate his subjects. Dr. Acland had joined the
party; and he asked Millais to sketch their host as he stood
contemplatively on the rocks with the torrent thundering beside him. The
picture with additional work in the following winter, became the
well-known portrait in the possession of Sir Henry Acland, much the best
likeness of this early period.

[Footnote 4: "What a beauty of a man he is!" wrote old Mr. Ruskin, "and
high in intellect.... Millais' sketches are 'prodigious'! Millais is the
painter of the age." "Capable, it seems to me, of almost everything, if
his life and strength be spared," said the younger Ruskin to Miss
Mitford.]

Another portrait was painted--in words--by one of his audience at
Edinburgh on November 1, when he gave the opening lecture of his course,
his first appearance on the platform. The account is extracted from the
_Edinburgh Guardian_ of November 19, 1853:


     "Before you can see the lecturer, however, you must get into the
     hall, and that is not an easy matter, for, long before the doors
     are opened, the fortunate holders of season tickets begin to
     assemble, so that the crowd not only fills the passage, but
     occupies the pavement in front of the entrance and overflows into
     the road. At length the doors open, and you are carried through the
     passage into the hall, where you take up, of course, the best
     available position for seeing and hearing.... After waiting a weary
     time ... the door by the side of the platform opens, and a thin
     gentleman with light hair, a stiff white cravat, dark overcoat with
     velvet collar, walking, too with a slight stoop, goes up to the
     desk, and looking round with a self-possessed and somewhat formal
     air, proceeds to take off his great-coat, revealing thereby, in
     addition to the orthodox white cravat, the most orthodox of white
     waistcoats.... 'Dark hair, pale face, and massive marble brow--that
     is my ideal of Mr. Ruskin,' said a young lady near us. This proved
     to be quite a fancy portrait, as unlike the reality as could well
     be imagined, Mr. Ruskin has light sand-coloured hair; his face is
     more red than pale; the mouth well-cut, with a good deal of
     decision in its curve, though somewhat wanting in sustained dignity
     and strength; an aquiline nose; his forehead by no means broad or
     massive, but the brows full and well bound together; the eye we
     could not see, in consequence of the shadows that fell upon his
     countenance from the lights overhead, but we are sure it must be
     soft and luminous, and that the poetry and passion we looked for
     almost in vain in other features must be concentrated there.[5]
     After sitting for a moment or two, and glancing round at the sheets
     on the wall as he takes off his gloves, he rises, and leaning
     slightly over the desk, with his hands folded across, begins at
     once,--'You are proud of your good city of Edinburgh,' etc.

     [Footnote 5: "Mary Russell Mitford found him as a young man 'very
     eloquent and distinguished-looking, tall, fair, and slender, with a
     gentle playfulness, and a sort of pretty waywardness that was quite
     charming.' Sydney Dobell, again, in 1852, discovered an earnestness
     pervading every feature, giving power to a face that otherwise
     would be merely lovable for its gentleness. And, finally, one who
     visited him at Denmark Hill characterized him as emotional and
     nervous, with a soft, genial eye, a mouth 'thin and severe,' and a
     voice that, though rich and sweet, yet had a tendency to sink into
     a plaintive and hopeless tone,"--_Literary World_, May 19, 1893.]

     "And now for the style of the lecture.... Properly speaking, there
     were two styles essentially distinct, and not well blended,--a
     speaking and a writing style; the former colloquial and spoken
     off-hand; the latter rhetorical and carefully read in quite a
     different voice,--we had almost said intoned.... He has a
     difficulty in sounding the letter 'r'; [and there is a] peculiar
     tone in the rising and falling of his voice at measured intervals,
     in a way scarcely ever heard except in the public lection of the
     service appointed to be read in churches. These are the two things
     with which, perhaps you are most surprised,--his dress and manner
     of speaking--both of which (the white waistcoat notwithstanding)
     are eminently clerical. You naturally expect, in one so
     independent, a manner free from conventional restraint, and an
     utterance, whatever may be the power of voice, at least expressive
     of a strong individuality; and you find instead a Christ Church man
     of ten years' standing, who has not yet taken orders; his dress and
     manner derived from his college tutor, and his elocution from the
     chapel-reader."

The lectures were a summing up, in popular form, of the chief topics of
Ruskin's thought during the last two years. The first (November 1)
stated, with more decision and warmth than part of his audience
approved, his plea for the Gothic Revival, for the use of Gothic as a
domestic style. The next lecture, given three days later, went on to
contrast the wealth of ornament in mediæval buildings with the poor
survivals of conventionalized patterns which did duty for decoration in
nineteenth-century "Greek" architecture; and he raised a laugh by
comparing a typical stonemason's lion with a real tiger's head, drawn in
the Edinburgh zoological gardens by Mr. Millais.

The last two lectures, on November 15 and 18, were on Painting; briefly
reviewing the history of landscape and the life and aims of Turner; and
finally, Christian art and Sincerity in imagination, which was now put
forth as the guiding principle of Pre-Raphaelitism.

Public opinion was violently divided over these lectures; and they were
the cause of much trouble at home. The fact of his lecturing at all
aroused strong opposition from his friends and remonstrances from his
parents. Before the event his mother wrote: "I cannot reconcile myself
to the thought of your bringing yourself personally before the world
till you are somewhat older and stronger." Afterwards, his father, while
apologizing for the word "degrading," is disgusted at his exposing
himself to such an interruption as occurred, and to newspaper comments
and personal references. The notion of an "itinerant lecturer"
scandalizes him. He hears from Harrison and Holding that John is to
lecture even at their very doors--in Camberwell. "I see small bills up,"
he writes, "with the lecturers' names; among them Mr. ---- who gets your
old clothes!" And he bids him write to the committee that his parents
object to his fulfilling the engagement. He postponed his lecture--for
ten years; but accepted the Presidency of the Camberwell Institute,
which enabled him to appear at their meetings without offence to any.

While staying at Edinburgh, Mr. Ruskin met the various celebrities of
modern Athens, some of them at the table of his former fellow-traveller
in Venice, Mrs. Jameson. He then returned home to prepare the lectures
for printing.

These lectures as published in April, 1854 were fiercely assailed by the
old school; but a more serious blow fell on him before that month was
out. His wife returned to her parents and instituted a suit against him,
to which he made no answer. The marriage was annulled in July. A year
later she married Millais.

In May (1854) the Pre-Raphaelites again needed his defence. Mr. Holman
Hunt exhibited the "Light of the World" and the "Awakening Conscience."
Ruskin made them the theme of two more letters to _The Times_;
mentioning, by the way, the "spurious imitations of Pre-Raphaelite work"
which were already becoming common. Starting for his summer tour on the
Continent, in the Simmenthal he wrote a pamphlet on the opening of the
Crystal Palace. There had been much rejoicing over the "new style of
architecture" in glass and iron, and its purpose as a palace of art.
Ruskin who had declined, in the last chapter of the "Seven Lamps," to
join in the cry for a new style, was not at all ready to accept this as
any real artistic advance; and took the opportunity to plead again for
the great buildings of the past, which were being destroyed or
neglected, while the British public was glorifying its gigantic
greenhouse. The pamphlet practically suggested the establishment of the
Society for the preservation of ancient buildings, which has since come
into operation.

This summer of 1854 he projected a study of Swiss history: to tell the
tale of six chief towns--Geneva, Fribourg, Basle, Thun, Baden and
Schaffhausen, to which in 1858 he added Rheinfelden and Bellinzona. He
intended to illustrate the work with pictures of the places described.
He began with his drawing of Thun, a large bird's-eye view of the town
with its river and bridges, roofs and towers, all exquisitely defined
with the pen, and broadly coloured in fluctuating tints that seem to
melt always into the same aerial blue; the blue, high up the picture,
beyond the plain, deepening into distant mountains.

But his father wanted to see "Modern Painters" completed, and so he
began his third volume at Vevey, with the discussion of the grand style,
in which he at last broke loose from Reynolds, as was inevitable, after
his study of Pre-Raphaelitism, and all the varied experiences of the
last ten years. The lesson of the Tulse Hill ivy had been brought home
to him in many ways: he had found it to be more and more true that
Nature is, after all, the criterion of art, and that the greatest
painters were always those whose aim, so far as they were conscious of
an aim, was to take fact for their starting-point. Idealism, beauty,
imagination, and the rest, though necessary to art, could not, he felt,
be made the object of study; they were the gift of heredity, of
circumstances, of national aspirations and virtues; not to be produced
by the best of rules, or achieved by the best of intentions.

What his own view of his own work was can be gathered from a letter to
an Edinburgh student, written on August 6, 1854:


     "I am sure I never said anything to dissuade you from trying to
     excel or to do great things. I only wanted you to be sure that your
     efforts were made with a substantial basis, so that just in the
     moment of push your footing might not give way beneath you; and
     also I wanted you to feel that long and steady effort made in a
     contented way does more than violent effort made from some strong
     motive and under some enthusiastic impulse. And I repeat--for of
     this I am perfectly sure--that the best things are only to be done
     in this way. It is very difficult thoroughly to understand the
     difference between indolence and reserve of strength, between
     apathy and severity, between palsy and patience; but there is all
     the difference in the world; and nearly as many men are ruined by
     inconsiderate exertions as by idleness itself. To do as much as you
     can heartily and happily do each day in a well-determined
     direction, with a view to far-off results, with present enjoyment
     of one's work, is the only proper, the only essentially profitable
     way."




