CHAPTER VII

"TIME AND TIDE" (1867)


The series of letters published as "Time and Tide by Weare and Tyne"
were addressed[13] to Thomas Dixon, a working cork-cutter of Sunderland,
whose portrait by Professor Legros is familiar to visitors at the South
Kensington Museum. He was one of those thoughtful, self-educated working
men in whom, as a class, Ruskin had been taking a deep interest for the
past twelve years, an interest which had purchased him a practical
insight into their various capacities and aims, and the right to speak
without fear or favour. At this time there was an agitation for
Parliamentary reform, and the better representation of the working
classes; and it was on this topic that the letters were begun, though
the writer went on to criticise the various social ideals then popular,
and to propose his own. He had already done something of the sort in
"Unto this Last"; but "Time and Tide" is much more complete, and the
result of seven years' further thought and experience. His "Fors
Clavigera" is a continuation of these letters, but written at a time
when other work and ill health broke in upon his strength. "Time and
Tide" is not only the statement of his social scheme as he saw it in his
central period, but, written as these letters were--at a stroke, so to
speak--condensed in exposition and simple in language, they deserve the
most careful reading by the student of Ruskin.

[Footnote 13: During February, March and April, 1867, and published in
the _Manchester Examiner_ and _Leeds Mercury_.]

Before this work was ended, Carlyle had come back from Mentone to
Chelsea, and was begging his friend, in the warmest terms, to come and
see him. Shortly afterward, a passage which Ruskin would not retract
gave offence to Carlyle. But the difference was healed, and later years
reveal the sage of Chelsea as kindly and affectionate as ever. This
friendship between the two greatest writers of their age, between two
men of vigorous individuality, outspoken opinions, and widely different
tastes and sympathies, is a fine episode in the history of both.

In May, Ruskin was invited to Cambridge to receive the honorary degree
of LL.D., and to deliver the Rede Lecture. The _Cambridge Chronicle_ of
May 24th, 1867, says: "The body of the Senate House was quite filled
with M.A.'s and ladies, principally the latter, whilst there was a large
attendance of undergraduates in the galleries, who gave the lecturer a
most enthusiastic reception." A brief report of the lecture was printed
in the newspaper; but it was not otherwise published, and the manuscript
seems to have been mislaid for thirty years. I take the liberty of
copying the opening sentences as a specimen of that Academical oratory
which Mr. Ruskin then adopted, and used habitually in his earlier
lectures at Oxford.

The title of the discourse was "The Relation of National Ethics to
National Arts."


     "In entering on the duty to-day entrusted to me, I should hold it
     little respectful to my audience if I disturbed them by expression
     of the diffidence which they know that I must feel in first
     speaking in this Senate House; diffidence which might well have
     prevented me from accepting such duty, but ought not to interfere
     with my endeavour simply to fulfil it. Nevertheless, lest the
     direction which I have been led to give to my discourse, and the
     narrow limits within which I am compelled to confine the treatment
     of its subject may seem in anywise inconsistent with the purpose of
     the founder of this Lecture--or with the expectations of those by
     whose authority I am appointed to deliver it, let me at once say
     that I obeyed their command, not thinking myself able to teach any
     dogma in the philosophy of the arts, which could be of any new
     interest to the members of this University: but only that I might
     obtain the sanction of their audience, for the enforcement upon
     other minds of the truth, which--after thirty years spent in the
     study of art, not dishonestly, however feebly--is manifest to me as
     the clearest of all that I have learned, and urged upon me as the
     most vital of all I have to declare."

He then distinguished between true and false art, the true depending
upon sincerity, whether in literature, music or the formative arts: he
reinforced his old doctrine of the dignity of true imagination as the
attribute of healthy and earnest minds; and energetically attacked the
commercial art-world of the day, and the notion that drawing-schools
were to be supported for the sake of the gain they would bring to our
manufacturers.

In this lecture we see the germ of the ideas, as well as the beginning
of the style, of the Oxford Inaugural course, and the "Eagle's Nest";
something quite different in type from the style and teaching of the
addresses to working men, or to mixed popular audiences at Edinburgh or
Manchester, or even at the Royal Institution. At this latter place, on
June 4th, Sir Henry Holland in the chair, he lectured on "The Present
State of Modern Art, with reference to advisable arrangement of the
National Gallery," repeating much of what he had said in "Time and Tide"
about the taste for the horrible and absence of true feeling for pure
and dignified art in the theatrical shows of the day, and in the
admiration for Gustave Doré, then a new fashion. Mr. Ruskin could never
endure that the man who had illustrated Balzac's "Contes Drôlatiques"
should be chosen by the religious public of England as the exponent of
their sacred ideals.

In July after a short visit to Huntly Burn near Abbotsford, he went to
Keswick for a few weeks, from whence he wrote the rhymed letters to his
cousin at home, quoted (with the date wrongly given as 1857) in
"Præterita" to illustrate his "heraldic character" of "Little Pigs" and
to shock exoteric admirers. Like, for example, Rossetti and Carlyle,
Ruskin was fond of playful nicknames and grotesque terms of endearment.
He never stood upon his dignity with intimates; and was ready to allow
the liberties he took, much to the surprise of strangers.

He reached Keswick by July 4, and spent his time chiefly in walks upon
the hills, staying at the Derwentwater Hotel. He wrote:


     "Keswick, _19th July, '67, Afternoon, 1/2 past 3_.

     "My dearest Mother,

     "As this is the last post before Sunday I send one more line to say
     I've had a delightful forenoon's walk--since 1/2 past ten--by St.
     John's Vale, and had pleasant thoughts, and found one of the most
     variedly beautiful torrent beds I ever saw in my life; and I feel
     that I gain strength, slowly but certainly, every day. The great
     good of the place is that I can be content without going on great
     excursions which fatigue and do me harm (or else worry me with
     problems;)--I am _content_ here with the roadside hedges and
     streams; and this contentment is the great thing for health,--and
     there is hardly anything to annoy me of absurd or calamitous human
     doing; but still this ancient cottage life--very rude and miserable
     enough in its torpor--but clean, and calm, not a vile cholera and
     plague of bestirred pollution, like back streets in London. There
     is also much more real and deep beauty than I expected to find, in
     some of the minor pieces of scenery, and in the cloud effects."

     "_July 16_.

     "I have the secret of extracting sadness from all things, instead
     of joy, which is no enviable talisman. Forgive me if I ever write
     in a way that may pain you. It is best that you should know, when I
     write cheerfully, it is no pretended cheerfulness; so when I am
     sad--I think it right to confess it."

     "_30th July._

     "Downes[14] arrived yesterday quite comfortably and in fine
     weather. It is not bad this morning, and I hope to take him for a
     walk up Saddleback, which, after all, is the finest, to my mind, of
     all the Cumberland hills--though that is not saying much; for they
     are much lower in effect, in proportion to their real height, than
     I had expected. The beauty of the country is in its quiet roadside
     bits, and rusticity of cottage life and shepherd labour. Its
     mountains are sorrowfully melted away from my old dreams of them."

     [Footnote 14: The gardener at Denmark Hill.]

     Next day he "went straight up the steep front of Saddleback by the
     central ridge to the summit. It is the finest thing I've yet seen,
     there being several bits of real crag-work, and a fine view at the
     top over the great plains of Penrith on one side, and the
     Cumberland hills, as a chain, on the other. Fine fresh wind
     blowing, and plenty of crows. Do you remember poor papa's favourite
     story about the Quaker whom the crows ate on Saddleback? There were
     some of the biggest and hoarsest-voiced ones about the cliff that
     I've ever had sympathetic croaks from;--and one on the top, or near
     it, so big that Downes and Crawley, having Austrian tendencies in
     politics, took it for a 'black eagle.' Downes went up capitally,
     though I couldn't get him down again, because he _would_ stop to
     gather ferns. However, we did it all and came down to Threlkeld--of
     the Bridal of Triermain,

    "'The King his way pursued
    By lonely Threlkeld's waste and wood,'

     "in good time for me to dress and, for a wonder, go out to dinner
     with Acland's friends the Butlers."

     As an episode in this visit to Keswick, ten days were given to the
     neighbourhood of Ambleside, "to show Downes Windermere."

     "Waterhead, Windermere,

     "_10th August, 1867, Evening_.

     "I was at Coniston to-day. Our old Waterhead Inn, where I was so
     happy playing in the boats, _exists_ no more.--Its place is grown
     over with smooth Park grass--the very site of it forgotten! and, a
     quarter of a mile down the lake, a vast hotel built in the railroad
     station style--making up, I suppose, its fifty or eighty beds, with
     coffee-room--smoking-room--and every pestilent and devilish
     Yankeeism that money can buy, or speculation plan.

     "The depression, whatever its cause, does not affect my strength. I
     walked up a long hill on the road to Coniston to-day (gathering
     wild raspberries)--then from this new Inn, two miles to the foot of
     Coniston Old Man; up it; down again--(necessarily!)--and back to
     dinner, without so much as warming myself--not that there was much
     danger of doing that at the top; for a keen west wind was blowing
     drifts of cloud by at a great pace, and one was glad of the
     shelter of the pile of stones, the largest and _oldest_ I ever saw
     on a mountain top. I suppose the whole mountain is named from it.
     It is of the shape of a beehive, strongly built, about 15 feet high
     (so that I made Downes follow me up it before I would allow he had
     been at the top of the Old Man) and covered with lichen and short
     moss. Lancaster sands and the Irish sea were very beautiful, and so
     also the two lakes of Coniston and Windermere, lying in the vastest
     space of sweet cultivated country I have ever looked over,--a great
     part of the view from the Rigi being merely over black pine forest,
     even on the plains. Well, after dinner, the evening was very
     beautiful, and I walked up the long hill on the road back from
     Coniston--and kept ahead of the carriage for two miles: I was sadly
     vexed when I had to get in: and now--I don't feel as if I had been
     walking at all--and shall probably lie awake for an hour or
     two--and feeling as if I had not had exercise enough to send me to
     sleep."


     "LANGDALE, _13th August, Evening._

     "It is perfectly calm to-night, not painfully hot--and the full
     moon shining over the mountains, opposite my window, which are the
     scene of Wordsworth's 'Excursion.' It was terribly hot in the
     earlier day, and I did not leave the house till five o'clock. Then
     I went out, and in the heart of Langdale Pikes found the loveliest
     rock-scenery, chased with silver waterfalls, that I ever set foot
     or heart upon. The Swiss torrent-beds are always more or less
     savage, and ruinous, with a terrible sense of overpowering strength
     and danger, lulled. But here, the sweet heather and ferns and star
     mosses nestled in close to the dashing of the narrow
     streams;--while every cranny of crag held its own little placid
     lake of amber, trembling with falling drops--but quietly
     trembling--not troubled into ridgy wave or foam--the rocks
     themselves, _ideal_ rock, as hard as iron--no--not quite that, but
     _so_ hard that after breaking some of it, breaking solid white
     quartz seemed like smashing brittle loaf sugar, in comparison--and
     cloven into the most noble masses; not grotesque, but majestic and
     full of harmony with the larger mountain mass of which they formed
     a part. Fancy what a place! for a hot afternoon after five, with no
     wind--and absolute solitude; no creature--except a lamb or two--to
     mix any ruder sound or voice with the plash of the innumerable
     streamlets."

It was during this tour that he looked at a site on the hill above
Bowness-on-Windermere, where Mr. T. Richmond, the owner, proposed
building him a house. He liked the view, but found it too near the
railway station.

After spending September with his mother at Norwood under the care of
Dr. Powell, he was able to return home, prepare "Time and Tide" for
publication, and write the preface on Dec. 14th. On the 19th the book
was out, and immediately bought up. A month later the second edition was
issued.





