CHAPTER II

THE FATHER OF THE MAN (1819-1825)


Into this family John Ruskin was born on February 8, 1819, at half-past
seven in the morning. He was baptised on the twentieth by the Rev. Mr.
Boyd.

The first account of him in writing is in a letter from his mother when
he was six weeks old. She chronicles--not without a touch of
superstition--the breaking of a looking-glass, and continues: "John
grows finely; he is just now on my knees sleeping and looking so
sweetly; I hope I shall not get proud of him." He was a fine healthy
baby, and at four months was "beginning to give more decided proofs that
he knows what he wants, and will have it if crying and passion will get
it." At a year his mother resolves that "this will be cured by a good
whipping when he can understand what it is," and we know that she
carried out her Spartan resolve.

This, and the story in "Arachne," how she let him touch the tea-kettle;
and the reminiscences in "Præterita" of playthings locked up, and a lone
little boy staring at the water-cart and the pattern on the carpet--all
these give a gloomy impression of his mother, against which we must set
the proofs of affection and kindliness shown in her letters. In these we
can see her anxiously nursing him through childish ailments, taking him
out for his daily walk to Duppas Hill with a captain's biscuit in her
muff, for fear he should be hungry by the way; we hear her teaching him
his first lessons, with astonishment at his wonderful memory, and
glorying with Nurse Anne over his behaviour in church; and all these
things she retails in gossiping letters to her husband, while Mr.
Richard Gray gives two-year-old John "his first lesson on the flute,
both sitting on the drawing-room floor, very deeply engaged." "I am
sure," she says, "there is no other love, no other feeling, like a
mother's towards her first boy when she loves his father;" and her pride
in his looks, and precocity, and docility--"I never met with a child of
his age so sensible to praise or blame"--found a justification in his
passionate devotion to the man who was so dear to them both.

Though he was born in the thick of London, he was not City-bred. His
first three summers were spent in lodgings in Hampstead or Dulwich, then
"the country." So early as his fourth summer he was taken to Scotland by
sea to stay with his aunt Jessie, Mrs. Richardson of Perth. There he
found cousins to play with, especially one, little Jessie, of nearly his
own age; he found a river with deep swirling pools, that impressed him
more than the sea, and he found the mountains. Coming home in the
autumn, he sat for his full-length portrait to James Northcote, R.A.,
and being asked what he would choose for background, he replied, "Blue
hills."

Northcote had painted Mr. and Mrs. Ruskin, and, as they were fond of
artistic company, remained their friend. A certain friendship too, was
struck up between the old Academician, then in his seventy-seventh year,
the acknowledged cynic and satirist, and the little wise boy who asked
shrewd questions, and could sit still to be painted; who, moreover, had
a face worth painting, not unlike the model from whom Northcote's
master, the great Sir Joshua, had painted his famous cherubs. The
painter asked him to come again, and sit as the hero of a fancy picture,
bought at the Academy by the flattered parents. There is a grove, a
flock of toy sheep, drapery in the grand style, a mahogany Satyr taking
a thorn out of the little pink foot of a conventional nudity--poor
survivals of the Titianesque. But the head is an obvious portrait, and a
happy one; far more like the real boy, so tradition says, than the
generalized chubbiness of the commissioned picture.

In the next year (1823) they quitted the town for a suburban home. The
spot they chose was in rural Dulwich, on Herne Hill, a long offshoot of
the Surrey downs; low, and yet commanding green fields and scattered
houses in the foreground, with rich undulating country to the south, and
looking across London toward Windsor and Harrow. It is all built up now;
but their house (later No. 28) must have been as secluded as any in a
country village. There were ample gardens front and rear, well stocked
with fruit and flowers--quite an Eden for a little boy, and all the more
that the fruit of it was forbidden. It was here that all his years of
youth were spent. Here, under his parents' roof, he wrote his earlier
works, as far as vol. i. of "Modern Painters." To the adjoining house,
as his own separate home, he returned for a period of his middle life;
and in the old home, handed over to his adopted daughter, he still used
to find his own rooms ready when he cared to visit London.

So he was brought up almost as a country boy, though near enough to town
to get the benefit of it, and far enough from the more exciting scenes
of landscape nature to find them ever fresh, when summer after summer he
revisited the river scenery of the West or the mountains of the North.
For by a neat arrangement, and one fortunate for his education, the
summer tours were continued yearly. Mr. John James Ruskin still
travelled for the business, then greatly extending. "Strange," he writes
on one occasion, "that Watson [his right-hand man] went this journey
without getting one order, and everyone gives me an order directly." In
return for these services to the firm, Mr. Telford, the capitalist
partner, took the vacant chair at the office, and even lent his carriage
for the journeys. There was room for two, so Mrs. Ruskin accompanied her
husband, whose indifferent health gave her and his friends constant
anxiety during long separations. And the boy could easily be packed in,
sitting on his little portmanteau, and playing horses with his father's
knees; the nurse riding on the dickey behind.

They started usually after the great family anniversary, the father's
birthday, on May 10, and journeyed by easy stages through the South of
England, working up the west to the north, and then home by the
east-central route, zigzagging from one provincial town to another,
calling at the great country seats, to leave no customer or possible
customer unvisited; and in the intervals of business seeing all the
sights of the places they passed through--colleges and churches,
galleries and parks, ruins, castles, caves, lakes, and mountains--and
seeing them all, not listlessly, but with keen interest, noting
everything, inquiring for local information, looking up books of
reference, setting down the results, as if they had been meaning to
write a guide-book and gazetteer of Great Britain. _They_, I say, did
all this, for as soon as the boy could write, he was only imitating his
father in keeping his little journal of the tours, so that all he
learned stayed by him, and the habit of descriptive writing was formed.

In 1823 they seem to have travelled only through the south and
south-west; in 1824 they pushed north to the lakes, stayed awhile at
Keswick, and while the father went about his business, the child was
rambling with his nurse on Friar's Crag, among the steep rocks and
gnarled roots, which suggested, even at that age, the feelings expressed
in one of the notable passages in "Modern Painters." Thence they went on
to Scotland, and revisited their relatives at Perth. In 1825 they took a
more extended tour, and spent a few weeks in Paris, partly for the
festivities at the coronation of Charles X., partly for business
conference with Mr. Domecq, who had just been appointed wine-merchant to
the King of Spain. Thence they went to Brussels and the field of
Waterloo, of greater interest than the sights of Paris to six-year-old
John, who often during his boyhood celebrated the battle, and the heroes
of the battle, in verse.

Before he was quite three he used to climb into a chair and preach.
There is nothing so uncommon in that. Of Robert Browning, his neighbour
and seven-years-older contemporary, the same tale is told. But while the
incident that marks the baby Browning is the aside, _à propos_ of a
whimpering sister, "Pew-opener, remove that child," the baby Ruskin is
seen in his sermon: "People, be dood. If you are dood, Dod will love
you; if you are not dood, Dod will not love you. People, be dood."

At the age of four he had begun to read and write, refusing to be taught
in the orthodox way--this is so accurately characteristic--by syllabic
spelling and copy-book pothooks. He preferred to find a method out for
himself, and he found out how to read whole words at a time by the look
of them, and to write in vertical characters like book-print, just as
the latest improved theories of education suggest. His first letter may
be quoted as illustrating his own account of his childhood, and as
proving how entirely Scotch was the atmosphere in which he was brought
up. The postmark gives the date March 15, 1823. Mrs. Ruskin premises
that John was scribbling on a paper from which he proceeded to read what
she writes down (I omit certain details about the whip):


     "MY DEAR PAPA,

     "I love you. I have got new things. Waterloo Bridge--Aunt Bridget
     brought me it. John and Aunt helped to put it up, but the pillars
     they did not put right, upside down. Instead of a book bring me a
     whip, coloured red and black.... To-morrow is Sabbath. Tuesday I go
     to Croydon. I am going to take my boats and my ship to Croydon.
     I'll sail them on the pond near the burn which the bridge is over.
     I will be very glad to see my cousins. I was very happy when I saw
     Aunt come from Croydon. I love Mrs. Gray and I love Mr. Gray. I
     would like you to come home, and my kiss and my love."

     [First autograph in straggling capitals]

     "JOHN RUSKIN"

When once he could read, thenceforward his mother gave him regular
morning lessons in Bible-reading and in reciting the Scotch paraphrases
of the Psalms and other verse, which for his good memory was an easy
task. He made rhymes before he could write them, of course.

At five he was a bookworm, and the books he read fixed him in certain
grooves of thought, or, rather, say they were chosen as favourites from
an especial interest in their subjects--an interest which arose from his
character of mind, and displayed it. But with all this precocity, he was
no milksop or weakling; he was a bright, active lad, full of fun and
pranks, not without companions, though solitary when at home, and kept
precisely, in the hope of guarding him from every danger. He was so
little afraid of animals--a great test of a child's nerves--that about
this time he must needs meddle with their fierce Newfoundland dog,
Lion, which bit him in the mouth, and spoiled his looks. Another time he
showed some address in extricating himself from the water-butt--a common
child-trap. He did not fear ghosts or thunder; instead of that, his
early-developed landscape feeling showed itself in dread of foxglove
dells and dark pools of water, in coiling roots of trees--things that to
the average English fancy have no significance whatever.

At seven he began to imitate the books he was reading, to write books
himself. He had found out how to _print_, as children do; and it was his
ambition to make real books, with title-pages and illustrations, not
only books, indeed, but sets of volumes, a complete library of his whole
works. But in a letter of March 4, 1829, his mother says to his father:
"If you think of writing John, would you impress on him the propriety of
not beginning too eagerly and becoming careless towards the end of his
_works_, as he calls them? I think in a letter from you it would have
great weight. He is never idle, and he is even uncommonly persevering
for a child of his age; but he often spoils a good beginning by not
taking the trouble to think, and concluding in a hurry."

The first of these sets was imitated in style from Miss Edgeworth; he
called it, "Harry and Lucy Concluded; or, Early Lessons." Didactic he
was from the beginning. It was to be in four volumes, uniform in red
leather, with proper title, frontispiece, and "copper-plates," "printed
and composed by a little boy, and also drawn." It was begun in 1826, and
continued at intervals until 1829. It was all done laboriously in
imitation of print, and, to complete the illusion, contained a page of
errata. This great work was, of course, never completed, though he
laboured through three volumes; but when he tired of it, he would turn
his book upside down, and begin at the other end with other matters; so
that the red books contain all sorts of notes on his minerals and
travels, reports of sermons, and miscellaneous information, besides
their professed contents; in this respect also being very like his later
works.

There you have our author ready made, with his ever-fresh interest in
everything, and all-attempting eagerness, out of which the first thing
that crystallizes into any definite shape is the verse-writing.




