CHAPTER IX

"THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF ART" (1857-1858)


The humble work of the drawing-classes at Great Ormond Street was
teaching Ruskin even more than he taught his pupils. It was showing him
how far his plans were practicable; how they should be modified; how
they might be improved; and especially what more, beside
drawing-classes, was needed to realize his ideal. He was anxiously
willing to co-operate with every movement, to join hands with any kind
of man, to go anywhere, do anything that might promote the cause he had
at heart.

Already at the end of 1854 he had given three lectures, his second
course, at the Architectural Museum, specially addressed to workmen in
the decorative trades. His subjects were design and colour, and his
illustrations were chiefly drawn from mediæval illumination, which he
had long been studying. These were informal, quasi-private affairs,
which nevertheless attracted notice owing to the celebrity of the
speaker. It would have been better if his addresses had been carefully
prepared and authentically published; for a chance word here and there
raised replies about matters of detail in which his critics thought they
had gained a technical advantage, adding weight to his father's desire
not to see him "expose himself" in this way. There were no more lectures
until the beginning of 1857.

On January 23rd, 1857, he spoke before the Architectural Association
upon "The Influence of Imagination in Architecture," repeating and
amplifying what he had said at Edinburgh about the subordinate value of
proportion, and the importance of sculptured ornament based on natural
forms. This of course would involve the creation of a class of
stone-carvers who could be trusted with the execution of such work. Once
grant the value of it, and public demand would encourage the supply, and
the workmen would raise themselves in the effort.

A louder note was sounded in an address at the St. Martin's School of
Art, Castle Street, Long Acre (April 3rd, 1857), where, speaking after
George Cruikshank, his old friend--practically his first master--and an
enthusiastic philanthropist and temperance advocate, Ruskin gave his
audience a wider view of art than they had known before: "the kind of
painting they most wanted in London was painting cheeks red with
health." This was anticipating the standpoint of the Oxford Lectures,
and showed how the inquiry was beginning to take a much broader aspect.

Another work in a similar spirit, the North London School of Design,
had been prosperously started by a circle of men under Pre-Raphaelite
influence, and led by Thomas Seddon. He had given up historical and
poetic painting for naturalistic landscape, and had returned from the
East with the most valuable studies completed, only to break down and
die prematurely. His friends, among them Holman Hunt, were collecting
money to buy from the widow his picture of Jerusalem from the Mount of
Olives, to present it to the National Gallery as a memorial of him; and
at a meeting for the purpose, Ruskin spoke warmly of his labours in the
cause of the working classes.

In the summer of 1857 the Art Treasures Exhibition was held at
Manchester, and Ruskin was invited to lecture. The theme he chose was
"The Political Economy of Art." He had been studying political economy
for some time back, but, as we saw from his letter to Carlyle, he had
found no answer in the ordinary text-books for the questions he tried to
put. He wanted to know what Bentham and Ricardo and Mill, the great
authorities, would advise him as to the best way of employing artists,
of educating workmen, of elevating public taste, of regulating
patronage; but these subjects were not in their programme. And so he put
together his own thoughts into two lectures upon Art considered as
Wealth: first, how to get it; next, how to use it.[7]

[Footnote 7: July 10 and 13, 1857. He went to Manchester from Oxford,
where he had been staying with the Liddells, writing enthusiastically of
the beauty of their children and the charm of their domestic life.]

There were very few points in these lectures that were not vigorously
contested at the moment, and conceded in the sequel--in some form or
other. The paternal function of government, the right of the state to
interfere in matters beyond its traditional range, its duty with regard
to education--all this was quite contrary to the prevailing habits of
thought of the time, especially at Manchester, the headquarters of the
_laissez faire_ school; but to Ruskin, who, curiously enough, had just
then been referring sarcastically to German philosophy, knowing it only
at second-hand, and unaware of Hegel's political work--to him this
Platonic conception of the state was the only possible one, as it is to
most people nowadays. In the same way, his practical advice has been
accepted, perhaps unwittingly, by our times. We do now understand the
difference between artistic decoration and machine-made wares; we do now
try to preserve ancient monuments, and to use art as a means of
education. And we are in a fair way, it seems, of lowering the price of
modern pictures, as he bids us, to "not more than £500 for an oil
picture and £100 for a water-colour."

After a visit to the Trevelyans at Wallington he went with his parents
to Scotland; for his mother, now beginning to grow old, wanted to
revisit the scenes of her youth. They went to the Highlands and as far
north as the Bay of Cromarty, and then returned by way of the Abbeys of
the Lowlands, to look up Turner sites, as he had done in 1845 on the St.
Gothard. From the enjoyment of this holiday he was recalled to London by
a letter from Mr. Wornum saying that he could arrange the Turner
drawings at the National Gallery.

His first letter on the National Gallery, in 1847, has been noticed. He
had written again to _The Times_ (December 29th, 1852), pressing the
same point--namely, that if the pictures were put under glass no
cleaning nor restoring would be needed; and that the Gallery ought not
to be considered as a grand hall, decorated with pictures, but as a
convenient museum, with a chronological sequence of the best works of
all schools,--every picture hung on the line and accompanied by studies
for it, if procurable, and engravings from it.

Now--in 1857--question was raised of removing the National Gallery from
Trafalgar Square. The South Kensington Museum was being formed, and the
whole business of arranging the national art treasures was gone into by
a Royal Commission, consisting of Lord Broughton (in the chair), Dean
Milman, Prof. Faraday, Prof. Cockerell, and George Richmond. Ruskin was
examined before them on April 6th, and re-stated the opinions he had
written to _The Times_, adding that he would like to see two National
Galleries--one of popular interest, containing such works as would catch
the public eye and enlist the sympathy of the untaught; and another
containing only the cream of the collections, in pictures, sculpture and
the decorative crafts, arranged for purposes of study. This was
suggested as an ideal; of course, it would involve more outlay, and less
display, than any Parliamentary vote would sanction, or party leader
risk.

Another question of importance was the disposal of the pictures and
sketches which Turner had left to the nation. Ruskin was one of the
executors under the will; but, on finding that, though Turner's
intention was plain, there were technical informalities which would make
the administration anything but easy, he declined to act. It was not
until 1856 that the litigation was concluded, and Turner's pictures and
sketches were handed to the Trustees of the National Gallery. Ruskin,
whose want of legal knowledge had made his services useless before, now
felt that he could carry out the spirit of Turner's will by offering to
arrange the sketches; which were in such a state of confusion that only
some person with knowledge of the artist's habits of work and subjects
could, so to speak, _edit_ them; and the editor would need no ordinary
skill, patience and judgment, into the bargain.

Meanwhile, for that winter (1856-7) a preliminary exhibition was held of
Turner's oil-paintings, with a few water-colours, at Marlborough House,
then the headquarters of the Department of Science and Art, soon
afterwards removed to South Kensington. Ruskin wrote a catalogue, with
analysis of Turner's periods of development and characteristics; which
made the collection intelligible and interesting to curious sight-seers.
They showed their appreciation by taking up five editions in rapid
succession.

Just before lecturing at Manchester, he wrote again on the subject to
_The Times_; and in September his friend R.N. Wornum, Director of the
National Gallery in succession to Eastlake and Uwins, wrote--as we
saw--that he might arrange the sketches as he pleased. He returned from
Scotland, and set to work on October 7th.

It was strange employment for a man of his powers; almost as removed
from the Epicurean Olympus of "cultured ease" popularly assigned to him,
as night-school teaching and lecturing to workmen. But, beside that it
was the carrying out of Turner's wishes, he always had a certain love
for experimenting in manual toil; and this was work in which his extreme
neatness and deftness of hand was needed, no less than his knowledge and
judgment. During the winter for full six months, he and his two
assistants worked, all day and every day, among the masses of precious
rubbish that had been removed from Queen Anne Street to the National
Gallery.

Mr. J.J. Ruskin wrote, on February 19 and 21, 1852:


     "I have just been through Turner's house with Griffith. His labour
     is more astonishing than his genius. There are £80,000 of oil
     pictures done and undone--Boxes half as big as your Study Table,
     filled with Drawings and Sketches. There are Copies of Liber
     Studiorum to fill all your Drawers and more, and House Walls of
     proof plates in Reams--they may go at 1/-each....

     "Nothing since Pompeii so impressed me as the interior of Turner's
     house; the accumulated dust of 40 years partially cleared off;
     Daylight for the first time admitted by opening a window on the
     finest productions of art buried for 40 years. The Drawing Room
     has, it is reckoned, £25,000 worth of proofs, and sketches, and
     Drawings, and Prints. It is amusing to hear Dealers saying there
     can be no Liber Studiorums--when I saw neatly packed and well
     labelled as many Bundles of Liber Studiorum as would fill your
     entire Bookcase, and England and Wales proofs in packed and
     labelled Bundles like Reams of paper, as I told you, piled nearly
     to Ceiling ...

     "The house must be dry as a Bone--the parcels were apparently quite
     uninjured. The very large pictures were spotted, but not much. They
     stood leaning against another in the large low Rooms. Some
     _finished_ go to Nation, many unfinished _not_: no frames. Two are
     given unconditional of Gallery Building--_very fine_: if (and this
     is a condition) _placed beside Claude._ The style much like the
     laying on in Windmill Lock in Dealer's hands, which, now it is
     cleaned, comes out a real Beauty. I believe Turner loved it. The
     will desires all to be framed and repaired and put into the best
     showing state; as if he could not release his money to do this till
     he was dead. The Top of his Gallery is one ruin of Glass and
     patches of paper, now only just made weather-proof ...

     "I saw in Turner's Rooms, _Geo. Morlands_ and _Wilsons_ and
     _Claudes_ and _portraits_ in various stiles _all by Turner._ He
     copied every man, was every man first, and took up his own style,
     casting all others away. It seems to me you may keep your money and
     revel for ever and for nothing among Turner's Works."

Among the quantities so recklessly thrown aside for dust, damp, soot,
mice and worms to destroy--some 15,000 Ruskin reckoned at first, 19,000
later on--there were many fine drawings, which had been used by the
engravers, and vast numbers of interesting and valuable studies in
colour and in pencil. Four hundred of these were extricated from the
chaos, and with infinite pains cleaned, flattened, mounted, dated and
described, and placed in sliding frames in cabinets devised by Ruskin,
or else in swivel frames, to let both sides of the paper be seen. The
first results of the work were shown in an Exhibition at Marlborough
House during the winter, for which he wrote another catalogue. Of the
whole collection he began a more complete account, which was too
elaborate to be finished in that form; but in 1881 he published a
"Catalogue of the Drawings and Sketches of J M.W. Turner, R.A., at
present exhibited in the National Gallery," so that his plan was
practically fulfilled.

During 1858 Ruskin continued to lecture at various places on subjects
connected with his Manchester addresses--the relation of art to
manufacture, and especially the dependence of all great architectural
design upon sculpture or painting of organic form. The first of the
series was given at the opening of the Architectural Museum at South
Kensington, January 13th, 1858, entitled "The Deteriorative Power of
Conventional Art over Nations;" in which he showed that naturalism, as
opposed to meaningless pattern-making, was always a sign of life. For
example, the strength of the Greek, Florentine and Venetian art arose
out of the search for truth, not, as it is often supposed, out of
striving after an ideal of beauty; and as soon as nature was superseded
by recipe, the greatest schools hastened to their fall. From which he
concluded that modern design should always be founded on natural form,
rather than upon the traditional patterns of the east or of the
mediævals.

On February 16th he spoke on "The Work of Iron, in Nature, Art and
Policy," at Tunbridge Wells; a subject similar to that of his address to
the St. Martin's School of the year before, but amplified into a plea
for the use of wrought-iron ornament, as in the new Oxford Museum, then
building, and on April 25th he again addressed St. Martin's School.

The Oxford Museum was an experiment in the true Gothic revival. The
architects, Sir Thomas Deane and Benjamin Woodward, had allowed their
workmen to design parts of the detail, such as capitals and spandrils,
quite in the spirit of Ruskin's teaching, and the work was accordingly
of deep interest to him. So far back as April, 1856, he had given an
address to the men employed at the Museum, whom he met, on Dr. Acland's
invitation, at the Workmen's Reading Rooms. He said that his object was
not to give some labouring men the chance of becoming masters of other
labouring men, and to help the few at the expense of the many, but to
lead them to those sources of pleasure, and power over their own minds
and hands, that more educated people possess. He did not sympathize with
the socialism that had been creeping into vogue since 1848. He thought
existing social arrangements good, and he agreed with his friends, the
Carlyles, who had found that it was only the incapable who could not get
work. But it was the fault of the wealthy and educated that working
people were not better trained; it was not the working-men's fault, at
bottom. The modern architect used his workman as a mere tool; while the
Gothic spirit set him free as an original designer, to gain--not more
wages and higher social rank, but pleasure and instruction, the true
happiness that lies in good work well done.

To explain the design of the Oxford Museum and to enlist support, he
wrote two letters to Dr. Acland (May 25th, 1858, and January 20th,
1859), which formed part of a small book, reporting its aims and
progress, illustrated with an engraving of one of the workmen's
capitals. Ruskin himself contributed both time and money to the work,
and his assistance was not unrecognised. In 1858 "Honorary Studentships"
(i.e., fellowships) were created at Christ Church by the Commissioners'
ordinances. At the first election held, December 6th, 1858, there were
chosen for the compliment Ruskin, Gladstone, Sir G. Cornewall Lewis, Dr.
(Sir) H.W. Acland, and Sir F.H. Gore Ouseley. At the second, December
15th, 1858, were elected Henry Hallam, the Earl of Stanhope, the Earl of
Elgin, the Marquis of Dalhousie and Viscount Canning.

Parallel with this movement for educating the "working-class," there was
the scheme for the improvement of middle-class education, which was then
going on at Oxford--the beginning of University Extension--supported by
the Rev. F. Temple (later Archbishop of Canterbury), and Mr. (afterwards
Sir) Thomas Dyke Acland. Ruskin was heartily for them; and in a letter
on the subject, he tried to show how the teaching of Art might be made
to work in with the scheme. He did not think that in this plan, any more
than at the Working Men's College, there need be an attempt to teach
drawing with a view to forming artists; but there were three objects
they might hold in view: the first, to give every student the advantage
of the happiness and knowledge which the study of Art conveys; the next,
to enforce some knowledge of Art amongst those who were likely to become
patrons or critics; and the last, _to leave no Giotto lost among hill
shepherds._




