CHAPTER VIII

"MODERN PAINTERS" CONTINUED (1855-1856)


It was in the year 1855 that Ruskin first published "Notes on the Royal
Academy and other Exhibitions." He had been so often called upon to
write his opinion of Pre-Raphaelite pictures, either privately or to
the newspapers, or to mark his friends' catalogues, that he found at
last less trouble in printing his notes once for all. The new plan was
immediately popular; three editions of the pamphlet were called for
between June 1 and July 1. Next year he repeated the "Notes" and six
editions were sold.

In spite of a dissentient voice here and there, he was really by that
time recognised as the leading authority upon taste in painting. He was
trusted by a great section of the public, who had not failed to notice
how completely he and his friends were winning the day. The proof of it
was in the fact that they were being imitated on all sides; Ruskinism in
writing and Pre-Raphaelitism in painting were becoming fashionable.

But at the same time the movement gave rise to the Naturalist-landscape
school, a group of painters who threw overboard the traditions of Turner
and Prout, Constable and Harding, and the rest, just as the
Pre-Raphaelite Brethren threw over the Academical masters. For such men
their study was their picture; they devised tents and huts in wild glens
and upon waste moors, and spent weeks in elaborating their details
directly from nature, instead of painting at home from sketches on the
spot.

This was the fulfilment of his advice to young artists; and so far as
young artists worked in this way, for purposes of study, he encouraged
them. But he did not fail to point out that this was not all that could
be required of them. Even such a work as Brett's "Val d'Aosta,"
marvellous as it was in observation and finish, was only the beginning
of a new era, not its consummation. It was not the painting of detail
that could make a great artist; but the knowledge of it, and the
masterly use of such knowledge. A great landscapist would know the facts
and effects of nature, just as Tintoret knew the form of the human
figure; and he would treat them with the same freedom, as the means of
expressing great ideas, of affording by the imagination noble grounds
for noble emotion, which, as Ruskin had been writing at Vevey in 1854,
was poetry. Meanwhile the public and the critic ought to become familiar
with the aspects of nature, in order to recognise the difference between
the true poetry of painting, and the mere empty sentimentalism which was
only the rant and bombast of landscape art.

With such feelings as these he wrote the third and fourth volumes of
"Modern Painters," (published respectively January 15 and April 14,
1856). The work was afterwards interrupted only by a recurrence of his
old cough, in the exceptionally cold summer of 1855. He went down to
Tunbridge Wells, where his cousin, William Richardson of Perth, was
practising as a doctor; it was not long before the cough gave way to
treatment, and he was as busy as ever. About October of that year he
wrote to Mrs. Carlyle as follows, in a letter printed by Professor C.E.
Norton, conveniently summing up his year:


     "Not that I have not been busy--and very busy, too. I have written,
     since May, good six hundred pages, had them rewritten, cut up,
     corrected, and got fairly ready for press--and am going to press
     with the first of them on Gunpowder Plot day, with a great hope of
     disturbing the Public Peace in various directions. Also, I have
     prepared above thirty drawings for engravers this year, retouched
     the engravings (generally the worst part of the business), and
     etched some on steel myself. In the course of the six hundred pages
     I have had to make various remarks on German Metaphysics, on
     Poetry, Political Economy, Cookery, Music, Geology, Dress,
     Agriculture, Horticulture, and Navigation,[6] all of which subjects
     I have had to 'read up' accordingly, and this takes time. Moreover,
     I have had my class of workmen out sketching every week in the
     fields during the summer; and have been studying Spanish proverbs
     with my father's partner, who came over from Spain to see the
     Great Exhibition. I have also designed and drawn a window for the
     Museum at Oxford; and have every now and then had to look over a
     parcel of five or six new designs for fronts and backs to the said
     Museum.

     [Footnote 6: Most of these subjects will be easily recognised in
     "Modern Painters," Vols. III. and IV. The "Navigation" refers to
     the "Harbours of England."]

     "During my above-mentioned studies of horticulture, I became
     dissatisfied with the Linnæan, Jussieuan, and Everybody-elseian
     arrangement of plants, and have accordingly arranged a system of my
     own; and unbound my botanical book, and rebound it in brighter
     green, with all the pages through-other, and backside foremost--so
     as to cut off all the old paging numerals; and am now printing my
     new arrangement in a legible manner, on interleaved foolscap. I
     consider this arrangement one of my great achievements of the year.
     My studies of political economy have induced me to think also that
     nobody knows anything about that; and I am at present engaged in an
     investigation, on independent principles, of the natures of money,
     rent, and taxes, in an abstract form, which sometimes keeps me
     awake all night. My studies of German metaphysics have also induced
     me to think that the Germans don't know anything about _them_; and
     to engage in a serious enquiry into the meaning of Bunsen's great
     sentence in the beginning of the second volume of the 'Hippolytus,'
     about the Finite realization of Infinity; which has given me some
     trouble.

     "The course of my studies of Navigation necessitated my going to
     Deal to look at the Deal boats; and those of geology to rearrange
     all my minerals (and wash a good many, which, I am sorry to say, I
     found wanted it). I have also several pupils, far and near, in the
     art of illumination; an American young lady to direct in the study
     of landscape painting, and a Yorkshire young lady to direct in the
     purchase of Turners,--and various little bye things besides. But I
     am coming to see you."

The tone of humorous exaggeration of his discoveries and occupations was
very characteristic. But he was then growing into the habit of leaving
the matter in hand, as he often did afterwards, to follow side issues,
and to take up new studies with a hasty and divided attention; the
result of which was seen in his sub-title for the third volume of
"Modern Painters"--"Of Many Things"; which amused his readers not a
little. But that he still had time for his friends is seen in the
account of a visit to Denmark Hill, written this year by James Smetham.


     "I walked there through the wintry weather, and got in about dusk.
     One or two gossiping details will interest you before I give you
     what I care for; and so I will tell you that he has a large house
     with a lodge, and a valet and footman and coachman, and grand rooms
     glittering with pictures, chiefly Turner's, and that his father and
     mother live with him, or he with them.... His father is a fine old
     gentleman, who has a lot of bushy gray hair, and eyebrows sticking
     up all rough and knowing, with a comfortable way of coming up to
     you with his hands in his pockets, and making _you_ comfortable,
     and saying, in answer to your remark, that 'John's' prose works are
     pretty good. His mother is a ruddy, dignified, richly dressed old
     gentlewoman of seventy-five, who knows Chamonix better than
     Camberwell; evidently a _good_ old lady, with the 'Christian
     Treasury'tossing about on the table. She puts 'John' down, and
     holds her own opinions, and flatly contradicts him; and he receives
     all her opinions with a soft reverence and gentleness that is
     pleasant to witness....

     "I wish I could reproduce a good impression of 'John' for you, to
     give you the notion of his 'perfect gentleness and lowlihood.' He
     certainly bursts out with a remark, and in a contradictious way,
     but only because he believes it, with no air of dogmatism or
     conceit. He is different at home from that which he is in a lecture
     before a mixed audience, and there is a spiritual sweetness in the
     half-timid expression of his eyes; and in bowing to you, as in
     taking wine, with (if I heard aright) 'I drink to thee,' he had a
     look that has followed me, a look bordering on tearful.

     "He spent some time in this way. Unhanging a Turner from the wall
     of a distant room, he brought it to the table and put it in my
     hands; then we talked; then he went up into his study to fetch down
     some illustrative print or drawing; in one case, a literal view
     which he had travelled fifty miles to make, in order to compare
     with the picture. And so he kept on gliding all over the house,
     hanging and unhanging, and stopping a few minutes to talk."

And yet there were many with whom he had to deal who did not look at
things in his light; who took his criticism as personal attack, and
resented it with bitterness. There is a story told (but not by himself)
about one of the "Notes on the Academy," which he was then
publishing--how he wrote to an artist therein mentioned that he
regretted he could not speak more favourably of his picture, but he
hoped it would make no difference in their friendship. The artist
replied (so they say) in these terms: "Dear Ruskin,--Next time I meet
you, I shall knock you down; but I hope it will make no difference in
our friendship." "Damn the fellow! why doesn't he stand up for his
friends?" said another disappointed acquaintance. Perhaps Ruskin, secure
in his "house with a lodge, and a valet and footman and coachman,"
hardly realized that a cold word from his pen sometimes meant the
failure of an important Academy picture, and serious loss of
income--that there was bitter truth underlying _Punch's_ complaint of
the Academician:

    "I paints and paints.
    Hears no complaints,
     And sells before I'm dry;
    Till savage Ruskin
    Sticks his tusk in,
     And nobody will buy."

Against these incidents should be set such an anecdote as the following,
told by Mr. J.J. Ruskin in a letter of June 3, 1858:


     "Vokins wished me to name to you that Carrick, when he read your
     criticism on 'Weary Life,' came to him with the cheque Vokins had
     given, and said your remarks were all right, and that he could not
     take the price paid by Vokins the buyer; he would alter the
     picture. Vokins took back the money, only agreeing to see the
     picture when it was done."

John Ruskin in reply said he did not see why Carrick should have
returned the cheque.

A letter from Mrs. Browning describes a visit to Denmark Hill, and
ends,--"I like Mr. Ruskin very much, and so does Robert; very gentle,
yet earnest--refined and truthful. I like him very much. We count him
one among the valuable acquaintances made this year in England." This
has been dated 1855; but Ruskin, writing to Miss Mitford from
Glenfinlas, 17th August, 1853, says, "I had the pleasure this spring, of
being made acquainted with your dear Elizabeth Browning, as well as with
her husband. I was of course prepared to like _her_, but I did not
expect to like _him_ as much as I did. I think he is really a very fine
fellow, and _she_ is the only sensible woman I have yet met with on the
subject of Italian politics. Evidently a noble creature in all things."
In June, 1850, he had met Robert Browning, on the invitation of Coventry
Patmore, and said: "He is the only person whom I have ever heard talk
ration-ally about the Italians, though on the Liberal side."

In these volumes of "Modern Painters" he had to discuss the Mediæval and
Renaissance spirit in its relation to art, and to illustrate from
Browning's poetry, "unerring in every sentence he writes of the Middle
Ages, always vital and right and profound; so that in the matter of art
there is hardly a principle connected with the mediæval temper that he
has not struck upon in those seemingly careless and too rugged lines of
his." This was written twenty-five years before the Browning Society was
heard of, and at a time when the style of Browning was an offence to
most people. To Ruskin, also, it had been some, thing of a puzzle; and
he wrote to the poet, asking him to explain himself; which the poet
accordingly did.

That Ruskin was open to conviction and conversion could be shown from
the difference in his tone of thought about poetry before and after this
period; that he was the best of friends with the man who took him to
task for narrowness, may be seen from the following letter, written on
the next Christmas Eve:


     "MY DEAR MR. RUSKIN,

     "Your note having just arrived, Robert deputes me to write for him
     while he dresses to go out on an engagement. It is the evening. All
     the hours are wasted, since the morning, through our not being
     found at the Rue de Grenelle, but here--and our instinct of
     self-preservation or self-satisfaction insists on our not losing a
     moment more by our own fault.

     "Thank you, thank you for sending us your book, and also for
     writing my husband's name in it. It will be the same thing as if
     you had written mine--except for the pleasure, as you say, which is
     greater so. How good and kind you are!

     "And not well. That is worst. Surely you would be better if you had
     the summer in winter we have here. But I was to write only a
     word--Let it say how affectionately we regard you.

     "ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING

     "3, RUE DU COLYSÉE,

     "_Thursday Evening, 24th" (December_, 1855).




