CHAPTER VI

"THE CROWN OF WILD OLIVE" (1865-1866)


Mention has been made of an address to working men at the Camberwell
Institute, January 24th, 1865. This lecture was published in 1866,
together with two others,[11] under the title of "The Crown of Wild
Olive"--that is to say, the reward of human work, a reward "which should
have been of gold, had not Jupiter been so poor," as Aristophanes said.

[Footnote 11: Republished in 1873, with a fourth lecture added, and a
Preface and notes on the political growth of Prussia, from Carlyle's
"Frederick."]

True work, he said, meant the production (taking the word production in
a broad sense) of the means of life; every one ought to take some share
in it, according to his powers: some working with the head, some with
the hands; but all acknowledging idleness and slavery to be alike
immoral. And, as to the remuneration, he said, as he had said before in
"Unto this Last," Justice demands that equal energy expended should
bring equal reward. He did not consider it justice to cry out for the
equalization of incomes, for some are sure to be more diligent and
saving than others; some work involves a great preliminary expenditure
of energy in qualifying the worker, as contrasted with unskilled labour.
But he did not allow that the possession of capital entitled a man to
unearned increment; and he thought that, in a community where a truly
civilized morality was highly developed, the general sense of society
would recognise an average standard of work and an average standard of
pay for each class.

In the next two lectures he spoke of the two great forms of Play, the
great Games of Money-making and War. He had been invited to lecture at
Bradford, in the hope that he would give some useful advice towards the
design of a new Exchange which was to be built; in curious
forgetfulness, it would appear, of his work during the past ten years
and more. Indeed, the picture he drew them of an ideal "Temple to the
Goddess of Getting-on" was as daring a sermon as ever prophet preached.
But when he came to tell them that the employers of labour might be true
captains and kings, the leaders and the helpers of their fellow-men,
and that the function of commerce was not to prey upon society but to
provide for it, there were many of his hearers whose hearts told them
that he was right, and whose lives have shown, in some measure, that he
did not speak in vain.

Still stranger, to hearers who had not noted the conclusion of his third
volume of "Modern Painters," was his view of war, in the address to the
Royal Military Academy at Woolwich, in December 1865. The common view of
war as destroyer of arts and enemy of morality, the easy acceptance of
the doctrine that peace is an unqualified blessing, the obvious evils of
battle and rapine and the waste of resources and life throughout so many
ages, have blinded less clear-sighted and less widely-experienced
thinkers to another side of the teaching of history, which Ruskin dwelt
upon with unexpected emphasis.

But modern war, horrible, not from its scale, but from the spirit in
which the upper classes set the lower to fight like gladiators in the
arena, he denounced; and called upon the women of England, with whom, he
said, the real power of life and death lay, to mend it into some
semblance of antique chivalry, or to end it in the name of religion and
humanity.

In the _New Review_ for March 1892, there appeared a series of "Letters
of John Ruskin to his Secretary," which, as the anonymous contributor
remarked, illustrate "Ruskin the worker, as he acts away from the eyes
of the world; Ruskin the epistolographer, when the eventuality of the
printing-press is not for the moment before him Ruskin the good
Samaritan, ever gentle and open-handed when true need and a good cause
make appeal to his tender heart; Ruskin the employer, considerate,
generous--an ideal master."

Charles Augustus Howell became known to Ruskin (in 1864 or 1865) through
the circle of the Pre-Raphaelites; and, as the editor of the letters
puts it, "by his talents and assiduity" became the too-trusted friend
and _protégé_ of Ruskin, Rossetti and others of their acquaintance. It
was he who proposed and carried out the exhumation, reluctantly
consented to, of Rossetti's manuscript poems from his wife's grave, in
October, 1869; for which curious service to literature let him have the
thanks of posterity. But he was hardly the man to carry out Ruskin's
secret charities, and long before he had lost Rossetti's confidence[12]
he had ceased to act as Ruskin's secretary.

[Footnote 12: In the manner described by Mr. W.M. Rossetti at p. 351,
Vol. I., of "D.G. Rossetti, his family letters," to which the reader is
referred.]

From these letters, however, several interesting traits and incidents
may be gleaned, such as anecdotes about the canary which was anonymously
bought at the Crystal Palace Bird Show (February 1866) for the owner's
benefit: about the shopboy whom Ruskin was going to train as an artist;
and about the kindly proposal to employ the aged and impoverished
Cruikshank upon a new book of fairy tales, and the struggle between
admiration for the man and admission of his loss of power, ending in the
free gift of the hundred pounds promised.

In April, 1866, after writing the Preface to "The Crown of Wild Olive,"
and preparing the book for publication, Ruskin was carried off to the
Continent for a holiday with Sir Walter and Lady Trevelyan, her niece
Miss Constance Hilliard (Mrs. Churchill), and Miss Agnew (Mrs. Severn),
for a thorough rest and change after three years of unintermitting work
in England. They intended to spend a couple of months in Italy. On the
day of starting, Ruskin called at Cheyne Walk with the usual bouquet for
Mrs. Carlyle, to learn that she had just met with her death, in trying
to save her little dog, the gift of Lady Trevelyan. He rejoined his
friends, and they crossed the Channel gaily, in spite of what they
thought was rather a cloud over him. At Paris they read the news. "Yes,"
he said, "I knew. But there was no reason why I should spoil your
pleasure by telling you."

On his arrival at Dijon he wrote to Carlyle, who in answer after giving
way to his grief--"my life all laid in ruins, and the one light of it as
if gone out,"--continued:--"Come and see me when you get home; come
oftener and see me, and speak _more_ frankly to me (for I am very true
to y'r highest interests and you) while I still remain here. You can do
nothing for me in Italy; except come home improved."

But before this letter reached Ruskin, he too had been in the presence
of death, and had lost one of his most valued friends. Their journey to
Italy had been undertaken chiefly for the sake of Lady Trevelyan's
health, as the following extracts indicate:


     "PARIS, _2nd May, 1866_.

     "Lady Trevelyan is much better to-day, but it is not safe to move
     her yet--till to-morrow. So I'm going to take the children to look
     at Chartres cathedral--we can get three hours there, and be back to
     seven o'clock dinner. We drove round by St. Cloud and Sèvres
     yesterday; the blossomed trees being glorious by the Seine,--the
     children in high spirits. It reminds me always too much of
     Turner--every bend of these rivers is haunted by him."

     "DIJON, _Sunday, 6th May, 1866_.

     "Lady Trevelyan is _much_ better, and we hope all to get on to
     Neufchatel to-morrow. The weather is quite fine again though not
     warm; and yesterday I took the children for a drive up the little
     valley which we used to drive through on leaving Dijon for Paris.
     There are wooded hills on each side, and we got into a sweet
     valley, as full of nightingales as our garden is of thrushes, and
     with slopes of broken rocky ground above, covered with the lovely
     blue milk-wort, and purple columbines, and geranium, and wild
     strawberry-flowers. The children were intensely delighted, and I
     took great care that Constance should not run about so as to heat
     herself, and we got up a considerable bit of hill quite nicely, and
     with greatly increased appetite for tea, and general mischief. They
     have such appetites that I generally call them 'my two little
     pigs.' There is a delightful French waiting-maid at dinner
     here--who says they are both 'charmantes,' but highly approves of
     my title for them nevertheless."

     "NEUFCHATEL, _10th May_, 1866.

     "Lady Trevelyan is still too weak to move. We had (the children and
     I) a delightful day yesterday at the Pierre à Bot, gathering
     vetches and lilies of the valley in the woods, and picnic
     afterwards on the lovely mossy grass, in view of all the
     Alps--Jungfrau, Eiger, Blumlis Alp, Altels, and the rest, with
     intermediate lake and farmsteads and apple-blossom--very heavenly."

Here, within a few days, Lady Trevelyan died. Throughout her illness she
had been following the progress of the new notes on wild-flowers
(afterwards to be "Proserpina") with keen interest, and Sir Walter lent
the help of botanical science to Ruskin's more poetical and artistic
observations. For the sake of this work, and for the "children," and
with a wise purpose of bearing up under the heavy blow that had fallen,
the two friends continued their journey for a while among the mountains.

From Thun they went to Interlachen and the Giessbach. Ruskin occupied
himself closely in tracing Studer's sections across the great
lake-furrow of central Switzerland--"something craggy for his mind to
break upon," as Byron said when he was in trouble. At the Giessbach
there was not only geology and divine scenery, enjoyable in lovely
weather, but an interesting figure in the foreground, the widowed
daughter of the hotel landlord, beautiful and consumptive, but brave as
a Swiss girl should be. They all seem to have fallen in love with her,
so to speak the young English girls as much as the impressionable
art-critic: and the new human interest in her Alpine tragedy relieved,
as such interests do, the painfulness of the circumstances through which
they had been passing. Her sister Marie was like an Allegra to this
Penserosa; bright and brilliant in native genius. She played piano-duets
with the young ladies; taught Alpine botany to the savants; guided them
to the secret dells and unknown points of view; and with a sympathy
unexpected in a stranger, beguiled them out of their grief, and won
their admiration and gratitude. Marie of the Giessbach was often
referred to in letters of the time, and for many years after, with
warmly affectionate remembrances.

A few bits from his letters to his mother, which I have been permitted
to copy, will indicate the impressions of this summer's tour.


     "HÔTEL DU GIESBACH, _6th June, 1866_,

     "MY DEAREST MOTHER,

     "Can you at all fancy walking out in the morning in a garden full
     of lilacs just in rich bloom, and pink hawthorn in masses; and
     along a little terrace with lovely pinks coming into cluster of
     colour all over the low wall beside it; and a sloping bank of green
     sward from it--and below that, the Giesbach! Fancy having a real
     Alpine waterfall in one's garden,--seven hundred feet high. You
     see, we are just in time for the spring, here, and the strawberries
     are ripening on the rocks. Joan and Constance have been just
     scrambling about and gathering them for me. Then there's the
     blue-green lake below, and Interlaken and the lake of Thun in the
     distance. I think I never saw anything so beautiful. Joan will
     write to you about the people, whom she has made great friends
     with, already."

     "_7th June, 1866_.

     "I cannot tell you how much I am struck with the beauty of this
     fall: it is different from everything I have ever seen in torrents.
     There are so many places where one gets near it without being wet,
     for one thing; for the falls are, mostly, not vertical so as to fly
     into mere spray, but over broken rock, which crushes the water into
     a kind of sugar-candy-like foam, white as snow, yet glittering; and
     composed, not of bubbles, but of broken-up water. Then I had
     forgotten that it plunged straight into the lake; I got down to the
     lake shore on the other side of it yesterday, and to see it plunge
     clear into the blue water, with the lovely mossy rocks for its
     flank, and for the lake edge, was an unbelievable kind of thing; it
     is all as one would fancy cascades in fairyland. I do not often
     endure with patience any cockneyisms or showings off at these
     lovely places. But they do one thing here so interesting that I can
     forgive it. One of the chief cascades (about midway up the hill)
     falls over a projecting rock, so that one can walk under the
     torrent as it comes over. It leaps so clear that one is hardly
     splashed, except at one place. Well, when it gets dark, they burn,
     for five minutes, one of the strongest steady fireworks of a
     crimson colour, behind the fall. The red light shines right
     through, turning the whole waterfall into a torrent of fire."

     "_11th June, 1866._

     "We leave, according to our programme, for Interlachen
     to-day,--with great regret, for the peace and sweetness of this
     place are wonderful and the people are good; and though there is
     much drinking and quarrelling among the younger men, there appears
     to be neither distressful poverty, nor deliberate crime: so that
     there is more of the sense I need, and long for, of fellowship with
     human creatures, than in any place I have been at for years. I
     believe they don't so much as lock the house-doors at night; and
     the faces of the older peasantry are really very beautiful. I have
     done a good deal of botany, and find that wild-flower botany is
     more or less inexhaustible, but the cultivated flowers are infinite
     in their caprice. The forget-me-nots and milkworts are singularly
     beautiful here, but there is quite as much variety in English
     fields as in these, as long as one does not climb much--and I'm
     very lazy, compared to what I used to be,"

     "_LAUTERBRUNNEN, 13th June, 1866._

     "We had a lovely evening here yesterday, and the children enjoyed
     and understood it better than anything they have yet seen among the
     Alps. Constance was in great glory in a little walk I took her in
     the twilight through the upper meadows: the Staubbach seen only as
     a grey veil suspended from its rock, and the great Alps pale above
     on the dark sky. She condescended nevertheless to gather a great
     bunch of the white catchfly,--to make 'pops' with,--her friend
     Marie at the Giesbach having shown her how a startling detonation
     may be obtained, by skilful management, out of its globular calyx.

     "This morning is not so promising,--one of the provoking ones which
     will neither let you stay at home with resignation, nor go anywhere
     with pleasure. I'm going to take the children for a little quiet
     exploration of the Wengern path, to see how they like it, and if
     the weather betters--we may go on. At all events I hope to find an
     Alpine rose or two."

In June, 1866, the Professorship of Poetry at Oxford was vacant; and
Ruskin's friends were anxious to see him take the post. He, however,
felt no especial fitness or inclination for it, and did not stand. Three
years later he was elected to a Professorship that at this time had not
been founded.

After spending June in the Oberland, he went homewards through Berne,
Vevey and Geneva, to find his private secretary with a bundle of begging
letters, and his friend Carlyle busy with the defence of Governor Eyre.

In 1865 an insurrection of negroes at Morant Bay, Jamaica, had
threatened to take the most serious shape, when it was stamped out by
the high-handed measures of Mr. Eyre. After the first congratulations
were over another side to the question called for a hearing. The Baptist
missionaries declared that among the negroes who were shot and hanged
_in terrorem_ were peaceable subjects, respectable members of their own
native congregations, for whose character they could vouch; they added
that the gravity of the situation had been exaggerated by private enmity
and jealousy of their work and creed. A strong committee was formed
under Liberal auspices, supported by such men as John Stuart Mill and
Thomas Hughes, the author of "Tom Brown's Schooldays"--men whose motive
was above suspicion--to bring Mr. Eyre to account.

Carlyle, who admired the strong hand, and had no interest in Baptist
missionaries, accepted Mr. Eyre as the saviour of society in his West
Indian sphere; and there were many, both in Jamaica and at home, who
believed that, but for his prompt action, the white population would
have been massacred with all the horrors of a savage rebellion. Ruskin
had been for many years the ally of the Broad Church and Liberal party.
But he was now coming more and more under the personal influence of
Carlyle; and when it came to the point of choosing sides, declared
himself, in a letter to the _Daily Telegraph_ (December 20th, 1865), a
Conservative and a supporter of order; and joined the Eyre Defence
Committee with a subscription of £100. The prominent part he took, for
example, in the meeting of September, 1866, was no doubt forced upon him
by his desire to save Carlyle, whose recent loss and shaken nerves made
such business especially trying to him. Letters of this period remain,
in which Carlyle begs Ruskin to "be diligent, I bid you!"--and so on,
adding, "I must absolutely _shut up_ in that direction, to save my
sanity." And so it fell to the younger man to work through piles of
pamphlets and newspaper correspondence, to interview politicians and men
of business, and--what was so very foreign to his habits--to take a
leading share in a party agitation.

But in all this he was true to his Jacobite instincts. He had been
brought up a Tory; and though he had drifted into an alliance with the
Broad Church and philosophical Liberals, he was never one of them. Now
that his father was gone, perhaps he felt a sort of duty to own himself
his father's son; and the failure of liberal philanthropy to realise his
ideals, and of liberal philosophy to rise to his economic standards,
combined with Carlyle to induce him to label himself Conservative. But
his conservatism could not be accepted by the party so called.
Fortunately, he did not need or ask their recognition. He took no
interest in party politics, and never in his life voted at a
Parliamentary election. He only meant to state in the shortest terms
that he stood for loyalty and order.




