CHAPTER VII

"KATA PHUSIN" (1837-1838)


Devoted as she was to her husband, Mrs. Ruskin felt bound to watch over
her son at Oxford. It was his health she was always anxious about;
doctoring was her forte. He had suffered from pleurisy; caught cold
easily; was feared to be weak in the lungs; and nobody but his mother
understood him. So taking Mary Richardson, she went up with him
(January, 1837), and settled in lodgings at Adams' in the High. Her plan
was to make no intrusion on his college life, but to require him to
report himself every day to her. She would not be dull; she could drive
about and see the country, and to that end took her own carriage to
Oxford, the "fly" which had been set up two years before. John had been
rather sarcastic about its genteel appearance. "No one," he said, "would
sit down to draw the form of it." However, she and Mary drove to Oxford,
and reckoned that it would only mean fifteen months' absence from home
altogether, great part of which deserted papa would spend in travelling.

John went into residence in Peckwater. At first he spent every evening
with his mother and went to bed, as Mr. Dale had told him, at ten. After
a few days Professor Powell asked him to a musical evening; he excused
himself, and explained why. The Professor asked to be introduced,
whereupon says his mother, "I shall return the call, but make no
visiting acquaintances."

The "early-to-bed" plan was also impracticable. It was not long before
somebody came hammering at his "oak" just as he was getting to sleep,
and next morning he told his mother that he really ought to have a glass
of wine to give. So she sent him a couple of bottles over, and that very
night "Mr. Liddell and Mr. Gaisford" (junior) turned up. "John was glad
he had wine to offer, but they would not take any; they had come to see
sketches. John says Mr. Liddell looked at them with the eye of a judge
and the delight of an artist, and swore they were the best sketches he
had ever seen. John accused him of quizzing, but he answered that he
really thought them excellent." John said that it was the scenes which
made the pictures; Mr. Liddell knew better, and spread the fame of them
over the college. Next morning "Lord Emlyn and Lord Ward called to look
at the sketches," and when the undergraduates had dropped in one after
another, the Dean himself, even the terrible Gaisford, sent for the
portfolio, and returned it with august approval.

Liddell, afterwards Dean of Christ Church; Newton, afterwards Sir
Charles, of the British Museum; Acland, afterwards Sir Henry, the
Professor of Medicine, thus became John Ruskin's friends: the first
disputing with him on the burning question of Raphael's art, but from
the outset an admirer of "Modern Painters," and always an advocate of
its author; the second differing from him on the claims of Greek
archæology, but nevertheless a close acquaintance through many long
years; and the third for half a century the best of friends and
counsellors.

The dons of his college he was less likely to attract. Dr. Buckland, the
famous geologist, and still more famous lecturer and talker, took notice
of him and employed him in drawing diagrams for lectures. The Rev.
Walter Brown, his college tutor, afterwards Rector of Wendlebury, won
his good-will and remained his friend. His private tutor, the Rev.
Osborne Gordon, was always regarded with affectionate respect. But the
rest seem to have looked upon him as a somewhat desultory and erratic
young genius, who might or might not turn out well. For their immediate
purpose, the Schools, and Church or State preferment, he seemed hardly
the fittest man.

The gentlemen-commoners of Christ Church were a puzzle to Mrs. Ruskin;
noblemen of sporting tastes, who rode and betted and drank, and got
their impositions written "by men attached to the University for the
purpose, at 1s.6d. to 2s.6d., so you have only to reckon how much you
will give to avoid chapel." And yet they were very nice fellows. If they
began by riding on John's back round the quad, they did not give him the
cold shoulder--quite the reverse. He was asked everywhere to wine; he
beat them all at chess; and they invaded him at all hours. "It does
little good sporting _his_ oak," wrote his mother, describing how Lord
Desart and Grimston climbed in through his window while he was hard at
work. "They say midshipmen and Oxonians have more lives than a cat, and
they have need of them if they run such risks."

Once, but once only, he was guilty, as an innocent freshman, of a breach
of the laws of his order. He wrote too good an essay. He tells his
father:


     "OXFORD, _February_, 1837.

     "Yesterday (Saturday) forenoon the Sub-dean sent for me, took me up
     into his study, sat down with me, and read over my essay, pointing
     out a few verbal alterations and suggesting improvements; I, of
     course, expressed myself highly grateful for his condescension.
     Going out, I met Strangeways. 'So you're going to read out to-day,
     Ruskin. _Do_ go it at a good rate, my good fellow. Why do you write
     such devilish good ones?' Went a little farther and met March.
     'Mind you stand on the top of the desk, Ruskin; gentlemen-commoners
     never stand on the steps.' I asked him whether it would look more
     dignified to stand head or heels uppermost. He advised heels. Then
     met Desart. 'We must have a grand supper after this, Ruskin;
     gentlemen-commoners always have a flare-up after reading their
     themes.' I told him I supposed he wanted to 'pison my
     rum-and-water.'"

And though they teased him unmercifully, he seems to have given as good
as he got. At a big wine after the event, they asked him whether his
essay cost 2s.6d. or 5s. What he answered is not reported; but they
proceeded to make a bonfire in Peckwater, while he judiciously escaped
to bed.

So for a home-bred boy, thrown into rather difficult surroundings, his
first appearance at Christ Church was distinctly a success.
"Collections" in March, 1837, went off creditably for him. Hussey,
Kynaston and the Dean said he had taken great pains with his work, and
had been a pattern of regularity; and he ended his first term very well
pleased with his college and with himself.

In his second term he had the honour of being elected to the Christ
Church Club, a very small and very exclusive society of the best men in
the college: "Simeon, Acland, and Mr. Denison proposed him; Lord Carew
and Broadhurst supported." And he had the opportunity of meeting men of
mark, as the following letter recounts. He writes on April 22, 1837:


     "My Dearest Father,

     "When I returned from hall yesterday--where a servitor read, or
     pretended to read, and Decanus growled at him, 'Speak out!'--I
     found a note on my table from Dr. Buckland, requesting the pleasure
     of my company to dinner, at six, to meet two celebrated geologists,
     Lord Cole and Sir Philip Egerton. I immediately sent a note of
     thanks and acceptance, dressed, and was there a minute after the
     last stroke of Tom. Alone for five minutes in Dr. B.'s
     drawing-room, who soon afterwards came in with Lord Cole,
     introduced me, and said that as we were both geologists he did not
     hesitate to leave us together while he did what he certainly very
     much required--brushed up a little. Lord Cole and I were talking
     about some fossils newly arrived from India. He remarked in the
     course of conversation that his friend Dr. B.'s room was cleaner
     and in better order than he remembered ever to have seen it. There
     was not a chair fit to sit upon, all covered with dust, broken
     alabaster candlesticks, withered flower-leaves, frogs cut out of
     serpentine, broken models of fallen temples, torn papers, old
     manuscripts, stuffed reptiles, deal boxes, brown paper, wool, tow
     and cotton, and a considerable variety of other articles. In came
     Mrs. Buckland, then Sir Philip Egerton and his brother, whom I had
     seen at Dr. B.'s lecture, though he is not an undergraduate. I was
     talking to him till dinner-time. While we were sitting over our
     wine after dinner, in came Dr. Daubeny, one of the most celebrated
     geologists of the day--a curious little animal, looking through its
     spectacles with an air very _distinguée_--and Mr. Darwin, whom I
     had heard read a paper at the Geological Society. He and I got
     together, and talked all the evening."

The long vacation of 1837 was passed in a tour through the North, during
which his advanced knowledge of art was shown in a series of admirable
drawings. Their subjects are chiefly architectural, though a few
mountain drawings are found in his sketch-book for that summer.

The interest in ancient and picturesque buildings was no new thing, and
it seems to have been the branch of art-study which was chiefly
encouraged by his father. During this tour among Cumberland cottages and
Yorkshire abbeys, a plan was formed for a series of papers on
architecture, perhaps in answer to an invitation from his friend Mr.
Loudon, who had started an architectural magazine. In the summer he
began to write "The Poetry of Architecture; or, The Architecture of the
Nations of Europe considered in its Association with Natural Scenery and
National Character," and the papers were worked off month by month from
Oxford, or wherever he might be, only terminating with the termination
of the magazine in January, 1839. They parade a good deal of classical
learning and travelled experience; readers of the magazine took their
author for some dilettante Don at Oxford. The editor did not wish the
illusion to be dispelled, so John Ruskin had to choose a _nom de
plume_. He called himself "Kata Phusin" ("according to nature"), for he
had begun to read some Aristotle. No phrase would have better expressed
his point of view, that of commonsense extended by experience, and
confirmed by the appeal to matters of fact, rather than to any
authority, or tradition, or committee of taste, or abstract principles.

While these papers were in process of publication "Kata Phusin" plunged
into his first controversy, as an opponent of "Parsey's Convergence of
Perpendiculars," according to which vertical lines should have a
vanishing point, even though they are assumed to be parallel to the
plane of the picture.

During this controversy, and just before the summer tour of 1838 to
Scotland, John Ruskin was introduced to Miss Charlotte Withers, a young
lady who was as fond of music as he was of drawing. They discussed their
favourite studies with eagerness, and, to settle the matter, he wrote a
long essay on "The Comparative Advantages of the Studies of Music and
Painting," in which he set painting as a means of recreation and of
education far above music.

Already at nineteen, then, we see him a writer on art, not full-fledged,
but attracting some notice. Towards the end of 1838 a question arose as
to the best site for the proposed Scott memorial at Edinburgh, and a
writer in the _Architectural Magazine_ quoted "Kata Phusin" as the
authority in such matters, saying that it was obvious, after those
papers of his, that design and site should be simultaneously considered;
on which the editor "begs the favour of 'Kata Phusin' to let our readers
have his opinion on the subject, which we certainly think of
considerable importance."

So he discussed the question of monuments in general, and of this one in
particular, in a long paper, coming to no very decided opinion, but
preferring, on the whole, a statue group with a colossal Scott on a
rough pedestal, to be placed on Salisbury Crags, "where the range gets
low and broken towards the north at about the height of St. Anthony's
Chapel." His paper did not influence the Edinburgh Committee, but it was
not without effect, as the following extract shows.


     "BAYSWATER, _November_ 30, 1838.

     "DEAR SIR,--... Your son is certainly the greatest natural genius
     that ever it has been my fortune to become acquainted with, and I
     cannot but feel proud to think that at some future period, when
     both you and I are under the turf, it will be stated in the
     literary history of your son's life that the first article of his
     which was published was in _London's Magazine of Natural
     History._--Yours very sincerely,

     "J.C. LOUDON"




