CHAPTER X

VERONA AND OXFORD (1869-1870)


The main object of this journey was, however, not to study mythology,
but to continue the revision of old estimates of architecture, and after
seventeen years to look with a fresh eye at the subjects of "Stones of
Venice."

The churches and monuments of Verona had been less thoroughly studied
than those of Venice, and now they were threatened with imminent
restoration. On May 25th he wrote:--"It is very strange that I have just
been in time--after 17 years' delay--to get the remainder of what I
wanted from the red tomb of which my old drawing hangs in the
passage"--(the Castelbarco monument). "To-morrow they put up scaffolding
to retouch, and I doubt not, spoil it for evermore." He succeeded in
getting a delay of ten days, to enable him to paint the tomb in its
original state; but before he went home it "had its new white cap on and
looked like a Venetian gentleman in a pantaloon's mask." He brought away
one of the actual stones of the old roof.

On June 3 he wrote:


     "I am getting on well with all my own work; and much pleased with
     some that Mr. Bunney is doing for me; so that really I expect to
     carry off a great deal of Verona.... The only mischief of the
     place is its being too rich. Stones, flowers, mountains--all
     equally asking one to look at them; a history to every foot of
     ground, and a picture on every foot of wall; frescoes fading away
     in the neglected streets--like the colours of the dolphin."

As assistants in this enterprise of recording the monuments of Venice
and Verona, and of recording them more fully and in a more interesting
way than by photography, he took with him Arthur Burgess and John
Bunney, his former pupils. Mr. Burgess was the subject of a memoir by
Ruskin in the _Century Guild Hobby Horse_ (April, 1887), appreciating
his talents and lamenting his loss. Mr. Bunney, who had travelled with
Ruskin in Switzerland in 1863, and had lately lived near Florence,
thenceforward settled in Venice, where he died in 1882, after completing
his great work, the St. Mark's now in the Ruskin Museum at Sheffield. A
memoir of him by Mr. Wedderburn appeared in the catalogue of the Venice
Exhibition, at the Fine Art Society's Gallery in November, 1882.

At Venice Ruskin had met his old friend Rawdon Brown[17], and Count
Giberto Borromeo, whom he visited at Milan on his way home, with deep
interest in the Luinis and in the authentic bust of St. Carlo; so
closely resembling Ruskin himself. Another noteworthy encounter is
recorded in a letter of May 4th.[18]

[Footnote 17: Whose book on the English in Italy (from Venetian
documents) was shortly to be published, with funds supplied by Ruskin.]

[Footnote 18: This date ought to be "June 4th," as Mr. E.T. Cook notices
(Library Edn. XIX., p. liv.).]

"As I was drawing in the square this morning, in a lovely, quiet,
Italian, light, there came up the poet Longfellow with his little
daughter--a girl of 12, or 13, with _springy_-curled flaxen
hair,--curls, or waves, that wouldn't come out in damp, I mean. They
stayed talking beside me some time. I don't think it was a very vain
thought that came over me, that if a photograph could have been taken of
the beautiful square of Verona, in that soft light, with Longfellow and
his daughter talking to me at my work--some people both in England and
America would have liked copies of it."

Readers of "Fors" will recognise an incident noted on the 18th of June.

"Yesterday, it being quite cool, I went for a walk; and as I came down
from a rather quiet hillside, a mile or two out of town, I past a house
where the women were at work spinning the silk off the cocoons. There
was a sort of whirring sound as in an English mill; but at intervals
they sang a long sweet chant, all together, lasting about two
minutes--then pausing a minute and then beginning again. It was good and
tender music, and the multitude of voices prevented any sense of
failure, so that it was very lovely and sweet, and like the things that
I mean to try to bring to pass."

For he was already meditating on the thoughts that issued in the
proposals of St. George's Guild, and the daily letters of this summer
are full of allusions to a scheme for a great social movement, as well
as to his plans for the control of Alpine torrents and the better
irrigation of their valleys. On the 2nd of June he wrote:--"I see more
and more clearly every day my power of showing how the Alpine torrents
may be--not subdued--but 'educated.' A torrent is just like a human
creature. Left to gain full strength in wantonness and rage, no power
can any more redeem it: but watch the channels of every early impulse,
and fence _them_, and your torrent becomes the gentlest and most
blessing of servants."

His mother was anxious for him to come home, being persuaded that he was
overworking himself in the continued heat which his letters reported.
But he was loath to leave Italy, in which, he said, his work for the
future lay. He made two more visits to Venice, to draw some of the
sculptured details, now quickly perishing, and to make studies of
Tintoret and Carpaccio. Among other friends who met him there was Mr.
Holman Hunt, with whom he went round his favourite Scuola di San Rocco
(1st July). Two days later he wrote:


     "You will never believe it; but I have actually been trying to
     draw--a baby. _The_ baby which the priest is holding in the little
     copy of Tintoret by Edward Jones which my father liked so much,
     over the basin stand in his bedroom.[19] All the knowledge I have
     gained in these 17 years only makes me more full of awe and wonder
     at Tintoret. But it _is_ so sad--so sad;--no one to care for him
     but me, and all going so fast to ruin. He has done that infant
     Christ in about five minutes--and I worked for two hours in vain,
     and could not tell _why_ in vain--the mystery of his touch is so
     great."

[Footnote 19: Mr. and Mrs Burne-Jones had been in Venice in June, 1862;
the artist, then young and comparatively unknown, with a commission to
copy for Ruskin.]

Final farewell was said to Verona on the 10th August, for the homeward
journey by the St. Gothard, and Giessbach, where he found the young
friend of 1866 now near her end--and Thun, where he met Professor C.E.
Norton. On the way he wrote:


     "Lugano, _Saturday, 14th August_, 1869.

     "My Dearest Mother,

     "Yesterday--exactly three months from the day on which I entered
     Verona to begin work, I made a concluding sketch of the old
     Broletto of Como, which I drew first for the 7 lamps[20]--I know
     not how many years ago,--and left Italy, for this time--having been
     entirely well and strong every day of my quarter of a year's
     sojourn there.

     [Footnote 20: "Stones of Venice," Vol. I., plate 5.]

     "This morning, before breakfast, I was sitting for the first time
     before Luini's Crucifixion: for all religious-art qualities the
     greatest picture south of the Alps--or rather, in Europe.

     "And just after breakfast I got a telegram from my cousin George
     announcing that I am Professor of Art--the first--at the University
     of Oxford.

     "Which will give me as much power as I can well use--and would have
     given pleasure to my poor father--and therefore to me--once.... It
     will make no difference in my general plans, about travel, etc. I
     shall think quietly of it as I drive up towards St. Gothard to-day.

     "Ever, my dearest mother, ever your loving son,

     "J. Ruskin."

Six years earlier, while being examined before the Royal Academy
commission, he had been asked: "Has it ever struck you that it would be
advantageous to art if there were at the universities professors of art
who might give lectures and give instruction to young men who might
desire to avail themselves of it, as you have lectures on geology and
botany?" To which he had replied: "Yes, assuredly. The want of interest
on the part of the upper classes in art has been very much at the bottom
of the abuses which have crept into all systems of education connected
with it. If the upper classes could only be interested in it by being
led into it when young, a great improvement might be looked for,
therefore I feel the expediency of such an addition to the education of
our universities." His interest in the first phase of University
Extension, and his gifts of Turners to Oxford and Cambridge, had shown
that he was ready to go out of his way to help in the cause he had
promoted. His former works on art, and reputation as a critic, pointed
to him as the best qualified man in the country for such a post. He had
been asked by his Oxford friends, who were many and influential, to
stand for the Professorship of Poetry, three years earlier. There was no
doubt that the election would be a popular one, and creditable to the
University. On the other hand, Ruskin as Professor would have a certain
sanction for his teaching, he believed; the title and the salary of £358
a year were hardly an object to him; but the position, as accredited
lecturer and authorised instructor of youth, opened up new vistas of
usefulness, new worlds of work to conquer; and he accepted the
invitation. On August 10th he was elected Slade Professor.

He returned home by the end of August to prepare himself for his new
duties. During the last period he had been giving, on an average, half
a dozen lectures a year, which amply filled his annual volume. Twelve
lectures were required of the professor. Many another man would have
read his twelve lectures and gone his way; but he was not going to work
in that perfunctory manner. He undertook to revise his whole teaching;
to write for his hearers a completely new series of treatises on art,
beginning with first principles and broad generalisations, and
proceeding to the different departments of sculpture, engraving,
landscape-painting and so on; then taking up the history of art:--an
encyclopædic scheme. He took this Oxford work not as a substitute for
other occupation, exonerating him from further claims upon his energy
and time; nor as a bye-play that could be slurred. He tried to do it
thoroughly, and to do it in addition to the various work already in
hand, under which, as it was, he used to break down, yearly, after each
climax of effort.

This autumn and winter, with his first and most important course in
preparation, he was still writing letters to the _Daily Telegraph_;
being begged by Carlyle to come--"the sight of your face will be a
comfort," says the poor old man--and undertaking lectures at the Royal
Artillery Institution, Woolwich, and at the Royal Institution, London.
The Woolwich lecture, given on December 14th, was that added to later
editions of the "Crown of Wild Olive," under the title of "The Future of
England." The other, February 4th, 1870, on "Verona and its Rivers,"
involved not only a lecture on art and history and contemporary
political economy, but an exhibition of the drawings which he and his
assistants had made during the preceding summer.

Four days later he opened a new period in his career with his inaugural
Lecture in the Sheldonian Theatre at Oxford.




