CHAPTER III

THE LIMESTONE ALPS (1863)


Our hermit among the Alps of Savoy differed in one respect from his
predecessors. They, for the most part, saw nothing in the rocks and
stones around them except the prison walls of their seclusion; he could
not be within constant sight of the mountains without thinking over the
wonders of their scenery and structure. And it was well for him that it
could be so. The terrible depression of mind which his social and
philanthropic work had brought on, found a relief in the renewal of his
old mountain-worship. After sending off the last of his _Fraser_ papers,
in which, when the verdict had twice gone against him, he tried to show
cause why sentence should not be passed, the strain was at its severest.
He felt, as few others not directly interested felt, the sufferings of
the outcast in English slums and Savoyard hovels; and heard the cry of
the oppressed in Poland and in Italy: and he had been silenced. What
could he do but, as he said in the letters to Norton, "lay his head to
the very ground," and try to forget it all among the stones and the
snows?

He wandered about geologizing, and spent a while at Talloires on the
Lake of Annecy, where the old Abbey had been turned into an inn, and one
slept in a monk's cell and meditated in the cloister of the monastery,
St. Bernard of Menthon's memory haunting the place, and St. Germain's
cave close by in the rocks above. At the end of May he came back to
England, and was invited to lecture again at the Royal Institution. The
subject he chose was "The Stratified Alps of Savoy."

At that time many distinguished foreign geologists were working at the
Alps; but little of conclusive importance had been published, except in
papers embedded in Transactions of various societies. Professor Alphonse
Favre's great work did not appear until 1867, and the "Mechanismus der
Gebirgsbildung" of Professor Heim not till 1878; so that for an English
public the subject was a fresh one. To Ruskin it was familiar: he had
been elected a Fellow of the Geological Society in 1840, at the age of
twenty-one; he had worked through Savoy with his Saussure in hand nearly
thirty years before, and, many a time since that, had spent the
intervals of literary business in rambling and climbing with the hammer
and note-book. In the field he had compared Studer's meagre sections,
and consulted the available authorities on physical geology, though he
had never entered upon the more popular sister-science of palaeontology.
He left the determination of strata to specialists: his interest was
fixed on the structure of mountains--the relation of geology to scenery;
a question upon which he had some right to be heard, as knowing more
about scenery than most geologists, and more about geology than most
artists.

As examples of Savoy mountains this lecture described in detail the
Salève, on which he had been living for two winters, and the Brezon, the
top of which he had tried to buy from the commune of Bonneville--one of
his many plans for settling among the Alps. The commune thought he had
found a gold-mine up there, and raised the price out of all reason.
Other attempts to make a home in the châteaux or chalets of Savoy were
foiled, or abandoned, like his earlier idea to live in Venice. But his
scrambles on the Salève led him to hesitate in accepting the explanation
given by Alphonse Favre of the curious north-west face of steeply
inclined vertical slabs, which he suspected to be created by cleavage,
on the analogy of other Jurassic precipices. The Brezon--_brisant_,
breaking wave--he took as type of the billowy form of limestone Alps in
general, and his analysis of it was serviceable and substantially
correct.

This lecture was followed in 1864 by desultory correspondence with Mr.
Jukes and others in _The Reader_, in which he merely restated his
conclusions, too slightly to convince. Had he devoted himself to a
thorough examination of the subject--but this is in the region of what
might have been. He was more seriously engaged in other pursuits, of
more immediate importance. Three days after his lecture he was being
examined before the Royal Academy Commission, and after a short summer
visit to various friends in the north of England, he set out again for
the Alps, partly to study the geology of Chamouni and North Switzerland,
partly to continue his drawings of Swiss towns at Baden and Lauffenburg,
with his pupil John Bunney. But even there the burden of his real
mission could not be shaken off, and though again seeking health and a
quiet mind, he could not quite keep silence, but wrote letters to
English newspapers on the depreciation of gold (repeating his theory of
currency), and on the wrongs of Poland and Italy; and he put together
more papers, not then published, in continuation of his "Munera
Pulveris."

Since about 1850, Carlyle had been gradually becoming more and more
friendly with John Ruskin; and now that this social and economical work
had been taken up, he began to have a real esteem for him, though always
with a patronizing tone, which the younger man's open and confessed
discipleship accepted and encouraged. This letter especially shows both
men in an unaccustomed light: Ruskin, hating tobacco, sends his "master"
cigars; Carlyle, hating cant, replies rather in the tone of the
temperance advocate, taking a little wine for his stomach's sake:


     "CHELSEA, 22 _Feby_, 1865

     "DEAR RUSKIN,

     "You have sent me a munificent Box of Cigars; for wh'h what can I
     say in ans'r? It makes me both sad and glad. _Ay de mi._

    "We are such stuff,
    Gone with a puff--Then
    think, and smoke Tobacco!'

     "The Wife also has had her Flowers; and a letter wh'h has charmed
     the female mind. You forgot only the first chapter of
     'Aglaia';--don't forget; and be a good boy for the future.

     "The Geology Book wasn't _Jukes_; I found it again in the
     Magazine,--reviewed there: 'Phillips,'[9] is there such a name? It
     has ag'n escaped me. I have a notion to come out actually some day
     soon; and take a serious Lecture from you on what you really know,
     and can give me some intelligible outline of, ab't the
     Rocks,--_bones_ of our poor old Mother; wh'h have always been
     venerable and strange to me. Next to nothing of rational could I
     ever learn of the subject....

     [Footnote 9: "Jukes,"--Mr. J.B. Jukes, F.R.S., with whom Ruskin had
     been discussing in _The Reader_. "Phillips," the Oxford Professor
     of Geology, and a friend of Ruskin's.]

     "Yours ever,

     "T. CARLYLE."




