BOOK IV

PROFESSOR AND PROPHET (1870-1900)




CHAPTER I

FIRST OXFORD LECTURES (1870-1871)


On Tuesday, 8th February, 1870, the Slade Professor's lecture-room was
crowded to over-flowing with members of the University, old and young,
and their friends, who flocked to hear, and to see, the author of
"Modern Painters." The place was densely packed long before the time;
the ante-rooms were filled with personal friends, hoping for some corner
to be found them at the eleventh hour; the doors were blocked open, and
besieged outside by a disappointed multitude.

Professorial lectures are not usually matters of great excitement: it
does not often happen that the accommodation is found inadequate. After
some hasty arrangements Sir Henry Acland pushed his way to the table,
announced that it was impossible for the lecture to be held in that
place, and begged the audience to adjourn to the Sheldonian Theatre. At
last, welcomed by all Oxford, the Slade Professor appeared, to deliver
his inaugural address.[21]

[Footnote 21: The inaugural course was given Feb. 8, 16, 23; March 3, 9,
16 and 23, 1870.]

It was not strictly academic, the way he used to come in, with a little
following of familiars and assistants,--exchange recognition with
friends in the audience, arrange the objects he had brought to
show,--fling off his long sleeved Master's gown, and plunge into his
discourse. His manner of delivery had not altered much since the time of
the Edinburgh Lectures. He used to begin by reading, in his curious
intonation, the carefully-written passages of rhetoric, which usually
occupied only about the half of his hour. By-and-by he would break off,
and with quite another air extemporise the liveliest interpolations,
describing his diagrams or specimens, restating his arguments,
re-enforcing his appeal. His voice, till then artificially cadenced,
suddenly became vivacious; his gestures, at first constrained, became
dramatic. He used to act his subject, apparently without premeditated
art, in the liveliest pantomime. He had no power of voice-mimicry, and
none of the ordinary gifts of the actor. A tall and slim figure, not yet
shortened from its five feet ten or eleven by the habitual stoop, which
ten years later brought him down to less than middle height; a stiff,
blue frock-coat; prominent, half-starched wristbands, and tall collars
of the Gladstonian type; and the bright blue stock which every one knows
for his heraldic bearing: no rings or gewgaws, but a long thin gold
chain to his watch:--plain old-English gentleman, neither fashionable
bourgeois nor artistic mountebank.

But he gave himself over to his subject with such unreserved intensity
of imaginative power, he felt so vividly and spoke so from the heart,
that he became whatever he talked about, never heeding his professorial
dignity, and never doubting the sympathy of his audience. Lecturing on
birds, he strutted like the chough, made himself wings like the swallow;
he was for the moment a cat, when he explained (not "in scorn") that
engraving was the "art of scratch." If it had been an affectation of
theatric display, we "emancipated school-boys," as the Master of
University used to call us, would have seen through it at once, and
scorned him. But it was so evidently the expression of his intense
eagerness for his subject, so palpably true to his purpose, and he so
carried his hearers with him, that one saw in the grotesque of the
performance only the guarantee of sincerity.

If one wanted more proof of that, there was his face, still
young-looking and beardless; made for expression, and sensitive to every
change of emotion. A long head, with enormous capacity of brain, veiled
by thick wavy hair, not affectedly lengthy but as abundant as ever, and
darkened into a deep brown, without a trace of grey; and short, light
whiskers growing high over his cheeks. A forehead not on the model of
the heroic type, but as if the sculptor had heaped his clay in handfuls
over the eyebrows, and then heaped more. A big nose, aquiline, and broad
at the base, with great thoroughbred nostrils and the "septum" between
them thin and deeply depressed; and there was a turn down at the corners
of the mouth, and a breadth of lower lip, that reminded one of his
Verona griffin, half eagle, half lion; Scotch in original type, and
suggesting a side to his character not all milk and roses. And under
shaggy eyebrows, ever so far behind, the fieriest blue eyes, that
changed with changing expression, from grave to gay, from lively to
severe; that riveted you, magnetised you, seemed to look through you and
read your soul; and indeed, when they lighted on you, you felt you had a
soul of a sort. What they really saw is a mystery. Some who had not
persuaded them to see as others see, maintained that they only saw what
they looked for; others, who had successfully deceived them, that they
saw nothing. No doubt they might be deceived; but I know now that they
often took far shrewder measurements of men--I do not say of women--than
anybody suspected.

For the Inaugural Course, he was, so to speak, on his best behaviour,
guarding against too hasty expression of individuality. He read careful
orations, stating his maturest views on the general theory of art, in
picked language, suited to the academic position. The little volume is
not discursive or entertaining, like "Modern Painters," and contains no
pictures either with pen or pencil; but it is crammed full of thought,
and of the results of thought.

The Slade Professor was also expected to organise and superintend the
teaching of drawing; and his first words in the first lecture expressed
the hope that he would be able to introduce some serious study of Art
into the University, which, he thought, would be a step towards
realising some of his ideals of education. He had long felt that mere
talking about Art was a makeshift, and that no real insight could be got
into the subject without actual and practical dealing with it. He found
a South Kensington School in existence at Oxford, with an able master,
Mr. Alexander Macdonald; and though he did not entirely approve of the
methods in use, tried to make the best of the materials to his hand,
accepting but enlarging the scope of the system. The South Kensington
method had been devised for industrial designing, primarily; Ruskin's
desire was to get undergraduates to take up a wider subject, to
familiarise themselves with the technical excellences of the great
masters, to study nature, and the different processes of art,--drawing,
painting and some forms of decorative work, such as, in especial,
goldsmiths' work, out of which the Florentine school had sprung. He did
not wish to train artists, but, as before in the Working Men's College,
to cultivate the habit of mind that looks at nature and life, not
analytically, as science does, but for the sake of external aspect and
expression. By these means he hoped to breed a race of judicious patrons
and critics, the best service any man can render to the cause of art.

And so he got together a mass of examples in addition to the Turners
which he had already given to the University galleries. He placed in the
school a few pictures by Tintoret, some drawings by Rossetti, Holman
Hunt, and Burne-Jones, and a great number of fine casts and engravings.
He arranged a series of studies by himself and others, as "copies,"
fitted, like the Turners in the National Gallery, with sliding frames
in cabinets for convenient reference and removal. After spending most of
his first Lent Term in this work, he went home for a month to prepare a
catalogue, which was published the same year: the school not being
finally opened until October, 1871. During these first visits to Oxford
he was the guest of Sir Henry Acland; on April 29, 1871, Professor
Ruskin, already honorary student of Christ Church, was elected to an
honorary fellowship at Corpus, and enabled to occupy rooms, vacated by
the Rev. Henry Furneaux, who gave up his fellowship on marrying Mr.
Arthur Severn's twin-sister.[22]

[Footnote 22: His rooms were in Fellows' buildings, No. 2 staircase,
first floor right.]

After this work well begun, he went abroad for a vacation tour with a
party of friends--as in 1866; Lady Trevelyan's sister, Mrs. Hilliard, to
chaperone the same young ladies, and three servants with them. They
started on April 27th; stayed awhile at Meurice's to see Paris; and at
Geneva, to go up the Salève, twice, in bitter black east wind. Then
across the Simplon to Milan. After a month at Venice and Verona, where
he recurred to his scheme against inundation, then ridiculed by _Punch_,
but afterwards taken up seriously by the Italians, they went to
Florence, and met Professor Norton. In the end of June they turned
homewards, by Pisa and Lucca, Milan and Como, and went to visit their
friend Marie of the Giessbach.

At the Giessbach they spent a fortnight, enjoying the July weather and
glorious walks, in the middle of which war was suddenly declared between
Germany and France. The summons of their German waiter to join his
regiment brought the news home to them, as such personal examples do,
more than columns of newspaper print; and as hostilities were rapidly
beginning, Ruskin, with the gloomiest forebodings for the beautiful
country he loved, took his party home straight across France, before the
ways should be closed.

August was a month of feverish suspense to everybody; to no one more
than to Ruskin, who watched the progress of the armies while he worked
day by day at the British Museum preparing lectures for next term.
This was the course on Greek relief-sculpture, published as "Aratra
Pentelici."[23] It was a happy thought to illustrate his subject
from coins, rather than from disputed and mutilated fragments;
and he worked into it his revised theory of the origin of art--not
Schiller's nor Herbert Spencer's, and yet akin to theirs of the
"Spieltrieb,"--involving the notion of doll-play;--man as a child,
re-creating himself, in a double sense; imitating the creation of the
world and really creating a sort of secondary life in his art, to play
with, or to worship. In the last lecture of the series (published
separately) the Professor compared--as the outcome of classic art in
Renaissance times--Michelangelo and Tintoret, greatly to the
disadvantage of Michelangelo. This heresy against a popular creed served
as text for some severe criticism; but as he said in a prefatory note to
the pamphlet, readers "must observe that its business is only to point
out what is to be blamed in Michael Angelo, and that it assumes the fact
of his power to be generally known," and he referred to Mr. Tyrwhitt's
"Lectures on Christian Art" for the opposite side of the question.

[Footnote 23: Delivered Nov. 24, 26, Dec. 1, 3, 8 and 10, 1870.]

Meanwhile the war was raging. Ruskin was asked by his friends to raise
his voice against the ravage of France; but he replied that it was
inevitable. At last, in October, he read how Rosa Bonheur and Edouard
Frère had been permitted to pass through the German lines, and next day
came the news of the bombardment of Strasburg, with anticipations of the
destruction of the Cathedral, library, and picture galleries,
foretelling, as it seemed, the more terrible and irreparable ruin of the
treasure-houses of art in Paris. His heart was with the French, and he
broke silence in the bitterness of his spirit, upbraiding their
disorder and showing how the German success was the victory of "one of
the truest monarchies and schools of honour and obedience yet organised
under heaven." He hoped that Germany, now that she had shown her power,
would withdraw, and demand no indemnity. But that was too much to ask.

Before long Paris itself became the scene of action, and in January 1871
was besieged and bombarded. So much of Ruskin's work and affection had
been given to French Gothic that he could not endure to think of his
beloved Sainte Chapelle as being actually under fire--to say nothing of
the horror of human suffering in a siege. He joined Cardinal (then
Archbishop) Manning, Professor Huxley, Sir John Lubbock and James
Knowles in forming a "Paris Food Fund," which shortly united with the
Lord Mayor's committee for the general relief of the besieged. The day
after writing on the Sainte Chapelle he attended the meeting of the
Mansion House, and gave a subscription of £50. He followed events
anxiously through the storm of the Commune and its fearful ending,
angered at the fratricide and anarchy which no Mansion House help could
avert or repair.

It was no time for talking on art, he felt: instead of the full course,
he could only manage three lectures on landscape, and these not so
completely prepared as to make them ready for printing. Before Christmas
he had been once more to Woolwich, where Colonel Brackenbury invited him
to address the cadets at the prize-giving of the Science and Art
Department, December 13, 1870, in which the Rev. W. Kingsley, an old
friend of Ruskin's and of Turner's, was one of the masters. Two of the
lectures of the "Crown of Wild Olive" had been given there, with more
than usual animation, and enthusiastically received by crowded and
distinguished audiences, among whom was Prince Arthur (the Duke of
Connaught), then at the Royal Military Academy. This time it was the
"Story of Arachne," an address on education and aims in life; opening
with reminiscences of his own childhood, and pleasantly telling the
Greek myths of the spider and the ant, with interpretations for the
times.

In the three lectures on landscape, given January 20, February 9 and 23,
1871, he dwelt on the necessity of human and historic interest in
scenery; and compared Greek "solidity and veracity" with Gothic
"spirituality and mendacity," Greek chiaroscuro and tranquil activity
with Gothic colour and "passionate rest." Botticelli's "Nativity" (now
in the National Gallery) was then being shown at the Old Master's
Exhibition, and Ruskin took it, along with the works of Cima, as a type
of one form of Greek Art.

In April, 1871, his cousin, Miss Agnew, who had been seven years at
Denmark Hill, was married to Mr. Arthur Severn. Ruskin, who had added to
his other work the additional labour of "Fors Clavigera," went for a
summer's change to Matlock. July opened with cold, dry, dark weather,
dangerous for out-of-door sketching. One morning early--for he was
always an early riser--he took a chill while painting a spray of wild
roses before breakfast (the drawing now in the Oxford Schools). He was
already overworked, and it ended in a severe attack of internal
inflammation, which nearly cost him his life. He was a difficult patient
to deal with. The local practitioner who attended him used to tell how
he refused remedies, and in the height of the disease asked what would
be _worst_ for him. He took it; and to everybody's surprise,
recovered.[24]

[Footnote 24: Mrs. Arthur Severn, in a note on the proof, says: "It was
a slice of cold roast beef he hungered for, at Matlock (to our horror,
and dear Lady Mount Temple's, who were nursing him): there was none in
the hotel, and it was late at night; and Albert Goodwin went off to get
some, somewhere, or anywhere. All the hotels were closed; but at last,
at an eating-house in Matlock Bath, he discovered some, and came back
triumphant with it, wrapped up in paper; and J.R. enjoyed his late
supper thoroughly; and though we all waited anxiously till the morning
for the result, it had done no harm! And when he was told pepper was bad
for him, he dredged it freely over his food in defiance! It was directly
after our return to Denmark Hill he got Linton's letter offering him
this place (Brantwood). There are, I believe, ten acres of moor
belonging to Brantwood." Mr. Albert Goodwin, R.W.S., the landscape
painter, travelled, about this time, in Italy with Ruskin.]

During the illness at Matlock his thoughts reverted to the old
"Iteriad" times of forty years before, when he had travelled with his
parents and cousin Mary from that same "New Bath Hotel," where he was
now lying, to the Lakes; and again he wearied for "the heights that look
adown upon the dale. The crags are lone on Coniston." If he could only
lie down there, he said, he should get well again.

He had not fully recovered before he heard that W.J. Linton, the poet
and wood-engraver, wished to sell a house and land at the very place:
£1,500, and it could be his. Without question asked he bought it at
once; and as it would be impossible to lecture at Oxford so soon after
his illness, he set off, before the middle of September, with his
friends the Hilliards to visit his new possession. They found a
rough-cast country cottage, old, damp, decayed; smoky chimneyed and
rat-riddled; but "five acres of rock and moor and streamlet; and," he
wrote, "I think the finest view I know in Cumberland or Lancashire, with
the sunset visible over the same."

The spot was not, even then, without its associations: Gerald Massey the
poet, Linton, and his wife Mrs. Lynn Linton the novelist, Dr. G.W.
Kitchin (Dean of Durham) had lived and worked there, and Linton had
adorned it outside with revolutionary mottoes--"God and the people," and
so on. It had been a favourite point of view of Wordsworth's; his "seat"
was pointed out in the grounds. Tennyson had lived for a while close by:
his "seat," too, was on the hill above Lanehead.

But the cottage needed thorough repair, and that cost more than
rebuilding, not to speak of the additions of later years, which have
ended by making it into a mansion surrounded by a hamlet. And there was
the furnishing; for Denmark Hill, where his mother lived, was still to
be headquarters. Ruskin gave carte-blanche to the London upholsterer
with whom he had been accustomed to deal; and such expensive articles
were sent that when he came down for a month next autumn, he reckoned
that, all included, his country cottage had cost him not less than
£4,000.

But he was not the man to spend on himself without sharing his wealth
with others. On November 22nd, Convocation accepted a gift from the
Slade Professor of £5,000 to endow a mastership of drawing at Oxford, in
addition to the pictures and "copies" placed in the schools; he had set
up a relative in business with £15,000, which was unfortunately lost;
and at Christmas he gave £7,000, the tithe of his remaining capital, to
the St. George's Fund; of which more hereafter.

On November 23rd he was elected Lord Rector of St. Andrew's University,
by 86 votes against 79 for Lord Lytton. After the election it was
discovered that, by the Scottish Universities Act of 1858, no one
holding a professorship at a British University was eligible. Professor
Ruskin was disqualified, and gave no address; and Lord Neaves was chosen
in his place.

Mrs. Ruskin was now ninety years of age; her sight was nearly gone, but
she still retained her powers of mind, and ruled with severe kindliness
her household and her son. Her old servant Anne had died in March. Anne
had nursed John Ruskin as a baby, and had lived with the family ever
since, devoted to them, and ready for any disagreeable task--

"So that she was never quite in her glory," "Præterita" says, "unless
some of us were ill. She had also some parallel speciality for _saying_
disagreeable things, and might be relied upon to give the extremely
darkest view of any subject, before proceeding to ameliorative action
upon it. And she had a very creditable and republican aversion to doing
immediately, or in set terms, as she was bid; so that when my mother and
she got old together, and my mother became very imperative and
particular about having her teacup set on one side of her little round
table, Anne would observantly and punctiliously put it always on the
other: which caused my mother to state to me, every morning after
breakfast, gravely, that if ever a woman in this world was possessed by
the Devil, Anne was that woman."

But this gloomy Calvinism was tempered with a benevolence quite as
uncommon. It was from his parents that Ruskin learned never to turn off
a servant, and the Denmark Hill household was as easy-going as the
legendary "baronial" retinue of the good old times. A young friend asked
Mrs. Ruskin, in a moment of indiscretion, what such a one of the ancient
maids did--for there were several without apparent occupation about the
house. Mrs. Ruskin drew herself up and said, "She, my dear, puts out the
dessert."

And yet, in her blindness, she could read character unhesitatingly. That
was, no doubt, why people feared her. When Mr. Secretary Howell, in the
days when he was still the oracle of the Ruskin-Rossetti circle, had
been regaling them with his wonderful tales, after dinner, she would
throw her netting down and say, "How _can you_ two sit there and listen
to such a pack of lies?" She objected strongly, in these later years, to
the theatre; and when sometimes her son would wish to take a party into
town to see the last new piece, her permission had to be asked, and was
not readily granted, unless to Miss Agnew, who was the ambassadress in
such affairs of diplomacy. But while disapproving of some of his worldly
ways, and convinced that she had too much indulged his childhood, the
old lady loved him with all the intensity of the strange fierce lioness
nature, which only one or two had ever had a glimpse of. And when
(December 5th, 1871) she died, trusting to see her husband again--not to
be near him, not to be so high in heaven but content if she might only
_see_ him, she said--her son was left "with a surprising sense of
loneliness." He had loved her truly, obeyed her strictly and tended her
faithfully; and even yet hardly realized how much she had been to him.
He buried her in his father's grave, and wrote upon it, "Here beside my
father's body I have laid my mother's: nor was dearer earth ever
returned to earth, nor purer life recorded in heaven."




