CHAPTER III

Woman and her Unconscious Impulses


If a healthy child be told to sit still for a long time at a stretch,
the chances are that it will disobey the order at the end of the first
two minutes.

Likewise, if a rhinoceros be placed in a soft-floored stable, the
chances are that it will very soon plough up the whole of its place of
captivity with its nasal horn.

Other examples can be thought of: the wallowing of ducks, unprovided
with water, in dirty puddles and ditches; the nail exercise of the cat
on the legs of our dining-room tables; and the gnawing away of wood by
white mice in a manner that can in no way effect their escape.

Let me explain some of these examples:

A healthy child—a little boy—is told to sit still. What happens? The
muscles and tissues of his body are well-nourished. In his constitution
there is a reserve of strength which, like the power of a galvanic
battery is seeking an outlet, a method of discharging itself. All his
muscles tell him most emphatically that they _want_ to be moving, that
they want to be actively employed.

Now let us turn to the child’s consciousness and to his brain. Let us
look to see what is happening there. These impatient messages that
are constantly coming up from every nerve and tissue in his body are
registered in the brain, but they do not enter consciousness in their
original form. _Consciousness receives only an interpretation of them._
The child is not really aware of them at all. If you asked him when he
first began to move or fidget: “What is the matter with you?” he would
reply either “I don’t like sitting here” or “I want to go and play.”
Not only is he unconscious of the fact that while he is sitting there
his body is in a state of genuine distress, because of energy seeking
to be discharged, but he would be utterly incapable of using the proper
phraseology to explain his condition, even if he were aware of it. All
he knows, all he is conscious of is this:

(1) _Playing is good fun._

He does not know that the reason why his body insists on moving is that
all his tissues are alive with energy that wants to be used.

(2) _Sitting here is a hopeless bore._

He does not realize that sitting still to a live body in a state of
energetic exuberance is actually painful, and even if he cries from
sheer pain, on this account alone, his consciousness will still say: “I
want to play,” “I don’t want to sit here.” He will never say, “I am in
pain,” or “It hurts not to play.”

Let him get down from his chair and go to play, and in less than a
minute you will probably find him exerting vain efforts to move a huge
stone or a massive log from one place to another. The purpose of the
transposition of this solid and inert mass will be clear neither to you
nor to him; but that is immaterial. His body wants to spend its energy,
and the little boy, therefore, likes moving a large stone or a large
log about. And he will cry or protest violently if you tell him he is
not to do it. He does not know in the least why he wants to do it; he
only knows, for the moment, that moving big stones is good.

_From all this it is clear, not only that the brain’s interpretation of
a bodily state is unreliable as a sign of what is actually proceeding
in that body, but also that it does not always require to be reliable
in order to lead its owner to do the right thing, or to adopt the
proper course of action._

Now let us suppose the same child peevish and irritable. What actually
happens?

Let us look inside his body for a moment! The large intestine is
congested; his bowels have not been properly opened for thirty-six
hours. Last night, owing to this condition, his sleep was restless and
feverish. This morning he has eaten a good breakfast, but he is not so
lively as he was yesterday. Messages are going up to his brain every
second from every tissue in his body. And all these messages say one
and the same thing: “We are not happy: we are not in our usual clean,
healthy condition.” The brain itself, owing perhaps to disordered
circulation, is also a little surcharged with blood; so that, in
addition to the messages of distress that incessantly rise from the
body, it has its own distress.

Now let us turn to the child’s consciousness! What is happening there?
The child is not conscious of all the alarms and signals of distress
coming up from his body; he is not conscious of the pressure of blood
on his brain. All he knows is that he is feeling thoroughly and
utterly discontented. And since his human intelligence tells him that
discontent must have a cause, this cause must be found. An incident at
breakfast soon provides the whole scheme of a convincing cause for his
feeling of distress. His little sister picks up a crumb of his bread
and eats it—an innocent action which, if it had happened yesterday, or
the day before, would only have provoked laughter.

_It is, however, sufficient to provide the badly informed brain
with material for a false interpretation._ The sister’s action is
immediately posited as the cause of his feeling ill at ease, and in
a moment all his body’s angry discontent about its bad condition is
vented against the unfortunate little sister, who is as staggered as
she is hurt by his sudden unaccountable outburst of tears and bitter
words.

In the two examples given, what has been the _unconscious_ motive of
the little boy’s behaviour? In Example 1 it was a reserve of physical
energy that was seeking an outlet—interpreted by the little boy’s
consciousness as a desire to roll a stone or a log as an end in itself.

In Example 2 it was a state of physical depression which, reaching the
lad’s consciousness as a vague discontent, led him to seek its cause.
Thanks to a false interpretation, and still acting quite unconsciously
of the _real_ cause, he flies into a passion with his little sister,
because her taking of his crumb of bread seems to him a sufficient
cause for his discontentedness.

This part of my disquisition on the unconscious, together with what
follows, will do excellent service, if understood, in helping the
reader to see more clearly into the complicated train of consequences
which, as I shall point out later on, in Chapter VIII, lead to most
conjugal differences, and ultimately to Divorce. Irrelevant as the
above examples may seem, therefore, I would ask the reader to endeavour
to make quite sure that he understands the principle they involve;
because much of the lucidity of Chapter VIII will depend upon a
thorough grasp of this principle.

When I speak of people acting in a certain way, or doing otherwise
unaccountable and apparently immoral deeds as the result of a bodily
impulse that they misinterpret, I shall speak of an _unconscious_
motive on their parts. Only in this sense shall I speak of unconscious
motives.

The correlation of bodily equipment and motive or desire, therefore,
must always be kept very carefully in mind if we are to comprehend the
behaviour of our fellows, and of the lower animals.

_An animal that has a horn on its nose, like the rhinoceros, will have
a concomitant desire to use it._ Its motive for using it may be quite
_unconscious_; but that does not matter. The little kitten does not
hate you, or desire to hurt you when it uses its claws on your hands.
It has a bodily part, well supplied with intricate mechanism and
nerves, and it is more than it can do not to use that part.

The impulse coming from a bodily part that cries to be used is
generally misinterpreted. That can be taken as a more or less
universal rule. We have seen how the child, though it acted in the
right way in the first example, was utterly unconscious of the true
springs of its action. But that almost every positive action we perform
in our lives is the outcome of a correlation of our bodily parts
sending commands to our brain, is nevertheless an undeniable fact.

Take, for instance, the man who possesses the happy combination of a
very good eye and an agile, dexterous hand. According to the sort of
environment into which he falls, he may be one of several things—either
an excellent shot and warrior, or an excellent draughtsman, sculptor,
craftsman or painter. The correlation of his bodily parts determines
his desires and consequently his career. His motives throughout may be
unconscious—that is to say, he may be unaware until the end, of the
nature of the forces that actuated him.

Turning now, with these considerations in our mind, to the
contemplation of Woman, what do we find?

We find a creature who stands up to her shoulders in the business of
Life and its multiplication. Artfully contrived and richly equipped for
this business, and with the whole of her trunk and its nervous system
intricately organized for it—so that even in her limbs and the skin
upon them, so that even in her face and the hair on her head one can
detect reverberations, as it were, of the mighty and momentous forces
that irradiate her being—Woman cannot evade the common fate of all
creatures, and cannot help being guided in her conduct rigidly by the
correlation of her bodily parts, any more than all other creatures can.
But her actions and the unconscious motives behind them will be all the
more inevitable, for having such an elaborate, such a purposeful, and
such a deep-seated mechanism as their generator.

Woman’s positiveness to Life, therefore, only amounts to her saying
“Yea” to her bodily impulses, and this she cannot help doing without
entertaining thoughts of self-destruction. And her “Yea” to Life is
more determined, more unswerving, more unrelenting than man’s, in
proportion as she is more thoroughly organized and equipped than he
is for Life’s business. Her “Yea” to Life cannot be changed to “Nay,”
because she is utterly unconscious of it, and is therefore powerless
to change it. She may in a moment of bottomless despair say “Nay”
to herself, when a sufficient number of people, or a sufficiently
important one of many people, has said “Nay” to her; but even then,
she is not saying “Nay” to Life, but “Nay” to the thought of living an
empty life, or no life.[18]

Woman may ultimately marry. But she is already wed when she is born.
She is wed to Life. Life is her taskmaster, and Life is her Lord. I
shall show very soon how she unconsciously acknowledges this sway,
sacrifices herself to it, and immolates herself before it—aye, even
commits adultery for it, lies for it, murders and thieves for it, and
sometimes kills herself for it.

What is man in the presence of this formidable engine of Life’s
purpose? Merely a means that Woman unconsciously exploits while she
consciously imagines that she loves him. What are her children?
Children are the object of her eternally unconscious gratitude, because
they are the product of her healthy functioning, the instruments on
which she has played off the whole gamut of her sensibilities and
sensations.

The hierarchy then reads: (1) Life, (2) Woman, (3) Man. For the present
this will do.

To understand Woman, then, we must first of all think of her as a
creature who is constantly being actuated by the readiness and desire
her bodily equipment feels, to be used, to be made to function, to
exercise its powers. But we must always remember that she is not
aware of the nature of this actuating force, that it is always the
_unconscious motive_ of her actions. We know it must be so; we know it
is so; but we also know that she does not know it.

All her will, all her conduct, all her crimes or great deeds—if she
perpetrate any—must be ascribed to the actuating force of her bodily
equipment; but she will always be aware only of other motives for her
conduct, and her mind will invariably misinterpret the causes of it.

Let me go over the ground I have just covered, in a slightly different
way, in order that I may be quite sure of being understood. All those
who have already thoroughly grasped my point can skip this passage.

If we examine the relation of instinct to will, what do we find it to
be.[19]

An instinct may be understood as a predisposition implanted in a living
creature to act in a certain way prior to experience, or, as a bias
in favour of a certain line of conduct before any knowledge of that
line of conduct or its consequences has been brought clearly to the
conscious mind by individual experiment.

An infant, for instance, has no experience of food and its relation to
the body; it has no experience of anything; but it has a predisposition
to suck, which is the outcome of its bodily condition and ancestral
history at a certain period of its life; and, as far as its early
months are concerned, a child may be said to have an indomitable will
to be suckled or to suck—it will cry violently if this proclivity be
not indulged; its tears and cries will immediately subside if it has
its way.

How does instinct become implanted in a living creature? Instinct may
have two origins: (1) A racial origin, by which I mean that it is the
outcome of an ancestral habit, and constitutes a predisposition to
perform certain actions in a certain way, because of the incalculable
number of times that the ancestors in the same line of descent have
performed them in that way. As an example of this, take the circling
movements of the dog before he lies down. The movements have no purpose
now, because the domestic dog no longer lives in tall grass; but it is
reminiscent of his ancestors’ behaviour for ages, and in this sense may
be called an instinctive action of racial memory. The dog’s will is
bent on performing this unnecessary and now perfectly empty formality,
simply because his ancestors performed it so often in his line of
descent.

(2) A bodily origin, by which I mean that an instinct is the natural
outcome of a certain correlation of organs, bodily parts or weapons,
and the possession of which in itself is sufficient to suggest and to
enforce a certain mode of conduct in their possessor. As an example
of this take the butting or tossing proclivities of the goat and bull
respectively, the clawing of the cat, the burrowing of the mole, etc.
etc. All these activities are the outcome of the possession of certain
organs or bodily parts, that insist upon being used, that cause the
animal to feel ill-adapted and miserable if they cannot function.

What, then, is will?

All will is obviously the power of the instinct that determines conduct
for the moment, for a given period, or, as in some cases, for a
lifetime.

The will of an animal, therefore, is inseparable from the instincts to
which either his racial memory or his bodily parts give rise. For he
will do whatever his most powerful instinct, for the time being, bids
him do.

Let us now turn to man. With Reibmayr let me posit the three
fundamental instincts of man as (1) the Self-preservative Instinct, (2)
the Reproductive Instinct, (3) the Social Instinct.

According to his nature, man has one of these instincts stronger or
weaker than the other two, and this strength or weakness determines his
character, his choice of paths in life and of conduct in life.

Imagine the Self-preservative Instinct superior in power to the other
two, and, like all ambitious men bent only on self-aggrandisement,
he will scout both woman and society at all points where either of
these threatens to make him pay too heavy a toll. Suppose that his
Reproductive Instinct is the most powerful—as was the case with Mark
Antony—and he will be ready to sacrifice society and himself for the
woman he loves. If his Social Instinct leads him—as it lead Napoleon,
Disraeli, Charles I, Strafford, Colbert and others, he will make woman
and self subordinate to society’s claims upon his energies.

His will—that is to say the guiding power directing his conduct—is thus
only the popular term for “leading instinct.”

In men of the Herbert Spencer, Nietzsche, St. Francis of Assisi, John
the Baptist type, the social instinct was so strong that it completely
mastered and sacrificed the other two instincts. Their reproductive
instinct was suppressed and snubbed, and women were scouted by them,
while they considered their self-preservative instinct only in so far
as it assisted them in continuing and prolonging the exercise of their
social instinct. The will in these men resided in their leading social
instinct. It was that which determined their conduct.

In the coward, the anarchist, the deserter, the ambitious upstart
bent only on self-aggrandisement and security, in the unscrupulous
plutocrat, the self-preservative instinct is so strong that woman and
society are sacrificed or ignored, whenever any emergency or dilemma
occurs in which it becomes necessary to sacrifice them for the sake of
self-preservation. Such men’s wills reside entirely in the thought of
their own survival and security, and are determined exclusively by the
self-preservative instinct.

If, now, we ask what is Woman’s will, by what instinct is it
determined?—we are in a position to say at once: Woman’s will, owing to
the very correlation of her bodily parts and the important place the
organs and business of Life’s multiplication hold in her constitution,
is at least likely to have a strong bias or predisposition in favour
of being determined by her reproductive instinct. For the latter is
clearly very strongly implanted in her. The two sources from which
alone instinct can arise, and from which this particular instinct can
draw its strength, are present within her; they are undeniably her
idiosyncracy, and they are: (1) Racial memory (her women ancestors for
millions of generations, with the same organs as she possesses, having
performed all the functions of conception, parturition, and the rearing
of children more or less successfully, otherwise she herself would not
be there) and (2) the correlation of bodily parts (her body having
the full equipment for reproduction, which must crave the exercise of
its functions and suggest its use, if that equipment be healthy and
well-formed).

You may suggest that the same holds good of man. As a matter of fact,
it does not. Because in man there is some doubt, some uncertainty as
to the bias, as to the prejudice, suggested by his bodily parts. If
in man the organs concerned with Life’s multiplication held the same
predominant place as they do in woman, the same would certainly hold
good of him. But it is obvious that this is not the case. The case is
rather the reverse.

It is because of woman’s elaborate and extensive equipment precisely
for the business of Life’s multiplication, that we are justified in
suspecting that her will is likely to reside in this equipment, or
rather in the instinct that springs and takes its strength from it. We
are justified in suspecting this, on the same principle as that which
justifies us in suspecting that the will of the mole is determined by
its forelegs and general correlation of bodily parts.

_Provided she be healthy and well-formed_, then Woman’s will cannot
help being determined by the paramount equipment of sex in her body,
from which arises the reproductive instinct. Her social instinct
will be subservient, docile, ready to retreat before its master the
reproductive instinct on all occasions. The self-preservative instinct,
too, save when she is with child, will be limited by and associated
with the reproductive.

And all this will be so much Woman herself, so much part of her
essential being, that she will not be aware of it, _and while her
reproductive instinct will guide her, she herself will misinterpret
its promptings while doing its bidding_. So much so, indeed, will
she misinterpret its promptings, and her unconsciousness will be so
profound, so genuine, so unpretended, and so impenetrable, that it will
deceive even the spectator himself, even the contemplator and observer
of Woman.

If she has virtues, they will be offshoots from the reproductive
instinct; her vices will be the same. Her immorality, if she be capable
of it, will be Life’s immorality, vital immorality, positive immorality.

But what is most important in understanding Woman is, I repeat, her
inevitable mental misinterpretation of these phenomena. Weininger’s
book is wrong, weak, unjust, because he never lays sufficient stress on
this question of the unconscious and its bearing upon the nature and
conduct of Woman. Later on in this book many apparent problems in the
life-conduct of Woman, many of Woman’s apparent crimes, all Woman’s
so-called immorality, will be explained precisely on the basis of her
unconsciousness of the true forces actuating her. There is no other
explanation. There is no other way of understanding these things.

Let me repeat the sort of dialogue I constantly have with the average
man who is in the habit of taking things at their face value.

I. How’s Miss A.?

A.M. Oh, flourishing, thank you!

I. What is she doing now? Is she engaged yet?

A.M. No—not yet.

I. Any prospects?

A.M. None that I am aware of.

I. Where is she?

A.M. She’s attending lectures on Political Economy.

I. Political Economy!—whatever for?

A.M. Oh, she’s a very clever girl, and she’s interested in these
subjects.

I. Let me think!—how old is she?

A.M. Just twenty-three.

I. Well, well! I suppose she will meet plenty of fresh men at the
School of Political Economy, and may find what she wants there.

A.M. Oh, but you misunderstand Miss A. She has no such thought. She
says herself that she is deeply interested in Political Economy.

I. She does not know why she goes to the School of Political Economy;
she imagines it is because she is interested in the subject. But I know
why she goes there. Life sends her there. And even if the only thing
she could learn there were the turning and painting of skittles, she
would be interested in that. Life has found that one environment has
failed to give the girl her primary adaptations, so now it bids her
seek a new environment.

A.M. Oh nonsense!—you always imagine women think of nothing but men.

I. I didn’t say so!

A.M. But you imply it.

I. I. I don’t even imply it.

A.M. You do!

I. On the contrary, I feel quite certain that Miss A. is quite
unconscious of the true nature of the command that sent her to the
School of Political Economy.

At this stage in the dialogue the average man usually shrugs his
shoulders, because he knows nothing of unconscious motives; he knows
nothing of the brain’s misinterpretation of the body’s messages to it,
and the consequence is that he believes honestly in the avowed motive
in people’s conduct always being the real and true one.

But if this were so, women, with their moral upbringing as it is at
present, would be ashamed of doing half they constantly and habitually
do. It is their salvation in the present Puritanical age that their
deepest motives for their actions are not apparent to themselves,
otherwise the more tasteful, the more sensitive among them, would fly
to the nearest cellar for concealment and never show their faces again.

Never accept a Woman’s explanation of the motives actuating her—not
because she is deliberately lying, but because she does not know them:
The motive to her is always the one that is apparent, _the one that is
the outcome of her mind’s misinterpretation of the body’s messages to
it_.

People who say that women deliberately lie in these circumstances
simply do not know the subject, and had better start studying it afresh.

Let us analyse Miss A.’s case. I assume that she is a healthy normal
girl. Her hips are broad, her chest is full, she has been regular
in her periods from her fourteenth year. What is going on inside
her? All this equipment, in perfect working order and vigorously
constituted, has not ceased from signalling to the brain ever more
and more insistently for years: “We are not content; we are idle;
we are _sitting still_; we are not functioning; we are aching from
sitting still.” The brain misinterprets all this straight away, and
transmits it to consciousness as follows: “What a bore life is! _When_
is anything interesting or exciting going to happen? What are all the
men in my circle doing? Why don’t they notice me, or fall in love with
me?” The messages continue persistent, and they are the same as in the
first case, but more emphatic, more urgent. Again the brain transmits
them to consciousness as follows: “What a bore _home_ life is! What a
self-complacent, heedless creature mother is! What a tedious round this
week at home has been! I must go out; I must get away from it! I must
leave home! Couldn’t I study something? Anything that gets me out of
this tiresome futility! Isn’t there a course of something at the School
of Political Economy?” And so on!

In the terms of Life, this means simply: “My present environment is
failing to procure my principal adaptations for me. Life bids me seek
another environment at once.”

_Fidelity to Life in Woman must prevail over every other form of
fidelity._ In order to be _faithful_ to Life and Life’s purpose,
therefore, Miss A. must be _unfaithful_ to her old environment.

But to accuse such a girl of falsehood or dissimulation when she
declares that she is interested in Political Economy, and is pursuing
the study for its own sake, would be the cruellest injustice. Life is
quite unscrupulous in achieving her ends, and if Political Economy can
prove a road to them, why not Political Economy? But the woman is no
more conscious of the fact that Life is secretly directing her, than
the mole is of the reasons why it selects a subterranean life.

Hitherto I have spoken only of the healthy or positive woman. I
must, however, refer to the unhealthy woman; because, unless she is
rejected immediately, as a standard, we shall be utterly misled in our
examination of the true Female attitude.

For the present work, all I shall mean by unhealthy or negative,
will be that condition in which the body may be said to be either
_atonic_—that is to say, lacking in tone, in sanguine vigour—or
unfit, owing to inadequate, arrested or faulty development, for the
performance of its functions.

The fact that Weininger makes no classification of healthy and
unhealthy, but confines himself entirely to the two orders of women
that are either inclined to be male or inclined to be truly female,
vitiates the whole of his argument.

Unless I take into consideration whether a woman is properly equipped
not only with the mechanism but also with the tonality of the mechanism
for her functions, how can I proceed to postulate that she is either
male or female in her physical bias?

We know that the impulse to use an organ normally arises in the organ
itself in a state of health, and that the instincts of a creature have
only the two sources—racial memory and a correlation of organs—from
which they can possibly draw their strength. Suppress the more powerful
of these two sources, the organic impulse, and you cannot help
reducing, depressing, or even totally eliminating the instinct.

An unhealthy woman, in my sense, therefore, will approach maleness
in any case, whether she have male elements in her or not (to recall
Weininger); because with the decline in vigour of her reproductive
instincts consequent upon the atonic condition of her reproductive
organs, the voice of other instincts will make themselves heard, and
she will be less of a woman the more her other instincts dare to
measure themselves against her reproductive instinct.

To me, therefore, Weininger’s classification “Male” and “Female” woman
seems superfluous; it serves no useful purpose—because almost all the
secondary sexual characteristics of the male are rudimentary in woman
and come into prominence when her sex is in abeyance, either through
negativeness, immaturity (childhood), or at the climacteric (late
middle age); besides, even Weininger himself admits that he has “never
yet seen a single woman who was not fundamentally feminine,”[20] and
scores of cases could, moreover, be adduced which show that certain
races have reared women approaching as closely as possible to the
male—the _squaw_, for instance—without having produced _feminine_ males
to couple with them.

How Weininger, by the by, reconciles the opinion just quoted with his
other view, it is not incumbent upon me to say. His book is so full of
shallow conclusions, contradictions and superficial judgments, that it
is difficult to understand how it was ever taken seriously.

The relation of the unhealthy woman to Life, then, is rather that
of the renegade, of the atheist, of the infidel, towards his native
religion. She will not hanker after the business of Life and its
multiplication. Her Will will not reside in her reproductive instinct.
And this is what goes on in her mind:

(We are now inside the unhealthy woman’s brain.) Messages are being
received from all corners of her body. Her trunk with all its intricate
mechanism for reproduction sends constant signals of no urgency at
all—mere small talk! “We are quite content to be left alone; we are
quite happy sitting still; we are not anxious to have our lot altered
in the least.” The brain misinterprets all this straight away and
transmits these signals to consciousness as follows: “Man and my
supposed fatal relationship to him do not interest me in the least.
I am _above_ sex. I do not even feel a thrill in the presence of the
most virile, most positive male. All this talk about my lot on earth
being the business of Life and its multiplication, is simply nonsense
multiplied _ad infinitum_! I am born for higher things; I have the
instinct of higher things.”

As if there could be anything higher than the purpose of human
life!—Unless, of course, one is of the opinion of Schopenhauer,
Weininger and the rest of that ilk, and disbelieves in the desirability
of prolonging human life on earth.

To us, then, who are positive to Life, and to whom sterility is
therefore a thing to be regretted, deplored, and not admired, as
Weininger admired it; to us, who loathe the infertility of prostitution
and particularly of homosexuality, and who regard such a statement as
that of Weininger’s in regard to the last-named vice[21] as sufficient
not only to condemn a whole book, but a whole man as well: the
unhealthy or negative woman, despite all her superior and overweening
claims, is a subject of repulsion and disgust; and we would give her
a place in society where all her misinterpretations of her condition
would be rendered non-infectious and innocuous.

Unfortunately, what with the influence of Puritanism and its hostility
to sex and to sex-expression, what with the depressing foods and drinks
it has introduced,[22] or whose use it has fostered in the nation,
vitality even among creatures so positive and so vigorously positive as
women, has been greatly reduced and frequently hopelessly impaired; and
particularly in England, negative women, asexual women abound.

If, however, we keep strictly to our positive tenet: “_that all
that is good which is favourable to the best kind of life and its
multiplication_,” we shall have no difficulty in deciding whether this
increase of asexual women is a good or a bad thing; and our judgment
may be accordingly both definite and severe.


FOOTNOTES:

[18] The statistics showing that more women than men commit suicide and
go mad through disappointed love, prove that the importance attached by
women to this rebuff is much greater than that attached to it by men.
See Lombroso and Ferrero’s _La Femme Criminelle et la Prostituée_, pp.
515 and 517.

[19] I have already done this in my _Defence of Aristocracy_; but as
the standpoint is comparatively new, it will bear being related here in
fresh terms.

[20] Op. cit., p. 188.

[21] Op. cit., p. 66: “In the second part of my book, however, I shall
show reasons in favour of the possibility that homosexuality is a
higher form than hetero-sexuality.” See also p. 226, where Weininger
says: “Her position outside the mere preservation of the race, the fact
that she is not merely the channel and the indifferent protector of
the chain of beings that pass through her, place the prostitute, in a
sense, above the mother.”

[22] See my _Defence of Aristocracy_, chapter V.




