CHAPTER IV

 The Positive Man and the Positive Woman


I have spoken about the positive child and its Yea-saying attitude to
Life generally. Now I am going to turn to two creatures, a man and a
girl, who have been fortunate enough to succeed, despite the negative
influence of the age, in growing up to manhood and mature girlhood
without having lost the positive attitude to Life.

Let us consider the positive male first. And I refer to him only
because no book on Woman is complete without a more than passing
reference to her counterpart—Man.

First of all examine his body! It is clear that Life and its business
of multiplication have not nearly so strong, so complete, a hold over
him as they have over Woman. The sphere the business of reproduction,
alone, occupies in his body is limited, comparatively small, and
confined. The part he plays in this business is, moreover, incidental,
transitory, spasmodic. As I have already said, he is an amputation from
Life rather than Life itself; and he returns to Life only at certain
intervals in order, as it were, to pay tribute to her, to enable her
to carry on her grand scheme. When he has paid this tribute at stated
intervals, the fact that he willingly renounces any further concern
in the matter, in fact, with some discontent and sense of surfeit,
turns away as one who does not want to have anything more to do with
it, is proof enough of the relatively small part he plays. For while
he turns away and refreshes his resources by indulging for a space his
two other instincts only—the self-preservative and the social—Woman’s
reproductive work goes silently on and may be truly said never to cease.

In Man, therefore, we must not confound the attitude of positiveness
or yea-saying to Life with positiveness or yea-saying to sex. In Woman
they amount practically to the same thing. Her reproductive instinct
and her yea to Life are inextricably involved. They merge; they are
simply different ways of expressing the same attitude. But in Man there
is a positiveness to sex which is smaller, more fitful, more irregular
than his positiveness to Life. For the latter may last uninterruptedly
throughout his whole existence, whereas the former, as we have seen,
unless he be a mere beast, is moody, transient, intermittent.

Looking upon men from the outside, therefore, we should no more expect
to find their reproductive instinct universally predominant in them,
than the vice of kicking is universally predominant in horses.

We should readily acknowledge that a certain supernormal sexuality
might exist in men of the Mark Antony type, in which the reproductive
instinct prevailed over all others; but we should be forced to conclude
that as a general rule there would be every chance, even in the
healthiest and most normal man, either of the self-preservative or of
the social instinct obtaining the upper hand.

And this indeed is what we find constantly occurs in real life—at least
sufficiently often for us to recognize that the reproductive or sexual
obsession in Man is more or less an exception, or an abnormality.

From the correlation of his bodily parts, then, we cannot deduce a
predominance of the reproductive instinct in Man.

What do we know of his racial memory? What have his ancestors done
and been doing all these years? If we can posit anything absolutely
certain about them it is this, that they have been almost incessantly
concerned with the mastering of Life, and the organization of Man’s
life as a social being. Nothing is more certain than that. Nothing can
be read more clearly in the pages of history. Whereas the reproductive
instinct has formed but a recurring _leit-motif_ of man’s life, his
social instinct, with all that it entailed in the mastery of Nature
and the concomitant organization of man’s life, as a social being, has
constituted the unremitting and endless harmony of his existence.

Whereas, therefore, a woman cannot be positive without being
paramountly sexual, a man who would be paramountly sexual would be
negative to a most important part of his being—his relationship to
Nature, to the mastery of Nature, and therefore to the ordering and
organization of Life, including himself as a social being.

A paramountly sexual man, therefore, is as hostile to Life as the
asexual woman, and just as useless.

When a positive man faces Life with his social instinct keenly
sharpened, his ordering mind becomes creative and his creation is
society. He feels himself above Nature and bends it to his will which
is governed by his social instinct. The stylobate of the ancient Greek
temple, the elevation above the ground of the foundation of the Chêteau
de Versailles—these things are but instances of the unconscious tokens
Man has given all through his career as a rational being, of his
feeling of difference, of distance, from rude uncultured Life. When he
faces Woman, he also faces Life pure and simple, and in exactly the
same spirit. But here his body obtains the mastery, and the creation is
the child.

Nature and Woman, being both different forms of Life unordered and
unarranged, yield to Man’s ordering mastery. They understand it and
follow it, always _provided it understands them_; for, obviously, the
gardener who sought to turn the rose-tree upside down, the cattle
farmer who sought to make the sheep carnivorous, or the social gardener
who sought to convert woman into a sort of non-productive asexual
worker, might certainly come within an ace of success, but would be
equally certain of having consummated the wretchedness if not the death
both of the rose-tree, the sheep and woman respectively.

But when nature is understood it yields cheerfully and eagerly to
Man’s ordering power, although it does so dumbly and inarticulately.
Woman, on the other hand, who is simply nature, Life itself, become
articulate, does so admiringly, cheerfully, happily and consciously.

The positive man, therefore, is positive to three things; Society,
self-preservation, and Woman. He cannot be wholly positive if he lack
any one of these attitudes; and those men who have maintained all these
attitudes with dignity and _creative_ success, have been the only
truly great men of history. Others are simply specialists, cripples,
deformities or nonentities. Of course, for a man to be positive to
Woman it is not necessary that he should actually have had a child from
her. Circumstances may have been hostile to this consummating proof of
his sexuality. This is only documentary proof, so to speak, and its
absence does not necessarily argue against his having maintained a
strictly positive attitude towards her and sex all his life.

We must always remember, too, that the complicated and wearing
responsibility that man has always cheerfully undertaken, of ordering
Life and mastering nature, is an arduous and very onerous business, and
that those men who have fulfilled their obligations to their social
instinct most scrupulously and honestly, have frequently come to their
journey’s end without having been able to cast more than a glance of
hearty encouragement and tender affection at the women they passed on
the road, however positive may have been their feelings towards them.

When we see a whole regiment, or two or three regiments, present arms,
or slope arms simultaneously, so that the glint on their rifles seems
like one flash that illuminates the whole multitude in the same second
of time; when we see one policeman suddenly make a clear channel
through the congested traffic of Cheapside, in order that a fire-engine
may dash through to perform its work of rescue; or when we watch the
rhythmic and regular movements of a _corps de ballet_, keeping strict
time with a well-conducted orchestra;—a mysterious thrill passes
through us, a magic breath of cool air seems to lap the lower regions
of our spine, and for some reason which we do not stop to analyse, we
feel uplifted, exalted, in mystic and glowing fusion with something
deep and distant, buried far away in the history of our race.

What is this mysterious thrill, this cold shiver? It is intensely
pleasurable. It is the only purely non-sexual thrill that in any way
approaches the sexual thrill. Its importance, therefore, to us and our
lives must be enormous. For the fact that it is poles asunder from
sexuality, ought to make us see that here we have something, a deep
instinct that is not reproductive, which is capable of feeling immense
bodily pleasure.

As a matter of fact, this cold shiver is one of the most infallible
signs of profound unqualified approval that our body shows. When it is
felt deep down in the back, man may conclude with absolute certainty
that one of the strongest, most vital and most necessary chords of his
nature has been touched and set vibrating. For the fact that it is the
body that speaks here, is, I repeat, a proof that we are concerned
with an instinct, and not with an act of intellect. It is always
possible to make quite sure of this distinction by remembering that
the body never participates in an act of intellect. When the intellect
apprehends anything, the body, remembering its superior rank, and its
superior age, remains coldly distant and unaffected. For the intellect,
as Schopenhauer rightly observed, is the servant of the body, and not
_vice versâ_. And the body does not share either its servant’s triumphs
or pleasures.

Conversely, when the body apprehends something by means of its
instincts, its servant—the intellect—is all agog, intensely interested,
watchful and helpful; the intellect “stands by” and is ready to seek
ways and means by which the body may speedily be guided to the object
of its longing or to the consummation of its desire—no matter what the
instinct be that is providing the momentum.

All bodily thrills, then, are very important; because they signify
that the superior part of one, the older, more traditional, more
unalterable, and more untractable part of one, is gratified,
acquiescent, _deeply approving what happens to be taking place_.

This fact is most significant, particularly in regard to all that is
going to follow in this book.

The thrill of the sexual union is easily explained and disposed of once
and for all:—It is the superior, the oldest, most traditional, and most
unalterable part of us—our body—approving the act of procreation, which
promises a continuation and a multiplication of Life.

Now my claim is that this other thrill, which, in its different way, is
just as pleasurable as the thrill of sexual union, is also an act of
bodily approval—but of what?

Let us consider in what circumstances this thrill is felt. I have said
that it is when we see a large body of troops manœuvring in such a
manner that the movements of the whole multitude are as the movements
of one man. I have said that it is when we see one single man in blue
step into the midst of the torrent of vehicles in Cheapside, put his
hand up, and clear, as if by magic, an open thoroughfare for the
fire-engine to dash through on its mission of mercy and of rescue.
I have said also that it is when we see the rhythmic movements of a
_corps de ballet_ adjusted to perfection to the regular beat of a fine
orchestra.

Now what is common to all these three instances? It is obvious that the
only thing that can be common to them all is the quality of _order_,
the quality which is the result and creation of the _ordering power of
man_. Where this is found in a tangible, forcible, overwhelming form,
the body approves, the body is thrilled. And this thrill is the body’s
exultation over witnessing what from time immemorial must have been one
of the human being’s strongest cravings and deepest faiths,—the faith
in order, in regular arrangement, in the power of ordering confusion;
because such order, such regular arrangement, and such power of
ordering confusion, have always meant greater mastery over nature, over
our foes, over Life in general, and therefore greater security, better
fruit, more happiness, more beauty!

The particular manifestation of order that the body may be witnessing
is immaterial; for it is not the nature of the manifestation, but its
quality of order, that moves and thrills us so deeply, that, perhaps,
in no other moment of our lives—save possibly in sexual union—do we
feel such an exquisite titillation of our nerves and tissues.

This approval, this never-to-be-forgotten chorus of praise that our
old body sings, in spite of ourselves, is the sign that our _social
instinct_[23] feels gratified, feels secure, and in the environment in
which it can thrive; for it is our _social instinct_ that knows how to
appreciate the value of order, how important order is, and how great
were those who first created order out of chaos.

I do not know whether women get this cold shiver down their backs at
the sight of order—I believe they do; in fact I am sure they must:
because, to the extent to which they feel positive to Man and to the
child they must feel positive to the order that makes men and children
possible and safe acquisitions.

Woman’s respect for Man, her whole attitude of awe towards him, must of
necessity fall to pieces when the order which it is his duty to Life to
establish by means of his social instinct, either collapses, or proves
in any way inadequate. Because, although Woman is constantly seeking to
lure Man to specialize in his reproductive instinct, she never respects
the man whom she thus succeeds in forcing to betray his other trusts;
and knows perfectly well, unconsciously, that only that man who remains
positive both to his social and his reproductive instinct, is of any
use to the world and ultimately to her and her child.

For Man to fail in the exercise of his social instinct brings him
into just as bad repute with decent women as when he fails in his
reproductive instinct. Women realize that he cannot be wholly positive
to Life without the exercise of both, and although they may make a mad
and delirious rush into voluptuous pastimes with the man of degenerate
social instincts—as they are doing at present, for instance—the more
far-seeing among them, the more sensitive and apprehensive of their
sex, will have a sense of insecurity and dissatisfaction which will
make them look anxiously around and wonder whether all is well with
Life and the world.

This is not the place to discuss the Woman’s Suffrage Movement; but the
above adumbrates my view of the deepest causes that underlay this most
interesting, most significant and most symptomatic agitation of recent
years. It was by no means the most frivolous, the most superficial, and
the most pretentious women who were militants in this movement. All
frivolous, superficial and pretentious women nowadays are to be found
only shoulder to shoulder with degenerate man wherever and whenever he
is “enjoying himself,” and whiling away his empty existence in a whirl
of still more empty pleasure.

For the present I must proceed with the consideration of Man’s social
instinct in its relation to Woman.

In addition to the task of imposing order on chaos and of creating
the foundations of civilized society, it is the social instinct of
man that has always been responsible for the contriving of all codes
of morality, however diverse, however conflicting. It is the social
instinct in lesser men that keeps them moral. For immorality is, in the
first place, a crime against society.

Social life—and all healthy human life is social life—cannot flourish
unless it is well ordered; unless, that is to say, it follows certain
well chosen rules of conduct, diet, amusement and the like. Where
man’s social instinct begins to decline, therefore, he is not only
ceasing from being positive to social life, but he is actually immoral.
Of all this the best women, the most sensitive women, are vaguely,
unconsciously aware. As the custodians of Life, they cannot respect, or
feel confidence in, men whose social instincts are declining.

By immorality I do not mean that limited, foolishly narrow-minded
notion of the Puritans, which confines itself to the condemnation of
all sexual pleasure. The Puritans themselves were immoral in my sense;
because, they were hostile to life. St. Paul himself was immoral, in
my sense; because, being a celibate, and as good as a monk himself,
he said to the Corinthians: “It is good for a man not to touch a
woman,...[24] For I would that all men were even as I myself[25]....
I say, therefore, to the unmarried and widows, It is good for them if
they abide even as I.”[26] St. Paul was indeed very immoral in my
sense; because when he cast about him for a reason to justify the holy
and sacred union of matrimony, the only one he could find was that it
alleviated a man’s lust.[27] I mean by immorality, as I have already
explained, all those crimes of omission and commission that are hostile
to the best kind of life. Social life cannot continue unless it is well
ordered. Disordered social life is in danger of annihilation: therefore
all those crimes that lead to social disorder as the result of man’s
declining social instinct are, in my sense, immoral.

In Chapter III I showed how predominant the reproductive instinct must
of necessity be in Woman; but I also showed that, owing to her mind’s
constant misinterpretation of bodily messages, it does not follow that
Woman will always be _thinking_ of sex, man and the child, simply
because her body thinks and works round nothing else.

The Positive Woman—the young fully formed girl—is all sex; her body
aspires and yearns for nothing more ardently than the fulfilment of her
destiny; this cannot help being so, and yet what from all appearances
could be more remote, more different from thoughts of sexual relations
and reproduction than the mental preoccupations of the healthy decent
young girl? She could not tell you why she is fond of men’s society.
She knows only that she is fond of it. She could not explain why she
hopes to marry ultimately; she knows her father and mother were married
and that most adults seem to marry, but she has not the faintest
conception of all that this implies. She notices that she has a marked
taste in men—that some men are like wooden images to her, and that
others thrill her through and through; but she is not aware of the
reasons of all this. While, however, the very mystery of these thrills,
the very impenetrability of her likes and dislikes in regard to men,
make her abandon any hope of knowing the why and the wherefore of
these experiences, she is not unfavourably disposed towards them. On
the contrary they interest her and attract her as if magnetically;
while men are the object of her most solemn and most undivided
attention. Occasionally she has a terrible, unutterable dream, the
very recollection of which shocks her for days afterwards; but these
adventures she has in slumber throw no fresh light on her problem for
her; for has she not had the most impossible dreams all her life? Who
is to say that these she is having now are any more reliable than those
she had three, four, five or six years ago,—although the subject of
them is so entirely different? Still, it is all very strange, _very_
strange; and she regards men with perhaps a trifle more penetration on
the morrow, and the day after.

The very positive girl may be timid, in fact is, as a rule, very
timid in the presence of men, and very self-conscious too. Her body
is aware that in this environment it can find its consummation, it
would like to find its consummation, and it is therefore all tense and
braced with excitement—an excitement that the girl herself does not
quite understand, except that it makes her extremely uncomfortable.
And it is the difficulty she feels in overcoming her body’s concern
that constitutes the strain. This difficulty may easily be understood,
however, if we remember that ever since she first became fully
formed, her body has silently, but regularly been preparing for the
consummation of its destiny. Unbeknown to the girl’s consciousness,
though of course she has been aware of the phenomenon, every month Life
has prepared her—her body has dressed itself, so to speak, for the act
that will lead to the consummation of her destiny,—no wonder that after
all these months and years of silent waiting and waiting, and elaborate
and minute preparations for the guest, that there should be some
bustle, some joyful apprehension, when a potential guest is at hand, or
actually waiting. But the mind knows nothing of all this. What in fact
is going on in the girl’s mind?

All this bodily agitation gets telephoned through correctly enough to
the brain; but it is transmitted to consciousness in a form so utterly
garbled and inaccurate, that it becomes unintelligible. Consciously,
the girl only feels uncomfortable, and sometimes so painfully so that
she has to take flight altogether, and retire somewhere alone to
recover her self-possession. Charlotte and Emily Brontë had to avert
their eyes when they passed an attractive man in the street.

You may be quite certain that when a fully formed and decent girl looks
boldly and unmoved (as hundreds do nowadays) into the eyes of men—even
of the most attractive men—her degree of positiveness is very low
indeed, and her body feels very little at all in the presence of the
male sex.

The whole of the above, of course, applies only to the virgin.

There is no true positiveness to the social instinct in the positive
girl. The social instinct’s next finest products,[28] which are the
fine arts, are to her but means to an end—unconscious means to an
end, just as everything else is: the end being the full exercise of
her reproductive instinct. If a girl show a strong desire to play
the violin, to paint or to write, you may feel quite sure these next
finest manifestations of man’s social instinct are attracting her only
temporarily, as extra plumage with which to eclipse her sisters and
friends. And the really positive girl will throw all these accessories
to her bodily charms overboard the moment they have served her purpose.
No admirably positive woman would ever continue the pastimes of
painting, or music, once they had achieved her object for her.

As I suggested in Chapter III, for the social instinct to speak with
even an ever so feeble voice in Woman, it means that some part of
her reproductive instinct has had to stand aside—_ergo_, that her
reproductive instinct is not as strong as it might be, and consequently
that some flaw may be suspected either in her ancestry, or in the tone
or correlation of her bodily parts. If, then, she applies herself to
the fine arts—which are only the next highest bloom of the human social
instinct working for order in expression—she can do so only under
two conditions—(1) At the bidding of her reproductive instinct which
makes her unconsciously adopt one of the arts temporarily as an extra
feather with which to make her a more conspicuous female against the
background formed by her sisters and friends; or (2) at the bidding of
a genuine impulse to art, arising from a real whisper coming direct
from her social instinct—in which case her reproductive instinct may be
considered as imperfect, suspect, lacking in vigour. All positiveness
to the social instinct in Woman, therefore, denotes a decline of Woman
as Woman, a depression in the manifold and exalted virtues, the beauty,
the charm, and the power of Woman as the breeder, the mother, and the
custodian of Life.

Enough has now been said on this subject to leave the reader in no
doubt as to how I distinguish between the Positive Man and the Positive
Woman.

The first must, in order to be whole, be positive both to sex and to
society, through his reproductive and social instincts respectively.

The latter must, in order to be whole, be positive to sex only.

Of course, I need hardly remind the reader that all men, by the
exercise of their social instinct cannot be creative in social order,
or in the fine arts; but the least of them, if their social instinct is
normal, can protect and maintain society by observing its conventions
and rules.

Nor do I wish to imply that, because Woman is now anxious about the
fate of Life and society, she is therefore developing or acquiring new
powers of which neither her female ancestors nor her body can reveal
the generating source. I say only that the most apprehensive and most
sensitive of modern women are losing their faith in man because of
the undoubted decline in his social instinct, and because of their
having become aware of the danger that this entails to Life. I do not
even mean to suggest that what they say on this subject is worthy of a
moment’s attention. It is the fact that they _feel_ the danger, that is
important.

It now remains for me to differentiate between the Positive Man’s
and the Positive Woman’s attitude to the sexual act itself. This is
necessary, in fact indispensable; because upon a proper grasp of this
matter a true and serviceable understanding of Woman largely depends.

I shall deal with Man first.

The Positive Man, who is necessarily the healthy and moral man,
is faced by Woman as a temptation from a few years after puberty,
practically until the end of his life. He is faced by her as a
temptation very much in the same way as the child of my third chapter
was faced by the heavy stone as a temptation. One of the first things
he observes in regard to this temptation, however, is that it is not
continuous, not constant, but intermittent and fitful. It is much more
in the nature of an appetite that can be satisfied and momentarily
stilled, a desire that can be met and gratified, than a need that never
ceases, as for instance the need of air, or of food. What is more,
the very satisfaction it is possible to give it, is the principal
cause of its intermittent character. I do not, myself, believe in any
feeling of disgust or repulsion arising in the male towards the female
after a gratification of the male sexual appetite; I am convinced that
where this occurs it is only the outcome of bestial excess; but I am
certain that the appetite of the male, his desire, undoubtedly can and
does remain quiescent for a space after its gratification, _that it
is possible for him during that quiescent period to act and live in
a way which is absolutely, to all intents and purposes asexual, or
indistinguishable from the asexual life_.

The fact that the sexual act alone constitutes the whole of man’s
share, the whole of his desire, and the whole of his physical
concern, in regard to reproduction, and that for a space after its
accomplishment he may be regarded as practically asexual, is so
important in the understanding of Man’s attitude and his duty both to
the world, to Life, and to Woman, that it cannot be too thoroughly
understood.

It is the fitful nature of Man’s sexual Life, the _crescendo_
and _diminuendo_ of his desire, that constitutes its principal
characteristic. From the moment he rises from the couch—not refreshed,
but having rejoined the continuous stream of Life for a moment, only to
pay it tribute—he becomes for a while purely social, purely asexual,
turning his mind to other matters, _pleased_ to turn his mind to other
matters, and retaining the woman who is his mate, _no longer from pure
desire_ (let all women thoroughly grasp this), but from pure morality,
pure sociability;—aye! and supporting her children too, no longer as
a sexual accomplice or confederate, but as a social agent, prompted
thereto by his social instinct.

This state of asexuality, or pure sociability, lasts until the next
longing for the stream of Life seizes him once more; but even then
again, it is his social instinct that guides him in the way in which
he should gratify it, and the way he should meet the responsibilities
arising from having gratified it.

One can recognize immediately the man with a normally developed social
instinct (just as one can recognize immediately a well-developed social
community) by the strictness with which his fitfulness in regard to sex
is not allowed to work havoc among his female acquaintances generally,
or to make him neglectful of the responsibilities it imposes.

For, it should always be remembered that to the positive man,
well-built and well-fed, the sexual longing is sometimes the most
intolerable anguish, the most acute and importunate suffering, and its
gratification a thing which for the moment appears fraught with such
unspeakable, such ecstatic joy and delight, that to think of subsequent
responsibilities here, to dwell on subsequent duties here, denotes
a degree of social instinct that is far beyond the measure usually
supposed to be possessed by even the civilized individual. During the
moment of crisis, at its most acute stage, the only object that seems
desirable, reasonable, possible, the only prize that seems worth while,
is—gratification, satisfaction, in fact the willing Woman; even if
damnation loom threateningly behind her, even if death stand waiting at
the end!

Who has felt this and not marvelled at the fact that Man was ever able
to build up a _possible_ human society! Who has felt this and not
learnt thereby to admire and respect Man’s social instinct, which was
able, out of this fierce and tremendous passion to construct a scheme
whereby he who felt it took upon himself the responsibilities arising
from its very gratification![29]

No wonder a cold shiver of exquisite and mysterious pleasure courses
down our backs whenever we are in the presence of a masterful example
of Man’s order! What triumphs of the past that cold shiver remembers,
which we are at a loss to recall, but which we still unconsciously
applaud every time the regular movements of a multitude, the measured
strains of a rich melody, or the swing and stride of a _corps de
ballet_ appear before our eyes! For these are but the outward, visible,
tangible and most obvious examples of Man’s social instinct working for
order!

Powerful as the sexual passion is in Man, small though intense as is
his share in the joys of reproduction, only think what a powerful force
was required to meet this sexual passion, with any hope of success, in
order to discipline and control it! It had to be a force as great if
not greater than the reproductive instinct itself. And what force is it
in us that gives us a mysterious thrill, so different from, and yet so
subtly akin in bodily strength to the sexual thrill? I have spoken of
this thrill already; it is the cold shiver mentioned in the preceding
paragraph—the cold shiver of the social instinct gratified. This,
then, was the only power in man, that he himself could rally against
his fierce and ungovernable sexual desire; it was the only power that
held anything like a corresponding hold over his body; and he turned
it so successfully against his reproductive instinct, that he taught
the latter its limits, and forced it to accept the responsibilities
its tempestuous ardour involved.[30] This is the only form of
“self-control” that arises from the strength and not from the weakness
of a man.[31]

To return, however, to the question of his attitude to the sexual
act, it is clear that man, once he has risen from the couch, after
gratifying one of his fitful longings, has for the time being _done_
with sex. This is most important. After having rejoined the stream
of Life to pay it tribute, he becomes once more the amputation from
Life, and can turn away from its sexual thraldom until another of his
fitful longings overtakes him.[32] As a well-known French painter once
said to me at a moment when his house was in a turmoil over his wife’s
presenting him with his first child: “_J’y suis pour si peu de chose là
dedans!_”

It is clear, then, that while the joy of sex for man is intense,
immense and indescribably pleasurable—for, in addition to the actual
physical gratification it brings, there is the spiritual ecstasy of
the exercise of power, and power in its most flattering form, i.e.
over another human being—it is all concentrated into a few such brief
moments, into a space so short as to seem ridiculous when the efforts
made to experience it are taken into account. True, it is zenithal,
stupendous, quintessential; but it is perhaps, for that very reason,
short and exquisitely so. It is as if all the qualities of pleasure,
physical and spiritual, had for man been distilled and re-distilled
until they had been reduced to the smallest possible compass, in order
that he might be quickly and sufficiently gratified, and yet not
detained too long from those other duties to Life to which his other
instincts direct him.

And it is precisely this tabloid form of sexual ecstasy that enables
man to know exactly the limits and boundaries of his part in sexual
life. _He knows that there it begins and ends._ It is a definite thing
that he can seek and find. He can be quite conscious about it and _is_
quite conscious about it from the start. It is small enough, short
enough, intense enough, to be grasped and understood by consciousness.
The only things connected with sex that _last_ and _endure_, where man
is concerned, are its responsibilities—and these are, of course, the
very aspects of it that the man with a declining social instinct wishes
to cast off from the problem of sex. That is why the value of a man, as
a man, may almost always be determined by his attitude towards Woman.
The anarchist, the degenerate, loves the prostitute; the true artist,
the sober, healthy citizen loves the mother.[33]

To turn now to the attitude of the Positive Woman to the sexual act,
how very different is the case with her!

Take the little jewel constituting man’s small instant of sexual
ecstasy and beat it out to a length sufficiently great to cover twenty
to thirty months, and sometimes more, and you have its extended and
attenuated equivalent for the female. Until Woman has gathered up
all the experiences that constitute her participation and her share
of pleasure in the sexual act, and which are distributed over the
period above mentioned, her sexual life and the pleasure it brings to
her, cannot be said to be complete. Even the craving for the proper
functioning of her organs and the primary instinct that animates and
actuates her cannot be gratified unless she picks up every one of the
moments strewn over that space of time—unless, that is to say, she
passes through the whole cycle of events and sensations that go to make
up her complete relationship to man and to the child.

To suppose, by a false analogy with man, that sexual union alone,
without its natural results, is going to satisfy Woman’s body, however
much she herself may be deluded into believing it will, is nothing more
nor less than to condone an act of pure cruelty, of savage violence,
against a basic instinct and its elaborate generating mechanism.[34]

As a matter of fact, although Woman means everything to Man’s
sexuality, and is the embodiment of all that his reproductive instinct
can desire, even when it is at its keenest, Man means very little to
Woman. He is, after all, no more than the sparking-plug that sets an
elaborate process going, and the brief moment in which his share in
her business is accomplished, and the incomplete pleasure it affords
her, are ridiculously insignificant when compared with the importance
he himself would fain attach to them. Woman’s supposed devotion to
man, and even her love for him, is therefore much more of an illusion
than Man’s love for Woman. Regarded dispassionately and coolly, Woman’s
love for Man must be more or less of an exaggerated and romantic ideal.
He is merely the first station on a long and delightful journey, in
which the subsequent destination is the chief concern. Of course he may
be desired again as the first station for a second, third, fourth or
fifth journey; but it is always self-deception that induces any woman
to regard a man as more than that, as more final, more satisfying than
that; although utilitarian motives may induce her to exploit and use
his social instinct to the utmost while she is serving nature’s and her
own ends by having children by him.

The only kind of woman to whom Man is everything, is the prostitute,
and I shall show in Chapter IX what a cruel misconception even her
position is.

By the time that man has done his share in the sexual act, therefore,
and that his social instinct _alone_ has taken command of him, bidding
him protect and support his mate, and face the responsibilities that
are coming, the Woman may be said to have only just begun, only
just started on the road. Silently, secretly, but with vigorous
determination, the reproductive instinct still reigns supreme, and has
an enormous amount to do—pleasures and pain to bring and to forget,
power to confer and to withhold.

This is as important as it seems generally to be misunderstood; and
yet its non-acceptance as a principle is the source of more than
three-quarters of the crimes that are committed against and by women in
the whole of the modern world.

Unfortunately, positive Woman herself does not come forward with any
help here. Because positive Woman—sometimes even when she is married—is
completely unconscious of what is necessary in order for her to have a
complete and full sexual experience. _All positive women are in the
first place positive to men, and to men alone._ This cannot be helped,
as I shall explain later; it is one of the inevitable consequences
of Woman’s universal unconsciousness. But how easy is the step from
positiveness to men to exclusive positiveness to sexual union alone,
only those women who have experienced it can tell! And this fatal step
is taken by thousands of women annually—particularly in France, and it
is a step taken by all prostitutes.

It is, of course, physical anguish for the woman. Her body suffers;
because all the necessary subsequent stages of the sexual cycle are
omitted: the period of gestation; parturition; suckling, when the
mother’s power reaches its zenith, and when the soft helpless creature
in her arms offers exquisite flattery to every fibre, both mental and
physical, in her body. All this, until the actual day of weaning, comes
strictly within the cycle of Woman’s complete sexual experience. To
suppose that the mere act of sexual union, which is the first step in
this cycle, is sufficient or adequate in the case of Woman, especially
positive Woman, is to court disaster, it is to violate her deepest
craving. She does not know this. How many millions of women have lived
and died sufferers through not knowing this!

But those who profit from her unconsciousness in this matter, those who
trade upon her apparent inability to understand her body’s demands in
this matter, those, in short, who while debasing her from her exalted
position of the mother of Life to a mere instrument of pleasure, also
rob her of her full and complete sexual experience and its quota of
pleasure, are in my opinion no better than barbarians, troglodytes,
common whoreson knaves! Many thousands of them get punished quite
soundly enough, as I shall show in Part II; but how many thousands get
off scot free!

The Positive Woman, although she does not know it, must be and is
positive to the whole cycle of female sexual experiences. Her body
knows nothing else and craves for nothing else. It is true that her
body bids her seek the male alone (consciously), but merely because if
it were not for man’s diabolical skill and craft, this attitude would
perforce lead to the natural and inevitable results. The body, however,
knows nothing of the interception of the male fructifying element;
when, therefore, it drives woman to be positive at first to man alone,
it does the right thing; it does all it can be expected to do. It
forces woman to the first step which, as far as it is aware, will lead
to the inevitable cycle. Contraceptives obviously cannot come into its
purview.

That is why positive woman is conscious only of desiring the male,
while her body insists blindly on obtaining the whole cycle.

No young virgin who craves for children, or for a child of her own,
is really sincere. Such a desire never reaches consciousness from the
body. In fact the girls that make the best mothers are frequently
absurdly impatient with and intolerant of other people’s children. My
mother always told me that before she had her first child she took no
keen interest in children whatsoever. A positive girl may be fond of
children, and kind to children; but she is _consciously positive to
man only_. It is only natural that she should be so. The body knows of
no royal road to the love and possession of offspring save through the
portals of sexual life. Very often, however, a very positive girl will,
from mere bashfulness or decency, express her strong desire for man
by what she conceives to be a more polite and more euphemistic way of
revealing it, and will tell you that she longs for a child. This should
deceive no one. It is either a pose on her part, or a very transparent
disguise of her genuine feeling.

Although, therefore, we may again be deceived, and frequently are
deceived, by Woman’s double life—the unconscious life her body leads
with all its determined aspirations and desires constantly directing
her footsteps, and the mental or conscious life she leads, which
frequently has not the smallest bearing on the true aims of the
body, and as often misinterprets these aims—we cannot help admitting,
notwithstanding, that positive Woman, though she appears to be, and
will declare she is, positive to man and the sexual union alone, must
unconsciously be positive to the whole cycle constituting the female
sexual experience, _including particularly those long months spent with
the child alone_.

The prostitute, therefore, is merely a positive woman whom unfortunate
circumstances have conspired to petrify and confirm in her
misunderstanding of her true needs and desires.

The important bearing this admission has on the subsequent chapters
of this book, emboldens me to urge the reader to bear it well in mind
from now onwards; for, simple as it seems in its baldest statement, it
clears up so many of the apparent complications of practical sexual
life, that unless it be properly grasped and remembered now it may in
itself appear complicated before my task is done.

I have but one more remark to make on positive Woman’s attitude to
the sexual act, and with it I shall draw this necessary but delicate
discussion to a close.

After admitting that she, or rather her body, pronounces it, alone,
inadequate, insufficient, why do I assume that though she consciously
craves for it alone, she unconsciously craves for the whole cycle?

As I have pointed out, it is possible for man to recognize the limits,
the full extent of his momentary participation in the business of
procreation. It is short, intense, tangible. But think of the host of
accidents, unexpected joys and pains that may attend an experience
lasting eighteen to twenty months! How could that possibly be grasped
by the body, let alone the mind, as a definite desire! Prophetic power
would have to enter into consciousness as well as into the body, in
order to distil from this panorama of events anything so delicate and
unequivocal as a desire for a pleasurable experience! It is impossible
for the young girl consciously to desire _all_ the events of these
fateful eighteen to twenty months, however much her body may insist
upon having them, and complain and murmur if it does not get them.

Personally I am convinced, from my knowledge of the healthy well-built
and positive mothers I have known, that once the joys of these eighteen
to twenty months have been experienced, they are _consciously_ desired
again. As, however, such mothers are, as a rule, not very communicative
concerning the precise nature and degree of these joys, but secretly
hug them all through their lives as something precious and private that
elevates them and differentiates them from the rest of mankind, a girl
can scarcely be expected to know about them secondhand, nor can she be
blamed for not finding out about them.

Have you ever injured or harmed, even by accident, a child that
its mother had reared at the breast? Have you ever experienced the
fierce love that immediately flashes out of the mother in the form
of the heartiest and most unjust indignation at your unintentional
trespass? If you know all this, like myself you can entertain no doubts
concerning the untold joys that Woman’s life, alone with the child, can
and often does bring her. To regard her relationship to man (without
its natural consequences) as her sexual consummation, or even as her
sexual pleasure, is, therefore, simply the most crass and most hopeless
form of primitive barbarism.

It is true that, in order to rule man and to get a hold over him,
also with the view of providing herself with an ever-ready means for
creating in him a guilty conscience about her, Woman, in Europe at
least, has grossly misrepresented her attitude to motherhood, and by
concealing its joys and exaggerating its pains as much as possible,
has at last succeeded in making maternity appear a sort of voluntary
self-martyrdom. It should never be forgotten, however, that with
stupid and ill-informed men, woman finds it easy to obtain power and
mastery in this manner; for, if her man be foolish enough to believe
her, it is the best means she has for cowing him. In making him
believe that he gets all the joy and she all the suffering from the
sexual life, she gives him a constant sense of guilt or at least of
indebtedness which makes him submissive. But the whole attitude is of
course pure misrepresentation and fraud. For the very idea that the
performance of a natural function should be so painful as to amount
to an act of “self-sacrifice,” is obvious nonsense. Certainly, when
disease or malformation is present (as it is now in the majority
of cases), maternity is nothing less than a torment; but in such
circumstances, disease or malformation should be pleaded, and not
maternity or matrimony, as the cause of the trouble. A man coupled to
a wife who moans and groans over maternity, should realize that he
has been guilty of a fundamental mistake in taste, that he has chosen
an inferior woman, and should blame himself, his upbringing, and his
general notions about life, for the trouble maternity brings into his
household. But he should not let himself be persuaded that because his
inferior woman suffers over a perfectly normal function, that therefore
all maternity is “self-sacrifice” and “unselfishness.” There could not
be a grosser misunderstanding. Only the sick or badly-formed woman has
any honest right to complain of motherhood; _but she has no right to
motherhood at all_. Motherhood is only “unselfish,” therefore, when
it is unpleasant (i.e. when abnormal conditions prevail); and those
English philosophers who derive altruism from the maternal instinct are
guilty of taking the abnormal as the norm for the basis of their values.

Healthy, honest women will confess that they thoroughly enjoy every
moment of motherhood; but inasmuch as to-day it is the fashion to speak
of self-sacrifice in regard to these functions, they will only admit in
secret, and with the feeling that they are making a guilty admission,
that they have enjoyed them. It has become the custom in modern Europe,
and particularly in England, to represent women as performing some
mysterious personal “sacrifice” in marriage. In all modern novels
and plays this view of women is taken for granted. But it is only
another of the sentimental myths created by modern Western women for
their own ends. Where it is true, it ought to be a subject of shame,
as showing marked physiological inferiority; and where it is not true,
it is never anything more than a hoax for exercising moral power over
a foolish husband. For thousands of men nowadays are convinced that
whether a woman be healthy or unhealthy, well or badly formed, there is
something sweetly and edifyingly “unselfish” about motherhood. Western
Civilization has not produced a greater lie, or a more pernicious
lie than this; for it makes abnormality a virtue, and physiological
inferiority a claim upon our admiration!

Unfortunately the number of women to-day who really do suffer from
maternity shows such a large annual increase, and men’s taste in women
is so much vitiated by ignorance and false values, that the morbid
association of “self-sacrifice” with motherhood is now regarded as
almost inevitable, and doctors who thrive on it are the first to
proclaim it as a necessary and even _natural_ association.


FOOTNOTES:

[23] I feel I must offer some explanation here in regard to the precise
relationship of the social instinct to order. Some will object, and
quite rightly, that all order is not social order, and that all rhythm
is not gregarious rhythm. There is the natural rhythm (and therefore
the natural order) of birds’ songs, of insects’ buzzing, of horses’
and most animals’ movements, of fish in water, of corn waving in the
wind. Whatever be the strength or weakness of our social tendencies,
therefore, we must, as animals, feel instinctively and deeply akin to
the phenomenon of rhythm and its charm. This affinity will reside deep
down in our natures, and will hark back to an age far more remote than
that in which the first human society was formed. All this is perfectly
true. But this very phenomenon of natural rhythm, extended into the
general notion of order, is the only origin to which we can possibly
trace the power of rhythmic or orderly arrangement in the creative
human being. Extended into the notion of order and applied creatively
by a superior human being to Nature, whereby chaos becomes arrangement,
and confusion is unravelled, this rhythm constitutes the birth not only
of all human society, but of each separate civilization that has ever
existed. In this way I conceive of the social instinct having, as a
product of natural rhythm and order, engulfed and absorbed the source
of its existence, in the human kind, and established itself in humanity
as the developed and highly extended form of that source.

[24] 1 Corinthians vii. 1.

[25] _Ibid._, vii. 7.

[26] _Ibid._, vii. 8.

[27] _Ibid._, vii. 9. “But if they cannot contain, let them marry; for
it is better to marry than to burn.”

[28] For the connexion between man’s social instinct and the Arts, see
my Introduction to _The Letters of a Post-Impressionist_ (Constable &
Co., 1912).

[29] I know of only one woman who has recognized this and given man
full credit for his self-mastery in regard to the consequences of his
sexual lust. See Arabella Kenealy (_Op. cit._, pp. 178-9). The passages
are too long to be quoted, but they should be read by all those who may
be tempted to conclude that my views, as expressed above, have been
prompted by masculine bias alone.

[30] See Sir Almroth E. Wright, M.D., F.R.S., _The Unexpurgated Case
against Woman Suffrage_, p. 74, where the author hints at how much
under civilization has been done for women by man.

[31] See also pp. 7, 90-94.

[32] The part played by his self-preservative instinct in all this will
be disclosed in another chapter. See chapter V, pp. 89-90.

[33] Cf. Weininger, Op. cit., p. 227: Where the author disagreeing
with me says: “Great men have always preferred women of the prostitute
type.” It is true that eighteen pages farther on he contradicts
himself by saying of the prostitute: “She is the mate of the worst
sort of men”; but this single example, taken from among the many
equally amazing contradictions in this book, only tends to show its
extraordinary futility.

[34] And yet most of the modern books on sex questions, particularly
those written by women, take this false analogy for granted.




