CHAPTER V

 Virgin Love in the Positive Man and the Positive Girl


The moment when a healthy young man stands for the first time before
a beautiful positive girl, with a full consciousness of what that
girl can and may mean to him, is one of the most trying and most
disconcerting in his whole life.

In plain English, he is standing before Life itself. Life itself is
taking stock of him. Let us be in no doubt here. His eyes may wander,
dazed, over the bewildering spectacle before him; his eyelids may
quiver; he may not understand what his feelings are, or why he feels so
numb and speechless, and breathes so deeply; but he is well aware that
an iron Fate has suddenly seized him like a vice, and is holding him
spellbound before an examiner, who is far more relentless than any he
has hitherto encountered at school or college.

And now turn your eyes on Life itself! Look at the girl! Provided that
he is not watching her too closely, her eyes are scanning every inch
of his body, with a penetration, an attention, a fierce criticism,
that is allowing no detail to escape, no indication of virile potency
to go unnoticed. Her hands may be cold, even moist with emotion; but
Life in her is neither cold nor moist: it is at white heat, working its
hardest, and deciding for her whether it shall be Aye or Nay!

The very speed with which this decision is often made proves how
concentrated, how unrelaxing the scrutiny must be; and however hard
the work that has to be done, it is all over and frequently quite
brilliantly dispatched in a few seconds—a minute at the most!

Aye or Nay! No wonder the youth feels embarrassed! Such an examination
by Life itself is hard to bear. The verdict, too, if it be favourable,
is gratifying. The approval of a positive, healthy, well-built girl
is a certificate of potency; because it is not only Life’s approval
of one of its own products; it is healthy Life acquiescing in one
of its essential means to multiplication. To feel pleased in such
circumstances is perfectly justifiable; to feel satisfied here is
nothing but becoming.

But there is another side to the picture, and I state it now, while
we are discussing this particular situation. There is nothing more
harrowing, more pathetic, more heartrending than to witness poor,
patient and enduring Life, in the form of a beautiful maiden, being
forced by circumstances (by the fact perhaps that this is the girl’s
only chance) to choose the next best, the second best, the third best!
Oh, how she stifles her highest feelings! How she chafes beneath the
yoke! And how ruthlessly Life re-registers upon her eyes all the
defects of her future mate, as fast as she in her positiveness wipes
them away with the impatient sponge of her desire!

That “Yea,” given reluctantly, shamefully, almost guiltily (because
women feel that they are betraying a trust in such circumstances),
in the presence of a poor specimen of manhood,[35] simply because it
is better to be positive to Life, even on a minor scale, than not to
be positive at all!—there is nothing more excruciatingly painful to
witness!

How often this tragic farce is enacted in _our_ part of the world, only
women know, only brave women know—they who prefer anything rather than
not to remain positive to Life.

Unfortunately, it is not unusual nowadays for the positive healthy
girl, particularly of the wealthier classes, to be spoilt by foolish
modern prejudices that misguide her in this first important criticism
of the men with whom she is confronted. From the very atmosphere she
has breathed ever since her infancy, she has imbibed certain wholly
fictitious standards regarding so-called “manliness” which, at this
vital moment in her life, frequently cause her to make the most
grievous mistakes. She has had dinned into her innumerable conventional
desiderata relating to manners, sporting capacities, cheerfulness,
levity, boyishness and bodily build, which now cause her to select
consciously the very kind of man who is least likely to constitute
an understanding and adequate mate. He must possess a certain kind
of mind—supple, ready for light laughter, humorous, not too broody,
not too masterful, not too self-centred, and above all, painstakingly
chivalrous. He must have had his spirit, if not broken, at least
curbed by the public-school system; his self-esteem severely shaken
by excessive contact with mediocrities who have insisted on his being
like one of themselves, and he must have the body and face of a young
athlete. He must be capable of being trusted alone with her on rambles
in the country, at games, on short excursions. He must not take himself
or his claims or his thoughts too seriously, and the _sine qua non_
is that he must be capable of idealizing Woman, of “looking up” to
her, of feeling a lump in his throat at the thought of her purity, her
devotion, her “heroism” as a mother, her condescension as a possible
mate to himself, and her ladyhood.

All these attributes the spoilt positive girl of our wealthier classes
has been taught to seek and select among the young men that are paraded
before her; and in insisting on these attributes, she consistently,
almost without exception, succeeds in taking a man who is ideally
equipped with every possible characteristic for making her thoroughly
and exasperatingly miserable the whole of her life. For very few indeed
of these attributes have any connexion whatsoever with true, desirable
manliness in a mate, and the young man who has been tamed into making
a trustworthy companion to a single positive girl in her games and her
walks, is more often a torture machine than a delight as her husband in
later years.

But let us see what unspoilt Life, through the positive unspoilt girl,
is actually trying to discover in the positive young man before her.
Is she concerned with probing his soul? Does she meditate about his
chances of going to Heaven when he dies? Is she wondering whether he
has a load of sin that weighs him down?—She is very far from giving a
thought to these matters. Her primary consideration is undoubtedly:
Is he a fully equipped male? Is he a normally equipped male? Has he,
above all, that _exuberance_ which at one and the same time is beauty,
sexual potency, and tense passion? Is he savoury?—that is to say,
is he devoid of everything capable of ultimately inspiring disgust?
Classical features are by no means a vital consideration. Exuberance
and savouriness are much more important. Is there fire in his
eyes?—voluptuousness and fullness in his mouth? Is there eagerness and
enthusiasm in the dilatation of his nostrils? Is there energy lurking
in the vibrations of his voice? Is his mouth clean and his breath
pure?—Is there all this, and yet a remoteness from the brute, from the
mere animal into the bargain?

These facts are ascertained in the first few seconds, and all this time
Life alone has been active in criticism. A satisfactory reply to all
these questions makes the young man at once an object of the keenest
interest to the girl, and her eyes now begin, in a more collected and
less rapid manner, to survey the accessory man—his hands, his feet, his
taste as revealed by his clothes, his intelligence as revealed by his
remarks, his degree of mastery as revealed by his manner of approaching
her. All these things are important, because they represent not merely
the “quality” but also the “surviving power” of the tree to which the
female butterfly is going to entrust her eggs.

A sleek, flourishing youth has a tremendous advantage here; because it
is not Woman’s self-preservative instinct that demands the evidence of
a sound worldly position in a man, but again her reproductive instinct
thinking of the security of the coming brood. All this, of course, is
more or less unconscious, but it is satisfactorily accomplished by the
instinct.

A brilliant exuberant youth, who is shabby and poor, is naturally and
very rightly less attractive to the positive girl than the youth who,
though less brilliant, but quite as exuberant, flings on an opulent
fur coat after a champagne supper, and gracefully hands her and her
chaperon into his 40-horse-power Rolls-Royce. This youth is simply
irresistible!

This must be so. Because, although the more brilliant youth may be
an artist, a fascinating poet, or a gifted musician—all these things
belong to the sphere of the social instinct, which Woman can scarcely
appreciate critically, while the flourishing circumstances of the
fur-coated youth belong to the sphere of the reproductive instinct,
since they are one of the necessary conditions of the tree to which the
eggs are going to be entrusted.

Great spiritual gifts, _per se_, never really attract the healthy,
positive girl; the only reason why she so frequently falls in love
with men of great spiritual gifts is because extraordinarily high
sexual exuberance is so often correlated with great spiritual gifts
and powerful creative genius in a young man. In later life, of course,
the relationship changes; because you cannot burn a candle at both
ends, and the man of great spiritual gifts who has cultivated that side
of himself alone, generally suffers a proportionate loss of sexual
exuberance as he advances in years. But in any case, as far as young
men are concerned, the rule holds good that high sexual exuberance is
frequently accompanied by very superior spiritual gifts.

Incidentally, this association always constitutes the most dangerous
and often most disastrous characteristic of the artist’s life. It is a
choice of roads—and frequently the favour he finds with women leads the
young artist inevitably along the road of least resistance and greatest
voluptuousness.

Recalling our positive couple, we will suppose that the youth, in
addition to responding favourably to all the girl’s searching scrutiny,
is also a person of sound material position. Then, when the chorus of
bodily messages to the girl’s brain are unanimous in praising him,
consciousness comes forward with the conclusion: “That man attracts me
or fascinates me!” or “I like that man!” or “That man is a dream!” or
“He’s my ideal!” etc. etc. It is from this moment that the relationship
of virgin love may be said to begin, and if there is a response from
the young man besides—if, that is to say, he also comments favourably
on the girl, then the two may be said to be each other’s destiny; and,
if they are both very positive, and therefore impatient, the sooner
they marry the better.

Many girls are, however, so overwhelmed by spiritual gifts, nowadays,
that the position of the man, his material wealth, is often foolishly
overlooked. On the whole this is not quite the fault of the modern
girl. This Age, for some reason or other, sets enormous store by
spiritual gifts. Girls are brought up in an atmosphere steeped in the
worship of intellect. “Clever”—this is the most coveted adjective. Is
he clever? Is she clever? Very often the most unhappy marriages are
consummated precisely owing to the absurdly exaggerated value that is
attached to cleverness. I do not lose sight of the fact that great
spiritual gifts are frequently accompanied by great sexual exuberance
in a man, and I make allowances for that and for the temptation such a
man may certainly prove to the positive girl; but his spiritual gifts
ought not to be allowed to weigh against his poverty if he be poor,
or his inferiority as an animal, if he have bad teeth, an undersized
and weak frame, a delicate constitution, or foul breath. Only girls,
of course, whose minds have been perverted in this matter, make the
mistake of taking a poor clever man, or an unappetizing clever man,
in preference to a duller though wealthier or more appetizing suitor;
for the instinct of the female when unperverted is to find not only a
secure support for her offspring, but also a mate whom it will at least
not disgust her to embrace.

And, after all, what does this spiritual fascination amount to
for women, apart from its occasional correlation with high sexual
exuberance? If you ask yourself what it is you tire of first in life;
if you inquire to which kind of phenomenon you can relevantly apply
the expression “hackneyed” when you have seen or heard it once too
often—what is your inevitable reply? The word “hackneyed” can be used
relevantly only in regard to products of the spirit. A song, however
beautiful, repeated too often becomes a bore. A picture seen too often
begins to pall. (It is only because we scarcely ever notice with deep
attention the pictures on our walls, that we can endure them. In
time, they form part of the general scheme of decoration.) The finest
poem read too frequently becomes insufferably wearisome; and who can
read even the best novel more than three times? I confess I have read
_Wuthering Heights_ three times; but I doubt whether I could perform
the feat a fourth time. All these things, however, are of the spirit,
products of spiritual gifts. It would not sound strange or irrelevant
to apply the epithet “hackneyed” to any one of them, provided that
their charms had been impressed upon us once too often. This fact alone
should make us suspicious of the spirit as a phenomenon possessing
lasting powers of attraction.

There are, however, other things to which the expression “hackneyed”
could not be relevantly applied. What should we think or say, for
instance, of a visitor, who rising suddenly in the middle of one of
our tea-parties, exclaimed quite gravely that she refused to take
another piece of bread-and-butter for the rest of her life, because
bread-and-butter was “hackneyed.” We should all be astonished, not to
say alarmed. We should suspect her of something a little more serious
than mere eccentricity. But, as a matter of fact, nobody in his senses,
however professedly devoted to the spirit he might be, would ever dream
of saying “bread-and-butter is hackneyed.” It is a thing of the body,
and provided the body remains healthy and exuberant, the pleasures it
provides are _never_ hackneyed. Given a fair appetite and a healthy
digestion, and bread-and-butter will remain a joy for ever. Unlike the
spirit, therefore, which however exuberant and however healthy, wearies
and fatigues if it be called upon to appreciate the same spirit, or
the same product of another spirit too often, the body can enjoy
“bread-and-butter” for threescore years and ten without ever feeling
that it is hackneyed.

This alone ought to make all admirers of “brains” in men pause before
they allow themselves to be so completely dazzled by mere spiritual
brilliance, as to forget other things.—What other things?—Material
position, and that quality which all eminently desirable men have in
common with good bread-and-butter—I refer to _savouriness_.

I know of one very sad case that happened in my own circle. A
well-educated but misguided Swedish girl who while being no fool
herself had the modern exaggerated love for “brains,” happened to meet
a man in Ireland who, though brilliant to the point of genius, was
as unappetizing, as _unsavoury_ as the form of man can possibly be.
I confess to having sat in that man’s company frequently myself, and
having revelled in the easy and fluent flow of his exuberant wit. There
was virtuosity not only in his speech but also in the thoughts behind
his speech. When he met the girl in question she too came under the
spell of his extraordinary intelligence; and, forgetting the rule about
the spirit, and forgetting the quality of good bread-and-butter—for
he was so unsavoury that one could not approach him without becoming
aware of the fact with one’s nostrils, not to speak of one’s eyes—she
worshipped and married him.

It was, of course, a cruel mistake, because marriage from the woman’s
standpoint is a tragedy if she has to smother any loathing in the
embrace. Still, she admired “brains” and she certainly obtained what
she admired. But at what cost! In time, of course, she explored all the
territory of his spirit, and tasted all the delights of his skilful
conceits; and had, no doubt, by a kindly effort of will, prolonged her
enjoyment of these things very far beyond the point at which anyone
else would have tired of them; and then—what was left?—Only boredom
where spiritual intercourse was concerned, and ever-increasing disgust
of all physical intercourse, because of her unfortunate husband’s
eminently unsavoury person.

No truly positive woman, however—particularly if she has remained
uninfected by modern brain-worship—ever takes any notice of a man’s
spiritual gifts, provided that he be savoury, exuberant, and in a sound
material position; and the very fact that she does not do so is a sign
of the wise and penetrating vision of Life behind her. Men have to take
spiritual gifts into consideration in their dealings with one another;
it is essential that they should. They may be pardoned, therefore, if
they all too frequently extend this habit to their relations with the
other sex. But the woman who takes a man for his brains is a ninny, or
else a poor deluded victim of the madness of the Age. All she wants,
I repeat, is exuberance with savouriness and a sound position; and if
brains enter into the bargain as well, they are usually accepted quite
unsuspectingly by the really positive and sane woman as one of those
incidental details concerning her husband which, like his number in
gloves or his taste in ties, she bears in mind simply as part of his
general identity. Truth to tell, however, most women are saved from the
mistake of marrying brains alone, owing to the readiness which most of
them show to impute brains to the dullest male, provided he pleases
them.

This explains why so many wives of gifted men have loved and eloped
with males infinitely inferior to their husbands where brains were
concerned; it also explains why so many wives of gifted men, who have
been faithful, have been bitterly unhappy in their fidelity.

Where the artist is concerned perhaps we might make an exception,
because the artist’s peculiar gifts are so frequently allied with an
exceptionally exuberant sexuality. One German writer has suggested that
the creative power itself is the outcome of an excess of absorbed semen
in the blood. But even the artist’s mental gifts, though correlated
with a quality that is frequently irresistible to women, are an unsound
reason for a girl’s mating with him. All women should remember that
artists cannot marry them without committing adultery. For, if Woman
is wed to Life before she marries, the artist is certainly wed to his
particular muse.

All this the positive girl knows more or less instinctively, because
Life in her knows every word of it. It is only when she has become
infected with the stupid modern worship of brains that her conscious
bias sometimes overrides her better bodily feelings.

But to return to our positive couple—the condition of mutual attraction
in which they now find themselves is one of tremendous fascination,
because it constitutes an enhancement of the feeling of power, and
a deepening of the feeling of surrender. So intense is this feeling
of power and of slavery at the same time, so exquisite is the scale
of emotions that run from the bottom note of absolute subjection to
a human being to the top note of supreme sovereignty over a human
being—so that the girl bids and her bidding is done, and the man bids
and his bidding is done—that it is probably the richest experience,
as spiritual sensations go, that anyone can have. While it is being
undergone the self-preservative instinct of both parties is entirely
suspended. The male’s must be in any case, because no male throughout
the animal kingdom can approach sex without making a substantial
sacrifice in self-preservation. He cannot join the stream of Life
without paying it tribute, and this to begin with is hostile to his
self-preservative instinct inasmuch as it reduces his surviving power
for the time being. But there is this fact in addition: his social
instinct cannot face the responsibilities of a wife and her offspring
unless his self-preservative instinct is prepared to make a good many
reluctant concessions.

The woman, too, readily sacrifices all her self-preservative instinct
to her first-husband Life, and to her second husband, her lover. In
fact, to speak with levity, but with some profound truth as well,
in every respectable love-marriage, the legal husband is the dupe
or breadwinning agent who _keeps_ the girl while she does her first
mate—Life’s business.

Child-birth is not always successful even in the most healthy
communities, and a woman’s reproductive instinct often has to clap its
hand on the mouth of her self-preservative instinct before she can
consent to having a second child.

With the self-preservative instincts both of the man and the girl
in abeyance, then, we have what is always a dramatic situation. We
have a situation in which neither the man nor the girl cares what
happens provided that each can get the other. Pain, hardship, parental
hostility, parental injustice, privation, dangers of all kinds, fire,
water, exile—all these things, even to Death itself, will be faced with
determination by the positive couple who are waiting only to be united,
if only they help a step forward, or put an end for ever to all doubt
and misgivings.

How often in the history of our race have not a chaste and positive
couple, kept apart by unfavourable circumstances and in the midst of
appalling difficulties, whispered to each other passionately: “One
long embrace from you and I should be content to die!” This shows that
the self-preservative instinct is as good as dead in such cases. Dead
in the woman, because when her reproductive instinct is “meaning
business,” nothing else can live beside it; and dead in the man,
because (1) he knows that love and his girl expect him to be determined
and unrelenting in his worship and his desire, and (2) because his very
positiveness itself makes him set the multiplication of Life higher
than his own existence for the time being.

Moreover, when the girl and the man insist upon an attitude of complete
and unreserved “unselfishness” in each other, they are simply betraying
the fact that they expect the self-preservative instinct in each other
to be for the time being in a state of suspended animation. This is
a proof of what they understand by love. As a matter of fact, it is
a proof only of the circumstance that the reproductive instinct is
expected for the moment to become all-powerful or to suppress every
other feeling.

When this state is reached, if the girl has no vigilant protector or
guardian, and the man is not strongly endowed with social instinct,
the result is usually and inevitably seduction, particularly if the
man shows some mastery in sex, and some understanding of it too. And,
indeed, when one considers the forces that are active here; when,
moreover, one considers the temptations that are elevated here to the
_nth_ power, the wonder is not that seduction occasionally occurs among
positive couples, but that it does not always occur, that it is not
the rule. Only man’s social instinct can prevent it. Only man’s social
instinct remains, and is strong enough to prevent it. Do not, however,
let us confound the social instinct of the positive man, which is
strong enough to stand up to his reproductive instinct, to control it,
and to make it wait and consider responsibilities, with the so-called
“self-control” of the negative young man, who could love his negative
girl for half a century without ever desiring more than to squeeze her
pale thin hand, while she feels exactly the same about him.[36]

Of course, in countries like France, where positiveness on both sides
is at such a high pitch of intensity that it actually fills the
atmosphere of every room and makes every mixed company electric, and
also where the social instinct of men is declining more and more every
year, the only possible check on wholesale seductions is a vigilant and
inexorable protector or guardian, who watches over the _jeune fille de
famille_, until she is married, and does so with such unabating zeal
that it can truly be said that a respectable French girl is _always
being watched_.

As a matter of fact, if the same custom of vigilant supervision of the
young girl does not prevail in England, it is a bad rather than a good
sign.

It is a bad sign for the following reasons: (1) It is waived either
because it is a generally recognized thing that the Englishman’s
social instinct is of a higher order than the Frenchman’s (which is
not the case); or (2), because it is a generally recognized fact that
the Englishman is safer, i.e. less inflammable, i.e. less exuberant
sexually, i.e. less positive than the Frenchman (which _is_ the case).

I think it would be hard to prove that the social instinct of the
Englishman is of a higher kind than that of the Frenchman. There is
nothing to show that there is more order in England than in France,
more social harmony, more mastery of social problems. There are
absolutely no grounds whatever for assuming that there is less social
misery in England than in France, less social muddle, less social
strife. Nor if we go to the next highest products of the social
instinct, which are represented by the sense of order manifesting
itself in artistic productions, can we say that there is more Art, or
a higher kind of Art, in England than in France. In fact, if we draw
these comparisons at all, we must in fairness conclude that if there is
any difference, that difference is undoubtedly to the advantage of the
Frenchman. But for the sake of this discussion it is sufficient for me
to assume that the social instincts of the Frenchman and Englishman
respectively are about equal.

Well, then, if this is so, it must be some other circumstance that
accounts for the enormous freedom allowed in this country to the girl
turned sixteen, in her intercourse with men of her own generation and
older.

There can be no doubt that, in the first place, the English girl is
generally a little less positive to Life and therefore to man than
the French girl; this accounts for a good deal. There can be no doubt
either that there is a very much larger sprinkling of negative girls
in England than in France—girls, that is to say, who are happy and
content as spinsters, or whose passions are so tepid as to enable
them to endure platonic relations with men, and to resist men quite
successfully for interminable periods.

A few facts alone, apart from the evidence that can be gathered first
hand by all those who know France and England well, will be sufficient
to prove this.

In 1910, although France had for many years admitted women to the
hospitals, to the Bar and to the chemist’s dispensary, there were out
of a total of 13,000 French doctors only eighty-three women[37]; there
were only two women barristers—one in Paris and one at Toulouse, and
there were only three women chemists—one in Paris and two at Montpelier.

To take the profession of the Bar alone, think how very many more
women-barristers we should have in England in the space of five years
if the Bar had been opened to women!

To point to economic pressure here, and to say that the English girl is
more hard pressed than the French girl, would be entirely false. It is
much more difficult, as a matter of fact, for a French girl than for an
English girl to find a husband.

The truth of the matter is that the French girl is very much more
positive to Life and therefore to man, than the English girl. The
latter can frequently not only be happy without man; but she will boast
of the fact—applaud, that is to say, her negativeness, her nothingness!

I do not say this in any spirit of hostility to the English girl,
because I have travelled England and Scotland, and am aware that
very large numbers of British girls are positive and extremely
positive to Life and to man; it is, however, unfortunately true that
negativeness is on the increase—hence the almost amazing liberty
that is granted, and every year more readily granted, to the English
girl in her intercourse with young men. Were things otherwise, such
liberty would only lead to the most disastrous results; because there
is absolutely no reason whatever to suppose that the Englishman’s
social instinct—which is the only adequate check to an overpowering
reproductive instinct—is superior to that of the Frenchman.

There is, however, another side to the question, and a far more serious
and alarming side. I refer to the almost universal and increasing
negativeness of the English youth and young man. The negativeness among
females in England is as nothing compared with the negativeness to be
found among males—and it is here really and truly that the safety of
the young positive girl lies. Often to her intense annoyance and sorrow
she finds she is dealing with wood and not with vital tissue at all.
It is simply humbug to speak of self-control in such cases. For the
negative young man is nothing more or less than a wet squib—and who
believes in the self-control of a wet squib when it refuses to respond
to the lighted match.[38]

The ravages that Puritanism perpetrated in the human kind—and I have
dwelt sufficiently upon these ravages in another work[39]—affected the
men of England far more deeply than the women; and were in a sense
bound to do so. Men are not Life itself, they are an amputation from
Life. As I have shown, the reproductive instinct is less powerful, less
wilful, more fitful and less persistent in them than in women; how,
then, could they fail to be more disastrously affected by the cruel
repressing and detoning methods of Puritanism than women are? They had
fewer forces to meet and resist the attack; sex held their bodies with
too much laxity to make them survive it completely, and the consequence
is that in England and all countries like England, sexual exuberance
in males—save in the working classes (which are always the last to be
affected by anything)—is not only lower than elsewhere, rarer than
elsewhere, and more heartily suspected than elsewhere; but it is also
decreasing more and more every year. So much so, indeed, that for many
generations now, long chaste engagements have not only been possible,
but more or less common; so much so that _positive girls who marry are
able to declare quite honestly that marriage is a disappointment and
an empty delusion_; so much so, that in nine cases out of ten we could
without a qualm and without a scruple allow our unmarried daughter to
travel round the world with her so-called lover and feel quite certain
that they would both remain perfectly chaste.

This may seem most convenient and even desirable from the standpoint
of the squeamish matron; but would it not be ever so much better from
the point of view of Life if it were impossible, and if we were forced
to exercise a vigilance at least equal if not greater than that of the
French chaperon over the young couple?

To mention self-control in connexion with such safety in the
association of young people is to use a euphemism for a very much
less acceptable word. It would be unfair and wrong to postulate the
possession of a higher degree of social instinct by the Englishman than
by the Frenchman; therefore it must be some other factor that is active
in this unnatural continence where there are no safeguards; and that
factor, as every one must know, as every doctor knows, and as most
women know, is a low degree of sexual exuberance, a strong and in many
cases a pronounced form of negativism.[40]

Many readers will probably cry out: “But surely this is excellent!
What could be better! Our girls are safer; we do not require to be
suspicious; we can trust the young men—and everybody is happy!”

But _everybody is not happy_! The men are not happy; because this
negativism in sex, this lack of exuberance in sex, gives them no
mastery over it, and leaves them all their lives with a guilty
conscience about it. (For, as pointed out earlier in the book, _certain
fusions are only made possible through fire_. Fire purifies all
things.) And the women are certainly not happy, particularly if they
are positive; because they meet with no response, they meet with no
leadership, they yield to no overwhelming impetuosity where sex is
concerned—an impetuosity that carries everything before it, and which
leaves them with no ungratified desire or longing, with not one of
those aching, secret longings that thousands of women are too tasteful
and too proud to reveal and often even too modest to entertain.

Of course the negative ideal in sex was excellent from the Puritan
point of view; because, as I have shown elsewhere,[41] the Puritans
were concerned with rearing a race of office hermits, clerks,
commercial and industrial slaves of all kinds; and to these, sexual
exuberance would naturally be a most irksome, dangerous and undesirable
possession. But Life is not an office or a factory, or, for that
matter, a large draper’s store; and what may be eminently desirable for
these horrible institutions, is simply ugly, repulsive, and nauseating
out in the open, amid fields, sucking lambs and beneath a shining sun.

There are few things more pathetic, more tragic, than a positive
young English girl going to her coming-out dance. What could be more
beautiful than to see her, figuratively speaking, extend her eager
open hand to Life, with a confidence, a fullness of hope and trust, a
profuseness of delicious expectations, and a bravery and singleness
of purpose that is never again equalled in her life? And who can help
hiding his eyes when he sees the same girl take back her hand again and
again, either holding nothing at all, or filled with the merest husks,
the merest scrapings of Life? Oh, the youths that go to dances!—these
sacred functions where the positive girl takes her first step towards
her sacred calling! One can watch with equanimity the negative young
Miss of narrow hips, still narrower chest, and even still narrower
outlook, succeeding in captivating her negative affinity. Such dramas
leave one unmoved. But to witness exuberant Life itself, obliged to
be content with creatures who are mere mementoes of Life, mere echoes
of Life; to see exuberant Life itself unnoticed, unselected, feared,
shunned, and shelved!—to anyone who has any feelings at all, such an
experience must be too painful ever to be forgotten.

For in England, not only are there barely sufficient men to go all
round; but there are not nearly sufficient positive men for the
preponderating number of positive girls. And since innocent girls are
absolutely unconscious of the causes of their misery when they meet and
marry the negative man, you find in England and all countries like it,
hundreds and hundreds of positive women who will affirm—nay, who are
ready to prove—that marriage is the most unexciting thing in existence,
and that Life itself is the most unexciting phenomenon in the universe!
And the tragedy of it all is that, as far as their own unfortunate
experiences go, they are right, and they convince because they are not
only right but miserable.

Thus Life gets suspected, slandered, unjustly weighed and valued, and
the legion of negative women about seize hold of these facts with the
avidity of famishing jealousy, and _prove_ that Life and its legitimate
joys are suspicious, rightly maligned, and valueless!

Although this is a book on Woman, it is necessary to speak about one
aspect of the question of virgin love which strictly belongs to this
chapter, but which is concerned only with men; I refer to the love felt
for a girl by a man, and of the forces that direct him in feeling this
love.

When the positive man faces the positive girl, he really has but one
inquiry: “Does the girl provoke desire?” Because desire is essential
to his share in the sexual act. He does not actually say: “Does she
provoke desire?” but he implies as much.

He insists upon her being what he calls “pretty” or “attractive.” But
from that point onwards it depends entirely upon his upbringing, the
values and current opinions of his Age, the prejudices of his religion,
his class, or his own particular taste, whether he makes a wise or a
foolish choice from the standpoint of Life.

I have shown that Man is much more conscious of the limitations and the
extent of the joys that sexual life is going to bring him than Woman
is or can be. He is not only more conscious as regards the sexual life
alone, but also as regards its consequences, its responsibilities.

Notwithstanding all this, however, or rather precisely on account
of all this, he is much more susceptible to the traditional values,
opinions, or prejudices of his time, his country or his class, than
Woman is, in the making of his choice. Woman is in the grip of Life.
Life constantly speaks through her. Unless she is actually unhealthy or
spoilt, Life speaks through her in a way that is profitable to Life.
The positive, unspoilt girl, then, although she acts unconsciously,
rarely makes a mistake in her choice of a man as a sexual being,
provided that she be not reluctantly compelled to do so by social
stress, by the feeling that her choice is a last shift to be positive
somehow, or by any other non-vital consideration.

Man, however, is rather differently situated. Being conscious, he
is much weaker in the stand he takes. For _conscious_ opinions,
_conscious_ views, can be modified by persuasion, by precept, by
example, by a consensus of contemporary opinion.

When the man faces the girl, therefore, he is often and almost
universally swayed by the prejudices in regard to what constitutes an
attractive girl that are current in his Age, country or class. And
thus we arrive at this important conclusion: _That provided his Age,
his country and class entertain positive views and values in regard to
Life, his choice will be correct and perfectly desirable as far as the
highest purposes of Life are concerned; but that provided his Age, his
country and class entertain the wrong or negative views or values in
regard to Life, his choice will be incorrect and entirely undesirable
as far as the highest purposes of Life are concerned_, and this despite
the fact that he himself may be a healthy, exuberant and positive
specimen of humanity.

If, for instance, the ethereal, languishing, angelic and slightly
delicate type of female beauty be the type exalted by the current
values of his environment, he runs considerable danger of regarding
her as the attractive type; and in selecting her he will deliberately
overlook her narrow frame, her lack of fire, her lack of exuberance,
her lack of positiveness.[42] Where Puritan values prevail, the
sexually exuberant female with the ardent and fierce brow and eye
will be regarded even as distinctly ugly. It will not surprise some
people to hear, therefore, that in France the angelic, passive, and
meek expression of most Englishmen’s wives is regarded as strangely
incompatible with the frequently robust, self-assertive, exuberant
appearance of the Englishmen themselves.

Purity is indeed exhaled by such women: but not the purity that all
positive people understand as purity. _To them the only purity worth
having is that which is the outcome of fire._ Everything else is
impure. A tepid passion, a non-exuberant passion, is impure: it can
wait, it can temporize, it can play with Life; it can even thwart the
highest purposes of Life: therefore it is impure.

How often in our own small circle have we not seen a youth that we
admired—a positive, robust and savoury fellow, full of trust and
energy—condescend to take the most fragile, shadowy reminiscence of
Life for a mate and the mother of his children! I say “condescend
to take”; but I mean _in his sense of course_, “aspire to taking”;
for it was obvious that he regarded her as the highest example of
womanhood that could possibly be discovered; to this extent was he
prevailed upon by the Puritanical prejudices of his Age! But it is
within the experience of most people that the negative values of an
environment will drive some men even farther. There are a few who will
not even stop at deformities, sickness, disease. I know of two such
cases: one man who fell in love with a consumptive girl, knowing her
to be consumptive; and another who loved and married a girl with hip
disease. Both of these men were acting in a manner utterly hostile
to the highest purposes of Life; their love actually denied, baulked
and frustrated the highest purposes of Life; they were, in my sense,
therefore, utterly impure, immoral, criminal. But from the point of
view of their Age, their class, their religion and their country, what
was there, in sooth, to show them that they were wrong?

Had they not heard from their earliest childhood onwards, that the soul
was everything and that the body did not matter? Had they not had it
dinned into them at every turn along their life’s path, that a pure
soul can make up for any physical defect, even foul breath? Had they
not learnt to regard brains as better than brawn? And who had ever told
them when they were children and when they were quite ready to despise
sickness, deformity, or botchedness generally, that their instincts in
this respect were quite right and proper? Who had explained to them
that things that are unclean (as the good, honest Old Testament has it)
should be avoided?[43]

There is no science of physiognomy and of human selection to-day. It
will be objected, of course, that no possible elaboration of such a
science could ever induce young people to “fall in love” with the
proper mates. My reply to that is: Let it be tried. When our young folk
tell us that they have fallen in love at first sight, we know that
they must have followed some principles of physiognomy and selection.
However adventitiously these may have been acquired, they constitute
the only guide obtainable. But are these principles any the better
for having been acquired by chance, and very often from false and
unreliable sources? They must have acquired their principles from some
source. Is it better that they should have picked them up, as it were,
on life’s way, than that they should have been taught them? It is not
a difficult matter to educate the taste of children on certain broad
lines. The fact is not that these guiding lines are lacking to-day—on
the contrary, they abound—but that they are based on no understanding
of essentials and are as a rule not regulated by a deep concern for
health and high vitality. And since you can teach mankind the points of
a good horse or a good dog, it is surely a little bold to deny that you
can teach it the points of a desirable mate.[44] At least you can lay
down certain very distinct principles regarding the mate to be avoided.
But not even that is attempted nowadays.[45]

The danger at present is that a young man, despite his proper instincts
in this matter, may be wrongly influenced by the values and prejudices
of his Age, his country and his class, so that willy-nilly he goes
astray, and inclines in a negative direction when all the time his
instincts are positive.

In regard to sex and the choice of the positive woman, the Englishman
particularly, therefore (more especially of the wealthier middle
classes), wants re-educating, re-instructing in the values of positive
Life. And it is to him, more than to Woman (for, after all, he is the
chooser), that the chapters of this book are addressed.


FOOTNOTES:

[35] Always from the standpoint of sexual potency be it remembered.

[36] See also pp. 7, 70 and 94.

[37] In 1911 there were 477 women doctors in England, 382 of whom were
unmarried.

[38] See also pp. 7, 70, and 91.

[39] See _A Defence of Aristocracy_, chapter V.

[40] It will occur to some that I ought perhaps to have referred to the
fact that English Law is more severe against illicit relations than is
the Law of France. This is true; but, after all, English Law applies
only to girls under a certain age, and is by no means repressive of
illicit relations after that age.

[41] _A Defence of Aristocracy_, chapter V.

[42] Speaking of the prevalence of this type of girl at present,
Arabella Kenealy says (op. cit., p. 84): “So devitalized and
neurasthenic are many of our pretty young girls that their flowerlike
faces, topping over-tall and undeveloped bodies, suggest delicate
blossoms crowning long attenuated, sapless stems. Neither faces nor
bodies are vitalized and athrill with powers rooted in healthful
organs, vivified by healthful functions, and instinct with warm,
iron-rich, magnetic blood. They show that making for beauty which is
inherent in the Woman-traits, but which, in latter-day girls, owing to
defective constitutional vigour or to educational, social or industrial
exhaustion, has been able to realize itself only in sickly and
weed-like development.”

[43] Even the fiction they read did not help them to the correct
attitude in this. Does Lord Lytton ever express any horror at his hero
and heroine, who were both consumptive, falling in love with each other
in _Pilgrims on the Rhine_? And how many other cases could be quoted!

[44] The teaching that is most steadily opposed to this view is that
of Christianity; for, if once you admit that the physical points of a
human being are important, you underrate the supreme importance of the
so-called “soul,” which takes precedence of everything. That is why
Christianity has always strongly deprecated any doctrine of physiognomy
or human selection.

[45] For instance, most of the stigmata of degeneration and disease are
well known. Why are they not generally taught to the young? This would
constitute at least a start in the right direction. The ancient Hindus
were in this respect, as in many others, very much more civilized than
ourselves. In the Laws of Manu, Book III, definite hints are given to
the young man regarding the kind of girl he should choose. In verse
seven we read: “Let him avoid that family (in selecting a wife) which
neglects the sacred rites, one in which no male children (are born),
one in which the Veda is not studied, one (the members of) which
have thick hair on the body, those which are subject to hemorrhoids,
phthisis, weakness of digestion, epilepsy, or white or black leprosy.”
Verse eight: “Let him not marry a maiden (with) reddish (hair), nor one
who has a redundant member, nor one who is sickly, nor one either with
no hair (on the body) or too much; nor one who is garrulous or has red
(eyes).” Verse ten: “Let him wed a female free from bodily defects who
has an agreeable name, the (graceful) gait of a _Hamsa_ or an elephant,
a moderate (quantity of) hair on the body and on the head, small teeth,
and soft limbs.”




