





  Transcriber’s Note
  Italic text displayed as: _italic_




  WOMAN
  A Vindication




_BY THE SAME AUTHOR_


  A DEFENCE OF ARISTOCRACY
  MAN’S DESCENT FROM THE GODS
  THE FALSE ASSUMPTIONS OF DEMOCRACY
  ETC.




  WOMAN

  A Vindication

  By

  ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI


  CONSTABLE · LONDON
  BOMBAY · SYDNEY · 1923




_Printed in Great Britain by_ Butler & Tanner, _Frome and London_




CONTENTS


  CHAP.                                                             PAGE

  INTRODUCTION                                                       vii


  Part I

  PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS

     I POSITIVENESS—THE SAYING OF “YEA” TO LIFE                        3

    II THE SUBJECT TREATED GENERALLY                                  24

   III WOMAN AND HER UNCONSCIOUS IMPULSES                             37

    IV THE POSITIVE MAN AND THE POSITIVE WOMAN                        54

     V VIRGIN LOVE IN THE POSITIVE MAN AND THE POSITIVE GIRL          80

    VI THE POSITIVE ENGLISH GIRL                                     104


  Part II

  INFERENCES FROM PART I

   VII THE MARRIAGE OF THE POSITIVE GIRL AND THE POSITIVE MAN        125

  VIII BREACHES OF THE MARRIAGE CONTRACT AND DIVORCE                 178

    IX THE OLD MAID AND HER RELATION TO SOCIETY                      229

     X THE VIRTUES AND VICES OF WOMEN                                280

    XI WOMEN IN ART, PHILOSOPHY AND SCIENCE. THE OUTLOOK. CONCLUSION 346

       INDEX                                                         369




INTRODUCTION

 “The most disgusting cant permeates everything. Except for the
 representation of savage and violent sentiments, everything is stifled
 by it.”—Stendhal, _De l’Amour_.


The object of this volume is twofold: in the first place to
raise certain weighty objections to that industrialization and
commercialization of woman, which has stamped the “progress” of Western
Europe during the last fifty years; and, secondly, to reveal woman, not
only as a creature whose least engaging characteristics are but the
outcome of the most vital qualities within her, but also as a social
being in whom these least engaging characteristics themselves only
become disturbing and undesirable when she is partially or totally out
of hand.

While trying to escape the influence of all that “tinsel of false
sentiment” which in the atmosphere of Democracy and sentimentality has
gathered about the subject of Woman in modern England, it has been my
endeavour to defend her against certain traditional and well-founded
charges, by showing that the very traits in her character which have
given rise to these charges form so essential a part of her vital
equipment that it would be dangerous to the race to modify or to alter
them. Thus, despite the fact that there is much in this book that
may possibly strike the reader as unfriendly, if not actually harsh,
I am aware of no other work in which so complete and so elaborate a
plea (from the standpoint of Life and Life’s needs) has been made in
defence of Woman’s whole character, including all that side of it which
the wisest of mankind, and the oldest traditions of mankind, have
consistently and unanimously deprecated.

Couched in the briefest possible terms, my thesis is practically this,
that, whether we contemplate Woman in the rôle of the adulteress, of
the heartless stepmother, of the harlot, or of the creature whose
duplicity has been the riddle of all ages; or whether we contemplate
her as the staunchest of lovers, as the most reliable of allies, as
the mother whose noble devotion to her offspring will drive her to any
extreme of danger in defence of them, and as the representative of that
sex which has given us a Joan of Arc, an Emily Brontë, and an Emily
Davison of Derby fame; we are always confronted by a creature whose
worst can, on final analysis, be shown to be only the outcome of her
best and most vital qualities, turned to evil by mal-adaptation; and
whose best is but the normal and effortless expression of her natural
endowments.

Seeing, however, that among the mal-adaptations which cause Woman’s
best to manifest itself as her worst, I include lack of guidance and
control from the quarter of her menfolk, I range myself naturally
among the Anti-Feminists, though at the same time I most emphatically
disclaim all anti-feminine prejudices. Indeed, so far from this being
the case, I am a deep and passionate admirer and lover of Woman. In
order to love her, however, I do not find it necessary to exalt her to
a plane on which all her sturdier, more vital, and more “dangerous”
characteristics are whittled down to mere sweetness. Those to whom the
love of woman depends upon so gross an idealization of her nature as to
cause them to overlook or deny that “wickedness” in her, which is at
once her greatest vital strength and her most powerful equipment as the
custodian and the promoter of life, will find very little to sustain
them in this love throughout the present volume. And, if in this age
of “Safety first,” they fancy that it is expedient to rear and to love
only those women from whom all “danger” has been removed, they will
find that I have endeavoured to demonstrate to them the extreme peril
even of this plausible ideal.

As far as I know this work represents the first radical attempt that
has been made to differentiate two very definite and dissimilar types
of women—the positive and the negative—and to account for their
respective virtues and vices on the grounds of their peculiarities of
health, tonality, vigour, and constitutional bias in favour of life. It
is my belief that this is a necessary and useful differentiation, that
without it there can be no clarity about Woman, and that the fact that
it has not been attempted by previous writers, accounts for much in
their work which is both unfair and untrue. It must be quite plain to
everyone, that in a world where so-called virtue is all too frequently
the outcome of a _minus_ rather than of a _plus_ in vitality, it
would be grossly inaccurate to class all women together; for while
in the case of one woman chastity may be a great feat of discernment
and self-overcoming, in the case of another whose body is less tonic
and less vital, it may be the easiest of human accomplishments. All
reactions are known to differ according to the vitality of the organism
stimulated. To overlook tonality and vitality in any description of
human beings would therefore be a most unpardonable omission. Thus,
Weininger’s and Schopenhauer’s failure to differentiate between
positive and negative women effectually invalidates, in my opinion,
most of what they have said about her; while a good deal of the rest
of the literature dealing with the subject of sex seems to me to fail
owing to the fact that it makes no attempt to describe a standard or a
norm before it proceeds to expatiate upon sex characteristics and their
consequences.

The fact that a classification on these broad lines does not prevent me
from occasionally bringing charges which will seem severe against the
very type that I most warmly recommend, is in no way inconsistent with
my claim that my work is a vindication; for while I show that all the
charges that I myself advance are only an indictment of Woman in so far
as she is unguided and uncontrolled, I also defend her against many
other harsh judgments which are commonly passed against her, and with
which I will have nothing to do.

Thus in the course of this work, the reader will find that I defend
even the so-called “male” woman against the gibes which recently it
has been the fashion to level against her. And on what grounds do I
undertake her vindication?—I point out that, in a nation that can
boast, as England undoubtedly can, of great and worldwide masculine
achievements in the past, such achievements can only have been possible
because the women of the nation did not too seriously dilute the
masculine qualities of the race, with the element “effeminine.” But for
this to have been the rule, these women must have had a large share
of masculine virtues. I show that other nations, such as the Romans
and the Red Indians, also reared generations of masculine women, and
always to the advantage of the community. These male women, against
whom so much has been said, are therefore merely the vestiges of our
great masculine past. Now they are ill-adapted, because they can no
longer find the men to whose greater masculinity they might adapt
themselves. It is the degeneration of man that is the cause of their
mal-adaptation. Women, or at least the best women, nowadays, are no
longer inspired or uplifted by their association with him.

To reply to this, as most people all too hastily do, that the last
War was a proof that Englishmen at least have not degenerated, does
not constitute a serious objection to my statement. For, after all,
successful fighting is only one—and the most primitive—among the many
desirable qualities that the masculine civilized being has cultivated.

Degeneration may be defined as a departure from the high qualities
of a race or a kind. But it is possible to depart from a very great
number of cultivated qualities, and still to retain the moral and
physical equipment of the good fighter. When, therefore, I seek to
explain a good deal of Woman’s discontent with Man, and most of her
very justifiable contempt of him, by pointing to his degeneration, I
mean that, despite the evidence of the great War, in which the modern
European admittedly revealed the primitive fighting qualities in all
their pristine strength, the man of to-day in many other respects—in
the matter of catholicity of tastes, for instance, versatility of
gifts, will-power, vigour, character, and health—shows a marked
departure from the higher endowments of his ancestors. The fact that
this degeneration is due to the devitalizing, cramping and specialized
labours which several generations of Commercialism and Industrialism
and excessive “Urbanism” have imposed upon the male sex, can hardly be
questioned; and if we are in search of an explanation of Feminism, if
we are anxious to discover how and why it is that women are now coming
forward in large numbers to measure their strength against men in all
those callings and offices which hitherto have been regarded as Man’s
special spheres, we may be sure that the true cause of all this does
not lie so much in a desirable change in Woman’s nature itself, as it
does in an undesirable depreciation in our own general abilities, which
women have been only too slow to observe.

To point to the great War in such circumstances, is only cant; but like
all cant, it is the outcome of a desire to spare our vanity at a moment
when everything points indubitably to our humiliation.

There is, however, no subject in the whole world, or at least in the
whole of our English world, around which more cant has collected, than
the subject of sex and the relation of the sexes. But perhaps it would
be as well to make quite clear what is precisely meant by “cant” in
this respect. With Stendhal, I am of the opinion that cant is created
more by vanity than by Puritanism, or the sense of propriety. And it is
because vanity is involved, that the fight against cant is so stubborn.
If Psycho-Analysis had really assailed our vanity, instead of merely
offending our sense of propriety, we should have heard much less about
it. Also we have only to think of the huge popular success of writers
like Zola in order to assure ourselves that for a man’s work to be
hushed up and ignored, he must be guilty of a greater crime than the
mere violation of the proprieties or conventions.

As a rule, mankind will listen patiently when it is told of the
material and not infrequently sordid animal background to some of its
dearest emotions; for, after all, it is only disturbed in its prudery
by such revelations. But proceed to tear away the tinsel of cant from
those activities, for instance, which are alleged to be humanitarian,
“unselfish,” or to belong to the class known as “self-sacrifice,” and
point out how all these activities themselves invariably arise from
purely egotistical emotions and desires, and mankind will immediately
become both incredulous and indignant. Why is this? Obviously because a
very large section of the population of the western world find the very
basis of their self-esteem in the activities enumerated. To show the
egotistical root of these activities, as Hobbes, Helvetius, Stendhal
and Nietzsche consistently did, is therefore to wound these people in
the very sanctuary of their vanity; and those against whom this kind
of violence is attempted nowadays usually retaliate with both rancour
and rage. Hence the determination with which writers like Hobbes,
Helvetius, Nietzsche and Stendhal are forgotten and ignored.

Over the writings of all these men there hangs a very pronounced and
unmistakable fragrance, which may be almost painful at the first
inhalation, and a certain atmosphere which has a noticeably low
temperature. Frequently this atmosphere is quite glacial, and produces
the distinctly unpleasant reaction of goose-skin in the reader’s mind.
Both in the ideas they present, and in their manner of presenting them,
these authors scorn to please. They all possess the same penetrating
insight into the psychology of man; they reveal what the French call
“_une psychologie fouillée_,” and their honesty is hampered by no
desire to fortify themselves or their fellows in their self-esteem.
Unlike Swift, however, it is certain that these men did not write
“to vex the world more than to divert it,” but because they realized
that certain falsifications of sentiment are dangerous and lead to
degeneration.

Now there is an instinctive inclination in every reader to identify
himself with the picture of humanity presented to him in the book
that he happens to be perusing, whether it be a novel or a scientific
treatise. Naturally enough, therefore, he is exposed to the severest
shocks if at every turn he is prevented from idealizing his own nature,
or from thinking too well of it, owing to the fact that the picture
he is contemplating is too humiliating to be pleasant, and yet too
convincing to be lightly rejected.

The bulk of modern readers, however, are women. This fact, too well
known to editors and publishers, is quite inadequately understood
from the standpoint of its influence on taste and quality in literary
production. For not only do women reveal the trait common to all
readers, which consists in a tendency to identify themselves with
one of the characters of a novel, or with the portrait of humanity
presented in a scientific treatise, but they are also addicted to the
practice of confounding that which is pleasant to themselves with that
which is true. Thus in the woman reader there is a twofold tendency
to tolerate or to applaud cant; for, on the one hand, she views truth
hedonistically, and, on the other, she feels deep discomfiture,
either when she finds herself unable, through her false idealization
of herself and her motives, to identify herself with the anti-cant
portrayal of a certain heroine (Stendhal’s Félicie Féline, for
instance), or, when she finds her reading of human nature, which is
based upon her idealized reading of herself, affronted by a picture of
humanity which shatters her rosy view.

To the influence of women in this connexion, however, ought in all
fairness to be added that of a vast number of men, who, in these days,
whether from the same hedonistic view of truth, or prompted by a
certain poltroonery and vanity in the face of reality, tend to shrink
ever more and more from any understanding of human relations and the
passions that govern them, which would distort their comfortable and
comforting assumptions concerning both. If, however, they actually
form, together with the women, a force sufficiently powerful to govern
the taste of the day, especially in the world of literature and in that
department of it which treats of human psychology, we may well feel
some anxiety concerning the real worth of that literature. If Byron and
Stendhal could honestly complain of cant even in their time, what can
be our position to-day?

       *       *       *       *       *

Frankly acknowledging my indebtedness to the school of writers that can
be said to have adopted the rigorous psychological uprightness of our
great philosopher Hobbes, I have endeavoured also to strip the “tinsel
of sentiment” from one of the most important of human relations, in
order, if possible, to build afresh, and to build wholesomely, where
too much confusion and too much falsehood have been allowed to flourish
in the past. In order, however, to protect myself from a charge to
which the asperity and frequent severity of my language is almost sure
to expose me, it may be as well for me to state at once that, unlike
many that have written on the subject of Woman, I have been animated by
no bitterness and by none of those unhappy experiences which often warp
judgment and impair the vision. On the contrary, to all my principal
relations to women I owe the most pleasant and possibly some of the
most valuable experiences of my life.

Unlike Schopenhauer, Byron, or Balzac, my relationship to my mother
was an exceptionally devoted and happy one. Both friends and relatives
are unanimous here, and have frequently declared that they rarely saw
anything to equal it, both on her side and on my own. Up to the time
of her death she was my best and dearest friend, and in my passionate
love for her, my love for my subject may well be said to have begun.
What has my relation to other women been? In this regard I can only
say that, though I have spent an enormous amount of my time with
women, I have never suffered the smallest wrong at the hands of any
one of them; neither have I had any experience which could possibly
give me a distorted view of the sex, or a resentful attitude towards
it as a whole. I have learned a tremendous deal from women, and,
having not a little of the woman in me besides (and to _comprise_ is
to _comprehend_), I have through the usual channels of introspection
been able to supplement my objective studies with a good deal of
subjective information. From my earliest youth, too, the subject of sex
has interested me deeply. True, it interests every one deeply; but I
have fortunately never felt any of the customary shame that so often
arrests thought and speculation on the subject. Neither can I say that
my environment was ever of a kind to hinder me in my free and careful
study of it. Brought up in an atmosphere of art and literature, I never
became acquainted with that false modesty and embarrassment that seizes
upon most young people when, for the first time, they are confronted
with the most mysterious and fascinating subject of existence. I was
allowed to dwell on the question, had no reason to suppose it was wrong
to do so, and even when, at the age of ten I took my first steps in the
science of physiology—a subject I used to beg all my elders to instruct
me upon—I and they little knew that I was anticipating, by at least
six years, a passionate interest in the principal and most fundamental
question of human relations. To this day I remember the little green
manual of Physiology, by Professor Huxley, that my governess put into
my hands, and I cannot say I remember any book better, save perhaps
another little green volume containing Schopenhauer’s essays on _Woman
and the Metaphysics of Love_, which I read when I was eighteen. At the
age of nineteen I wrote my first book, which bore the title _Girls and
Love_; but, needless to say, it was never published. And ever since
the subject of sex has scarcely ever ceased from occupying my mind in
various ways. For the rest, I have listened with respectful attention
to the voice of the Ancients—of the Orient, of Egypt and of Greece—and,
as usual, have listened most intently there where I knew relative
permanence to have been achieved and humanity to have flourished best.
Such preoccupations in regard to a matter that ought to be so natural,
so well ordered, as to be taken for granted, just as breathing is, can
denote but one thing, namely: that to the thoughtful, nowadays, sex
has undoubtedly become a real and puzzling problem; that is to say,
something that is not in order, that is not properly understood, and
that every one has, as it were, to face and to overcome for himself
afresh, before he can “carry on,” and before he can allow time and age
to overtake him.

In the present work I have attempted to be as clear and as
straightforward as is compatible with the task of handling a delicate
subject delicately. I am convinced that a good deal of the dangerous
silence that hangs over the vital and fundamental questions I shall
sometimes have to touch upon, owes its existence for the most part to
the unfortunate fact that the subject of sex, outside medical circles,
has hitherto usually been confronted by only two classes of mind—the
puritanically prudish, who have done their best to shelve it, and their
opposite extreme, the licentious and libidinous, who have refrained
from no excess or extravagance that could possibly offend and startle
their opponents in the opposite camp. With neither of these classes
have I any connexion. I object to the licentious as wholeheartedly as
to the Puritanical. I protest against being suspected unjustly of a
licentious turn of mind, because I venture to speak freely concerning
a subject that is systematically hushed up to the peril of all; I also
protest most emphatically against being suspected of Puritanism because
I make no attempt to conceal my loathing of certain modern aspects of
the sexual relationship.




Part I

PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS




CHAPTER I

 Positiveness—The Saying of “Yea” to Life


(1) SEX _VERSUS_ DEATH

A scheme of life that includes death as the periodic end of each
generation of beings must, if it is to persist, include some form of
periodic reproduction of life. Reproduction, or the reproducing of a
fresh generation of beings, is thus the necessary balance of death.
This sounds the merest platitude. But it is a platitude that cannot be
dwelt upon too often or too carefully, if one remembers how constantly
and obstinately its consequences are denied or vilified.

To speak of the higher organic life on this globe as sexual, therefore,
is merely to state in other words, that all higher organic life is
doomed to die, and must be replaced by new life. Abolish death and you
abolish the meaning and the need of sex and reproduction. Abolish sex
and reproduction, and, if you cannot establish eternal higher organic
life, the higher organic life of the globe must for ever perish.

At least for human beings and myriads of animals, Death and Sex are
consequently counterparts. Sex with its purpose, reproduction, might
be regarded as the contrivance for circumventing Death, for nullifying
it, for cheating it of its complete victory over life. And that is why
all dreams or concepts of eternal life are, and cannot help being,
tainted by a certain hostility to sex: because where eternal life is
the scheme, sex drops out. Conversely, all hostility to eternal life is
and cannot help being tainted by a certain positiveness, friendliness
and favour towards mortal life and its ally sex: because where eternal
life is an impossibility, sex is indispensable.

It is for this reason that, in its depths, Christianity is more logical
and more acceptable to a rational man than Mohammedanism. Christianity,
accepting the concept Eternal Life, says: “In heaven there will be
no marriage or giving in marriage.”[1] It realized that you cannot
eat your cake and have it. Mohammedanism, while accepting the concept
Eternal Life, imagines an eternity of sex-life into the bargain, which
is an absurdity. Mohammed did not realize that you cannot eat your cake
and have it. Read the Koran and you will understand how it happened
that he could be guilty of this confusion of thought.

Sex, then, while as a scheme it is opposed to eternal life, is
nevertheless the enemy of _death_—the most unconquerable, crafty,
resourceful and untiring enemy of death—so much so, indeed, that
whereas mortal life is not nearly such a good opposite of death as is
eternal life (for the dead mortal is eternally dead to this world), sex
might, and in this book will be regarded as _the_ opposite of death,
the reverse of death.

This point is important in any case; but it is particularly important
to me in this book; because all my conclusions will be based upon
it. To repeat, then, the equation reads: Sex = Mortal Life; No-Sex =
Eternal Life, or, in the absence of Eternal Life, Death.

From this chapter onwards, however, save in regard to the one
particular question of virtue, I shall cease from considering Eternal
Life; because, as we see from the equation, Eternal Life and Death come
strangely as correlatives together—that is to say, for all ordinary
purposes, and as far as this world is concerned, they mean the same
thing—they both oppose mortal life and sex.

A very significant conclusion arises from this: that in this conflict
of sex and death, all those who are opposed to sex, or who call it
a sin, or who associate it with guilt, or who cast odium upon it,
range themselves on the side of death; while all those who stand by
sex, favour it, wish to vindicate it, and claim for it a character
absolutely free from all sin, guilt or odium, range themselves against
death. Here Christianity is quite logical. At its root it is hostile
to mortal life, and in favour of Eternal Life. But it never refers to
Eternal Life as a possibility on this globe, but always as an existence
that is a correlative of _death_ on this globe.

Christianity, therefore, being an advocate of Eternal Life, very
logically preaches that sex is to be deplored, to be avoided, and,
if possible, negatived. And the Puritan, who may be regarded as
the extreme Christian, is notorious for his implacable loathing of
sex. Unconsciously he sees quite clearly that any scheme of organic
life that involves sex, must be a substitute for eternal organic
life[2]—which in an idealized form is the life for which he has been
taught to crave. Death to him, therefore, is merely a merciful gateway
leading from Sex into Eternal Life. Being the foe of Sex, he knows
quite well that Death must be his ally, his accomplice, his ringleader,
in his conspiracy to realize Eternal Life.

Is this quite clear? For the present I have wished to say nothing
concerning the respective merits either of Sex, Death, Eternal Life,
or Mortal Life; I have only wished to point out that, as schemes, as
ideas, they are mutually exclusive and irreconcilable, and that you
cannot desire the one without thereby coveting the doom of the other.

As far as this world and its problems are concerned, however—and who,
if you please, stands outside this world and its problems?—we have to
deal with one kind of life only—Mortal Life. As I have shown, the
necessary correlative of Mortal Life, if it is to continue, is Sex. We
are concerned, therefore, immediately and directly, with Mortal Life,
and its indispensable correlative Sex. We need not accept the scheme
as it is thus unceremoniously thrust upon us. We can deny Mortal Life
and its concomitant need, Sex, by putting an end to everything at least
for ourselves, through straightway committing suicide the very moment
we realize that Mortal Life and Sex are undesirable. If, however, we
accept the proposition, “Mortal Life is desirable,” we necessarily
commit ourselves to the rider, “Sex is desirable.” These features are
all we know concerning Life; they constitute the two sides of the only
kind of Life of which we are aware, and however real and realistic our
visions of an Eternal Life may be, however vivid our mental pictures of
a Heaven may seem, such visions and such mental pictures, as we very
well know, are of a kind the true existence of which is quite incapable
of proof or demonstration; whereas Mortal Life is here before us, with
us and in us, and the way to live it is our chief concern; the way to
live it well so that it may redound to the benefit and credit of all,
is our highest concern.

Throughout this book, I shall argue on the assumption that the reader,
like myself, believes that mortal life is desirable. I shall take
it for granted that he, like me, is content to allow transcendental
questions to weigh with him only in so far as they do not render him
hostile to Mortal Life. I shall therefore assume all along that he
believes, as I do, that Sex is desirable, however far the consequences
of such an admission may lead him.

Be this as it may, let him entertain no qualms as to the direction in
which I wish these consequences to lead him. There are more than two
alternatives in the choice of one’s attitude to Sex. To most people
there appear to be but two opposite extremes: the attitude of the
lecherous reprobate who makes decent women ashamed of being women;
and the attitude of the Puritan who, in his heart of hearts, feels
that if only he could have been at the Almighty’s elbow at the time
of the Creation, he would have respectfully suggested a somewhat more
“drawing-room” method of propagating the species.

To neither of these attitudes has this book, or the spirit of it,
even the remotest relation. The acknowledgment that Mortal Life is
desirable, and that consequently its indispensable correlative Sex
is desirable, can be made by a man in full possession of a healthy
control over his passions,[3] in a state of complete mastery over his
appetites, and endowed with the most fastidious taste as to where
normal desire and its gratification end, and where excess begins.
Extremes belong only to the uncultured, to the hogs of life. It is they
who make everything appear disgusting, simply because they are unable
to approach a single aspect of life with that amount of understanding
and reverence which is due to all things connected with the sacred task
of making mankind and his existence an honour and not a curse to the
universe.

To accept the proposition that Mortal Life is desirable and to commit
one’s self by so doing to its inevitable rider that Sex is desirable,
may lead one very far, as this book will show; but, if it lead one to
a tastelessly pornographic or licentious attitude towards the most
fundamental instinct of life, then one is of a nature that has no right
to Mortal Life, much less, therefore, to its indispensable correlative
Sex.

Without wishing to labour this point, but with a keen sense of the host
of misunderstandings and prejudices that will cling like barnacles
to a book of this kind, unless I make my position unmistakably clear
from the start, let me put the case a little differently by the use of
another instinct of Mortal Life. Let me say, to accept the proposition,
_Mortal Life is desirable_, is to commit one’s self to its inevitable
rider that eating and drinking are desirable. There is no objection
to this statement as it stands. All who endorse Mortal Life also
endorse eating and drinking. And those who attack eating and drinking,
simultaneously strike at Mortal Life.

This conclusion, however, provides absolutely no sanction for those
who are sufficiently material and gross to make food and drink
things of shame and of horror. No man, therefore, need fear lest by
acknowledging that eating and drinking are desirable he should find
himself supporting gluttony, drunkenness and bestiality of all kinds.
It is, however, a strange and significant coincidence that, where we
find hostility to Sex, we also find a certain suspicion of all things
connected with the body. The Puritans did not accept Sex as desirable;
at the best they held it to be a necessary evil; but we also find the
Puritans hostile to eating and drinking, and not only to excessive
eating and drinking. I have already shown with sufficient elaboration
elsewhere what regrettable reforms in food and drink they introduced
into England in the seventeenth century.[4] This only supports my
contention that you cannot be hostile to Sex without being hostile to
Mortal Life in general.

If, therefore, you believe that the acceptance of Sex is immoral, as
Otto Weininger did;[5] if you believe, as he did, that “woman is the
sin of man”;[6] if, moreover, you claim, as he did, that “it is the
Jew and the woman who are the apostles of pairing to bring guilt on
mankind”;[7] if, again, you assert that “sexual union is immoral”;[8]
that “women must really and truly and spontaneously relinquish it”;[9]
that “woman will exist as long as man’s guilt is inexpiated, until
he has really vanquished his own sexuality”;[10] that “man must free
himself of sex, for in that way, and that way alone, can he free
woman”;[11] and, finally—this gem of negativeness: “all sexuality
implies degradation”;[12]—if this be your position, I say, then, you
must logically be hostile to Mortal Life, and you cannot rationally
accept it. Your only course is to commit suicide. This, as we know,
Otto Weininger was logical and consistent enough to do. He died by his
own hand on October 4, 1903.


(2) MORTAL LIFE AND ITS CONSEQUENCES ACCEPTED

As we have seen, it is impossible to have it both ways and to remain
consistent. You are at liberty, of course, to take up the Puritan’s, or
Otto Weininger’s, or St. Paul’s attitude towards Sex; but, by so doing,
you straightway disclaim Mortal Life itself and reject it utterly. Let
this be quite clear to you before you go any further, because a good
deal depends upon this simple but profoundly significant issue. The
fact that St. Paul and the Puritans did not put an end to themselves
right away, as Otto Weininger was clear-headed and honest enough to
do, need not disturb you. Fanatics are rarely clear-headed, and they
are scarcely ever honest. It is sufficient for my purpose to point to
St. Paul’s and the Puritan’s hostility to life in general in order
to show that, although they did not reach the logical end of their
journey, they were certainly well advanced along the road thither.
Besides, if you study St. Paul and the Puritans, you will find, as I
have done, that there is perhaps another explanation to their apparent
inconsistency.

A man may remain longer than he likes in a certain vicinity or
apartment, if he feels it his duty, before taking his leave, to get
others to accompany him thence, to persuade and exhort others to
forsake the place as well. St. Paul certainly felt it his duty to act
in this way, and so for that matter did Schopenhauer.

For us who accept Mortal Life and say “Yea” to it wholeheartedly,
there are certain very grave duties too. The thing to which we say
“Yea,” we wish to keep both clean, sweet and alluring. This world is
our home, and we take a pride in it. We must make it such that we are
able to take a pride in it. We recognize that Mortal Life includes
pain as a prominent factor; but, provided that pain is practically
inseparable from the best purposes of life (as, for instance, the pain
of self-discipline, self-mastership, the pain of habituation to new
knowledge, new arts, the pain resulting from the natural relationships
to our myriads of fellows, and the pains of child-birth), we say “Yea”
to it too, and with the same wholeheartedness.

We do not shrink from pain, as Schopenhauer did, we do not magnify it
or concentrate upon it, as he did, and condemn the whole of existence
because of it. We do not call our glorious history, as the King of the
Animals, the _Martyrdom of Man_, as Winwood Reade did. We call our
history the _Triumph of Man_; and it is because we wish to maintain it
as the triumph of man that we face it with spirit and positiveness.

Our duties are grave, I say; they involve everything, in fact, that can
be conceived as belonging to the task of keeping that to which we say
“Yea” in the highest degree worthy of our “Yea”—worthy, that is to say,
of our unreserved acceptance.

The conduct of Mortal Life, therefore, is our principal concern. And
for this conduct to be correct and fruitful in good things, we must be
quite clear as to the “shall” and the “shall not” of what we should
hate and what we should love, of what we should call bad, and what we
should call good.

Throughout this book the word “good” will always mean “_that which is
favourable to the best kind of Mortal Life and its multiplication_.” If
this book reveals any hate at all, it will be for that which is hostile
to the best kind of life, and if it reveals any love at all it will be
for everything that is friendly to the best kind of life.

This takes us far, no doubt; but not farther, I believe, than anyone
should wish to go who has said “Yea” honestly and sanguinely to Mortal
Life.

For instance, in opposition to men like St. Paul, Knox, Calvin, Prynne,
Schopenhauer, Otto Weininger and their like, we say that Sex is good,
Woman is good, the flesh is good. And we heartily dislike men like St.
Paul, Knox, Calvin, Prynne, Schopenhauer and Otto Weininger because
their attitude shows not only hostility to Woman and to Sex, but also,
by implication, to Mortal Life, to which we have said “Yea.”

We call _good_ all that which actuates us and maintains us in a proper
exercise of our functions, and makes Mortal Life desirable: appetite,
desire, lust, motherhood, fertility, reproductive love, reverence for
the body, prepossession in favour of health and prejudice against
sickness, respect of love, of beauty and of its multiplication. We also
call _good_ the loathing of ugliness and the desire to suppress it; we
therefore approve of deep suspicion towards ugliness and illness, and
towards everything and everybody that attempts to give ugliness and
illness fine-sounding and euphemistic names, and we cultivate a love of
moderation and a loathing of excess.

We call _bad_ all that thwarts us in a proper exercise of our functions
and all that makes Mortal Life undesirable or seem undesirable:
loss of appetite or desire, the abuse of appetite or desire, as of
all things; the finding of excuses or extenuating circumstances for
ugliness, botchedness and sickness. We also call the following _bad_:
excess, sterility, non-reproductive love, prostitution, homosexuality,
irreverence towards the body, the setting of transcendental questions
before vital questions.

On our side, in our advocacy of the first-named things, we have our
instincts which, if they are sound, confirm us on every point.

It frequently happens, however, that Mortal Life is so difficult, and
those who preach against it are so many, so eloquent and so powerful,
that we need almost an intellectual assent over and above our
instinctive acceptance of it. For it is precisely in the moments of our
greatest weakness, when we feel uncertain, when we have made mistakes
and know that we have erred, that the preachers against life and the
body, and against the fundamental instincts and desires of Mortal Life,
will seem to be right, will seem almost to convince us that they are
right. Like vultures they wait afar off till they see the body of our
trust and hope in life, the corpse of our clean conscience, prostrate
on the ground, and then down they swoop and devour the carrion that is
their natural food.

It is before such disasters happen that an intellectual assent to
the deepest promptings of our instincts is the greatest need of all.
In practical life it may be taken as a general rule that it is more
helpful to have an intellectual justification for our mistakes and the
instincts that have led to them, than the most convincing theories
in favour of our virtues. For it is innocence in the exercise of our
natural functions that the preachers against Mortal Life and the body
are most anxious to undermine, and most successful in undermining. And
how often, particularly when an instinct has, so to speak, “drawn in
its horns,” or ceased to assert itself owing to a momentary mistake,
check or rebuff, would not an intellectual justification of its
vigorous re-assertion help us to tide over the evil hour without our
falling a prey to the opposing party—to the enemies of Mortal Life and
the body!

If, however, we bear in mind the maxim that everything is “good” that
is favourable to the best kind of Mortal Life, and everything is
“bad” that is unfavourable to the best kind of life; if, moreover,
we stand bravely and firmly by the principle that Mortal Life is
acceptable and desirable, and therefore that all it exacts for its
continuance must also be acceptable and desirable, and consequently
that the things of the body—beauty, charm, ardour—together with the
flesh, the world, sex, woman, procreation, multiplication and good
food, are for the glory, joy and exaltation of Mortal Life and man;
if, over and above all this, we heroically embrace pain as a necessary
incidental factor in the process of living, then, I say, we have an
intellectual weapon far more formidable and far more effective for
the warding off of those vultures of gloom and doubt—the preachers
against life and the body—than any known engine of destruction could
possibly be. It is this intellectual attitude to Mortal Life, with all
its consequences in our code of morals, our likes and dislikes, that
throughout this book I shall call the “_positive_” or “_yea-saying_”
attitude: while the opposite attitude of mind will be designated by
the word “_negative_.”[13] Nor shall I refer any longer in these pages
to “Mortal Life,” but will speak merely of Life itself: for not only
is it the only kind of life that will concern me here, but also, as
we know nothing about Eternal Life, and our only notions of life are
derived entirely from what we know of Mortal Life, Mortal Life and Life
are to all intents and purposes one and the same thing for us, and
the expression “Mortal Life” can well fall out at this stage of the
discussion.


(3) THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE POSITIVE MIND

Unless they are very delicate or very sick, all children are positive.
They are fresh from the anvil of Life. Life itself speaks through them
without reserve, without constraint. They have made no mistakes yet,
or are not aware of having made any; they have had none of those rude
shocks that shake our faith in Life and render us an easy prey to those
vultures of which I have already spoken, that live on the carrion
of shattered hopes and broken consciences. They say “Yea” to Life
innocently and unconsciously, like kittens playing with balls of wool.
And it is because they say “Yea” to Life innocently and unconsciously
that they are so deeply interesting to the positive philosopher.
Because in them he sees the attitude which he must maintain and
sustain intellectually, despite all the shocks and misfortunes life
has brought. But I point out again that I speak of this intellectual
positiveness only as a helpful confirmation of sound instincts. If the
sound instincts are not there, the positive intellectual attitude is
nothing but a pose.

There is something strangely pathetic about this positiveness of the
child. The philosopher knows the wilderness it is in. He knows that
on the mountain peaks all around, the vultures are waiting hungrily
to see it make its first mistake, to see it writhe under its first
misfortune—or its first “guilt” as they like to call it. He knows with
what extraordinary vigilance they are tracking its footsteps, so that
they may be there in time, so that they may be at its side in the first
moment of its doubt in Life, to tell it that Life is sinful, that
lust is sinful, that sex is sinful, that the World, the Flesh and the
Devil are interchangeable terms. And the positive philosopher cannot
help wondering with some alarm how the child will survive this first
encounter with doubt, with suspicion, and with distrust concerning that
to which a moment ago it said “Yea” so wholeheartedly.

The positive philosopher trembles over the outcome of the conflict.
With fear and trepidation he forges the weapons of intellectual
positiveness and flings them with anxious prodigality before the child,
hoping that they will sustain it in the struggle and confirm its best
instincts; trusting with all his heart that they will revive its
“Yea” to Life before it is completely overcome. And when the positive
philosopher succeeds in this and sees the birds of ill-omen turn
disconsolately away, foiled in their endeavour, he celebrates his feast
of feasts; because there is more rejoicing in his heart over one child
that is saved from negativeness than over thousands that repent!

To the positive philosopher, then, the healthy child is the best
pattern for the yea-saying and positive man. The only danger the child
is in, as I have shown, consists in the fact that it is intellectually
unprepared to justify its “Yea” in the face of the preachers of “Nay.”
Apart from this one flaw, however—which in a universally positive
world would not be felt as a disadvantage at all (because it is
only in negative environments and negative ages that a conscious or
intellectual confirmation of one’s soundest instincts is necessary)—the
child, or the animal for that matter, presents the perfect example
of the positive attitude towards Life. The positive philosopher,
therefore, learns from the child, and watches it with interest.

The principal characteristic of the healthy child is, that it does
not play with its primary appetites; it does not laugh about them;
it cannot abide a joke about them. Watch a healthy child eat! It is
absolutely serious, absorbed, concentrated, intent! A very healthy boy
will even frown over his meal, just as he will frown when he eats a
piece of chocolate. It is obvious from his expression that eating is no
joke with him. It is one of the gravest, most pressing, most engrossing
interests in life. And the same holds good of all healthy, positive
adults. Watch a healthy and positive adult at his meals; he is serious
to a fault! It is only when the demands of his body have been satisfied
that he begins to indulge in levity. The man who habitually jokes at
the beginning of a meal is past salvation. He is negative by nature and
cannot be rescued.

Seriousness towards the primary instinct of self-preservation is
one of the principal characteristics of the healthy child. But the
healthy child is not yet fully, consciously concerned about any other
instinct; if it were—if, for instance, it were fully conscious of the
reproductive instinct—we may be quite sure that it would take it quite
seriously too; for it is serious—most serious perhaps—even when it is
playing.

In spite of all the apparent light-heartedness of the healthy child,
which is all that superficial people can see in it; in spite of the
ease with which it turns from sleep to wakefulness, from tears to
laughter, and _vice versâ_, there is a profundity, a sobriety, a
solidity about its seriousness that nothing can affect. It takes its
own body, itself, the world, and life tremendously seriously. It takes
its wants and its desires seriously. It takes its loves and its hates
seriously. Little children can be homicidal in their loathing of other
children; they can be heroic in their devotion. Those who always depict
children with a smile on their chubby faces, and hopping about on one
leg, know nothing about them. They know nothing of the imperturbable
gravity of the child, and of positiveness generally.

To watch the face of an elderly, negative spinster when a really
healthy boy loses his temper, is to witness in one human countenance
the whole history of the long conflict between those vultures of which
I have spoken and the artless yea-sayer to Life.

Later on, if he is carefully handled, this boy will take his love
seriously; he will cling to the girl he chooses in a manner that will
make that same spinster marvel at his determination, and he will be as
fierce and as serious in his desire for the woman of his choice as he
once was over his games, over his hates, and over his meals.

Laughter is not nearly such a common characteristic of healthy positive
life as the superficial imagine—more particularly noisy laughter. In
every mixed party where much loud laughter or shrill laughter is heard,
there is sure to be a good deal, not of gaiety, not of wanton spirits,
but of nervous irascibility, sexual excitation, and particularly
sexual abstinence, exasperation and—negativeness! He who travels the
world over ascertains this curious fact: that loud, shrill laughter is
essentially the social _noise_ of Puritanical countries.

Positive people take too serious an attitude to life, to themselves, to
each other, and particularly to members of the opposite sex, constantly
to vent what they feel in an idle cackle or giggle. They laugh, but
their hilarity is short, violent, and apparently effective; because
it seems to relieve them for longer periods than does the laughter of
negative people.

_One of the chief characteristics of the positive mind, then, is the
gravity, the solemn interest, with which it confronts life itself, the
body that holds it, and everything vital, including sex._

Behold the healthy child, and you have an automaton guided absolutely
by a positive mind! To retain this positive mind throughout one’s
youth and adulthood is the greatest triumph—particularly nowadays—that
anyone can achieve. He who achieves it may well laugh; he has a right
to laugh; for he has mastered the most redoubtable foe a man can
encounter—the powerful false values that are now seeking to prevail
everywhere, and over the victims of which the vultures are muttering
their thanksgiving.

The only positive form of laughter is the expression of a consciousness
of acquired power. This is Hobbes’ view, it was Stendhal’s view; it
is the biologist’s view, who says that laughter is the expression of
superior adaptation.

Another characteristic of the positive mind _is its forgetfulness in
regard to the things that incapacitate it for taking a lively interest
in life_. This quality of the mind is simply a spiritual counterpart
of the healthy body’s power of evacuating those portions of the food
absorbed which cannot be assimilated without hurt: forgetting and
digesting being the same function of evacuation in two different
departments. The positive mind, like the healthy body it is in,
knows how to get rid of a useless thing quickly—in fact knows how
to forget. Things do not weigh on it, or bear it down, any more than
a hearty meal lies heavily on its body’s stomach. Its body digests
quickly, and has very soon done with the process. The positive mind
digests quickly—particularly its supposed misdeeds. That is why it is
so difficult to give a positive person a guilty conscience; because a
guilty conscience is simply a costive conscience. The positive mind
remembers only so much as interests it keenly, or as much as does not
stand in the way of a continued positive attitude to life; just as its
body only retains the nourishment out of all it absorbs.

_The positive mind has no fear of pain_, particularly if this pain is
incurred in a vital effort. Little boys will actually enjoy enormous
discomfort and pain, provided it is encountered in doing things that
reek of active life, that bring their bodies into violent action, and
give them the thrill and bracing sensation of overcoming an obstacle,
of resisting an attempt at capture, or of effecting a capture. “Yea” is
their constant attitude to everything, even to the things which, to the
adult, are disagreeable.

I remember on one occasion, when I was walking home from a friend’s
house in the pouring rain, I met that same friend’s two little sons
returning at a perfectly leisurely pace from school. I had an umbrella,
they had not. Naturally I felt it incumbent upon me to see them
home, and, gathering them carefully under my silk shelter, I marched
them smartly in the direction of their father’s house. I soon found,
however, that all my pains were wasted on them, for whenever I was
not looking, out one of them would stray into the drenching shower;
and when I insisted on their keeping quite close to me, each of them
gravely extended his free arm out into the rain to catch as much of
it as possible, while every puddle was conscientiously and solemnly
explored by their feet.

This may seem a trifling circumstance to dwell upon; but unimportant
as it was, it struck me as being but another example of the indomitable
yea-saying of healthy childhood to anything and everything.

The gravity of the little boy when he does these things shows clearly
the relation between positiveness and things that matter—things that
have _weight_, _solidity_, _importance_, _tangibility_, _definition_.

Another incident occurs to me as I write. I remember once feeling a
little intrigued by the sight of a knot of little village boys standing
like conspirators very seriously together in one of the streets of my
favourite Sussex village. Their ages ranged from about eight to eleven
years. I knew them all perfectly well, and the fact that I drew close
up to them did not disturb them in the least. When I was near enough to
discover what they were talking about, this is what I saw and heard:—In
the centre of the grave and almost hushed group there stood a lad of
about nine years of age. He was exhibiting his dirty hands proudly and
almost arrogantly to his friends, and the latter were listening with
rapt attention to his harangue. I noticed that they all appeared to be
a little crestfallen and dejected, save the boy who was demonstrating
with his hands, and one other boy who seemed to be arguing with him.
Now the explanation of all this profound interest, rapt attention
and conflicting emotions, was as follows:—The central figure, the
boy of nine, had hands that were covered thickly with large warts,
and he possessed one particularly big and ugly-looking specimen just
beneath the knuckle of a finger of his right hand. He was exhibiting
these horrible excrescences to his schoolfellows triumphantly and
defying them to show anything like them, or even approaching them in
size and number; and there was but one of them who had a sufficiently
respectable record, where warts were concerned, to be able to answer
him and meet him, as it were, on equal ground, and this was the boy who
had been contesting his point all the time.

Again, this is a trifling incident, but it is full of significance
for the analyst of the positive mind. This yea-saying to anything and
everything, which surges up with the conviction of an explosion at
every moment, everywhere, is far more important, far more profound,
far more solid, as a characteristic of childhood, than that mythical
innocence and sweet merriness which is the only characteristic of
healthy childhood that superficial child-lovers will either grant or
recognize.


(4) DISCIPLINE IN ITS RELATION TO THE POSITIVE MIND

The discipline of healthy children, because of their very positiveness,
is one of the most intricate and delicate tasks that devolves upon the
adult man or woman. It is the task and problem of practical morality,
and to solve it without chilling any of that valuable positiveness
of childhood, to impose a limit, in fact, upon juvenile positiveness
without destroying or blighting it, is the most difficult achievement
in education.

To say “yea” to everything—to mud, to filth, to danger, to illness (for
positive children are positive even to their bodily disorders), to the
rain, to animals, to vermin, to the knife, to explosives, to ladders,
to dangerous altitudes, to the precipice, and so on—is of course,
supremely delightful, supremely healthy; but it cannot be allowed in
its full catholicity. This I am perfectly ready to knowledge. The
luxuriance of the child’s positiveness _must_ be pruned. The human
being must be reared for society. He must be taught the limitations of
his freedom; above all, he must be taught taste and discrimination:
what to select and what to reject. And there is perhaps no more
solemn moment in life than when a full-grown man or woman, in perfect
possession of all the necessary intellectual equipment for the task,
approaches his universally yea-saying junior to discipline it—that is
to say, to determine its “yea,” to limit it, and to confine it only to
a certain set of things.

The problem is obviously, how can the child be kept positive to this
world while being rendered negative to the undesirable elements in
this life. Or to put it in a sentence: how can I make my little boy
say “No” to warts without saying “No” to the world? To all those who
approach the child with a negative creed, to all those who are vultures
themselves, or who derive from the vulture breed, the order is clearly
“Hands off!” Only people who have retained their positive attitude
to life should be allowed to interfere where children are concerned;
because ordered social life itself is discipline, and but very little
careful and discriminating guidance need be added. When Herbert Spencer
said that children of large families were always better than those of
small families, because in the case of the former the parents have
less time to interfere with natural processes, he propounded a very
true principle as far as the modern negative world is concerned;
because most of the juvenile discipline nowadays is not only imposed by
negative people, but the very social environment in which these people
move and breathe is also negative and hostile to life.

The object and province of juvenile discipline are simply these: to
rear a positive human being for social life; to discipline it to
selection and rejection without forcing it to scout or to suspect vital
functions or vital virtues. It sounds simple enough when stated in a
single line; but how many misunderstandings, how many ruined careers,
how many bitter, disappointed and ill-adapted adults are not the result
of the opposite principle, the principle which reads that the positive
child should above all be taught to distrust its deepest instincts, its
body, and to be suspicious of the world, the flesh and the Devil—the
latter meaning very often no more than wanton spirits.

Sometimes when one sees the kind of people—men and women—into whose
gentle bloodless hands, into whose drab, lifeless but well-meaning
existences, healthy helpless children are made to fall, it is
difficult not to shudder. How good they are! How sweet is their ideal
of what a child ought to be! How vigilant they are for any signs of
“wickedness”! Who can submit to their Procrustean method and survive
a whole, positive being? They _know_! They know what pleases God and
the angels! No one is better informed than they on this subject.
Honest?—no one could be more so than they. Reliable?—they could be
trusted to stamp the exuberance out of a boa-constrictor! Good?—not
merely good, but holy! Their mild cerulean eyes gaze beyond the child
in their tender care, and towards a wonderful ideal, far away, of
perfect childhood—a bright, merry, glowing angel who, preferably, would
have wings on his shoulders, _à la_ Joshua Reynolds, and nothing—no
nothing at all—beneath the thorax. His body might end there with
advantage. That is their belief, their hope, their ambition. All human
beings might end there with advantage; but above all the child, because
children are so pure, so guileless, so sweet; it is such a pity that——

Luckily, robust positiveness has a tenacity and a vigour that
frequently survive even the contagion of these toads with evil
consciences. But how few are the survivals compared with the number
that go under annually!

That is why little girls survive the process more often than little
boys; because, as a rule, unless attacked from the side of the body,
a female’s positiveness to life is wholly and utterly unbreakable.
But it is deeper, more silent, less conspicuous, less articulate
than that of the little boy; therefore it more easily eludes the
cerulean but very superficial glance of the negative adult. It is
more unconscious and consequently less liable to betray itself in the
presence of constraining influences. It manifests itself, too, in a
less arresting, less annoying fashion; it appears to be “harmless.”
Behold the girls that are turned out annually from convent schools or
strictly Puritanical High Schools. If their tremendous positiveness had
not been secret, concealed, subcutaneous, unconscious, how could it
possibly have survived? Again and again I have heard the negative adult
deny a passionate positive temperament in a little girl, when I saw it
clearly. It is this mistake, this inability to detect a trait that is
deep enough to be very far below the surface, that is alone responsible
for the salvation of thousands of girls to-day.

Modern man is not only less positive generally than woman, but
the modicum of positiveness he possesses is also more apparent,
less resisting, more self-assertive, more conscious and therefore
less secret. It also manifests itself in a more obtrusive and more
irritating way.[14]

Boys suffer most from a negative discipline. Men are suffering most
physically and mentally from our negative age. Women only suffer from
the indirect results of the age—that is to say, from the deterioration
it causes in their men.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] See St. Matthew, chap. xxii. verse 30: “For in the resurrection
they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as the angels of
God in heaven.”

[2] It should always be remembered that the promise of Christianity is
“the resurrection of the body.”

[3] For an explanation of what I mean by this much-abused phrase, see
pp. 70, 90-94.

[4] See my _Defence of Aristocracy_ (Constable), chap. V.

[5] See _Sex and Character_ (Heinemann, 1906), p. 299.

[6] _Ibid._, p. 299.

[7] _Ibid._, p. 329.

[8] _Ibid._, p. 336.

[9] _Ibid._, p. 343.

[10] _Ibid._, p. 345.

[11] _Ibid._, p. 345.

[12] Op. cit., p. 346.

[13] Of course, I mean this intellectual positiveness only as a
rational confirmation of bodily and constitutional positiveness; for
frequently when I shall use the expression “positive” it will also
mean the unconscious, spontaneous positiveness of a healthy body.
From the context there will be no mistaking which I mean. The same
remark applies naturally to the expression intellectual negativeness.
For instance, St. Paul and Calvin were both intellectually as well as
spontaneously negative. An unhealthy child, or an unhealthy adult, may
be only unconsciously or spontaneously so.

[14] In this connexion, see pp. 98-103.




