CHAPTER VI

The Positive English Girl


Nothing is more instructive than to proceed from a general to a
particular case; and nothing, at all events, could possibly be more
instructive where women are concerned, than to select the positive
English girl as the particular case; because it is in her heart that
the conflict between the sound promptings of the body, and the unsound
external promptings of the modern world rages most fiercely and most
dramatically. It is in her heart that the issue of the conflict has its
most momentous and far-reaching consequences.

To a heart overflowing with human sympathy, there is something
infinitely wistful and pathetic in the appearance of this apparently
careless and blooming maiden. For, has not every circumstance of her
education and upbringing conspired to make her believe that all those
things which to-morrow will be the meaning and explanation of her
existence, are the very things that yesterday were most concealed, most
“tabooed,” most anxiously hushed up?

The transition from indifference, here, to keen disconcerting interest,
is an effort of the first magnitude—however willing and eager the body
may be to assist in the change of standpoint.

Her soul is very self-contemptuous, self-condemnatory, pessimistic.
And the more positive she is, the more this will be so; because the
greater will be her feeling of conflict with it. She feels she must
be wrong, and her soul and the world right. She is on the verge of
morbid self-dislike, self-rejection. But how can it be otherwise?
Her body is a scandalous and exuberant old Pagan, and every minute
of the day is whispering all kinds of shameless “indecencies” to
her modern high-school soul. And she has been taught to value her
modern high-school soul more than anything on earth. How can she help
despising herself from the standpoint of a first-class high-school
upbringing, when the latter constantly snorts prudishly at everything
her other self—her body, dares to hint to her reluctantly attentive
ear? Who is there to tell her that her high-school soul is entirely
wrong in making her despise herself?

But it is her pessimism that is so terrible and so virulent. All
ill-adapted creatures are prone to be pessimistic, and she is horribly
ill-adapted. Beneath all her tennis-playing, her hockey-playing, her
bright and cheerful manner, that always utterly deceives her parents
and the superficial adults about her, this pessimism clings to her like
a limpet. But how could she help feeling ill-adapted and pessimistic,
in the face of the terrible alternative that now confronts her—the
alternative consisting of either doing violence to the healthy dictates
of her body, or of rejecting all the deepest beliefs of her childhood
and adolescence?

And that is why an everlasting curse must surely hang over every
creature, woman or man, who can be so unscrupulous as to exploit this
temporary pessimism of healthy English female adolescence, and to turn
it to negative account. For all those who, in the nefarious traffic of
political or religious propaganda, avail themselves of it in order to
turn a girl against Life finally and irrevocably, no punishment that
can be imagined is sufficiently severe. Let them draw the unhealthy,
negative girl over to their side; for it is better for all concerned
if she and her like are converted to Life-Heresy; but let them leave
the healthy positive girl alone, to fight her own battle with her
high-school soul.

But the healthy English “Flapper” is courageous and infinitely
enduring. And this is the secret of her constant success against her
high-school soul. For, what is it that really matters in her apparently
uneven conflict between soul and body—a conflict, remember, in which
all the weight of her environment and education is on the side of the
soul? What matters is her body. Now her body knows quite well that
everything is all right, and it has its tongue in its cheek the whole
time, more particularly when the girl herself dallies with thoughts
of the convent or of suicide. Besides, even her high-school soul has
elements that can be persuaded and lured over to the other party. She
is attractive, and is beginning to receive attention. The vanity in
her soul, therefore, soon forms a league with the instincts of her
body. Her soul also wants power, and this power her body guarantees to
give her, if only she will snub the importunate high-school portions
of herself, and neither balk nor overlook its designs. Above all, her
soul is aching with curiosity concerning the secret of life, and the
happiness of life; and as her body’s irrepressible lust of life is
always at hand to lend support to any intellectual inquisitiveness,
a combination of forces is effected that is as formidable as it is
usually triumphant.

Where is the party on earth that could survive all these defections
from its ranks? That is why, if left alone, the negative side of her,
her high-school, puritanical soul, is bound to be defeated; that is why
she ultimately rises superior to her shame, her apprehension and her
pessimism.

But it would be a mistake to underrate her struggle, to minimize her
qualms, or to scoff at her cryptic religiosity; her conviction that she
is tremendously deep—all people are deep who have a fight raging in
them—and that she stands on the brink of an even deeper abyss! Even the
haughty manner in which she holds her inexperienced nose high in the
air is instructive. She is trying her hardest to appear as if she were
already above the struggle that is not yet over. Besides, all people
who are in pain, not only feel deep and proud, but are deeper and
prouder than those who do not suffer. Pain not only delves, it also
distinguishes.

Her confusion and the conflict raging inside her, are inclined to make
her ill at ease with all men except the youth of seventeen; for, since
she feels years his senior, he cannot disturb her. She will readily
kill time with him, and with his assistance play an empty game while
she is waiting for the forces in her body to readjust themselves
to the new facts. Then she will not even look at him. Then it is
business. Lads of seventeen will strike her as raw, ridiculous! Even
full-grown men will interest her only to the extent to which they mean
business. They will evoke her blessing only to the extent to which they
realize that she too is in earnest about life, and takes it perfectly
seriously. Then woe to her if one who attracts her heedlessly passes
on! But woe to _him_, above all, who while promising business, and
undertaking it legally and conscientiously with all the sanction of
society and the Church, yet undeceives her, and disappoints her when
it comes to the point, and drives her back to the pessimism of her
youth, and the doubts and shame she had so valiantly overcome. For the
duty of the positive man is to give woman a perfectly clean conscience
in regard to sex and its pleasures. As the Church of England Prayer
Book nobly and rightly puts it: “The husband ... is the Saviour of the
body.” He who does not realize the profundity of this passage in the
Church of England Prayer Book had better put the present work aside;
for he will never be able to sympathize with anything in it. No man who
is not the “Saviour of the body” of his wife can help being anything
else than a thing of torment and torture to her; while her love and
her devotion to him are increased a thousandfold, and her fidelity to
him probably secured for life, if only he knows how to confirm and
consolidate the triumph her body once achieved, single-handed, over her
high-school soul during the trying period of her adolescence.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let no young lady who has read the above passage with indignation
suppose that it was an attempt to describe her particular type. The
very fact that she has felt indignant about it sufficiently proves that
it does not refer to her in the least; so she can set her mind at rest
and absolve me of any intention of slighting or offending her.

If, however, she has read the words with a feeling of passionate
anger—anger at the thought that all I have said truly applies to her,
though no longer now, alas!—no longer at her present stage in life;—if,
therefore, her emotion is the righteous anger of one who is filled with
regret and sorrow for the things that she now recognizes as having
once been hers, though they are hers no longer;—things she is still
young enough to possess, though they have been filched from her by her
environment and her unsound mode of life—I, as the mere analyst in this
affair, applaud her feeling, and am glad that she has not yet reached
that stage of listless resignation when youth, positiveness and ardour
have ceased from moving her or from exciting her longing. If once she
has been the girl I have just described, and she has deteriorated or
grown negative, either (1) through a too prolonged and too exhausting
wait, and a period too protracted of absolute abstinence; or (2)
through unwholesome living, or—which is worst of all—(3) through
marrying a man who has not proved the “Saviour of her body”; then I,
too, join my anger to hers, and am perhaps even more angry than she;
because all those who have a keen appreciation of quality, must loathe
to see it squandered, destroyed or so badly mismanaged as to be made a
thing of naught.

The three causes of deterioration and deflection to negativeness will
now be examined separately, and in the order of the numbers given above.

(1) Maybe that at seventeen, or perhaps eighteen, the positive English
girl was fully equipped, and felt herself fully equipped. Maybe Nature
itself at that age had concentrated all its most subtle art on the one
task of making her as attractive and as irresistible as possible. Her
top wave came with her nineteenth, twentieth and twenty-first years—all
years of bewilderingly beautiful ripeness, when every fibre in her body
was agog, on the _qui vive_, harking for the approach of the mate that
would justify all this sumptuous and generous preparation; harking
timidly, though eagerly, for him who would consummate her expectant
womanhood, give the only genuine value that they could claim to all her
wondrous charms, and reveal herself to herself in all her wealth of
ancestral virtues, gifts and skill.

She had received her pearl necklace; she had received her golden
bracelets; she wore on her right hand a ring that had belonged to
her grandmother; but now she wanted the crowning jewel of all, the
hall-mark of her genuine womanhood—the little band of gold that was the
emblem of matrimony.

Her twenty-second year went by, and nothing happened. Her twenty-third
and twenty-fourth vanished also, and still her insignia were
incomplete. But there was time yet, and anxiety, though present, was
by no means acute. She was prepared for another year, or two, or even
three, of patient waiting.

Since, however, it is impossible even for Nature herself to stand for
ever on the tiptoe of anticipation; since it is too much to expect of
anything or anybody, that weariness will not ultimately supervene if
a wait is prolonged unduly, or if nothing—aye, nothing!—ever comes
to repay an all too lavish outlay of beauty and its promise of joys
untasted; it is, alas, a not uncommon occurrence—however ready the
girl herself may be to continue waiting and watching—for Nature itself
to feel so bitterly snubbed that it withdraws, as it were, from its
position of proud and unstinting impresario, and wanders off elsewhere
to spread its ornaments and charms over another and perhaps more
fortunate subject.

This stage in the positive English girl’s career is not apparent to
the outsider, nor is it immediately apparent to the girl herself. All
she knows is that she does not feel quite as well as she used to feel.
She does not sleep so well, eat so well, or resist fatigue so well.
She is not conscious, yet, that her looks are no longer so startlingly
attractive as they were three or four years ago; but there is a shade
of difference of which even she herself is aware on certain days. Her
face is beginning to acquire definition. Her features do not melt into
one another with the same indefinite sweep of downy cuticle; while
the tone has also begun to decline in her bigger organs, and they are
losing the braced, tense, healthy readiness they possessed at the
beginning of the wait.

She may have all kinds of disorders now which she did not have at
the moment of her top wave, while a concomitant depression of spirit
makes her feel less keen about life, less eager about its mysteries.
There is even a threat of anæmia—the result of occasional costiveness,
its frequent correlative leucorrhœa, and a general lack of tone in
her whole system. A neglected organ avenges itself, a neglected body
avenges itself; her whole spirit wishes to avenge itself; for, like
a flower, she needed the sun—in her case the sun of love—and she is
visibly withering without it.[46]

With the third and final stage, all the symptoms become acute,
before dying away completely only to leave the body a mere husk of
_unrealised_ and now _undesired_ possibilities. Discontent, unconscious
or conscious, together with all kinds of troublesome, though not
dangerous, disorders, gradually reduce her body and her spirit, and
thus undermine her positiveness. Her temper is irascible; her periods
irregular, unreliable and sometimes very painful—the sign that the body
is really indignant! Costiveness and leucorrhœa set in chronically.
Nobody understands either; nobody cares. The first principles of
negativeness begin to creep stealthily into her once positive mind.
Her features, hands and arms have lost all their bloom and roundness.
With genuine alarm, one day, she suddenly recognizes that she is but a
travesty, a caricature, of what she once was; and that Life itself is
only a caricature of what it used to be. Now she no longer feels any
real physical horror at the thought of spinsterhood, because she is not
what she was when spinsterhood would certainly have filled her with
horror. If she dislikes the idea of spinsterhood now, it is chiefly
owing to her vanity, not to her bodily appetites. She feels that her
prestige would be enhanced by the “Mrs.”—that is all! But her body has
no share in this vain sentiment.

If she has once been the positive girl I describe, however, she is now
filled with an indescribable feeling of burning, aching, consuming
detestation of the world she once loved. Hope, trust, yea-saying have
all gone. Her thwarted instincts manifest themselves in an obverse
character, and she becomes misanthropic, purely negative to Man and to
Life, and desiring only to end her existence in an act of revenge on
man, society and her more fortunate sisters.

Only the very positive girl makes a hateful spinster, because only
she has lost anything precious, only she knows what a cruel snub
her sumptuous preparations once received! To have had all these
preparations wasted; to have had to look on while, one by one, her
charms grew so faint as no longer even to lure the guest for whom
such a rich banquet had once been laid; to have been a magnet and to
have watched one’s magnetism gradually vanish without having been
effective—these experiences are cruel in any case; but their cruelty
increases in proportion to the magnitude, wealth and beauty of the
original welcome that Nature had organized.

The negative girl, to whom an atonic state of the body, irregular and
painful periods, have been an ever-present and familiar condition since
her earliest puberty, or the negative girl who, while suffering from
none of these disorders, is yet insufficiently vigorous or sound in
organic equipment to render the thwarting of her reproductive instinct
a state of suffering and bitter disillusionment, may make a perfectly
cheerful, engaging, companionable and even thoroughly good-natured old
maid.[47]

It is an interesting fact that in France, where positiveness among
girls is ever so much more general than in England, the old maid is
universally unbearable, and is proverbially known to be so.

       *       *       *       *       *

(2) But there are other agencies at work in modern society for reducing
the positive English girl to negativeness, besides the unfortunate
and often inevitable circumstances of an all-too-long wait. For, in
England, there is extraordinarily little care taken of the female body.
It should never be forgotten in this regard, that although we, as a
nation, are lovers of both sport and open-air exercise, we are culpably
neglectful of that hygiene which is concerned with the fundamentals
of life. Genuine and gentle reverence for the body, particularly for
the young female body, is startlingly rare in England. Fundamentals
are not faced; they are, if possible, avoided; and frequently owing
to a deliberate refusal to recognize the needs and fragility of an
equipment that is vital, elaborate and easily disordered, girls are
as much as possible handled and treated like boys of their own age.
Positive girls, particularly, who are well built and vigorous, whose
correlation of bodily parts is as near perfect as it is possible for
the organs of modern people to be, have very few difficulties in early
puberty. They are regular, they feel little or no inconvenience from
the attending phenomena of puberty; but owing to this very freedom
from morbid symptoms they are often allowed, thanks to the prevailing
lack of reverence for the body, to engage in pastimes and sports—even
during their moments of indisposition—which must, and undoubtedly do,
ultimately induce a morbid condition if the habit is persisted in. Let
me explain:—

To begin with, the very fact that anxious and almost fearful silence
and secrecy are made to hang over all the manifestations of puberty in
girls, is in itself an inducement for the young female to desire to
behave during her moments of indisposition as much as possible like her
schoolmates who are not indisposed. When, therefore, in addition to
this desire, she feels and is known to feel no very marked discomfort
at such moments, there is apparently nothing to prevent her from going
a long walk or joining in a game of tennis, net-ball or even hockey
with the rest of her friends, at a moment when violent exercise of
all kinds ought to be most carefully avoided. In girls’ high schools
and later on at college, such breaches of reverence towards the body
are not only of constant occurrence, they may be said to be the rule
where the positive girl is concerned, unless, of course, her parents
have been wise enough to insist specially upon the proper precautions
being observed. In the end, however, long as the period of successful
resistance may be, the body must suffer from this violence, and the
toll paid is then both severe and heavy.

Another very dangerous custom is that of having recreation and games
directly after a meal. There is nothing objectionable in sports for
girls, provided they are not too violent.[48]—On the contrary, games
keep them out in the open air and exercise their bodies. But it
is a risky thing, in view of the subsequent cost to the whole body
and spirit, to give the alimentary canal in girls the slightest
possible excuse for getting out of order; and exercise after a meal,
particularly when such exercise is violent, is a potent factor in
bringing about indigestion, costiveness and all their concomitant
disorders. This notwithstanding, it is not uncommon, in fact it is an
almost regular practice for girls in high schools and at college—often
with the consent of their parents if these happen to know—to rush out
directly after lunch to a game of hockey or tennis, or what not, and
to engage in the most violent exercise and movements in the course
of their play. This is the most unscrupulous vandalism; for, even
if they are not indisposed at the time, the evil effects of such
excessive activity directly after a meal are notorious. In the end
costiveness must occur, not as a temporary affection, but alas! as a
chronic habit; and the custom of correcting this tendency by means of
constant purgation only aggravates the trouble.[49] Now constipation
is in itself a bad thing. It lowers spirit, it gives rise to nervous
trouble, causes auto-intoxication that saps energy and interferes
with sound sleep; it also acts as a poison on the red corpuscles of
the blood and reduces their number, and thus fosters the development
of anæmia. But this is not all; for with constipation there is always
serious infection of the lower colon, and a general loss of tone in
that organ. The gravity of this condition in women cannot, however,
be overrated, because the surrounding and adjacent parts are so vital
and so important, that no risk that can possibly imperil their health
and vigour ought ever to be run, much less therefore courted and
chosen. How long it takes for an infected and atonic colon to affect
the neighbouring organs, it is impossible to say; but that the atonic
condition can and does spread from the original seat of the trouble
to other parts is unquestioned, particularly when anæmia has reduced
their resisting power; and the results are always of the worst possible
nature. Very quickly, if it is not already present, that worst and most
insidious of maladies, leucorrhœa, makes its first appearance, and then
a vicious circle is formed which it is extremely difficult to break.

This does not pretend to be a medical work; but the consequences and
symptoms of this disease, leucorrhœa, are so far reaching and generally
so much ignored, that it seems imperative to speak out quite openly on
the subject. All through this book, the relations of the spirit to the
body is considered as being so close, so intimate, and the relation of
the attitudes of the positiveness and negativeness to the state of the
body is recognized as so inevitable and deep-seated, that I should be
guilty of a flaw in my argument, of a grave omission in the frank array
of my facts, if, particularly at this stage, I were to scout a subject
which, however disagreeable and delicate, formed a necessary link in
the chain of my reasoning.

To begin with, then, let it be said most emphatically, for all those
whom it may concern, that leucorrhœa—this most regrettable and most
neglected of the hidden scourges that harass the women of England—is a
much more serious and much more distressing ailment than the ordinary
general practitioner, or even specialist gynæcologist, is ready to
admit. The fact that Albutt in his _Twentieth Century Practice_ allots
only one paragraph of about fifteen lines to the subject of leucorrhœa
in girls, shows at once with what a frivolous shrug of the shoulders
the orthodox medical school cavalierly disposes of this all-important
question. Leucorrhœa is not only a catarrh in a most vital part, it is
also the symptom of a loss of tone in a most vital part—a loss of tone
and therefore of vitality. It is important to remember, in regard to
this disease, _that scarcely a case of the kind has ever been known in
which colon bacilli were not present in the mucous discharge_. The
intimate connexion between leucorrhœa and the state of the colon is
therefore indisputable, and shows with what reverent care the body of
the young positive girl should be tended and watched. The body of the
negative girl does not matter nearly as much.

When it is remembered that persistent and obstinate leucorrhœa is
the cause not only of more than three-quarters of the irregularity
and pain of girls’ periodic indispositions, not only of a depression
and degeneration of sexual keenness that may make sexual union quite
unenjoyable, not to say unpleasant, but also that it is a reducing,
an exhausting, and a sterilizing ailment (sterility where it is not
the result of actual malformation is almost always the result of
leucorrhœa), it cannot be too urgently or too deeply impressed upon the
parent and the guardian of the positive English girl, that reverence
for her body, and not alone for her pure soul (which, as we have seen,
can well be left to look after itself), is their most solemn and most
sacred duty.

Unfortunately, and incredible as it may appear, I have, after the
most careful inquiry, discovered that even where leucorrhœa has been
diagnosed and proved beyond any doubt to be present, it has been
impossible to prescribe the only effective remedies and the only
salutary hygiene, owing to the fact that they are frequently of such
a nature that no English parent would dream of tolerating their
application for an instant! The price we pay for our Puritanism is
occasionally very heavy indeed.

When in addition to chronic costiveness and leucorrhœa, anæmia
ultimately sets in to stamp its powerful blight upon the face and body
of our fair and positive English girl, the amount of positiveness
that has been left within her, the extent of her original self that
still remains, may easily be computed. I need hardly say that this is
not much, and yet, though she is spoiled for every other purpose, she
probably stands as a tennis, a hockey, and often a classical champion,
as the glory of her whole family, class and nation.

And, mark you, she has been spoiled for every other purpose, not
by necessity, not by fate or accident, but by a manner of life the
mistakes of which could have been avoided, eliminated and corrected,
if only those to whom she was related had felt that reverence for her
body, which all beautiful things deserve and demand, and without which
they surely perish.

Where the positive girl of the poorer classes is concerned the evil is
just as great and just as widespread; but at least in her case, there
is the excuse of necessity, of compulsion, of economic pressure. She
does not, it is true, rush out to a game of hockey, tennis or net-ball
immediately after her meals, neither, as a rule, does she have to take
a long pleasure-walk; but she has certainly to rush off either to the
local underground railway or to an omnibus in order to get to her work,
or else she has to hurry along a considerable distance on foot to get
there. She does not play at hockey or tennis when she is indisposed;
but if she works at a factory she has to go there all the same; if she
works in a shop she has to stand about there all the same; and if she
is a laundress she has to stand at a board or a machine all the same.

In both classes, then, rich and poor, Puritanism in different ways—on
the one hand by its doctrine of indifference to the body, and on the
other by its creations, modern industry and commerce—has succeeded in
suppressing all reverence for the positive girl’s beautiful body, and
the spiritual as well as the physical cost to the nation of this stupid
and iniquitous attitude is as appalling as it is incalculable.

       *       *       *       *       *

(3) Even if she marry early—as all positive girls should—she may
still be converted to negativeness; and in this last instance, not by
discontent, a too long wait, or an unhealthy mode of life during youth,
but actually by her young husband himself.

Although, strictly speaking, this question should come in the chapter
on Marriage, its discussion here, in view of what has gone before,
seems so opportune and necessary, that I have decided to include it
here, and thus leave myself all the more room for other considerations
in Chapter VII.

I have mentioned before that the deterioration of men from the
standpoint of Life—i.e. their gradual approximation to a purely, or
relatively, negative type—has been a process that, in England at least,
has been going on for almost 270 years. In this time a good deal can
be accomplished in the matter of altering a type, and there can be
no doubt that a good deal has indeed been accomplished. Fortunately,
however, apart from the actual deterioration through bad food and
unhealthy living and work (which, as I have shown elsewhere, are the
indirect results of Puritanical values), Puritanism has not done much
to affect the positiveness of the poorest classes in England. Where it
has proved most formidable is in (1) the plutocracy, (2) the middle
classes, and (3) the lower middle classes. In these the ravages of
Puritanical tradition on the constitutions and outlook of the men is
everywhere noticeable; and that which makes the incidence of this evil
all the harder to bear is the fact that the women of all these classes
have not suffered nearly to the same extent from this tradition.

Whereas, therefore, it is a more or less common experience to find a
positive girl in all these classes, the appearance of a truly positive
man is excessively rare. I may have occasion to refer to this state
of affairs again in Part II; but, for the present, let us examine its
immediate effects on the positive girl who has just married.

The positive girl extends her hand confidently, bravely and hopefully
to Life. She does not expect to draw it back empty; she does not desire
to draw it back full of bliss. She is brave enough, rational enough,
and above all exuberant enough, to expect to draw it back with its full
quantum of pleasure and pain. She wants _Life_, and what though Life
means some pain, willy-nilly she will have it notwithstanding, and her
heart whispers “damn the consequences.”

But there is something she does expect, something she has a right to
expect; and that is that her husband himself should be her guide, her
mentor and initiator. From time immemorial it is his sex that has been
_prehensile_. Throughout the higher animal kingdom, prehension in the
sex act is the exclusive attribute of the male. He often has the organs
for it, and he almost always has the superior strength for it—even when
his strength is not required for other purposes. But just think what
prehension means! It involves initiation; it means taking the first
steps; it is certainly tantamount to setting the tone, the manner,
the order of an encounter. Traditionally, then, for millions of years
the male has had his particular rôle, the rôle of prehension, with
all its correlative virtues and qualities. Before self-consciousness
dawned in the human being, he was prehensile in the sexual act—and his
rôle therein involved, as I think it necessary to repeat, powers of
initiation, the ability to take the first steps, the necessary mastery
over sex, to set the tone, the manner and the order of the sexual
encounter. What does all this imply? It is obvious! It implies that
for an equal number of millions of years the female of the species has
expected this prehension and all its correlative qualities in the male.
It means that now, to this very day, her deepest feelings tell her
that it is only right, only proper, and only becoming, that he should
possess and display a certain mastery, a certain free virtuosity—that
virtuosity of a flame in a roaring fire—in the matter of sex, and that
his very ardour, his very virtuosity, his very ease in mastery, should
finally seal the coffin of all that guilty feeling towards sex which
she had almost killed in her youth, and which she now expects to be
buried once and for all.

This, positive Woman understands. This is what she has a right to
expect; this is what makes her serene, content, free in conscience and
in gait, confident that life is worth living and that her positive
impulses have been correct all along.

But what is it that happens so frequently that often a sense of shame
regarding sex actually begins in a positive woman on the very day of
her marriage—never again to be completely dissipated?

—The unfortunate modern man whom our positive girl marries, is often as
remote from any mastery over sex, or from any ease or free virtuosity
where it is concerned, as a marble statue. Thanks to the prudish
nature of his upbringing, his environment and his outlook, and also
to the general lack of sexual exuberance in his constitution, he is
frequently as terrified of the subject as is his spinster aunt, and
he knows no more about taking the initiative properly, artistically,
capably, than a child of three. As for that impetuosity that carries
everything before it, even the girl’s natural modesty, and releases the
pent-up demons of roguery so long stifled in her breast!—poor man! far
from releasing them he would prefer a thousand times to slip another
bolt across the door that imprisons them! Hesitation, shame, disgust,
a sense of guilt and of discomfort, often followed by incredibly
long periods of post-conjugal virginity and chastity, are frequently
the result, and with general consequences that are most deeply to be
deplored.

Prehension!—He has not even comprehension where sex is concerned! And
since in this matter, which is rightly so delicate and therefore so
dependent upon consummate art, the Woman is utterly dependent upon
him, a miserable, uncomfortable and clammy atmosphere is straightway
generated in a new home, in which everything could otherwise be so
bright, so clean, so full of mutual confidence and good spirits. And in
all this, mark you, no reference is made to the need of child-bearing
for the woman, which here is left indefinitely ungratified and
unconsidered.

How many women ever survive this first great shock to their
positiveness it is impossible to say; but that a very large number
undoubtedly do grow negative from the effects of it, I myself have
been able to ascertain and to record, even in my own small but fairly
representative circle.


FOOTNOTES:

[46] Hundreds of people, doctors included, will declare that this is
wrong; that an all-too-long wait does not necessarily impair health
or beauty. As if not being used, not being made to function, could
possibly be a good thing, or at least a thing that does no harm! Make
a child sit still for years, and see how its health will be affected!
It is absurd to argue that when an equipment is normal and healthy, it
does not do it and the body containing it considerable damage not to
use it! But in this matter, I do not ask you to believe me! Ask the
positive girls themselves! Ask them (if they remained virgins) whether
they felt the same at twenty-five as they did at nineteen! Ask them
whether they have not learnt from sad experience that an elaborate
mechanism when it is not used gets out of order! Get them into your
confidence, and you will hear the truth for once on this matter.

[47] Paradoxical as it may seem at first sight, it is however only
too true that the worst kind of spinster is precisely this “perfectly
cheerful, engaging, companionable and even thoroughly good-natured old
maid,” because, like the cheerful cripple or the happy invalid, she
is a living mockery of Life, passion and instinct thwarted. Her very
adaptedness to her unnatural lot seems to the unwary an argument in
favour of an unnatural lot, or at least not an argument against it. See
chapter IX.

[48] By violent sports I mean any form of jumping, hockey, football,
lawn tennis, golf and lacrosse. In all these games the movements
of the body are too jerky and too jarring, and muscular effort is
too long sustained. Even for men football is very bad, for women it
is barbarous. In young girls Nature makes an effort to compensate
the excessive demands made by violent sports on the muscles and
bony structure of the legs and pelvis, by proceeding to a premature
stiffening of the fleshy, and a premature ossification of the bony
parts—both of which processes not only arrest full subsequent
development, but also make for unnecessary rigidity in the pelvic and
upper femoral regions—effects which are heavily paid for later on
unless the girls remain unmarried. The fact that even among males,
sailors show smaller hip measurements than soldiers—the former being
habituated from earliest youth to much more violent bodily exertions
than soldiers—shows what a difference this natural compensation for
early muscular strain makes in a sex in which pelvic development is
neither as vital nor as characteristic as it is among girls. Another
danger arising from violent sports for young women, which is not
mentioned in the text, consists in the jerking and jarring of the
spine, small and imperceptible sprains of which, particularly near
the ilium, often lead to very obscure but severe nervous disorders in
later life. The fact that young girls enjoy violent sports is often
adduced as an argument in favour of their adoption at school and
elsewhere. But surely young people, as I have shown, are so catholic
in their positiveness, that their mere liking for an occupation or
amusement should not constitute in itself, and without further inquiry,
a sufficient ground for allowing them to pursue it. Neither should
parents allow themselves to be influenced by the fact that a conclave
of women doctors has recently decided in favour of violent sports for
girls. The decisions come to by middle-aged matrons or middle-aged
spinsters concerning the care and discipline of young girls, should
never be trusted. It is always difficult to be quite certain about the
motives, whether conscious or unconscious, that have animated women of
this age in their dealings with young girls. On the whole, unless it be
her mother, the advice of any middle-aged woman concerning a young girl
ought to be treated with suspicion. See p. 246 (footnote).

[49] With regard to the effects of diet on constipation, I give some
useful hints in chapter V of _A Defence of Aristocracy_.




