CHAPTER XI.
CORRESPONDENCE.


    “Base is the slave that pays.”—ANCIENT PISTOL.

THE Captain was neither drowned nor poisoned, neither miasmatised nor
anatomised.  But, before we proceed to account for him, we must look back
to a young lady, of whom some little notice was taken in the first
chapter; and who, though she has since been out of sight, has never with
us been out of mind: Miss Susannah Touchandgo, the forsaken of the junior
Crotchet, whom we left an inmate of a solitary farm, in one of the deep
valleys under the cloud-capt summits of Meirion, comforting her wounded
spirit with air and exercise, rustic cheer, music, painting, and poetry,
and the prattle of the little Ap Llymrys.

One evening, after an interval of anxious expectation, the farmer,
returning from market brought for her two letters, of which the contents
were these:

                         “_Dotandcarryonetown_, _State of Apodidraskiana_.
                                                          “_April_ 1, 18..

    “MY DEAR CHILD,

    “I am anxious to learn what are your present position, intention, and
    prospects.  The fairies who dropped gold in your shoe, on the morning
    when I ceased to be a respectable man in London, will soon find a
    talismanic channel for transmitting you a stocking full of dollars,
    which will fit the shoe as well as the foot of Cinderella fitted her
    slipper.  I am happy to say I am again become a respectable man.  It
    was always my ambition to be a respectable man, and I am a very
    respectable man here, in this new township of a new state, where I
    have purchased five thousand acres of land, at two dollars an acre,
    hard cash, and established a very flourishing bank.  The notes of
    Touchandgo and Company, soft cash, are now the exclusive currency of
    all this vicinity.  This is the land in which all men flourish; but
    there are three classes of men who flourish especially,—methodist
    preachers, slave-drivers, and paper-money manufacturers; and as one
    of the latter, I have just painted the word BANK on a fine slab of
    maple, which was green and growing when I arrived, and have
    discounted for the settlers, in my own currency, sundry bills, which
    are to be paid when the proceeds of the crop they have just sown
    shall return from New Orleans; so that my notes are the
    representatives of vegetation that is to be, and I am accordingly a
    capitalist of the first magnitude.  The people here know very well
    that I ran away from London; but the most of them have run away from
    some place or other; and they have a great respect for me, because
    they think I ran away with something worth taking, which few of them
    had the luck or the wit to do.  This gives them confidence in my
    resources, at the same time that, as there is nothing portable in the
    settlement except my own notes, they have no fear that I shall run
    away with them.  They know I am thoroughly conversant with the
    principles of banking, and as they have plenty of industry, no lack
    of sharpness, and abundance of land, they wanted nothing but capital
    to organise a flourishing settlement; and this capital I have
    manufactured to the extent required, at the expense of a small
    importation of pens, ink, and paper, and two or three inimitable
    copper plates.  I have abundance here of all good things, a good
    conscience included; for I really cannot see that I have done any
    wrong.  This was my position: I owed half a million of money; and I
    had a trifle in my pocket.  It was clear that this trifle could never
    find its way to the right owner.  The question was, whether I should
    keep it, and live like a gentleman; or hand it over to lawyers and
    commissioners of bankruptcy, and die like a dog on a dunghill.  If I
    could have thought that the said lawyers, etc., had a better title to
    it than myself, I might have hesitated; but, as such title was not
    apparent to my satisfaction, I decided the question in my own favour,
    the right owners, as I have already said, being out of the question
    altogether.  I have always taken scientific views of morals and
    politics, a habit from which I derive much comfort under existing
    circumstances.

    “I hope you adhere to your music, though I cannot hope again to
    accompany your harp with my flute.  My last _andante_ movement was
    too _forte_ for those whom it took by surprise.  Let not your
    _allegro vivace_ be damped by young Crotchet’s desertion, which,
    though I have not heard it, I take for granted.  He is, like myself,
    a scientific politician, and has an eye as keen as a needle to his
    own interest.  He has had good luck so far, and is gorgeous in the
    spoils of many gulls; but I think the Polar Basin and Walrus Company
    will be too much for him yet.  There has been a splendid outlay on
    credit, and he is the only man, of the original parties concerned, of
    whom his Majesty’s sheriffs could give any account.

    “I will not ask you to come here.  There is no husband for you.  The
    men smoke, drink, and fight, and break more of their own heads than
    of girls’ hearts.  Those among them who are musical, sing nothing but
    psalms.  They are excellent fellows in their way, but you would not
    like them.

    “_Au reste_, here are no rents, no taxes, no poor-rates, no tithes,
    no church establishment, no routs, no clubs, no rotten boroughs, no
    operas, no concerts, no theatres, no beggars, no thieves, no king, no
    lords, no ladies, and only one gentleman, videlicet, your loving
    father,

                                                      “TIMOTHY TOUCHANDGO.

    “P.S.—I send you one of my notes; I can afford to part with it.  If
    you are accused of receiving money from me, you may pay it over to my
    assignees.  Robthetill continues to be my factotum; I say no more of
    him in this place: he will give you an account of himself.”

                                             “_Dotandcarryonetown_, _etc._

    “DEAR MISS,

    “Mr. Touchandgo will have told you of our arrival here, of our
    setting up a bank, and so forth.  We came here in a tilted waggon,
    which served us for parlour, kitchen, and all.  We soon got up a
    log-house; and, unluckily, we as soon got it down again, for the
    first fire we made in it burned down house and all.  However, our
    second experiment was more fortunate; and we are pretty well lodged
    in a house of three rooms on a floor; I should say the floor, for
    there is but one.

    “This new state is free to hold slaves; all the new states have not
    this privilege: Mr. Touchandgo has bought some, and they are building
    him a villa.  Mr. Touchandgo is in a thriving way, but he is not
    happy here: he longs for parties and concerts, and a seat in
    Congress.  He thinks it very hard that he cannot buy one with his own
    coinage, as he used to do in England.  Besides, he is afraid of the
    Regulators, who, if they do not like a man’s character, wait upon him
    and flog him, doubling the dose at stated intervals, till he takes
    himself off.  He does not like this system of administering justice:
    though I think he has nothing to fear from it.  He has the character
    of having money, which is the best of all characters here, as at
    home.  He lets his old English prejudices influence his opinions of
    his new neighbours; but, I assure you, they have many virtues.
    Though they do keep slaves, they are all ready to fight for their own
    liberty; and I should not like to be an enemy within reach of one of
    their rifles.  When I say enemy, I include bailiff in the term.  One
    was shot not long ago.  There was a trial; the jury gave two dollars
    damages; the judge said they must find guilty or not guilty; but the
    counsel for the defendant (they would not call him prisoner) offered
    to fight the judge upon the point: and as this was said literally,
    not metaphorically, and the counsel was a stout fellow, the judge
    gave in. The two dollars damages were not paid after all; for the
    defendant challenged the foreman to box for double or quits, and the
    foreman was beaten.  The folks in New York made a great outcry about
    it, but here it was considered all as it should be.  So you see,
    Miss, justice, liberty, and everything else of that kind, are
    different in different places, just as suits the convenience of those
    who have the sword in their own hands.  Hoping to hear of your health
    and happiness, I remain,

                                         “Dear Miss, your dutiful servant,
                                                    “RODERICK ROBTHETILL.”

Miss Touchandgo replied as follows to the first of these letters:

    “MY DEAR FATHER,

    “I am sure you have the best of hearts, and I have no doubt you have
    acted with the best intentions.  My lover, or, I should rather say,
    my fortune’s lover, has indeed forsaken me.  I cannot say I did not
    feel it; indeed, I cried very much; and the altered looks of people
    who used to be so delighted to see me, really annoyed me so, that I
    determined to change the scene altogether.  I have come into Wales,
    and am boarding with a farmer and his wife.  Their stock of English
    is very small; but I managed to agree with them, and they have four
    of the sweetest children I ever saw, to whom I teach all I know, and
    I manage to pick up some Welsh.  I have puzzled out a little song,
    which I think very pretty; I have translated it into English, and I
    send it you, with the original air.  You shall play it on your flute
    at eight o’clock every Saturday evening, and I will play and sing it
    at the same time, and I will fancy that I hear my dear papa
    accompanying me.

    “The people in London said very unkind things of you: they hurt me
    very much at the time; but now I am out of their way, I do not seem
    to think their opinion of much consequence.  I am sure, when I
    recollect, at leisure, everything I have seen and heard among them, I
    cannot make out what they do that is so virtuous, as to set them up
    for judges of morals.  And I am sure they never speak the truth about
    anything, and there is no sincerity in either their love or their
    friendship.  An old Welsh bard here, who wears a waistcoat
    embroidered with leeks, and is called the Green Bard of Cadeir Idris,
    says the Scotch would be the best people in the world, if there was
    nobody but themselves to give them a character: and so I think would
    the Londoners.  I hate the very thought of them, for I do believe
    they would have broken my heart, if I had not got out of their way.
    Now I shall write you another letter very soon, and describe to you
    the country, and the people, and the children, and how I amuse
    myself, and everything that I think you will like to hear about: and
    when I seal this letter, I shall drop a kiss on the cover.

                            “Your loving daughter,

                                                     “SUSANNAH TOUCHANDGO.

    “P.S.—Tell Mr. Robthetill I will write to him in a day or two.  This
    is the little song I spoke of:

    “Beyond the sea, beyond the sea,
    My heart is gone, far, far from me;
    And ever on its track will flee
    My thoughts, my dreams, beyond the sea.

    “Beyond the sea, beyond the sea,
    The swallow wanders fast and free;
    Oh, happy bird! were I like thee,
    I, too, would fly beyond the sea.

    “Beyond the sea, beyond the sea,
    Are kindly hearts and social glee:
    But here for me they may not be;
    My heart is gone beyond the sea.”




