CHAPTER XXIV


I could hear well enough, but at first I couldn't see any of them. But
I gathered that Miss Lucy was standing up whilst she was talking, and
moving around a bit now and then. I seen one of her sleeves, and then a
wisp of her hair. Which was aggervating, fur I wanted to know what she
was like. But her voice was so soft and quiet that you kind of knowed
before you seen her how she orter look.

"Prentiss McMakin came to me that day," she was saying, "with an
appeal--I hardly know how to tell you." She broke off.

"Go ahead, Lucy," says Colonel Tom's voice.

"He was insulting," she said. "He had been drinking. He wanted me
to--to--he appealed to me to run off with him.

"I was furious--NATURALLY." Her voice changed as she said it enough so
you could feel how furious Miss Lucy could get. She was like her brother
Tom in some ways.

"I ordered him out of the house. His answer to that was an offer to
marry me. You can imagine that I was surprised as well as angry--I was
perplexed.

"'But I AM married!' I cried. The idea that any of my own people, or any
one whom I had known at home, would think I wasn't married was too much
for me to take in all at once.

"'You THINK you are,' said Prentiss McMakin, with a smile.

"In spite of myself my breath stopped. It was as if a chilly hand had
taken hold of my heart. I mean, physically, I felt like that.

"'I AM married,' I repeated, simply.

"I suppose that McMakin had got the story of our wedding from YOU." She
stopped a minute. The doctor's voice answered:

"I suppose so," like he was a very tired man.

"Anyhow," she went on, "he knew that we went first to Clarksville. He
said:

"'You think you are married, Lucy, but you are not.'

"I wish you to understand that Prentiss McMakin did it all very, very
well. That is my excuse. He acted well. There was something about
him--I scarcely know how to put it. It sounds odd, but the truth is that
Prentiss McMakin was always a more convincing sort of a person when he
had been drinking a little than when he was sober. He lacked warmth--he
lacked temperament. I suppose just the right amount put it into him. It
put the devil into him, too, I reckon.

"He told me that you and he, Tom, had been to Clarksville, and had made
investigations, and that the wedding was a fraud. And he told it with a
wealth of convincing detail. In the midst of it he broke off to ask to
see my wedding certificate. As he talked, he laughed at it, and tore
it up, saying that the thing was not worth the paper it was on, and he
threw the pieces of paper into the grate. I listened, and I let him do
it--not that the paper itself mattered particularly. But the very fact
that I let him tear it showed me, myself, that I was believing him.

"He ended with an impassioned appeal to me to go with him.

"I showed him the door. I pretended to the last that I thought he was
lying to me. But I did not think so. I believed him. He had done it
all very cleverly. You can understand how I might--in view of what had
happened?"

I wanted to see Miss Lucy--how she looked when she said different
things, so I could make up my mind whether she was forgiving the doctor
or not. Not that I had much doubt but what they would get their personal
troubles fixed up in the end. The iron grating in the floor was held
down by four good-sized screws, one at each corner. They wasn't no
filling at all betwixt it and the iron grating that was in the ceiling
of the room below. The space was hollow. I got an idea and took out my
jack-knife.

"What are you going to do?" whispers Martha.

"S-sh-sh," I says, "shut up, and you'll see."

One of the screws was loose, and I picked her out easy enough. The
second one I broke the point off of my knife blade on. Like you nearly
always do on a screw. When it snapped Colonel Tom he says:

"What's that?" He was powerful quick of hearing, Colonel Tom was. I laid
low till they went on talking agin. Then Martha slides out on tiptoe and
comes back in three seconds with one of these here little screw-drivers
they use around sewing-machines and the little oil can that goes with
it. I oils them screws and has them out in a holy minute, and lifts the
grating from the floor careful and lays it careful on the rug.

By doing all of which I could get my head and shoulders down into that
there hole. And by twisting my neck a good deal, see a little ways to
each side into the room, instead of jest underneath the grating. The
doctor I couldn't see yet, and only a little of Colonel Tom, but Miss
Lucy quite plain.

"You mean thing," Martha whispers, "you are blocking it up so I can't
hear."

"Keep still," I whispers, pulling my head out of the hole so the sound
wouldn't float downward into the room below. "You are jest like all
other women--you got too much curiosity."

"How about yourself?" says she.

"Who was it thought of taking the grating off?" I whispers back to her.
Which settles her temporary, but she says if I don't give her a chancet
at it purty soon she will tickle my ribs.

When I listens agin they are burying that there Prent McMakin. But
without any flowers.

Miss Lucy, she was half setting on, half leaning against, the arm of a
chair. Which her head was jest a bit bowed down so that I couldn't see
her eyes. But they was the beginnings of a smile onto her face. It was
both soft and sad.

"Well," says Colonel Tom, "you two have wasted almost twenty years of
life."

"There is one good thing," says the doctor. "It is a good thing that
there was no child to suffer by our mistakes."

She raised her face when he said that, Miss Lucy did, and looked in his
direction.

"You call that a good thing?" she says, in a kind of wonder. And after
a minute she sighs. "Perhaps," she says, "you are right. Heaven only
knows. Perhaps it WAS better that he died."

"DIED!" sings out the doctor.

And I hearn his chair scrape back, like he had riz to his feet sudden.
I nearly busted my neck trying fur to see him, but I couldn't. I was all
twisted up, head down, and the blood getting into my head from it so I
had to pull it out every little while.

"Yes," she says, with her eyes wide, "didn't you know he died?" And then
she turns quick toward Colonel Tom. "Didn't you tell him--" she begins.
But the doctor cuts in.

"Lucy," he says, his voice shaking and croaking in his throat, "I never
knew there was a child!"

I hears Colonel Tom hawk in HIS throat like a man who is either going
to spit or else say something. But he don't do either one. No one says
anything fur a minute. And then Miss Lucy says agin:

"Yes--he died."

And then she fell into a kind of a muse. I have been myself in the fix
she looked to be in then--so you forget fur a while where you are, or
who is there, whilst you think about something that has been in the back
part of your mind fur a long, long time.

What she was musing about was that child that hadn't lived. I could tell
that by her face. I could tell how she must have thought of it, often
and often, fur years and years, and longed fur it, so that it seemed to
her at times she could almost touch it. And how good a mother she would
of been to it. Some women has jest natcherally GOT to mother something
or other. Miss Lucy was one of that kind. I knowed all in a flash,
whilst I looked at her there, why she had adopted Martha fur her child.

It was a wonderful look that was onto her face. And it was a wonderful
face that look was onto. I felt like I had knowed her forever when I
seen her there. Like the thoughts of her the doctor had been carrying
around with him fur years and years, and that I had caught him thinking
oncet or twicet, had been my thoughts too, all my life.

Miss Lucy, she was one of the kind there's no use trying to describe.
The feller that could see her that-a-way and not feel made good by it
orter have a whaling. Not the kind of sticky, good feeling that makes
you uncomfortable, like being pestered by your conscience to jine a
church or quit cussing. But the kind of good that makes you forget they
is anything on earth but jest braveness of heart and being willing to
bear things you can't help. You knowed the world had hurt her a lot when
you seen her standing there; but you didn't have the nerve to pity her
none, either. Fur you could see she had got over pitying herself. Even
when she was in that muse, longing with all her soul fur that child she
had never knowed, you didn't have the nerve to pity her none.

"He died," she says agin, purty soon, with that gentle kind of smile.

Colonel Tom, he clears his throat agin. Like when you are awful dry.

"The truth is--" he begins.

And then he breaks off agin. Miss Lucy turns toward him when he speaks.
By the strange look that come onto her face there must of been something
right curious in HIS manner too. I was jest simply laying onto my
forehead mashing one of my dern eyeballs through a little hole in the
grating. But I couldn't, even that way, see fur enough to one side to
see how HE looked.

"The truth is," says Colonel Tom, trying it agin, "that I--well, Lucy,
the child may be dead, but he didn't die when you thought he did."

There was a flash of hope flared into her face that I hated to see come
there. Because when it died out in a minute, as I expected it would have
to, it looked to me like it might take all her life out with it. Her
lips parted like she was going to say something with them. But she
didn't. She jest looked it.

"Why did you never tell me this--that there was a child?" says the
doctor, very eager.

"Wait," says Colonel Tom, "let me tell the story in my own way."

Which he done it. It seems when he had went to Galesburg this here child
had only been born a few days. And Miss Lucy was still sick. And the kid
itself was sick, and liable to die any minute, by the looks of things.

Which Colonel Tom wishes that it would die, in his heart. He thinks that
it is an illegitimate child, and he hates the idea of it and he hates
the sight of it. The second night he is there he is setting in his
sister's room, and the woman that has been nursing the kid and Miss Lucy
too is in the next room with the kid.

She comes to the door and beckons to him, the nurse does. He tiptoes
toward her, and she says to him, very low-voiced, that "it is all over."
Meaning the kid has quit struggling fur to live, and jest natcherally
floated away. The nurse had thought Miss Lucy asleep, but as both her
and Colonel Tom turn quick toward her bed they see that she has heard
and seen, and she turns her face toward the wall. Which he tries fur to
comfort her, Colonel Tom does, telling her as how it is an illegitimate
child, and fur its own sake it was better it was dead before it ever
lived any. Which she don't answer of him back, but only stares in
a wild-eyed way at him, and lays there and looks desperate, and says
nothing.

In his heart Colonel Tom is awful glad that it is dead. He can't help
feeling that way. And he quits trying to talk to his sister, fur he
suspicions that she will ketch onto the fact that he is glad that it is
dead. He goes on into the next room.

He finds the nurse looking awful funny, and bending over the dead kid.
She is putting a looking-glass to its lips. He asts her why.

She says she thought she might be mistaken after all. She couldn't
say jest WHEN it died. It was alive and feeble, and then purty soon it
showed no signs of life. It was like it hadn't had enough strength to
stay and had jest went. I didn't show any pulse, and it didn't appear
to be breathing. And she had watched it and done everything before she
beckoned to Colonel Tom and told him that it was dead. But as she come
back into the room where it was she thought she noticed something that
was too light to be called a real flutter move its eyelids, which she
had closed down over its eyes. It was the ghost of a move, like it had
tried to raise the lids, or they had tried to raise theirselves, and had
been too weak. So she has got busy and wrapped a hot cloth around it,
and got a drop of brandy or two between its lips, and was fighting to
bring it back to life. And thought she was doing it. Thought she had
felt a little flutter in its chest, and was trying if it had breath at
all.

Colonel Tom thinks of what big folks the Buckner fambly has always been
at home. And how high they had always held their heads. And how none of
the women has ever been like this before. Nor no disgrace of any kind.
And that there kid, if it is alive, is a sign of disgrace. And he hoped
to God, he said, it wasn't alive.

But he don't say so. He stands there and watches that nurse fight fur to
hold onto the little mist of life she thinks now is still into it. She
unbuttons her dress and lays the kid against the heat of her own breast.
And wills fur it to live, and fights fur it to, and determines that it
must, and jest natcherally tries fur to bullyrag death into going away.
And Colonel Tom watching, and wishing that it wouldn't. But he gets
interested in that there fight, and so purty soon he is hoping both ways
by spells. And the fight all going on without a word spoken.

But finally the nurse begins fur to cry. Not because she is sure it is
dead. But because she is sure it is coming back. Which it does, slow.

"'But I have told HER that it is dead,'" says Colonel Tom, jerking his
head toward the other room where Miss Lucy is lying. He speaks in a low
voice and closes the door when he speaks. Fur it looks now like it was
getting strong enough so it might even squall a little.

"I don't know what kind of a look there was on my face," says Colonel
Tom, telling of the story to his sister and the doctor, "but she must
have seen that I was--and heaven help me, but I WAS!--sorry that the
baby was alive. It would have been such an easy way out of it had it
been really dead!

"'She mustn't know that it is living,' I said to the nurse, finally,"
says Colonel Tom, going on with his story. I had been watching Miss
Lucy's face as Colonel Tom talked and she was so worked up by that fight
fur the kid's life she was breathless. But her eyes was cast down, I
guess so her brother couldn't see them. Colonel Tom goes on with his
story:

"'You don't mean--' said the nurse, startled.

"'No! No!' I said, 'of course--not that! But--why should she ever know
that it didn't die?'"

"'It is illegitimate?' asked the nurse.

"'Yes,' I said." The long and short of it was, Colonel Tom went on to
tell, that the nurse went out and got her mother. Which the two of them
lived alone, only around the corner. And give the child into the keeping
of her mother, who took it away then and there.

Colonel Tom had made up his mind there wasn't going to be no bastards in
the Buckner fambly. And now that Miss Lucy thought it was dead he would
let her keep on thinking so. And that would be settled for good and all.
He figgered that it wouldn't ever hurt her none if she never knowed it.

The nurse's mother kept it all that week, and it throve. Colonel Tom was
coaxing of his sister to go back to Tennessee. But she wouldn't go. So
he had made up his mind to go back and get his Aunt Lucy Davis to come
and help him coax. He was only waiting fur his sister to get well enough
so he could leave her. She got better, and she never ast fur the kid,
nor said nothing about it. Which was probable because she seen he hated
it so. He had made up his mind, before he went back after their Aunt
Lucy Davis, to take the baby himself and put it into some kind of an
institution.

"I thought," he says to Miss Lucy, telling of the story, "that you
yourself were almost reconciled to the thought that it hadn't lived."

Miss Lucy interrupted him with a little sound. She was breathing hard,
and shaking from head to foot. No one would have thought to look at her
then she was reconciled to the idea that it hadn't lived. It was cruel
hard on her to tear her to pieces with the news that it really had
lived, but had lived away from her all these years she had been longing
fur it. And no chancet fur her ever to mother it. And no way to tell
what had ever become of it. I felt awful sorry fur Miss Lucy then.

"But when I got ready to leave Galesburg," Colonel Tom goes on, "it
suddenly occurred to me that there would be difficulties in the way of
putting it in a home of any sort. I didn't know what to do with it--"

"What DID you? What DID you? WHAT DID YOU?" cries out Miss Lucy,
pressing her hand to her chest, like she was smothering.

"The first thing I did," says Colonel Tom, "was to get you to another
house--you remember, Lucy?"

"Yes, yes!" she says, excited, "and what then?"

"Perhaps I did a very foolish thing," says Colonel Tom.

"After I had seen you installed in the new place and had bidden you
good-bye, I got a carriage and drove by the place where the nurse and
her mother lived. I told the woman that I had changed my mind--that you
were going to raise the baby--that I was going to permit it. I don't
think she quite believed me, but she gave me the baby. What else could
she do? Besides, I had paid her well, when I discharged her, to say
nothing to you, and to keep the baby until I should come for it. They
needed money; they were poor.

"I was determined that it should never be heard of again. It was about
noon when I left Galesburg. I drove all that afternoon, with the baby
in a basket on the seat of the carriage beside me. Everybody has read
in books, since books were first written--and seen in newspapers,
too--about children being left on door steps. Given an infant to dispose
of, that is perhaps the first thing that occurs to a person. There was
a thick plaid shawl wrapped about the child. In the basket, beside the
baby, was a nursing bottle. About dusk I had it refilled with warm milk
at a farmhouse near--"

My head was beginning fur to swim. I pulled my head out of that there
hole, and rammed my foot into it. It banged against that grating and
loosened it. It busted loose some plaster, which showered down into the
room underneath. Miss Lucy, she screamed. And the doctor and Colonel Tom
both yelled out to oncet:

"Who's that?"

"It's me," I yells, banging that grating agin. "Watch out below there!"
And the third lick I give her she broke loose and clattered down right
onto a centre table and spilled over some photographs and a vase full of
flowers, and bounced off onto the floor.

"Look out below," I yells, "I'm coming down!"

I let my legs through first, and swung them so I would land to one side
of the table, and held by my hands, and dropped. But struck the table a
sideways swipe and turned it over, and fell onto the floor. The doctor,
he grabbed me by the collar and straightened me up, and give me a shake
and stood me onto my feet.

"What do you mean--" he begins. But I breaks in.

"Now then," I says to Colonel Tom, "did you leave that there child
sucking that there bottle on the doorstep of a blacksmith's house next
to his shop at the edge of a little country town about twenty miles
northeast of Galesburg wrapped up in that there plaid shawl?"

"I did," says Colonel Tom.

"Then," says I, turning to Miss Lucy, "I can understand why I have been
feeling drawed to YOU fur quite a spell. I'm him."



     Transcribers Note:  The following changes made:
      ORIGINAL
     PAGE  LINE  ORIGINAL               CHANGED TO
       17    28  Primose,               Primrose,
       41    12  jests looks            jest looks
       83    14  to,                    too,
       84     4  jests sets             jest sets
       89    28  it                     it.
       99    13  our fur                out fur
      121     4  Chieftan.              Chieftain.
      121    16  i  it                  if it
      160     8  them.                  then.
      183    18  sir fo'                sir, fo'
      189    16  shedon'                she don'
      207    22  purty seen             purty soon
      210     5  They way               The way
      212     6  pintetdly              pintedly
      251     2  Witherses.'            Witherses'.
      251    22  toe hurt               to hurt
      269     3  "Gentleman,            "Gentlemen,
      276    19  'Will,"                "Will,"
      282     9  won't!"                won't
      288    16  real y                 really
      292    10  t ouble.               trouble.
      308     1  al right               all right
      316     4  I says," they          I says, "they








