Part II




22 Earlshall


The next morning after breakfast Joe put Merrylegs into the mistress'
low chaise to take him to the vicarage; he came first and said good-by
to us, and Merrylegs neighed to us from the yard. Then John put the
saddle on Ginger and the leading rein on me, and rode us across the
country about fifteen miles to Earlshall Park, where the Earl of W----
lived. There was a very fine house and a great deal of stabling. We went
into the yard through a stone gateway, and John asked for Mr. York. It
was some time before he came. He was a fine-looking, middle-aged man,
and his voice said at once that he expected to be obeyed. He was very
friendly and polite to John, and after giving us a slight look he
called a groom to take us to our boxes, and invited John to take some
refreshment.

We were taken to a light, airy stable, and placed in boxes adjoining
each other, where we were rubbed down and fed. In about half an hour
John and Mr. York, who was to be our new coachman, came in to see us.

“Now, Mr. Manly,” he said, after carefully looking at us both, “I can
see no fault in these horses; but we all know that horses have their
peculiarities as well as men, and that sometimes they need different
treatment. I should like to know if there is anything particular in
either of these that you would like to mention.”

“Well,” said John, “I don't believe there is a better pair of horses in
the country, and right grieved I am to part with them, but they are not
alike. The black one is the most perfect temper I ever knew; I suppose
he has never known a hard word or a blow since he was foaled, and all
his pleasure seems to be to do what you wish; but the chestnut, I fancy,
must have had bad treatment; we heard as much from the dealer. She came
to us snappish and suspicious, but when she found what sort of place
ours was, it all went off by degrees; for three years I have never seen
the smallest sign of temper, and if she is well treated there is not
a better, more willing animal than she is. But she is naturally a more
irritable constitution than the black horse; flies tease her more;
anything wrong in the harness frets her more; and if she were ill-used
or unfairly treated she would not be unlikely to give tit for tat. You
know that many high-mettled horses will do so.”

“Of course,” said York, “I quite understand; but you know it is not easy
in stables like these to have all the grooms just what they should be. I
do my best, and there I must leave it. I'll remember what you have said
about the mare.”

They were going out of the stable, when John stopped and said, “I had
better mention that we have never used the check-rein with either of
them; the black horse never had one on, and the dealer said it was the
gag-bit that spoiled the other's temper.”

“Well,” said York, “if they come here they must wear the check-rein. I
prefer a loose rein myself, and his lordship is always very reasonable
about horses; but my lady--that's another thing; she will have style,
and if her carriage horses are not reined up tight she wouldn't look at
them. I always stand out against the gag-bit, and shall do so, but it
must be tight up when my lady rides!”

“I am sorry for it, very sorry,” said John; “but I must go now, or I
shall lose the train.”

He came round to each of us to pat and speak to us for the last time;
his voice sounded very sad.

I held my face close to him; that was all I could do to say good-by; and
then he was gone, and I have never seen him since.

The next day Lord W---- came to look at us; he seemed pleased with our
appearance.

“I have great confidence in these horses,” he said, “from the character
my friend Mr. Gordon has given me of them. Of course they are not a
match in color, but my idea is that they will do very well for the
carriage while we are in the country. Before we go to London I must try
to match Baron; the black horse, I believe, is perfect for riding.”

York then told him what John had said about us.

“Well,” said he, “you must keep an eye to the mare, and put the
check-rein easy; I dare say they will do very well with a little
humoring at first. I'll mention it to your lady.”

In the afternoon we were harnessed and put in the carriage, and as the
stable clock struck three we were led round to the front of the house.
It was all very grand, and three or four times as large as the old house
at Birtwick, but not half so pleasant, if a horse may have an opinion.
Two footmen were standing ready, dressed in drab livery, with scarlet
breeches and white stockings. Presently we heard the rustling sound of
silk as my lady came down the flight of stone steps. She stepped round
to look at us; she was a tall, proud-looking woman, and did not
seem pleased about something, but she said nothing, and got into the
carriage. This was the first time of wearing a check-rein, and I must
say, though it certainly was a nuisance not to be able to get my head
down now and then, it did not pull my head higher than I was accustomed
to carry it. I felt anxious about Ginger, but she seemed to be quiet and
content.

The next day at three o'clock we were again at the door, and the footmen
as before; we heard the silk dress rustle and the lady came down the
steps, and in an imperious voice she said, “York, you must put those
horses' heads higher; they are not fit to be seen.”

York got down, and said very respectfully, “I beg your pardon, my lady,
but these horses have not been reined up for three years, and my lord
said it would be safer to bring them to it by degrees; but if your
ladyship pleases I can take them up a little more.”

“Do so,” she said.

York came round to our heads and shortened the rein himself--one hole,
I think; every little makes a difference, be it for better or worse, and
that day we had a steep hill to go up. Then I began to understand what
I had heard of. Of course, I wanted to put my head forward and take the
carriage up with a will, as we had been used to do; but no, I had to
pull with my head up now, and that took all the spirit out of me, and
the strain came on my back and legs. When we came in Ginger said, “Now
you see what it is like; but this is not bad, and if it does not get
much worse than this I shall say nothing about it, for we are very well
treated here; but if they strain me up tight, why, let 'em look out! I
can't bear it, and I won't.”

Day by day, hole by hole, our bearing reins were shortened, and instead
of looking forward with pleasure to having my harness put on, as I used
to do, I began to dread it. Ginger, too, seemed restless, though she
said very little. At last I thought the worst was over; for several days
there was no more shortening, and I determined to make the best of
it and do my duty, though it was now a constant harass instead of a
pleasure; but the worst was not come.




23 A Strike for Liberty


One day my lady came down later than usual, and the silk rustled more
than ever.

“Drive to the Duchess of B----'s,” she said, and then after a pause,
“Are you never going to get those horses' heads up, York? Raise them at
once and let us have no more of this humoring and nonsense.”

York came to me first, while the groom stood at Ginger's head. He drew
my head back and fixed the rein so tight that it was almost intolerable;
then he went to Ginger, who was impatiently jerking her head up and down
against the bit, as was her way now. She had a good idea of what was
coming, and the moment York took the rein off the terret in order to
shorten it she took her opportunity and reared up so suddenly that York
had his nose roughly hit and his hat knocked off; the groom was nearly
thrown off his legs. At once they both flew to her head; but she was
a match for them, and went on plunging, rearing, and kicking in a most
desperate manner. At last she kicked right over the carriage pole and
fell down, after giving me a severe blow on my near quarter. There is no
knowing what further mischief she might have done had not York promptly
sat himself down flat on her head to prevent her struggling, at the
same time calling out, “Unbuckle the black horse! Run for the winch and
unscrew the carriage pole! Cut the trace here, somebody, if you can't
unhitch it!” One of the footmen ran for the winch, and another brought
a knife from the house. The groom soon set me free from Ginger and the
carriage, and led me to my box. He just turned me in as I was and ran
back to York. I was much excited by what had happened, and if I had ever
been used to kick or rear I am sure I should have done it then; but
I never had, and there I stood, angry, sore in my leg, my head still
strained up to the terret on the saddle, and no power to get it down. I
was very miserable and felt much inclined to kick the first person who
came near me.

Before long, however, Ginger was led in by two grooms, a good deal
knocked about and bruised. York came with her and gave his orders, and
then came to look at me. In a moment he let down my head.

“Confound these check-reins!” he said to himself; “I thought we should
have some mischief soon. Master will be sorely vexed. But there, if a
woman's husband can't rule her of course a servant can't; so I wash my
hands of it, and if she can't get to the duchess' garden party I can't
help it.”

York did not say this before the men; he always spoke respectfully when
they were by. Now he felt me all over, and soon found the place above my
hock where I had been kicked. It was swelled and painful; he ordered it
to be sponged with hot water, and then some lotion was put on.

Lord W---- was much put out when he learned what had happened; he blamed
York for giving way to his mistress, to which he replied that in future
he would much prefer to receive his orders only from his lordship; but
I think nothing came of it, for things went on the same as before. I
thought York might have stood up better for his horses, but perhaps I am
no judge.

Ginger was never put into the carriage again, but when she was well of
her bruises one of the Lord W----'s younger sons said he should like
to have her; he was sure she would make a good hunter. As for me, I was
obliged still to go in the carriage, and had a fresh partner called Max;
he had always been used to the tight rein. I asked him how it was he
bore it.

“Well,” he said, “I bear it because I must; but it is shortening my
life, and it will shorten yours too if you have to stick to it.”

“Do you think,” I said, “that our masters know how bad it is for us?”

“I can't say,” he replied, “but the dealers and the horse-doctors know
it very well. I was at a dealer's once, who was training me and another
horse to go as a pair; he was getting our heads up, as he said, a little
higher and a little higher every day. A gentleman who was there asked
him why he did so. 'Because,' said he, 'people won't buy them unless we
do. The London people always want their horses to carry their heads high
and to step high. Of course it is very bad for the horses, but then it
is good for trade. The horses soon wear up, or get diseased, and they
come for another pair.' That,” said Max, “is what he said in my hearing,
and you can judge for yourself.”

What I suffered with that rein for four long months in my lady's
carriage it would be hard to describe; but I am quite sure that, had it
lasted much longer, either my health or my temper would have given way.
Before that, I never knew what it was to foam at the mouth, but now
the action of the sharp bit on my tongue and jaw, and the constrained
position of my head and throat, always caused me to froth at the mouth
more or less. Some people think it very fine to see this, and say, “What
fine spirited creatures!” But it is just as unnatural for horses as
for men to foam at the mouth; it is a sure sign of some discomfort,
and should be attended to. Besides this, there was a pressure on my
windpipe, which often made my breathing very uncomfortable; when I
returned from my work my neck and chest were strained and painful, my
mouth and tongue tender, and I felt worn and depressed.

In my old home I always knew that John and my master were my friends;
but here, although in many ways I was well treated, I had no friend.
York might have known, and very likely did know, how that rein harassed
me; but I suppose he took it as a matter of course that it could not be
helped; at any rate, nothing was done to relieve me.




24 The Lady Anne, or a Runaway Horse


Early in the spring, Lord W---- and part of his family went up to
London, and took York with them. I and Ginger and some other horses were
left at home for use, and the head groom was left in charge.

The Lady Harriet, who remained at the hall, was a great invalid, and
never went out in the carriage, and the Lady Anne preferred riding on
horseback with her brother or cousins. She was a perfect horsewoman, and
as gay and gentle as she was beautiful. She chose me for her horse, and
named me “Black Auster”. I enjoyed these rides very much in the clear
cold air, sometimes with Ginger, sometimes with Lizzie. This Lizzie was
a bright bay mare, almost thoroughbred, and a great favorite with the
gentlemen, on account of her fine action and lively spirit; but Ginger,
who knew more of her than I did, told me she was rather nervous.

There was a gentleman of the name of Blantyre staying at the hall;
he always rode Lizzie, and praised her so much that one day Lady Anne
ordered the side-saddle to be put on her, and the other saddle on me.
When we came to the door the gentleman seemed very uneasy.

“How is this?” he said. “Are you tired of your good Black Auster?”

“Oh, no, not at all,” she replied, “but I am amiable enough to let you
ride him for once, and I will try your charming Lizzie. You must confess
that in size and appearance she is far more like a lady's horse than my
own favorite.”

“Do let me advise you not to mount her,” he said; “she is a charming
creature, but she is too nervous for a lady. I assure you, she is not
perfectly safe; let me beg you to have the saddles changed.”

“My dear cousin,” said Lady Anne, laughing, “pray do not trouble your
good careful head about me. I have been a horsewoman ever since I was a
baby, and I have followed the hounds a great many times, though I know
you do not approve of ladies hunting; but still that is the fact, and
I intend to try this Lizzie that you gentlemen are all so fond of; so
please help me to mount, like a good friend as you are.”

There was no more to be said; he placed her carefully on the saddle,
looked to the bit and curb, gave the reins gently into her hand, and
then mounted me. Just as we were moving off a footman came out with a
slip of paper and message from the Lady Harriet. “Would they ask this
question for her at Dr. Ashley's, and bring the answer?”

The village was about a mile off, and the doctor's house was the last
in it. We went along gayly enough till we came to his gate. There was a
short drive up to the house between tall evergreens.

Blantyre alighted at the gate, and was going to open it for Lady Anne,
but she said, “I will wait for you here, and you can hang Auster's rein
on the gate.”

He looked at her doubtfully. “I will not be five minutes,” he said.

“Oh, do not hurry yourself; Lizzie and I shall not run away from you.”

He hung my rein on one of the iron spikes, and was soon hidden among the
trees. Lizzie was standing quietly by the side of the road a few paces
off, with her back to me. My young mistress was sitting easily with a
loose rein, humming a little song. I listened to my rider's footsteps
until they reached the house, and heard him knock at the door. There was
a meadow on the opposite side of the road, the gate of which stood open;
just then some cart horses and several young colts came trotting out in
a very disorderly manner, while a boy behind was cracking a great whip.
The colts were wild and frolicsome, and one of them bolted across the
road and blundered up against Lizzie's hind legs, and whether it was
the stupid colt, or the loud cracking of the whip, or both together, I
cannot say, but she gave a violent kick, and dashed off into a headlong
gallop. It was so sudden that Lady Anne was nearly unseated, but she
soon recovered herself. I gave a loud, shrill neigh for help; again and
again I neighed, pawing the ground impatiently, and tossing my head to
get the rein loose. I had not long to wait. Blantyre came running to
the gate; he looked anxiously about, and just caught sight of the flying
figure, now far away on the road. In an instant he sprang to the saddle.
I needed no whip, no spur, for I was as eager as my rider; he saw it,
and giving me a free rein, and leaning a little forward, we dashed after
them.

For about a mile and a half the road ran straight, and then bent to the
right, after which it divided into two roads. Long before we came to
the bend she was out of sight. Which way had she turned? A woman was
standing at her garden gate, shading her eyes with her hand, and looking
eagerly up the road. Scarcely drawing the rein, Blantyre shouted, “Which
way?” “To the right!” cried the woman, pointing with her hand, and away
we went up the right-hand road; then for a moment we caught sight of
her; another bend and she was hidden again. Several times we caught
glimpses, and then lost them. We scarcely seemed to gain ground upon
them at all. An old road-mender was standing near a heap of stones, his
shovel dropped and his hands raised. As we came near he made a sign to
speak. Blantyre drew the rein a little. “To the common, to the common,
sir; she has turned off there.” I knew this common very well; it was for
the most part very uneven ground, covered with heather and dark-green
furze bushes, with here and there a scrubby old thorn-tree; there were
also open spaces of fine short grass, with ant-hills and mole-turns
everywhere; the worst place I ever knew for a headlong gallop.

We had hardly turned on the common, when we caught sight again of the
green habit flying on before us. My lady's hat was gone, and her long
brown hair was streaming behind her. Her head and body were thrown back,
as if she were pulling with all her remaining strength, and as if that
strength were nearly exhausted. It was clear that the roughness of the
ground had very much lessened Lizzie's speed, and there seemed a chance
that we might overtake her.

While we were on the highroad, Blantyre had given me my head; but now,
with a light hand and a practiced eye, he guided me over the ground in
such a masterly manner that my pace was scarcely slackened, and we were
decidedly gaining on them.

About halfway across the heath there had been a wide dike recently cut,
and the earth from the cutting was cast up roughly on the other side.
Surely this would stop them! But no; with scarcely a pause Lizzie took
the leap, stumbled among the rough clods and fell. Blantyre groaned,
“Now, Auster, do your best!” He gave me a steady rein. I gathered myself
well together and with one determined leap cleared both dike and bank.

Motionless among the heather, with her face to the earth, lay my poor
young mistress. Blantyre kneeled down and called her name: there was no
sound. Gently he turned her face upward: it was ghastly white and
the eyes were closed. “Annie, dear Annie, do speak!” But there was no
answer. He unbuttoned her habit, loosened her collar, felt her hands and
wrist, then started up and looked wildly round him for help.

At no great distance there were two men cutting turf, who, seeing Lizzie
running wild without a rider, had left their work to catch her.

Blantyre's halloo soon brought them to the spot. The foremost man seemed
much troubled at the sight, and asked what he could do.

“Can you ride?”

“Well, sir, I bean't much of a horseman, but I'd risk my neck for the
Lady Anne; she was uncommon good to my wife in the winter.”

“Then mount this horse, my friend--your neck will be quite safe--and
ride to the doctor's and ask him to come instantly; then on to the hall;
tell them all that you know, and bid them send me the carriage, with
Lady Anne's maid and help. I shall stay here.”

“All right, sir, I'll do my best, and I pray God the dear young lady may
open her eyes soon.” Then, seeing the other man, he called out, “Here,
Joe, run for some water, and tell my missis to come as quick as she can
to the Lady Anne.”

He then somehow scrambled into the saddle, and with a “Gee up” and a
clap on my sides with both his legs, he started on his journey, making
a little circuit to avoid the dike. He had no whip, which seemed to
trouble him; but my pace soon cured that difficulty, and he found the
best thing he could do was to stick to the saddle and hold me in, which
he did manfully. I shook him as little as I could help, but once or
twice on the rough ground he called out, “Steady! Woah! Steady!” On the
highroad we were all right; and at the doctor's and the hall he did his
errand like a good man and true. They asked him in to take a drop of
something. “No, no,” he said; “I'll be back to 'em again by a short cut
through the fields, and be there afore the carriage.”

There was a great deal of hurry and excitement after the news became
known. I was just turned into my box; the saddle and bridle were taken
off, and a cloth thrown over me.

Ginger was saddled and sent off in great haste for Lord George, and I
soon heard the carriage roll out of the yard.

It seemed a long time before Ginger came back, and before we were left
alone; and then she told me all that she had seen.

“I can't tell much,” she said. “We went a gallop nearly all the way, and
got there just as the doctor rode up. There was a woman sitting on the
ground with the lady's head in her lap. The doctor poured something into
her mouth, but all that I heard was, 'She is not dead.' Then I was led
off by a man to a little distance. After awhile she was taken to
the carriage, and we came home together. I heard my master say to
a gentleman who stopped him to inquire, that he hoped no bones were
broken, but that she had not spoken yet.”

When Lord George took Ginger for hunting, York shook his head; he said
it ought to be a steady hand to train a horse for the first season, and
not a random rider like Lord George.

Ginger used to like it very much, but sometimes when she came back I
could see that she had been very much strained, and now and then she
gave a short cough. She had too much spirit to complain, but I could not
help feeling anxious about her.

Two days after the accident Blantyre paid me a visit; he patted me and
praised me very much; he told Lord George that he was sure the horse
knew of Annie's danger as well as he did. “I could not have held him in
if I would,” said he, “she ought never to ride any other horse.” I found
by their conversation that my young mistress was now out of danger, and
would soon be able to ride again. This was good news to me and I looked
forward to a happy life.




25 Reuben Smith


Now I must say a little about Reuben Smith, who was left in charge of
the stables when York went to London. No one more thoroughly understood
his business than he did, and when he was all right there could not be
a more faithful or valuable man. He was gentle and very clever in his
management of horses, and could doctor them almost as well as a
farrier, for he had lived two years with a veterinary surgeon. He was a
first-rate driver; he could take a four-in-hand or a tandem as easily
as a pair. He was a handsome man, a good scholar, and had very pleasant
manners. I believe everybody liked him; certainly the horses did. The
only wonder was that he should be in an under situation and not in the
place of a head coachman like York; but he had one great fault and that
was the love of drink. He was not like some men, always at it; he used
to keep steady for weeks or months together, and then he would break
out and have a “bout” of it, as York called it, and be a disgrace to
himself, a terror to his wife, and a nuisance to all that had to do with
him. He was, however, so useful that two or three times York had hushed
the matter up and kept it from the earl's knowledge; but one night, when
Reuben had to drive a party home from a ball he was so drunk that he
could not hold the reins, and a gentleman of the party had to mount the
box and drive the ladies home. Of course, this could not be hidden, and
Reuben was at once dismissed; his poor wife and little children had to
turn out of the pretty cottage by the park gate and go where they could.
Old Max told me all this, for it happened a good while ago; but shortly
before Ginger and I came Smith had been taken back again. York had
interceded for him with the earl, who is very kind-hearted, and the man
had promised faithfully that he would never taste another drop as long
as he lived there. He had kept his promise so well that York thought he
might be safely trusted to fill his place while he was away, and he was
so clever and honest that no one else seemed so well fitted for it.

It was now early in April, and the family was expected home some time in
May. The light brougham was to be fresh done up, and as Colonel Blantyre
was obliged to return to his regiment it was arranged that Smith should
drive him to the town in it, and ride back; for this purpose he took the
saddle with him, and I was chosen for the journey. At the station the
colonel put some money into Smith's hand and bid him good-by, saying,
“Take care of your young mistress, Reuben, and don't let Black Auster be
hacked about by any random young prig that wants to ride him--keep him
for the lady.”

We left the carriage at the maker's, and Smith rode me to the White
Lion, and ordered the hostler to feed me well, and have me ready for him
at four o'clock. A nail in one of my front shoes had started as I came
along, but the hostler did not notice it till just about four o'clock.
Smith did not come into the yard till five, and then he said he should
not leave till six, as he had met with some old friends. The man then
told him of the nail, and asked if he should have the shoe looked to.

“No,” said Smith, “that will be all right till we get home.”

He spoke in a very loud, offhand way, and I thought it very unlike him
not to see about the shoe, as he was generally wonderfully particular
about loose nails in our shoes. He did not come at six nor seven, nor
eight, and it was nearly nine o'clock before he called for me, and then
it was with a loud, rough voice. He seemed in a very bad temper, and
abused the hostler, though I could not tell what for.

The landlord stood at the door and said, “Have a care, Mr. Smith!” but
he answered angrily with an oath; and almost before he was out of the
town he began to gallop, frequently giving me a sharp cut with his whip,
though I was going at full speed. The moon had not yet risen, and it was
very dark. The roads were stony, having been recently mended; going over
them at this pace, my shoe became looser, and as we neared the turnpike
gate it came off.

If Smith had been in his right senses he would have been sensible of
something wrong in my pace, but he was too drunk to notice.

Beyond the turnpike was a long piece of road, upon which fresh stones
had just been laid--large sharp stones, over which no horse could be
driven quickly without risk of danger. Over this road, with one shoe
gone, I was forced to gallop at my utmost speed, my rider meanwhile
cutting into me with his whip, and with wild curses urging me to go
still faster. Of course my shoeless foot suffered dreadfully; the hoof
was broken and split down to the very quick, and the inside was terribly
cut by the sharpness of the stones.

This could not go on; no horse could keep his footing under such
circumstances; the pain was too great. I stumbled, and fell with
violence on both my knees. Smith was flung off by my fall, and, owing to
the speed I was going at, he must have fallen with great force. I soon
recovered my feet and limped to the side of the road, where it was free
from stones. The moon had just risen above the hedge, and by its light
I could see Smith lying a few yards beyond me. He did not rise; he made
one slight effort to do so, and then there was a heavy groan. I could
have groaned, too, for I was suffering intense pain both from my foot
and knees; but horses are used to bear their pain in silence. I uttered
no sound, but I stood there and listened. One more heavy groan from
Smith; but though he now lay in the full moonlight I could see no
motion. I could do nothing for him nor myself, but, oh! how I listened
for the sound of horse, or wheels, or footsteps! The road was not much
frequented, and at this time of the night we might stay for hours before
help came to us. I stood watching and listening. It was a calm, sweet
April night; there were no sounds but a few low notes of a nightingale,
and nothing moved but the white clouds near the moon and a brown owl
that flitted over the hedge. It made me think of the summer nights long
ago, when I used to lie beside my mother in the green pleasant meadow at
Farmer Grey's.




26 How it Ended


It must have been nearly midnight when I heard at a great distance the
sound of a horse's feet. Sometimes the sound died away, then it grew
clearer again and nearer. The road to Earlshall led through woods that
belonged to the earl; the sound came in that direction, and I hoped it
might be some one coming in search of us. As the sound came nearer and
nearer I was almost sure I could distinguish Ginger's step; a little
nearer still, and I could tell she was in the dog-cart. I neighed
loudly, and was overjoyed to hear an answering neigh from Ginger, and
men's voices. They came slowly over the stones, and stopped at the dark
figure that lay upon the ground.

One of the men jumped out, and stooped down over it. “It is Reuben,” he
said, “and he does not stir!”

The other man followed, and bent over him. “He's dead,” he said; “feel
how cold his hands are.”

They raised him up, but there was no life, and his hair was soaked with
blood. They laid him down again, and came and looked at me. They soon
saw my cut knees.

“Why, the horse has been down and thrown him! Who would have thought the
black horse would have done that? Nobody thought he could fall. Reuben
must have been lying here for hours! Odd, too, that the horse has not
moved from the place.”

Robert then attempted to lead me forward. I made a step, but almost fell
again.

“Halloo! he's bad in his foot as well as his knees. Look here--his hoof
is cut all to pieces; he might well come down, poor fellow! I tell you
what, Ned, I'm afraid it hasn't been all right with Reuben. Just think
of his riding a horse over these stones without a shoe! Why, if he had
been in his right senses he would just as soon have tried to ride him
over the moon. I'm afraid it has been the old thing over again. Poor
Susan! she looked awfully pale when she came to my house to ask if
he had not come home. She made believe she was not a bit anxious, and
talked of a lot of things that might have kept him. But for all that she
begged me to go and meet him. But what must we do? There's the horse to
get home as well as the body, and that will be no easy matter.”

Then followed a conversation between them, till it was agreed that
Robert, as the groom, should lead me, and that Ned must take the body.
It was a hard job to get it into the dog-cart, for there was no one to
hold Ginger; but she knew as well as I did what was going on, and stood
as still as a stone. I noticed that, because, if she had a fault, it was
that she was impatient in standing.

Ned started off very slowly with his sad load, and Robert came and
looked at my foot again; then he took his handkerchief and bound it
closely round, and so he led me home. I shall never forget that night
walk; it was more than three miles. Robert led me on very slowly, and I
limped and hobbled on as well as I could with great pain. I am sure he
was sorry for me, for he often patted and encouraged me, talking to me
in a pleasant voice.

At last I reached my own box, and had some corn; and after Robert
had wrapped up my knees in wet cloths, he tied up my foot in a bran
poultice, to draw out the heat and cleanse it before the horse-doctor
saw it in the morning, and I managed to get myself down on the straw,
and slept in spite of the pain.

The next day after the farrier had examined my wounds, he said he hoped
the joint was not injured; and if so, I should not be spoiled for work,
but I should never lose the blemish. I believe they did the best to make
a good cure, but it was a long and painful one. Proud flesh, as they
called it, came up in my knees, and was burned out with caustic; and
when at last it was healed, they put a blistering fluid over the front
of both knees to bring all the hair off; they had some reason for this,
and I suppose it was all right.

As Smith's death had been so sudden, and no one was there to see it,
there was an inquest held. The landlord and hostler at the White Lion,
with several other people, gave evidence that he was intoxicated when he
started from the inn. The keeper of the toll-gate said he rode at a hard
gallop through the gate; and my shoe was picked up among the stones, so
that the case was quite plain to them, and I was cleared of all blame.

Everybody pitied Susan. She was nearly out of her mind; she kept saying
over and over again, “Oh! he was so good--so good! It was all that
cursed drink; why will they sell that cursed drink? Oh Reuben, Reuben!”
 So she went on till after he was buried; and then, as she had no home or
relations, she, with her six little children, was obliged once more to
leave the pleasant home by the tall oak-trees, and go into that great
gloomy Union House.




27 Ruined and Going Downhill


As soon as my knees were sufficiently healed I was turned into a small
meadow for a month or two; no other creature was there; and though I
enjoyed the liberty and the sweet grass, yet I had been so long used to
society that I felt very lonely. Ginger and I had become fast friends,
and now I missed her company extremely. I often neighed when I heard
horses' feet passing in the road, but I seldom got an answer; till one
morning the gate was opened, and who should come in but dear old Ginger.
The man slipped off her halter, and left her there. With a joyful whinny
I trotted up to her; we were both glad to meet, but I soon found that it
was not for our pleasure that she was brought to be with me. Her story
would be too long to tell, but the end of it was that she had been
ruined by hard riding, and was now turned off to see what rest would do.

Lord George was young and would take no warning; he was a hard rider,
and would hunt whenever he could get the chance, quite careless of his
horse. Soon after I left the stable there was a steeplechase, and he
determined to ride. Though the groom told him she was a little strained,
and was not fit for the race, he did not believe it, and on the day of
the race urged Ginger to keep up with the foremost riders. With her high
spirit, she strained herself to the utmost; she came in with the first
three horses, but her wind was touched, besides which he was too heavy
for her, and her back was strained. “And so,” she said, “here we are,
ruined in the prime of our youth and strength, you by a drunkard, and I
by a fool; it is very hard.” We both felt in ourselves that we were not
what we had been. However, that did not spoil the pleasure we had in
each other's company; we did not gallop about as we once did, but we
used to feed, and lie down together, and stand for hours under one
of the shady lime-trees with our heads close to each other; and so we
passed our time till the family returned from town.

One day we saw the earl come into the meadow, and York was with him.
Seeing who it was, we stood still under our lime-tree, and let them come
up to us. They examined us carefully. The earl seemed much annoyed.

“There is three hundred pounds flung away for no earthly use,” said he;
“but what I care most for is that these horses of my old friend, who
thought they would find a good home with me, are ruined. The mare shall
have a twelve-month's run, and we shall see what that will do for her;
but the black one, he must be sold; 'tis a great pity, but I could not
have knees like these in my stables.”

“No, my lord, of course not,” said York; “but he might get a place where
appearance is not of much consequence, and still be well treated. I know
a man in Bath, the master of some livery stables, who often wants a
good horse at a low figure; I know he looks well after his horses.
The inquest cleared the horse's character, and your lordship's
recommendation, or mine, would be sufficient warrant for him.”

“You had better write to him, York. I should be more particular about
the place than the money he would fetch.”

After this they left us.

“They'll soon take you away,” said Ginger, “and I shall lose the only
friend I have, and most likely we shall never see each other again. 'Tis
a hard world!”

About a week after this Robert came into the field with a halter, which
he slipped over my head, and led me away. There was no leave-taking
of Ginger; we neighed to each other as I was led off, and she trotted
anxiously along by the hedge, calling to me as long as she could hear
the sound of my feet.

Through the recommendation of York, I was bought by the master of the
livery stables. I had to go by train, which was new to me, and required
a good deal of courage the first time; but as I found the puffing,
rushing, whistling, and, more than all, the trembling of the horse-box
in which I stood did me no real harm, I soon took it quietly.

When I reached the end of my journey I found myself in a tolerably
comfortable stable, and well attended to. These stables were not so
airy and pleasant as those I had been used to. The stalls were laid on
a slope instead of being level, and as my head was kept tied to the
manger, I was obliged always to stand on the slope, which was very
fatiguing. Men do not seem to know yet that horses can do more work if
they can stand comfortably and can turn about; however, I was well fed
and well cleaned, and, on the whole, I think our master took as much
care of us as he could. He kept a good many horses and carriages of
different kinds for hire. Sometimes his own men drove them; at
others, the horse and chaise were let to gentlemen or ladies who drove
themselves.




28 A Job Horse and His Drivers


Hitherto I had always been driven by people who at least knew how to
drive; but in this place I was to get my experience of all the different
kinds of bad and ignorant driving to which we horses are subjected; for
I was a “job horse”, and was let out to all sorts of people who wished
to hire me; and as I was good-tempered and gentle, I think I was oftener
let out to the ignorant drivers than some of the other horses, because
I could be depended upon. It would take a long time to tell of all the
different styles in which I was driven, but I will mention a few of
them.

First, there were the tight-rein drivers--men who seemed to think that
all depended on holding the reins as hard as they could, never relaxing
the pull on the horse's mouth, or giving him the least liberty of
movement. They are always talking about “keeping the horse well in
hand”, and “holding a horse up”, just as if a horse was not made to hold
himself up.

Some poor, broken-down horses, whose mouths have been made hard and
insensible by just such drivers as these, may, perhaps, find some
support in it; but for a horse who can depend upon his own legs, and who
has a tender mouth and is easily guided, it is not only tormenting, but
it is stupid.

Then there are the loose-rein drivers, who let the reins lie easily on
our backs, and their own hand rest lazily on their knees. Of course,
such gentlemen have no control over a horse, if anything happens
suddenly. If a horse shies, or starts, or stumbles, they are nowhere,
and cannot help the horse or themselves till the mischief is done. Of
course, for myself I had no objection to it, as I was not in the habit
either of starting or stumbling, and had only been used to depend on my
driver for guidance and encouragement. Still, one likes to feel the rein
a little in going downhill, and likes to know that one's driver is not
gone to sleep.

Besides, a slovenly way of driving gets a horse into bad and often lazy
habits, and when he changes hands he has to be whipped out of them with
more or less pain and trouble. Squire Gordon always kept us to our best
paces and our best manners. He said that spoiling a horse and letting
him get into bad habits was just as cruel as spoiling a child, and both
had to suffer for it afterward.

Besides, these drivers are often careless altogether, and will attend to
anything else more than their horses. I went out in the phaeton one day
with one of them; he had a lady and two children behind. He flopped the
reins about as we started, and of course gave me several unmeaning cuts
with the whip, though I was fairly off. There had been a good deal of
road-mending going on, and even where the stones were not freshly laid
down there were a great many loose ones about. My driver was laughing
and joking with the lady and the children, and talking about the country
to the right and the left; but he never thought it worth while to keep
an eye on his horse or to drive on the smoothest parts of the road; and
so it easily happened that I got a stone in one of my fore feet.

Now, if Mr. Gordon or John, or in fact any good driver, had been there,
he would have seen that something was wrong before I had gone three
paces. Or even if it had been dark a practiced hand would have felt by
the rein that there was something wrong in the step, and they would have
got down and picked out the stone. But this man went on laughing and
talking, while at every step the stone became more firmly wedged between
my shoe and the frog of my foot. The stone was sharp on the inside and
round on the outside, which, as every one knows, is the most dangerous
kind that a horse can pick up, at the same time cutting his foot and
making him most liable to stumble and fall.

Whether the man was partly blind or only very careless I can't say, but
he drove me with that stone in my foot for a good half-mile before he
saw anything. By that time I was going so lame with the pain that at
last he saw it, and called out, “Well, here's a go! Why, they have sent
us out with a lame horse! What a shame!”

He then chucked the reins and flipped about with the whip, saying, “Now,
then, it's no use playing the old soldier with me; there's the journey
to go, and it's no use turning lame and lazy.”

Just at this time a farmer came riding up on a brown cob. He lifted his
hat and pulled up.

“I beg your pardon, sir,” he said, “but I think there is something the
matter with your horse; he goes very much as if he had a stone in
his shoe. If you will allow me I will look at his feet; these loose
scattered stones are confounded dangerous things for the horses.”

“He's a hired horse,” said my driver. “I don't know what's the matter
with him, but it is a great shame to send out a lame beast like this.”

The farmer dismounted, and slipping his rein over his arm at once took
up my near foot.

“Bless me, there's a stone! Lame! I should think so!”

At first he tried to dislodge it with his hand, but as it was now
very tightly wedged he drew a stone-pick out of his pocket, and very
carefully and with some trouble got it out. Then holding it up he said,
“There, that's the stone your horse had picked up. It is a wonder he did
not fall down and break his knees into the bargain!”

“Well, to be sure!” said my driver; “that is a queer thing! I never knew
that horses picked up stones before.”

“Didn't you?” said the farmer rather contemptuously; “but they do,
though, and the best of them will do it, and can't help it sometimes on
such roads as these. And if you don't want to lame your horse you must
look sharp and get them out quickly. This foot is very much bruised,”
 he said, setting it gently down and patting me. “If I might advise,
sir, you had better drive him gently for awhile; the foot is a good deal
hurt, and the lameness will not go off directly.”

Then mounting his cob and raising his hat to the lady he trotted off.

When he was gone my driver began to flop the reins about and whip the
harness, by which I understood that I was to go on, which of course I
did, glad that the stone was gone, but still in a good deal of pain.

This was the sort of experience we job horses often came in for.




29 Cockneys


Then there is the steam-engine style of driving; these drivers were
mostly people from towns, who never had a horse of their own and
generally traveled by rail.

They always seemed to think that a horse was something like a
steam-engine, only smaller. At any rate, they think that if only they
pay for it a horse is bound to go just as far and just as fast and with
just as heavy a load as they please. And be the roads heavy and muddy,
or dry and good; be they stony or smooth, uphill or downhill, it is all
the same--on, on, on, one must go, at the same pace, with no relief and
no consideration.

These people never think of getting out to walk up a steep hill. Oh, no,
they have paid to ride, and ride they will! The horse? Oh, he's used
to it! What were horses made for, if not to drag people uphill? Walk! A
good joke indeed! And so the whip is plied and the rein is chucked and
often a rough, scolding voice cries out, “Go along, you lazy beast!” And
then another slash of the whip, when all the time we are doing our
very best to get along, uncomplaining and obedient, though often sorely
harassed and down-hearted.

This steam-engine style of driving wears us up faster than any other
kind. I would far rather go twenty miles with a good considerate driver
than I would go ten with some of these; it would take less out of me.

Another thing, they scarcely ever put on the brake, however steep the
downhill may be, and thus bad accidents sometimes happen; or if they do
put it on, they often forget to take it off at the bottom of the hill,
and more than once I have had to pull halfway up the next hill, with one
of the wheels held by the brake, before my driver chose to think about
it; and that is a terrible strain on a horse.

Then these cockneys, instead of starting at an easy pace, as a gentleman
would do, generally set off at full speed from the very stable-yard; and
when they want to stop, they first whip us, and then pull up so suddenly
that we are nearly thrown on our haunches, and our mouths jagged with
the bit--they call that pulling up with a dash; and when they turn a
corner they do it as sharply as if there were no right side or wrong
side of the road.

I well remember one spring evening I and Rory had been out for the day.
(Rory was the horse that mostly went with me when a pair was ordered,
and a good honest fellow he was.) We had our own driver, and as he was
always considerate and gentle with us, we had a very pleasant day. We
were coming home at a good smart pace, about twilight. Our road turned
sharp to the left; but as we were close to the hedge on our own side,
and there was plenty of room to pass, our driver did not pull us in. As
we neared the corner I heard a horse and two wheels coming rapidly down
the hill toward us. The hedge was high, and I could see nothing, but the
next moment we were upon each other. Happily for me, I was on the side
next the hedge. Rory was on the left side of the pole, and had not even
a shaft to protect him. The man who was driving was making straight for
the corner, and when he came in sight of us he had no time to pull over
to his own side. The whole shock came upon Rory. The gig shaft ran right
into the chest, making him stagger back with a cry that I shall never
forget. The other horse was thrown upon his haunches and one shaft
broken. It turned out that it was a horse from our own stables, with the
high-wheeled gig that the young men were so fond of.

The driver was one of those random, ignorant fellows, who don't even
know which is their own side of the road, or, if they know, don't care.
And there was poor Rory with his flesh torn open and bleeding, and the
blood streaming down. They said if it had been a little more to one side
it would have killed him; and a good thing for him, poor fellow, if it
had.

As it was, it was a long time before the wound healed, and then he was
sold for coal-carting; and what that is, up and down those steep hills,
only horses know. Some of the sights I saw there, where a horse had to
come downhill with a heavily loaded two-wheel cart behind him, on which
no brake could be placed, make me sad even now to think of.

After Rory was disabled I often went in the carriage with a mare named
Peggy, who stood in the next stall to mine. She was a strong, well-made
animal, of a bright dun color, beautifully dappled, and with a
dark-brown mane and tail. There was no high breeding about her, but she
was very pretty and remarkably sweet-tempered and willing. Still, there
was an anxious look about her eye, by which I knew that she had some
trouble. The first time we went out together I thought she had a very
odd pace; she seemed to go partly a trot, partly a canter, three or four
paces, and then a little jump forward.

It was very unpleasant for any horse who pulled with her, and made me
quite fidgety. When we got home I asked her what made her go in that
odd, awkward way.

“Ah,” she said in a troubled manner, “I know my paces are very bad, but
what can I do? It really is not my fault; it is just because my legs are
so short. I stand nearly as high as you, but your legs are a good three
inches longer above your knee than mine, and of course you can take a
much longer step and go much faster. You see I did not make myself.
I wish I could have done so; I would have had long legs then. All my
troubles come from my short legs,” said Peggy, in a desponding tone.

“But how is it,” I said, “when you are so strong and good-tempered and
willing?”

“Why, you see,” said she, “men will go so fast, and if one can't keep up
to other horses it is nothing but whip, whip, whip, all the time. And so
I have had to keep up as I could, and have got into this ugly shuffling
pace. It was not always so; when I lived with my first master I always
went a good regular trot, but then he was not in such a hurry. He was a
young clergyman in the country, and a good, kind master he was. He had
two churches a good way apart, and a great deal of work, but he never
scolded or whipped me for not going faster. He was very fond of me.
I only wish I was with him now; but he had to leave and go to a large
town, and then I was sold to a farmer.

“Some farmers, you know, are capital masters; but I think this one was a
low sort of man. He cared nothing about good horses or good driving; he
only cared for going fast. I went as fast as I could, but that would
not do, and he was always whipping; so I got into this way of making a
spring forward to keep up. On market nights he used to stay very late at
the inn, and then drive home at a gallop.

“One dark night he was galloping home as usual, when all of a sudden the
wheel came against some great heavy thing in the road, and turned the
gig over in a minute. He was thrown out and his arm broken, and some of
his ribs, I think. At any rate, it was the end of my living with him,
and I was not sorry. But you see it will be the same everywhere for me,
if men must go so fast. I wish my legs were longer!”

Poor Peggy! I was very sorry for her, and I could not comfort her, for
I knew how hard it was upon slow-paced horses to be put with fast ones;
all the whipping comes to their share, and they can't help it.

She was often used in the phaeton, and was very much liked by some of
the ladies, because she was so gentle; and some time after this she was
sold to two ladies who drove themselves, and wanted a safe, good horse.

I met her several times out in the country, going a good steady pace,
and looking as gay and contented as a horse could be. I was very glad to
see her, for she deserved a good place.

After she left us another horse came in her stead. He was young, and had
a bad name for shying and starting, by which he had lost a good place. I
asked him what made him shy.

“Well, I hardly know,” he said. “I was timid when I was young, and was a
good deal frightened several times, and if I saw anything strange I
used to turn and look at it--you see, with our blinkers one can't see
or understand what a thing is unless one looks round--and then my master
always gave me a whipping, which of course made me start on, and did not
make me less afraid. I think if he would have let me just look at things
quietly, and see that there was nothing to hurt me, it would have been
all right, and I should have got used to them. One day an old gentleman
was riding with him, and a large piece of white paper or rag blew across
just on one side of me. I shied and started forward. My master as usual
whipped me smartly, but the old man cried out, 'You're wrong! you're
wrong! You should never whip a horse for shying; he shies because he is
frightened, and you only frighten him more and make the habit worse.'
So I suppose all men don't do so. I am sure I don't want to shy for the
sake of it; but how should one know what is dangerous and what is not,
if one is never allowed to get used to anything? I am never afraid of
what I know. Now I was brought up in a park where there were deer; of
course I knew them as well as I did a sheep or a cow, but they are not
common, and I know many sensible horses who are frightened at them, and
who kick up quite a shindy before they will pass a paddock where there
are deer.”

I knew what my companion said was true, and I wished that every young
horse had as good masters as Farmer Grey and Squire Gordon.

Of course we sometimes came in for good driving here. I remember one
morning I was put into the light gig, and taken to a house in Pulteney
Street. Two gentlemen came out; the taller of them came round to my
head; he looked at the bit and bridle, and just shifted the collar with
his hand, to see if it fitted comfortably.

“Do you consider this horse wants a curb?” he said to the hostler.

“Well,” said the man, “I should say he would go just as well without;
he has an uncommon good mouth, and though he has a fine spirit he has no
vice; but we generally find people like the curb.”

“I don't like it,” said the gentleman; “be so good as to take it off,
and put the rein in at the cheek. An easy mouth is a great thing on a
long journey, is it not, old fellow?” he said, patting my neck.

Then he took the reins, and they both got up. I can remember now how
quietly he turned me round, and then with a light feel of the rein, and
drawing the whip gently across my back, we were off.

I arched my neck and set off at my best pace. I found I had some one
behind me who knew how a good horse ought to be driven. It seemed like
old times again, and made me feel quite gay.

This gentleman took a great liking to me, and after trying me several
times with the saddle he prevailed upon my master to sell me to a friend
of his, who wanted a safe, pleasant horse for riding. And so it came to
pass that in the summer I was sold to Mr. Barry.




30 A Thief


My new master was an unmarried man. He lived at Bath, and was much
engaged in business. His doctor advised him to take horse exercise, and
for this purpose he bought me. He hired a stable a short distance from
his lodgings, and engaged a man named Filcher as groom. My master knew
very little about horses, but he treated me well, and I should have had
a good and easy place but for circumstances of which he was ignorant. He
ordered the best hay with plenty of oats, crushed beans, and bran,
with vetches, or rye grass, as the man might think needful. I heard the
master give the order, so I knew there was plenty of good food, and I
thought I was well off.

For a few days all went on well. I found that my groom understood
his business. He kept the stable clean and airy, and he groomed me
thoroughly; and was never otherwise than gentle. He had been an hostler
in one of the great hotels in Bath. He had given that up, and now
cultivated fruit and vegetables for the market, and his wife bred and
fattened poultry and rabbits for sale. After awhile it seemed to me that
my oats came very short; I had the beans, but bran was mixed with them
instead of oats, of which there were very few; certainly not more than a
quarter of what there should have been. In two or three weeks this began
to tell upon my strength and spirits. The grass food, though very good,
was not the thing to keep up my condition without corn. However, I
could not complain, nor make known my wants. So it went on for about two
months; and I wondered that my master did not see that something was
the matter. However, one afternoon he rode out into the country to see a
friend of his, a gentleman farmer, who lived on the road to Wells.

This gentleman had a very quick eye for horses; and after he had
welcomed his friend he said, casting his eye over me:

“It seems to me, Barry, that your horse does not look so well as he did
when you first had him; has he been well?”

“Yes, I believe so,” said my master; “but he is not nearly so lively as
he was; my groom tells me that horses are always dull and weak in the
autumn, and that I must expect it.”

“Autumn, fiddlesticks!” said the farmer. “Why, this is only August; and
with your light work and good food he ought not to go down like this,
even if it was autumn. How do you feed him?”

My master told him. The other shook his head slowly, and began to feel
me over.

“I can't say who eats your corn, my dear fellow, but I am much mistaken
if your horse gets it. Have you ridden very fast?”

“No, very gently.”

“Then just put your hand here,” said he, passing his hand over my neck
and shoulder; “he is as warm and damp as a horse just come up from
grass. I advise you to look into your stable a little more. I hate to be
suspicious, and, thank heaven, I have no cause to be, for I can trust my
men, present or absent; but there are mean scoundrels, wicked enough to
rob a dumb beast of his food. You must look into it.” And turning to
his man, who had come to take me, “Give this horse a right good feed of
bruised oats, and don't stint him.”

“Dumb beasts!” Yes, we are; but if I could have spoken I could have told
my master where his oats went to. My groom used to come every morning
about six o'clock, and with him a little boy, who always had a covered
basket with him. He used to go with his father into the harness-room,
where the corn was kept, and I could see them, when the door stood ajar,
fill a little bag with oats out of the bin, and then he used to be off.

Five or six mornings after this, just as the boy had left the stable,
the door was pushed open, and a policeman walked in, holding the child
tight by the arm; another policeman followed, and locked the door on the
inside, saying, “Show me the place where your father keeps his rabbits'
food.”

The boy looked very frightened and began to cry; but there was no
escape, and he led the way to the corn-bin. Here the policeman found
another empty bag like that which was found full of oats in the boy's
basket.

Filcher was cleaning my feet at the time, but they soon saw him, and
though he blustered a good deal they walked him off to the “lock-up”,
and his boy with him. I heard afterward that the boy was not held to be
guilty, but the man was sentenced to prison for two months.




31 A Humbug


My master was not immediately suited, but in a few days my new groom
came. He was a tall, good-looking fellow enough; but if ever there was
a humbug in the shape of a groom Alfred Smirk was the man. He was very
civil to me, and never used me ill; in fact, he did a great deal of
stroking and patting when his master was there to see it. He always
brushed my mane and tail with water and my hoofs with oil before he
brought me to the door, to make me look smart; but as to cleaning my
feet or looking to my shoes, or grooming me thoroughly, he thought no
more of that than if I had been a cow. He left my bit rusty, my saddle
damp, and my crupper stiff.

Alfred Smirk considered himself very handsome; he spent a great deal of
time about his hair, whiskers and necktie, before a little looking-glass
in the harness-room. When his master was speaking to him it was always,
“Yes, sir; yes, sir”--touching his hat at every word; and every one
thought he was a very nice young man and that Mr. Barry was very
fortunate to meet with him. I should say he was the laziest, most
conceited fellow I ever came near. Of course, it was a great thing not
to be ill-used, but then a horse wants more than that. I had a loose
box, and might have been very comfortable if he had not been too
indolent to clean it out. He never took all the straw away, and the
smell from what lay underneath was very bad; while the strong vapors
that rose made my eyes smart and inflame, and I did not feel the same
appetite for my food.

One day his master came in and said, “Alfred, the stable smells rather
strong; should not you give that stall a good scrub and throw down
plenty of water?”

“Well, sir,” he said, touching his cap, “I'll do so if you please, sir;
but it is rather dangerous, sir, throwing down water in a horse's box;
they are very apt to take cold, sir. I should not like to do him an
injury, but I'll do it if you please, sir.”

“Well,” said his master, “I should not like him to take cold; but I
don't like the smell of this stable. Do you think the drains are all
right?”

“Well, sir, now you mention it, I think the drain does sometimes send
back a smell; there may be something wrong, sir.”

“Then send for the bricklayer and have it seen to,” said his master.

“Yes, sir, I will.”

The bricklayer came and pulled up a great many bricks, but found nothing
amiss; so he put down some lime and charged the master five shillings,
and the smell in my box was as bad as ever. But that was not all:
standing as I did on a quantity of moist straw my feet grew unhealthy
and tender, and the master used to say:

“I don't know what is the matter with this horse; he goes very
fumble-footed. I am sometimes afraid he will stumble.”

“Yes, sir,” said Alfred, “I have noticed the same myself, when I have
exercised him.”

Now the fact was that he hardly ever did exercise me, and when the
master was busy I often stood for days together without stretching my
legs at all, and yet being fed just as high as if I were at hard work.
This often disordered my health, and made me sometimes heavy and dull,
but more often restless and feverish. He never even gave me a meal
of green food or a bran mash, which would have cooled me, for he
was altogether as ignorant as he was conceited; and then, instead of
exercise or change of food, I had to take horse balls and draughts;
which, beside the nuisance of having them poured down my throat, used to
make me feel ill and uncomfortable.

One day my feet were so tender that, trotting over some fresh stones
with my master on my back, I made two such serious stumbles that, as he
came down Lansdown into the city, he stopped at the farrier's, and asked
him to see what was the matter with me. The man took up my feet one
by one and examined them; then standing up and dusting his hands one
against the other, he said:

“Your horse has got the 'thrush', and badly, too; his feet are very
tender; it is fortunate that he has not been down. I wonder your groom
has not seen to it before. This is the sort of thing we find in foul
stables, where the litter is never properly cleaned out. If you will
send him here to-morrow I will attend to the hoof, and I will direct
your man how to apply the liniment which I will give him.”

The next day I had my feet thoroughly cleansed and stuffed with tow
soaked in some strong lotion; and an unpleasant business it was.

The farrier ordered all the litter to be taken out of my box day by day,
and the floor kept very clean. Then I was to have bran mashes, a little
green food, and not so much corn, till my feet were well again. With
this treatment I soon regained my spirits; but Mr. Barry was so much
disgusted at being twice deceived by his grooms that he determined to
give up keeping a horse, and to hire when he wanted one. I was therefore
kept till my feet were quite sound, and was then sold again.




