III
THE PLAINS OF NAUSET


The next morning, Thursday, October 11th, it rained, as hard as ever;
but we were determined to proceed on foot, nevertheless. We first made
some inquiries with regard to the practicability of walking up the
shore on the Atlantic side to Provincetown, whether we should meet with
any creeks or marshes to trouble us. Higgins said that there was no
obstruction, and that it was not much farther than by the road, but he
thought that we should find it very “heavy” walking in the sand; it was
bad enough in the road, a horse would sink in up to the fetlocks there.
But there was one man at the tavern who had walked it, and he said that
we could go very well, though it was sometimes inconvenient and even
dangerous walking under the bank, when there was a great tide, with an
easterly wind, which caused the sand to cave. For the first four or
five miles we followed the road, which here turns to the north on the
elbow, —the narrowest part of the Cape,—that we might clear an inlet
from the ocean, a part of Nauset Harbor, in Orleans, on our right. We
found the travelling good enough for walkers on the sides of the roads,
though it was “heavy” for horses in the middle. We walked with our
umbrellas behind us, since it blowed hard as well as rained, with
driving mists, as the day before, and the wind helped us over the sand
at a rapid rate. Everything indicated that we had reached a strange
shore. The road was a mere lane, winding over bare swells of bleak and
barren-looking land. The houses were few and far between, besides being
small and rusty, though they appeared to be kept in good repair, and
their dooryards, which were the unfenced Cape, were tidy; or, rather,
they looked as if the ground around them was blown clean by the wind.
Perhaps the scarcity of wood here, and the consequent absence of the
wood-pile and other wooden traps, had something to do with this
appearance. They seemed, like mariners ashore, to have sat right down
to enjoy the firmness of the land, without studying their postures or
habiliments. To them it was merely _terra firma_ and _cognita_, not yet
_fertilis_ and _jucunda_. Every landscape which is dreary enough has a
certain beauty to my eyes, and in this instance its permanent qualities
were enhanced by the weather. Everything told of the sea, even when we
did not see its waste or hear its roar. For birds there were gulls, and
for carts in the fields, boats turned bottom upward against the houses,
and sometimes the rib of a whale was woven into the fence by the
road-side. The trees were, if possible, rarer than the houses,
excepting apple-trees, of which there were a few small orchards in the
hollows. These were either narrow and high, with flat tops, having lost
their side branches, like huge plum-bushes growing in exposed
situations, or else dwarfed and branching immediately at the ground,
like quince-bushes. They suggested that, under like circumstances, all
trees would at last acquire like habits of growth. I afterward saw on
the Cape many full-grown apple-trees not higher than a man’s head; one
whole orchard, indeed, where all the fruit could have been gathered by
a man standing on the ground; but you could hardly creep beneath the
trees. Some, which the owners told me were twenty years old, were only
three and a half feet high, spreading at six inches from the ground
five feet each way, and being withal surrounded with boxes of tar to
catch the cankerworms, they looked like plants in flower-pots, and as
if they might be taken into the house in the winter. In another place,
I saw some not much larger than currant-bushes; yet the owner told me
that they had borne a barrel and a half of apples that fall. If they
had been placed close together, I could have cleared them all at a
jump. I measured some near the Highland Light in Truro, which had been
taken from the shrubby woods thereabouts when young, and grafted. One,
which had been set ten years, was on an average eighteen inches high,
and spread nine feet with a flat top. It had borne one bushel of apples
two years before. Another, probably twenty years old from the seed, was
five feet high, and spread eighteen feet, branching, as usual, at the
ground, so that you could not creep under it. This bore a barrel of
apples two years before. The owner of these trees invariably used the
personal pronoun in speaking of them; as, “I got _him_ out of the
woods, but _he_ doesn’t bear.” The largest that I saw in that
neighborhood was nine feet high to the topmost leaf, and spread
thirty-three feet, branching at the ground five ways.

[Illustration: A Nauset lane]

In one yard I observed a single, very healthy-looking tree, while all
the rest were dead or dying. The occupant said that his father had
manured all but that one with blackfish.

This habit of growth should, no doubt, be encouraged; and they should
not be trimmed up, as some travelling practitioners have advised. In
1802 there was not a single fruit-tree in Chatham, the next town to
Orleans, on the south; and the old account of Orleans says:
“Fruit-trees cannot be made to grow within a mile of the ocean. Even
those which are placed at a greater distance are injured by the east
winds; and, after violent storms in the spring, a saltish taste is
perceptible on their bark.” We noticed that they were often covered
with a yellow lichen-like rust, the _Parmelia parietina_.

The most foreign and picturesque structures on the Cape, to an
inlander, not excepting the salt-works, are the
wind-mills,—gray-looking octagonal towers, with long timbers slanting
to the ground in the rear, and there resting on a cart-wheel, by which
their fans are turned round to face the wind. These appeared also to
serve in some measure for props against its force. A great circular rut
was worn around the building by the wheel. The neighbors who assemble
to turn the mill to the wind are likely to know which way it blows,
without a weathercock. They looked loose and slightly locomotive, like
huge wounded birds, trailing a wing or a leg, and re-minded one of
pictures of the Netherlands. Being on elevated ground, and high in
themselves, they serve as landmarks,—for there are no tall trees, or
other objects commonly, which can be seen at a distance in the horizon;
though the outline of the land itself is so firm and distinct that an
insignificant cone, or even precipice of sand, is visible at a great
distance from over the sea. Sailors making the land commonly steer
either by the wind-mills or the meeting-houses. In the country, we are
obliged to steer by the meeting-houses alone. Yet the meeting-house is
a kind of wind-mill, which runs one day in seven, turned either by the
winds of doctrine or public opinion, or more rarely by the winds of
Heaven, where another sort of grist is ground, of which, if it be not
all bran or musty, if it be not _plaster_, we trust to make bread of
life.

There were, here and there, heaps of shells in the fields, where clams
had been opened for bait; for Orleans is famous for its shell-fish,
especially clams, or, as our author says, “to speak more properly,
worms.” The shores are more fertile than the dry land. The inhabitants
measure their crops, not only by bushels of corn, but by barrels of
clams. A thousand barrels of clam-bait are counted as equal in value to
six or eight thousand bushels of Indian corn, and once they were
procured without more labor or expense, and the supply was thought to
be inexhaustible. “For,” runs the history, “after a portion of the
shore has been dug over, and almost all the clams taken up, at the end
of two years, it is said, they are as plenty there as ever. It is even
affirmed by many persons, that it is as necessary to stir the clam
ground frequently as it is to hoe a field of potatoes; because, if this
labor is omitted, the clams will be crowded too closely together, and
will be prevented from increasing in size.” But we were told that the
small clam, _Mya arenaria_, was not so plenty here as formerly.
Probably the clam ground has been stirred too frequently, after all.
Nevertheless, one man, who complained that they fed pigs with them and
so made them scarce, told me that he dug and opened one hundred and
twenty-six dollars’ worth in one winter, in Truro.

[Illustration: Nauset Bay]

We crossed a brook, not more than fourteen rods long, between Orleans
and Eastham, called Jeremiah’s Gutter. The Atlantic is said sometimes
to meet the Bay here, and isolate the northern part of the Cape. The
streams of the Cape are necessarily formed on a minute scale, since
there is no room for them to run, without tumbling immediately into the
sea; and beside, we found it difficult to run ourselves in that sand,
when there was no want of room. Hence, the least channel where water
runs, or may run, is important, and is dignified with a name. We read
that there is no running water in Chatham, which is the next town. The
barren aspect of the land would hardly be believed if described. It was
such soil, or rather land, as, to judge from appearances, no farmer in
the interior would think of cultivating, or even fencing. Generally,
the ploughed fields of the Cape look white and yellow, like a mixture
of salt and Indian meal. This is called soil. All an inlander’s notions
of soil and fertility will be confounded by a visit to these parts, and
he will not be able, for some time afterward, to distinguish soil from
sand. The historian of Chatham says of a part of that town, which has
been gained from the sea: “There is a doubtful appearance of a soil
beginning to be formed. It is styled _doubtful_, because it would not
be observed by every eye, and perhaps not acknowledged by many.” We
thought that this would not be a bad description of the greater part of
the Cape. There is a “beach” on the west side of Eastham, which we
crossed the next summer, half a mile wide, and stretching across the
township, containing seventeen hundred acres, on which there is not now
a particle of vegetable mould, though it formerly produced wheat. All
sands are here called “beaches,” whether they are waves of water or of
air that dash against them, since they commonly have their origin on
the shore. “The sand in some places,” says the historian of Eastham,
“lodging against the beach-grass, has been raised into hills fifty feet
high, where twenty-five years ago no hills existed. In others it has
filled up small valleys, and swamps. Where a strong-rooted bush stood,
the appearance is singular: a mass of earth and sand adheres to it,
resembling a small tower. In several places, rocks, which were formerly
covered with soil, are disclosed, and being lashed by the sand, driven
against them by the wind, look as if they were recently dug from a
quarry.”

We were surprised to hear of the great crops of corn which are still
raised in Eastham, notwithstanding the real and apparent barrenness.
Our landlord in Orleans had told us that he raised three or four
hundred bushels of corn annually, and also of the great number of pigs
which he fattened. In Champlain’s “Voyages,” there is a plate
representing the Indian cornfields hereabouts, with their wigwams in
the midst, as they appeared in 1605, and it was here that the Pilgrims,
to quote their own words, “bought eight or ten hogsheads of corn and
beans” of the Nauset Indians, in 1622, to keep themselves from
starving.[1]

“In 1667 the town [of Eastham] voted that every housekeeper should kill
twelve blackbirds or three crows, which did great damage to the corn;
and this vote was repeated for many years.” In 1695 an additional order
was passed, namely, that “every unmarried man in the township shall
kill six blackbirds, or three crows, while he remains single; as a
penalty for not doing it, shall not be married until he obey this
order.” The blackbirds, however, still molest the corn. I saw them at
it the next summer, and there were many scarecrows, if not
scare-blackbirds, in the fields, which I often mistook for men.

[Illustration: A scarecrow]

From which I concluded that either many men were not married, or many
blackbirds were. Yet they put but three or four kernels in a hill, and
let fewer plants remain than we do. In the account of Eastham, in the
“Historical Collections,” printed in 1802, it is said, that “more corn
is produced than the inhabitants consume, and about a thousand bushels
are annually sent to market. The soil being free from stones, a plough
passes through it speedily; and after the corn has come up, a small
Cape horse, somewhat larger than a goat, will, with the assistance of
two boys, easily hoe three or four acres in a day; several farmers are
accustomed to produce five hundred bushels of grain annually, and not
long since one raised eight hundred bushels on sixty acres.” Similar
accounts are given to-day; indeed, the recent accounts are in some
instances suspectable repetitions of the old, and I have no doubt that
their statements are as often founded on the exception as the rule, and
that by far the greater number of acres are as barren as they appear to
be. It is sufficiently remarkable that any crops can be raised here,
and it may be owing, as others have suggested, to the amount of
moisture in the atmosphere, the warmth of the sand, and the rareness of
frosts. A miller, who was sharpening his stones, told me that, forty
years ago, he had been to a husking here, where five hundred bushels
were husked in one evening, and the corn was piled six feet high or
more, in the midst, but now, fifteen or eighteen bushels to an acre
were an average yield. I never saw fields of such puny and unpromising
looking corn as in this town. Probably the inhabitants are contented
with small crops from a great surface easily cultivated. It is not
always the most fertile land that is the most profitable, and this sand
may repay cultivation, as well as the fertile bottoms of the West. It
is said, moreover, that the vegetables raised in the sand, without
manure, are remarkably sweet, the pumpkins especially, though when
their seed is planted in the interior they soon degenerate. I can
testify that the vegetables here, when they succeed at all, look
remarkably green and healthy, though perhaps it is partly by contrast
with the sand. Yet the inhabitants of the Cape towns, generally, do not
raise their own meal or pork. Their gardens are commonly little
patches, that have been redeemed from the edges of the marshes and
swamps.

All the morning we had heard the sea roar on the eastern shore, which
was several miles distant; for it still felt the effects of the storm
in which the _St. John_ was wrecked,—though a school-boy, whom we
overtook, hardly knew what we meant, his ears were so used to it. He
would have more plainly heard the same sound in a shell. It was a very
inspiriting sound to walk by, filling the whole air, that of the sea
dashing against the land, heard several miles inland. Instead of having
a dog to growl before your door, to have an Atlantic Ocean to growl for
a whole Cape! On the whole, we were glad of the storm, which would show
us the ocean in its angriest mood. Charles Darwin was assured that the
roar of the surf on the coast of Chiloe, after a heavy gale, could be
heard at night a distance of “21 sea miles across a hilly and wooded
country.” We conversed with the boy we have mentioned, who might have
been eight years old, making him walk the while under the lee of our
umbrella; for we thought it as important to know what was life on the
Cape to a boy as to a man. We learned from him where the best grapes
were to be found in that neighborhood. He was carrying his dinner in a
pail; and, without any impertinent questions being put by us, it did at
length appear of what it consisted. The homeliest facts are always the
most acceptable to an inquiring mind. At length, before we got to
Eastham meeting-house, we left the road and struck across the country
for the eastern shore at Nauset Lights,—three lights close together,
two or three miles distant from us. They were so many that they might
be distinguished from others; but this seemed a shiftless and costly
way of accomplishing that object. We found ourselves at once on an
apparently boundless plain, without a tree or a fence, or, with one or
two exceptions, a house in sight. Instead of fences, the earth was
sometimes thrown up into a slight ridge. My companion compared it to
the rolling prairies of Illinois. In the storm of wind and rain which
raged when we traversed it, it no doubt appeared more vast and desolate
than it really is. As there were no hills, but only here and there a
dry hollow in the midst of the waste, and the distant horizon was
concealed by mist, we did not know whether it was high or low. A
solitary traveller whom we saw perambulating in the distance loomed
like a giant. He appeared to walk slouchingly, as if held up from above
by straps under his shoulders, as much as supported by the plain below.
Men and boys would have appeared alike at a little distance, there
being no object by which to measure them. Indeed, to an inlander, the
Cape landscape is a constant mirage. This kind of country extended a
mile or two each way. These were the “Plains of Nauset,” once covered
with wood, where in winter the winds howl and the snow blows right
merrily in the face of the traveller. I was glad to have got out of the
towns, where I am wont to feel unspeakably mean and disgraced,—to have
left behind me for a season the bar-rooms of Massachusetts, where the
full-grown are not weaned from savage and filthy habits,—still sucking
a cigar. My spirits rose in proportion to the outward dreariness. The
towns need to be ventilated. The gods would be pleased to see some pure
flames from their altars. They are not to be appeased with cigar-smoke.

As we thus skirted the back-side of the towns, for we did not enter any
village, till we got to Provincetown, we read their histories under our
umbrellas, rarely meeting anybody. The old accounts are the richest in
topography, which was what we wanted most; and, indeed, in most things
else, for I find that the readable parts of the modern accounts of
these towns consist, in a great measure, of quotations, acknowledged
and unacknowledged, from the older ones, without any additional
information of equal interest;—town histories, which at length run into
a history of the Church of that place, that being the only story they
have to tell, and conclude by quoting the Latin epitaphs of the old
pastors, having been written in the good old days of Latin and of
Greek. They will go back to the ordination of every minister and tell
you faithfully who made the introductory prayer, and who delivered the
sermon; who made the ordaining prayer, and who gave the charge; who
extended the right hand of fellowship, and who pronounced the
benediction; also how many ecclesiastical councils convened from time
to time to inquire into the orthodoxy of some minister, and the names
of all who composed them. As it will take us an hour to get over this
plain, and there is no variety in the prospect, peculiar as it is, I
will read a little in the history of Eastham the while.

When the committee from Plymouth had purchased the territory of Eastham
of the Indians, “it was demanded, who laid claim to Billingsgate?”
which was understood to be all that part of the Cape north of what they
had purchased. “The answer was, there was not any who owned it. ‘Then,’
said the committee, ‘that land is ours.’ The Indians answered, that it
was.” This was a remarkable assertion and admission. The Pilgrims
appear to have regarded themselves as Not Any’s representatives.
Perhaps this was the first instance of that quiet way of “speaking for”
a place not yet occupied, or at least not improved as much as it may
be, which their descendants have practised, and are still practising so
extensively. Not Any seems to have been the sole proprietor of all
America before the Yankees. But history says that, when the Pilgrims
had held the lands of Billingsgate many years, at length “appeared an
Indian, who styled himself Lieutenant Anthony,” who laid claim to them,
and of him they bought them. Who knows but a Lieutenant Anthony may be
knocking at the door of the White House some day? At any rate, I know
that if you hold a thing unjustly, there will surely be the devil to
pay at last.

Thomas Prince, who was several times the governor of the Plymouth
colony, was the leader of the settlement of Eastham. There was recently
standing, on what was once his farm, in this town, a pear-tree which is
said to have been brought from England, and planted there by him, about
two hundred years ago. It was blown down a few months before we were
there. A late account says that it was recently in a vigorous state;
the fruit small, but excellent; and it yielded on an average fifteen
bushels. Some appropriate lines have been addressed to it, by a Mr.
Heman Doane, from which I will quote, partly because they are the only
specimen of Cape Cod verse which I remember to have seen, and partly
because they are not bad.

“Two hundred years have, on the wings of Time,
    Passed with their joys and woes, since thou, Old Tree!
Put forth thy first leaves in this foreign clime.
    Transplanted from the soil beyond the sea.”


*    *    *    *    *


[These stars represent the more clerical lines, and also those which
have deceased.]

“That exiled band long since have passed away,
    And still, Old Tree I thou standest in the place
Where Prince’s hand did plant thee in his day,—
    An undesigned memorial of his race
And time; of those our honored fathers,
    when They came from Plymouth o’er and settled here;
Doane, Higgins, Snow, and other worthy men.
    Whose names their sons remember to revere.


*    *    *    *    *


“Old Time has thinned thy boughs. Old Pilgrim Tree!
    And bowed thee with the weight of many years;
Yet ’mid the frosts of age, thy bloom we see,
    And yearly still thy mellow fruit appears.”


There are some other lines which I might quote, if they were not tied
to unworthy companions by the rhyme. When one ox will lie down, the
yoke bears hard on him that stands up.

One of the first settlers of Eastham was Deacon John Doane, who died in
1707, aged one hundred and ten. Tradition says that he was rocked in a
cradle several of his last years. That, certainly, was not an Achillean
life. His mother must have let him slip when she dipped him into the
liquor which was to make him invulnerable, and he went in, heels and
all. Some of the stone-bounds to his farm which he set up are standing
to-day, with his initials cut in them.

The ecclesiastical history of this town interested us somewhat. It
appears that “they very early built a small meeting-house, twenty feet
square, with a thatched roof through which they might fire their
muskets,”—of course, at the Devil. “In 1662, the town agreed that a
part of every whale cast on shore be appropriated for the support of
the ministry.” No doubt there seemed to be some propriety in thus
leaving the support of the ministers to Providence, whose servants they
are, and who alone rules the storms; for, when few whales were cast up,
they might suspect that their worship was not acceptable. The ministers
must have sat upon the cliffs in every storm, and watched the shore
with anxiety. And, for my part, if I were a minister I would rather
trust to the bowels of the billows, on the back-side of Cape Cod, to
cast up a whale for me, than to the generosity of many a country parish
that I know. You cannot say of a country minister’s salary, commonly,
that it is “very like a whale.” Nevertheless, the minister who depended
on whales cast up must have had a trying time of it. I would rather
have gone to the Falkland Isles with a harpoon, and done with it. Think
of a whale having the breath of life beaten out of him by a storm, and
dragging in over the bars and guzzles, for the support of the ministry!
What a consolation it must have been to him! I have heard of a
minister, who had been a fisherman, being settled in Bridgewater for as
long a time as he could tell a cod from a haddock. Generous as it
seems, this condition would empty most country pulpits forthwith, for
it is long since the fishers of men were fishermen. Also, a duty was
put on mackerel here to support a free-school; in other words, the
mackerel-school was taxed in order that the children’s school might be
free. “In 1665 the Court passed a law to inflict corporal punishment on
all persons, who resided in the towns of this government, who denied
the Scriptures.” Think of a man being whipped on a spring morning till
he was constrained to confess that the Scriptures were true! “It was
also voted by the town that all persons who should stand out of the
meeting-house during the time of divine service should be set in the
stocks.” It behooved such a town to see that sitting in the
meeting-house was nothing akin to sitting in the stocks, lest the
penalty of obedience to the law might be greater than that of
disobedience. This was the Eastham famous of late years for its
camp-meetings, held in a grove near by, to which thousands flock from
all parts of the Bay. We conjectured that the reason for the perhaps
unusual, if not unhealthful, development of the religious sentiment
here was the fact that a large portion of the population are women
whose husbands and sons are either abroad on the sea, or else drowned,
and there is nobody but they and the ministers left behind. The old
account says that “hysteric fits are very common in Orleans, Eastham,
and the towns below, particularly on Sunday, in the times of divine
service. When one woman is affected, five or six others generally
sympathize with her; and the congregation is thrown into the utmost
confusion. Several old men suppose, unphilosophically and uncharitably,
perhaps, that the will is partly concerned, and that ridicule and
threats would have a tendency to prevent the evil.” How this is now we
did not learn. We saw one singularly masculine woman, however, in a
house on this very plain, who did not look as if she was ever troubled
with hysterics, or sympathized with those that were; or, perchance,
life itself was to her a hysteric fit,—a Nauset woman, of a hardness
and coarseness such as no man ever possesses or suggests. It was enough
to see the vertebrae and sinews of her neck, and her set jaws of iron,
which would have bitten a board-nail in two in their ordinary
action,—braced against the world, talking like a man-of-war’s-man in
petticoats, or as if shouting to you through a breaker; who looked as
if it made her head ache to live; hard enough for any enormity. I
looked upon her as one who had committed infanticide; who never had a
brother, unless it were some wee thing that died in infancy,—for what
need of him?—and whose father must have died before she was born. This
woman told us that the camp-meetings were not held the previous summer
for fear of introducing the cholera, and that they would have been held
earlier this summer, but the rye was so backward that straw would not
have been ready for them; for they lie in straw. There are sometimes
one hundred and fifty ministers (!) and five thousand hearers
assembled. The ground, which is called Millennium Grove, is owned by a
company in Boston, and is the most suitable, or rather unsuitable, for
this purpose of any that I saw on the Cape. It is fenced, and the
frames of the tents are at all times to be seen interspersed among the
oaks. They have an oven and a pump, and keep all their kitchen utensils
and tent coverings and furniture in a permanent building on the spot.
They select a time for their meetings when the moon is full. A man is
appointed to clear out the pump a week beforehand, while the ministers
are clearing their throats; but, probably, the latter do not always
deliver as pure a stream as the former. I saw the heaps of clam-shells
left under the tables, where they had feasted in previous summers, and
supposed, of course, that that was the work of the unconverted, or the
backsliders and scoffers. It looked as if a camp-meeting must be a
singular combination of a prayer-meeting and a picnic.

[Illustration: Millennium Grove camp-meeting grounds]

The first minister settled here was the Rev. Samuel Treat, in 1672, a
gentleman who is said to be “entitled to a distinguished rank among the
evangelists of New England.” He converted many Indians, as well as
white men, in his day, and translated the Confession of Faith into the
Nauset language. These were the Indians concerning whom their first
teacher, Richard Bourne, wrote to Gookin, in 1674, that he had been to
see one who was sick, “and there came from him very savory and heavenly
expressions,” but, with regard to the mass of them, he says, “the truth
is, that many of them are very loose in their course, to my
heartbreaking sorrow.” Mr. Treat is described as a Calvinist of the
strictest kind, not one of those who, by giving up or explaining away,
become like a porcupine disarmed of its quills, but a consistent
Calvinist, who can dart his quills to a distance and courageously
defend himself. There exists a volume of his sermons in manuscript,
“which,” says a commentator, “appear to have been designed for
publication.” I quote the following sentences at second hand, from a
Discourse on Luke xvi. 23, addressed to sinners:—

“Thou must erelong go to the bottomless pit. Hell hath enlarged
herself, and is ready to receive thee. There is room enough for thy
entertainment....

“Consider, thou art going to a place prepared by God on purpose to
exalt his justice in,—a place made for no other employment but
torments. Hell is God’s house of correction; and, remember, God doth
all things like himself. When God would show his justice, and what is
the weight of his wrath, he makes a hell where it shall, indeed, appear
to purpose.... Woe to thy soul when thou shalt be set up as a butt for
the arrows of the Almighty....

“Consider, God himself shall be the principal agent in thy misery,—his
breath is the bellows which blows up the flame of hell forever;—and if
he punish thee, if he meet thee in his fury, he will not meet thee as a
man; he will give thee an omnipotent blow.”

“Some think sinning ends with this life; but it is a mistake. The
creature is held under an everlasting law; the damned increase in sin
in hell. Possibly, the mention of this may please thee. But, remember,
there shall be no pleasant sins there; no eating, drinking, singing,
dancing, wanton dalliance, and drinking stolen waters, but damned sins,
bitter, hellish sins; sins exasperated by torments, cursing God, spite,
rage, and blasphemy.—The guilt of all thy sins shall be laid upon thy
soul, and be made so many heaps of fuel....

“Sinner, I beseech thee, realize the truth of these things. Do not go
about to dream that this is derogatory to God’s mercy, and nothing but
a vain fable to scare children out of their wits withal. God can be
merciful, though he make thee miserable. He shall have monuments enough
of that precious attribute, shining like stars in the place of glory,
and singing eternal hallelujahs to the praise of Him that redeemed
them, though, to exalt the power of his justice, he damn sinners heaps
upon heaps.”

“But,” continues the same writer, “with the advantage of proclaiming
the doctrine of terror, which is naturally productive of a sublime and
impressive style of eloquence (‘Triumphat ventoso gloriæ curru orator,
qui pectus angit, irritat, et implet terroribus.’ Vid. Burnet, De Stat.
Mort., p. 309), he could not attain the character of a popular
preacher. His voice was so loud that it could be heard at a great
distance from the meeting-house, even amidst the shrieks of hysterical
women, and the winds that howled over the plains of Nauset; but there
was no more music in it than in the discordant sounds with which it was
mingled.”

“The effect of such preaching,” it is said, “was that his hearers were
several times, in the course of his ministry, awakened and alarmed; and
on one occasion a comparatively innocent young man was frightened
nearly out of his wits, and Mr. Treat had to exert himself to make hell
seem somewhat cooler to him”; yet we are assured that “Treat’s manners
were cheerful, his conversation pleasant, and sometimes facetious, but
always decent. He was fond of a stroke of humor, and a practical joke,
and manifested his relish for them by long and loud fits of laughter.”

This was the man of whom a well-known anecdote is told, which doubtless
many of my readers have heard, but which, nevertheless, I will venture
to quote:—

“After his marriage with the daughter of Mr. Willard (pastor of the
South Church in Boston), he was sometimes invited by that gentleman to
preach in his pulpit. Mr. Willard possessed a graceful delivery, a
masculine and harmonious voice; and, though he did not gain much
reputation by his ‘Body of Divinity,’ which is frequently sneered at,
particularly by those who have read it, yet in his sermons are strength
of thought and energy of language. The natural consequence was that he
was generally admired. Mr. Treat having preached one of his best
discourses to the congregation of his father-in-law, in his usual
unhappy manner, excited universal disgust; and several nice judges
waited on Mr. Willard, and begged that Mr. Treat, who was a worthy,
pious man, it was true, but a wretched preacher, might never be invited
into his pulpit again. To this request Mr. Willard made no reply; but
he desired his son-in-law to lend him the discourse; which being left
with him, he delivered it without alteration to his people a few weeks
after. They ran to Mr. Willard and requested a copy for the press. ‘See
the difference,’ they cried, ‘between yourself and your son-in-law; you
have preached a sermon on the same text as Mr. Treat’s, but whilst his
was contemptible, yours is excellent.’ As is observed in a note, ‘Mr.
Willard, after producing the sermon in the handwriting of Mr. Treat,
might have addressed these sage critics in the words of Phaedrus,

“‘En hic declarat, quales sitis judices.’”[2]


Mr. Treat died of a stroke of the palsy, just after the memorable storm
known as the Great Snow, which left the ground around his house
entirely bare, but heaped up the snow in the road to an uncommon
height. Through this an arched way was dug, by which the Indians bore
his bod to the grave.

The reader will imagine us, all the while, steadily traversing that
extensive plain in a direction a little north of east toward Nauset
Beach, and reading under our umbrellas as we sailed, while it blowed
hard with mingled mist and rain, as if we were approaching a fit
anniversary of Mr. Treat’s funeral. We fancied that it was such a moor
as that on which somebody perished in the snow, as is related in the
“Lights and Shadows of Scottish Life.”

The next minister settled here was the “Rev. Samuel Osborn, who was
born in Ireland, and educated at the University of Dublin.” He is said
to have been “A man of wisdom and virtue,” and taught his people the
use of peat, and the art of drying and preparing it, which as they had
scarcely any other fuel, was a great blessing to them. He also
introduced improvements in agriculture. But, notwithstanding his many
services, as he embraced the religion of Arminius, some of his flock
became dissatisfied. At length, an ecclesiastical council, consisting
of ten ministers, with their churches, sat upon him, and they,
naturally enough, spoiled his usefulness. The council convened at the
desire of two divine philosophers,—Joseph Doane and Nathaniel Freeman.

In their report they say, “It appears to the council that the Rev. Mr.
Osborn hath, in his preaching to this people, said, that what Christ
did and suffered doth nothing abate or diminish our obligation to obey
the law of God, and that Christ’s suffering and obedience were for
himself; both parts of which, we think, contain dangerous error.”

“Also: ‘It hath been said, and doth appear to this council, that the
Rev. Mr. Osborn, both in public and in private, asserted that there are
no promises in the Bible but what are conditional, which we think,
also, to be an error, and do say that there are promises which are
absolute and without any condition,—such as the promise of a new heart,
and that he will write his law in our hearts.’”

“Also, they say, ‘it hath been alleged, and doth appear to us, that Mr.
Osborn hath declared, that _obedience_ is a considerable _cause_ of a
person’s justification, which, we think, contains very dangerous
error.’”

And many the like distinctions they made, such as some of my readers,
probably, are more familiar with than I am. So, far in the East, among
the Yezidis, or Worshippers of the Devil, so-called, the Chaldaeans,
and others, according to the testimony of travellers, you may still
hear these remarkable disputations on doctrinal points going on. Osborn
was, accordingly, dismissed, and he removed to Boston, where he kept
school for many years. But he was fully justified, methinks, by his
works in the peat-meadow; one proof of which is, that he lived to be
between ninety and one hundred years old.

The next minister was the Rev. Benjamin Webb, of whom, though a
neighboring clergy-man pronounced him “the best man and the best
minister whom he ever knew,” yet the historian says that,

“As he spent his days in the uniform discharge of his duty (it reminds
one of a country muster) and there were no shades to give relief to his
character, not much can be said of him. (Pity the Devil did not plant a
few shade-trees along his avenues.) His heart was as pure as the
new-fallen snow, which completely covers every dark spot in a field;
his mind was as serene as the sky in a mild evening in June, when the
moon shines without a cloud. Name any virtue, and that virtue he
practised; name any vice, and that vice he shunned. But if peculiar
qualities marked his character, they were his humility, his gentleness,
and his love of God. The people had long been taught by a son of
thunder (Mr. Treat): in him they were instructed by a son of
consolation, who sweetly allured them to virtue by soft persuasion, and
by exhibiting the mercy of the Supreme Being; for his thoughts were so
much in heaven that they seldom descended to the dismal regions below;
and though of the same religious sentiments as Mr. Treat, yet his
attention was turned to those glad tidings of great joy which a Saviour
came to publish.”

We were interested to hear that such a man had trodden the plains of
Nauset.

Turning over further in our book, our eyes fell on the name of the Rev.
Jonathan Bascom, of Orleans; “Senex emunctæ naris, doctus, et auctor
elegantium verborum, facetus, et dulcis festique sermonis.” And, again,
on that of the Rev. Nathan Stone, of Dennis: “Vir humilis, mitis,
blandus, advenarum hospes; (there was need of him there;) suis commodis
in terrâ non studens, reconditis thesauris in cœlo.” An easy virtue
that, there, for methinks no inhabitant of Dennis could be very
studious about his earthly commodity, but must regard the bulk of his
treasures as in heaven. But probably the most just and pertinent
character of all is that which appears to be given to the Rev. Ephraim
Briggs, of Chatham, in the language of the later Romans, “_Seip,
sepoese, sepoemese, wechekum_,”—which not being interpreted, we know
not what it means, though we have no doubt it occurs somewhere in the
Scriptures, probably in the Apostle Eliot’s Epistle to the Nipmucks.

Let no one think that I do not love the old ministers. They were,
probably, the best men of their generation, and they deserve that their
biographies should fill the pages of the town histories. If I could but
hear the “glad tidings” of which they tell, and which, perchance, they
heard, I might write in a worthier strain than this.

There was no better way to make the reader realize how wide and
peculiar that plain was, and how long it took to traverse it, than by
inserting these extracts in the midst of my narrative.

 [1] They touched after this at a place called Mattachiest, where they
 got more corn; but their shallop being cast away in a storm, the
 Governor was obliged to return to Plymouth on foot, fifty miles
 through the woods. According to Mourt’s Relation, “he came safely
 home, though weary and _surbated_,” that is, foot-sore. (Ital.
 _sobattere_, Lat. _sub_ or _solea battere_, to bruise the soles of the
 feet; v. Dic. Not “from _acerbatus_, embittered or aggrieved,” as one
 commentator on this passage supposes.) This word is of very rare
 occurrence, being applied only to governors and persons of like
 description, who are in that predicament; though such generally have
 considerable mileage allowed them, and might save their soles if they
 cared.


 [2] Lib. v. Fab. 5.




