VII
ACROSS THE CAPE


When we have returned from the seaside, we sometimes ask ourselves why
we did not spend more time in gazing at the sea; but very soon the
traveller does not look as the sea more than at the heavens. As for the
interior, if the elevated sand-bar in the midst of the ocean can be
said to have any interior, it was an exceedingly desolate landscape,
with rarely a cultivated or cultivable field in sight. We saw no
villages, and seldom a house, for these are generally on the Bay side.
It was a succession of shrubby hills and valleys, now wearing an
autumnal tint. You would frequently think, from the character of the
surface, the dwarfish trees, and the bearberries around, that you were
on the top of a mountain. The only wood in Eastham was on the edge of
Wellfleet. The pitch-pines were not commonly more than fifteen or
eighteen feet high. The larger ones covered with lichens,—often hung
with the long gray _Usnea_. There is scarcely a white-pine on the
forearm of the Cape. Yet in the northwest part of Eastham, near the
Camp Ground, we saw, the next summer, some quite rural, and even sylvan
retreats, for the Cape, where small rustling groves of oaks and locusts
and whispering pines, on perfectly level ground, made a little
paradise. The locusts, both transplanted and growing naturally about
the houses there, appeared to flourish better than any other tree.
There were thin belts of wood in Wellfleet and Truro, a mile or more
from the Atlantic, but, for the most part, we could see the horizon
through them, or, if extensive, the trees were not large. Both oaks and
pines had often the same flat look with the apple-trees. Commonly, the
oak woods twenty-five years old were a mere scraggy shrubbery nine or
ten feet high, and we could frequently reach to their topmost leaf.
Much that is called “woods” was about half as high as this,—only
patches of shrub-oak, bayberry, beach-plum, and wild roses, overrun
with woodbine. When the roses were in bloom, these patches in the midst
of the sand displayed such a profusion of blossoms, mingled with the
aroma of the bayberry, that no Italian or other artificial rose-garden
could equal them. They were perfectly Elysian, and realized my idea of
an oasis in the desert. Huckleberry-bushes were very abundant, and the
next summer they bore a remarkable quantity of that kind of gall called
Huckleberry-apple, forming quite handsome though monstrous blossoms.
But it must be added, that this shrubbery swarmed with wood-ticks,
sometimes very troublesome parasites, and which it takes very horny
fingers to crack.

[Illustration: A Truro footpath]

The inhabitants of these towns have a great regard for a tree, though
their standard for one is necessarily neither large nor high; and when
they tell you of the large trees that once grew here, you must think of
them, not as absolutely large, but large compared with the present
generation. Their “brave old oaks,” of which they speak with so much
respect, and which they will point out to you as relics of the
primitive forest, one hundred or one hundred and fifty, ay, for aught
they know, two hundred years old, have a ridiculously dwarfish
appearance, which excites a smile in the beholder. The largest and most
venerable which they will show you in such a case are, perhaps, not
more than twenty or twenty-five feet high. I was especially amused by
the Liliputian old oaks in the south part of Truro. To the
inexperienced eye, which appreciated their proportions only, they might
appear vast as the tree which saved his royal majesty, but measured,
they were dwarfed at once almost into lichens which a deer might eat up
in a morning. Yet they will tell you that large schooners were once
built of timber which grew in Wellfleet. The old houses also are built
of the timber of the Cape; but instead of the forests in the midst of
which they originally stood, barren heaths, with poverty-grass for
heather, now stretch away on every side. The modern houses are built of
what is called “dimension timber,” _imported_ from Maine, all ready to
be set up, so that commonly they do not touch it again with an axe.
Almost all the wood used for fuel is imported by vessels or currents,
and of course all the coal. I was told that probably a quarter of the
fuel and a considerable part of the lumber used in North Truro was
drift-wood. Many get _all_ their fuel from the beach.

Of birds not found in the interior of the State,—at least in my
neighborhood,—I heard, in the summer, the Black-throated Bunting
(_Fringilla Americana_) amid the shrubbery, and in the open land the
Upland Plover (_Totanus Bartramius_), whose quivering notes were ever
and anon prolonged into a clear, somewhat plaintive, yet hawk-like
scream, which sounded at a very indefinite distance. The bird may have
been in the next field, though it sounded a mile off.

To-day we were walking through Truro, a town of about eighteen hundred
inhabitants. We had already come to Pamet River, which empties into the
Bay. This was the limit of the Pilgrims’ journey up the Cape from
Provincetown, when seeking a place for settlement. It rises in a hollow
within a few rods of the Atlantic, and one who lives near its source
told us that in high tides the sea leaked through, yet the wind and
waves preserve intact the barrier between them, and thus the whole
river is steadily driven westward butt-end foremost,—fountain-head,
channel, and light-house at the mouth, all together.

Early in the afternoon we reached the Highland Light, whose white tower
we had seen rising out of the bank in front of us for the last mile or
two. It is fourteen miles from the Nauset Lights, on what is called the
Clay Pounds, an immense bed of clay abutting on the Atlantic, and, as
the keeper told us, stretching quite across the Cape, which is here
only about two miles wide. We perceived at once a difference in the
soil, for there was an interruption of the desert, and a slight
appearance of a sod under our feet, such as we had not seen for the
last two days.

After arranging to lodge at the light-house, we rambled across the Cape
to the Bay, over a singularly bleak and barren-looking country,
consisting of rounded hills and hollows, called by geologists diluvial
elevations and depressions,—a kind of scenery which has been compared
to a chopped sea, though this suggests too sudden a transition. There
is a delineation of this very landscape in Hitchcock’s Report on the
Geology of Massachusetts, a work which, by its size at least, reminds
one of a diluvial elevation itself. Looking southward from the
light-house, the Cape appeared like an elevated plateau, sloping very
regularly, though slightly, downward from the edge of the bank on the
Atlantic side, about one hundred and fifty feet above the ocean, to
that on the Bay side. On traversing this we found it to be interrupted
by broad valleys or gullies, which become the hollows in the bank when
the sea has worn up to them. They are commonly at right angles with the
shore, and often extend quite across the Cape. Some of the valleys,
however, are circular, a hundred feet deep without any outlet, as if
the Cape had sunk in those places, or its sands had run out. The few
scattered houses which we passed, being placed at the bottom of the
hollows for shelter and fertility, were, for the most part, concealed
entirely, as much as if they had been swallowed up in the earth. Even a
village with its meeting-house, which we had left little more than a
stone’s throw behind, had sunk into the earth, spire and all, and we
saw only the surface of the upland and the sea on either hand. When
approaching it, we had mistaken the belfry for a summer-house on the
plain. We began to think that we might tumble into a village before we
were aware of it, as into an ant-lion’s hole, and be drawn into the
sand irrecoverably. The most conspicuous objects on the land were a
distant windmill, or a meeting-house standing alone, for only they
could afford to occupy an exposed place. A great part of the township,
however, is a barren, heath-like plain, and perhaps one third of it
lies in common, though the property of individuals. The author of the
old “Description of Truro,” speaking of the soil, says: “The snow,
which would be of essential service to it provided it lay level and
covered the ground, is blown into drifts and into the sea.” This
peculiar open country, with here and there a patch of shrubbery,
extends as much as seven miles, or from Pamet River on the south to
High Head on the north, and from Ocean to Bay. To walk over it makes on
a stranger such an impression as being at sea, and he finds it
impossible to estimate distances in any weather. A windmill or a herd
of cows may seem to be far away in the horizon, yet, after going a few
rods, he will be close upon them. He is also deluded by other kinds of
mirage. When, in the summer, I saw a family a-blueberrying a mile off,
walking about amid the dwarfish bushes which did not come up higher
than their ankles, they seemed to me to be a race of giants, twenty
feet high at least.

The highest and sandiest portion next the Atlantic was thinly covered
with Beach-grass and Indigo-weed. Next to this the surface of the
upland generally consisted of white sand and gravel, like coarse salt,
through which a scanty vegetation found its way up. It will give an
ornithologist some idea of its barrenness if I mention that the next
June, the month of grass, I found a night-hawk’s eggs there, and that
almost any square rod thereabouts, taken at random, would be an
eligible site for such a deposit. The kildeer-plover, which loves a
similar locality, also drops its eggs there, and fills the air above
with its din. This upland also produced _Cladonia_ lichens,
poverty-grass, savory-leaved aster (_Diplopappus linariifolius_),
mouse-ear, bear-berry, &c. On a few hillsides the savory-leaved aster
and mouse-ear alone made quite a dense sward, said to be very pretty
when the aster is in bloom. In some parts the two species of
poverty-grass (_Hudsonia tomentosa_ and _ericoides_), which deserve a
better name, reign for miles in littli hemispherical tufts or islets,
like moss, scattered over the waste. They linger in bloom there till
the middle of July. Occasionally near the beach these rounded beds, as
also those of the sea-sandwort (_Honkenya peploides_), were filled with
sand within an inch of their tops, and were hard, like large ant-hills,
while the surrounding sand was soft. In summer, if the poverty-grass
grows at the head of a Hollow looking toward the sea, in a bleak
position where the wind rushes up, the northern or exposed half of the
tuft is sometimes all black and dead like an oven-broom, while the
opposite half is yellow with blossoms, the whole hillside thus
presenting a remarkable contrast when seen from the poverty-stricken
and the flourishing side. This plant, which in many places would be
esteemed an ornament, is here despised by many on account of its being
associated with barrenness. It might well be adopted for the Barnstable
coat-of-arms, in a field _sableux_. I should be proud of it. Here and
there were tracts of Beach-grass mingled with the Sea-side Goldenrod
and Beach-pea, which reminded us still more forcibly of the ocean.

[Illustration: Truro meeting-house on the hill]

We read that there was not a brook in Truro. Yet there were deer here
once, which must often have panted in vain; but I am pretty sure that I
afterward saw a small fresh-water brook emptying into the south side of
Pamet River, though I was so heedless as not to taste it. At any rate,
a little boy near by told me that he drank at it. There was not a tree
as far as we could see, and that was many miles each way, the general
level of the upland being about the same everywhere. Even from the
Atlantic side we overlooked the Bay, and saw to Manomet Point in
Plymouth, and better from that side because it was the highest. The
almost universal bareness and smoothness of the landscape were as
agreeable as novel, making it so much the more like the deck of a
vessel. We saw vessels sailing south into the Bay, on the one hand, and
north along the Atlantic shore, on the other, all with an aft wind.

The single road which runs lengthwise the Cape, now winding over the
plain, now through the shrubbery which scrapes the wheels of the stage,
was a mere cart-track in the sand, commonly without any fences to
confine it, and continually changing from this side to that, to harder
ground, or sometimes to avoid the tide. But the inhabitants travel the
waste here and there pilgrim-wise and staff in hand, by narrow
footpaths, through which the sand flows out and reveals the nakedness
of the land. We shuddered at the thought of living there and taking our
afternoon walks over those barren swells, where we could overlook every
step of our walk before taking it, and would have to pray for a fog or
a snow-storm to conceal our destiny. The walker there must soon eat his
heart.

In the north part of the town there is no house from shore to shore for
several miles, and it is as wild and solitary as the Western
Prairies—used to be. Indeed, one who has seen every house in Truro will
be surprised to hear of the number of the inhabitants, but perhaps five
hundred of the men and boys of this small town were then abroad on
their fishing grounds. Only a few men stay at home to till the sand or
watch for blackfish. The farmers are fishermen-farmers and understand
better ploughing the sea than the land. They do not disturb their sands
much, though there is a plenty of sea-weed in the creeks, to say
nothing of blackfish occasionally rotting the shore. Between the Pond
and East Harbor Village there was an interesting plantation of
pitch-pines, twenty or thirty acres in extent, like those which we had
already seen from the stage. One who lived near said that the land was
purchased by two men for a shilling or twenty-five cents an acre. Some
is not considered worth writing a deed for. This soil or sand, which
was partially covered with poverty and beach grass, sorrel, &c., was
furrowed at intervals of about four feet and the seed dropped by a
machine. The pines had come up admirably and grown the first year three
or four inches, and the second six inches and more. Where the seed had
been lately planted the white sand was freshly exposed in an endless
furrow winding round and round the sides of the deep hollows, in a
vertical spiral manner, which produced a very singular effect, as if
you were looking into the reverse side of a vast banded shield. This
experiment, so important to the Cape, appeared very successful, and
perhaps the time will come when the greater part of this kind of land
in Barnstable County will be thus covered with an artificial pine
forest, as has been done in some parts of France. In that country
12,500 acres of downs had been thus covered in 1811 near Bayonne. They
are called _pignadas_, and according to Loudon “constitute the
principal riches of the inhabitants, where there was a drifting desert
before.” It seemed a nobler kind of grain to raise than corn even.

[Illustration: A herd of cows]

A few years ago Truro was remarkable among the Cape towns for the
number of sheep raised in it; but I was told that at this time only two
men kept sheep in the town, and in 1855, a Truro boy ten years old told
me that he had never seen one. They were formerly pastured on the
unfenced lands or general fields, but now the owners were more
particular to assert their rights, and it cost too much for fencing.
The rails are cedar from Maine, and two rails will answer for ordinary
purposes, but four are required for sheep. This was the reason assigned
by one who had formerly kept them for not keeping them any longer.
Fencing stuff is so expensive that I saw fences made with only one
rail, and very often the rail when split was carefully tied with a
string. In one of the villages I saw the next summer a cow tethered by
a rope six rods long, the rope long in proportion as the feed was short
and thin. Sixty rods, ay, all the cables of the Cape, would have been
no more than fair. Tethered in the desert for fear that she would get
into Arabia Felix! I helped a man weigh a bundle of hay which he was
selling to his neighbor, holding one end of a pole from which it swung
by a steel-yard hook, and this was just half his whole crop. In short,
the country looked so barren that I several times refrained from asking
the inhabitants for a string or a piece of wrapping-paper, for fear I
should rob them, for they plainly were obliged to import these things
as well as rails, and where there were no newsboys, I did not see what
they would do for waste paper.

The objects around us, the make-shifts of fishermen ashore, often made
us look down to see if we were standing on terra firma. In the wells
everywhere a block and tackle were used to raise the bucket, instead of
a windlass, and by almost every house was laid up a spar or a plank or
two full of auger-holes, saved from a wreck. The windmills were partly
built of these, and they were worked into the public bridges. The
light-house keeper, who was having his barn shingled, told me casually
that he had made three thousand good shingles for that purpose out of a
mast. You would sometimes see an old oar used for a rail. Frequently
also some fair-weather finery ripped off a vessel by a storm near the
coast was nailed up against an outhouse. I saw fastened to a shed near
the lighthouse a long new sign with the words “ANGLO SAXON” on it in
large gilt letters, as if it were a useless part which the ship could
afford to lose, or which the sailors had discharged at the same time
with the pilot. But it interested somewhat as if it had been a part of
the Argo, clipped off in passing through the Symplegades.

To the fisherman, the Cape itself is a sort of store-ship laden with
supplies,—a safer and larger craft which carries the women and
children, the old men and the sick; and indeed sea-phrases are as
common on it as on board a vessel. Thus is it ever with a sea-going
people. The old Northmen used to speak of the “keel-ridge” of the
country, that is, the ridge of the Doffrafield Mountains, as if the
land were a boat turned bottom up. I was frequently reminded of the
Northmen here. The inhabitants of the Cape are often at once farmers
and sea-rovers; they are more than vikings or kings of the bays, for
their sway extends over the open sea also. A farmer in Wellfleet, at
whose house I afterward spent a night, who had raised fifty bushels of
potatoes the previous year, which is a large crop for the Cape, and had
extensive salt-works, pointed to his schooner, which lay in sight, in
which he and his man and boy occasionally ran down the coast a-trading
as far as the Capes of Virginia. This was his market-cart, and his
hired man knew how to steer her. Thus he drove two teams a-field,

“ere the high _seas_ appeared
Under the opening eyelids of the morn.”


Though probably he would not hear much of the “gray fly” on his way to
Virginia.

A great proportion of the inhabitants of the Cape are always thus
abroad about their teaming on some ocean highway or other, and the
history of one of their ordinary trips would cast the Argonautic
expedition into the shade. I have just heard of a Cape Cod captain who
was expected home in the beginning of the winter from the West Indies,
but was long since given up for lost, till his relations at length have
heard with joy, that, after getting within forty miles of Cape Cod
light, he was driven back by nine successive gales to Key West, between
Florida and Cuba, and was once again shaping his course for home. Thus
he spent his winter. In ancient times the adventures of these two or
three men and boys would have been made the basis of a myth, but now
such tales are crowded into a line of shorthand signs, like an
algebraic formula in the shipping news. “Wherever over the world,” said
Palfrey in his oration at Barnstable, “you see the stars and stripes
floating, you may have good hope that beneath them some one will be
found who can tell you the soundings of Barnstable, or Wellfleet, or
Chatham Harbor.”

I passed by the home of somebody’s (or everybody’s) Uncle Bill, one day
over on the Plymouth shore. It was a schooner half keeled-up on the
mud: we aroused the master out of a sound sleep at noonday, by thumping
on the bottom of his vessel till he presented himself at the hatchway,
for we wanted to borrow his clam-digger. Meaning to make him a call, I
looked out the next morning, and lo! he had run over to “the Pines” the
evening before, fearing an easterly storm. He outrode the _great_ gale
in the spring of 1851, dashing about alone in Plymouth Bay. He goes
after rockweed, lighters vessels, and saves wrecks. I still saw him
lying in the mud over at “the Pines” in the horizon, which place he
could not leave if he would till flood tide. But he would not then
probably. This waiting for the tide is a singular feature in life by
the sea-shore. A frequent answer is, “Well! you can’t start for two
hours yet.” It is something new to a landsman, and at first he is not
disposed to wait. History says that “two inhabitants of Truro were the
first who adventured to the Falkland Isles in pursuit of whales. This
voyage was undertaken in the year 1774, by the advice of Admiral
Montague of the British navy, and was crowned with success.”

At the Pond Village we saw a pond three eighths of a mile long densely
filled with cat-tail flags, seven feet high,—enough for all the coopers
in New England.

[Illustration: Pond Village]

The western shore was nearly as sandy as the eastern, but the water was
much smoother, and the bottom was partially covered with the slender
grass-like seaweed (_Zostera_), which we had not seen on the Atlantic
side; there were also a few rude sheds for trying fish on the beach
there, which made it appear less wild. In the few marshes on this side
we afterward saw Samphire, Rosemary, and other plants new to us
inlanders.

In the summer and fall sometimes, hundreds of blackfish (the Social
Whale, _Globicephalus Melas_ of De Kay; called also Black Whale-fish,
Howling Whale, Bottlehead, etc.), fifteen feet or more in length, are
driven ashore in a single school here. I witnessed such a scene in
July, 1855. A carpenter who was working at the lighthouse arriving
early in the morning remarked that he did not know but he had lost
fifty dollars by coming to his work; for as he came along the Bay side
he heard them driving a school of blackfish ashore, and he had debated
with himself whether he should not go and join them and take his share,
but had concluded to come to his work. After breakfast I came over to
this place, about two miles distant, and near the beach met some of the
fishermen returning from their chase. Looking up and down the shore, I
could see about a mile south some large black masses on the sand, which
I knew must be blackfish, and a man or two about them. As I walked
along towards them I soon came to a huge carcass whose head was gone
and whose blubber had been stripped off some weeks before; the tide was
just beginning to move it, and the stench compelled me to go a long way
round. When I came to Great Hollow I found a fisherman and some boys on
the watch, and counted about thirty blackfish, just killed, with many
lance wounds, and the water was more or less bloody around. They were
partly on shore and partly in the water, held by a rope round their
tails till the tide should leave them. A boat had been somewhat stove
by the tail of one. They were a smooth shining black, like
India-rubber, and had remarkably simple and lumpish forms for animated
creatures, with a blunt round snout or head, whale-like, and simple
stiff-looking flippers. The largest were about fifteen feet long, but
one or two were only five feet long, and still without teeth. The
fisherman slashed one with his jackknife, to show me how thick the
blubber was,—about three inches; and as I passed my finger through the
cut it was covered thick with oil. The blubber looked like pork, and
this man said that when they were trying it the boys would sometimes
come round with a piece of bread in one hand, and take a piece of
blubber in the other to eat with it, preferring it to pork scraps. He
also cut into the flesh beneath, which was firm and red like beef, and
he said that for his part he preferred it when fresh to beef. It is
stated that in 1812 blackfish were used as food by the poor of
Bretagne. They were waiting for the tide to leave these fishes high and
dry, that they might strip off the blubber and carry it to their
try-works in their boats, where they try it on the beach. They get
commonly a barrel of oil, worth fifteen or twenty dollars, to a fish.
There were many lances and harpoons in the boats,—much slenderer
instruments than I had expected. An old man came along the beach with a
horse and wagon distributing the dinners of the fishermen, which their
wives had put up in little pails and jugs, and which he had collected
in the Pond Village, and for this service, I suppose, he received a
share of the oil. If one could not tell his own pail, he took the first
he came to.

As I stood there they raised the cry of “another school,” and we could
see their black backs and their blowing about a mile northward, as they
went leaping over the sea like horses. Some boats were already in
pursuit there, driving them toward the beach. Other fishermen and boys
running up began to jump into the boats and push them off from where I
stood, and I might have gone too had I chosen. Soon there were
twenty-five or thirty boats in pursuit, some large ones under sail, and
others rowing with might and main, keeping outside of the school, those
nearest to the fishes striking on the sides of their boats and blowing
horns to drive them on to the beach. It was an exciting race. If they
succeed in driving them ashore each boat takes one share, and then each
man, but if they are compelled to strike them off shore each boat’s
company take what they strike. I walked rapidly along the shore toward
the north, while the fishermen were rowing still more swiftly to join
their companions, and a little boy who walked by my side was
congratulating himself that his father’s boat was beating another one.
An old blind fisherman whom we met, inquired, “Where are they? I can’t
see. Have they got them?” In the mean while the fishes had turned and
were escaping northward toward Provincetown, only occasionally the back
of one being seen. So the nearest crews were compelled to strike them,
and we saw several boats soon made fast, each to its fish, which, four
or five rods ahead, was drawing it like a race-horse straight toward
the beach, leaping half out of water, blowing blood and water from its
hole, and leaving a streak of foam behind. But they went ashore too far
north for us, though we could see the fishermen leap out and lance them
on the sand. It was just like pictures of whaling which I have seen,
and a fisherman told me that it was nearly as dangerous. In his first
trial he had been much excited, and in his haste had used a lance with
its scabbard on, but nevertheless had thrust it quite through his fish.

I learned that a few days before this one hundred and eighty blackfish
had been driven ashore in one school at Eastham, a little farther
south, and that the keeper of Billingsgate Point light went out one
morning about the same time and cut his initials on the backs of a
large school which had run ashore in the night, and sold his right to
them to Provincetown for one thousand dollars, and probably
Provincetown made as much more. Another fisherman told me that nineteen
years ago three hundred and eighty were driven ashore in one school at
Great Hollow. In the Naturalists’ Library, it is said that, in the
winter of 1809-10, one thousand one hundred and ten “approached the
shore of Hralfiord, Iceland, and were captured.” De Kay says it is not
known why they are stranded. But one fisherman declared to me that they
ran ashore in pursuit of squid, and that they generally came on the
coast about the last of July.

About a week afterward, when I came to this shore, it was strewn, as
far as I could see with a glass, with the carcasses of blackfish
stripped of their blubber and their heads cut off; the latter lying
higher up. Walking on the beach was out of the question on account of
the stench. Between Provincetown and Truro they lay in the very path of
the stage. Yet no steps were taken to abate the nuisance, and men were
catching lobsters as usual just off the shore. I was told that they did
sometimes tow them out and sink them; yet I wondered where they got the
stones to sink them with. Of course they might be made into guano, and
Cape Cod is not so fertile that her inhabitants can afford to do
without this manure,—to say nothing of the diseases they may produce.

After my return home, wishing to learn what was known about the
Blackfish, I had recourse to the reports of the zoological surveys of
the State, and I found that Storer had rightfully omitted it in his
Report on the Fishes, since it is not a fish; so I turned to Emmons’s
Report of the Mammalia, but was surprised to find that the seals and
whales were omitted by him, because he had had no opportunity to
observe them. Considering how this State has risen and thriven by its
fisheries,—that the legislature which authorized the Zoological Survey
sat under the emblem of a codfish,—that Nantucket and New Bedford are
within our limits,—that an early riser may find a thousand or fifteen
hundred dollars’ worth of blackfish on the shore in a morning,—that the
Pilgrims saw the Indians cutting up a blackfish on the shore at
Eastham, and called a part of that shore “Grampus Bay,” from the number
of blackfish they found there, before they got to Plymouth,—and that
from that time to this these fishes have continued to enrich one or two
counties almost annually, and that their decaying carcasses were now
poisoning the air of one county for more than thirty miles,—I thought
it remarkable that neither the popular nor scientific name was to be
found in a report on our mammalia,—a catalogue of the productions of
our land and water.

We had here, as well as all across the Cape, a fair view of
Provincetown, five or six miles distant over the water toward the west,
under its shrubby sand-hills, with its harbor now full of vessels whose
masts mingled with the spires of its churches, and gave it the
appearance of a quite large seaport town.

The inhabitants of all the lower Cape towns enjoy thus the prospect of
two seas. Standing on the western or larboard shore, and looking
across to where the distant mainland looms, they can say, This is
Massachusetts Bay; and then, after an hour’s sauntering walk, they may
stand on the starboard side, beyond which no land is seen to loom, and
say, This is the Atlantic Ocean.

On our way back to the lighthouse, by whose white-washed tower we
steered as securely as the mariner by its light at night, we passed
through a graveyard, which apparently was saved from being blown away
by its slates, for they had enabled a thick bed of huckleberry-bushes
to root themselves amid the graves. We thought it would be worth the
while to read the epitaphs where so many were lost at sea; however, as
not only their lives, but commonly their bodies also, were lost or not
identified, there were fewer epitaphs of this sort than we expected,
though there were not a few. Their graveyard is the ocean. Near the
eastern side we started up a fox in a hollow, the only kind of wild
quadruped, if I except a skunk in a salt-marsh, that we saw in all our
walk (unless painted and box tortoises may be called quadrupeds). He
was a large, plump, shaggy fellow, like a yellow dog, with, as usual, a
white tip to his tail, and looked as if he fared well on the Cape. He
cantered away into the shrub-oaks and bayberry-bushes which chanced to
grow there, but were hardly high enough to conceal him. I saw another
the next summer leaping over the top of a beach-plum a little farther
north, a small arc of his course (which I trust is not yet run), from
which I endeavored in vain to calculate his whole orbit: there were too
many unknown attractions to be allowed for. I also saw the exuviae of a
third fast sinking into the sand, and added the skull to my collection.
Hence I concluded that they must be plenty thereabouts; but a traveller
may meet with more than an inhabitant, since he is more likely to take
an unfrequented route across the country. They told me that in some
years they died off in great numbers by a kind of madness, under the
effect of which they were seen whirling round and round as if in
pursuit of their tails. In Crantz’s account of Greenland, he says:
“They (the foxes) live upon birds and their eggs, and, when they can’t
get them, upon crowberries, mussels, crabs, and what the sea casts
out.”

Just before reaching the light-house, we saw the sun set in the
Bay,—for standing on that narrow Cape was, as I have said, like being
on the deck of a vessel, or rather at the masthead of a man-of-war,
thirty miles at sea, though we knew that at the same moment the sun was
setting behind our native hills, which were just below the horizon in
that direction. This sight drove everything else quite out of our
heads, and Homer and the Ocean came in again with a rush,—

Ἐν δ’ ἔπεσ’ Ὠκεανῷ λαμπρὸν φάος ἠελίοιο,


the shining torch of the sun fell into the ocean.




