The Project Gutenberg eBook of Cape Cod, by Henry David Thoreau

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Cape Cod

Author: Henry D. Thoreau

Illustrator: Clifton Johnson

Release Date: November 21, 2010 [eBook #34392]
[Most recently updated: December 10, 2022]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Steve Mattern


[Illustration]

[Illustration]




Cape Cod

by Henry David Thoreau

Author of “A Week on the Concord,” “Walden,”
“Excursions,” “The Maine Woods,” etc.

ILLUSTRATED BY
CLIFTON JOHNSON

[Illustration]

NEW YORK
THOMAS Y. CROWELL & CO.
PUBLISHERS

Copyright, 1908
By THOMAS Y. CROWELL & CO.
THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A.

Contents

 INTRODUCTION
 I. The Shipwreck
 II. Stage-coach Views
 III. The Plains Of Nauset
 IV. The Beach
 V. The Wellfleet Oysterman
 VI. The Beach Again
 VII. Across the Cape
 VIII. The Highland Light
 IX. The Sea and the Desert
 X. Provincetown

ILLUSTRATIONS

 The Clam-Digger (Photogravure)
 Cohasset—The little cove at Whitehead promontory
 An old windmill
 A street in Sandwich
 The old Higgins tavern at Orleans
 A Nauset lane
 Nauset Bay
 A scarecrow
 Millennium Grove camp-meeting grounds
 A Cape Cod citizen
 Wreckage under the sand-bluff
 Herring River at Wellfleet
 A characteristic gable with many windows
 A Wellfleet oysterman
 Wellfleet
 Hunting for a leak
 Truro—Starting on a voyage
 Unloading the day’s catch
 A Truro footpath
 Truro meeting-house on the hill
 A herd of cows
 Pond Village
 Dragging a dory up on the beach
 An old wrecker at home
 The Highland Light
 Towing along shore
 A cranberry meadow
 The sand dunes drifting in upon the trees
 The white breakers on the Atlantic side
 In Provincetown harbor
 Provincetown—A bit of the village from the wharf
 The day of rest
 A Provincetown fishing-vessel




INTRODUCTION


Of the group of notables who in the middle of the last century made the
little Massachusetts town of Concord their home, and who thus conferred
on it a literary fame both unique and enduring, Thoreau is the only one
who was Concord born. His neighbor, Emerson, had sought the place in
mature life for rural retirement, and after it became his chosen
retreat, Hawthorne, Alcott, and the others followed; but Thoreau, the
most peculiar genius of them all, was native to the soil.

In 1837, at the age of twenty, he graduated from Harvard, and for three
years taught school in his home town. Then he applied himself to the
business in which his father was engaged,—the manufacture of lead
pencils. He believed he could make a better pencil than any at that
time in use; but when he succeeded and his friends congratulated him
that he had now opened his way to fortune he responded that he would
never make another pencil. “Why should I?” said he. “I would not do
again what I have done once.”

So he turned his attention to miscellaneous studies and to nature. When
he wanted money he earned it by some piece of manual labor agreeable to
him, as building a boat or a fence, planting, or surveying. He never
married, very rarely went to church, did not vote, refused to pay a tax
to the State, ate no flesh, drank no wine, used no tobacco; and for a
long time he was simply an oddity in the estimation of his
fellow-townsmen. But when they at length came to understand him better
they recognized his genuineness and sincerity and his originality, and
they revered and admired him. He was entirely independent of the
conventional, and his courage to live as he saw fit and to defend and
uphold what he believed to be right never failed him. Indeed, so
devoted was he to principle and his own ideals that he seems never to
have allowed himself one indifferent or careless moment.

He was a man of the strongest local attachments, and seldom wandered
beyond his native township. A trip abroad did not tempt him in the
least. It would mean in his estimation just so much time lost for
enjoying his own village, and he says: “At best, Paris could only be a
school in which to learn to live here—a stepping-stone to Concord.”

He had a very pronounced antipathy to the average prosperous city man,
and in speaking of persons of this class remarks: “They do a little
business commonly each day in order to pay their board, and then they
congregate in sitting-rooms, and feebly fabulate and paddle in the
social slush, and go unashamed to their beds and take on a new layer of
sloth.”

The men he loved were those of a more primitive sort, unartificial,
with the daring to cut loose from the trammels of fashion and inherited
custom. Especially he liked the companionship of men who were in close
contact with nature. A half-wild Irishman, or some rude farmer, or
fisherman, or hunter, gave him real delight; and for this reason, Cape
Cod appealed to him strongly. It was then a very isolated portion of
the State, and its dwellers were just the sort of independent,
self-reliant folk to attract him. In his account of his rambles there
the human element has large place, and he lingers fondly over the
characteristics of his chance acquaintances and notes every salient
remark. They, in turn, no doubt found him interesting, too, though the
purposes of the wanderer were a good deal of a mystery to them, and
they were inclined to think he was a pedler.

His book was the result of several journeys, but the only trip of which
he tells us in detail was in October. That month, therefore, was the
one I chose for my own visit to the Cape when I went to secure the
series of pictures that illustrate this edition; for I wished to see
the region as nearly as possible in the same guise that Thoreau
describes it. From Sandwich, where his record of Cape experiences
begins, and where the inner shore first takes a decided turn eastward,
I followed much the same route he had travelled in 1849, clear to
Provincetown, at the very tip of the hook.

Thoreau has a good deal to say of the sandy roads and toilsome walking.
In that respect there has been marked improvement, for latterly a large
proportion of the main highway has been macadamed. Yet one still
encounters plenty of the old yielding sand roads that make travel a
weariness either on foot or in teams. Another feature to which the
nature lover again and again refers is the windmills. The last of these
ceased grinding a score of years ago, though several continue to stand
in fairly perfect condition. There have been changes on the Cape, but
the landscape in the main presents the same appearance it did in
Thoreau’s time. As to the people, if you see them in an unconventional
way, tramping as Thoreau did, their individuality retains much of the
interest that he discovered.

Our author’s report of his trip has a piquancy that is quite alluring.
This might be said of all his books, for no matter what he wrote about,
his comments were certain to be unusual; and it is as much or more for
the revelations of his own tastes, thoughts, and idiosyncrasies that we
read him as for the subject matter with which he deals. He had
published only two books when he died in 1862 at the age of forty-four,
and his “Cape Cod” did not appear until 1865. Nor did the public at
first show any marked interest in his books. During his life,
therefore, the circle of his admirers was very small, but his fame has
steadily increased since, and the stimulus of his lively descriptions
and observations seems certain of enduring appreciation.

Clifton Johnson.

Hadley, Mass.




I
THE SHIPWRECK


Wishing to get a better view than I had yet had of the ocean, which, we
are told, covers more than two-thirds of the globe, but of which a man
who lives a few miles inland may never see any trace, more than of
another world, I made a visit to Cape Cod in October, 1849, another the
succeeding June, and another to Truro in July, 1855; the first and last
time with a single companion, the second time alone. I have spent, in
all, about three weeks on the Cape; walked from Eastham to
Provincetown twice on the Atlantic side, and once on the Bay side
also, excepting four or five miles, and crossed the Cape half a dozen
times on my way; but having come so fresh to the sea, I have got but
little salted. My readers must expect only so much saltness as the land
breeze acquires from blowing over an arm of the sea, or is tasted on
the windows and the bark of trees twenty miles inland, after September
gales. I have been accustomed to make excursions to the ponds within
ten miles of Concord, but latterly I have extended my excursions to the
seashore.

I did not see why I might not make a book on Cape Cod, as well as my
neighbor on “Human Culture.” It is but another name for the same thing,
and hardly a sandier phase of it. As for my title, I suppose that the
word Cape is from the French _cap_; which is from the Latin _caput_, a
head; which is, perhaps, from the verb _capere_, to take,—that being
the part by which we take hold of a thing:—Take Time by the forelock.
It is also the safest part to take a serpent by. And as for Cod, that
was derived directly from that “great store of codfish” which Captain
Bartholomew Gosnold caught there in 1602; which fish appears to have
been so called from the Saxon word _codde_, “a case in which seeds are
lodged,” either from the form of the fish, or the quantity of spawn it
contains; whence also, perhaps, _codling_ (_pomum coctile?_) and
coddle,—to cook green like peas. (V. Dic.)

Cape Cod is the bared and bended arm of Massachusetts: the shoulder is
at Buzzard’s Bay; the elbow, or crazy-bone, at Cape Mallebarre; the
wrist at Truro; and the sandy fist at Provincetown,—behind which the
State stands on her guard, with her back to the Green Mountains, and
her feet planted on the floor of the ocean, like an athlete protecting
her Bay,—boxing with northeast storms, and, ever and anon, heaving up
her Atlantic adversary from the lap of earth,—ready to thrust forward
her other fist, which keeps guard the while upon her breast at Cape
Ann.

On studying the map, I saw that there must be an uninterrupted beach on
the east or outside of the forearm of the Cape, more than thirty miles
from the general line of the coast, which would afford a good sea view,
but that, on account of an opening in the beach, forming the entrance
to Nauset Harbor, in Orleans, I must strike it in Eastham, if I
approached it by land, and probably I could walk thence straight to
Race Point, about twenty-eight miles, and not meet with any
obstruction.

We left Concord, Massachusetts, on Tuesday, October 9th, 1849. On
reaching Boston, we found that the Provincetown steamer, which should
have got in the day before, had not yet arrived, on account of a
violent storm; and, as we noticed in the streets a handbill headed,
“Death! one hundred and forty-five lives lost at Cohasset,” we decided
to go by way of Cohasset. We found many Irish in the cars, going to
identify bodies and to sympathize with the survivors, and also to
attend the funeral which was to take place in the afternoon;—and when
we arrived at Cohasset, it appeared that nearly all the passengers were
bound for the beach, which was about a mile distant, and many other
persons were flocking in from the neighboring country. There were
several hundreds of them streaming off over Cohasset common in that
direction, some on foot and some in wagons,—and among them were some
sportsmen in their hunting-jackets, with their guns, and game-bags, and
dogs. As we passed the graveyard we saw a large hole, like a cellar,
freshly dug there, and, just before reaching the shore, by a pleasantly
winding and rocky road, we met several hay-riggings and farm-wagons
coming away toward the meeting-house, each loaded with three large,
rough deal boxes. We did not need to ask what was in them. The owners
of the wagons were made the undertakers. Many horses in carriages were
fastened to the fences near the shore, and, for a mile or more, up and
down, the beach was covered with people looking out for bodies, and
examining the fragments of the wreck. There was a small island called
Brook Island, with a hut on it, lying just off the shore. This is said
to be the rockiest shore in Massachusetts, from Nantasket to
Scituate,—hard sienitic rocks, which the waves have laid bare, but have
not been able to crumble. It has been the scene of many a shipwreck.

The brig _St. John_, from Galway, Ireland, laden with emigrants, was
wrecked on Sunday morning; it was now Tuesday morning, and the sea was
still breaking violently on the rocks. There were eighteen or twenty of
the same large boxes that I have mentioned, lying on a green hillside,
a few rods from the water, and surrounded by a crowd. The bodies which
had been recovered, twenty-seven or eight in all, had been collected
there. Some were rapidly nailing down the lids, others were carting the
boxes away, and others were lifting the lids, which were yet loose, and
peeping under the cloths, for each body, with such rags as still
adhered to it, was covered loosely with a white sheet. I witnessed no
signs of grief, but there was a sober dispatch of business which was
affecting. One man was seeking to identify a particular body, and one
undertaker or carpenter was calling to another to know in what box a
certain child was put. I saw many marble feet and matted heads as the
cloths were raised, and one livid, swollen, and mangled body of a
drowned girl,—who probably had intended to go out to service in some
American family,—to which some rags still adhered, with a string, half
concealed by the flesh, about its swollen neck; the coiled-up wreck of
a human hulk, gashed by the rocks or fishes, so that the bone and
muscle were exposed, but quite bloodless,—merely red and white,—with
wide-open and staring eyes, yet lustreless, dead-lights; or like the
cabin windows of a stranded vessel, filled with sand. Sometimes there
were two or more children, or a parent and child, in the same box, and
on the lid would perhaps be written with red chalk, “Bridget
such-a-one, and sister’s child.” The surrounding sward was covered with
bits of sails and clothing. I have since heard, from one who lives by
this beach, that a woman who had come over before, but had left her
infant behind for her sister to bring, came and looked into these boxes
and saw in one,—probably the same whose superscription I have
quoted,—her child in her sister’s arms, as if the sister had meant to
be found thus; and within three days after, the mother died from the
effect of that sight.

We turned from this and walked along the rocky shore. In the first cove
were strewn what seemed the fragments of a vessel, in small pieces
mixed with sand and sea-weed, and great quantities of feathers; but it
looked so old and rusty, that I at first took it to be some old wreck
which had lain there many years. I even thought of Captain Kidd, and
that the feathers were those which sea-fowl had cast there; and perhaps
there might be some tradition about it in the neighborhood. I asked a
sailor if that was the _St. John_. He said it was. I asked him where
she struck. He pointed to a rock in front of us, a mile from the shore,
called the Grampus Rock, and added:

“You can see a part of her now sticking up; it looks like a small
boat.”

I saw it. It was thought to be held by the chain-cables and the
anchors. I asked if the bodies which I saw were all that were drowned.

“Not a quarter of them,” said he.

“Where are the rest?”

“Most of them right underneath that piece you see.”

It appeared to us that there was enough rubbish to make the wreck of a
large vessel in this cove alone, and that it would take many days to
cart it off. It was several feet deep, and here and there was a bonnet
or a jacket on it. In the very midst of the crowd about this wreck,
there were men with carts busily collecting the sea-weed which the
storm had cast up, and conveying it beyond the reach of the tide,
though they were often obliged to separate fragments of clothing from
it, and they might at any moment have found a human body under it.
Drown who might, they did not forget that this weed was a valuable
manure. This shipwreck had not produced a visible vibration in the
fabric of society.

About a mile south we could see, rising above the rocks, the masts of
the British brig which the _St. John_ had endeavored to follow, which
had slipped her cables and, by good luck, run into the mouth of
Cohasset Harbor. A little further along the shore we saw a man’s
clothes on a rock; further, a woman’s scarf, a gown, a straw bonnet,
the brig’s caboose, and one of her masts high and dry, broken into
several pieces. In another rocky cove, several rods from the water, and
behind rocks twenty feet high, lay a part of one side of the vessel,
still hanging together. It was, perhaps, forty feet long, by fourteen
wide. I was even more surprised at the power of the waves, exhibited on
this shattered fragment, than I had been at the sight of the smaller
fragments before. The largest timbers and iron braces were broken
superfluously, and I saw that no material could withstand the power of
the waves; that iron must go to pieces in such a case, and an iron
vessel would be cracked up like an egg-shell on the rocks. Some of
these timbers, however, were so rotten that I could almost thrust my
umbrella through them. They told us that some were saved on this piece,
and also showed where the sea had heaved it into this cove, which was
now dry. When I saw where it had come in, and in what condition, I
wondered that any had been saved on it. A little further on a crowd of
men was collected around the mate of the _St. John_, who was telling
his story. He was a slim-looking youth, who spoke of the captain as the
master, and seemed a little excited. He was saying that when they
jumped into the boat, she filled, and, the vessel lurching, the weight
of the water in the boat caused the painter to break, and so they were
separated. Whereat one man came away, saying:—

“Well, I don’t see but he tells a straight story enough. You see, the
weight of the water in the boat broke the painter. A boat full of water
is very heavy,”—and so on, in a loud and impertinently earnest tone, as
if he had a bet depending on it, but had no humane interest in the
matter.

Another, a large man, stood near by upon a rock, gazing into the sea,
and chewing large quids of tobacco, as if that habit were forever
confirmed with him.

“Come,” says another to his companion, “let’s be off. We’ve seen the
whole of it. It’s no use to stay to the funeral.”

Further, we saw one standing upon a rock, who, we were told, was one
that was saved. He was a sober-looking man, dressed in a jacket and
gray pantaloons, with his hands in the pockets. I asked him a few
questions, which he answered; but he seemed unwilling to talk about it,
and soon walked away. By his side stood one of the life-boatmen, in an
oil-cloth jacket, who told us how they went to the relief of the
British brig, thinking that the boat of the _St. John_, which they
passed on the way, held all her crew,—for the waves prevented their
seeing those who were on the vessel, though they might have saved some
had they known there were any there. A little further was the flag of
the _St. John_ spread on a rock to dry, and held down by stones at the
corners. This frail, but essential and significant portion of the
vessel, which had so long been the sport of the winds, was sure to
reach the shore. There were one or two houses visible from these rocks,
in which were some of the survivors recovering from the shock which
their bodies and minds had sustained. One was not expected to live.

We kept on down the shore as far as a promontory called Whitehead, that
we might see more of the Cohasset Rocks. In a little cove, within half
a mile, there were an old man and his son collecting, with their team,
the sea-weed which that fatal storm had cast up, as serenely employed
as if there had never been a wreck in the world, though they were
within sight of the Grampus Rock, on which the _St. John_ had struck.
The old man had heard that there was a wreck, and knew most of the
particulars, but he said that he had not been up there since it
happened. It was the wrecked weed that concerned him most, rock-weed,
kelp, and sea-weed, as he named them, which he carted to his barn-yard;
and those bodies were to him but other weeds which the tide cast up,
but which were of no use to him. We afterwards came to the life-boat in
its harbor, waiting for another emergency,—and in the afternoon we saw
the funeral procession at a distance, at the head of which walked the
captain with the other survivors.

On the whole, it was not so impressive a scene as I might have
expected. If I had found one body cast upon the beach in some lonely
place, it would have affected me more. I sympathized rather with the
winds and waves, as if to toss and mangle these poor human bodies was
the order of the day. If this was the law of Nature, why waste any time
in awe or pity? If the last day were come, we should not think so much
about the separation of friends or the blighted prospects of
individuals. I saw that corpses might be multiplied, as on the field of
battle, till they no longer affected us in any degree, as exceptions to
the common lot of humanity. Take all the graveyards together, they are
always the majority. It is the individual and private that demands our
sympathy. A man can attend but one funeral in the course of his life,
can behold but one corpse. Yet I saw that the inhabitants of the shore
would be not a little affected by this event. They would watch there
many days and nights for the sea to give up its dead, and their
imaginations and sympathies would supply the place of mourners far
away, who as yet knew not of the wreck. Many days after this, something
white was seen floating on the water by one who was sauntering on the
beach. It was approached in a boat, and found to be the body of a
woman, which had risen in an upright position, whose white cap was
blown back with the wind. I saw that the beauty of the shore itself was
wrecked for many a lonely walker there, until he could perceive, at
last, how its beauty was enhanced by wrecks like this, and it acquired
thus a rarer and sublimer beauty still.


[Illustration: Cohasset, The little cove at Whitehead promontory]

Why care for these dead bodies? They really have no friends but the
worms or fishes. Their owners were coming to the New World, as Columbus
and the Pilgrims did,—they were within a mile of its shores; but,
before they could reach it, they emigrated to a newer world than ever
Columbus dreamed of, yet one of whose existence we believe that there
is far more universal and convincing evidence—though it has not yet
been discovered by science—than Columbus had of this; not merely
mariners’ tales and some paltry drift-wood and sea-weed, but a
continual drift and instinct to all our shores. I saw their empty hulks
that came to land; but they themselves, meanwhile, were cast upon some
shore yet further west, toward which we are all tending, and which we
shall reach at last, it may be through storm and darkness, as they did.
No doubt, we have reason to thank God that they have not been
“shipwrecked into life again.” The mariner who makes the safest port in
Heaven, perchance, seems to his friends on earth to be shipwrecked, for
they deem Boston Harbor the better place; though perhaps invisible to
them, a skillful pilot comes to meet him, and the fairest and balmiest
gales blow off that coast, his good ship makes the land in halcyon
days, and he kisses the shore in rapture there, while his old hulk
tosses in the surf here. It is hard to part with one’s body, but, no
doubt, it is easy enough to do without it when once it is gone. All
their plans and hopes burst like a bubble! Infants by the score dashed
on the rocks by the enraged Atlantic Ocean! No, no! If the _St. John_
did not make her port here, she has been telegraphed there. The
strongest wind cannot stagger a Spirit; it is a Spirit’s breath. A just
man’s purpose cannot be split on any Grampus or material rock, but
itself will split rocks till it succeeds.

The verses addressed to Columbus, dying, may, with slight alterations,
be applied to the passengers of the _St. John:_—

“Soon with them will all be over,
Soon the voyage will be begun
That shall bear them to discover,
Far away, a land unknown.

“Land that each, alone, must visit,
But no tidings bring to men;
For no sailor, once departed,
Ever hath returned again.

“No carved wood, no broken branches,
Ever drift from that far wild;
He who on that ocean launches
Meets no corse of angel child.

“Undismayed, my noble sailors,
Spread, then spread your canvas out;
Spirits! on a sea of ether
Soon shall ye serenely float!

“Where the deep no plummet soundeth,
Fear no hidden breakers there,
And the fanning wing of angels
Shall your bark right onward bear.

“Quit, now, full of heart and comfort,
These rude shores, they are of earth;
Where the rosy clouds are parting,
There the blessed isles loom forth.”


One summer day, since this, I came this way, on foot, along the shore
from Boston. It was so warm that some horses had climbed to the very
top of the ramparts of the old fort at Hull, where there was hardly
room to turn round, for the sake of the breeze. The _Datura
stramonium_, or thorn-apple, was in full bloom along the beach; and, at
sight of this cosmopolite,—this Captain Cook among plants,—carried in
ballast all over the world, I felt as if I were on the highway of
nations. Say, rather, this Viking, king of the Bays, for it is not an
innocent plant; it suggests not merely commerce, but its attend-ant
vices, as if its fibres were the stuff of which pirates spin their
yarns. I heard the voices of men shouting aboard a vessel, half a mile
from the shore, which sounded as if they were in a barn in the country,
they being between the sails. It was a purely rural sound. As I looked
over the water, I saw the isles rapidly wasting away, the sea nibbling
voraciously at the continent, the springing arch of a hill suddenly
interrupted, as at Point Alderton,—what botanists might call
premorse,—showing, by its curve against the sky, how much space it must
have occupied, where now was water only, On the other hand, these
wrecks of isles were being fancifully arranged into new shores, as at
Hog Island, inside of Hull, where everything seemed to be gently
lapsing, into futurity. This isle had got the very form of a
ripple,—and I thought that the inhabitants should bear a ripple for
device on their shields, a wave passing over them, with the _datura_,
which is said to produce mental alienation of long duration without
affecting the bodily health,[1] springing from its edge. The most
interesting thing which I heard of, in this township of Hull, was an
unfailing spring, whose locality was pointed out to me, on the side of
a distant hill, as I was panting along the shore, though I did not
visit it. Perhaps, if I should go through Rome, it would be some spring
on the Capitoline Hill I should remember the longest. It is true, I was
somewhat interested in the well at the old French fort, which was said
to be ninety feet deep, with a cannon at the bottom of it. On Nantasket
beach I counted a dozen chaises from the public-house. From time to
time the riders turned their horses toward the sea, standing in the
water for the coolness,—and I saw the value of beaches to cities for
the sea breeze and the bath.

At Jerusalem village the inhabitants were collecting in haste, before a
thunder-shower now approaching, the Irish moss which they had spread to
dry. The shower passed on one side, and gave me a few drops only, which
did not cool the air. I merely felt a puff upon my cheek, though,
within sight, a vessel was capsized in the bay, and several others
dragged their anchors, and were near going ashore. The sea-bathing at
Cohasset Rocks was perfect. The water was purer and more transparent
than any I had ever seen. There was not a particle of mud or slime
about it. The bottom being sandy, I could see the sea-perch swimming
about. The smooth and fantastically worn rocks, and the perfectly clean
and tress-like rock-weeds falling over you, and attached so firmly to
the rocks that you could pull yourself up by them, greatly enhanced the
luxury of the bath. The stripe of barnacles just above the weeds
reminded me of some vegetable growth,—the buds, and petals, and
seed-vessels of flowers. They lay along the seams of the rock like
buttons on a waistcoat. It was one of the hottest days in the year, yet
I found the water so icy cold that I could swim but a stroke or two,
and thought that, in case of shipwreck, there would be more danger of
being chilled to death than simply drowned. One immersion was enough to
make you forget the dog-days utterly. Though you were sweltering
before, it will take you half an hour now to remember that it was ever
warm. There were the tawny rocks, like lions couchant, defying the
ocean, whose waves incessantly dashed against and scoured them with
vast quantities of gravel. The water held in their little hollows, on
the receding of the tide, was so crystalline that I could not believe
it salt, but wished to drink it; and higher up were basins of fresh
water left by the rain,—all which, being also of different depths and
temperature, were convenient for different kinds of baths. Also, the
larger hollows in the smoothed rocks formed the most convenient of
seats and dressing-rooms. In these respects it was the most perfect
seashore that I had seen.

I saw in Cohasset, separated from the sea only by a narrow beach, a
handsome but shallow lake of some four hundred acres, which, I was
told, the sea had tossed over the beach in a great storm in the spring,
and, after the alewives had passed into it, it had stopped up its
outlet, and now the alewives were dying: by thousands, and the
inhabitants were apprehending a pestilence as the water evaporated. It
had live rocky islets in it.

This Rock shore is called Pleasant Cove, on some maps; on the map of
Cohasset, that name appears to be confined to the particular cove where
I saw the wreck of the St. John. The ocean did not look, now, as if
any were ever shipwrecked in it; it was not grand and sublime, but
beautiful as a lake. Not a vestige of a wreck was visible, nor could I
believe that the bones of many a shipwrecked man were buried in that
pure sand. But to go on with our first excursion.

 [1] The Jamestown weed (or thorn-apple). “This, being an early plant,
 was gathered very young for a boiled salad, by some of the soldiers
 sent thither [_i.e._ to Virginia] to quell the rebellion of Bacon; and
 some of them ate plentifully of it, the effect of which was a very
 pleasant comedy, for they turned natural fools upon it for several
 days: one would blow up a feather in the air; another would dart
 straws at it with much fury; and another, stark naked, was sitting up
 in a corner like a monkey, grinning and making mows at them; a fourth
 would fondly kiss and paw his companions, and sneer in their faces,
 with a countenance more antic than any in a Dutch droll. In this
 frantic condition they were confined, lest they should, in their
 folly, destroy themselves,—though it was observed that all their
 actions were full of innocence and good nature. Indeed, they were not
 very cleanly. A thousand such simple tricks they played, and after
 eleven days returned to themselves again, not remembering anything
 that had passed.”—Beverly’s _History of Virginia_, p. 120.
 



