VI
THE BEACH AGAIN


Our way to the high sand-bank, which I have described as extending all
along the coast, led, as usual, through patches of Bayberry bushes
which straggled into the sand. This, next to the Shrub-oak, was perhaps
the most common shrub thereabouts. I was much attracted by its
odoriferous leaves and small gray berries which are clustered about the
short twigs, just below the last year’s growth. I know of but two
bushes in Concord, and they, being staminate plants, do not bear fruit.
The berries gave it a venerable appearance, and they smelled quite
spicy, like small confectionery. Robert Beverley, in his “History of
Virginia,” published in 1705, states that “at the mouth of their
rivers, and all along upon the sea and bay, and near many of their
creeks and swamps, grows the myrtle, bearing a berry, of which they
make a hard brittle wax, of a curious green color, which by refining
becomes almost transparent. Of this they make candles, which are never
greasy to the touch nor melt with lying in the hottest weather; neither
does the snuff of these ever offend the smell, like that of a tallow
candle; but, instead of being disagreeable, if an accident puts a
candle out, it yields a pleasant fragrancy to all that are in the room;
insomuch that nice people often put them out on purpose to have the
incense of the expiring snuff. The melting of these berries is said to
have been first found out by a surgeon in New England, who performed
wonderful things with a salve made of them.” From the abundance of
berries still hanging on the bushes, we judged that the inhabitants did
not generally collect them for tallow, though we had seen a piece in
the house we had just left. I have since made some tallow myself.
Holding a basket beneath the bare twigs in April, I rubbed them
together between my hands and thus gathered about a quart in twenty
minutes, to which were added enough to make three pints, and I might
have gathered them much faster with a suitable rake and a large shallow
basket. They have little prominences like those of an orange all
creased in tallow, which also fills the interstices down to the stone.
The oily part rose to the top, making it look like a savory black
broth, which smelled much like balm or other herb tea. You let it cool,
then skim off the tallow from the surface, melt this again and strain
it. I got about a quarter of a pound weight from my three pints, and
more yet remained within the berries. A small portion cooled in the
form of small flattish hemispheres, like crystallizations, the size of
a kernel of corn (nuggets I called them as I picked them out from amid
the berries), Loudon says, that “cultivated trees are said to yield
more wax than those that are found wild.” (See Duplessy, _Végetaux
Résineux_, Vol. II. p. 60.) If you get any pitch on your hands in the
pine-woods you have only to rub some of these berries between your
hands to start it off. But the ocean was the grand fact there, which
made us forget both bay berries and men.

To-day the air was beautifully clear, and the sea no longer dark and
stormy, though the waves still broke with foam along the beach, but
sparkling and full of life. Already that morning I had seen the day
break over the sea as if it came out of its bosom:—

“The saffron-robed Dawn rose in haste from the streams
Of Ocean, that she might bring light to immortals and to mortals.”


The sun rose visibly at such a distance over the sea that the
cloud-bank in the horizon, which at first concealed him, was not
perceptible until he had risen high behind it, and plainly broke and
dispersed it, like an arrow. But as yet I looked at him as rising over
land, and could not, without an effort, realize that he was rising over
the sea. Already I saw some vessels on the horizon, which had rounded
the Cape in the night, and were now well on their watery way to other
lands.

We struck the beach again in the south part of Truro. In the early part
of the day, while it was flood tide and the beach was narrow and soft,
we walked on the bank, which was very high here, but not so level as
the day before, being more interrupted by slight hollows. The author of
the Description of the Eastern Coast says of this part, that “the bank
is very high and steep. From the edge of it west, there is a strip of
sand a hundred yards in breadth. Then succeeds low brushwood, a quarter
of a mile wide, and almost impassable. After which comes a thick,
perplexing forest, in which not a house is to be discovered. Seamen,
therefore, though the distance between these two hollows (Newcomb’s and
Brush Hollows) is great, must not attempt to enter the wood, as in a
snowstorm they must undoubtedly perish.” This is still a true
description of the country, except that there is not much high wood
left.

[Illustration: Truro—Starting on a voyage]

There were many vessels, like gulls, skimming over the surface of the
sea, now half concealed in its troughs, their dolphin-strikers
ploughing the water, now tossed on the top of the billows. One, a bark
standing down parallel with the coast, suddenly furled her sails, came
to anchor, and swung round in the wind, near us, only half a mile from
the shore. At first we thought that her captain wished to communicate
with us, and perhaps we did not regard the signal of distress, which a
mariner would have understood, and he cursed us for cold-hearted
wreckers who turned our backs on him. For hours we could still see her
anchored there behind us, and we wondered how she could afford to
loiter so long in her course. Or was she a smuggler who had chosen that
wild beach to land her cargo on? Or did they wish to catch fish, or
paint their vessel? Erelong other barks, and brigs, and schooners,
which had in the mean while doubled the Cape, sailed by her in the
smacking breeze, and our consciences were relieved. Some of these
vessels lagged behind, while others steadily went ahead. We narrowly
watched their rig, and the cut of their jibs, and how they walked the
water, for there was all the difference between them that there is
between living creatures. But we wondered that they should be
remembering Boston and New York and Liverpool, steering for them, out
there; as if the sailor might forget his peddling business on such a
grand highway. They had perchance brought oranges from the Western
Isles; and were they carrying back the peel? We might as well transport
our old traps across the ocean of eternity. Is _that_ but another
“trading-flood,” with its blessed isles? Is Heaven such a harbor as the
Liverpool docks?

Still held on without a break, the inland barrens and shrubbery, the
desert and the high sand bank with its even slope, the broad white
beach, the breakers, the green water on the bar, and the Atlantic
Ocean; and we traversed with delight new reaches of the shore; we took
another lesson in sea-horses’ manes and sea-cows’ tails, in sea-jellies
and sea-clams, with our new-gained experience. The sea ran hardly less
than the day before. It seemed with every wave to be subsiding, because
such was our expectation, and yet when hours had elapsed we could see
no difference. But there it was, balancing itself, the restless ocean
by our side, lurching in its gait. Each wave left the sand all braided
or woven, as it were, with a coarse woof and warp, and a distinct
raised edge to its rapid work. We made no haste, since we wished to see
the ocean at our leisure; and indeed that soft sand was no place in
which to be in a hurry, for one mile there was as good as two
elsewhere. Besides, we were obliged frequently to empty our shoes of
the sand which one took in in climbing or descending the bank.

As we were walking close to the water’s edge this morning we turned
round, by chance, and saw a large black object which the waves had just
cast up on the beach behind us, yet too far off for us to distinguish
what it was; and when we were about to return to it, two men came
running from the bank, where no human beings had appeared before, as if
they had come out of the sand, in order to save it before another wave
took it. As we approached, it took successively the form of a huge
fish, a drowned man, a sail or a net, and finally of a mass of
tow-cloth, part of the cargo of the _Franklin_, which the men loaded
into a cart.

Objects on the beach, whether men or inanimate things, look not only
exceedingly grotesque, but much larger and more wonderful than they
actually are. Lately, when approaching the seashore several degrees
south of this, I saw before me, seemingly half a mile distant, what
appeared like bold and rugged cliffs on the beach, fifteen feet high,
and whitened by the sun and waves; but after a few steps it proved to
be low heaps of rags,—part of the cargo of a wrecked vessel,—scarcely
more than a foot in height. Once also it was my business to go in
search of the relics of a human body, mangled by sharks, which had just
been cast up, a week after a wreck, having got the direction from a
light-house: I should find it a mile or two distant over the sand, a
dozen rods from the water, covered with a cloth, by a stick stuck up. I
expected that I must look very narrowly to find so small an object, but
the sandy beach, half a mile wide, and stretching farther than the eye
could reach, was so perfectly smooth and bare, and the mirage toward
the sea so magnifying, that when I was half a mile distant the
insignificant sliver which marked the spot looked like a bleached spar,
and the relics were as conspicuous as if they lay in state on that
sandy plain, or a generation had labored to pile up their cairn there.
Close at hand they were simply some bones with a little flesh adhering
to them, in fact, only a slight inequality in the sweep of the shore.
There was nothing at all remarkable about them, and they were
singularly inoffensive both to the senses and the imagination. But as I
stood there they grew more and more imposing. They were alone with the
beach and the sea, whose hollow roar seemed addressed to them, and I
was impressed as if there was an understanding between them and the
ocean which necessarily left me out, with my snivelling sympathies.
That dead body had taken possession of the shore, and reigned over it
as no living one, could, in the name of a certain majesty which
belonged to it.

We afterward saw many small pieces of tow-cloth washed up, and I learn
that it continued to be found in good condition, even as late as
November in that year, half a dozen bolts at a time.

We eagerly filled our pockets with the smooth round pebbles which in
some places, even here, were thinly sprinkled over the sand, together
with flat circular shells (_Scutellæ?_); but, as we had read, when they
were dry they had lost their beauty, and at each sitting we emptied our
pockets again of the least remarkable, until our collection was well
culled. Every material was rolled into the pebble form by the waves;
not only stones of various kinds, but the hard coal which some vessel
had dropped, bits of glass, and in one instance a mass of peat three
feet long, where there was nothing like it to be seen for many miles.
All the great rivers of the globe are annually, if not constantly,
discharging great quantities of lumber, which drifts to distant shores.
I have also seen very perfect pebbles of brick, and bars of Castile
soap from a wreck rolled into perfect cylinders, and still spirally
streaked with red, like a barber’s pole. When a cargo of rags is washed
ashore, every old pocket and bag-like recess will be filled to bursting
with sand by being rolled on the beach; and on one occasion, the
pockets in the clothing of the wrecked being thus puffed up, even after
they had been ripped open by wreckers, deluded me into the hope of
identifying them by the contents. A pair of gloves looked exactly as if
filled by a hand. The water in such clothing is soon wrung out and
evaporated, but the sand, which works itself into every seam, is not so
easily got rid of. Sponges, which are picked up on the shore, as is
well known, retain some of the sand of the beach to the latest day, in
spite of every effort to extract it.

I found one stone on the top of the bank, of a dark gray color, shaped
exactly like a giant clam (_Mactra solidissima_), and of the same size;
and, what was more remarkable, one-half of the outside had shelled off
and lay near it, of the same form and depth with one of the valves of
this clam, while the other half was loose, leaving a solid core of a
darker color within it. I afterward saw a stone resembling a razor
clam, but it was a solid one. It appeared as if the stone, in the
process of formation, had filled the mould which a clam-shell
furnished; or the same law that shaped the clam had made a clam of
stone. Dead clams, with shells full of sand, are called sand clams.
There were many of the large clamshells filled with sand; and sometimes
one valve was separately filled exactly even, as if it had been heaped
and then scraped. Even among the many small stones on the top of the
bank, I found one arrow-head.

Beside the giant clam and barnacles, we found on the shore a small clam
(_Mesodesma arctata_), which I dug with my hands in numbers on the
bars, and which is sometimes eaten by the inhabitants, in the absence
of the _Mya arenaria_, on this side. Most of their empty shells had
been perforated by some foe.—Also, the

_Astarte castanea_.

The Edible Mussel (_Mytilus edulis_) on the few rocks, and washed up in
curious bunches of forty or fifty, held together by its rope-like
_byssus_.

The Scollop Shell (_Pecten concentricus_), used for card-racks and
pin-cushions.

Cockles, or Cuckoos (_Natica heros_), and their remarkable _nidus_,
called “sand-circle,” looking like the top of a stone jug without the
stopple, and broken on one side, or like a flaring dickey made of
sand-paper. Also,

_Cancellaria Couthouyi_ (?), and

Periwinkles (?) (_Fusus decemcostatus_).

We afterward saw some other kinds on the Bay-side. Gould states that
this Cape “has hitherto proved a barrier to the migrations of many
species of Mollusca.”—“Of the one hundred and ninety-seven species
[which he described in 1840 as belonging to Massachusetts],
eighty-three do not pass to the South shore, and fifty are not found on
the North shore of the Cape.”

Among Crustacea, there were the shells of Crabs and Lobsters, often
bleached quite white high up the beach; Sea or Beach Fleas
(_Amphipoda_); and the cases of the Horse-shoe Crab, or Saucepan Fish
(_Limulus Polyphemus_), of which we saw many alive on the Bay side,
where they feed pigs on them. Their tails were used as arrow-heads by
the Indians.

Of Radiata, there were the Sea Chestnut or Egg (_Echinus granulatus_),
commonly divested of its spines; flat circular shells (_Scutella
parma?_) covered with chocolate-colored spines, but becoming smooth and
white, with five petal-like figures; a few Star-fishes or Five-fingers
(_Asterias rubens_); and Sun-fishes or Sea-jellies (_Aureliæ_).

There was also at least one species of Sponge.

The plants which I noticed here and there on the pure sandy shelf,
between the ordinary high-water mark and the foot of the bank, were Sea
Rocket (_Cakile Americana_), Saltwort (_Salsola kali_), Sea Sandwort
(_Honkenya peploides_), Sea Burdock (_Xanthium echinatum_), Sea-side
Spurge (_Euphorbia poylgonifolia_); also, Beach Grass (_Arundo,
Psamma_, or _Calamagrostis arenaria_), Sea-side Golden-rod (_Solidago
sempervirens_), and the Beach Pea (_Lathyrus maritimus_).

Sometimes we helped a wrecker turn over a larger log than usual, or we
amused ourselves with rolling stones down the bank, but we rarely could
make one reach the water, the beach was so soft and wide; or we bathed
in some shallow within a bar, where the sea covered us with sand at
every flux, though it was quite cold and windy. The ocean there is
commonly but a tantalizing prospect in hot weather, for with all that
water before you, there is, as we were afterward told, no bathing on
the Atlantic side, on account of the undertow and the rumor of sharks.
At the lighthouse both in Eastham and Truro, the only houses quite on
the shore, they declared, the next year, that they would not bathe
there “for any sum,” for they sometimes saw the sharks tossed up and
quiver for a moment on the sand. Others laughed at these stories, but
perhaps they could afford to because they never bathed anywhere. One
old wrecker told us that he killed a regular man-eating shark fourteen
feet long, and hauled him out with his oxen, where we had bathed; and
another, that his father caught a smaller one of the same kind that was
stranded there, by standing him up on his snout so that the waves could
not take him. They will tell you tough stories of sharks all over the
Cape, which I do not presume to doubt utterly,—how they will sometimes
upset a boat, or tear it in pieces, to get at the man in it. I can
easily believe in the undertow, but I have no doubt that one shark in a
dozen years is enough to keep up the reputation of a beach a hundred
miles long. I should add, however, that in July we walked on the bank
here a quarter of a mile parallel with a fish about six feet in length,
possibly a shark, which was prowling slowly along within two rods of
the shore. It was of a pale brown color, singularly film-like and
indistinct in the water, as if all nature abetted this child of ocean,
and showed many darker transverse bars or rings whenever it came to the
surface. It is well known that different fishes even of the same
species are colored by the water they inhabit. We saw it go into a
little cove or bathing-tub, where we had just been bathing, where the
water was only four or five feet deep at that time, and after exploring
it go slowly out again; but we continued to bathe there, only observing
first from the bank if the cove was preoccupied. We thought that the
water was fuller of life, more aerated perhaps than that of the Bay,
like soda-water, for we were as particular as young salmon, and the
expectation of encountering a shark did not subtract anything from its
life-giving qualities.

Sometimes we sat on the wet beach and watched the beach birds,
sand-pipers, and others, trotting along close to each wave, and waiting
for the sea to cast up their breakfast. The former (_Charadrius
melodus_) ran with great rapidity and then stood stock still remarkably
erect and hardly to be distinguished from the beach. The wet sand was
covered with small skipping Sea Fleas, which apparently make a part of
their food. These last are the little scavengers of the beach, and are
so numerous that they will devour large fishes, which have been cast
up, in a very short time. One little bird not larger than a sparrow,—it
may have been a Phalarope,—would alight on the turbulent surface where
the breakers were five or six feet high, and float buoyantly there like
a duck, cunningly taking to its wings and lifting itself a few feet
through the air over the foaming crest of each breaker, but sometimes
outriding safely a considerable billow which hid it some seconds, when
its instinct told it that it would not break. It was a little creature
thus to sport with the ocean, but it was as perfect a success in its
way as the breakers in theirs. There was also an almost uninterrupted
line of coots rising and falling with the waves, a few rods from the
shore, the whole length of the Cape. They made as constant a part of
the ocean’s border as the pads or pickerel-weed do of that of a pond.
We read the following as to the Storm Petrel (_Thalassidroma
Wilsonii_), which is seen in the Bay as well as on the outside. “The
feathers on the breast of the Storm Petrel are, like those of all
swimming birds, water-proof; but substances not susceptible of being
wetted with water are, for that very reason, the best fitted for
collecting oil from its surface. That function is performed by the
feathers on the breast of the Storm Petrels as they touch on the
surface; and though that may not be the only way in which they procure
their food, it is certainly that in which they obtain great part of it.
They dash along till they have loaded their feathers and then they
pause upon the wave and remove the oil with their bills.”

Thus we kept on along the gently curving shore, seeing two or three
miles ahead at once,—along this ocean side-walk, where there was none
to turn out for, with the middle of the road the highway of nations on
our right, and the sand cliffs of the Cape on our left. We saw this
forenoon a part of the wreck of a vessel, probably the _Franklin_, a
large piece fifteen feet square, and still freshly painted. With a
grapple and a line we could have saved it, for the waves repeatedly
washed it within cast, but they as often took it back. It would have
been a lucky haul for some poor wrecker, for I have been told that one
man who paid three or four dollars for a part of the wreck of that
vessel, sold fifty or sixty dollars’ worth of iron out of it. Another,
the same who picked up the Captain’s valise with the memorable letter
in it, showed me, growing in his garden, many pear and plum trees which
washed ashore from her, all nicely tied up and labelled, and he said
that he might have got five hundred dollars’ worth; for a Mr. Bell was
importing the nucleus of a nursery to be established near Boston. His
turnip-seed came from the same source. Also valuable spars from the
same vessel and from the _Cactus_ lay in his yard. In short the
inhabitants visit the beach to see what they have caught as regularly
as a fisherman his weir or a lumberer his boom; the Cape is their boom.
I heard of one who had recently picked up twenty barrels of apples in
good condition, probably a part of a deck load thrown over in a storm.

Though there are wreck-masters appointed to look after valuable
property which must be advertised, yet undoubtedly a great deal of
value is secretly carried off. But are we not all wreckers contriving
that some treasure may be washed up on our beach, that we may secure
it, and do we not infer the habits of these Nauset and Barnegat
wreckers from the common modes of getting a living?

The sea, vast and wild as it is, bears thus the waste and wrecks of
human art to its remotest shore. There is no telling what it may not
vomit up. It lets nothing lie; not even the giant clams which cling to
its bottom. It is still heaving up the tow-cloth of the _Franklin_, and
perhaps a piece of some old pirate’s ship, wrecked more than a hundred
years ago, comes ashore to-day. Some years since, when a vessel was
wrecked here which had nutmegs in her cargo, they were strewn all along
the beach, and for a considerable time were not spoiled by the salt
water. Soon afterward, a fisherman caught a cod which was full of them.
Why, then, might not the Spice-Islanders shake their nutmeg trees into
the ocean, and let all nations who stand in need of them pick them up?
However, after a year, I found that the nutmegs from the _Franklin_ had
become soft.

You might make a curious list of articles which fishes have
swallowed,—sailors’ open clasp-knives, and bright tin snuff-boxes, not
knowing what was in them,—and jugs, and jewels, and Jonah. The other
day I came across the following scrap in a newspaper.

“A Religious Fish.—A short time ago, mine host Stewart, of the Denton
Hotel, purchased a rock-fish, weighing about sixty pounds. On opening
it he found in it a certificate of membership of the M. E. Church,
which we read as follows:—

                                    Member Methodist E. Church. Founded
                                    A. D. 1784. Quarterly Ticket. 18
                                    Minister.

‘For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a
far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.’—2 Cor. iv. 17.


‘O what are all my sufferings here,
    If, Lord, thou count me meet
With that enraptured host t’ appear,
    And worship at thy feet!’


“The paper was of course in a crumpled and wet condition, but on
exposing it to the sun, and ironing the kinks out of it, it became
quite legible.—_Denton_ (_Md._) _Journal_.”

From time to time we saved a wreck ourselves, a box or barrel, and set
it on its end, and appropriated it with crossed sticks; and it will lie
there perhaps, respected by brother wreckers, until some more violent
storm shall take it, really lost to man until wrecked again. We also
saved, at the cost of wet feet only, a valuable cord and buoy, part of
a seine, with which the sea was playing, for it seemed ungracious to
refuse the least gift which so great a personage offered you. We
brought this home and still use it for a garden line. I picked up a
bottle half buried in the wet sand, covered with barnacles, but
stoppled tight, and half full of red ale, which still smacked of
juniper,—all that remained I fancied from the wreck of a rowdy
world,—that great salt sea on the one hand, and this little sea of ale
on the other, preserving their separate characters. What if it could
tell us its adventures over countless ocean waves! Man would not be man
through such ordeals as it had passed. But as I poured it slowly out on
to the sand, it seemed to me that man himself was like a half-emptied
bottle of pale ale, which Time had drunk so far, yet stoppled tight for
a while, and drifting about in the ocean of circumstances; but destined
erelong to mingle with the surrounding waves, or be spilled amid the
sands of a distant shore.

In the summer I saw two men fishing for Bass hereabouts. Their bait was
a bullfrog, or several small frogs in a bunch, for want of squid. They
followed a retiring wave and whirling their lines round and round their
heads with increasing rapidity, threw them as far as they could into
the sea; then retreating, sat down, flat on the sand, and waited for a
bite. It was literally (or _littorally_) walking down to the shore, and
throwing your line into the Atlantic. I should not have known what
might take hold of the other end, whether Proteus or another. At any
rate, if you could not pull him in, why, you might let him go without
being pulled in yourself. And _they_ knew by experience that it would
be a Striped Bass, or perhaps a Cod, for these fishes play along near
the shore.

From time to time we sat under the lee of a sand-hill on the bank,
thinly covered with coarse Beach-grass, and steadily gazed on the sea,
or watched the vessels going south, all Blessings of the Bay of course.
We could see a little more than half a circle of ocean, besides the
glimpses of the Bay which we got behind us; the sea there was not wild
and dreary in all respects, for there were frequently a hundred sail in
sight at once on the Atlantic. You can commonly count about eighty in a
favorable summer day and pilots sometimes land and ascend the bank to
look out for these which require their services. These had been waiting
for fair weather, and had come out of Boston Harbor together. The same
is the case when they have been assembled in the Vineyard Sound, so
that you may see but few one day, and a large fleet the next. Schooners
with many jibs and stay-sails crowded all the sea road; square-rigged
vessels with their great height and breadth of canvas were ever and
anon appearing out of the far horizon, or disappearing and sinking into
it; here and there a pilot-boat was towing its little boat astern
toward some distant foreigner who had just fired a gun, the echo of
which along the shore sounded like the caving of the bank. We could see
the pilot looking through his glass toward the distant ship which was
putting back to speak with him. He sails many a mile to meet her; and
now she puts her sails aback, and communicates with him
alongside,—sends some important message to the owners, and then bids
farewell to these shores for good and all; or, perchance a propeller
passed and made fast to some disabled craft, or one that had been
becalmed, whose cargo of fruit might spoil. Though silently, and for
the most part incommunicatively, going about their business, they were,
no doubt, a source of cheerfulness and a kind of society to one
another.

[Illustration: Unloading the day’s catch]

To-day it was the Purple Sea, an epithet which I should not before have
accepted. There were distinct patches of the color of a purple grape
with the bloom rubbed off. But first and last the sea is of all colors.
Well writes Gilpin concerning “the brilliant hues which are continually
playing on the surface of a quiet ocean,” and this was not too
turbulent at a distance from the shore. “Beautiful,” says he, “no doubt
in a high degree are those glimmering tints which often invest the tops
of mountains; but they are mere coruscations compared with these marine
colors, which are continually varying and shifting into each other in
all the vivid splendor of the rainbow, through the space often of
several leagues.” Commonly, in calm weather, for half a mile from the
shore, where the bottom tinges it, the sea is green, or greenish, as
are some ponds; then blue for many miles, often with purple tinges,
bounded in the distance by a light almost silvery stripe; beyond which
there is generally a dark-blue rim, like a mountain-ridge in the
horizon, as if, like that, it owed its color to the intervening
atmosphere. On another day it will be marked with long streaks,
alternately smooth and rippled, light-colored and dark, even like our
inland meadows in a freshet, and showing which way the wind sets.

Thus we sat on the foaming shore, looking on the wine-colored ocean,—

Φίν’ ἔφ’ ἁλὸς πολιῆς, ὁρόων ἐπὶ οἴνοπα πόντον.


Here and there was a darker spot on its surface, the shadow of a cloud,
though the sky was so clear that no cloud would have been noticed
otherwise, and no shadow would have been seen on the land, where a much
smaller surface is visible at once. So, distant clouds and showers may
be seen on all sides by a sailor in the course of a day, which do not
necessarily portend rain where he is. In July we saw similar dark-blue
patches where schools of Menhaden rippled the surface, scarcely to be
distinguished from the shadows of clouds. Sometimes the sea was spotted
with them far and wide, such is its inexhaustible fertility. Close at
hand you see their back fin, which is very long and sharp, projecting
two or three inches above water. From time to time also we saw the
white bellies of the Bass playing along the shore.

It was a poetic recreation to watch those distant sails steering for
half-fabulous ports, whose very names are a mysterious music to our
ears: Fayal, and Babelmandel, ay, and Chagres, and Panama,—bound to the
famous Bay of San Francisco, and the golden streams of Sacramento and
San Joaquin, to Feather River and the American Fork, where Sutter’s
Fort presides, and inland stands the City de los Angeles. It is
remarkable that men do not sail the sea with more expectation. Nothing
remarkable was ever accomplished in a prosaic mood. The heroes and
discoverers have found true more than was previously believed, only
when they were expecting and dreaming of something more than their
contemporaries dreamed of, or even themselves discovered, that is, when
they were in a frame of mind fitted to behold the truth. Referred to
the world’s standard, they are always insane. Even savages have
indirectly surmised as much. Humboldt, speaking of Columbus approaching
the New World, says: “The grateful coolness of the evening air, the
ethereal purity of the starry firmament, the balmy fragrance of
flowers, wafted to him by the land breeze, all led him to suppose (as
we are told by Herrara, in the Decades) that he was approaching the
garden of Eden, the sacred abode of our first parents. The Orinoco
seemed to him one of the four rivers which, according to the venerable
tradition of the ancient world, flowed from Paradise, to water and
divide the surface of the earth, newly adorned with plants.” So even
the expeditions for the discovery of El Dorado, and of the Fountain of
Youth, led to real, if not compensatory discoveries.

We discerned vessels so far off, when once we began to look, that only
the tops of their masts in the horizon were visible, and it took a
strong intention of the eye, and its most favorable side, to see them
at all, and sometimes we doubted if we were not counting our eyelashes.
Charles Darwin states that he saw, from the base of the Andes, “the
masts of the vessels at anchor in the bay of Valparaiso, although not
less than twenty-six geographical miles distant,” and that Anson had
been surprised at the distance at which his vessels were discovered
from the coast, without knowing the reason, namely, the great height of
the land and the transparency of the air. Steamers may be detected much
farther than sailing vessels, for, as one says, when their hulls and
masts of wood and iron are down, their smoky masts and streamers still
betray them; and the same writer, speaking of the comparative
advantages of bituminous and anthracite coal for war-steamers, states
that, “from the ascent of the columns of smoke above the horizon, the
motions of the steamers in Calais Harbor [on the coast of France] are
at all times observable at Ramsgate [on the English coast], from the
first lighting of the fires to the putting out at sea; and that in
America the steamers burning the fat bituminous coal can be tracked at
sea at least seventy miles before the hulls become visible, by the
dense columns of black smoke pouring out of their chimneys, and
trailing along the horizon.”

Though there were numerous vessels at this great distance in the
horizon on every side, yet the vast spaces between them, like the
spaces between the stars, far as they were distant from us, so were
they from one another,—nay, some were twice as far from each other as
from us,—impressed us with a sense of the immensity of the ocean, the
“unfruitful ocean,” as it has been called, and we could see what
proportion man and his works bear to the globe. As we looked off, and
saw the water growing darker and darker and deeper and deeper the
farther we looked, till it was awful to consider, and it appeared to
have no relation to the friendly land, either as shore or bottom,—of
what use is a bottom if it is out of sight, if it is two or three miles
from the surface, and you are to be drowned so long before you get to
it, though it were made of the same stuff with your native soil?—over
that ocean, where, as the Veda says, “there is nothing to give support,
nothing to rest upon, nothing to cling to,” I felt that I was a land
animal. The man in a balloon even may commonly alight on the earth in a
few moments, but the sailor’s only hope is that he may reach the
distant shore. I could then appreciate the heroism of the old
navigator. Sir Humphrey Gilbert, of whom it is related that, being
overtaken by a storm when on his return from America, in the year 1583,
far northeastward from where we were, sitting abaft with a book in his
hand, just before he was swallowed up in the deep, he cried out to his
comrades in the _Hind_, as they came within hearing, “We are as near to
Heaven by sea as by land.” I saw that it would not be easy to realize.

On Cape Cod, the next most eastern land you hear of is St. George’s
Bank (the fishermen tell of “Georges,” “Cashus,” and other sunken lands
which they frequent). Every Cape man has a theory about George’s Bank
having been an island once, and in their accounts they gradually reduce
the shallowness from six, five, four, two fathoms, to somebody’s
confident assertion that he has seen a mackerel-gull sitting on a
piece of dry land there. It reminded me, when I thought of the
shipwrecks which had taken place there, of the Isle of Demons, laid
down off this coast in old charts of the New World. There must be
something monstrous, methinks, in a vision of the sea bottom from over
some bank a thousand miles from the shore, more awful than its imagined
bottomlessness; a drowned continent, all livid and frothing at the
nostrils, like the body of a drowned man, which is better sunk deep
than near the surface.

I have been surprised to discover from a steamer the shallowness of
Massachusetts Bay itself. Off Billingsgate Point I could have touched
the bottom with a pole, and I plainly saw it variously shaded with
sea-weed, at five or six miles from the shore. This is “The
Shoal-ground of the Cape,” it is true, but elsewhere the bay is not
much deeper than a country pond. We are told that the deepest water in
the English Channel between Shakespeare’s Cliff and Cape Grinéz, in
France, is one hundred and eighty feet; and Guyot says that “the Baltic
Sea has a depth of only one hundred and twenty feet between the coasts
of Germany and those of Sweden,” and “the Adriatic between Venice and
Trieste has a depth of only one hundred and thirty feet.” A pond in my
native town, only half a mile long, is more than one hundred feet deep.

The ocean is but a larger lake. At midsummer you may sometimes see a
strip of glassy smoothness on it, a few rods in width and many miles
long, as if the surface there were covered with a thin pellicle of oil,
just as on a country pond; a sort of stand-still, you would say, at the
meeting or parting of two currents of air (if it does not rather mark
the unrippled steadiness of a current of water beneath), for sailors
tell of the ocean and land breeze meeting between the fore and aft
sails of a vessel, while the latter are full, the former being suddenly
taken aback. Daniel Webster, in one of his letters describing
blue-fishing off Martha’s Vineyard, referring to those smooth places,
which fishermen and sailors call “slicks,” says: “We met with them
yesterday, and our boatman made for them, whenever discovered. He said
they were caused by the blue-fish chopping up their prey. That is to
say, those voracious fellows get into a school of menhaden, which are
too large to swallow whole, and they bite them into pieces to suit
their tastes. And the oil from this butchery, rising to the surface,
makes the ‘slick.’”

Yet this same placid Ocean, as civil now as a city’s harbor, a place
for ships and commerce, will erelong be lashed into sudden fury, and
all its caves and cliffs will resound with tumult. It will ruthlessly
heave these vessels to and fro, break them in pieces in its sandy or
stony jaws, and deliver their crews to sea-monsters. It will play with
them like sea-weed, distend them like dead frogs, and carry them about,
now high, now low, to show to the fishes, giving them a nibble. This
gentle Ocean will toss and tear the rag of a man’s body like the father
of mad bulls, and his relatives may be seen seeking the remnants for
weeks along the strand. From some quiet inland hamlet they have rushed
weeping to the unheard-of shore, and now stand uncertain where a sailor
has recently been buried amid the sandhills.

It is generally supposed that they who have long been conversant with
the Ocean can foretell by certain indications, such as its roar and the
notes of sea-fowl, when it will change from calm to storm; but probably
no such ancient mariner as we dream of exists; they know no more, at
least, than the older sailors do about this voyage of life on which we
are all embarked. Nevertheless, we love to hear the sayings of old
sailors, and their accounts of natural phenomena, which totally ignore,
and are ignored by, science; and possibly they have not always looked
over the gunwale so long in vain. Kalm repeats a story which was told
him in Philadelphia by a Mr. Cock, who was one day sailing to the West
Indies in a small yacht, with an old man on board who was well
acquainted with those seas. “The old man sounding the depth, called to
the mate to tell Mr. Cock to launch the boats immediately, and to put a
sufficient number of men into them, in order to tow the yacht during
the calm, that they might reach the island before them as soon as
possible, as within twenty-four hours there would be a strong
hurricane. Mr. Cock asked him what reasons he had to think so; the old
man replied that, on sounding, he saw the lead in the water at a
distance of many fathoms more than he had seen it before; that
therefore the water was become clear all of a sudden, which he looked
upon as a certain sign of an impending hurricane in the sea.” The
sequel of the story is that, by good fortune and by dint of rowing they
managed to gain a safe harbor before the hurricane had reached its
height; but it finally raged with so much violence that not only many
ships were lost and houses unroofed, but even their own vessel in
harbor was washed so far on shore that several weeks elapsed before it
could be got off.

The Greeks would not have called the ocean ἀτρύγετος, or unfruitful,
though it does not produce wheat, if they had viewed it by the light of
modern science; for naturalists now assert that “the sea, and not the
land, is the principal seat of life,”—though not of vegetable life.
Darwin affirms that “our most thickly inhabited forests appear almost
as deserts when we come to compare them with the corresponding regions
of the ocean.” Agassiz and Gould tell us that “the sea teems with
animals of all classes, far beyond the extreme point of flowering
plants”; but they add that “experiments of dredging in very deep water
have also taught us that the abyss of the ocean is nearly a
desert”;—“so that modern investigations,” to quote the words of Desor,
“merely go to confirm the great idea which was vaguely anticipated by
the ancient poets and philosophers, that the Ocean is the origin of all
things.” Yet marine animals and plants hold a lower rank in the scale
of being than land animals and plants. “There is no instance known,”
says Desor, “of an animal becoming aquatic in its perfect state, after
having lived in its lower stage on dry land.” but as in the case of the
tadpole, “the progress invariably points towards the dry land.” In
short, the dry land itself came through and out of the water in its way
to the heavens, for, “in going back through the geological ages, we
come to an epoch when, according to all appearances, the dry land did
not exist, and when the surface of our globe was entirely covered with
water.” We looked on the sea, then, once more, not as ἀτρύγετος, or
unfruitful, but as it has been more truly called, the “laboratory of
continents.”

Though we have indulged in some placid reflections of late, the reader
must not forget that the dash and roar of the waves were incessant.
Indeed, it would be well if he were to read with a large conch-shell at
his ear. But notwithstanding that it was very cold and windy to-day, it
was such a cold as we thought would not cause one to take cold who was
exposed to it, owing to the saltness of the air and the dryness of the
soil. Yet the author of the old Description of Wellfleet says: “The
atmosphere is very much impregnated with saline particles, which,
perhaps, with the great use of fish, and the neglect of cider and
spruce-beer, may be a reason why the people are more subject to sore
mouths and throats than in other places.”




