CHAPTER IV

EDUCATION--THE SCIENCE OF INDIVIDUAL DEVELOPMENT


Eugenics provides the hereditary qualities of the Super Man; Social
Adjustment furnishes the environment in which these qualities are to
develop; there still remains the development of the individual through
Education, a word which means, for our purposes, all phases of character
shaping from birth-day to death-day.

The individual has been rediscovered during the past three centuries. He
was known in some of the earlier civilizations, but during the Middle Ages
the place that had seen him knew him no more. He was submerged in the
group and forced to subordinate his interests to the demands of group
welfare. The distinctive work of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries
has been a reversal of this enforced individual oblivion and the
formulation of a demand for individual initiative and activity. The
individual, pushed forward in politics, in religion, and in commerce has
freely asserted and successfully maintained his right to consideration,
until the opportunities of the twentieth century free citizen far exceed
those of the convention-bound citizen of the middle ages. The twentieth
century citizen is free because he makes efficient choices. The
continuance of his freedom depends upon the continued wisdom of his
choice.

The chief objective point of modern endeavor has been individual freedom
of choice. The _laissez-faire_ doctrine in commercial relations, democracy
in politics, the natural philosophy and natural theology of the eighteenth
century are all expressions of a belief in equality. When men are made
free to choose, they are placed on a basis of equality, since they have a
like opportunity to succeed or fail. The man who chooses rightly wins
success--the man who chooses wrongly fails.

Thus the freedom to choose is for the average man a right of inestimable
value, because it places in his hands the opportunity to achieve. Rights
do not, however, come alone. The freeman is bound in his choices to
recognize the law that rights are always accompanied by duties.

Each right is accompanied by a proportionate responsibility--there is no
dinner without its dishwashing. To be sure, you may shift the burden of
dishwashing to the maid, and the burden of voting to the "other fellow,"
but the responsibility is none the less present. Garbage is still garbage,
even when thrown into the well, and your responsibilities, shifted to the
maid and the other voter, return to plague you in the form of a servant
problem and of vicious politics. Men who have a right to choose have also
a duty to fulfill, and this right and this duty are inseparable.

The eighteenth century began the discovery of the individual man; the
nineteenth century--at least the latter half of it--was responsible for
the discovery of the individual woman. Even to-day in many civilized
lands, the woman is merely an appendage. Men innumerable write in the
hotel register "John Edwards and Wife," yet if the truth were told they
should often write "Jane Edwards and John Edwards," and perhaps sometimes
"Jane Edwards and husband."

Western civilization, a good unthinking creature, has insisted bravely on
the development of the individual man, while largely overlooking the
existence of the individual woman; yet the studies of heredity show very
clearly that at least as many qualities are inherited from the female as
from the male. Nay, further, since the female is less specialized, the
distinctive race qualities are inherited from her, rather than from the
more specialized male. In short, the Super Man will have a mother as well
as a father.

The fact that the average man has as many female as he had male ancestors
is very frequently overlooked. Yet it is a fact that inevitably carries
with it the imputation, that if his ancestors were thus equally
apportioned, he must have inherited his qualities from both sexes.
Therefore, in the production of the Super Man, the qualities of the woman
are of equal importance with the qualities of the man.

The individual is the goal and Education the means, since Education is
the science of individual development. Through Education, we shall enable
the individual to live completely. But what is complete life? How shall we
compass or define it?

Two laws are laid down as fundamental in nature--the laws of self
preservation and of self perpetuation. With the development of society,
and social relations, the individual must recognize himself, not as an
individual only, but likewise as a unit in a social group. Hence, for him,
self preservation and self perpetuation necessarily involve group
preservation and group perpetuation. His code of life must therefore
formulate itself in this wise--

THE OBJECTS OF ENDEAVOR

                 _Immediate_        _Ultimate_
                    ----               ----
  INDIVIDUAL   Self Expression      Super Man

             { Eugenics
  SOCIAL     { Social Adjustment    Super Race
             { Education

The individual, for self preservation, demands self expression; for self
perpetuation he demands that the standard of his children be higher than
his own. As a member of the social group, he looks to Eugenics, Social
Adjustment, and Education as the immediate means of raising social
standards, and the ultimate means of providing a Super Race.

Such are the abstract ideals--how may they be practically applied? How
shall the individual express, through Eugenics, Social Adjustment, and
Education his desire for the development of a Super Race?

Do you, sir, enjoy living in the neighborhood of vandals and thieves?
Well, hardly. One could not be expected to take so frivolous a view of
life, therefore you will in self defense take every possible precaution to
suppress vandalism and thievery? Never, my dear sir, never! You must take
every possible precaution to reduce the spirit of vandalism and of
thievery. The acts are in themselves unconsequential--they are but the
product of a diseased mind or an indifferent training. The spirit, here as
elsewhere, is all important.

Are you a scientist? Do you admire Pasteur and Herbert Spencer? You are a
"practical" man--see what Edison has done for you. As a statesman, you
revere Lincoln and Daniel Webster. You cannot, as an artist, overlook the
portraits of Rembrandt or the water scenes of Ruysdael. You must agree
with me that these and a thousand others that I might mention--men called
geniuses by their contemporaries or their descendants--have contributed
untold worth to the society of which they were a part. They chose rightly.
They are looked upon, and justly, as the salt of the earth. You admit the
value of geniuses, in civilization, and you would, of course, do anything
to increase their number? Then, let me say to you that the first thing for
you to decide is that your own children shall be neither vandals nor
thieves. The second thing for you to decide is that they shall, in so far
as you are able to determine the matter, possess all of your good
qualities, coupled with the good qualities which you lack, supplied by an
able mate. In short, you must choose your life partner with a view to the
elimination of anti-social tendencies, on the one hand, and on the other
to the development of the qualities which distinguish the Super Man.

How obvious is this statement, yet how haphazard has been the production
of greatness. Only once in a generation does a man, in his choice of a
wife, follow the example of John Newcomb. In a truly scientific spirit he
enumerated on paper the qualities which he possessed; placed opposite them
the qualities in which he was lacking; and then set out to find the woman
who should supply his deficiencies. When he had located his future
helpmeet, playing hymn tunes on an organ in a little red school house, and
upon further acquaintance, had assured himself that she really possessed
the needed qualities, he married her, with the determination that their
first child should be a great mathematician. Their first child was Simon
Newcomb, one of the leading astronomers of the nineteenth century.

John Newcomb was a village school master, and his wife a village maiden,
but in their choice they combined two sets of qualities which would
inevitably produce a Super Man. John Newcomb was a pioneer eugenist. He
chose a mate with the thought of the future foremost in his mind.

Too often, however, the men of parts follow the example of the brilliant
professor who married a "social butterfly." "Why in the world did you do
it?" asked an old friend. "Oh, well," answered the professor, "I felt that
I had brains enough for both."

True, professor, but according to the Mendelian law of heredity, those
brains of yours will be halved in each of your children, and quartered in
each of your grandchildren. Why should not the future be at least as
brilliant as your own generation?

Human marriage is ordinarily a hit or miss affair. Men and women, inspired
by the loftiest motives, and animated in most matters by supreme good
sense, not infrequently grope blindly toward matrimony; often marry
uncongenially; and finally bring disgrace upon their own heads, and misery
upon their families. Stevenson, with such marriages in mind, writes to
the average prospective bridegroom--

"What! you have had one life to manage, and have failed so strangely, and
now can see nothing wiser than to conjoin with it the management of some
one else's? Because you have been unfaithful in a very little, you propose
yourself to be a ruler over ten cities. You are no longer content to be
your own enemy; you must be your wife's also. God made you, but you marry
yourself; no one is responsible but you. You have eternally missed your
way in life, with consequences that you still deplore, and yet you
masterfully seize your wife's hand, and blindfold, drag her after you to
ruin. And it is your wife, you observe, whom you select. She, whose
happiness you most desire, you choose to be your victim. You would
earnestly warn her from a tottering bridge or bad investment. If she were
to marry some one else, how you would tremble for her fate! If she were
only your sister and you thought half as much of her, how doubtfully would
you entrust her future to a man no better than yourself!"[18]

Here, then, lies the path of eugenic activity for the individual--clear,
straight, unmistakable. In the first place, he must never transmit to the
future any defect. If he has a transmissible defect, he must have no
offspring. This seems but reasonable--an obligation to bring no
unnecessary misery into a world where so much already exists. But the
individual--free to choose--must go one step further, and in his
selection, must seek a mate with the qualities which are complementary to
his own.

Looked at from the standpoint of society, there is no single choice which
compares in importance to the choice of a mate; for on that choice depend
the qualities which this generation will transmit to the next, and from
which the next generation must create its follower. Furthermore, there is
no choice which, in modern society, is more completely individual--more
freed from social interference, than the choice of a life mate. The man in
choosing his life partner, chooses the future. Civilization hangs
expectant on his decision. The Super Race, dim and indistinct, may be
made a living reality by a eugenic choice in the present--a choice for
which each man and woman who marries is in part responsible. With the
advance of woman's emancipation, with the increasing range of her
activity, comes an ever increasing opportunity to exercise such a choice.
She, as well as the man, may now assist in the determination of the
future. She as well as the man may now be held accountable for the
non-appearance of the Super Race.

Does the burden of Eugenic Choice rest heavily upon the shoulders of the
individual? Does he hesitate to assume the responsibility of the future
race? The burden of shaping Social Adjustments is no less onerous.

Briefly, then, what changes may the individual make in institutions to
develop the qualities of the Super Man? The social institutions with which
the average man comes into the most intimate contact are:

  1. The Home.
  2. The School.
  3. The Government.

The home as an institution must provide for the Super Man enough food,
clothing and shelter to guarantee him a good physique; enough training in
cooperation and mutual helpfulness to give him the vision of a Super Race;
and a supply of enthusiasm sufficient to enable him to work with
increasing energy for the fulfillment of those things in which he
believes. In order that the home may supply these things, it must have an
income sufficient to provide all of the necessaries and some of the
comforts of life. It must further be dominated by a spirit of sympathetic
democracy.

While the present system of wealth distribution is so grotesquely
unscientific that men are forced to rear families on incomes that will not
provide the necessaries, to say nothing of the comforts, of life, no true
home can be established nor can a Super Race be produced. If the child is
an asset to the state, the state should support the child, guaranteeing to
it an income sufficient to provide for its material welfare.

Why prate of home virtue? Why discourse learnedly on the possibilities of
a developed manhood to a father earning nine dollars a week? If you can
guarantee such a man an income of three dollars a week for each child, in
addition to the nine dollars for his wife and himself, you may well air
your views regarding a Super Race; but until your lowest income is high
enough to guarantee the necessaries of life to a family of five; or until
the state guarantees an income to each child in its early life, "You may
as well go stand upon the beach and bid the main flood bate his usual
height," as to demand that a man, working for starvation wages, provide a
home in which Super Men can be reared.

When income has been provided; when there is food for every mouth, warm
clothing for every back, enough fuel for winter, and a few pennies each
week for recreation, then indeed you may begin to speak in terms of social
improvement. Then, and then only, you may tell the father and the mother
that upon their efforts during the first seven years of their children's
lives depends the attitude which those children will assume when they go
out into the world; that the home in which tyranny is unknown, in which
the family rules the family, will produce the noblest citizens for the
noblest state; that the home is still the most fundamental institution in
civilization, the conservator of our ideals, and visions of the better
things that are to come in the future--these things you may say,
emphasizing the fact, that without a well rounded home-training in youth,
even the noblest talents cannot come to their full fruition.

The school is a specialized form of home. In early days, when life was
simple, and specialization was unknown, education was given almost wholly
in the home; but with the growth of specialized tasks, the home could no
longer fulfill its function as educator and the school was introduced.
Education, whether given in the home or in the school, has as its object a
complete life. The purpose of education is to enable the pupil to live
completely--to be a rounded being, in whatever station he may be called
upon to fill.

Would you mold the school to fit the needs of the children? Then, the
system of education must be so shaped that children are prepared to live
their lives completely. They must understand themselves. "Know thyself" is
a command worthy of their attention. The child's body, in the period of
change from childhood to adulthood, is an organism of the most delicate
nature, barely reaching adjustment under the most auspicious conditions,
and more than frequently failing signally from a lack of knowledge, or
from the absence of sympathetic understanding. The child--the father of
the man--must be taught to appreciate the human machine of which he is
given charge. It is in the school, with its corps of specialists, that
this work can be most effectively done.

Then, one by one, the school may take up and foster the qualities of the
Super Man. Physique must come first. It is blatant mockery to speak of
educating minds that dwell in anaemic bodies. Every boy and girl has a
right to a strong, well knit frame, and the school must teach the best
methods of securing it. Mental grasp--the power to see and judge a
situation or combination of facts, may also come through the school. In
fact, the school course, as at present organized, aims to secure that and
little else. As the science of education advances, the same material which
now comprises the entire course will be taught in less time and in wiser
ways, so that the child shall be free to learn some of those other things
so important to his soul's welfare. Aggressiveness and concentration are
methods rather than ends, and can be made a part of every game, every
competition, and every study, so that the child absorbs them as he absorbs
the atmosphere, without knowing that they become a part of his being.
Whether the school can instill sympathy and inspire vision is a question
that the future alone must decide. Both may be given by individual
teachers, and both may be possible to the school, though, if the home is
doing its work, these things will come more effectively there than through
the school. Most or all of the essential qualities of the Super Man can
and will come through a well organized and properly directed educational
system.

The government--providing the machinery of state administration,
furnishing the school, the playground, and the library; affording an
opportunity for the exercise of citizenship and the expression of those
advancing ideas which must gradually remold the social institutions of
each age in response to the demands of the new generation--affords one of
the most potent forces for the development of the Super Man.

The school is the big home; the government is the big school. The child
leaves the home, and enters the school; leaves the school and enters the
state. In the home he is acted upon; in the school he, himself, begins to
act; but in the government he is the sole actor--he is the state. A home
must be higher than the children; the school must be more advanced than
the pupils; but the state reflects exactly the character of its citizens.
It is in the state that the Super Man, crystallizing his convictions and
beliefs into the form of legislative enactments, must prepare the way for
the Super Race.

The Super Race is the produce of heredity, of social environment, and of
individual development. Heredity supplies the raw material--the
individual human being, while education and social environment, operating
upon this raw stuff, determine the course of its development. Steel is not
made from bee's wax, nor is the Super Man created out of a defective
heredity. In like manner, since those who are in Rome do as the Romans do,
the raw material, no matter what its quality, is shaped by its
surroundings. The old saying "as the twig is bent, the tree's inclined,"
should be modified in this one particular--the force which bends the twig
must continue in the tree, else the latter will turn and grow toward the
sky.

The stock of the Super Man will be secured by the mating of persons
possessing the Super-Race qualities; yet, reared in an unfavorable
environment, these qualities cannot produce the highest result.

Neither biologic nor social forces are alone adequate to develop the Super
Race. Physique, mental capacity, aggressiveness, concentration, sympathy
and vision are the products of heredity, social environment and training.
The system of human mating must be perfected and the status of social
institutions must be raised in order that the individuals produced in each
generation may attain an additional increment of the qualities which will,
in the end, produce the Super Race.




