PART III.

CONCLUSION.


§ GENERAL APPRECIATION OF THE DABISTAN AND ITS AUTHOR.


Mohsan Fáni collected in the Dabistán, as I hope to have shown by a
rapid review of its principal contents, various important information
concerning religions of different times and countries. His accounts
are generally clear, explicit, and deserving confidence; they agree in
the most material points with those of other accredited authors. Thus,
to quote one more instance, the accuracy of his topographic
information relative to the marvellous fountain in Kachmir is in the
main confirmed by that published by Bernier who had visited the
country. Our author enlivens his text by interesting quotations from
the works of famous poets and philosophers, and by frequent references
to books which deserve to be known. I beg to mention the _Tabsaret al
âvam_, “Rendering quick-sighted the Vulgar,” which he regrets not to
have before his eyes. His whole work is interspersed with anecdotes
and sayings, characteristic of individuals and sects which existed in
his times. To what he relates from personal observation or other
sources, he frequently adds reflections of his own, which evince a
sagacious and enlightened mind. Thus, he exhibits in himself an
interesting example of Asiatic erudition and philosophy.

The Dabistán adds, if I am not mistaken, not only a few ideas to our
historical knowledge, but also some features to the picture which we
hitherto possessed of the Asiatics. May I be permitted to quote a
remarkable instance relative to the latter? We are wont to speak of
the inherent apathy and stationary condition of the Muhammedans, as an
effect of their legislation. Although this general idea of their
character and state be not unfounded, yet it is carried to such an
exaggerated degree, that we think them incapable of progress. We may
therefore be astonished to find in the work before us[206] a maxim
such as this: “He who does not proceed, retrogrades,” and beside a
declaration attributed to Muhammed himself: “He whose days are alike
is deceived.” Our author, it is true, interprets it in the particular
point of view of an orthodox Súfi, who thinks that there is a degree
of mental perfection, beyond which it is impossible to rise: this was,
he says, the state of Muhammed, the prophet, always the same, from
which no ascent nor descent was possible, the perfection of unity with
God, higher than whom nothing can be: _the blackness beyond which no
color can go_. With the exception of these fits of mysticism, now and
then occurring, it is just to say that Mohsan Fani most commonly leans
to the side of progressive reform.

For the just appreciation of his work, I think it necessary to point
out another opinion, which, very generally entertained, requires to be
considerably modified: I mean that which attributes to the Muhammedans
an unrestrained intolerance in religious matters. On that account, I
beg to refer directly to the book, which to them always was the sacred
source of all rules and precepts of conduct――the Koran. In this
astonishing farrago of truth and falsehood, we find here and there a
great extent of toleration. In fact, Muhammedism was eclectic in all
the religious ideas of its time, Magian, Jewish, and Christian.
Muhammed avowed himself to be “a man like every body;”[207] he did not
pretend, that “the treasures of God were in his power,” nor did he say
“that he knew the secrets of God, neither that he was an angel; no; he
thought only to follow what was revealed to him,”[208] so much every
body else may say and think, He professed his good-will to Christians,
“as inclinable to entertain friendship for the true believers;[209] he
exhorted his followers not to dispute, but in the mildest manner,[210]
against those who have received the Scripture, and wished to come to a
just determination between both parties, that they all worshipped not
any but God.”[211]――“Abraham,” said he, “was neither a Jew nor a
Christian, but one resigned unto God (Moslim); excellence is in the
hand of God; he gives it unto whom he pleaseth.”[212]――Still more; the
prophet seems to give a general license to the professors of every
religion to observe certain rites about which he prohibits all
disputes;[213] nay, he declares: “If the Lord had pleased, verily, all
who are in the earth would have believed in general. Wilt thou
therefore forcibly compel men to be true believers? No soul can
believe but by the permission of God.”[214]

Although the Arabian prophet and his followers too often gave by their
conduct a strong denial to these principles, still the existence of
them in the Koran was a sanction to all those who were disposed to
profess them in words and actions. Such sentiments of religious
toleration are in accordance with similar ones expressed in many
Christian moral treatises, but in none of the latter do I remember to
have read: “that the diversities of religions distributed among
nations, according to the exigency of each, are manifestations of the
divine light and power, and that these various forms, by which God’s
inscrutable essence may be viewed by glimpses, are means of possessing
eternal beatitude, whilst here below the acquisition of knowledge is
sufficient to insure to mankind the enjoyment of concord, friendship,
and agreeable intercourse.”[215]

These appear to be the maxims adopted by the Súfis, and particularly
by those among them who, under Akbar, professed to be _Ilahians_. The
creed of this class exists in our days, although the name has not
survived. To these we may suppose, if to any, Mohsan Fáni belonged. If
we could agree with Erskine that “he was in strict intimacy with the
sect of enthusiasts by whom the Desátir was venerated,” we should
still be obliged to avow, that his enthusiasm had not in the least
influenced his free judgment upon religious matters. His imagination
although justly exalted by sublime notions of the Divinity, certainly
appears now and then bewildered by the mysterious action of unknown
causes; but on other occasions pointing out, in a satirical vein, so
many follies, absurdities, and extravagances prevailing among mankind,
he seems to laugh at all enthusiasm whatsoever, his own not excepted.
In general, there breathes in his words a spirit of independence,
which would command attention even among us in the accustomed circle
of long-established liberty. His boldness in religious controversy
startled even sir W. Jones so much that, in characterising it by the
harsh term of _blasphemy_, the English judge appears for a moment
ready to plead for the abettors of popular superstition, who stood
confounded before the tribunal of the philosophic Akbar.

I shall however not conceal, that Mohsan Fani sometimes paid tribute
to the prevailing ignorance and inveterate prejudices of his time, and
above all, to the sovereign power of early impressions; nor that,
although in many respects he offers in himself an honorable exception
to the general character of his countrymen, he now and then confounds
himself with them. Thus, he was far from being above all popular
superstition. The Asiatic, from the dawn of his reason, is nourished
with the marvellous, trained to credulity, and prepared for mysticism,
the bane of practical life; in short, he imbibes from his infancy a
superstition from which he never frees himself, always prone to
interpret every unusual phenomenon as a miracle. No sort of study
enables him to correct his first impressions, or to enlighten his
ignorance; natural history and experimental philosophy are not
cultivated in Asia. If not an agriculturist, mechanic, tradesman, or
soldier, he devotes himself to the intricacies of metaphysics, and
very commonly to a contemplative life; he becomes an ascetic. Thus he
knows no social life embellished by the refinement of mutual sympathy,
nor the noble vocations of a citizen who lives――with more than one
life in himself, in others, and in the whole community. Such being the
general state of Asia, let us not wonder that Mohsan Fani believed
some strange stories of miracles, and viewed with astonishment tricks
of jugglers, which he relates with serious credulity, strangely
contrasting with his usual good sense, sagacity, and judgment. Thus,
he presents to us a man standing on his head with his heels in the air
during a whole night; others restraining their breath many hours, and
remaining immoveable during two or three days; he speaks of the
miraculous effects of austerity, such as being in different places at
the same time; resuscitating the dead; understanding the language of
animals, vegetables, and minerals; walking on the surface of water,
and through fire and air; commanding the elements; leaving and
reassuming the body; and the like. But let us not forget that such
stories were told elsewhere, and in Europe, even so late as the time
in which the Dabistán was written.

Further, although generally moral and judicious in his sentences,
grave and austere in his views, fervent and exalted in devout
contemplation, our author now and then happens to use the language of
ribaldry and indecency, which deserves serious reprobation. We shall
however remark that taste, or the sense of propriety in words and
expressions among Asiatics differs, as much as their general
civilisation, from ours. From religious austerity they banished the
elegant arts, as objects of sensuality; but, as they could not stifle
this essential part of human nature, they only prevented its useful
refinement; they clipt the delicate flower, but left the brute part of
it: hence the grossness of their jokes, expressions, and images. “To
sacrifice to the graces” is, among them, not understood at all, or
thought an abomination. But they cannot be said to _violate_ laws
which they do not know; the offence which they give from want of taste
and decency, is purely unintentional, and cannot with them have that
evil effect which, among us, it would be likely to produce.

As to the general style of the Dabistán――it is only in the original
text itself, that it can be justly appreciated. It will perhaps
sufficiently appear from our translation that it distinguishes itself
favorably among other Oriental works with which it may be compared.
The diction is generally free from their usual bombast; it is commonly
clear, and when obscure to an European reader, it is so on account of
the strangeness and abstruseness of the matter treated. As to form――if
judged according to the rules of Western criticism, the work of Mohsan
Fani may be found deficient in the distribution and arrangement of
matter; there are useless repetitions, incoherences, disorder, abrupt
digressions, and excess, sonetimes of prolixity, at others of
concision. Although we have reason to praise him for generally naming
the source from which he drew his information, still we can but
regret, now and then, his not sufficiently authenticating nor
explaining the particulars which he relates. Thus we could wish him to
have been more explicit concerning the Desátir. Upon the whole, we
cannot accuse him of not having performed what, in his time and
circumstances, was hardly possible, and what hitherto no Asiatic
author has achieved. We ought to keep in mind how much, with respect
to the perfection of literary publications, we owe solely to the art
of printing, the practice of which, by its own nature, necessitates
and facilitates a manifold revision and correction of the text, which
otherwise could hardly take place. This alone sufficiently accounts
for the frequent defects even of the best manuscript works.

Striking an equitable balance between faults and excellencies, and
with particular regard to the abundance of curious, useful, and
important information, I shall not hesitate to express my sincere
persuasion, that the Dabistán was worthy of the eulogy bestowed by the
great Orientalist who first brought it into public notice.


     [206] Vol. III. p. 287.

     [207] The Koran, ch. XVIII. v. 100.

     [208] _Ibid._, ch. VI. v. 49.

     [209] _Ibid._, ch. V. vv. 86. 88.

     [210] _Ibid._, ch. XXIX. v. 45.

     [211] _Ibid._, ch. III. v. 57.

     [212] _Ibid._, vv. 61. 66. 67.

     [213] _Ibid._, ch. XX. v. 66.

     [214] _Ibid._, ch. X. vv. 99. 100.

     [215] See Epilogue.




§ II.――NOTICE CONCERNING THE PRINTED EDITION, SOME MANUSCRIPTS, AND
THE TRANSLATIONS OF THE DABISTAN.

It is well known, that the only printed edition of the Dabistán which
exists is due to the press of Calcutta. At the end of the work will be
found the Epilogue of the editor, _Moulavi Nazer Ushruf_, a learned
Muhammedan gentleman of the district of Juanpur, who was for many
years employed in judicial offices in the district of Burdwan, and in
the court of Sudder Diwani Adawlet, in Calcutta. These particulars
were communicated to me by the favor of the honorable gentleman whose
name the said editor mentions in his Epilogue with encomium, the
sincerity of which can certainly not be questioned: it was William
Butterworth Bayley, at present director and chairman of the Honorable
East India Company. It was he, a distinguished Persian scholar, who
directed and superintended the edition of the Dabistán. Upon the
strength of his authority I am enabled to add, that the printed copy
was the result of a careful collation of several manuscript copies of
this work. One was obtained from Delhi (as mentioned in the epilogue),
and another from Bombay; two or three were in the possession of
natives in Calcutta. Although these, as it is more or less the case
with all manuscripts, procurable in India, were defective, yet we may
believe the assurance given by the editor, that “the doubts and faults
have been as much as possible discarded, and the edition carried to a
manifest accuracy.” This is confirmed by the fact, that only a few
discrepancies from the printed edition were found in two other
manuscripts, which were in England at the disposition of the late
David Shea for the translation of the first part of the Dabistán. Nor
did I find frequent deviations from the printed text in the copy which
was transcribed for me in Calcutta from a manuscript, procured from
the library of the king of Oude. Mutilated in many places, and
imperfect as is this latter, it afforded me nevertheless a few
acceptable readings. I was obliged to content myself with the
assistance of this only manuscript for the translation, as several
circumstances, among which was the lamented death of the earl of
Munster, prevented me from obtaining the use of other manuscript
copies. All circumtances considered, I do not hesitate to say, that
the printed edition of the Dabistán is more correct than any of the
manuscript copies which can be found; we have only to regret that its
typography, owing to the then imperfect state of the Oriental press in
Calcutta, is so irregular, as to be scarce entitled to any preference
over the common sort of Persian manuscripts.

The English translation of the Dabistán was begun some time before the
year 1835, by David Shea, one of the professors of Oriental languages
at Hayleybury. He was in his early years distinguished in the
university of Dublin for his classical attainments, and remained
devoted to literature in all the various circumstances of his life. It
was not for, nor in, India――the great object and school of English
students――but in Malta, from peculiar inducement, that, by uncommon
application, he acquired the Arabic and Persian languages. After his
return to England, having been attached to the Hayleybury college――I
should not fail to add to his eulogy by saying, that he had before won
the kind interest and recommendation of sir Graves Haughton――and
having become a member of the committee of the Oriental Translation
Fund, he earned the applause of Orientalists in England, and on the
continent of Europe, by his faithful and spirited translation of
Mirkhond’s history of the early kings of Persia. Undertaking the
translation of the Dabistán, he was undoubtedly preparing to himself a
new success, the full realisation of which he was not permitted to
enjoy; the last date in his manuscript copy, in which he was wont to
mark the progress of his labor, was April 22, 1835. From this day he
appears to have withdrawn his hand from the Dabistán, and too soon
after――I shall be permitted to use the very words of the author whom
he was translating:[216]

  “He sought the stores of holy liberty,
   A resting place on high, and soar’d from hence
   Beyond the bounds of heaven, earth, and time.”

It was in the beginning of the year 1837 that I was honored by the
earl of Munster, the vice president of the Royal Asiatic Society of
Great Britain and Ireland, with the proposal of completing and editing
the English Dabistán. Having already several years before been
occupied with the same work whilst pursuing my Indian studies, I was
so much the more prompted to accept the proffered honor. Engaged
however as I then was in publishing my French translation of the first
six books of the _Rajatarangini_ from the Sanscrit, I could not begin
the new work before 1841. This delay was the cause of my being
deprived of the desired honor and satisfaction of presenting my
translation to the earl of Munster, who while in the full enjoyment of
life, welcomed with a benevolent interest every contribution, however
small, to the general diffusion of Oriental history and literature; he
had accepted in Paris my Dedication a short time before his death; it
remains to me to consecrate, with a profound feeling of regret and
veneration for departed worth, the English Dabistán to his memory.

I took charge of the manuscript copy of David Shea’s version, which
had been carried to page 201 of the printed Calcutta edition.[217] In
this there were only a few omissions to be supplied, and no other
rectifications to be made but those which a second review would have
suggested to my learned predecessor himself; his notes, and those
which I thought necessary to add, are marked each with the initials of
our respective names.

If I found little to change, I had much to imitate in David Shea’s
translation――his faithfulness and clearness. By faithfulness I
understand not only expressing truly the sense, but also keeping
unaltered the words, figures, images, and phrases of the original, as
it is in them that the author’s national and individual peculiarity is
manifested. This sort of faithfulness may roughen or hamper the
phrase, destroy the elegance of style, and even offend good taste, but
by it alone we shall not only know, as I have just observed, the
genius of the foreign writer, but also satisfy the exigencies of
philology, which is one of the main purposes of translations not
undertaken as mere exercises of improvable eloquence.

An author will not employ more or other words than those he thinks
necessary for being understood by readers of his own nation, religion,
school; he writes, for instance, as a Muhammedan for Muhammedans, a
Súfi for Súfis. But a translator must do his best for uniting
faithfulness with clearness, the indispensable condition of any speech
or writing; he must add what is required for illustrating the original
text, and thus submit to a charge, now and then heavier than he can
bear.

Under the necessity of expounding the translation by notes, I was not
actuated by the ambition of being new, but only by that of being as
useful as my means permitted, that is, by endeavoring to spare the
reader time and trouble to look for dates and biographical notices of
the persons, the situation of the places, and the explanation of the
technical terms which occur in the text. Orientalists know the
difficulty of rendering in a European language the phraseology of the
Asiatic theology and philosophy. The Dabistán presents, besides the
Sanscrit, a confusion of Arabic and Persian technical expressions;
some of them have a very comprehensive signification, and for the sake
of clearness must be rendered by different terms in different places;
other expressions have at times a particular sense, and are at other
times to be taken in the common acceptation; the same terms must be
translated by different words, and different terms by the same;
finally, the matter treated of is frequently so abstruse in its nature
that professed philosophers have not yet been able to agree upon some
of the most important questions. I can therefore but apprehend that I
may not have thoroughly understood, and must confess that I have not
translated, to my own satisfaction, more than one passage relative to
Indian doctrines, and to the Muhammedan scholastic philosophy.

The Sanscrit names and terms of Indian mythology, theology, and
philosophy are much corrupted by the Persian spelling; I have
endeavored to restore them to their original forms. I thought it right
to adduce in most cases the Sanscrit, Arabic, or Persian word at the
same time in Roman as well as Devanagari, or Arabic characters, with
its interpretation. I followed the rule proposed by sir William Jones
for writing oriental words in Roman characters, as often as I took
these words from a Sanscrit, Persian, or Arabic text; but from works
written in a European language, I was generally obliged to copy the
spelling of Oriental names: on which account, in my notes, a
regretable inequality of orthography could not be avoided.

The Dabistán not only touches upon most difficult points of science
and erudition, but also comprises in its allusions and references
nearly the whole history of Asia. In observing this, I am necessarily
at the same time pointing to the many deficiencies which will be found
in my attempts to comment and illustrate so comprehensive and
diversified a text. The best advantage which a man obtains at the
termination of an arduous work, is to have enabled himself to make it
better, if he could begin again; but he can but humbly submit to the
decrees of an all-ruling power, which bestows upon each mortal only a
certain measure of faculties and of time.

Desirous to fulfil my task to the best of my abilities, I did not
neglect to consult every translation of any part of the Dabistán which
had been published. I have already mentioned, in this preface,[218]
that Gladwin edited the Persian text of a part of the first chapter
with an English version which was worthy of his reputation as an
excellent Orientalist. Every thing that came from the pen of the late
doctor Leyden deserved attention. I had before my eyes his translation
of chapter IX., on the religion of the Roshenian.[219] I did not
neglect the abridged interpretation of the religious controversies
held before Akbar, given in form of a dialogue by the learned and
ingenious Vans Kennedy.[220] I perused with due regard the
explanations which the illustrious Silvestre de Sacy furnished of some
passages of the Dabistán[221] since this work became known to him in
1821, as well as the remarks cursorily made upon it by some
Orientalists.

I did not fail also to profit by the advantages which my residence in
Paris, and my connections with distinguished cultivators of Oriental
literature, could afford me on behalf of my translation. It is my duty
to acknowledge the services which I received from the kindness of M.
Garcin de Tassy, professor of Hindostanee, whose intimate acquaintance
with Arabic and Persian literature in general, and with Muhammedan
theology in particular, is attested by several esteemed works which he
has published. The many Arabic passages, disseminated in the Dabistán,
have mostly been revised, interpreted, and referred to the Koran, by
him. M. Eugène Burnouf, professor of Sanscrit, is never in vain
consulted concerning that part of ancient philology in which he has
acquired a most particular and eminent distinction. I also constantly
experienced the most friendly readiness to tender me information, when
required, in M. Julius Mohl and baron Mac Guckin de Slane, as well as
in M. Reinaud, professor of Arabic, attached to the Royal Library, a
most distinguished conservator and most complaisant communicator of
the valuable manuscripts under his special charge. I beg these
honorable gentlemen to receive my sincerest acknowledgments.


     [216] See vol. I. p. 131.

     [217] In the English transl. to vol. II. p. 85.

     [218] P. vi.

     [219] See _As. Res._, vol. XI. pp. 406-420; Calcutta quarto
     edit.; and vol. III. pp. 26-42 of this work.

     [220] See Transact. of the Bombay Lit. Soc., vol. II. pp.
     242-270, and vol. III. of this work, p. 50 _et seq._

     [221] See _Journal des Savans, février 1821_, Review of the
     Desátir; and December, 1821, and January, 1822, Review of
     Thulok’s work upon Súfism.




THE DABISTÁN,

OR

SCHOOL OF MANNERS.




THE DABISTÁN,

OR,

SCHOOL OF MANNERS.


         [222]In the name of the bountiful and merciful God.

                            Verse.[223]

  “O Thou, whose name is the beginning of the book of the children
     of the school,
   Thy remembrance is to the adult amongst the Sages the torch of
     their nightly retirement;
   Without thy name the tongue fails the palate of the barbarians,
   Although they know the language of Arabia;[224]
  _Having_ the heart in the body _full_ of thy remembrance, the
     novice, as well as the adept, in contemplation
  _Becomes_ a supreme king of beatitude, and the throne of the kingdom
     of gladness.
   Whatever road I took, it joined the street _which leads_ to Thee;
   The desire _to know_ thy being is also the life of the meditators;
   He who found that there is nothing but Thee, has found the _final_
     knowledge;
   The móbed is the teacher of thy truth, and the world a school.”

Blessing without limit to the mighty Being, the Lord of existence, the
rider upon the sun of the celestial sphere _which is_ the eye-witness
_of his glory_; _to Him_ whose servant is Saturn, Baharam (Mars) the
messenger, Jupiter the star, _the herald of good fortune_, Venus the
slave; _to Him who is_ the ornament of the throne of the empire of the
faith, and the crown of divinity of the kingdom of truth.”

                           Masnavi.[225]

  “The being to whom the holy God said:
   If not thee, I would not have created the worlds;[226]
   That primitive wisdom and that soul of the world;
   That man of spirit, and that spirit of man.
   Blessing be also to the Khalifs of the faithful, and to the
     Lords of the Imáns of the faith.”[227]

                         Rabaâi (quatrain).

  “The world is a book full of knowledge and of justice,
   The binder of which book is destiny, and the binding the
     beginning and the end;
   The suture of it is the law, and the leaves are the religious
     persuasions;
   The whole nation is formed of its disciples, and the apostle is
     the teacher.”

In this book, called “The Dabistan,” is contained something of the
knowledge and faith of past nations, of the speeches and actions of
modern people, as it has been reported by those who know what is
manifest, and see what is concealed; as well as by those who are
attached to exterior forms, and by those who discern the inward
meaning, without omission, and diminution, without hatred, envy and
scorn, and without taking a part for the one, or against the other
side of the question.

This work is composed of several chapters.

  CHAPT. I. treats of the religion of the _Pársián_.
  CHAPT. II. of the religion of the _Hindus_.
  CHAPT. III. of the religion of the _Tabitían_.
  CHAPT. IV. of the religion of the _Yahud_ (Jews).
  CHAPT. V. of the religion of the _Tarasás_ (Christians).
  CHAPT. VI. of the religion of the _Muselmáns_.
  CHAPT. VII. of the religion of the _Sádakíah_.
  CHAPT. VIII. of the religion of the _Váhadiáh_ (Unitarians).
  CHAPT. IX. of the religion of the _Rósheníán_.
  CHAPT. X. of the religion of the _Ilahíah_.
  CHAPT. XI. of the religion of the Wise (Philosophers).
  CHAPT. XII. of the religion of the _Súfiah_.


     [222] The words in italic are not in the Persian text.

     [223] The five distichs are in the metre called هزج,
     “hazaj,” composed of the following feet: مفعول مفاعيل فاعيل
     فعولن. See _M. Garcin de Tassy, author of the “Mémoire sur
     le système métrique des Arabes, adapté à la langue
     Hindoustani.”_ 1832.

     [224] This distich contains the same idea as the following
     of Nizámi:
            هر که نه گويا بتوخاموش به
            هر چه نه ياد تو فراموش به

     “It is better not to speak than to speak of another but
     thee; it is better to leave in oblivion what does not remind
     of thee.” _Quoted in the “Rudimens de la langue
     Hindoustani,” by the author just mentioned (p. 16 and 25)._

     [225] The two distichs are in a metre, which is a variety of
     the _hazaj_, before mentioned, and is composed as follows:
     مفعول مفاعلن فعولن.

     [226] This verse expresses the same idea as the following
     hemistich of the Arabic poem, called Borda, and composed by
     Sharf-eddin-al Búsíri:

     لولاه لما تخرج الدنيا من العدم

     “Without him the world would never have come forth from
     nothingness.” This is one of the celebrated traditions
     respecting Muhammed, contained in the following words:

     لولاک ما حلقت الافلاک

     “If it had not been for thee (Muhammed), the worlds would
     never have been created.” This encomiastic expression has
     been reproduced in several other poems, Arabic, Persian, and
     Hindostani. _See upon this subject, “Les aventures de
     Kamrup,” p. 146-147, and “Les OEuvres de Wali,” p. 51-52,
     traduites de l’Hindoustani, par M. Garcin de Tassy._

     [227] The manuscript of Oude has here: محسن فانی گوبه,
     “Mohsen Fáni says:” which would leave no doubt upon the name
     of the author of this book, if these words were not a mere
     addition of the copyist.




