PART II.

SYNOPSIS OF THE DYNASTIES, RELIGIONS, SECTS, AND PHILOSOPHIC OPINIONS,
TREATED OF IN THE DABISTAN.


§ I.――THE FIRST RELIGION――THE DYNASTIES OF MAHABAD, ABAD AZAR, SHAI
ABAD, SHAI GILIV, SHAI MAHBUL, AND YASAN.

Mohsan Fani exhibits the remarkable notions, dogmas, customs, and
ceremonies of twelve religions, and their various sects, without
giving more of their origin and genesis than the names of their
founders. The very first principle of all religion is referred, by
some, to a primitive Divine revelation; by others, to a natural
propensity of the human mind to superstition. However this may be,
history confirms the suggestions of psychology, that admiration was
one of the principal sources of religious feelings; how should man not
be struck with the glories of the sky? Therefore, the adoration of
stars was one of the most ancient religions. It needed no prophet: it
is “_the poetry of heaven_,” imprinted in eternal characters of fire
upon the ethereal expanse. Prometheus, enumerating the benefits which
he bestowed upon untutored barbarians, says:[73]

  “―― ―― ―― At random all their works
   Till I instructed them to mark the stars,
   Their rising, and, a harder science yet,
   Their setting.”[74]

According to all traditions, astronomy was one of the first sciences
cultivated by men.[75] The stars not only occasioned the institution,
but also served to announce the regular return, of religious feasts;
thus they became, as called by Plato, “the instruments of time,” men
were at once induced and taught by religion to count months and years.
Astronomy, in her feast-calendars, consecrated upon an altar the first
fruits of her labors.

Upon the star-paved path of heaven man was conducted to the sanctuary
of the supreme Being. In general, the first feeling of “the Divine (το
θεῖον),” seizing the human mind with its own supernatural power,
elevated it at once above the material concerns of the nether world;
thus, sublime ideas of the Deity, the universe, and the immortality of
the soul preceded the invention of many arts and sciences relative to
the comforts of social life. This is confirmed by the account,
contained in the Dabistán, of the most ancient religion of the
Persians, which is founded upon transcendental ideas of the Divinity:
“Except God himself, who can comprehend his origin? Entity, unity,
identity are inseparable properties of this original essence, and are
not adventitious to Him.” So the Desátir, with which the Dabistán
generally so fully agrees, that we can scarce doubt that the author of
the latter had the former before his eyes.

No sooner has man acquired the consciousness of mental freedom, than
he endeavors to expand beyond himself the first vague feeling of the
Divine; not satisfied to admire all exterior marvel, he desires to
understand and to name its interior moving cause: this is something
immaterial; it is a soul, such as acts in himself. Among the ancient
Iranians, the “first creation of the existence-bestowing bounty” was
the intellectual principle, called _Azad Bahman_, “the first
intelligence;” he is also the first angel; from him other spirits or
angels proceed. Every star, every heavenly sphere has its particular
intelligence and spirit or angel. In the lower region, each of the
four elements owns its particular guardian; vegetables, minerals,
animals have their protecting angels; the conservative angel of
mankind is _Farun Faro Vakshur_. It is not without reason, that this
religion was called “the religion of light.” As the supreme Being

  “Sow’d with stars the heav’n thick as the field.”[76]

So also he peopled the vast extent with the “sons of light, the
empyreal host of angels,” who not only moved and governed the
celestial orbs, but also descended into the elemental regions to
direct, promote, and protect his creation. Not a drop of dew fell
without an angel. The Hindus and Greeks animated universal nature; the
Persians imparadized the whole creation by making it the abode of
angels. Hence demonology in all its extent. But, “_among_ the most
resplendent, powerful, and glorious of the servants who are free from
inferior bodies and matter, there is none God’s enemy or rival, or
disobedient, or cast down, or annihilated.” This important passage of
the Desátir[77] I shall have occasion to refer to hereafter.

Human souls are eternal and infinite; they come from above, and are
spirits of the upper spheres. If distinguished for knowledge and
sanctity, while on earth, they return above, are united with the sun,
and become empyreal sovereigns; but if the proportion of their good
works bore a closer affinity to any other star, they become lords of
the place assigned to that star; their stations are in conformity with
the degrees of their virtue; perfect men attain the beatific vision of
the light of lights, and the cherubine hosts of the supreme Lord. Vice
and depravity, on the contrary, separate souls from the primitive
source of light, and chain them to the abode of the elements: they
become evil spirits. The imperfectly good migrate from one body to
another, until, by the efficacy of good words and actions, they are
finally emancipated from matter, and gain a higher rank. The
thoroughly-depraved descend from the human form to animal bodies, to
vegetable, and even to mineral substances.

So far we see the well-known dogma of transmigration ingeniously
combined with the Sidereal religion. Here is exhibited a singular
system of heavenly dominion, maintained by every star, whether fixed
or planetary, during periods of many thousand years. A fixed star
begins the revolution, and reigns alone, the king of the cycle, during
a millenium, after which, each of the fixed and planetary stars
becomes its partner or prime-minister for a thousand years; the last
of all is the moon, for a millenium. Then the sovereignty of the first
king devolves to the star which was its first associate. This second
king goes through the same course as the first, until this becomes for
a thousand years his partner, and then his period is also past. The
same is the course of all other stars. When the moon shall have been
king, and all stars associated with it and its reign too past, then
one great period shall be accomplished. The state of the revolving
world recommences, the human beings, animals, vegetables, and
minerals, which existed during the first cycle, are restored to their
former language, acts, dispositions, species, and appearances; the
world is renovated, that is to say, forms, similar to those which
passed away, reappear. This system, copied from the Desátir,[78]
expresses nothing else but the general vague idea of long heavenly
revolutions, and periodical renovations of the same order of things in
the nether world.

The Dabistán[79] adds a mode of computing as peculiar to the followers
of the ancient faith: they call one revolution of the regent Saturn a
day; thirty such days one month; twelve such months one year; a
million of such years one _fard_; a million fard one _vard_; a million
vard one _mard_; a million vard one _jad_; three thousand jads one
_vad_; and two thousand vád one _zád_. To these I must subjoin
_salam_, _shamar_, _aspar_, _radah_, _aradah_, _raz_, _araz_,
_biaraz_, that is, eight members of a geometric progression, the first
of which is 100,000, and the coefficient 100. But these years are
revolutions, called _farsals_, of thirty common years each. There are
besides farsals of Mars, Venus, Mercury, and the moon, a day of each
being the time of their respective revolution.

I thought it necessary to repeat these extravagant numbers, because it
is by them that the reigns of the first ancient dynasties are
measured.[80] The first earthly ruler of the present cycle, who with
his wife survived the great period to become the first ancestor of a
new innumerable population, was _Mahabada_. This name seems of
Sanscrit derivation.[81] In his reign we find traced the first
ground-lines of all human societies; agriculture and the arts of life
are invented; villages and cities organised; four classes of society
established――priests, warriors, agriculturists, and tradesmen. The
names of these classes are in the Dabistán much like those of the four
Hindu _castes_, but the Desátir and the Shahnamah have other
denominations, belonging to an ancient Persian dialect,[82] for these
divisions, which originated in the indispensable wants of a rising
society. This institution connects itself with the principles of
social morality: men are bound to each other by the laws of justice
and mutual kindness, which is extended even to all innoxious
creatures. To Mahabad the _Desátir_ was sent, a celestial code, and
his faith was maintained through the whole series of his fourteen
successors; the number of whom reminds us of the fourteen Indian
Manus; they are said to have reigned six hundred and six trillions of
years.

To the Mahabadians succeeded _Abad Azar_, who soon withdrew from
government, and devoted himself to solitude and piety. After him, the
hitherto fortunate state of society changed into war, confusion, and
anarchy. His son, _Jai Afram_, was called to the throne, and restored
peace and order in the world, giving his name to a new dynasty. After
this, four other princely families are named, that of _Shai Abad_,
_Shai Giliv_, _Shai Mahbul_, and _Yasan_.[83] I shall not count the
many millions of years during which they ruled; all that is said of
their reigns appears nothing but a repetition of the first; a period
of peace, order, and happiness is followed by war, disorder, and
misery, until a revolution renews the state of things. Such traditions
of a progress and regress in virtue and happiness, and of repeated
changes from one condition to another, are not destitute of general
truth. The moral is not, more than the physical world, exempt from
revolutions. These, although their date cannot be determined, have
left behind them undeniable traces, and without a reference to them,
we could not explain so much of the strangeness, incoherence, and
heterogeneity in the history of men and nature.

Thus I have slightly sketched the principal features of the religion
which prevailed among the first Persian dynasties; these, not
mentioned in other historical books, are we know peculiar to the
Desátir and Dabistán, which appeared to sir W. Jones an
unexceptionable authority for believing the Iranian monarchy “the
oldest in the world.” Upon this, W. Erskine remarked:[84] “Shall I be
forgiven for saying, that the history of letters seems to me scarcely
to afford an instance of a more perverted judgment on historical
evidence?” Silvestre de Sacy[85] too “banishes among the most absurd
fables the dynasties of the Mahabadians, and of their successors,
which sir William Jones, and after him some other Orientalists, have
too hastily adopted, and of which they would to-day blush, since their
titles have been produced.” More recently, William von Schlegel[86]
said: “It would be useless to conceal to the public that that learned
man, endowed with talents so rare, was totally deficient in historical
criticism:” This was inferred, because he had admitted, and used in
some of his considerations, as genuine, a forgery of Wilford’s Pandit.
Besides, “he received without diffidence, and even welcomed with
enthusiasm, the traditions contained in the Dabistán, a modern Persian
book, written with _the intention to claim for Persia the pre-eminence
over India with respect to the antiquity of religious revelations_.”

As to “the intention” mentioned, I hope to be able to justify Mohsan
Fani. With respect to the Mahabadian dynasties――the light recently
acquired upon the ancient history of Persia, reflect rather favorably
upon that part of sir William Jones’s opinion, that this country, in
its wide extent, was once the original seat of many nations now
settled in distant regions. So much, at least, may be considered as
established: 1. that the limits of history are to be removed further
back than those before fixed; 2. that in the earliest times primitive
nations, related by language to each other, had their origin in the
common elevated country of central Asia, and that the Iranians and
Indians were once united before their migration into Iran and
India.[87] This great fact presents itself, as it were, upon the
border of a vast abyss of unknown times.

For these a measure was sought. Hence we meet with extravagant, but
perpetually recurring chronological statements. The Mahabadian ages
are neither better nor worse, as to accuracy, than the Indian yugs,
the Chaldean,[88] or other periods. In order to reduce them to their
true value, we must consider them as nothing else than expressions of
the ideas which the ancients entertained of the antiquity of the world
and human society, in which they cannot be easily refuted, and at
least are not absurd. Such ideas originated, when man, curious after
his past, had long ceased to be a listless barbarian; but the earliest
civilisation is a late product of slow-working time, the memory of
which could have been preserved only by monuments. The most ancient of
these however are but recent in our historical knowledge, the limits
of which are far from being those of antiquity. The duration of
ante-historical empires, in printless but extensive spaces of times,
escapes research and computation. As men, however, bear with
impatience vague and loose ideas, the Persians, as well as other
nations, determined the past by numbers formed from the multiplication
of some astronomical periods known in early times, as has been
observed:[89] this appears to me at once the whole truth and falsehood
of those statements. In the utter impossibility to reconcile the
discordant data of different nations, we must content ourselves to
take up the general ideas and facts in which they all agree, whilst in
the particulars they all differ. Thus, in laying down maps of
countries little known, we are satisfied with tracing the general
direction of some rivers and mountains, and abstain from topographical
details.


     [73] Προμηθευς δεσμωτης,
          ―― ―― ―― ―― ἄτης γνώμης τὸ πᾶν
         Ἔπρασσον, ἔς τε δή σφιν ἀντολὰς ἐγὼ
          Αστρων ἔδειξα, τάς τε δυσκρίτους δύσεις.
                                              (v. 457-459).

     [74] Transl. by Dr. Potter.

     [75] Hyde, who did not know the Dabistán, says (p. 188):
     that a year, or calendar, of Median invention was introduced
     in Persia, before Jamshid, that is, according to Ferdusi’s
     not irrational chronology, earlier than 3429 before our era.

     [76] Milton’s Paradise Lost, b. VII. v. 358.

     [77] The book of Shet Shai Kiliv, v. 59. p. 56.

     [78] Bombay edit. Engl. transl., pp. 19. 20.

     [79] Vol. I. p. 14. The Bombay Desátir does not mention the
     revolution of Saturn, and states differently the value of
     fard, mard, etc., etc.

     [80] It is known that in India, and perhaps all over Asia,
     the number of ciphers not followed by a significative
     number, is indifferent, and indicates nothing else but
     magnitude. Thus the Hindus, to determine positively
     hundreds, thousands, etc., affix the required figure at the
     end: for instance, to determine 100 rupees to be given, they
     write 101.

     [81] The word is perhaps a form of the Sanscrit _Mahábodhi_,
     “a great deified teacher.” In the Burhani Kati we find six
     significations attributed to the word _Abad_; these are: 1.
     cultivated; 2. praise and prayer; 3. exclamation of praise;
     4. the name of the Kaba; 5. the name of the first Persian
     prophet; 6. good and beauteous.

     [82] See vol. I. pp. 19-20.

     [83] I have (see vol. I. p. 26, note 1) derived this name
     from the Sanscrit _yas_, “glory, honor.” In Burhan Katii it
     is interpreted by “what is convenient.”

     [84] _Loco cit._, p. 342.

     [85] _Journ. des Savans, février 1821_, p. 69.

     [86] See _Réflexions sur l’Étude des Langues orientales_,
     _loc. cit._, p. 51.

     [87] See the development of these ideas in _Erdkunde von
     Carl Ritter_, _VIII^{ter} Theil_; _III^{ter} Buch_, _West-asien
     Seiten_ 105-109, with reference to _E. Burnouf Comment. sur
     le Yacna_, pp. 461, 563.

     [88] We may be here permitted to call to mind the eras of
     the Chaldeans, who, according to Berosus, Epigenes, Diodorus
     of Sicily, Abydenus counted 490,000, 720,000, 473,000,
     463,763 years. They are said to have exhibited, before
     Alexander’s conquest in Asia, historical annals for 150,000
     years.

     [89] See p. lxvii.


§ II.――THE PESHDADIAN, KAYANIAN, ASHKANIAN, AND
SASSANIAN DYNASTIES――THEIR RELIGIOUS AND POLITICAL
INSTITUTIONS.

After the four dynasties mentioned follows the _Gilshanian_, monarchy,
founded by _Gilshah_, or _Kayomers_, “the king or form of earth.”[90]
We are now upon well-known ground, and hear familiar names of four
races: the _Péshdadian_, _Kayanian_, _Ashkaniun_, and _Sassanian_, to
which, altogether, the Dabistán attributes a period of 6024 years,
differing considerably from that of other Asiatic chronologers.[91]

Sir William Jones was right when he declared,[92] that “the annals of
the _Péshdadi_ (or Assyrian) race must be obscure and fabulous; those
of the Kayání family, or the Medes and Persians, heroic and poetic:”
annals gathered from oral traditions can be but such as the great
Orientalist characterises those of the mentioned dynasties. But it was
in his younger years, before he had enlarged his views upon the
history of mankind, that he fixed the origin of the Persian monarchy
so late as 890 years before our era;[93] afterwards, in India, he
refuted his former notions, and ranged more freely in the expanded
fields of antiquity. I shall add that Ferdusi places the beginning of
Gilshah’s reign 3529 years before Christ, an epoch which receives
synchronical confirmation from our daily-increasing knowledge of the
antiquity of China, India, Assyria, Egypt, and other states.

The fundamental religion remains the same: a celestial volume called
_Payman-i-farhang_, in perfect accord with the Mahabadian code, is
transmitted to Kayomers. So the Dabistán: but, in the Desátir, the
four books ascribed to the first four Mahabadian prophet-kings contain
the purest deism, and although the foundation of astrolatry and
demonolatry may be perceived in the cosmology of the first book, yet
these did not form a positive worship, which develops itself in the
seven planetary books of the seven subsequent Persian kings, to wit:
_Kayomers_, _Siamok_, _Hushang_, _Tahmúras_, _Jamshid_, _Feridun_, and
_Menocheher_. Under these monarchs, a particular worship was rendered
to the seven planets, as to mediators between God and men; the
description of the forms under which they have been adored, is not, to
my knowledge, found in any other book but the Dabistán.

Superstition is certainly as ancient as human nature itself; it is
impossible to fix the epoch at which particular opinions and practices
originated, such as the eighty-four sitting-postures at prayer; the
suppression of the breath for the abstraction of thought; the mystical
and fantastical notions upon vision and revelation; and particularly
the belief that a man may attain the faculty to quit and to reassume
his body, or to consider it as a loose garment, which he may put off
at pleasure for ascending to the world of light, and on his return be
reunited with the material elements. All these matters are considered
as very ancient.

We find in the Dabistán a curious account of Persian sects under
different names, such as _Abadians_, _Azur-Húshangians_,
_Jamshaspians_, _Samradians_, _Khodaiyans_, _Radians_, _Shidrangians_,
_Paikarians_, _Milanians_, _Alarians_, _Shidabians_, _Akshiyans_. The
founders of these sects are placed so far back as the reigns of
Jamshid and Zohak. Individuals professing the particular creed of each
of these sects were living in the time of the author of the Dabistán,
who was personally acquainted with several of them, and imparts the
information which he had himself received from their lips. He gives
with particular care an account of the before-mentioned Azar
Kaivan,[94] the chief of the later _Abadíans_ and _Azar-Hushangians_.
The doctrine of these sectaries contained peculiar notions about God’s
nature and attributes, and the world; the latter was to some an
illusion; God himself but an idea. To others, God was every thing, to
be served alone without a mediator between him and mankind;
the heavens and the stars were his companions. God was the
sun――fire――air――water――earth; he was the essence of the elements: from
every one of these divine principles the heavens, stars, and the whole
world proceeded. These were some of the fundamental principles of
their metaphysical religion.

Their morality appears to have consisted in the acknowledgment of all
natural virtues; piety, justice, charity, sobriety; wine and strong
drinks were forbidden; above all a tenderness towards all living
creatures was recommended; and the severity against those who slew
innoxious animals was carried to such an excess, than even sons
punished their fathers with death, and fathers their sons, for the
slaughter of a sheep or an elk.[95]

Their political constitution appears from the earliest time to have
been that of an absolute monarchy: this is the curse attached to
Asiatics. The king was to be of a noble descent, and bound to
acknowledge the _Farhang-Abad_, “code of Abad.” All dignities,
military and civil, were hereditary from father to son. The royal
court and inner apartments appear to have been regulated in much the
same manner as they are still in Asia; his cup-bearers and familiar
servants, as well as those of his sons, and other nobles, were always
females.

The interior administration of cities and villages is sufficiently
detailed in the Dabistán. An active police was established, with
numerous spies and secret reporters, for the security of government.
We are glad to find in such early times hospitals for the relief of
the suffering, and caravansaras for the convenience of travellers.
Moreover, post-stations of horses and messengers were distributed for
the rapid communication of news, from all sides of the vast empire, to
the monarch.[96]

Not a little care was bestowed upon the discipline and continual
exercise of numerous armies. The military chiefs were distinguished by
the magnificent decorations of their persons, horses, and arms, in
which they prided themselves. They were bound to treat their soldiers
kindly, nay, obliged to produce certificates, from their subordinates,
of having behaved well towards them. An order of battle was
prescribed, in which they were to encounter the enemy; no plunder
after victory was permitted; they never slew, nor treated with
violence, a man who had thrown down his arms and asked for quarter.

History may well be referred to religion, which is an ancient
intellectual monument, living in the human soul from generation to
generation. I have hitherto marked two religious periods: the first,
that of the _Desátir_, through the Mahabadian dynasty; the second,
that of _Paiman-í-Farhang_, prevailing during the Pésh-dadi-race until
the middle of the Kayanian reign; I now come to the third.


     [90] The first word is pure Persian; the other may be
     derived from the Sanscrit _kaya_, “body, form,” and _mrita_,
     “earth.”

     [91] See vol. I. p. 31, note 1.

     [92] His Works, vol. III. the sixth Anniversary Discourse,
     p. 108.

     [93] _Ibid._, vol. XII. p. 399.

     [94] See page 63.

     [95] See vol. I. pp. 181. 184.

     [96] _Parasang_, _Farsang_, even in our days a Persian word,
     is found and determined as a lineal measure of distances in
     Herodotus, lib. II. V. and VI.


§ III.――THE RELIGION OF ZARDUSHT, OR ZOROASTER.

All religions are said to have deviated from their primitive
simplicity and purity, as men advanced in knowledge and civilisation.
This is true but in a restricted and distinctive sense, and may be
explained, even without yielding to our habit of considering that
which is more remote and less known as holier than that which is
nearer and better examined. Thus, we may admit that the impressions
made upon men in the first stage of expanding reason are stronger and
more vivid, the less they are distracted by simultaneous and
correlative associations; one great idea is enough to fill their whole
mind, and admits of no rival, of no commixture with any thing else;
curiosity, versatility, luxuriancy of intellect are not yet known;
constancy is a necessity in a small compass of ideas. We have already
touched[97] upon the powerful effect which the early perception of the
_Divine_ produced upon man: but he soon circumscribed what was too
vast or his comprehension in a perceptible object――heaven, sun, fire,
to which he offered his adoration; he wanted a visible type or image
of the invisible Divinity; but, his means of formation being at first
very confined, he contented himself with the most simple
representation: he had a symbol, an idol in a grove or cavern, but not
yet a Pantheon. Simplicity may be a mere restriction to one object or
to few objects; purity, nothing else but homogeneity in good or bad,
true or false; we shall not confound them with rationality, which may
subsist with multiplicity and mixture. Thus, the adoration of one
deified man, one great serpent, one huge stone, is by no means more
rational than the worship of numerous generations of gods, the
ingenious personification sof multiform nature, ever acknowledged as
the genuine offspring of the happy marriage between intellect and
imagination. In the absence of arts and riches, worship is rude and
destitute of showy accessories. Afterwards, the development of the
understanding widens the field of reasoning, the fertility of which
may be attested more by the shoot of weeds than by the growth of
fruits: error prevails over truth; the increase of manifold resources
facilitates and prompts superfetation of exterior religion. Besides,
the impressions, by which the first legislator attached his followers
to his doctrine, are effaced by time; the first traditions, obscured,
confused, and altered; faith is weakened, and an opening made for
change in belief, practice, and morals. A change, merely as such, is
considered as a corruption by the adherents of the old creed. Finally,
revolutions, interior and exterior, deteriorate or destroy religion
and civilisation.

These reflexions, with the explanation previously given as to the
various notions of which the religions in Asia were composed, will
clearly show that, in the course of ages, a reform of astrolatry,
pyrolatry, and idolatry, the branches of Sabæism and Mezdaism, became
desirable; and _Zardusht_, or _Zoroaster_, appeared.

In the notes placed at the bottom of the pages containing Mohsan
Fani’s account of Zoroaster,[98] will be found some of the principal
results of the investigations which have been made in Europe
respecting this legislator. The name of Zoroaster was applied by some
to the founder of Magism, or Sabæism; we know also, that he has been
identified with many other prophets under different names, among whom
is _Abraham_, called “the great Zardusht,” and _Hom_, of so extensive
a celebrity, that his name is mentioned by Strabo as predecessor of
Zoroaster. No wonder that the name of the latter occurs in more or
less remote times. According to the Dabistán, he was born in Rai, a
town in the province of Jebal, or Irak Ajem, the country of the
ancient Parthians, and appeared as a reformer of religion, under the
reign of _Gushtasp_, the fifth king of the Kayanian dynasty, by the
Occidental historians generally identified with _Darius Hystaspes_.
Although variously stated, this period is less subject to
chronological difficulties than are many others; for, as Eastern and
Western historians agree in the epoch of Alexander’s death (321 B.
C.), we may from this, as from a fixed point, remount upwards to
Gushtasp; we find, according to some Orientals, five reigns in 228
years,[99] and therefore that of the said king, beginning 549 years
before our era, whilst, according to the Occidentals, there are ten
reigns within 200 years, from Alexander’s conquest of Persia to Darius
Hystaspes, whose reign commences in 521 A. D. The discrepancy of
twenty-eight years is far from being unexampled, even in more known
periods, and may in this case be most easily and plausibly
adjusted.[100]

According to a wide-spread tradition, to which I shall have occasion
to return, Gushtasp was instructed by Brahmans; pursuant to the
Dabistán, his brother Jamasp was the pupil of the Indian
_Jangran-ghachah_ (Sankara acharya)[101]. This sage, as soon as he
heard of Gushtasp’s listening to Zoroaster, wrote an epistle to
dissuade the king from the adoption of the new creed; an interview
took place at Balkh between the Persian and Indian sages, and the
latter abandoned his religion upon hearing a _nosk_, or chapter of the
_Zand-Avesta_.[102] This is the name of the work attributed to
Zoroaster himself, a part of which was brought to Europe, in the year
1761, by Anquetil du Perron.

The author of the Dabistán mentions the Zand-Avesta, and declares the
_Mah-Zand_ to be a portion of the Desátir, and the Zand books in
general conformable to the Mahabadian code. The fifth Sassan, the
translator and commentator of the Desátir, in a passage
above-quoted,[103] joins this work to the Avesta, and is said in the
Dabistán to have made a translation of the code of Zardusht.

Great was the sensation caused among the learned of Europe at the
first appearance of the works attributed to Zoroaster, published in
French by Anquetil du Perron, in 1771. In a note of this volume[104]
will be found the names of the principal authors who declared
themselves for or against the authenticity of the Zoroastrian books.
Among those who combated it, sir William Jones was most conspicuous.
Seventy years have since elapsed, and a learned controversy may now be
considered as settled, nay, entirely forgotten, in the course of a
most eventful historical period. Nevertheless, the Desátir is so
closely connected with the Zand-Avesta, that so much having been said
of the one, the other should not be lightly discarded. The value and
importance of the Dabistán rest chiefly upon the support of the two
documents mentioned; on that account I may hope to be pardoned if I
here venture to repeat whatever facts and arguments appear to me to
have some bearing upon this work. But it was sir William Jones who
then roused the whole learned public into lively attention, and, I
dare presume, that the subject may by itself at all times excite
considerable interest.

I shall quote the very words of lord Teignmouth concerning the French
author before mentioned:[105] “Anquetil had published in three quarto
volumes an account of his travels in India, the life of Zoroaster, and
some supposed works of that philosopher. To this publication he
prefixed a Discourse, in which he treated the university of Oxford,
and some of its learned members and friends of Mr. Jones, with
ridicule and disrespect. From the perusal of his works, Mr. Jones was
little disposed to agree with Monsieur du Perron in the boasted
importance of his communication; he was disgusted with his vanity and
petulance, and particularly offended by his illiberal attack upon the
university, which he respected, and upon the persons whom he esteemed
and admired. The letter which he addressed to M. du Perron was
anonymous; it was written with great force, and expresses his
indignation and contempt with a degree of asperity which the judgment
of maturer years would have disapproved.”[106]

The letter alluded to contains most severe remarks, not only upon the
Zand-Avesta, but also upon Oriental studies in general: these are
blows so much more sensible to Orientalists, as they come from a
friendly and most revered hand. Such was the ardor of a susceptible
mind under the impression of having to vindicate the honor of his
friends, that he forgot for a moment the wreath which he had already
won in the career of Oriental literature; he had already composed his
commentary upon Asiatic poetry, and translated from the original
Persian the Life of Nadir-shah; he had then no presentiment of the
glory which he was destined to acquire by collecting, under the Indian
heaven, the lore of antique Asia. As his French letter, written in a
very spirited and brilliant style, can never be read without causing a
great impression, I shall be permitted to borrow from the writings of
this celebrated author himself some reflexions, which I think
necessary for placing in a right point of view Oriental studies in
general, and in particular the contents of the Dabistán, inasmuch as
these are in some parts founded upon the Zand-Avesta, and in other
points of a nature similar to that so much ridiculed in that ingenious
satire.

If it were true, that Anquetil was wrong “to affront death for
procuring us useless lights――if the writings of Zoroaster are a
collection of galimatia――if enlightened Europe had no need of his
Zand-Avesta, which he has translated to no purpose, and upon which he
uselessly spent eighteen years, a time which ought to have been
precious to him――――”[107] then any similar attempts which have been or
shall be made to procure, in Asia, and to publish ancient historical
documents, are equally ridiculous and blamable. It is certainly not
the founder of a new era in Oriental literature whom we hear in these
words. Nobody knew better than he that, in Asia, the cradle of
mankind, we must search for the most ancient documents to restore the
lost history of mankind; and if all endeavors were to prove vain and
useless, still the merit of having attempted the attainment of a most
laudable purpose would remain. It is not unimportant to fix the limits
which researches can reach, and beyond which nothing is to be gained;
men are benefitted and enriched at once by the saving of time and
trouble which preceding attempts teach; and by all the acquisitions
which better directions render possible in a new and more profitable
career. Should the bold navigators who strive to arrive at the pole
never attain their aim, still would their endeavors be worthy of
praise; the smallest fragment of a rock, the slightest shoot of a
plant, plucked off in the desert of eternal ice, in latitude
eighty-eight, would at home be regarded with lively interest, and
navigation have not a little gained in aid of other more fortunate
undertakings.

But, who can like to read “puerile details, disgusting descriptions,
barbarous words――Zoroaster could not have written such
nonsense――either he had no common sense, or he wrote not the book
which Anquetil attributed to him.”[108]

As much has been and may be said of the books attributed to other
Asiatic legislators, who were nevertheless revered as sacred during
many ages by numerous nations. Until we properly understand the
ignorance and habitual ideas of Asiatics, we shall always remain
ignorant of what is proverbially called _the wisdom of the East_. To
appreciate the just value of the ancient codes of laws, we ought to
represent to ourselves the primitive children of the earth, as
Prometheus describes them:

  “They saw, indeed, they heard; but what avail’d
   Or sight, or sense of hearing, all things rolling,
   Like the unreal imagery of dreams,
   In wild confusion mix’d! The lightsome wall
   Of finer masonry, the rafter’d roof
   They knew not; but, like ants still buried, delved
   Deep in the earth, and scoop’d their sunless caves.
   Unmark’d the seasons chang’d, the biting winter,
   The flow’r-perfumed spring, the ripening summer,
   Fertile of fruits.”[109]

It will then be felt how important it was to break the savage under
the yoke of seemingly puerile practices and customs. In a state which
was not unaptly called “the infancy of man,” it was by no means absurd
to ensure health by dietetical prescriptions, cleanliness by
obligatory ablutions, and decency with convenience by a regulated
dress; the _koshti_, “the girdle,” of Zoroaster was then not so
unmeaning as it now appears to us. It was necessary to educate the
moral sense by appropriate images, and to occupy conveniently, by
fables, symbols, and mythical accounts, the first active faculty of
the soul, imagination. Although those men who, as legislators, were
elevated above their barbarous age, could in many points but partake
in the general imbecility and ignorance of an infant state of society,
they have nevertheless, among seemingly childish and absurd precepts,
promulgated most luminous truths, better than which none have hitherto
been known, even at the most advanced degree of civilisation. Any
information above the common understanding of the age is justly called
“a revelation,” and every nation has received some from their
prophets, by which we have all benefited.[110] We, the youngest sons
of science, ought to keep a grateful and reverential remembrance of
our elder brothers. Let it be a subject of regret that, by the
maintenance of ancient institutions much longer than was required for
their intended purpose, the intellectual growth of many Asiatic
nations was stopped; thus they now appear made for their laws, whilst
their laws were once made for them. After these and similar
reflexions, we shall view Zoroaster’s hundred gates, and the remains
of his twenty-one nosks, as venerable monuments of an antique
civilisation, which ought never to be profaned by derision.

Upon the Zand language, in which Zoroaster’s laws were written, I
refer to the great philologers of our days, who have examined
it――Rask,[111] Bopp, Burnouf, Lassen, and others: it is one of the
most important conquests made in archæology and philology, and this we
owe to Anquetil. When Jones[112] treated with such severity the
publication of this French author, he could not foresee that he should
one day call forth to notoriety the Dabistán, which rests in great
part upon the authority of the Desátir, and these very books to which
he refused all authenticity. Mohsan Fani, one hundred and twenty years
before Anquetil, derived his information probably from other copies of
Zoroaster’s works, and knew nothing of Western authors, yet his
statements agree with what the latter, before and after our era
related, and most particularly with what the French discoverer
published of that ancient philosopher. Can it be supposed that all
these men of different nations, whose statements have thus coincided
during the lapse of more than two thousand years, have “imposed upon
themselves, or been imposed upon by others concerning the pretended
laws of a pretended legislator?” Anquetil deserved a better name than
that of “a French adventurer, who translated the books ascribed to
Zoroaster, from the translation of a certain gypsy at Surat, and his
boldness in sending them abroad as genuine”[113] was not unsupported
by judgment. If there was some folly and foppery to deride in a young
man, who spoke of his _lilly-rosy cheeks and elegant figure_, there
was no “_imposture_” to detect, and too much acerbity shewn in
retorting thoughtless indiscretions, exaggerated into “_invectives_.”

Sir William Jones, when he published the strictures which his
antagonist, from pride or moderation, never answered, was but in his
twenty-fourth year and under the influence of youthful ardor. Eighteen
years after, in a discourse, addressed to the Asiatic Society of
Calcutta, in 1789, he spoke with more moderation of Anquetil as
“having had the merit of undertaking a voyage to India in his earliest
youth with no other view than to recover the writings of Zoroaster.”
The illustrious president of that Society was not in the position to
appreciate Anquetil’s whole character, and died too soon to become
acquainted with the brilliant reputation which the youthful voyager
acquired in his maturer years as a learned member of the French
Academy of Letters, both in his own country and abroad.[114]

The Dabistán informs us, that the Zand-books are of two kinds: the
one, perspicuous and without enigmatical forms of speech, is called
the _Mah-Zand_, “great Zand;” the second, abounding in enigmatic or
figurative language, is entitled _Kah-Zand_, “little Zand.” The first,
in most points speculative and practical, agrees with the Desátir; the
second is intended to prevent philosophy falling into the hands of the
ignorant, to whom an enigmatical veil is offered, whilst the sages
know the true purport of the pure doctrine. To king Gushtasp, his
brother Jamasp, his son Isfendiar, and to Bahman, the son of the
latter, were attributed the interpretations of Zoroaster’s religious
system, and many ingenious parables which, for their moral sense, may
be reckoned among the best specimens of this kind of popular
instruction.

This true statement, contained in the Dabistan,[115] corrects the
assertion of sir William Jones,[116] that Mohsan Fani affirms “the
work of Zartusht to “have been lost.” The learned Orientalist
evidently confounds the _Mah-zand_, which is said to be a portion of
the Desátir, with the work of Zartusht. The writer of the Dabistán
enumerates[117] the twenty-one _nosks_ or books, of which the Zand was
composed; he says:[117] “At present there are fourteen complete nosks,
possessed by the Dosturs of Karman; the other seven being incomplete,
as, through the wars and dissensions which prevailed in Iran some of
the nosks have disappeared, so that, notwithstanding the greatest
researches, the nosks have come into their hands in a defective
state.” We find it expressly declared in the Dabistán, on the
authority[118] of the Dostur who wrote the volume of the _Sad dur_,
“the hundred gates,” that “the excellent faith has been received from
the prophet Zartusht.” In a particular section, intitled _Enumeration
of some advantages which arise from the enigmatical forms of the
precepts of Zartusht’s followers_, Mohsan not only adduces examples of
Zartushtian allegories, but subjoins his own interpretations of them;
yet he never _affirms_, nor even insinuates “the place of Zoroaster’s
lost works to have been supplied by a recent compilation.” Nor can we
assent to the view, which sir W. Jones takes of the modern literature
of the Mobeds, “for whom,” he says,[119] “as they continued to profess
among themselves the religion of their forefathers, it became
expedient to supply the last or mutilated works of their legislator by
new compositions, partly from their imperfect recollection, and partly
from such moral and religious knowledge as they gleaned, most probably
among the Christians with whom they had an intercourse.”

To settle our judgment upon this subject, we ought to recollect, that
languages and precepts may be transmitted from generation to
generation by oral instruction, which indeed was once the only
possible mode during a long period of time. It was then that memory
was so much stronger, as, destitute of all artificial assistance, it
depended solely upon itself. We bought the advantage of writing by
resigning somewhat of memorial energy; this was the evil, which,
according to Plato, Thamus, the Egyptian king, predicted to Theut, the
inventor of writing. However this may be, it will appear founded upon
reason and history, that religious creeds, which had once been the
property of nations, are not easily eradicated by any force, or
forgotten under any circumstances; they become living streams of ideas
and sentiments, which run uninterruptedly through the ever-renewed
races of man, even when these separate from a parent stock. Hence we
find, in countries and among nations the most remote from each other,
so many notions and customs, the origin of which is lost in the night
of time. Shall I mention the Jews, who, throughout the whole world,
repeat to-day the same words which they learned more than thirty-three
centuries ago? With regard to the Guebres――sir W. Jones might have
safely granted a little more confidence to his friend Bahman, his
Persian reader, who always named with reverence Zartusht, whose
religion he professed, in common with many so called Guebres. For
these it was not necessary “to preserve Zoroastrian books, in sheets
of lead or copper, at the bottom of wells near Yezd:”[120] this fact,
which Bahman used to assert, shows the particular care which had once
been taken to guard these sacred documents, the veneration for which
most naturally prevented any falsification of their known contents.

We are confirmed, by the author of the Dabistán, that Zoroaster did
not change the fundamentals of the ancient religion; only the dualism
of the principles, good and bad, not existing, as I have remarked[121]
in the Mahabadian religion, was either then first introduced, or only
further developed; besides, we see the cycle of 12,000 years fixed,
and divided into four periods of 3000 years each; we hear the promise
of a Saviour to restore the empire of God promulgated, and the
destruction of the world by fire announced: this is at the same time
the epoch of the general resurrection, which is one of the most
remarkable dogmas of the Zoroastrian religion.

Although this be not destitute of religious observances, yet we find
scarce any painful austerity recommended. The twenty-fifth gate of
Zoroaster contains the remarkable precept: “Know that in thy faith
there is no fasting except that of avoiding sin: in which sense thou
must fast the whole year.”[122] The ancient Mahabadian religion,
although adulterated before, during, and after Zoroaster’s life, seems
to have never lost its grave character and solemnity. In the
Zand-books known to us, no trace of temples, altars, or religious
symbols exist. Herodotus knew of none; the fire-places were upon a
desert place, or upon mountains; the fire upon the ground. Upon the
Persian monuments which time has spared, upon the walls of the
thousand-pillared palace of Isfahan, and upon those of the Royal tombs
we see no idols, but priests and kings, performing the sacrifice of
fire before their _fervers_, “ideals of virtue and sanctity,” and
other actions rather of a political than religious character. The
pyræa, round and concave, represented the vault of heaven. Nevertheles
other accounts permit us to believe, that, by association with other
nations; most likely by the introduction of sculpture, architecture,
and painting; and, as the Dabistán expressly says, by the use of
symbolical language: a superstitious worship of sacred places and
symbolic images gained a great ascendancy.

This religion prevailed during the times of the Kayanian kings from
Gushtasp to Dara the Second, during more than two centuries. After the
conquest of Persia by Alexander, a political and religious revolution
took place in this country, and extended to Greece, where, according
to the commentary of the Desátir, the creed of the _Gushaspians_ was
introduced. This is declared to be a medium between the _Illuminated_
and the _Rationalists_, perhaps the same which the Dabistán calls the
faith of the _Beh-dinians_, “professors of the better religion.” So
much is avowed by Philo, Plinius, and others――and we have reason to
lay stress upon this avowal――that at one time the so called barbarians
were reckoned to be more wise and virtuous than the Greeks. During the
Ashkanian dynasty (from the third century B. C. to the end of the
second after our era), the people conformed to the _Kah-zand_, that
is, yielded to the superstition, which the figurative language was apt
to suggest. Ardeshir, the first Sassanian, in the beginning of the
third century A. D.; endeavored to re-establish the ancient religion;
but, after his reign of forty years, the Kah-zand took and kept the
ascendancy, until the Persian empire fell before the overwhelming
power of the Muhammedans. The Mah-zand was lost during the domination
of the intolerant invaders, Greeks, Arabs, and Turks; the Kah-zand
still remains in some of its parts, whilst many others were lost in
the successive disorders of the state.

The fifteenth and last section of the first chapter treats of
_Mazdak_, who lived in the fifth century of our era. We are informed
of the existence of a book, called _Desnak_, which the author of the
Dabistán saw, and which contains the doctrine of this reformer. This
was nothing else than the Zoroastrian system about the two principles,
_Yezed_, “God” or “light,” and _Ahriman_, “agent of evil” or
“darkness,” with a few peculiarities which did not destroy the
fundamental principles of the original religion. But, it was the
ethical part of his doctrine which at first caused a great revolution,
and at last the destruction of the teacher and his numerous disciples,
Mazdak bade all men to be partners in riches and women, just as they
are of fire, water, and grass; private property was not to exist; each
man to enjoy or to endure, in his turn, the good and bad lots of this
world. To this strange doctrine may be perhaps applied the saying of a
great bishop (Bossuet): that “every error is but an abuse of some
truth.” To prevent an excessive inequality of fortunes in society was
the object towards which celebrated ancient legislators tended, and
for which frequently wishes were expressed, reforms projected, and
politico-philosophical romances[123] composed by well-meaning and
respectable persons. It is therefore to a natural, but dangerous
propensity of the human mind, that we ought to refer Mazdak’s bold and
for some time too successful attempt, as well as all the doctrines of
the same tendency, which before and after him were and will henceforth
be proposed.

I have now terminated the general review of what the first chapter of
the Dabistán, and the first volume of the English translation contain,
concerning the most ancient dynasties, religions, and political
institutions of Persia.


     [97] See page 70.

     [98] See vol. I. p. 211 _et seq._

     [99] See sir John Malcolm’s History of Persia. Ferdusi
     counts 304 years from Alexander’s death to the beginning of
     Gushtasp’s reign; but he assigns to the latter 120, and 112
     to that of his successor _Bahman Arjer_, or _Ardishir diraz_
     (Artaxerxes longimanus). These two reigns might have
     comprised those of several others not mentioned by Ferdusi.

     [100] The duration of the whole Kayanian dynasty is stated
     by the Orientals (see vol. I. p. 31, note 1 of this work) to
     be 704 years in 10 reigns; according to Occidental
     historians, it is only 380 years in 18 reigns. The first
     statement is evidently erroneous as to the small number of
     kings, but it is not decided that it is equally so as to the
     duration of the whole dynasty. The error is more likely to
     be in the list of the kings than in the whole period of
     their reigns. May I be permitted to refer to my discussion
     upon the chronology of the _Rajatarangini_ (vol. II. p. 387)?

     [101] Sir William Jones says (Works, vol. III. p. 128): “It
     was he (Zoroaster)――not as Ammianus asserts, his protector,
     Gushtasp――who travelled in India, that he might receive
     information from the Brahmans in theology and ethics.” This
     is not to be found in the edition of Calcutta, nor in the
     manuscript of the Dabistán which D. Shea and myself have
     seen.

     [102] Mr. Eugène Burnouf, when he communicated to me his
     opinion upon the derivation of the word _Wasátir_ (see
     p. xxii), adverted incidentally to that of the term
     _Zand-Avesta_, interpreted sometimes “the _Zand_ and the
     _Usta_,” and said, that these words are found in perhaps a
     single passage of the books of Zoroaster, to wit, _huzanth
     vacha vaidhya cha_. These two words are applied to _mantras_
     (prayers), and seem to signify “which will give life,” or
     “which are salutary to towns and nations,” and “which are
     learned.” We recognise the Sanscrit _sujantu_ and _vidya_.

     [103] See page 66.

     [104] See vol. I. p. 223.

     [105] See Memoirs of the life, writings, and correspondence
     of sir W. Jones, in his Works, vol. I. p. 190, 8vo., ed.,
     1807.

     [106] See works of sir W. J. vol. X. p. 403 _et seq._

     [107] See Works of Sir W. J., vol. X. p. 403 _et seq._

     [108] See works of sir W. J. pp. 413. 432. 437.

     [109] De Potter’s Transl. of Æschylus, Prometheus chained.
     In the Greek origin. v. 447-456.

     [110] Voltaire, whose genius sir W. Jones knew how to
     appreciate, said: “Glorifions-nous de ce que les vérités les
     plus importantes sont devenues des lieux communs pour les
     Européens, mais ne nous en moquons pas, et sachons avoir
     quelque reconnaissance pour les anciens legislateurs qui
     nous les ont, les premiers, appris.”

     [111] See Transact. of the R. A. S. of Great Brit. and
     Irel., vol. III. part I. p. 524 _et seq._ _Remarks on the
     Zand language and the Zand-Avesta._ This able tract is
     chiefly a comment upon Erskine’s Memoir _On the sacred book
     and religion of the Parsis_, in the Transact. of the Lit.
     Soc. of Bombay, vol. II. p. 295.

     [112] Sir W. J. says (see his Works, vol. III. p. 116) that,
     according to his conviction, the dialect of the Guebrs,
     which they pretend to be that of Zertusht, of which Bahman,
     a Guebr and his Persian reader, gave him a variety of
     written specimens, is a late invention of their priests.
     What language does he mean? certainly not that of the
     Zand-Avesta, of which he speaks in particular, and states
     (_ibid._, p. 118) “the language of the Zand was at least a
     dialect of the Sanscrit, approaching, perhaps, as nearly to
     it as the Prácrit, or other popular idioms, which we know to
     have been spoken in India two thousand years ago.”

     [113] Sir W. J.’s Works, vol. V. pp. 414-415.

     [114] Anquetil composed a number of Memoirs, read to the
     French Institut and preserved in their printed records. He
     published, in 1771, three quarto volumes upon his voyages
     to, in, and from India, and the Works of Zoroaster; in 1798,
     _L’Inde en rapport avec l’Europe; in 1799, La Legislation
     orientale, ou le despotisme considéré dans la Turquie, la
     Perse et l’Indostane_. An epistle which he placed before his
     Latin translation of _Dara Shuko’s Persian Upanishad_, and
     addressed to the Brahmans of India, contained, as it were,
     his religious and political testament. He declares his
     nourishment to have been reduced, like that of an abstemious
     ascetic, living, even in winter, without fire; and sleeping
     in a bed without feathers or sheets. His juvenile boast of
     “personal beauty” was expiated by total neglect of his body,
     left “with linen unchanged and unwashed;” his aspirations to
     “a vast extent of learning” had subsided into patient and
     most persevering studies. But, disdaining to accept gifts
     and pensions, even from government, he preserved his
     absolute liberty, and blessed his poverty, “as the salvation
     of his soul and body, the rampart of morality and of
     religion; a friend of all men; victorious over the
     allurements of the world” he tended towards the Supreme
     Being. Well may virtues so rare efface other human failings
     of Anquetil du Perron. He died, in his seventy-fourth year,
     in 1805.――(See _Histoire et Mémoires de l’Institut royal de
     France. Classe d’Histoire et de Littérature anciennes_, tome
     III. 1818.)

     [115] See Transl., vol. I. pp. 351-353.

     [116] Works, vol. III. p. 115.

     [117] Transl. vol. I. p. 275.

     [118] _Ibid._, p. 310.

     [119] _Loco cit._, p. 117.

     [120] Yezd, in central Persia, is the ancient Isatichæ of
     Ptolemy. It is celebrated on account of the fire-worship of
     _Yezdan_ (or Ormuzd, as light), there practised, and as the
     last asylum of the adherents to Zoroaster’s religion, who
     fled before the Muhammedans. From thence thefire-worshippers
     sought a refuge in India, and settled in Diu, Bombay, and in
     the higher valleys of the Indus and the Ganges.

     [121] See vol. I. p. 71.

     [122] See vol. I. p. 321.

     [123] For instance, the _Utopia_ of Thomas Moore, the
     _Oceana_ of Harrington, the _Leviathan_ of Hobbes, etc., etc.


§ IV.――THE RELIGION OF THE HINDUS.

The theatre upon which the author of the Dabistán begins history from
the remotest times, is Persia, without limitation of its extent,
probably including Chaldæa. From thence he passes to India, he says
little of any other country; nothing at all of Egypt. The delta of
this most fertile land, as an alluvial formation of the great river
Nile, was necessarily posterior to the existence of inland regions;
still its claims to antiquity are very high and not unsupported, to a
certain extent, by the best written testimonies and architectural
monuments. If I here refer in a cursory manner to its eras,[124] it is
to strengthen what was above remarked concerning the general belief of
the great age of the world. The ancient religion of Egypt, although
connected and conformable in many points with other Asiatic religions,
is never alluded to by the author of the Dabistán, probably because in
his time the Egyptians had lost even the memory of their ancient
history, which very little attracted the curiosity of their masters,
the Muhammedans, except perhaps by the medium of the Bible of the
Jews, often quoted in their Koran.[125]

I cannot here omit briefly noticing the various opinions of several
learned men concerning the comparative antiquity of the Magi, the
Egyptian priests, and the Hindu philosophers. Aristotle[126] believed
the Magi more ancient than the Egyptians; Diodorus of Sicily[127]
believed the Hindus to have never sent nor received colonies, and
invented every art and science; Lucian, Philostratus[128], and
Eusebius[129] granted anteriority in philosophy to the Hindus over the
Egyptians. In our times the learned abbé Mignot established in three
Memoirs[130], that the Hindus owed nothing to the Egyptians, and
traced the true communications of the former with several nations of
Asia and Europe. But sir W. Jones declared in 1785[131], as not
ill-grounded, the opinion that Ethiopia and Hindostan were peopled or
colonized by the same extraordinary race, or that the Ethiopians of
Meroe were the same people as the Hindus. His opinion was reproduced
under different forms by Hennel, Wilford, Forbes, Carwithen, among the
English, and adopted by L. Langles among the French. I need not dwell
upon this opinion, as the grounds upon which it rested are now
considered as entirely destroyed. Sir W. Jones himself seems to have
abandoned it in 1789,[132] as the Dabistán appeared to him to furnish
an unexceptionable evidence, that the Iranian monarchy must have been
the oldest in the world, although, he added, it will remain dubious to
which of the three stocks, Hindu, Arabian, or Tartar, the first kings
of Iran belonged; or whether they sprang from a fourth race, distinct
from any of the others; He further states, that no country but Persia
seems likely to have sent forth colonies to all the kingdoms of Asia,
and that the three races (Indians, Arabs, Tartars) migrated from Iran
as from their common country, “the true centre of population, of
knowledge, of languages, and of arts; which, instead of travelling
westward only, as it has been fancifully supposed, or eastward, as
might with equal reason have been asserted, were expanded in all
directions to all the regions of the world, in which the Hindu race
had settled under various denominations.”

The second chapter of the Dabistán describes, in twelve sections, the
religious systems and customs of the Hindus. It is a detailed account,
given by a Persian who, as traveller and resident in India during
about thirty years, had the best opportunities to collect right
information; he shows himself acquainted with the canonical books of
this nation; he quotes their Puránas, and other works less known.[133]

The Hindus are, among all nations, most particularly distinguished by
a decided turn for metaphysics, which even tinctured the radicals of
their language; they have labored more than others to solve, exhaust,
comprehend, what is insolvible, inexhaustible, incomprehensible. To
give a general notion of their metaphysical theology, I do not say to
render it intelligible, would require an extensive treatise. We will
now give a few characteristic and leading features of their systems as
indicated in the Dabistán.

Some of their theological philosophers made incredible efforts to
steer clear of anthropomorphism in their conceptions of the Divinity:
their Brahm, in the neuter gender, has no symbol, nor image, nor
temple; they generally profess the great principle of _emanation of
all existences from a common but unknown source_. God is the producer
of the beginning and end, exhibiting himself in the mirror of pure
space. Creation is held to have proceeded from pure space and time.
Other Hindu philosophers establish: 1. a primary, subtile, universal
substance, undergoing modification through its own energy. This they
call _Mula Prakritti_, “rudimental nature,” no production but the root
of all, involving, 2. _seven principles_, which are productions and
productive (that is, intellect, egotism, and five subtile elements);
from these seven proceed: 3. _sixteen productions_ (to wit, eleven
organs and five gross elements); to these just mentioned twenty-four
(namely, Nature, seven principles and sixteen productions); add, 4.
_the soul_, which is neither a production, nor productive, and you
have the _twenty-five physical and metaphysical categories_ of the
Sankhya philosophy.[134] This strikes us as a very specious methodical
arrangement of an abstruse matter, which is not thereby in any degree
rendered more intelligible.

We seem to understand something more when, as in the Vedenta
philosophy, it is said of the truly-existing Being (God):[135] “that
he has exhibited the “world and the heavens in the field of existence,
but has nothing like an odor of being, nor taken a color of reality;
and this manifestation is called _Máya_ that is, ‘the Magic of God,’
because the universe is his playful deceit, and he is the bestower of
imitative existence, himself the unity of reality. With this pure
substance, like an imitative actor, he passes every moment into
another form. He, manifesting his being and unity in three persons,
separate from each other, formed the universe. The connexion of the
spirits with the holy Being is like the connexion of the billows with
the ocean, or that of sparks with fire.” This is pure idealism; but
man will spontaneously break through the shadowy illusion, and grasp
at some reality; the trinity of the Hindus became _creation_,
_preservation__, and _destruction_ (or renovation), the history of
nature before their eyes.

I shall here remark, without attempting to explain, the striking
contrast in the religion of the same nation between the most subtile
metaphysic theology and the grossest idolatry. In the latter, the
symbolical representation prevails; it is known, that in its
immoderate use they have entirely abandoned the normal proportions of
the human form, and by the multiplication of members banished all
fitness and beauty. Their plastic and graphic typification of an
all-mighty, all-bestowing, and all-resuming God, with its three, four,
five heads, so many and more arms, is repulsive; in their poetry he
frightens us with innumerable mouths, eyes, breasts, arms, and legs,
grinding between his teeth the generations of men, who precipitate
themselves into his mouth like rivers into the ocean, or flies into
fire.[136]

The psychology of the Hindus is not less abstruse than the rest of
their metaphysics. We have already mentioned the soul among the
twenty-five categories as neither a production nor productive. The
Indian philosophers distinguish spirit and soul, that is, a rational
soul and a mere sensitive principle. The first is supposed enveloped
with a subtile, shadowy form of the most delicate material ether. Some
hold the soul to be incased in three sheaths, the intellectual, the
mental, and the organic or vital sheath.[137] According to different
views the vital spirit is _Máya_ herself, or an emanation of Máyá, in
any case the illusive manifestation of the universe.

This ingenuous conception seems to have taken deep and complete
possession of the Hindus; it dominates in their most subtile
abstractions, and embodies itself in a thousand forms to their vivid
and luxuriant imagination. The _Saktians_, a sect wedded to sensual
materialism, represent Máyá as a _Saktí_ or energy of Siva; she is
“the mother of the universe;” “non-entity finds no access to this
creator, the garment of perishableness does not sit right upon the
body of this fascinating empress; the dust of nothingness does not
move round the circle of her dominion; the real beings and the
accidental creatures of the nether world are equally enamoured and
intoxicated with desire before her.” Above the six circles, into which
the Hindus divide the human body, is “the window of life, and the
passage of the soul, which is the top and middle of the head, and in
that place is the _flower of the back_ of one thousand leaves: this is
the residence of the glorious divinity, that is, of the
world-deceiving queen, and in this beautiful site reposes her origin.
With the splendor of one hundred thousand world-illuminating suns, she
wears, at the time of rising, manifold odoriferous herbs and various
flowers upon her head, and around her neck: her resplendent body is
penetrated with perfumes of divers precious ingredients, such as musk,
safran, sandal, and amber, and bedecked with magnificent garments; in
this manner, she is to be represented.”[138] Thus we see the poetical
imagination of the Hindus, playing, as it were, with abstruseness,
materializing what is spiritual, and spiritualizing what is material.

Characteristic of and peculiar to the Hindus, are their conceptions
relative to the states of the embodied soul, which are chiefly three:
“_waking_, _dreaming_, and _profound sleep_.”[138] In these three
conditions the soul is imprisoned, but it may, by virtue and sanctity,
break the net of illusion, that is, acquire the consciousness of the
illusion which captivates it, and know that, even when awake, man is
dreaming: this is the triumph of his perfection.

Such, and other notions, in their development and application, form a
system of metaphysics, in which excess and abuse of refined
speculations lose themselves in obscurity, contradiction, and
absurdity.

Among the Indian sectaries appear the _Charvak_, who, rejecting the
popular religion, follow their own system of philosophic opinions.

Of _Buddha_ and the _Buddhists_, we are disappointed to find so little
in the Dabistán, except the important information that Vichnu, in
order to destroy the demons and evil genii, the agents of night,
assumed the avatár of Buddha when ten years only of the Dwaparyug
remained, that is, 3112 years before Christ. In the section on the
tenets held by the followers of Buddha, these religionists are called
_Jatis_ or _Yatis_, a great number of whom are corn-traders and get
their livelihood as servants; they are divided in several classes, and
do not believe the incarnations of the deity; as to the rest, they
have tenets and customs in common with other Indian sects, only
distinguishing themselves by a great aversion to Brahmans, and an
extreme care of not hurting animal life.

In the whole account, which the Dabistán gives of the various sects
and doctrines of the Hindus, we can but remark a frequent confusion of
Indian with Muhammedan notions and stories. Indeed, this work having
been written in India at a time when, after a sojourn of more than
seven centuries, about twenty millions of Muselmans appeared, as it
were, lost in the midst of one hundred millions of Hindus, we cannot
wonder that a mutual assimilation in opinions and customs took place
among individuals of both religions. A remarkable instance of it
presents itself in the person of _Kabir_, renowned in his time for
sanctity. After his death, both the Hindus and Muhammedans claimed his
corpse for funeral honors; monuments erected to him by each party
exist in our days, with the proverbial precept which originated from
this event:

  “Live so as to be claimed after death to be burnt by Hindus,
   and to be buried by Muslims.”

The Indian Yogis, Sanyásis, and Vairagis are perpetually confounded
with Muhammedan Durvishes, and Sufis, of whom hereafter.

We do not fail to meet with many traces of the ancient Persian
astrolatry and pyrolatry among the Indians. Mohsan mentions the
_Surya-makhan_ (_Sauras_), “worshippers of the sun,” and periphrases,
as addressed to that luminary, a Sanscrit prayer, which seems to be
one of those called _gayátri_, the holiest verses of the Vedas, kept
as mysterious by the Brahmans, and pronounced with the deepest sense
of concentrated devotion. In our days, more than one _gayátri_ has
been made known.[139] We cannot doubt that (according to the
poet)[140]――

  “That vast source of liquid light, the ethereal sun, which
   perpetually laves heaven with ever-renewed brightness,”

was, from the remotest times, the object of adoration in India. The
Dabistán mentions also the _Chandra-bakhtra_, “worshippers of the
moon.” Even in our days we find the veneration for the sun, the
planets, and fire, openly practised by the Hindus. The worshippers of
the latter elements called _Sagníkas_, are very numerous at
Benares;[141] they keep many _agni-hotras_, “burnt-offerings,”
continually blazing; they kindle, with two pieces of sacred wood,
called _sámi_, a fire, never extinguished during their lives, for the
performance of solemn sacrifices, their nuptial ceremonies, the
obsequies of departed ancestors, and their own funeral pile. There are
besides particular worshippers of the wind, water, earth, and the
three kingdoms of nature. The latter are called _Tripujas_,
“trinitarians.” We find also _Manushya-bhakta_, “worshippers of
mankind,” who recognise the being of God in man, and believe nothing
to be more perfect than mankind; like _Channing_, a famous American
preacher of our days. In short, the worship of personified nature, in
its utmost extent, is most evident in what we know of the Vedas, and
never ceased to be the general religion of the Hindus.

Not without interest will be read in the Dabistán the account of
_Nanak_,[142] the founder of the Sikh religion and domination. He is
there represented as having been, in a former age, _Janaka_, sovereign
of Mithila, and father of Sitá, the wife of Rama. The revolution
effected by Nanak, in the middle of the sixteenth century, proves that
the Hindus are not quite so unchangeable in religion and customs as is
generally believed. It is however to be remarked, that the Panj-ab,
the country of the Sikhs, was always considered by the Brahmans as the
seat of heterodoxy (probably Buddhism), and blamed for irregularity of
manners. Mohsan’s account will be found to add confirmation and a few
particulars to that given of Nanak, from the best sources――the
generals sir John Malcolm, and John Briggs.

What will appear most valuable in this work is the description of
various usages, some of which have never been described elsewhere. The
most ancient customs are brought to recollection. Thus, we find
stated, on the authority of Maha bharat, that widows could formerly
take other husbands――married women, with the consent of their
husbands, maintain intercourse with other men――several individuals, of
the same race and religion, espouse one wife among them;――in ancient
times there existed no such practice as appropriation of husband and
wife; every woman being allowed to cohabit with whomsoever she liked;
conjugal fidelity was only in later times made a duty. Much of what he
describes may be seen, even in our days, in India, where all the
degrees of civilisation which the Hindus ever attained, from the
lowest to the highest, occur here and there within a small compass of
country. So constant are they in good and bad! The whole of antiquity
is still living in India, and Herodotus stands confirmed in what
appeared most incredible in his narrative by the testimonies of Mohsan
Fáni, the reverend abbe Dubois,[143] Ward, and others. The Persian
author intersperses his account with anecdotes which characterise in
the most lively manner individuals, sects, and tribes. If now and then
we must avert our eyes from disgusting scenes of human degradation,
more frequently we admire man, even in his errors, for the power and
command of the mental over the physical part of his nature. The naked
Yogi, who inflicts the most cruel tortures upon himself, wants but a
better motive for being justly extolled as a hero of fortitude; death
appears to him an habitual companion, into whose arms he sinks without
fear; overpowered by malady, he buries himself alive.

We may be astonished at the number of unbelievers among the Hindus of
whom we read, and at the licentiousness of their opinions, expressed
with a strength which we should think carried to excess.[144] We
perceive also that, in contradiction to common belief, in the midst of
the seventeenth century, when the Dabistán was composed (1645 A. D.) a
numerous class of Indians assumed the name of Muselmans, but it must
be remarked, that the Hindus neither endeavor to make, nor easily
admit, proselytes: because their religion depends much less upon
creed, in which they are latitudinarians, than upon the fixed customs
of their castes, the character of which, being derived from birth,
cannot be transferred to strangers.[145] We shall see hereafter in
what manner Hindus and Muhammedans may be confounded with each other.

So much of India being known in our days, we have the facility of
trying the veracity and correctness of the Dabistán concerning this
country. Its account will be found, I dare say, rather incomplete in
the small compass in which so extensive a subject was inclosed, but
not inaccurate in the greatest part of its various statements. Sir W.
Jones[146] bears Mohsan Fani the testimony, “that his information
concerning the Hindus is wonderfully correct.” Let us compare the
account given by him with all that has been published about India by
the best instructed Europeans before the foundation of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal, and we shall regret that the Dabistán was brought
into notice so late. Whatever it be, the particular views of a
Persian, through a medium of education, religion, and custom, so
different from that through which we consider India, can but interest
us by their novelty, and by themselves add something to our
information about the character of Asiatics.


     [124] According to Manetho, a high-priest of Heliopolis, the
     Egyptians counted 53,525 years; they saw twice the sun set
     where he now rises――they saw (as well as the Chaldeans) the
     ecliptic perpendicular upon the equator before 39,710 years.
     Herodotus (lib. II) attributes to them, more moderately,
     15,882 historical years.

     [125] The history of Joseph, Pharaoh, Moses in Egypt, is
     often referred to by Muhammed and his followers; they state
     that the Egyptian king professed a religion unlike that
     mentioned by Greek authors, with whom the Bible also
     disagrees. In general, monotheism is adverse to the
     examination of polytheistical systems, and seldom accurate
     in the representation of their tenets.

     [126] Quoted by Diogenes Laertius, _Prœm._, p. 6.

     [127] Lib. II. p. 113. edit. Wossel.

     [128] Vita Apol. c. 6.

     [129] _Chron. lib. post._, n. 400.

     [130] _Mémoires de Littérature de l’Académie royale des
     Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres_, tome XXXI.

     [131] Works, vol. III. p. 41.

     [132] Ibid., pp. 111. 134.

     [133] Such is the Jog-Vasishta, mentioned (vol. II. pp. 28
     and 256) as a very ancient book. Sir W. Jones calls it one
     of the finest compositions on the philosophy of the Vedanta
     school; it contains the instructions of the great Vasishta
     to his pupil Rama. Lord Teignmouth says, that several
     Persian versions of this work exist, and quotes some
     passages of them, which, compared with the original
     Sanscrit, were found substantially accurate.

     [134] See the detailed table of it, vol. II. p. 122.

     [135] Vol. II. pp. 91-92.

     [136] See _Bhagavad-gita_, vv. 16. 23. 28. 29. Schlegel’s ed.

     [137] vol. II. p. 24.

     [138] See vol. II. pp. 150-151.

     [139] That which sir W. Jones quotes (see Works, vol. XIII.
     p. 367) is, perhaps, most to be depended upon.

     [140] Lucretius, V. v. 282:
           Largus item liquidi fons luminis, æthereus sol,
           Irrigat assiduè cœlum candore recenti.

     [141] Sir W. J., Works, vol. III. p. 127.

     [142] Vol. II. pp. 246-288.

     [143] See _Mœurs, Institutions et Cérémonies des Peuples de
     l’Inde; par M. l’abbé J. A. Dubois, ci-devant missionnaire
     dans le Meissour_. Paris, 1825. This work was first
     published in the English language, London, 1816. It had been
     translated from the author’s French manuscript, which lord
     William Bentinck, governor of Madras, purchased on the
     account of the East India Company, in 1807. This composition
     received the approbation of major Wilks, resident of
     Maissour, sir James Mackintosh, and William Erskine, Esq.;
     to which I am happy to add the most decisive judgment of the
     honorably-known Brahman, Ram Mohun Roy, whom I often heard
     say: “The European who best knew the Hindus, and gave the
     most faithful account of them, was the abbé Dubois.”

     [144] See vol. II. p. 201.

     [145] The celebrated Ram Mohun Roy had abandoned all the
     tenets, but remained as much as possible attached to the
     customs, of his Brahminical caste.

     [146] His Works, vol. IV. p. 16.


§ V.――RETROSPECT OF THE PERSIAN AND INDIAN RELIGIONS.

I have endeavored to trace the most remarkable features of Persian and
Indian religions from among those which are contained in the Dabistán.
In them we recognise resemblances, and, in more than one point, even
coincidences, which appear not merely taken from each other in the
course of time, but rather originally inwoven in the respective
institutions. This may be explained, partly by the general probability
that nations, passing through the same stages of civilisation, might
agree in several parts of religion, politics, and philosophy, and
chiefly by the fact, now generally admitted among the learned,[147]
that in very remote times, a union of all the Arian nations, among
whom the Persians and Indians are counted, existed in the common
regions of central Asia. Sir W. Jones[148] goes so far as to say: “We
cannot doubt that the book of Mahabad, or Manu, written in a celestial
dialect, means the Veda.” William von Schlegel most ingeniously
surmises,[149] “that the name of _Zand_ may be but a corruption of the
Sanscrit word _chhandas_, one of the most usual names of the Vedas.”
The fourteen Mahabadians are to him: “Nothing else but the fourteen
Manus, past and future, of the Brahmanical mythology.”[150] Thus we
should have to thank Mohsan Fani for a confirmation of the
above-stated historical fact; the _Mahabadians_ were nothing else but
_Mahabodhis_, in good Sanscrit, “great deified teachers;” he would
have placed them, as did lately Burnouf, Lassen, and Charles Ritter,
somewhere on the highlands of Iran, and he _invented_ nothing.

From the ante-historical dynasties descending to later times, let us
consider that, according to respectable traditions,[151] there existed
friendly and hostile relations between Iran and Persia in the time of
the Iranian king _Feridun_, 1729 years before our era: he reconducted
with an army a fugitive Indian prince, and rendered India tributary.
Two other invasions took place under the Persian monarch
_Manucheher_,[152] after which the Indians recovered their liberty.
Under Kai Kobad[153] flourished Rustum, who ruled, beside other
countries, Sejistan and Kabul, conquered the Panj-áb, and carried war
into the bosom of Arya varta. This country was also attacked by
Afrasiab, a Turan prince,[154] then possessor of Persia. Ferdusi’s
Shah-namah indicates expeditions of Feramurs, a son of Rustum, to
India, under the reign of Kai Khosrú. We arrive at the epoch of
Gushtasp, who ordered the Indus to be explored, and although he had
not, as Herodotus asserts,[155] conquered the Indians, he entertained
religious relations with that nation. After Alexander’s conquest of
Persia, Sassan, the son of Dara, retired to Hind, where, devoted to
the service of God, he died.[156] After a very obscure period of
Persian history, Ardeshir, directed by a dream, brought an offspring
of Sassan from Kabulistan to Istakhar. We cannot doubt that at all
times a communication was open between Iran and India, where Bahram
Gor married an Indian princess, and whence Nushirvan received a
celebrated book and the game of chess. In our seventh century, the
Muhammedan Arabians, driven by the spirit of conquest, turned their
arms towards India, but stopped on the borders of the Indus. It was
reserved to Muhammedan Moghuls, mixed with Persians, to establish in
the midst of India an empire which, after eight hundred years,
disjoined by various disorders, fell into the hands of the English.

This rapid sketch is perhaps sufficient to explain any mixture,
fusion, and resemblance of Persian and Indian doctrines and
institutions, if even we were not disposed to seek their fountain-head
in the sacred gloom of the remotest antiquity. Whatever it be, in any
case, it will no more be said, that the Dabistán  was written “with
the intention to claim for Persia the pre-eminence over India,
concerning the antiquity of religious revelations.”[157] In fact,
Mohsan Fani never explicitly alludes to a comparative antiquity
between the Persians and Indians, and implicitly acknowledges the
anteriority of the Indian religion over the Zoroastrian, in a part of
Persia at least, by relating that Gushtasp was converted from the
former to the latter by Zardusht, by whom also the Indian sage,
_Sankhara atcharya_, was vanquished.

After a more accurate examination, the resemblance between the said
religions will be found to exist certainly in particular principles
and tenets, but not at all in the general character or the spirit of
these religious systems. Nothing can be more dissimilar than the
austerity of Mezdaism and the luxuriancy of Hinduism in the
development of their respective dogmas, and particularly in their
worship, as was already observed.[158] We cannot however deny, that
not a little of the similarity in the account of different religions
belongs to the author of the Dabistán, who most naturally confounded
the ideas of his own with those of more ancient times, and used
expressions proper to his particular creed when speaking of that of
others. Thus he employs very often the term _angels_ for that of
divinities, and carries the mania of allegorising, so peculiar to the
later Muhammedan Súfis, into his description of the Indian mythology.
This sort of substitution, or these anachronisms of expression, are to
be remarked in the narrative of other authors, praised for general
correctness and veracity; I can here so much the more readily call to
mind similar inaccuracies in the accounts which Greek historians, and
in particular the philosophic Xenophon, gave of Persia, as I may add,
that in many points they agree with our Mohsan Fani.


     [147] See above, p. 76.

     [148] His Works, vol. IV. p. 105.

     [149] _Loco cit._, p. 69.

     [150] _Ibid._, p. 51. Among the Persians is even found
     _Behesht-i-Gang_, and _Gang-diz_, “the Paradise,” and “the
     castle of Ganga” (Hyde, p. 170).――Mr. Julius Mohl says
     (_Journal asiatique, mars_ 1841, p. 281): “Zohac is the
     representative of a Semitical dynasty, which in Persia took
     place of the _Indian_ dynasty, and overthrew the entirely
     _Brahmanical_ institutions of Jamshid.” We see the opinion
     that Hinduism once resided in Iran daily gaining ground.

     [151] The History of Hindostan, etc., by Alex. Dow, 1768, t.
     I. p. 12 _et seq._ The same, by J. Briggs, 1829. Introd.,
     ch. p. xiv. _et seq._

     [152] The Mandauces of Ctesias and of Moses of Chorene. He
     reigned, according to Ferdusi, B. C., from 1229-1109;
     according to our chronogers, from 730-715.

     [153] The Arphaxad of the Hebrews; the Dejoces of Herodotus;
     the Arsæus of Ctesias; he is placed B. C. 1075 by the
     Orientals; 696 years by the Occidentals.

     [154] All kings of Turan were called Afrasiáb.

     [155] Lib. IV.

     [156] See _The Desátir_, Engl. trans., p. 185.

     [157] See before, p. 75.

     [158] See page 102.


§ VI.――THE RELIGION OF THE TABITIAN (TIBETANS).

The third chapter of the Dabistán treats of the religion of the _Kera
Tabitán_ (Tibitans). The author says that he received his information
from a learned man of this sect by means of an interpreter, who did
not always satisfy his inquiries; the little he says appears to belong
to a class of Buddhistic Hinduism, and not to be destitute of truth.


§ VII.――THE RELIGION OF THE JEWS.

Then follows, in the fourth chapter, a short account of the religion
of the Yahuds or Jews. The author derived his notion from a Rabbin
converted to Muhammedism, and states nothing which was not really
professed by one of the Jewish sects, which, in his summary narration,
he does not distinguish. He gives a Persian translation of the first
five chapters, and a part of the sixth chapter of the Genesis from the
Hebrew original; a comparison of it with several other translations
known in Europe, proves its general accuracy; I thought it not
altother unimportant to point out the few variations which occur.


§ VIII.――THE RELIGION OF THE CHRISTIANS.

It is not without great interest that an European Christian will
peruse the fifth chapter, in which a Persian treats of the religion of
the _Tarsas_, that is, “Christians.” Mohsan Fani declares, that he saw
several learned Christians, such as the Padre _Francis_,[159] highly
esteemed by the Portuguese in Goa and in Surat. We can scarce doubt,
that it was from that father, or some other Roman Catholic missionary,
that he received his information; as he portrays particularly the
Roman Catholic doctrine, of which, in my opinion, he exhibits a more
faithful idea than that which a great number of Protestants entertain,
and are wont to express.

Every Christian may be satisfied with the picture of his religion,
which, although contracted in a small compass, is nevertheless
faithfully drawn by a foreign but impartial hand. Mohsan Fani, in
seventeen pages of our translation, states only a few circumstances of
the life of Jesus Christ, and a few dogmas relative to him as son of
God, and the second person of the holy Trinity. In the account of
seven sacraments, the eucharist is characterised in a manner which
will not fail to attract attention.[160] Scarce any rites or
ceremonies are mentioned; the greatest part of the statement relates
to the moral precepts of Christianity, which presents an advantageous
contrast with the many absurd and superstitious duties, with which
other religions are encumbered. Thus, we find confirmed in the
Dabistán that the Pentateuch of the Jews and the Gospel of the
Christians were both sufficiently familiar to Muhammedans who had any
pretension to learning.


     [159] Probably a Portuguese. From him Mohsan Fani might have
     received the information (see vol. II. p. 307) that an image
     of St. Veronica is preserved in a town of Spain, probably
     within the year 1641, before it was known in India that
     Portugal had freed itself from the domination of Spain,
     which event took place on the 1st December, 1640. On that
     account, the father spoke of the peninsular sovereign as
     still possessor of both kingdoms, and, instead of calling
     him _king of Spain_, styled him _king of Portugal_, from
     fond partiality for his native country. This remark was
     suggested to me by the learned viscount of Santarem.――(See
     vol. II. pp. 307. 308, note 1.)

     [160] See vol. II. p. 315. “The holiest of all the
     sacraments, as it presents the Lord Jesus under the form of
     bread, that it may become the power of the soul.” This
     definition was most likely not that which Mohsan Fani heard
     from father Francis, but the intelligent Persian might have
     understood that a strong and lively representation of an
     object is equivalent to its _real presence_, which latter
     words must have been those used, as orthodox, by a Roman
     Catholic priest.


§ IX.――THE RELIGION OF THE MUSELMANS.

The author of the Dabistán, after having treated of the most ancient
religions, passes to the comparatively modern religious system of
Arabia. The Arabians, although frequently attacked, were never
conquered by the Assyrians, Medians, Persians, or Romans; they
maintained their political independance, but could not avoid nor
resist the religious influence of nations with whom they were, during
ages, in various relations. The ancient history of Arabia is lost,
like that of many other nations; so much is known of their oldest
religion, that it resembled that of the Persians and Hindus: it was
the Magism or Sabæism; the stars were worshipped as idols from the
remotest times; we read of antediluvian idols. At the time, which we
now consider, that is the seventh century of our era, all the then
existing religions seemed to be far remote from their original
simplicity and purity;[161] idolatry was dominant, and Monotheism
preserved and positively professed only in Judaism and Christianity,
although likewise corrupted by various kinds of superstition.
Followers of both these religions were settled in Arabia, to which
region the Jews fled from the cruel destruction of their country by
the Romans; and the Christians, on account of the persecutions and
disorders which had arisen in the Eastern church.

We see by what facts, circumstances, and notions Muhammed was acted
upon, whilst nourishing his religious enthusiasm by solitary
contemplation in the cavern of mount Hara, to which he was wont to
retire for one month in every year. In his fortieth year, at the same
age at which Zoroaster began to teach 600 years before Christ
(according to some chronologers), Muhammed, as many years after the
Messiah, assumed the prophetic mission to reform the Arabians. He felt
the necessity of seizing some safe and essential dogmas in the chaos
of Magian, Zoroastrian, Jewish, and Christian notions; broke all the
figures of planets in the temple of Mecca, and declared the most
violent war against all plastic, graven, and painted idols; he left
undisturbed only the _black stone_, Saturn’s emblem before, and at the
time when the Jewish traditions claimed it for Abraham, and even
transported it to heaven. Muhammed preferred the latter to the more
ancient superstition; as to the rest, he abhorred the prevailing
idolatry of the Sabaians; and blamed the corruption of monotheism in
the Jews and Christians. He felt in himself the powerful spirit, and
undertook to re-establish the _Touhid_, “the unity and spiritualism of
God;” he preached with enthusiastic zeal the _Islam_, “devotedness und
resignation to God.”

But, in order to found and to expand the great and necessary truths,
he knew no other means, but to attach the believers to his own person,
and to accustom them to blind obedience to his dictates; he
proclaimed: “There is no God but God, and Muhammed is his prophet;” he
gave them the Koran, the only holy book, in which his precepts were as
many commands proclaimed under the penalty of eternal damnation. In
the Muhammedan all spontaneity is stifled; all desire, all attempt to
be self-convinced is interdicted; every thing becomes exterior, the
religious and civil Code but one.

Muhammed seemed not to know that religion cannot be the gift, as it is
not the property, of any single man; it belongs to mankind. Any
particular creed lives only by its inherent force, independently of
the founder, who retires and leaves nothing behind him but his name as
a mere distinction from that of another religion. Every individual
action is of little avail, if it does not proceed from the free and
pure impulse of the spirit, which must revive in all succeeding
generations. This is acknowledged in the Dabistán[162] by giving a
very philosophic explanation of the expression _prophetic seal_, or
“the last of prophets:” “That which is reared up by superior wisdom,
renders the prophet’s knowledge vain, and takes his color; that is to
say: if one hundred thousand prophets like himself realise in
themselves the person of superior wisdom, they are possessors of the
seal, the last prophets, because it is superior wisdom which is the
seal, and they know themselves to be _effaced_, and superior wisdom
existing.” Muhammed, although wise enough to connect himself with
other prophets, his predecessors, pretended however to close the
series, and to be the last of prophets, or “the seal of prophetism.”

Vain project! immediately after him violent contests arose,

  “And discord, with a thousand various mouths.”

Thirty years after his death his family was dispossessed of the
Khalifat. This passed to the Moaviyahs, who, residing in Damascus,
kept it during 90 years, and then ceded it to the Abbasides, who
established their seat at Baghdad. The impulse and development of the
Islam was overwhelming during the one hundred and twenty years after
the prophet’s death; the mighty spirit of conquest had arisen and
was――I shall not say irresistible――but certainly badly resisted by the
nations assailed. The Romans and Persians were then hard pressed
themselves; on the West by the Goths, on the East by the Huns:――whilst
the Greeks had sunk into general luxury and degeneracy; all feebly
sustained the attack of hardy and active men, whose native habit of
rapine and devastation was then exalted and sanctified by the name of
religion, and continually invigorated by rich, splendid, and easy
conquests. Thus, the khalifs, who were divided into two great lines,
the before-mentioned _Abbasides_ and the _Fatimites_, extended their
empire within 600 years after Muhammed, not only over the greatest
part of Asia, but also along the western shore of Africa, Egypt,
Spain, and Sicily; threatening the rest of Europe.

After the first labors, came rest, during which the genius of the
Arabs turned to persevering study, deep speculation, and noble
ambition: this was the scientific age of the Arabs, which began in the
middle of our eighth century, and was most conspicuous in the old
seats of learning, Babylonia, Syria, Egypt, Persia, and India. But in
the numerous schools rose violent schisms and bloody contests between
philosophy and religion. In the mean time the khalifs, by becoming
worldly sovereigns, had lost their sacred character, and were in
contradiction with the principle of their origin. The crusades of the
Christians, by reviving their martial energy, maintained for some time
the vacillating power of the Khalifs, but their vast and divided
empire, assailed by Pagan nations, first in the West in 1211, and
forty-seven years afterwards in the East, fell in 1258 of our era.
Muhammedism however revived in the barbarous and energetic conquerors,
Turks, Seljuks, Albanese, Kurds, Africans, who were drawn into its
circle; and science was again cultivated in Tunis, Bulgaria, and
India.

I thought necessary to draw this rapid historical sketch, because
within its outlines is contained the account of the Muhammedan sects
as given in the text of the Dabistán.

Mohsan Fani himself lived in the age of general decline of
Muhammedism. He exhibits in the sixth chapter the religion of his own
nation: we may expect that he will be true and accurate. He divides
the chapter into two sections: the first treats of the creed of the
Sonnites; the second, of that of the Shiâhs. These are the two
principal sects of the Muhammedans, but divided into a number of
others, exceeding that of seventy-three, which Muhammed himself has
announced, and consigned, all except one, to eternal damnation. This
one was that of the _sonnah_ “the traditional law,” or _Jamaât_, “the
assembly.” The Dabistán explains this religion in a manner which, to
Muhammedans, might appear sufficiently clear, in spite of digressions
and want of order in the arrangement of the matter; but an European
reader will desire more light than is afforded in the text, and feel
himself perplexed to understand the meaning of frequent technical
terms, and to connect the various notions disseminated in an unequal
narrative――now too diffuse, now too contracted. The following are the
principal features of the long account of Muhammedism contained in the
Dabistán.

Immediately after the promulgation of the Koran, which followed
Muhammed’s death, it became necessary to fix the meaning and to
determine the bearing of its text. There was one theme in which all
agreed: the grandeur, majesty, and beneficence of one supreme Being,
the Creator, ruler, and preserver of the world, which is the
effulgence of his power. This is expressed in the Koran in such a
strain of sublimity as may unite men of all religions in one feeling
of admiration. This excellence is an inheritance of the most ancient
Asiatic religion. God can but be always the object of boundless
adoration, but never that of human reasoning. Hence the Muhammedan
sects disagreed about the attributes of God.

The residence assigned, although inconsistently with pure
spiritualism, to the supreme Being was the ninth heaven; an eighth
sphere formed the intermediate story between the uppermost heaven and
seven other spheres, distributed among so many prophets, in the same
manner as, in the Desátir, the seven prophet kings of the Péshdadian
dynasty were joined to the seven planets which they, each one in
particular, venerated. Numberless angels, among whom four principal
chiefs, fill the universe, and serve, in a thousand different ways,
the supreme Lord of creation. We recognisee the notions of the ancient
Persian religion in this, and in the whole system of divine
government.

Another subject of violent and interminable dispute was God’s action
upon the nether world, principally upon mankind, or God’s universal
and eternal judgment, commonly called _predestination_. This subject
was greatly agitated by the _Matezalas_, _Kadarians_, _Jabarians_, and
others; they disputed

  “_Of providence, foreknowledge. will, and fate,
   Fix’d fate, free will, foreknowledge absolute,
   And found no end, in wand’ring mazes lost._”

Although this subject appears to be connected with the Zoroastrian
doctrine of the two principles, “good and bad,” yet it has never been
agitated with so much violence in so many particular ways by any
religionists as by the Muhammedans.

It has already been observed that, according to tradition, the ancient
Persian philosophy was carried in the reign of Alexander to Greece,
and from thence, after having been recast in the mould of Greek
genius, returned in translations to its original country. We find it
expressly stated in the Dabistán, that Plato and Aristotle were
acknowledge as the founders of two principal schools of Muhammedan
philosophers, to wit, those of the _Hukma ashrákín_, “Platonists,” and
the _Hukma masháyín_, “Aristotelian, or Peripatetics.” To these add
the Súfí’s _matsherâin_, “orthodox Sufis,” who took care not to
maintain any thing contrary to revelation, and exerted all their
sagacity to reconcile passages of the Koran with sound philosophy.
This was the particular profession of the _Matkalmin_, “scholastics.”
These cede to no other philosophers the palm of mastering subtilties
and acute distinctions. They had originally no other object but that
of defending their creed against the heterodox philosophers. But they
went further, and attacked the Peripatetics themselves with the
intention to substitute another philosophy for theirs. It may be here
sufficient to call to mind the works of three most celebrated men,
_Alfarabi_, _Ibn Sina_ (Avisenna), and _Ghazali_, whose works are
reckoned to be the best specimens of Arabian and Muhammedan
philosophy.[163] They contain three essential parts of orthodox
dogmatism: 1. _ontology_, _physiology_, and _psychology_; these
together are called “the science of possible things;” 2. _theology_,
that is, the discussion upon the existence, essence, and the
attributes of God; as well as his relations with the world and man in
particular; 3. _the science of prophetism_, or “revealed theology.”
All these subjects are touched upon in the Dabistán, but in a very
desultory manner. I shall add, that the author puts in evidence a sect
called _Akhbárín_, or “dogmatic traditionists,” who participate
greatly in the doctrine of the Matkalmin, and in his opinion are the
most approvable of all religious philosophers.

The contest for the khalifat between the family of Ali, Muhammed’s
son-in-law, and the three first khalifs, as well as the families of
Moaviah and Abbas, a contest which began in the seventh century, and
appears not yet terminated in our days――this contest, so much more
violent as it was at once religious and political, occasioned the rise
of a great number of sects. Much is found about Ali in the Dabistán,
and even an article of the Koran,[164] published no where else
relative to this great Muselman, which his adversaries are said to
have suppressed. The adherents of Ali are called _Shiâhs_.

The Persians, after being conquered by the Arabs, were compelled to
adopt the Muhammedan religion, but they preserved a secret adherence
to Magism, their ancient national creed, they were therefore easily
disposed to join any sect, which was more or less contrary to the
standard creed of their conquerors, and bore some slight conformity,
or had the least connection with, their former religion. They became
Shiâhs.

Among these sectaries originated the particular office of _Imám_,
whose power partook of something of a mysterious nature: the visible
presence of an Imám was not required; he could, although concealed, be
acknowledged, direct and command his believers; his name was _Mahdi_,
“the director.” This opinion originated and was spread after the
sudden disappearance of the seventh Imám, called _Ismâil_. His
followers, the Ismâilahs, maintained that he was not dead; that he
lived concealed, and directed the faithful by messages, sent by him,
and brought by his deputies; that he would one day reappear, give the
victory to his adherents over all other sects, and unite the world in
one religion. More than one Mahdi was subsequently proclaimed in
different parts of Asia, Africa, and Europe――always expected, never
appearing――so that it became a proverbial expression among the Arabs
to denote tardiness: “_as slow as a Mahdi_.” We recognize in this an
ancient idea of Zoroaster: he too was to reappear in his sons at the
end of 12,000 years; rather late,――but mankind never tire of hope and
expectation.

A creed, like that of the _Ismâilahs_, because founded upon something
mysterious, vague, and spiritual, was likely to branch out in most
extraordinary conceptions and practices. The Dabistán abounds with
curious details about them. Their doctrine bore the character of
duplicity: one part was manifest, the other concealed. Their manner of
making proselytes was not open; they acted in the dark. They first
induced the neophyte to doubt, then to despise his own creed, and at
last to exchange it for apparently more sublime truths, until, after
having sufficiently emboldened his reasoning faculty, they enabled him
to throw off every restraint of authority in religious matters. We see
in the Dabistán,[165] the degrees through which an Ismâilah was to
pass until he believed in no religion at all.

A most remarkable sect of the Ismâilahs was that of the _Almutians_,
so called from _Alamut_, a hill-fort in the Persian province of
_Ghilan_. This fort was the seat of _Hassan_, a self-created Imám, and
became the capital of an empire, perhaps unique in the history of the
world.[166] An Imám, called by Europeans “the old man of the
mountain,” without armies, or treasures, commanded the country around,
and terrified a great part of Asia by a band of devoted adherents,
whom he sent about to propagate his religion, and to execute his
commands, which were frequently the murder of his enemies. The
executioners were unknown save at the fatal moment of action; mighty
khalifs and sultans met with their murderers among their most intimate
servants, or the guardians of their doors, in the midst of crowded
public places or in the solitude of their secret bed-chambers. The
_Fedayis_, so were they called, devoted themselves not only to the
sacred service of their Imám, but hired their arm also for profane
service to foreign chiefs, such as the Christian crusaders. Among
Europeans, these Ismâilahs were known under the name of _Assassins_,
which well answered their infamous profession, but is better derived
from _Hashishah_[167], a sort of hemp, from which they extracted an
intoxicating beverage for their frequent use. During one hundred and
sixty years the Ismâilahs were the terror of the weak and the mighty,
until they fell in one promiscuous slaughter, with the khalif of
Islámism, under the swords of the ferocious invaders who, issuing from
the vast steppes of Tartary, fell upon the disordered empire of the
Muhammedans.

The Ismâilahs, and other sects connected with them, professed a great
attachment to an Imám, whose lineage was always traced up to Ali
through a series of intermediate descendants; but it belonged to the
_Ali-Ilahians_ to deify Ali himself, or to believe his having been an
incarnation of God.

Another sect, the _Ulviahs_, also devoted to Ali, maintain that he was
united with the sun, that he is now the sun, and having also been the
sun before, he was for some days only united to an elemental body.
Both these sects reject the Koran.

Here terminates the review of the second volume of the English
Dabistán.


     [161] See, in what sense, pp. 83-84.

     [162] See vol. III. pp. 202-203. See also _ibid._, p. 229
     and note 2.

     [163] See upon this subject a recent very ingenious work:
     _Essai sur les Écoles philosophiques chez les Arabes, et
     notamment sur la doctrine d’Algazzalí, par Auguste
     Schmölders, docteur en philosophie_, Paris, 1842. Dedicated
     to M. Reinaud, member of the Institute of France, and
     professor of Arabic.

     [164] See vol. II. p. 368.

     [165] Vol. II. pp. 404-407.

     [166] See vol. II. p. 433 _et seq._

     [167] See _Mémoires géographiques et historiques sur
     l’Égypte et sur quelques contrées voisines, par Étienne
     Quatremère_, vol. II. p. 504. 1811.


§ X.――THE RELIGION OF THE SADIKIAHS.

The third volume of this work begins with the seventh chapter, upon
the religion of the _Sadikiahs_. It is generally known that, during
the life of Muhammed, another prophet, called Musaylima, arose in the
country of Yamáma, and dared offer to himself in a letter to the
former as a partner of his sacred mission, but was treated as a liar.
He had however gained a great number of followers, at the head of whom
he was defeated and himself slain in a bloody battle against Khaled, a
general of the first Khalif, the very same year as Muhammed’s death.
We find in the Dabistán, what appears less generally known, that
Musaylima’s sect, far from being entirely crushed after his fall,
existed under the name of _Sadikias_ in the seventeenth century of our
era, and conformed to a second _Faruk_, or Koran, to which they
attributed a divine origin, and a greater authority than to the
first.[168]

Another account, not frequently met with, is contained in the eighth
chapter of the Dabistán, concerning _Vahed Mahmud_, who appeared in
the beginning of our thirteenth century, and is by his adherents
placed above Muhammed and Ali. Among his tenets and opinions is to be
remarked that of an ascending refinement or perfection of elemental
matter, from the brute or mineral to that of a vegetable form; from
this to that of an animal body; and thence progressing to that of
Mahmud.[169] Further, the particular mode of transmigration of souls
by means of food into which men, after their death, are changed; such
food, _in which intelligence and action may reside_, becomes
continually the aliment and substance of new successive human beings.
We were not a little astonished to find these singular opinions
agreeing with the information, which Milton’s archangel Raphael
imparts to Adam, the father of mankind.[170]

  “O Adam, one Almighty is, from whom
   All things proceed, and up to him return,
   If not depraved from good, created all
   Such to perfection, one first matter all,
   Indued with various forms, various degrees
   Of substance, and in things that live, of life;
   But more refin’d, more spirituous, and pure,
   As nearer to him plac’d or nearer tending,
   Each in their several active spheres assign’d,
  _Till body up to spirit work_, in bounds
   Proportioned to each kind. So from the root
   Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves
   More aery, last the bright consummate flower
   Spirits odorous breathes: _flow’rs and their fruit,
   Man’s nourishment, by gradual scale sublim’d,
   To vital spirits aspire, to animal,
   To intellectual_; give both life and sense,
   Fancy and understanding; whence the soul
   Reason receives, and reason is her being,
   Discursive, or intuitive ―― ―― ――.”

This sort of hylozoism is more expanded in a particular system of
cosmogony of the same Vahed,[171] according to which the materials of
the world existed from the very beginning, which signifies from the
first appearance of _afrad_, “rudimental units.” We can never think
meanly of this opinion, when we find it coinciding with that of
_Leibnitz_ in our seventeenth century, contemporary of Mohsan Fani.
According to the celebrated German philosopher,[172] there exists
already an entirely organical preformation in the seeds of the bodies
which are born, and all souls had always pre-existed in some sort of
organized body, and shall after death remain united with an organic
whole; because in the order of nature souls are not likely to exist
entirely separated from any kind of body. In the eighteenth century
_Bonnet_, a great physiologist, maintained,[173] that all was
preformed from the beginning, nothing engendered; all organized bodies
were pre-existing in a very small compass in the germs, in which souls
may also pre-exist, these indestructible germs may sojourn in such or
such a body until the moment of its decomposition, then pass, without
the least alteration, into another body, from this into a third, and
so on; each of the germs incloses another imperishable germ, which
will be developed but in a future state of our planet, which is
destined to experience a new revolution.

We see here the very same ideas, without any mutual communication,
entertained in the East and the West, in ancient and modern times.

Vahed Mahmud combines his cosmogony with periods of 8000 years, eight
of which form a great cycle of 64,000 years, at the completion of
which the world is renovated. This sect is said to have been widely
spread in the world; in Persia the persecution of Shah Abbas forced
them to lie concealed.


     [168] Vol. III. p. 1-11.

     [169] The Druids, among the ancient Britons, believed the
     progressive ascent of the soul, beginning with the meanest
     insect, and arriving through various orders of existence at
     its human stage. The soul, according to its choice during
     terrestrial life, progressed, even after death, in good and
     happiness, or evil and misery; the virtuous could return to
     earth and become prophets among mankind: in which belief the
     ancient Britons agreed with the Indian Buddhists.

     [170] Paradise Lost, V. v. 470-488.

     [171] The Dabistán, vol. III. p. 17.

     [172] See his _Théodicée, édit. Amsterd. préface, pp._
     xxviii _et seq._

     [173] See _La Palingénésie philosophique, ou Idées sur
     l’État passé et sur l’État futur des Êtres vivans, par C.
     Bonnet, de diverses Académies, Amsterd._ 1769, vol. I. pp.
     170. 198. 201. 204, etc., etc.


§ XI.――THE RELIGION OF THE ROSHENIANS.

The ninth chapter of the Dabistán introduces to us _Mian Báyezid_,
who, born in the Panjáb, flourished in the middle of the sixteenth
century under the reign of Humayún, the Emperor of India. At first a
strict observer of Muhammedism, he abandoned afterwards the exterior
practices of this religion, and, devoting his mind to contemplation,
assumed with the character of a saint the title of a “master of
light;” his followers were called _Roshenians_, or “enlightened.” His
sayings, several of which are quoted in the Dabistán, express sound
reason, pure morality, and fervent piety. In the spirit of his nation
and time, and for self-defence, he took up arms against the Moghuls.
His history and that of his sons is carried to the middle of the
seventeenth century, the time of Mohsan Fani.

Muhammed was the permanent type of a prophet, in whom the religious
and political character were united. The first Khalifs were all
military chiefs and religious men; the Koran furnished the rules of
foreign and internal policy, the final decision of every tribunal, the
inciting exclamation to combat and carnage, and a prayer for every
occasion. The founders of sects were frequently warriors, or, what in
Asia is generally the same, highwaymen and plunderers of caravans;
such was the just mentioned Miyan Bayezid, and many others. As
possessors of empires, they preserved the austere habits of ascetics:
they carried a sabre and a rosary, counted their beads and gave order
for battle; emaciated by fasts, covered with a woollen mantle, sitting
upon the bare ground, they disposed of empires and received the homage
of millions of men.

The Mohammedans preserved their religion, as long as they were
militant: because all states of mental excitement are apt to support
each other. But, in solitary retirement, and in the precincts of
schools, the doctrine of Muhammed was put to the test of reason: now
began the struggle between religion and philosophy. Fearful to part at
once with early impressions and national feelings, attempts to
reconcile faith and reason were made; religious philosophers had
recourse to allegory, in order to rationalize strange and absurd
dogmas and practices; for the literal they substituted a mystical
sense; under arbitrary acceptations and interpretations, the
foundation of the doctrine itself disappeared, or was confounded with
some old dogma renewed, if not one entirely invented: in short, the
Muhammedan religion appeared to have survived itself; its presumed
period of one thousand years was believed to be completed under the
reign of Akbar.


§ XII.――THE RELIGION OF THE ILAHIAHS.

Akbar was the greatest among the Moghul emperors of India. He began in
his fourteenth year a reign environed by war and rebellion. After
having vanquished all his enemies and established peace and security
around him, he turned his attention to religion. He soon found it
right to grant unlimited toleration to all religions in his empire.
Called the “shade of God,” he took the resolution to realise in
himself the otherwise vain title bestowed by slavish flattery upon all
sovereigns of Asia, and to imitate, according to his faculties, him
who bestows the blessings of his merciful providence on all creatures
without distinction. This he declared to his fanatic son Jehangir, who
did not conceal his discontent about the building of an Hindu temple
in Benares: “Are not,” said Akbar, “five-sixths of all mankind either
Hindus or unbelievers? If I were actuated by motives similar to those
which thou ownest, what would remain to me but to destroy them all?”

The inquisitive emperor was acquainted with the religious history of
the Persian empire; he surrounded himself with men of all
religions――Muhammedans of all sects, Hindus, Jews, and Christians, as
well as with philosophers free from superstition; he liked to question
them all, and to encourage public polemical discussions in his
presence. The Sonnites and Shiâhs reviled reciprocally the chief
personages of their adherence, the three first khalifs and Ali;
Muhammed himself was not more spared than his companions and
successors. The errors of their doctrine, the vices of their
character, and the irregularities of their conduct were freely
exposed, severely blamed, and wittily ridiculed. If Muhammedism was
treated in such a manner, other religions could not claim more
indulgence. The dramatic form, which Mohsan Fani gives to the
religious controversies, is certainly curious; we can scarce suppose
his having known the dialogues of Lucian, nor is it in the least
probable that a late French author ever saw the Dabistán and took from
this book the idea of the twenty-first chapter of his celebrated work,
entitled “Problem of religious “contradictions.”[174] The object aimed
at by these three authors was the same; but their compositions differ
from each other as much as the genius and character of the Greeks,
French, and Persians, in whose language each of them respectively
wrote. In whatsoever point Mohsan Fani may yield to the Greco-Syrian,
or to the French author, he, certainly, I will venture to say, equals
them in force, boldness, and sincerity; and perhaps surpasses either
in pointed application of truth. His objections are not vague attempts
of witticism with the intention to ridicule: they are special and
serious, directed to real and patent falsehood or prejudice; he does
not fence with imaginary shadowy adversaries, but he strikes a present
and tangible foe; his style, never tainted by affectation, is plain
and blunt, such as becomes a reformer combating popular superstition.
The controversies, the scene of which is placed before the throne, or
rather tribunal, of Akbar, obtain the imperial sanction: Muhammedism
is condemned.

Indeed, the emperor abrogated several practices of that religion to
which he had been devoted in his first years; he confined the
cultivation of science, as taken from the Arabs, to astronomy,
geography, medicine, and philosophy, and wished to prevent the waste
of life in futile and useless studies. At last, in the month of
December, A. D. 1579, twenty-six years before his death, he
substituted for the common profession of the Muhammedans the new:
“_There is no God but God, and Akbar his khalif_ (or deputy).” He
received from a great number of Amirs and distinguished persons the
voluntary agreement and consent to four conditions, namely, the
sacrifice of property, life, reputation, and religion, by entering
into the new religious pact, called _Ilahi_, “divine.” Moreover, he
introduced in lieu of the former, a new era, to begin from the death
of his father Huinayún, that is from the year of the Hejira 963, (A.
D. 1555): it was to be called _Ilahi_; the months were regulated
according to the mode of Irán, and fourteen festivals established in
concordance with those of Zoroaster’s religion. It was to this ancient
Persian creed, that he gave the preference, having been instructed in
its sacred tenets and practices by a learned fire-worshipper who had
joined him; and from books which were sent to him from Persia and
Kirmán. He received the sacred fire, and committed it to the faithful
hands of _Abu’l fazil_, his confidential minister: the holy flames of
Zardusht blazed again upon the altars of _Aria_, and, after a
separation of many centuries, Persians and Indians were reunited in a
common worship.

As a proof of Akbar’s expansive mind, directed to all subjects which
may interest mankind, I shall mention his having sequestered a number
of children, before they could speak, from all communition with the
rest of society, in order to know whether they would form a language.
After fourteen years of seclusion, it was found that they were dumb:
“which made it evident,” says Mohsan Fani, “that language and letters
are not natural to man――that language is of a long date and the world
very ancient.”[175]

In the third section of the tenth chapter, the author treats of the
influences of the stars upon the nether world, a very ancient
superstition, common to most nations. Every master of fame is said to
have worshipped particularly one of the stars; Akbar also received
divine commands with regard to them. We find, in a digression of this
section, curious historical details respecting the person of Jangis
khan, his adoration of the celestial bodies, epilepsy, and singular
superstition of combs. The great conqueror addressed to his sons the
most earnest admonitions to remain faithful to the religion of the
stars, to which their fortune was attached; but fifty-three years
after his death one of his successors and a great part of his nation
embraced Muhammedism.

The fourth section of the tenth chapter contains important information
upon the administration of India. Akbar was the first of the Moghul
emperors who considered India as his native country, and directed his
best efforts to the amelioration of its condition. Exalted to the
highest rank, not only by his birth, but also by his personal
acquirements; assisted, besides, by a train of devoted and enlightened
servants, he could promise himself duration of the new religion, which
he had fondly labored to found. In vain: it disappeared with him.
Private persons, camel-drivers, and robbers, emerging from obscurity,
such as Muhammed, and others before and after that Arabian leader,
effected more than an emperor, with every possible advantage united in
and around his person! Human intellect was perhaps then satiated with
religion; its measure was full: it could not receive any more. In
fact, after Muhammed a number of sects, but no new religion, arose: in
this sense he may, with some appearance of truth, be called the last
of prophets, or the _Khátim_, “the seal of prophetism.”

Akbar died in 1605 A. D., eight or ten years before the birth of the
author of the Dabistán. The latter passed his youth and manhood in
India, under the reigns of that emperor’s son, Jehangir, and
grand-son, Shah Jehan, and great-grandson Aurengzeb; and was in
personal connection with the latter’s brother, the religious
Darashukoh. Mohsan Fani had therefore good opportunities to be
informed of the events of their days. The religion of the _Ilahiahs_
is properly the last of which he treats; for what relates to the
religions of the philosophers and Súfis, the subjects of the two last
chapters, are rather selections of all creeds and opinions, than
particular religions. It will be remembered that sir W. Jones supposed
these two last chapters not to have been written by the author of the
rest of the Dabistán, which I dare neither affirm nor deny.[176]


     [174] _Les Ruines, ou Méditations sur les Révolutions des
     Empires, par M. Volney, député à l’Assemblée nationale de_
     1789, _Paris_, 1791.

     [175] Thus, our author coincides with lord Monboddo, who
     showed that language is the slow product of necessity among
     men linked in society. See his work _Of the Origin and
     Progress of Language_, with the motto of Horace:

         “Mutum ac turpe pecus ―― ―― ―― ――
          Donec Verba quibus voces sensusque notarent
          Nominaque invenere.”

     [176] See note, p. 6, n. 2.


§ XIII.――THE RELIGION OF THE PHILOSOPHERS.

In the eleventh chapter, entitled “Of the religion of the Wise,” we
find it repeated that Philosophers were divided into two great
classes: “the Eastern and the Western.” The first are the
_Hushangians_, teachers of the Greeks until the time of Plato and
Aristotle; it is believed that their philosophy, modified and refined,
returned from Greece to Asia, and was received by the Muhammedan
scholars to be adapted to their own creed. Then took place a singular
mixture and confusion of Siderism, Judaism, Christianity, Muhammedism,
and all sorts of philosophic opinions. The cosmology of the
Hushangians was preserved. Seven special prophets, Ismâil, Jesus,
Joseph, Enoch, Aaron, Moses, and Abraham, inhabit the seven
heavens,[177] to begin from that of the Moon, which is the lowest, and
rising upwards. If, in general, ten spheres are assumed,[178] they are
made the dwellings of so many intelligences. These ideas, so ancient,
as we have seen, were not disowned by eminent men in much later times.
The great Kepler, and after him Reaumur, believed that intelligences
or souls directed the movements of celestial bodies. Philosophers,
struck with the marvellous order of nature, were adverse to admitting
any mechanism――the very name of which frightened them; they therefore
called all occult powers souls or spirits. The same idea is adopted in
morality: whatever is praiseworthy is _angelic_, whatever blamable,
_satanic_. _From goodness arises an angel; from badness, a Satan_: so
said the prophet. Such simple and truth-like ideas were either
originally disguised under the vest of fiction; or existing traditions
of various origin were afterwards more or less ingeniously interpreted
as allegories. Thus, the ordinary names, expressions, tenets,
traditions, and practices of the Arabian prophet received symbolic,
allegoric, mystic interpretations. The _Kabah_ (the square temple of
Mecca), the holy centre of a living, circumambulating world, becomes
an emblem of the sun; its famous _black stone_, hollowed by the kisses
of the pious, represents Venus, the bright star on the borders of
heaven; _paradise_, its milk, honey, wine, _Tuba_ (tree of beatitude),
_Hur_ and _Kasur_ (nymphs and palaces) allude to intellectual
delights; _hell_, its _Zakum_ (tree of nature), and torments, are
explained as unavoidable consequences of depravity. Such
interpretations of the Muhammedans seem often to be like their bridge
_Sirat_, which connects heaven and hell, _sharp as a razor and thin as
a hair_. _Transmigration_, or rather reproduction, is admitted,
although not easily reconciled with the resurrection of the same body.
_The blasts of the trumpet_, and the whole scene of the resurrection
lose their materialism in a sort of rational allegory. _The other
world_ is the destruction and renovation of nature at the completion
and renewal of great periods of time, one of which comprised 360,000
solar years. _Resurrection_ is “the wakening from the sleep of
heedlessness;” whenever an intellect attained that degree of
perfection, it has returned to its origin; it is restored to life;
this indubitably happens when nothing material exists: for, “where
there is no body, there is no death.”

After having treated in this way the great dogmas of religion, the
Muhammedan philosophers found it not more difficult to rationalise
every circumstance respecting their prophet, he who obeyed the voice
of an invisible speaker. Did Muhammed really _split the moon_? Not in
the least――splitting is penetrating from the exterior into the
interior; the fissure of the moon typifies nothing else but the
renunciation of the external for the internal, which is “the superior
wisdom;” who possessed it more than the prophet (the peace of God be
with him!) he, the master of the _lunar sphere_? This, with the
Orientals, is the seat of human intelligence and perfection.[179] One
of their greatest scholars, or as they say “the learned of the world,”
known to us under the name of Avisenna, undertook to give a reasonable
account of Muhammed’s _ascent to heaven_, and framed a wonderful
romance of mystic spiritualism. He terminates by explaining how the
prophet, after his return from such a journey, could find his
bed-clothes still warm: “He had travelled with his mind, and when he
had completed his mental task, returned back to himself, and in less
than an eye’s twinkling recovered his former state; whoever knows,
understands why he went; and whoever knows not, looks in vain for an
explanation.”

We may, not without interest, observe the natural process of the human
mind in reviewing and reforming conceptions, the original form of
which is not seldom entirely obliterated. The author of the Dabistán
does more than satiate the most inquisitive reader with allegoric, now
and then very fanciful, interpretations, which he continues, not
without repetitions of the same subjects, through the subsequent
chapter, upon which I am about to touch. Mohsan Fani, here as
elsewhere, fails not to adduce several philosophers of more ancient as
well as of his own times. Among the latter is _Hakim Kamran_, whose
free and sound opinions, about the origin of societies and the
prophets regulating them, will be read with some interest; as will
also the account of the books which Kamran read and explained, whence
the state of literature of those times may be inferred.


     [177] See (vol. I. p. 293, note 1) the seven heavens under
     particular names, as given in the Viraf-namah, and the
     explanation of them. The seven prophets above-named are
     somewhat differently distributed by other authorities. See
     the notes to Avisenna’s explanation of Muhammed’s ascent to
     heaven (vol. III. pp. 186. 189). I shall subjoin the
     distribution of the seven prophet-kings, according to the
     Desátir, and that of seven Jewish and Christian prophets,
     according to the notes just referred to:

     PLANETS: ACCORDING TO                 ACCORDING TO
              THE DESATIR.            MUHAMMEDAN AUTHORITIES.

     Saturn, Inhabited by Gilshaw.     Inhabited by Abraham.
     Jupiter,  ――         Siamok.         ――        Moses.
     Mars,     ――         Hushang.        ――        Aaron.
     The Sun,  ――         Tahmuras.       ――        Idris.
     Venus,    ――         Jemshid.        ――        Joseph.
     Mercury,  ――         Feridun.        ――        Jesus, St. John.
     The Moon, ――         Minocheher.     ――        Adam.

     [178] See the Cosmology of the Desátir, compared with that
     of the modern Orientals, vol. III. p. 143, note.

     [179] According to the Occidental fabulists (see Ariosto’s
     _Orlando Furioso_, canto XXXIV), the moon holds, in a strait
     valley between two mountains, all that mortals lose here
     below: fame, tears and sighs of lovers, lost time, futile
     designs, vain desires, ancient crowns, all instruments of
     deceit, treaties, and conspiracies, works of false coiners
     and knaves, the good sense of every body, is there bottled;
     all is there except folly, which remains below, and never
     quits the earth:

       _Sol la Pazzia non v’è poca, nè assai,
        Chè stà quaggiù, nè se ne parte mai._


§ XIV.――THE RELIGION OF THE SUFIS.

We arrive at the last chapter, “_Upon the Sufis_;” the most abstruse
of the twelve, but to which we are well enough prepared by the
contents of the former.

Súfism, according to the Dabistán, belongs to all religions; its
adherents are known, under different names among the Hindus, Persians,
and Arabians; it appears to be nothing else but the rationalism of any
sort of doctrine. It could never be the religion of a whole nation; it
remained confined to the precincts of schools and societies.

In the work before us we find it stated, that the belief of the pure
Súfis was the same as that of the Ashrakians (Platonists): we know
what the Muhammedans have made of it. According to the Imám Koshairi,
quoted by Jâmi,[180] the Muselmans, after Muhammed’s death,
distinguished the eminent men among them by no other title but that of
“the companions of God’s apostle.” These were, in the second
generation, called _Tábáyún_, “followers.” Afterwards the Islamites
were divided into divers classes; those among them who particularly
devoted themselves to the practice of religion, were named “servants
of God,” which name was, after the rise of numerous sects, claimed by
some from among all the different sectaries. It was then that the
followers of the orthodox doctrine, in order to preserve the purity of
their faith and the strength of their piety, assumed the name of
_Súfis_, which name became celebrated before the end of the second
century of the Hejira, that is, before the year 815 of our era. We may
believe one of the greatest scholars of Muhammedism, _Ghazáli_, who
ranged himself among the Súfis of his time towards the end of our
eleventh century, when he declares that in their society he found rest
in believing one God, the prophet, and the last judgment: this is the
faith of the _orthodox Súfis_.

The assumption of any particular name carries men, who so distinguish
and separate themselves from their fellows, much further than they
themselves at first intended, particularly when the distinction and
separation are founded upon vague and indeterminate notions of
metaphysics. Under the impression, that there are secrets upon which
their salvation depends, they will stretch reason and imagination to
penetrate them. The Súfis are divided, according to their own
phraseology,[181] into three classes: “_the attracted_, _the
travellers_,” and “_the attracted travellers_;” the last of whom
combine the qualities of the two former. I will class them here, with
respect to their doctrine and manners, into five orders.

1. The religious Súfis, in general, are occupied with something beyond
the limits of our natural consciousness; they exercise to the utmost
their inward organ or inner sense, and acquire a philosophic
imagination――

  “The vision and the faculty divine.”[182]

Such was the prophetic gift of Muhammed, and as long as they adhere to
his sayings, they are _the orthodox Súfis_, whom I have already
mentioned.

2. Another order endeavor to comprehend, to fix, and to explain the
attributes of God; the holy object sanctifies their efforts;
unattainable, it exalts their souls above themselves;
incomprehensibility yields to the sacred power of self-intuition;
mysterious darkness to celestial light; their intellect, no more
terrestrial, “knows its own sun and its own stars;”[183] by continual
mental excitement they produce in themselves (according to their own
phraseology) a state of intoxication; in the full enjoyment of their
liberty, they approach the Supreme Being, and finally fancy an
intimate union with their Creator. These are the _mystic Sufis_.

Man, to express his most fervent adoration of the Divinity, uses the
expressions by which he is wont to address the object of his most
tender affections; he has but the fire of earth to kindle in sacrifice
to heaven; and to elevate his soul to the Supreme Being, he makes
wings of the most lively sentiments which he ever experienced, and can
excite in himself. The intensity of inward feeling breaks loose in
outward demonstrations, gesture, song, and dance――

  “Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere
   Of planets, and of fix’d, in all her wheels
   Resembles nearest, mazes intricate,
   Eccentric, intervolv’d, yet regular,
   Then most, when most irregular they seem.”[184]

Such in the poet’s eye is the dance of angels, but less refined must
be that of mortals, and really one sort of it strangely contrasts with
the usually grave deportment of bearded ample-robed Muselmans, from
Muhammed, who gave the example, down to the Durvishes of our days,
who, with frantic howls and vehement whirling motions, by ludicrous
and unseemly exhibition, destroy the whole gravity of inward
intention. Mohsan Fani adduces some instances of dancing, and quotes
throughout his work verses of mystical poetry upon Divine love, in
glowing expressions belonging to profane passion. It is known how
equivocal in their meaning they appear in the works of Jelal eddin
Rumi, Sâdi, Hafiz, and others.[185]

3. It was not always vehement enthusiasm which was nourished in the
contemplation of one Supreme Being; mysticism, in Súfis of a milder
character, became _quietism: he to whom all things are one, who
draweth all things to one, and seeth all things in one, may enjoy
peace and rest of spirit_. I have quoted the words of an English
bishop, Jeremy Taylor, and might borrow similar passages from a more
ancient Christian bishop, Synesius,[186] for expressing a sort of
purely _spiritual pantheism_. But there is another, which seems not to
exclude materialism: the great cause from which the infinite series of
all material and spiritual existences originates, is enveloped, as it
were, with the vest of the universe; never known as to its essence,
but always felt in its manifestations; it is

  “All in all, and all in every part.”[187]

In short, God is all, and all is God. This appeared not more
incomprehensible, but less complicated than any other system to the
_pantheistical Súfis_.

4. After excessive efforts to transcend the limits of his nature, the
philosophic inquirer re-enters into himself, and coerces his futile
attempts by the precept: “Know thyself.” Having, as it were, recovered
himself, and feeling that every thing proceeds from the depth of his
mind, he sees himself in every thing; heaven and earth are his own;
“he demands from himself whatever he wishes;” for he is every thing;
he finds the God whom he sought in himself, in his own heart, and
says, “Who knows himself, knows God.” This is religious psychology,
the creed of the _egotist class of Súfis_.

It is a fact which appears incredible, but is too well attested for
the admission of a doubt, that Súfis believed themselves to be gods,
and adhered to their belief, amid torments, until death.[188] This
psychological fact may be explained by considering that, according to
Súfism, God is nothing else but an idea of the highest perfection;
_he_, says our author, _from whose sight both worlds vanished, who in
the steps of right faith arrived at the rank of perfect purity, from
truth to truth, became God_; that is, he became one with his own idea
of perfection, which cannot be disputed to him; his divinity is an
illusion, but nothing else to him is the world; it is all and nothing,
dependent upon his own creation and annihilation.

V. Transacting as it were directly with the Divine Being, the Súfis
throw off the shackles of the positive religion; pious rebels, they
neither fast nor make pilgrimages to the temple of Mecca, nay, they
forget their prayers; for with God there is no other but the soundless
language of the heart. From excess of religion they have no religion
at all. Thus is confirmed the trite saying that “extremes meet.” “_The
perfection of a man’s state_,” says Jami, “_and the utmost degree to
which saints may attain, is to be without an attribute, and without a
mark_.” The most fervent zeal sinks into the coldest indifference
about religion. The author of the Dabistán declares positively,[189]
that “whoever says that the Muselmans are above the Christians, does
not know the true Being.” But the whole creed of an _emancipated_
(this is the name I give to one belonging to the fifth order of Súfis)
uniting in himself the egotist, pantheistic, and mystical Súfi will be
found in the following verses of Jelal-eddin Rúmi, before mentioned:

     [190]“O Moslims! what is to be done? I do not know myself; I
     am neither Jew, nor Christian, nor Gueber, nor Moslim; I am
     not from the East nor from the West; nor from land nor sea;
     neither from the region of nature nor from that of heaven;
     not from Hind nor China; not from Bulgaria nor Irak, nor
     from the towns of Khorassan. I am neither water nor dust,
     wind nor fire; not from the highest nor deepest, neither
     self-existent nor created; I am not from the two worlds, no
     son of Adam, not from hell nor from heaven, nor paradise. He
     is the first, the last, the interior, the exterior; I know
     but him, Yahu! Yahu! Menhu! I looked up, and saw both worlds
     to be one; I see but one――I seek but one――I know but one. My
     station is without space, my mark without impression; it is
     not soul nor body; I am the soul of souls. If I had passed
     one single day without thee, I would repent to have lived
     one single hour. When one day the friend stretches out his
     hand to me in solitude, I tread the worlds under my feet,
     and open my hands. O Shams Tabrizi,[191] I am so intoxicated
     here that, except intoxication, no other remedy remains to
     me.”

We know, by the preceding, what the Súfi is not; we shall now learn
what he is.

     “O Moslims! I am intoxicated by love in the world. I am a
     believer――an unbeliever――a drunken monk; I am the Shaikhs
     Bayazid, Shubli, Juneid, Abu Hanifa, Shafei, Hanbeli; I the
     throne and tent of heaven, from the dust up to the Pleyads;
     I am whatever thou seest in separation and enjoyment; I am
     the distance of two bows-length[193] around the throne; I am
     the Gospel, the Psalter, the Koran; I am _Usa_ and
     _Lat_,[194] the cross, the _Bál_ and _Dagon_,[195] the
     Kâbah, and the place of sacrifice. The world is divided into
     seventy-and-two sects, but there is but one God; the
     believer in him am I; I am the lie, the truth, the good, the
     evil, the hard and the soft, science, solitude, virtue,
     faith, the deepest pit of hell, the greatest torment of
     flames, the highest paradise, Huri, Risvan,[196] am I. What
     is the intent of this speech? Say it, O Shams Tabrizi! The
     intended meaning is: I am the soul of the world.”

After having sounded human nature in its depth, and viewed it in its
various forms, the Muhammedan philosophers conceived a high idea of
man in general, and call him _insan kamil_, “the perfect man.” He is
the reunion of all the worlds, divine and naturaf, universal and
partial; he the book, the pure, sublime, and venerable pages of which
are not to be touched, nor can be comprehended, but by those who have
thrown off the dark veils of ignorance. His soul is to his body what
the universal soul is to the great world, which bears the name of “the
great man.”

Sir William Jones refers,[197] for a particular detail of Súfi
metaphysics and theology, to the Dabistán. These are given with a
particular phraseology, for which it is not easy to find corresponding
expressions in any European language; and which I have endeavored, to
the best of my power, to explain in my notes. A particular
signification is attached even to the most common terms, such as
state, station, time, duration, existence, non-existence, possibility,
presence, absence, testimony, sanctity, annihilation, etc., etc.
Besides, we find particular divisions and classifications: different
attributions and names of the Deity, the unity of which is to be
preserved in all; the division of spirits, prophetism, true and false
miracles, revelation, inspiration; four sorts of mankind, as many of
life and death; seven degrees of contemplative life, in each of which
degrees the Súfi sees a different color; four lights of God; four
sorts of manifestations, the sign of which is annihilation, called
“the science,” or “positive knowledge.” Further we meet with a
metempsychosis for the imperfect soul, and an _appearance_ for the
perfect; even with a geography of the invisible, the land of shades in
the towns of _Jabilkha_, _Jabilsa_, and _Barzah_, etc., etc.; and, in
addition, manifo I pinions of Asiatic philosophy.

Here should be pointed out how Muhammedan or other Súfis may be
confounded with the Hindu Yogis or Sanyásis, although in reality
distinguishable from each other. The Yajur veda, and other sacred
books of the latter inculcate the precept that a man ought to acquire
perfect indifference concerning the whole exterior world, and in all
places to lay aside the notion of diversity. This is what a Yogi or
Sanyasi endeavors to attain: he quits every thing, house, wife,
children, even his _caste_; the world has no more right upon him than
he upon the world. In this he agrees with the Súfi; but the latter
generally aspires to the divine gift of inspiration, prophetism,
mystical enthusiasm, whilst the common state of a Yogi is that of
complete impassiveness or torpor.

It is only towards the end of the Dabistán that Mohsan Fani mentions
particularly the _Sabeans_, whose religion was, from the very
beginning of the work, treated of under different names of the ancient
Persian religions, such as _Yezdanians_, Jamsaspians, etc., etc.


     [180] See _Journal des Savans, décembre 1821_, pp. 721, 722,
     _art. de Silvestre de Sacy_.

     [181] The _Sálik_, _Mejezub_, and _Mejezub Salik_. (See A
     Treatise on Sufism, or Muhammedan Mysticism, by lieutenant
     J. William Graham. In the Transact. of the Lit. Soc. of
     Bombay, vol. I. p. 99, 1811.

     [182] Wordsworth.

     [183] “―― ―― ―― Solemque suum, sua sidera norunt.”
                                         _Æneis_, c. VI. v. 641.

     [184] Milton’s Paradise Lost, V., v. 620-624.

     [185] The two first give their name to the mystic and moral
     age; from 1203 to 1300; the third to that of the highest
     splendor of Persian lyrical poetry and rhetoric, from 1300
     to 1397 of our era.――(See _Schöne Redekünste Persiens Von
     Joseph Von Hammer, Wien_, 1818.)

     [186] He was born in Cyrene, in Africa, towards the end of
     our fourth century, and died, about 430, bishop of
     Ptolemais.

     [187] Cowley.

     [188] See vol. III. p. 291 n. 1.

     [189] See vol. III. pp. 123 n. 4; 293 n.

     [190] I follow the German translation of Baron von Hammer,
     _loco cit._, p. 189.

     [191] Shams-eddin Tabrisi, whom Jelal-eddin names at the end
     of nearly all his lyric poems, is said to have been the son
     of Khuand Ala-eddin, chief of the Assassins (Ismâilahs). He
     gained a great celebrity as a Súfi and a saint. From Tabriz,
     from which town he took his surname, he came to Konia; there
     Jelal-eddin chose him for his spiritual guide, and remained
     attached to him all his life, which terminated A. D. 1262.
     Shams-eddin survived him. The tombs of the master and
     disciple, near each other in Konia, are even in our days
     objects of veneration to pious Muselmans.

     [192] _Ibid._, p. 191,

     [193] The distance to which Muhammed approached God in
     heaven.

     [194] Two Arabian idols, the Dusares and Allitta of
     Herodotus.

     [195] Syrian deities.

     [196] The guardian of paradise.

     [197] In his Treatise on the mystical poetry of the Persians
     and Hindus: vol. IV. of his Works, p. 232.


§ XV.――RECAPITULATION OF THE CONTENTS OF THE DABISTAN.

Thus I have indicated the principal contents of the Dabistán.
Considering the philosophic opinions touched upon, we may remark that
truth, although in different times and places variously colored,
veiled, sometimes mutilated, often running into falsehood, is
nevertheless widely diffused, inasmuch as it reappears in the
concurring declarations of the greatest thinkers of all times. Thus,
among the notions of the Asiatics, we find implied the sense of the
ἐντελέχεια (_entelechia_) of Aristotle, this untranslatable word,[198]
which however can but signify “some continued and perennial
motion,[199] activity, moving force, perfection, principle of
things”[200]――we find _time_ and _space_, the necessary substrata of
all our notions, as taught by the Kantians――the want of substantial
reality in the objects of senses, maintained by the sceptics in
general――the prototypes and ideas of the Pythagoreans and
Platonists――the necessary connections of all things of the Stoics――the
atomic doctrine of Moschus, Leucippus, Democritus, Empedocles,
etc.――the universality of sensation and life of the Hermetites――the
preformation and pre-existence of the soul, alleged by Synesius,
Leibnitz, and others――the successive transformation, transmigration,
gradual perfection of beings; the periodical renovation of the world
professed by many Greek schools――the palingenesis of Bonnet――the _one_
and the _all_ of Parmenides, Plotinus, Synesius, Spinoza, not to omit
the refined Egoismus of Fichte, etc., etc. I shall not proceed further
in the enumeration of opinions ascribed in the Dabistán to different
sects, and reproduced in the doctrine of celebrated ancient and modern
philosophers of Europe. Who will realize that criterion of true
philosophy indicated by the great Leibnitz, namely, that which would
at once collect and explain the fragments of truth scattered through
all, and apparently the most incongruous, systems?

This is perhaps the prize to be gained, not by one mortal, but by a
series of generations, in a laborious task, so often interrupted and
recommenced, but never abandoned. The struggle of the human mind is
without term, but not without aim. We see two principal movers of
human intellect――PHILOSOPHY and RELIGION. The one employs reason as a
sufficient power for the solution of a solvable problem, which
comprehends knowledge, morality, and civilisation. The other distrusts
reason, and relies upon a supernatural power for the revelation of a
secret, or for the word of an enigma, which relates to a destination
beyond the bounds of this world. The philosopher, self-confident, is
liable to error for various reasons; but always capable of correction
and improvement, in the only possible way, that of self-activity, the
virtuous exertions of his faculties towards attainable perfection in
his whole condition. The religionist is exposed to deception by his
gratuitous faith in superhuman guidance, and, if mistaken, is
precluded from regress and improvement by his essential virtue,
fidelity; that is, the pious surrender of his soul to a spiritual and
mystical sovereignty. The Dabistán shows us more religionists than
philosophers; it is the school of sects, or rather that of inveterate
superstition, with which, in spite of the correctives which human
nature affords to its errors, the general character of the Asiatics
remains stamped, from time immemorial to the present day.

Although the twelve chapters of the Dabistán bear the titles of as
many religions, the author says himself, at the end of his work, that
there are only _five_ great religions――those of the Hindus, Persians,
Jews, Nazareans, and Muselmans. He no where mentions the Egyptians nor
the Chinese, apparently because, in his times and long before, no
trace of the Egyptian religion existed, although it certainly had once
occupied a great circle of influence, and because the Chinese creed
was known to be Buddhism.

The five religions mentioned constitute indeed so many bases, upon
which the whole creed of mankind has been, and remains founded. They
comprise, in general, _polytheism_ and _monotheism_. In all times and
places, the religion of the “Enlightened” was distinguished from that
of the “Vulgar;” the first as interior, being the product of universal
reason, was every where nearly uniform; the second, as exterior, being
composed of particular and arbitrary rites and ceremonies, varied
according to the influence of the climate, and the character, history,
and civilisation of a people. But, in the course of time, no religion
remained entirely the same, either in principle or form. Polytheism,
by mere simplification, tended to monotheism; this itself, in its
awful incomprehensibility, was modified according as it originated, or
assumed its notions, from anthropomorphism, hylozoism, spiritualism,
or pantheism. Nor did any religion remain simple and pure, as
proceeding from only one principle; all religious ideas, elemental,
sidereal, allegorical, symbolical, mystical, philosophical, and others
were mixed, as well as all sorts of worship interwoven. It is now
impossible to range in chronological order their rise and transition
into different forms. Still the one or the other of these kinds
predominated: thus _physiolatry_, or “the adoration of personified
nature,” in India; _astrolatry_, or “the worship of stars,” in Arabia
and Iran; none of the religions entirely disclaimed _monotheism_,
which was positively and exclusively professed in Judaism,
Christianity, and Muhammedanism.

Magism and the three last-named religions were founded or modified by
holy personages, or prophets, that is, by individuals whose historical
existence in more or less remote times is positively fixed; Hinduism
alone acknowledges _Manu_ as an ideal or mythological person, whose
laws are however derived from Brahma himself. This may perhaps be
assumed as a proof of its remotest antiquity; and India, having been
less disturbed by invasions, and conquered in much later times by
foreign nations, preserved its institutes complete in their
originality. There is scarcely a tenet to be found in any other creed
which does not, at least in its germ, exist in the Hindu religion.

It is most remarkable that, although men revered as divine messengers
of religion have existed, still the works containing the heaven-sent
doctrine are, either not at all or not incontestably, ascribed to
them; and in any case devolved upon posterity in a more or less
corrupted and mutilated state; so as to entail for ever an
inexhaustible subject of dispute, a heavy task for belief, and severe
trial of faith. If the Vedas are the best preserved, it is to no
general purpose, inasmuch as they are the least known and most
obscure. These facts the author of the Dabistán has set in full light,
and says,[201] as it were to tranquillise mankind with regard to the
multifarious inheritance of their prophets: “The varieties and
multitudes of the rules of prophets proceed only from the plurality of
names; and as in names there is no mutual opposition or contradiction,
the superiority in rank among them is only the predominance of a name.
To this I subjoin another passage, although it occurs in connection
with another subject:[202] “The time of a prophet is a universal one,
having neither priority nor posteriority――neither morning nor
evening:” that is, if I understand these words: As the same sun ever
shines upon us, so shines the same wisdom of all times, incorruptible
in its divine source.

If we take a rapid comparative view of the principal features of the
five religions mentioned, we find _emanation of all beings,
intellectual and material, from one great source_, to be the
fundamental and characteristic dogma of Hinduism, established and
developed in the most explicit and positive manner. _The division of
supernatural beings in good and bad_ is adopted in the five religions,
but in Magism it is of a somewhat different origin: for Ahriman and
his host are not rebellious or fallen good genii; they are an original
creation. _A primitive innocence and posterior corruption_ is
generally believed; but by the Hindus as coming from riches and
abundance, by the other nations as caused by seduction of the bad
spirits. _The destruction of mankind by a deluge_ is no part of the
Persian creed; it occurs in the Indian as one of the past periodical
renovations of the world, which are to be followed by others, and is
also admitted by the Persians, whilst the Jews, Christians, and
Muhammedans believe a deluge not very ancient, as a punishment of
human depravity. _Incarnations of the Deity for the benefit of
mankind_, are believed only by Hindus and Christians; to the latter
belongs exclusively the dogma of _a propitiatory sacrifice. Human
souls, immaterial_, have pre-existence according to the Vedas and the
Zand-Avesta; in the first, as parts of the Divinity; in the latter, as
created in their _fervers_, or “pre-established ideals” at the
beginning of the world. _Transmigration_ is taught in the sacred books
of the Hindus and Persians. _The immortality of the soul, reserved to
future beatitude or damnation_, is maintained generally, less
positively, by the ancient Jews; the righteous are cheered by the
prospect of the same heaven, the wicked threatened by the same
punishments, which are held to be eternal by Christians and
Muhammedans; the Hindus and Persians place the future life in a long
series of purifications or _purgatories_, leading, howsoever late,
finally to heaven, to which, according to the first, the most perfect
only are admitted immediately after their terrestrial life, and are
not to be born again, except by their own choice. _The resurrection
with the same body, and the last judgment_, are among the most
essential tenets of the Magi, Christians, and Muhammedans; the other
world is vaguely represented among the ancient Hebrews. It is just to
attribute to the Persians exclusively one of the most beautiful
personifications that was ever imagined:[203] the soul of the deceased
meets at the bridge of eternity an apparition either of an attractive
or repulsive form; “Who art thou?” asks the uncertain spirit, and
hears the answer: “I am thy life.”

Although the variety and multitude of human conceptions may appear
boundless, yet they may perhaps be reduced to a few fundamental
principles. In general, there is one object common to all sorts of
religion: this is to detach man from gross sensual matters, and to
accustom him to hold converse with holy supernatural beings, guides to
salvation, _omnipresent_ witnesses of all his actions, remunerators of
good, punishers of bad deeds; the belief in such beings, one or more,
is in fact the most essential support of morality, which, being fixed
in each individual, insures the peace and happiness of all. In short,
the most important object of all religion is to ennoble, refine, and
sanctify man’s inmost thoughts and feelings, as well as his exterior
actions. No wonder, that the same virtues are recommended by all
religions.

But, if these virtues be the same as to names, there is a great
difference as to their practical application. Thus, the Hindus,
tending excessively to the extinction of sensual propensities, and a
contemplative life, destroy spontaneity, and produce apathy. The
Persians recommend more practical virtues. Both nations, however, as
well as the Jews and Muhammedans, are subject to a great number of
dietetical and ritual observances, which divert them from useful
activity, confine their practical sense, and render inert the innate
perfectibility, the most precious prerogative of mankind. Among all
the Asiatic nations, considered in this work, theocracy, that is, the
junction of the religious and civil laws, doubles the power of
despotism, and commands equally the spiritual and material, the
present and the future world. The Western Christians were in the
course of time fortunate enough to modify the _Asiatic_ morals, to
enlarge the circle of civilization, and to open to themselves a
boundless prospect of progressive knowledge, morality, and happiness.

Finally, there is one idea common as an adjunct to the five religions
of mankind. Common are their failings, common their sufferings, common
is also their consolation――hope. Always regretting a purity,
simplicity, and independence, supposed to have been lost in the past,
because not to be found any where in the present, and never exempt
from oppression, men look to the future, and listen gladly to the
promise of universal reform and restoration to one rule, which each
religionist says, will be his own, to be effected among the Hindus by
_Kalki_, an incarnation of Brahma[204], among the other nations by the
reappearance of their respective _prophet_, _Messiah_, _Mahdi_.

        “And then shall come,
  When the world’s dissolution shall be ripe,
  With glory and pow’r to judge both quick and dead,
  To judge th’ unfaithful dead, but to reward
  His faithful, and receive them into bliss,
  Whether in Heav’n or Earth, for then the Earth
  Shall all be Paradise.”[205]


     [198] Hermelaus Barbaro relates that, finding the
     interpretation of that word so difficult, he one night
     invoked the devil for assistance. The old scoffer did not
     fail to appear, but told him a word still more unintelligible
     than the Greek. Hermolaus at last brought forth the strange
     term _perfectihabia_, which, I think, nobody adopted.

     [199] Cicero circumscribes the word: _Quasi quandam
     continuatam motionem et perennem_ (_Tusc. Quæst._, I. 10).
     Budæus translates it _efficacia_.――(On this subject see
     _Thesaurus Græcæ linguæ ab Henr. Stephano constructus_, new
     edit., Paris, 1838.)

     [200] Leibnitz (Op. t. II. p. II. p. 53; t. III. p. 321),
     after having said, that to the material mass must be added
     some superior principle, which may be called _formal_,
     concludes: “This principle of things, whether we call it
     _entelechia_, or ‘force,’ is of no matter, provided we
     recollect that it can only be explained by the notion of
     force.”

     [201] Vol. III. p. 276.

     [202] _Ibid._, p. 289.

     [203] Vol. I. p. 286.

     [204] Vol. II. p. 24, and _Vishnu-purana_, transl. of
     Wilson, p. 484.

     [205] Milton’s Paradise Lost, XII. v. 458-464.




