CHAPTER IV.

EAR WAX AND ITS USES.

     Nature Makes Nothing in Vain--A Successful Experiment--A Question
     for Ages--The Position--Meaning of Life--Some Questions
     Asked--Condition in Certain Diseases Caused by Cold--Cerumen in
     Fluid State--Winter Kills Babies--Some Advice to Mothers--A Case in
     Point--Connection of the brain and Other Nerves in
     Digestion--Unaided Investigation.


NATURE MAKES NOTHING IN VAIN.

That nature makes nothing in vain is an established truth in the minds
of all persons whose observation has created in such persons a desire to
reason, and that being my faith for many years I asked myself to try and
get a reason of why nature had made and placed in a person's head so
much fine machinery just to make a little ear-wax. If nothing is made in
vain, what is that bitter stuff made for? It is always there, and more
being made all the time. I have read many authors or say so's about
ear-wax, and about the best the wise or the unwise have said is that it
would keep bugs and other insects out of our heads. I thought if that
was all that it was made for nature had done a great deal to shoo off
the bugs. The idea that it was made bitter and bad to eat just to make
bugs sick was weak philosophy, if nature never did any useless work or
made anything in vain. At this time I saw the doors all open and a good
chance for the loaded mind to unload and give us other uses for ear-wax
than bug food, and to lubricate the auditory nerves with dry wax. At
this time of my desire to know some positive use or object that nature
had in forming so much fine machinery and no use for its products when
made, but to pull out of the head with a hairpin, I reasoned about so,
that this dry hard wax was once in the gaseous or fluid state.


A SUCCESSFUL EXPERIMENT.

When I had about concluded to sit down with the common herd of doctors
and say that wax was wax, a fat boy of two summers was reported to me to
be dying with croup. I began to think more about the dry wax that is
always found in cases of croup, sore throat, tonsilitis, pneumonia, and
all diseases of the lungs, nose and head. On examination I found the
ear-wax dried up. So I put a few drops of glycerine, and after a
minute's time a few drops of warm water in the child's head, and kept a
wet rag corked into its ear frequently for twelve hours, and gave it
Osteopathic treatment, at the end of which time all signs of croup had
disappeared. I used the glycerine to soften the wax, which combining
with water formed a harmless soap better qualified for washing the ear,
and retaining the wax in solution than anything I have tried, for it is
my opinion that the ear wax should be kept in a fluid state. When in
that state the absorbent can more readily take it up and use it in the
economy of life in this condition. The same day two ladies came to my
house, sore in lungs, necks tied up, sore throats, fever and headache.
As an experiment, in addition to Osteopathic treatment, I put a few
drops of glycerine in their ears, followed with water to wet and soften
the wax which was dry and hard, to get it back to a fluid state. Both
got better of their sore lungs and throats in a short time, and in
twenty-four hours they were about well, and lungs coughing out phlegm,
easily. From this I think that the cause of croup is simply the result
of abnormality of the cerumen system.


A QUESTION FOR AGES.

As a question of the uses of ear-wax has been before man for ages
without an answer being given that passes the line of conjecture, I
think there could be no reason why a few looks through the field glass
of inquiry should not be given in a limited way on that great plane of
fertility, for the minds of our most profound thinkers. As far as the
writer can learn from reading and other methods of inquiry, the power
and use of ear-wax has never been known, looked on, or thought of as one
of life's agents for good or bad health. One asks this question: "Why
are you talking about ear-wax, the filthy stuff?" In answer I asked,
"What do you know about ear-wax?" The answer, "I don't know or care
anything about the dirty stuff."


THE POSITION.

As my spleen is my organ of mirth, I let it bounce against my side a few
times at such ignorance and gave the wax subject more study than ever--I
began to read all the books I could find on Anatomy, Physiology, and
Histology to get some knowledge of the machinery that the wise architect
of that greatest of all temples had made to generate wax. At this time a
conviction came to me to be sure of its uses before I gave an opinion. I
find the center of nerve supply of the ears located at the base of the
brain and side of the head, in front of the cerebellum, just below and
near the center of the brain, a little above the foramen magnum, close
to and behind the carotid arteries, deep and superficial, just above the
entry of the spinal cord to the brain. Thus it is situated directly in
communication with all nerves to and from the brain to every part of the
body. Another question, and another came only to come and go without an
answer--such as how and where is this wax made? Of what use is it? Why
so awful bitter? Has it any living principle above dry earth? Is it
produced in the brain, lymphatics, fascia, heart, lungs, nerves or
where? How much of it would kill a man? Would it kill at all? What is it
made for? Is it used by nerves as food, or used by lungs, heart, or any
organ as an active principle in the magnetic or electric forces? So far
all authors are silent even to offer a speculative opinion about how it
is made and its uses. So far we get nothing from the ancient or modern
writers, as to its uses or anything that would cause a man to think that
the Creator had any great design, when he made so wisely constructed and
so much machinery and gave it such prominent place in the center of the
brain. By this time the reader begins to mentally ask what does this wax
evangelist know about the wax and its uses? The writer wishes to observe
and respect all nature and never be too hasty. To carefully explore all,
and never leave until he finds the cause and use that nature's hand has
placed in its works, never overlooking small packages as they often
contain precious gems. I am sure no man of brilliant mind can pass this
milepost and not hitch his team and do some precious loading. At this
point my pen will give notice to all anatomists, histologists, chemists
and physiologists that I will give "no sleep nor slumber to their
eyes," until I hear from them an answer, yes or no to these questions:
For what purpose did God make ear-wax? Is it food or refuse? If food,
what is nourished by it? and how do you know your position is true and
undebatable?


MEANING OF LIFE.

Life means existence; existence means subsistence; subsistence means
something to subsist on, and of the degree of refinement to suit the
being or principle whose function is to do the skilled work which is
found marked on the tressle-board of the wisest of all builders, whose
work is absolutely correct in form and action, and beautiful to behold.
It calls out the admiration of man and God himself, who did say of man,
"Not only good, but very good."


SOME QUESTIONS ASKED.

I consider ear-wax one of the most important questions before the minds
of our physiologists. The first and only knowledge of which substance
begins with the observer's eye when he beholds the dry wax as it is
excreted and dropped into the cavities of the ears. A question
arises--and stands without an answer--is this substance which is
commonly called ear-wax, technically called cerumen, is it dead or is it
alive while in this form and visible? If dead, why, and how did it lose
its life? Why has it not been consumed if once a living substance? When
alive, is it in the gaseous or fluid state? and when alive, and consumed
as nutriment by the system what does it nourish? is the question for the
philosopher's attention, not superficial, but his deepest thought? Why
is it deposited in the center of the brain if not to impart its vital
principle to all nerves interested in life and nutrition--both physical
and spiritual. Its location, itself, would indicate its importance.
Another thought is that no better place could be selected to establish
and locate a universal supply office for the laborers of all parts of
the whole superstructure. Another question arises: When we examine a
person paralyzed on one side, why do we find this bread of life in such
great quantities on the table and not consumed? Has not one-half of the
brain and the nerves of that whole side, limbs and all, lost their power
of digestion? Is hemiplegia a dyspepsia of the nerves of nutriment of
the brain and organs of that side? If so we have some foundation on
which to build an answer why this wax is not consumed and is dried up in
the ears of the parylytic. The answer would be that nutrition is
suspended.


CONDITIONS IN CERTAIN DISEASES, CAUSED BY COLDS.

Let us take croup, diphtheria, scarlet fever, la grippe, and all classes
of colds--on to pneumonia. They present about the same symptoms,
differing more in degrees of severity than of place. All affect the
tonsils, nostrils, membraneous air-passages, and lungs about the same
way. Croup exceeds by contracting the trachea enough to impede the
passing of air to the lungs; diphtheria has more swelling of the
tonsils, throat and glands of the neck, but all depend upon the same
blood and nerve supply, or a general law of blood beginning with
arteries to and from veins, lymphatics, glands and ducts to supply and
take away all fluids that are of no farther use to the vital and
material support. As all authors have agreed that the brain furnishes
the propelling forces to the nerves, it would be proper to inquire how
the brain is nourished. If so, we will begin and say the great cerebral
system of arteries supply the brain of which it gives quality of all
fluids and electric and magnetic forces, which must be generated in the
brain. Then a question arises, if the heart, lungs, liver, pancreas,
lymphatics, kidneys and all parts of the body depend upon the brain for
power, what do they give in return? If they give back anything it must
be of the kind of the organ from whence it comes; thus a kidney cannot
give liver nor spleen. Each must help to keep up the universal harmony
by furnishing its mite of its own kind. Suppose lung fever is the effect
of lack of renal salts, where would be a better place to dispatch from
to renal organs than the ears to reach the brain and touch the nerve
that connects with the sympathetic ganglion.


CERUMEN IN FLUID STATE.

Suppose we take the cerumen in its fluid state, by the secretions to the
lungs from the ears and see the action of air and other substances on
it, and it on them. We may safely look for a general action of some
kind. If it be magnetic food, we will see the magnetic power shown in
the lungs, and through the whole system, vitalizing all organs and
functions of life. Thus the lymphatics will move to wash out impurities,
and the nutritive nerves will rebuild lost energy. As but little is
known or said of how or where the cerumen is formed, we will guess it is
formed under the skin in the glands of the fascia and conveyed to the
ears by the secretory ducts. Its place and how it is manufactured is not
the question of the greatest importance, but its uses in disease and
health.


WINTER KILLS BABIES.

The writer has much reason to believe he has found a reliable pointer
for the cause of croup, diphtheria, and pneumonia; also a rational and
easy cure that any mother can administer and save the babe from choking
to death in her arms. Having witnessed croup in all its deadly work for
fifty years, and seen the best skill of each year and generation fail to
save, or even give relief, I lost all hope and grew to believe there was
no help and the doctor was only one more witness to the scene of death
and carnage found along the mysterious road that croup travels to slay
the babes of the whole earth. Of later days we have new and different
names for the disease, but alas, it kills the babe just as it did before
it was called diphtheria, la grippe and so on.


SOME ADVICE TO MOTHERS.

I write this more for the mothers than for the critics. We say to
mothers, as you are not Osteopaths, you are perfectly safe in putting
glycerine in a child's ears. It is made from oils and fats. I believe
when the wax is not consumed it clogs up the excretories with dead
matter, thus the irritation of the nerves of throat, neck, lungs and
lymphatics which give cause for the swelling of the tonsils and glands
of the neck. In this book can be found why I see wisdom in treating for
croup from the nerve centers of the brain. So far the uses and
importance of healthy ear-wax as a cure for disease has had no attention
that I can find by any author on disease or physiology. I hope time and
attention may lead us to a better knowledge of the cure of diphtheria,
croup, scarlet fever and all diseases of the throat and lungs of
children, and how to cure a greater per cent than has been up to this
writing. My experience up to date with such diseases, when treated as
indicated, has been very encouraging. Though it is but a short time
since I began to treat by this method, it has proven good with the young
and old.

As all authors so far seem silent even as to how or when the wax is
formed, we must resort to much careful dissection to find the relation
of the cerumen system to health. To intelligently acquaint the mother
with this treatment who does not understand anatomy so as to give
Osteopathic treatment for croup, diphtheria, and so on, I will say; take
a soft wet cloth and wash the child's neck and rub gently down from ears
to breast and shoulders; keep ears wet, often dropping in the glycerine.
Use glycerine because it will mix with the water and dissolve the wax,
while sweet oil and other oils will not do so.


A CASE IN POINT.

At 2 o'clock p. m. I called to see a babe having malignant croup in its
worst form, and examined its ears to see condition of wax. I had noticed
in consumptives that some cases had great quantities of dry wax in one
or both ears, but to this time had not thought of such deposits being an
evidence of lost or suspended action of the nerves that manufactured
cerumen. In this case I found wax dry and very hard, with much swelling
and hardness in region of ears, eustachian tubes and tonsils. I reasoned
that the excretory duct had become clogged, and that by the wax being
retained in ducts and glands an irritation of the nerves of the cervical
lymphatics had caused contraction near head, and produced congestion of
the lymphatics, of the pneumogastric, and cutting off nerves supply from
lungs. Believing this to be very likely I concluded to act on the above
line of reasoning and see if I could give some relief. I did not stop to
debate why the wax was hard and dry, but how to soften the wax, was the
question of interest to me then. So I proceeded. I reasoned that soap
and water would be the best treatment to clean the ears, and soften the
wax. At this point to select the best make of soap in the ears was to be
desired, so I took pure glycerine and water, dropped in a few drops and
took a small roll of cloth, made it wet in warm water and pushed it in
ears to keep them wet. In a few minutes I wet and inserted a soft cloth
cork in the child's ears. I twisted the corks around in the ears, each
time to mix the water and the wax to a softened condition, for to keep
the wax wet was the object. In a few minutes I got the wax wet and the
child coughed up phlegm easily, and when the dreaded hour, ten o'clock
at night came, all danger had passed.


CONNECTION OF BRAIN AND OTHER NERVES IN DIGESTION.

If digestion is the effect of organs, fluids and forces, then the
student of nature's law must be governed by well known truths, such as
the location of the brain, connection of the nerves to other organs,
bringing all parts interested in digestion in mental view. Thus you have
a chance to know if one organ has an assisting relation to any other
organ or system or if its products are of general or of special use. A
few questions at this point of inquiry would be in place. Does the brain
give assistance in digestion, and why may we reasonably suppose so, when
digestion does its work normally and has a full, rich supply of blood?
Yet disease enters the system, and begins its work with general
weakness, swelling, wastings, and pain with some, or all the glands
congested and sore, and a plenty of rich blood all the time. Then are we
justified to go to the brain and examine the electric and magnetic
batteries? We know such forces exist but as their location in the brain
is not known farther than the fact of their existence, we do not know
how they are fed, nor from where, so we are fully warranted in seeking a
use for both powers--magnetic and electric. One says the power of
electricity belongs more to the motor nerves and the magnetic to the
nutrient system; if not they are happily blended and give the results.
Without such forces life and motion could not be sustained. As it is not
my object to write a treatise on general physiology, I will turn at once
to the subject of the relation of life and health as affected by the
abnormal supply and action of ear-wax.[3]

[Footnote 3: "The secretion of the external auditory meatus, mixed with
the secretion of the neighboring glands or ceruminous glands, forms the
well known ear-wax or cerumen. The secretion in this place contains a
reddish pigment of a bitterish sweet taste, the composition of which has
not been investigated." American Text-Book of Physiology.]


UNAIDED INVESTIGATION.

As our investigations are without the assistance of ancient or modern
writers we will have to reason that man is a machine of form and power,
forming its own parts and generating its own powers as it has use for
them. At this time we begin to reason thus, that all powers are
invisible and we see effect only. We know such forces to be abundant in
nature, and life is sustained by them. To find the substances in the
body that causes them to act and how to act, has been the object of my
journey as an explorer. If they give us health when normal action
prevails and disease only when abnormal, then we are admonished to form
a more intimate acquaintance with the qualities, and with all the
products, when formed in this great laboratory which compounds and
qualifies each substance to fill its mission of force, construction,
purity and action.




