CHAPTER II.

OSTEOPATHIC EXPLORATIONS.

     Divisions of the Body--Searching for the Cause--Duty of the
     Osteopathic Explorer--Classification and Division--The
     Abnormal--Nerve Powers--Witnesses to Examine--Abnormal
     Growths--Cerebro Spinal Fluid--Body in Perfect
     Health--Chemistry--Nature's Chemistry.


DIVISIONS OF THE BODY.

After many long years, treating and trying to teach the student of
Osteopathy how to hunt for and find the local causes of diseases, not
contagious, or infectious, I have succeeded in planning and suggesting a
method, which I am sure the doctor can easily follow, and find any
diversion from the normal, that would interfere with the nerves, veins,
and arteries, of any organ or limb of the body. I have formulated a
simple mental diagram that divides the body into three parts, chest,
upper and lower limbs. The first division takes in head, neck, chest,
abdomen and pelvis. The second division takes in head, neck, lower and
upper arm and hand. The third division takes in foot, leg, thigh, pelvis
and lumbar vertebra. I make this division for the purpose of holding the
explorer to the limits of all supplies. In the ellipse of the chest is
found all vital supplies; then from that center of life we have two
branches only, one of the arm, and one of the lower limb. In each
division we have five points of exploration.[1]

[Footnote 1: Explore: (1) To seek for or after: to strive to attain by
search; to look wisely and carefully for; to search through or into; to
penetrate or range over for discovery; to examine thoroughly; as, to
explore new countries or seas; to explore the depths of science; "hidden
frauds (to) explore."--WEBSTER.]


SEARCHING FOR THE CAUSE.

To illustrate, we will take the lower limb, whether there is lameness,
soreness, gouty, rheumatic, neuralgic, swollen, shrunken, feverish,
cold, smooth and glassy, sores, ulcers, erysipelas, milkleg, varicose
veins, or any defect that the patient may complain of, who is the only
reliable book or being of symptomatology. For convenience we will divide
that lower limb into five parts, the foot, leg, thigh, pelvis and lumbar
region. The patient (symptomatologist) tells us he has a pain in front,
center and under part of foot. Now the doctor or bird dog, can find
quails of reason in but one field that would lead him to the cause. As
this field is divided into five parts and the hunter has carefully
searched four divisions, he will find the cause or causes in the fifth
and none other. If a dislocated bone is not found in the foot after
ascertaining that there has been no crushing by falling bodies, horses
feet, stepping on glass, nails and other things that would penetrate the
foot, and irritate by being broken off, closed and remaining in the
flesh; we will explore the leg for the quail, ascertain if the
articulation is normal at ankle and knee. If we find the bone is not
broken, the leg has no splinters of wood, nor injured flesh by bites
from dogs or other animals, nor any other substance that would injure
the leg, we are prepared to pass on and explore another place for pain
in the foot. We go on to division No. 3 or the thigh division, and
ascertain if the thigh is normal in all conditions, properly in socket,
with all muscles, ligaments and nerves unoppressed. There are but two
more divisions left for exploration, and they are the most important and
interesting of the five, the pelvis and lumbar, through which all the
nerves of the limb pass. We must stop at pelvis and observe carefully
that there is no twist of ligaments before going to lumbar, which is the
last of the five divisions. If we have found nothing in the previous
four, and have explored them as carefully as we should, we have but one
brush heap left, and that one contains the quail that we have been
hunting for. As the lumbar contains and conveys all nerve forces to the
pelvis from the brain and all divisions of the lower limbs, we will now
examine the articulations of that part of the spine, and in that we are
very certain to find the cause if we have made no mistake in our
examination in the preceding divisions of the limb. As we enter the
exploration of this part of the spine we must remember that we are about
to deal with the many divisions of the nerves of the _cauda equina_. The
great question before us, comes after this form. What would wound or
bruise any division of nerves that would lead by the way of the great or
lesser sciatic, to a bone in the front and under side of the foot? Jars,
strains, twists, and dislocations, must be carefully searched for. A
partial dislocation of one side of the spine would produce a twist which
would throw one muscle on to another and another, straining ligaments,
producing conjestion and inflammation, or some irritation that would
lead to a suspension of the fluids necessary to the harmonious vitality
of the foot, which is the great and only cause by which the suffering is
produced in a foreign land, which we call a famine in the foot.


DUTY OF THE OSTEOPATHIC EXPLORER.

This method of exploration is not directed by the sound of the fog-horns
of unreliable and unsatisfactory symptomatology. Osteopathy has a method
of its own, which is correct or it has no method at all, and is guided
by the surveyor's compass that will find all corners as established by
the orders of the government and surveyor's general. Thus an Osteopath
must find the true corners as set by the Divine Surveyor. The general
surveyor hands our plats and specifications to the division general,
with instructions to establish all lines and divisions, state, county,
township and sections, and mark each one by stones or otherwise, so they
cannot be lost; but are findable by any competent surveyor who follows
the field notes displayed in anatomy. Thus you would see a successful
Osteopath is guided by the field notes of nature to all corners, his
business is to know that every corner stone is in its place, standing
erect as nature designed and established it. If he tolerates any
variation of this stone or stones from the place or places that God the
grand surveyor of the universe has placed them, he will observe there is
an infringement and cause for inharmony and discord of the possessors of
the four quarter sections of land, for which this cornerstone was
placed; and his sworn duty is to bring this stone from any variation
from the field notes and establish it where it was first placed. Thus
his ability to find the true corners and adjust all stones will mark him
as a successful Osteopath.


CLASSIFICATION AND DIVISION.

I will classify or divide man's body for convenience of exploration for
diseases into head and neck first; then head, neck and chest, third,
head, neck, chest and abdomen; then unite head, neck, chest, abdomen and
sacrum. I will take up a few diseases under each division as they are
located. By this method I think I can better show what nerves should be
more or less active.


THE ABNORMAL.

A lesion may and does appear on a part or all of the person which may
appear as a growth or withering away of a limb in all its muscles,
nerves and blood supply. As in case of tumors on scalp, loss of hair,
eruptions of face, growth of tonsils, ulcers of one or both ears,
growths on outside and inside of eyes, a cause must precede an effect in
all cases. A pain in head is an effect; cause is older than the effect
and is absolute in all variations from normal conditions. A tumor on the
head and under the skin is an effect only. It took matter to give it
size, it took power to deliver that substance, the fact that a tumor was
formed, shows that the power to build was present and did the work of
construction. Another power should have been there to complete the work
at that location; that power is the offbearing of the dead matter after
the work of construction was complete.


NERVE POWERS.

If we think as men of reason should, we will count five nerve powers.
They must all be present to build a part, and must answer promptly at
roll call and work all the time. The names of these master workmen are
sensation, motion, nutrition, voluntary and involuntary. All must answer
at every roll call during life; none can be granted a leave of absence
for a moment. Suppose sensation should leave a limb for a time, have we
not a giving away of all cells and glands? An undue filling up follows
quickly because sensation limits and tells when the supply is too great
for the use of the builder's purpose. Suppose the nerve power known as
motion should fail for a time, starvation would soon begin its deadly
work for want of food. Suppose again the nerves of nutrition should fail
to apply the nourishing showers we would surely die in sight of food.
With the voluntary nerves we move or stay at the will of he or she who
wishes to give direction to the motor powers, at any time a change by
action is required. At this time I will stop defining the several and
varied uses of the five kinds of nerves, and begin to account for
growths and other variations, from the healthy to the unhealthy
conditions of man. The above named are the five known powers of animal
life, and to direct them wisely is the work of the doctor of
Osteopathy.


WITNESSES TO EXAMINE.

He has five witnesses to examine in all cases he has under his care. He
must give close attention to the source and supply of healthy blood. If
blood is too scant he must look to the motor systems of blood making,
that would surely invite his most careful attention and study of the
abdomen. He cannot expect blood to quietly pass through the diaphragm if
impeded by muscular constriction around aorta, vena cava or thoracic
duct. The diaphragm can and is often pulled down on both vena cava and
thoracic duct, obstructing blood and chyle from returning to heart so
much as to limit the chyle below the requirement of healthy blood, or
even suppress the nerve action of lymphatics to such degree as to cause
dropsy of the abdomen, or a stoppage of venous blood by pressure on vena
cava so long that venous blood would be in stages of ferment when it
enters the heart for renovation, and when purified and returned the
supply is too small to sustain life to a normal standard.


ABNORMAL GROWTHS.

Thus the importance of a careful attention to the normal certainty of
all the ribs to which the diaphragm is attached is essential. The
eleventh and twelfth ribs may, and do often get pushed so far from their
normal bearings, that they are often found turned in a line with the
spine, with cartilaginous ends down near ilio-lumbar articulation. When
in such position they draw the diaphragm down heavily on vena cava at
about the fourth lumbar. Then you have cause for intermittent pulse, as
the heart finds no passage of blood through the prolapsed diaphragm
which is also stopping the vena cava and producing universal stagnation
of blood and other fluids in all organs and glands below the diaphragm.
Thus you have a beginning for abnormal growths of womb, kidneys and all
lymphatics of liver, kidneys, spleen, pancreas, and all tumors of
abdomen.


CEREBRO SPINAL FLUID.

To satisfy the mind of a philosopher who is mentally capable of asking
for and knowing truth, when presented by nature, you must come at him
outside of the limits of conjecture, and address him with self-evident
truths only. When he takes up the philosophy of the great subject of
life, to him who does know truth, no substitute can to any degree
satisfy his mental demands. To the one who would deal in conjectures or
suppose so's, he will at once be placed in the proper category to which
he belongs, which is the drift-wood that floats down the dark river that
is overshadowed by the nightmare of ignorance and superstition. A
seeker after truth, is a man of few words, and they are used by him only
by the truths or facts discovered. He has no patience with the unmeaning
records offered only to please the credulous, and by those of little or
no truth that appears during a long recitation of ungrounded statements.
From the above it is wisely seen that the object of these remarks is to
present a few truths for the purpose of stimulating the attention of the
listener. We will take man when formed. When we use the word formed, we
mean the whole building being complete. The brain with all organs,
nerves, vessels, and every minutia in form with all materials found or
used in life.


BODY IN PERFECT HEALTH.

We look at it in perfect health which means perfection and harmony not
in part, but of the whole body. So far we are only filled with love,
wonder and admiration. Another period of observation appears to the
philosopher. We find partial or universal discord from the lowest
observable to the highest in action and death. Then the book of whys is
opened and displays its leaves which calls out mental labor even to the
degree of agony, to know the cause or causes that produce a failure of a
limb in sensation, motion, nutrition, voluntary and involuntary
functional exhibits. His mind will explore the bone, the ligament, the
muscle, the fascia, the channels through which the blood travels from
heart to local destiny, with lymphatics and their contents,--the nerves,
the blood vessels and every channel through or over which all substances
are transmitted all over the body, particularly the disabled limb in
question. It proceeds too and does obtain blood abundantly to and from
the heart, but the results obtained are not satisfactory, and another
leaf is opened of why no good results are obtained and where is the
mystery, what quality and element of force and vitality has been
withheld? A thought strikes him that the cerebro spinal fluid is the
highest known element that is contained in the human body, and unless
the brain furnishes this fluid in abundance a disabled condition of the
body will remain. He who is able to reason will see that this great
river of life must be tapped and the withering field irrigated at once,
or the harvest of health be forever lost.


CHEMISTRY.

As chemical compounds are not known to Osteopathy to be used as
remedies, then its use as a study for the student is only to teach that
elements in nature do combine and form other substances, and without
changes and unions, no teeth, bone, hair, or muscle could appear in the
body from the food eaten. Then chemistry is of great use as a part of a
thorough Osteopathic education. It gives us the reasons why food is
found in the body as bone, muscle and so on, to all kinds of flesh,
teeth and bones found in animal forms. Unless we know chemistry
reasonably well, we can not do away with much mental worry of what
becomes of food after eating. By chemistry the truths of physiology are
firmly established in the mind of the student of nature, that in man a
chemistry of wonderful powers does all the work of animal forms, and
that in the laboratory of nature's chemistry is the ruling power. By
elementary chemistry we are led to see the beauties of physiology only.
Thus chemistry of the elementary is one, and physiology is the witness
that it is law in man as in all nature. Thus in chemistry we comprehend
some of the laws of union in nature which we can use mentally with
knowing confidence. In chemistry we become acquainted with the law of
cause and change in union, which is a standard law sought by the student
of Osteopathy.


NATURE'S CHEMISTRY.

Osteopathy believes that all parts of the human body do work on chemical
compounds, and from the general supply manufacture for local wants; thus
the liver builds for itself of the material that is prepared in its own
division laboratory. The same of heart and brain. No disturbing or
hindering causes will be tolerated to stay if an Osteopath can find and
remove it. We must reason that to withhold the supply from a limb, to
wither away would be natural. We suffer from two causes. First, want of
supply (hunger), and the burdens of dead deposits along nerve centers,
which five nerves by chemical changes while in fermentation should
regulate local or general divisions.


CORRECT METHOD OF REASONING.

In concluding this chapter we will confine our labor to an effort to
direct the beginner to a correct method of reasoning. When he is brought
face to face with the stern realities of the "sick room," the Osteopath
begins his inquiries and follows with his questions just far enough to
know what division of the body is in trouble. If he finds an arm has
lost motion, he goes to arm to explore for cause. He can begin his hunt
for cause at hand, explore it carefully for wounds, strains or any
lesion that could injure nerves of the arm. If he finds no probable
cause there, he should explore bones for dislocations or strains of
ligaments at elbow; if he finds no defect there sufficient to locate
cause in lower arm or hand; he has only two more places left to inspect,
the shoulder and neck with their articulations of bone and muscles. If
found normal at shoulder, then go to neck, out of which go all or most
of the nerves of the arm; if he finds no lesion or cause equal to the
trouble so far, then he has been careless in his search and should go
over and over from marrow to periostium of all bones of the neck and
head, because there are only five divisions in which a lesion can exist.
Carefully look, think, feel and know that the head of the humerus is
true in the glenoid cavity, clavicle true at both ends of its
articulation, with sternum and acromion processes. See that the biceps
are in their grooves, and ribs on spine are true at manubrium and spine,
and that neck is true on first dorsal. True in all joints of the neck,
as the nerves of the arm come from the neck, there must be no variation
from normal, or trouble will appear from that cause. As the neck has
much to do with the arm, we should keep a living picture of the forms of
each bone, how and where it articulates with others, how it is joined by
ligaments, what blood vessels, nerves and muscles cross or range with it
lengthwise, because to overlook a small nerve and blood vessel you may
fail to remove a goitre, and all diseases of the head, face and neck.




