CHAPTER XI.

FEVERS.

     Be Armed With Facts--Union of Human Gases With Oxygen--Fever and
     Nettle-rash. Nature Constructs for a Wise Purpose--Processes of
     Life Must be Kept in Motion--No Satisfaction from Authors--Animal
     Heat--Semeiology--Symptomatology--Definition of Fever--Fevers only
     Effects--Result of Stoppages of Vein or Artery--Aneurisms.


BE ARMED WITH FACTS.

When we reason for causes we must begin with facts, and hold them
constantly in line for action, and use, all the time. It would be good
advice never to enter a contest without your saber is of the purest
steel of reason. By such only can you cut your way to the magazine of
truth.

As we line up to learn something of the cause of fever, we are met by
heat, a living fact. Does that put the machinery of your mind in motion?
If not, what will arouse your mental energy? You see that heat is not
like cold. It is not a horse with eyes, head, neck, body, limbs and
tail; but it is as much of a being as the horse; it is a being of heat.
If cause made the horse, and cause made the heat, why not devote all
energy in seeking for cause in all disturbances of life?


UNION OF HUMAN GASES WITH OXYGEN.

Who says heat is not a union of the human gases with oxygen and other
substances as they pass out of the excretory system. By what force do
parts of the engine of life move? If by the motor power of electricity,
how fast must the heart or life current run to ignite the gasolene of
the body and set a person on fire and burn to fever heat?

If we know anything of the laws of electricity, we must know velocity
modulates its temperature. Thus heat and cold are the effect.

If we understand anatomy as we should, we know man is the greatest
engine ever produced, complete in form, an electro-magnet, a motor, and
would be incomplete if it could not burn its own gases.

When man, is said to have fever, he is only on "fire," to burn out the
deadly gases, which a perverted, dirty, abnormal, laboratory, has
allowed to accumulate by friction of the journals of his body, or in the
supply of vital fluids. We are only complete when normal in all
parts,--a true compass points to the normal only.

When reasoning on the fever subject would it not be strictly in line to
suppose that the lowest perceptible grade of fever requires a less
additional physical energy to remove some foreign body from the person,
that at first would naturally show a very light effect upon the human
system, which would be the effect of itchy sensation.


FEVER AND NETTLE-RASH.

Let us stop and reason. Might this effect (itching) not come from
obstructed gases that flow through and from the skin? If gas should be
detained in the system by the excretory ducts the substance closing the
porous system would cause irritation of nerves, and increase the heart's
action to such degree that the temperature is raised to fever heat, by
the velocity with which electricity is brought into action. Electricity
being the force that is naturally required to contract muscles and force
gases from the body.

Let us advance higher in the scale of foreign bodies until we arrive to
the condition of steam, which is more dense than gas. Would it not take
more force to discharge it? By the same rule of reasoning we find water
to be much thicker as an element than either gas or steam.

Then we have lymph as another element, albumen, fibrin, with all the
elements found in arterial and venous blood, all of which forces
required to circulate, pass through and out of the system, must be
increased to suit. Therefore we are brought to this conclusion, that the
different degrees of temperature do mark the density of the fluids with
which the motor engine has to contend.

If gas produces an itching sensation, would it not be reasonable to
suppose that the consistence of lymph would cause elevations on the
skin, such as nettle-rash.

If this method of reasoning sustains us thus far, why not argue that
albumen obstructed while in the system of the fascia would require a
much greater force to put it through the skin. The excretions of the
body would cause a much greater heat to even throw the albumen as far as
the cuticle.

If a greater, with a greater velocity, why not grant to this as cause of
the disturbance of motor energy equal to measles. Let us add to this
albumen a quantity of fibrin, have we not cause to expect the energy
hereby required to be equal to that nerve and blood energy found in
smallpox?

If this be true, have we not a foundation in truth on which to base our
conclusions? That the difference in forces manifested is the resistance
offered by the difference in the consistence of devitalized fluids which
the nerves and fibers of the fascia labor to excrete.


NATURE CONSTRUCTS TO SUIT A WISE PURPOSE.

By close observation the philosopher who is hunting to acquaint himself
with the laws of cause and effect, finds upon his voyages as an
explorer, that nature as cause does construct for wise purposes; and
shows as much wisdom in the construction and preparation of all bodies,
beings and worlds, as the workings of those beings show when in action.

As life, the highest known principle sent forth by nature to vivify,
construct and govern all beings, it is expected to be the indweller and
operator, and one of the greatest perceivable and universal laws of
nature. And when it becomes necessary to break the friendly relation
between life and matter, nature closes up the channels of supply.

It may begin its work near the heart, at the origin of the greatest
blood vessels, or do its work at any point. It may begin its closing
process at the extremities of the veins or anywhere where exhausted
vital fluids may enter for return to the heart for renewal by union with
new material.

As nature is never satisfied with incompleteness in anything, all
interferences from whatsoever cause are sufficient for nature to call a
halt and begin the work of excavation by bringing the necessary fluids,
already prepared in the chemical laboratory, to dissolve and wash away
all obstructing deposits previous to beginning the work of
reconstruction, which is to repair all injured parts of the machinery
if disabled by atmospheric cause, poisons, or otherwise.

When nature renovates it is never satisfied to leave any obstruction in
any part of the body. All the powers of its battery force are brought in
line to do duty, and never stop short of completeness which ends in
perfection.

All seasons of the year come and go, and we see year in and out the
perpetual processes of construction of one class of bodies, and the
passing away of others.

Vegetation builds forests, and cold builds mountains of ice to be
dissolved and sent into the ocean to purify the water, and keep the
brines from drying to powder, as salt.


PROCESSES OF LIFE MUST BE KEPT IN MOTION.

All the processes of earth-life, must be kept in perpetual motion to
cultivate and be kept in healthy condition, or the world would wither
and die, and go to the tombs of space, to join the funeral procession of
other dead worlds. Thus you see all nature comes and goes by the fiat of
wisely adjusted laws.


NO SATISFACTION FROM AUTHORS.

Read all the authors from AEsculapius to this date, and all combined
leave the inquirers without a single fact as to the cause or causes of
fever.

One says fever may come from too much carbon. Another says chemical
defects may be the cause.

I would like to agree with some of the good men of our date or the
ancient theorists if I could, but they, both dead and alive, are a blank
except the tons of paper they have covered all over with conjectures,
and closed out by the words "Perhaps so's and howevers" spoken in all
tongues and languages on earth.

All have explored for centuries for the cause of fevers, and on return
from their multiple voyages say, we hope some day to find the cause. We
have killed many dogs experimenting, but have failed to find the cause
of fever.


ANIMAL HEAT.

To think of fever, we think of animal heat. By habit we want to know how
great the heat is. We measure by a yard stick till we find we have 100
deg., 102 deg., 104 deg., to 106 deg., at this point we stop as we find
too many yards of red calico to suit the size of the purse of life. Which
we think cannot consume more than 106 yards of heat. We begin to ask for
the substances that are more powerful than fire. We try all known fire
compounds and fail. The fire department had done faithful work, and all
it could bring to bear on the fire. It had put on hose and steam, knocked
shingles off and windows out, but not until the fire had ruined the house
with all its inside and outside usefulness and beauties. Another and
another house gets on fire and burns just as the first did. All are
content to see the ruins and say it is the will of the Lord; never
thinking for a moment that it was with the aid of the heart that the
brain burned up the body.

Of what use is a knowledge of anatomy to man if he overlooks cause and
effect in the results obtained by the machinery that anatomy should
teach? He finds each part connected to all others with the wisdom that
has given a set of plans and specifications that are without a flaw or
omission. The body generates its own heat and modulates to suit climate
and season. It can generate through its electro-motor system far beyond
the kindly normal, to the highest known fever heat, and is capable of
modulations far above or below normal. A knowledge of Osteopathy will
prepare you to bring the system under the rulings of the physical laws
of life. Fever is electric heat only.


SEMEIOLOGY.

(Med.) The science of the signs or symptoms of disease.


SYMPTOMATOLOGY.

The doctrine of symptoms; that part of the science of medicine which
treats of the symptoms of disease. Semeiology.

These definitions are from Webster's International Dictionary,
considered by all English speaking people as a standard authority. Both
words are chosen names to represent that system of guess work, which is
now and has been used as a method of ascertaining what disease is or
might be. It is supposed to be the best method known to date to classify
or name diseases, after which guessing begins in earnest. What kinds of
poisons, how much and how often to use them, and guess how much good or
how much harm is being done to the sick person.

To illustrate more forcibly, to the mind of the reader that such system
though honored by age is only worthy the name of guess work, as shown by
the following standard authority on fevers:


POTTER'S DEFINITION OF FEVER.

"Fever is a condition in which there are present the phenomena of rise
of temperature, quickened circulation, marked tissue change, and
disordered secretions.

"The primary cause of the fever phenomena is still a mooted (discussed
and debated) question, and is either a disorder of the sympathetic
nervous system giving rise to disturbances of the vaso-motor filaments,
or a derangement of the nerve centers located adjacent to the corpus
striatum, which have been found, by experiment, to govern the processes
of heat production, distribution, and dissipation.

"Rise of temperature is the pre-eminent feature of all fevers, and can
only be positively determined by the use of the clinical thermometer.
The term feverishness is used when the temperature ranges from 99 deg. to
100 deg. fahr.; slight fever if 100 deg. or 101 deg.; moderate, 102 deg.
or 103 deg.; high if 104 deg. or 105 deg. and intense if it exceed the
latter. The term hyperpyrexia is used when the temperature shows a
tendency to remain at 106 deg. fahr. and above.

"Quickened circulation is the rule in fevers, the frequency usually
maintaining a fair ratio with the increase of the temperature. A rise of
one degree fahr. is usually attended with an increase of eight to ten
beats of the pulse per minute.

"The following table gives a fair comparison between temperature and
pulse:--

   TABLE OF DEGREES.

   A temperature of 98 deg. corresponds to a pulse of 60 deg.
          "         99 deg.       "      "      "     70 deg.
          "        100 deg.F      "      "      "     80 deg.
          "        101 deg.F      "      "      "     90 deg.
          "        102 deg.F      "      "      "    100 deg.
          "        103 deg.F      "      "      "    110 deg.
          "        104 deg.F      "      "      "    120 deg.
          "        105 deg.F      "      "      "    130 deg.
          "        106 deg.F      "      "      "    140 deg.

"The tissue waste is marked in proportion to the severity and duration
of the febrile phenomena, being slight or (nil) in febricula, and
excessive in typhoid fever.

"The disordered secretions are manifested by the deficiency in the
salivary, gastric, intestinal, and nephritic secretions, the tongue
being furred, the mouth clammy, and there occurring anorexia, thirst,
constipation, and scanty, high-colored acid urine."[6]

[Footnote 6: What has the student gained by reading the above definition
of this standard author and representative of present medical attainment
but a labored effort to explain what he does not know.]


FEVERS ONLY EFFECTS.

Fevers are effects only. The cause may be far from mental conclusions.
If we have a house with one bell, and ten wires each fastened to a door
running to the center, all having wire connection and so arranged that
to pull any one wire will set the bell in motion, and without an
indicator you cannot tell which wire is disturbed, producing the effect
or ringing of the bell at the center. An electrician would know at once
the cause, but to discriminate and locate the wire disturbed is the
study.

Before a bell can be heard from any door, the general battery must be
charged. Thus you see but one source of supply. To better illustrate--we
will take a house with eight rooms, and all supplied by one battery--one
is a reception room, one a parlor, one a sitting room, one bed room,
one cloak room, one dining room, one a kitchen, and one a basement room,
all having wires and bells running to one bell in the clerk's office,
which has an indicator for each room by numbers on its face. If the
machinery is in good order he can call and answer correctly all the time
and never make a mistake. But should he ring to call the cook and her
bell keep on ringing and she and clerk could not stop it, and they
summon an electrician, what would you think if he began at the parlor
bell to adjust a trouble of the kitchen bell? Surely you would not have
him treat the parlor bell first, because you know the cook could only
answer by the effect, or rattling of the office bell. Hers is cause,
sound at office, effect. Now to apply this illustration, we will say a
system of bells and connecting wires run to all parts or rooms of the
body, from the battery of power or the brain, conveyed by the strings of
wires or nerves, that are put up and run to all active or vital parts of
the body. Thus arranged we see how blood is driven to any part of the
system, by the power that is sent over the nerves from the brain to the
spinal cord, and from there to all nerves of each and all divisions of
the body. Then your blood that has done its work in constructing parts
or all of the system, entering veins to be returned to the heart for
renewal. Each vein, great and small, has nerves with them as servants
of power, to force blood back to heart through the different sets of
tubes known as veins, and made to suit the duties they have to perform
in the process of life. As it travels to the heart with blood too thick
to suit the lungs, the great system of lymphatics pour in water to suit
demands, preparatory to entering the lungs to be purified and renewed.
Thus you see nature has amply prepared all the machinery and power to
prepare material and construct all parts, and when in normal condition
the mind and wisdom of God is satisfied that the machine will go on and
build and run according to the plan and specification. If this be true
as nature proves at every point and principle, what can man do farther
than plumb, line up, and trust to nature to get results desired, "life
and health?" Can we add or suggest any improvement? If not, what is left
for us to do is to keep bells, batteries and wires in normal place and
trust to normal law as given by nature.


RESULT OF STOPPAGE OF VEIN OR ARTERY.

But few questions remain to be asked by the philosophical navigator when
he sets sail to go to the cause of flux. Would he go to blood supply?
Certainly, there must be supply previous to deposit. Reason would cause
us to combine the fact that blood must be in perpetual motion from and
to the heart during life, and that law is the fiat of all nature which
is indispensable and absolute. Blood must not stop its motion nor be
allowed to unduly deposit, as the heart's action is perpetual in motion.
The work is complete of the heart if it delivers blood into the
exploring arteries. Each division must to do its part fully as a normal
heart does, or can in the greatest measure of health; and a normally
formed heart is just as much interested in the blood that is running
constantly for repairs and additions, as the whole system is on the
arteries for supply. Thus you must have perfection in shape first, and
from it to all parts as far as an artery reaches. All hindrances must be
kept away from the arteries great and small. Health permits of no
stopping of blood in either the vein or artery. If an artery cannot
unload its consents a strain follows, and as an artery must have room to
deposit its supplies it proceeds to build other vessels adjacent to the
points of obstruction.


ANEURISMS.

Some are builded to enormous sizes. We call them aneurisms or
accommodation chambers, builded by nature's constructing ability of the
arteries as deposits for blood. The artery should pass farther on, thus
you by reason must know an obstruction has limited the flow of blood,
and the tumor is only an effect, and obstruction is the cause of all
abnormal deposits, either from vein or artery. Unobstructed blood cannot
form a tumor, nor allow inharmony to dwell in any part of the system.
Flux is an effect, blood supply and circulation both at variation from
normal. An artery finds veins of bowels irritated and contracted to such
degree that arterial blood cannot enter veins with cargo of blood at
all, and deposits its blood at terminal points in mucous membrane of
bowels, and when membrane fails to hold all blood so delivered, then the
first blood which dies of asphyxia finds an outlet into the bowels to be
carried off and out by peristaltic actions. Thus you have a continuous
deposit and discharge for arterial blood until death stops the supply.




