CHAPTER VI.

THE LYMPHATICS.

     Importance of the Subject--Demands of Nature on the
     Lymphatics--Dunglinson's Definition--Dangers of Dead
     Substances--Lymph Continued--Solvent in Nature--Where Are the
     Lymphatics Situated?--The Fat and Lean.


IMPORTANCE OF THE SUBJECT.

Possibly less is known of the lymphatics than any other division of the
life-sustaining machinery of man. Thus ignorance of that division is
equal to a total blank with the operator. Finer nerves dwell with the
lymphatics than even with the eye. The eye is an organized effect, the
lymphatics the cause; in them the spirit of life more abundantly dwells.
No atom can leave the lymphatics in an imperfect state and get a union
with any part of the body. There the atom obtains form and knowledge of
how and what to do. The lymphatics consume more of the finer fluids of
the brain than the whole viscera combined. By nature, coarser substances
are necessary to construct the organs that run the blast, and rough
forging divisions. The lymphatics form, finish, temper and send the
bricks to the builder with intelligence, that he may construct by
adjusting all according to nature's plans and specifications. Nature
makes machinery that can produce just what is necessary, and when
united, produces what the most capable minds could exact.

The lymphatics are closely and universally connected with the spinal
cord and all other nerves, long or short, universal or separate, and all
drink from the waters of the brain. By an action of the nerves of the
lymphatics, a union of qualities necessary to produce gall, sugar,
acids, alkalies, bone, muscle and softer parts, with the thought that
elements can be changed, suspended, collected and associated and produce
any chemical compound necessary to sustain animal life, wash out, salt,
sweeten and preserve the being from decay and death by chemical,
electric, atmospheric or climatic conditions. By this we are admonished
in all our treatment not to wound the lymphatics, as they are
undoubtedly the life giving centers and organs. Thus it behooves us to
handle them with wisdom and tenderness, for by and from them a withered
limb, organ or any division of the body receives what we call
reconstruction, or is builded anew, and without this cautious procedure
your patient had better save his life and money by passing you by as a
failure, until you are by knowledge qualified to deal with the
lymphatics.


DEMANDS OF NATURE ON THE LYMPHATICS.

Why not reason on the broad plain of known facts, and give the why he or
she has complete prostration. When all systems are cut off from a chance
to move and execute such duties as nature has allotted to them, motor
nerves must drive all substances to and sensation must judge the supply
and demand. Nutrition must be in action the time and keep all parts well
supplied with power to labor or a failure is sure to appear. We must
ever remember the demands of nature on the lymphatics, liver and
kidneys. They must work all the time or a confusion for lack in their
duties will mark a cripple in some function of life over which they
preside.


DUNGLINSON'S DEFINITION.

Dunglinson's scientific definition of the lymphatics is very extensive,
comprehensive and right to the point for our use as doctors of
Osteopathy. He describes the lymphatic glands as countless in number,
universally distributed all through the human body, containing vitalized
water and other fluids necessary to the support of animal life, running
parallel with the venous system, and more abundantly there than in other
locations of the body, at the same time discharging their contents into
the veins while conveying the blood back to the heart from the whole
system. Is it not reasonable to suppose that besides being nutrient
centers, that they accumulate and pass water through the whole secretory
and excretory systems of the body, in order to reduce nourishment to
that degree from thick to thin, that it may easily pass through all
tubes, ducts and vessels interested in distribution, as nourishment
first, and renovation second, through the excretory ducts. The question
arises whence cometh this water?


DANGERS OF DEAD SUBSTANCES.

This leads us back to the lungs as one of the great sources of which you
have been informed under the head of "Lungs, Gases and Water." With this
fountain of life saving water provided by nature to wash away impurities
as they accumulate in our bodies, would it not be great stupidity in us
to see a human being burn to death by the fires of fever, or die from
asphyxia by allowing bad or dead lymph, albumen, or any substance to
load down the powers of nature and keep the blood from being washed to
normal purity? If so, let us go deeper into the study of the life-saving
powers of the lymphatics. Do we not find in death that the lymphatics
are dark, and in life they are healthy and red?


LYMPH CONTINUED.

What we meet with in all diseases is dead blood, stagnant lymph, and
albumen in a semi-vital or dead and decomposing condition all through
the lymphatics and other parts of the body, brain, lungs, kidneys, liver
and fascia. The whole system is loaded with a confused mass of blood,
that is mixed with much or little unhealthy substances, that should have
been kept washed out by lymph. Stop and view the frog's superficial
lymphatic glands; you see all parts move just as regular as the heart
does; they are all in motion during life. For what purpose do they move?
if not to carry the fluids to sustain by building up, while the
excretory channels receive and pass out all that is of no further use to
the body. Now we see this great system of supply is the source of
construction and purity. If this be true we must keep them normal all
the time or see confused nature in the form of disease, the list
through. Thus we strike at the source of life and death when we go to
the lymphatics.

With this fountain of life-saving water, provided by nature to wash away
impurities as they accumulate in our bodies, would it not be great
stupidity in us to see a human being burn to death by the fires of
fever, or die from asphyxia, by allowing bad or dead lymph, albumen or
any substance to load down the powers of nature to keep the blood washed
to normal purity? If so let us go deeper in the study of the
life-sustaining powers of the lymphatics.


NATURE'S SOLVENTS.

The brain flushes the nerves of the lymphatics first, and more than any
other system of the body. No part is so small or remote that it is not
in direct connection with some part or chain of the lymphatics. The
doctor of Osteopathy has much to think about when he consults natural
remedies, and how they are supplied and administered, and as disease is
the effect of tardy deposits in some or all parts of the body, reason
would bring us to hunt a solvent of such deposits, which hinder the
natural motion of blood and other fluids in functional works, which are
to keep the body pure from any substance that would check vital action.
When we have searched and found that the lymphatics are almost the sole
requisite of the body we then must admit that their use is equal to the
abundant and universal supply of such glands. If we think and use a
homely word and say that disease is only too much dirt in the wheels of
life, then we will see that nature takes this method to wash out the
dirt. As an application, pneumonia is too much dirt in the wheels of the
lungs, if so we must wash out; no where can we go to a better place for
water than to the lymphatics. Are they not like a fire company with
nozzles in all windows ready to flush the burning house?


WHERE ARE THE LYMPHATICS SITUATED?

A student of life must take in all parts, and study their uses and
relations to other parts and systems. We lay much stress on the uses of
blood and the powers of the nerves, but have we any evidence that they
are of more vital importance than the lymphatics? If not let us halt at
this universal system of irrigation and study its great uses in
sustaining animal life. Where are they situated in the body? Answer by,
where are they not? No space is so small as to be out of connection with
the lymphatics, with their nerves, secretory and excretory ducts. Thus
the system of lymphatics is complete and universal in the whole body.
After beholding the lymphatics distributed along all nerves, blood
channels, muscles, glands and all organs of the body, from the brain to
the soles of the feet, all loaded to fullness with watery liquids, we
certainly can make but one conclusion as to their use, which would be to
mingle with and carry out all impurities of the body, by first mixing
with such substances and reducing them to that degree of fluids in
fineness, that could pass through the smallest tubes of the excretory
system, and by that method free the body from all deposits of either
solids or fluids, and leave nourishment.


THE FAT AND LEAN.

A question: Why is he too fat and she only skin and bone, while a third
is just right? If one is just right, why not all? If we get fat by a
natural process why not reverse the process and stop at any desirable
point in flesh size? I believe the law of life is simple and natural in
both respects if wisely understood. Have we nerves of motion to carry
food to all parts, organs, glands and muscles? Have we channels to
convey to all? Have we fluids to suit all demands? Have we brain power
equal to all force needed? Is blood formed sufficiently to fill all
demands? Does that blood contain fat, water, muscle, skin, hair and all
kinds to suit each division, organ, and nerve? If so and blood has
builded too much flesh, can it not take that bulk away by returning
blood to gas and other fluids? Can that which has been done be done
again? If yes be the correct answer, then we should hope to return
blood, fat, flesh and bone to gas and pass them away while in gaseous
condition, and do away with all unnatural size or lack of size. I
believe that it is natural to build and destroy all material form from
the lowest animated being to the greatest rolling world. I believe no
world could be constructed without strict obedience to a governing law,
which gives size by addition and reduces that size by subtraction. Thus
a fat man is builded by great addition, and if desired can be reduced
by much subtraction, which is simply a rule of numbers. We multiply to
enlarge, also subtract when we wish a reduction. Turn your eye for a
time to the supply trains of nature. When the crop is abundant, the
lading would be great, and when the seasons do not suit, the crops are
short or shorter to no lading at all. Thus we have the fat man and the
lean man. Is it not reasonable as a conclusion of the most exacting
philosophy that the train of cars that can bring loads of stone, brick
and mortar until a great bulk is formed, can also carry away until this
bulk disappears in part or all? This being my conclusion I will say by
many years of careful observation of the work of creating bodies and
destroying the same, that to add to is the law of giving size, and to
subtract from is the law of reduction. Both are natural, and both can be
made practical in the reduction or addition of flesh, when found too
great in quantity, or we can add to and give size to the starving muscle
through the action of the motor and nutrient system conveyed to, and
appropriated from the laboratory in which all bodily substances are
formed. Thus the philosophy is absolute, and the sky is clear to proceed
with addition and subtraction of flesh. I believe I am prepared to say
at this time that I understand the nervous system well enough to direct
the laboratory of nature and cause it through its skilled arts to
unload, or reduce, he who is over-burdened with a super-abundance of
flesh, and add to the scanty muscle a sufficiency to give power of
comfortable locomotion and other forces, by opening the gate of the
supply trains of nutrition.




