The Project Gutenberg EBook of Selections from the Writings of
'Abdu'l-Baha by 'Abdu'l-Baha



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license

This is a _copyrighted_ Project Gutenberg eBook, details below. Please
follow the copyright guidelines in this file.



Title: Selections from the Writings of 'Abdu'l-Baha

Author: 'Abdu'l-Baha

Release Date: June 2006 [Ebook #19287]

Language: English

Character set encoding: US-ASCII


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTIONS FROM THE WRITINGS OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA***





Selections from the Writings of 'Abdu'l-Baha


by 'Abdu'l-Baha




Edition 1, (June 2006)





                           BAHA'I TERMS OF USE


You have permission to freely make and use copies of the text and any
other information ("Content") available on this Site including printing,
emailing, posting, distributing, copying, downloading, uploading,
transmitting, displaying the Content in whole or in part subject to the
following:

1. Our copyright notice and the source reference must be attached to the
Content;

2. The Content may not be modified or altered in any way except to change
the font or appearance;

3. The Content must be used solely for a non-commercial purpose.

Although this blanket permission to reproduce the Content is given freely
such that no special permission is required, the Baha'i International
Community retains full copyright protection for all Content included at
this Site under all applicable national and international laws.

For permission to publish, transmit, display or otherwise use the Content
for any commercial purpose, please contact us
(http://reference.bahai.org/en/contact.html).





                                 CONTENTS


Baha'i Terms of Use
1: O peoples of the world! The Sun of Truth hath ...
2: O my Lord! I have drawn nigh unto Thee, in the ...
3: O ye beloved of God! O ye children of His Kingdom! ...
4: Praise be to Him Who hath made the world of being, ...
5: The world's great Light, once resplendent upon all ...
6: O ye peoples of the Kingdom! How many a soul ...
7: O ye spiritual friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! A trusted ...
8: O ye beloved of 'Abdu'l-Baha and ye handmaids of ...
9: O thou whose heart overfloweth with love for the ...
10: O thou dear handmaid of God! Thy letter hath ...
11: Service to the friends is service to the Kingdom of ...
12: Know thou of a certainty that Love is the secret of ...
13: O thou daughter of the Kingdom! Thy letter dated ...
14: O ye two blessed souls! Your letters were received. ...
15: O captive of the love of God! The letter which ...
16: O ye illumined loved ones and ye handmaids of the ...
17: O ye who are the chosen ones of the Abha Kingdom! ...
18: O thou possessor of a seeing heart! Although, ...
19: Praise be to Him through Whose splendours the ...
20: When Christ appeared, twenty centuries ago, although ...
21: O thou distinguished personage, thou seeker after ...
22: O thou who art turning thy face towards God! ...
23: O thou who dost search after truth! Thy letter of ...
24: O spiritual youth! Praise thou God that thou hast ...
25: O thou handmaid of God! It is recorded in eastern ...
26: O thou who seekest the Kingdom of Heaven! Thy ...
27: In cycles gone by, each one of the Manifestations of ...
28: O leaf upon the Tree of Life! The Tree of Life, of ...
29: O thou who art captivated by the truth and ...
30: Existence is of two kinds: one is the existence of ...
31: O thou who art dear, and wise! Thy letter dated ...
32: O ye handmaids of the Lord! In this century--the ...
33: O servant of God! We have noted what thou didst ...
34: O thou who art serving the world of humanity! ...
35: O army of God! A letter signed jointly by all of ...
36: O ye two favoured handmaids of the Lord! The ...
37: O ye dear friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! A blessed letter ...
38: O handmaid of God, who tremblest even as a fresh ...
39: O handmaid of God! Thy letter hath been received, ...
40: O ye whom 'Abdu'l-Baha loveth! I have read your ...
41: O thou who art steadfast in the Covenant, and ...
42: O ye co-workers who are supported by armies ...
43: The prime requisites for them that take counsel ...
44: The members thereof must take counsel together ...
45: The first condition is absolute love and harmony ...
46: O ye who are firm in the Covenant! 'Abdu'l-Baha ...
47: O ye true friends! Your letter hath been received ...
48: O ye loyal servants of the Ancient Beauty! In every ...
49: Thy letter hath been received. Thou didst write of ...
50: You have asked as to the feast in every Baha'i ...
51: As to the Nineteen Day Feast, it rejoiceth mind and ...
52: O servant of the One true God! The Lord be ...
53: Verily, 'Abdu'l-Baha inhaleth the fragrance of the ...
54: Ye have written as to the meetings of the friends, and ...
55: It befitteth the friends to hold a gathering, a ...
56: Whensoever a company of people shall gather in a ...
57: We hear that thou hast in mind to embellish thy ...
58: Thou hast asked about places of worship and the ...
59: 'Abdu'l-Baha hath long cherished the desire that a ...
60: Although to outward seeming the Mashriqu'l-Adhkar ...
61: O Lord, O Thou Who dost bless all those who ...
62: O my well-beloved daughter of the Kingdom! ...
63: O ye blessed souls! The letter ye had written to ...
64: The Mashriqu'l-Adhkar is one of the most vital ...
65: O thou favoured handmaid of the heavenly Kingdom! ...
66: O thou who hast sought illumination from the ...
67: O thou lady of the Kingdom! Thy letter sent from ...
68: O ye who are firm in the Covenant and the Testament! ...
69: Thou hast written concerning organization. The ...
70: O thou ignited candle! Thy letter was received. Its ...
71: O thou beloved maidservant of God! Thy letter ...
72: O thou true friend! Read, in the school of God, the ...
73: O daughter of the Kingdom! Thy letter hath come ...
74: O bird that singeth sweetly of the Abha Beauty! In ...
75: Strive with heart and soul in order to bring about ...
76: O thou who hast an illumined heart! Thou art even ...
77: O thou revered maidservant of God! Thy letter ...
78: O thou who art pure in heart, sanctified in spirit, ...
79: O respected personage! I have read your work, ...
80: O thou who art turning thy face to God! Thy ...
81: Those souls who during the war have served the ...
82: O thou who art firm in the Covenant, thy letter ...
83: Convey on behalf of 'Abdu'l-Baha to thy respected ...
84: O thou dear handmaid of God! Thy letter hath ...
85: As for the question regarding marriage under the ...
86: Baha'i marriage is the commitment of the two ...
87: O thou memento of him who died for the Blessed ...
88: O ye my two beloved children! The news of your ...
89: O thou who art firm in the Covenant! The letter ...
90: O God, my God! This Thy handmaid is calling ...
91: O thou who hast bowed thyself down in prayer ...
92: O ye two believers in God! The Lord, peerless is ...
93: O thou maidservant of God! Every woman who ...
94: O handmaids of the beauty of Abha! Your letter ...
95: O handmaids of the Lord! The spiritual assemblage ...
96: O handmaids of the Merciful! Render ye thanks ...
97: There are certain pillars which have been established ...
98: Were there no educator, all souls would remain ...
99: Thou didst write as to the children: from the very ...
100: My wish is that these children should receive a ...
101: O ye who have peace of soul! Among the divine ...
102: O true companions! All humankind are as children ...
103: The education and training of children is among ...
104: O loved ones of God and handmaids of the ...
105: As to the difference between that material civilization ...
106: Among the greatest of all services that can possibly ...
107: It is the hope of 'Abdu'l-Baha that those youthful ...
108: Ye should consider the question of goodly ...
109: O ye recipients of the favours of God! In this new ...
110: As to the organization of the schools: if possible ...
111: The root cause of wrongdoing is ignorance, and ...
112: In this holy Cause the question of orphans hath ...
113: O handmaid of God!... To the mothers must be ...
114: O ye loving mothers, know ye that in God's sight, ...
115: O ye two well-loved handmaids of God! Whatever ...
116: O thou daughter of the Kingdom! Thy letters ...
117: O dear one of 'Abdu'l-Baha! Be the son of thy ...
118: O ye young Baha'i children, ye seekers after true ...
119: It is incumbent upon Baha'i children to surpass ...
120: O my dear children! Your letter was received. A ...
121: O thou whose years are few, yet whose mental ...
122: As to thy question regarding the education of ...
123: O thou who gazest upon the Kingdom of God! ...
124: The Sunday school for the children in which the ...
125: The changing of teachers should be neither too ...
126: Thy letter was received. Praise be to God it ...
127: O thou servant of the One true God! In this ...
128: Thy letter was received. I hope that thou mayest ...
129: O Friends of the Pure and Omnipotent God! To ...
130: O thou distinguished physician!... Praise be ...
131: When giving medical treatment turn to the ...
132: Although ill health is one of the unavoidable conditions ...
133: There are two ways of healing sickness, material ...
134: O thou who art attracted to the fragrant breathings ...
135: According to the explicit decree of Baha'u'llah ...
136: It is incumbent upon everyone to seek medical ...
137: O thou who art voicing the praises of thy Lord! ...
138: O ye beloved of the Lord! The Kingdom of God ...
139: O thou handmaid of God! The heavenly glad ...
140: Thou didst ask as to the transfiguration of Jesus, ...
141: O thou yearning flame, thou who art afire with ...
142: O thou dear handmaid of God! Praise thou God, ...
143: O thou who hast drawn nigh unto the spirit of ...
144: O lover of humankind! Thy letter hath been ...
145: Thou didst write as to the question of spiritual ...
146: O thou handmaid afire with the love of God! I ...
147: Reflect upon the past events of the time of ...
148: O ye sons and daughters of the Kingdom! ...
149: O thou who hast eyes to see! That which thou ...
150: O thou handmaid aflame with the fire of God's ...
151: O thou believer in the oneness of God! Know ...
152: As to the question regarding the soul of a murderer, ...
153: O thou handmaid of God! In this day, to thank ...
154: O thou son of the Kingdom! Thy most agreeable ...
155: O thou flame of God's love! What thou hast ...
156: O thou servant of the Holy Threshold! We have ...
157: O ye who are strongly attracted! O ye who are ...
158: Grieve thou not over the ascension of my beloved ...
159: As to thy question, doth every soul without ...
160: O thou sincere and loyal handmaid of the Lord! ...
161: O thou who seekest the Kingdom of heaven! ...
162: O ye dear friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! At all times ...
163: O ye two seekers after truth! Your letter was ...
164: O ye two faithful and assured souls! The letter ...
165: O my God! O my God! Verily Thy servant, ...
166: O servant of Baha! Be self-sacrificing in the path ...
167: Thou hadst asked about fate, predestination and ...
168: O thou lady of the Kingdom! Praise thou God ...
169: O ye two patient souls! Your letter was received. ...
170: O thou seeker of the Kingdom! Thy letter was ...
171: O thou beloved maidservant of God, although ...
172: Praise be to God, thy heart is engaged in the ...
173: Those souls that, in this day, enter the divine ...
174: O ye spiritual friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! The letter ...
175: Mortal charm shall fade away, roses shall give ...
176: O thou who art attracted to the Kingdom of ...
177: O living flame of heavenly love! Thine heart ...
178: O maidservant of God! Thy letter dated 9 ...
179: Strive as much as ye can to turn wholly toward ...
180: I hope that in this nether world thou shalt attain ...
181: Regarding the statement in The Hidden Words, ...
182: O ye who are holding fast unto the Covenant and ...
183: O thou daughter of the Kingdom! Thy letter was ...
184: O ye blessed souls! Although ye are undergoing ...
185: O ye friends and maidservants of the Merciful! ...
186: O thou who art firm in the Covenant! Three ...
187: O thou who art firm in the Covenant! Thy letter ...
188: O ye the cherished loved ones of 'Abdu'l-Baha! ...
189: Today, every wise, vigilant and foresighted person ...
190: Thou seest me, O my God, bowed down in lowliness, ...
191: O thou who hast been sore afflicted on the pathway ...
192: Today, the Lord of Hosts is the defender of the ...
193: It is daybreak, and from the rising-point of the ...
194: O ye the sincere loved ones of the Abha Beauty! ...
195: O thou exalted bough of the divine Lote-Tree! ...
196: O thou who art steadfast in the Covenant! Thy ...
197: O thou servant of God! Do not grieve at the ...
198: O thou who art enamoured of the breaths of God! ...
199: O ye sincere ones, ye longing ones, ye who are ...
200: O my spiritual loved ones! At a time when an ...
201: O thou who art carried away by the love of God! ...
202: O ye lovers of truth, ye servants of humankind! ...
203: O thou who art enamoured of the Covenant! ...
204: O phoenix of that immortal flame kindled in the ...
205: O ye respected souls! From the continual imitation ...
206: Praise be to Him Who hath rent the dark asunder, ...
207: O ye who have turned your faces toward the ...
208: O ye servants of the Sacred Threshold! The ...
209: O ye servants of the Blessed Beauty!... It is clear ...
210: O ye roses in the garden of God's love! O ye ...
211: When the friends do not endeavour to spread the ...
212: It is at such times that the friends of God avail ...
213: The teaching work should under all conditions be ...
214: Follow thou the way of thy Lord, and say not ...
215: My hope from the grace of the One true Lord ...
216: Rest assured that the breathings of the Holy Spirit ...
217: The teacher, when teaching, must be himself ...
218: O ye close and dear friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! ...
219: O ye sons and daughters of the Kingdom! Your ...
220: The Lord of all mankind hath fashioned this ...
221: O ye who are steadfast in the Covenant! The ...
222: O ye homeless and wanderers in the Path of God! ...
223: O ye sons and daughters of the Kingdom! Your ...
224: O thou servant of God! Thy letter was received. ...
225: O ye concourse of the Kingdom of Abha! Two ...
226: O thou servant of God! Thy letter was received, ...
227: O ye esteemed ones who are pioneers among the ...
228: O Servant of the Threshold of Baha'u'llah! Thy ...
229: O sincere servant of the True One! I hear thou ...
230: O respected personage! Thy second letter dated ...
231: O thou blossom on the Tree of Life! Happy art ...
232: As to President Wilson, the fourteen principles ...
233: O ye faithful friends, O ye sincere servants of ...
234: O thou who art enraptured by the sweet breathings ...
235: O God, my God! Illumine the brows of Thy true ...
236: O Thou, my God, Who guidest the seeker to the ...
237: Whoso reciteth this prayer with lowliness and ...






REFERENCES TO THE QUR'AN


In footnotes referring to the Qur'an the surihs have been numbered
according to the original, whereas the verse numbers are those in
Rodwell's translation which differ sometimes from those of the Arabic.





1: O PEOPLES OF THE WORLD! THE SUN OF TRUTH HATH ...


O peoples of the world! The Sun of Truth hath risen to illumine the whole
earth, and to spiritualize the community of man. Laudable are the results
and the fruits thereof, abundant the holy evidences deriving from this
grace. This is mercy unalloyed and purest bounty; it is light for the
world and all its peoples; it is harmony and fellowship, and love and
solidarity; indeed it is compassion and unity, and the end of foreignness;
it is the being at one, in complete dignity and freedom, with all on
earth.

The Blessed Beauty saith: 'Ye are all the fruits of one tree, the leaves
of one branch.' Thus hath He likened this world of being to a single tree,
and all its peoples to the leaves thereof, and the blossoms and fruits. It
is needful for the bough to blossom, and leaf and fruit to flourish, and
upon the interconnection of all parts of the world-tree, dependeth the
flourishing of leaf and blossom, and the sweetness of the fruit.

For this reason must all human beings powerfully sustain one another and
seek for everlasting life; and for this reason must the lovers of God in
this contingent world become the mercies and the blessings sent forth by
that clement King of the seen and unseen realms. Let them purify their
sight and behold all humankind as leaves and blossoms and fruits of the
tree of being. Let them at all times concern themselves with doing a
kindly thing for one of their fellows, offering to someone love,
consideration, thoughtful help. Let them see no one as their enemy, or as
wishing them ill, but think of all humankind as their friends; regarding
the alien as an intimate, the stranger as a companion, staying free of
prejudice, drawing no lines.

In this day, the one favoured at the Threshold of the Lord is he who
handeth round the cup of faithfulness; who bestoweth, even upon his
enemies, the jewel of bounty, and lendeth, even to his fallen oppressor, a
helping hand; it is he who will, even to the fiercest of his foes, be a
loving friend. These are the Teachings of the Blessed Beauty, these the
counsels of the Most Great Name.

O ye dear friends! The world is at war and the human race is in travail
and mortal combat. The dark night of hate hath taken over, and the light
of good faith is blotted out. The peoples and kindreds of the earth have
sharpened their claws, and are hurling themselves one against the other.
It is the very foundation of the human race that is being destroyed. It is
thousands of households that are vagrant and dispossessed, and every year
seeth thousands upon thousands of human beings weltering in their
life-blood on dusty battlefields. The tents of life and joy are down. The
generals practise their generalship, boasting of the blood they shed,
competing one with the next in inciting to violence. 'With this sword,'
saith one of them, 'I beheaded a people!' And another: 'I toppled a nation
to the ground!' And yet another: 'I brought a government down!' On such
things do men pride themselves, in such do they glory!
Love--righteousness--these are everywhere censured, while despised are
harmony, and devotion to the truth.

The Faith of the Blessed Beauty is summoning mankind to safety and love,
to amity and peace; it hath raised up its tabernacle on the heights of the
earth, and directeth its call to all nations. Wherefore, O ye who are
God's lovers, know ye the value of this precious Faith, obey its
teachings, walk in this road that is drawn straight, and show ye this way
to the people. Lift up your voices and sing out the song of the Kingdom.
Spread far and wide the precepts and counsels of the loving Lord, so that
this world will change into another world, and this darksome earth will be
flooded with light, and the dead body of mankind will arise and live; so
that every soul will ask for immortality, through the holy breaths of God.

Soon will your swiftly-passing days be over, and the fame and riches, the
comforts, the joys provided by this rubbish-heap, the world, will be gone
without a trace. Summon ye, then, the people to God, and invite humanity
to follow the example of the Company on high. Be ye loving fathers to the
orphan, and a refuge to the helpless, and a treasury for the poor, and a
cure for the ailing. Be ye the helpers of every victim of oppression, the
patrons of the disadvantaged. Think ye at all times of rendering some
service to every member of the human race. Pay ye no heed to aversion and
rejection, to disdain, hostility, injustice: act ye in the opposite way.
Be ye sincerely kind, not in appearance only. Let each one of God's loved
ones centre his attention on this: to be the Lord's mercy to man; to be
the Lord's grace. Let him do some good to every person whose path he
crosseth, and be of some benefit to him. Let him improve the character of
each and all, and reorient the minds of men. In this way, the light of
divine guidance will shine forth, and the blessings of God will cradle all
mankind: for love is light, no matter in what abode it dwelleth; and hate
is darkness, no matter where it may make its nest. O friends of God! That
the hidden Mystery may stand revealed, and the secret essence of all
things may be disclosed, strive ye to banish that darkness for ever and
ever.





2: O MY LORD! I HAVE DRAWN NIGH UNTO THEE, IN THE ...


O my Lord! I have drawn nigh unto Thee, in the depths of this darksome
night, confiding in Thee with the tongue of my heart, trembling with joy
at the sweet scents that blow from Thy realm, the All-Glorious, calling
unto Thee, saying:

O my Lord, no words do I find to glorify Thee; no way do I see for the
bird of my mind to soar upward to Thy Kingdom of Holiness; for Thou, in
Thy very essence, art sanctified above those tributes, and in Thy very
being art beyond the reach of those praises which are offered Thee by the
people that Thou hast created. In the sanctity of Thine own being hast
Thou ever been exalted above the understanding of the learned among the
Company on high, and forever wilt Thou remain enwrapped within the
holiness of Thine own reality, unreached by the knowledge of those
dwellers in Thine exalted Kingdom who glorify Thy Name.

O God, my God! How can I glorify or describe Thee inaccessible as Thou
art; immeasurably high and sanctified art Thou above every description and
praise.

O God, my God! Have mercy then upon my helpless state, my poverty, my
misery, my abasement! Give me to drink from the generous cup of Thy grace
and forgiveness, stir me with the sweet scents of Thy love, gladden my
bosom with the light of Thy knowledge, purify my soul with the mysteries
of Thy oneness, raise me to life with the gentle breeze that cometh from
the gardens of Thy mercy--till I sever myself from all else but Thee, and
lay hold of the hem of Thy garment of grandeur, and consign to oblivion
all that is not Thee, and be companioned by the sweet breathings that waft
during these Thy days, and attain unto faithfulness at Thy Threshold of
Holiness, and arise to serve Thy Cause, and to be humble before Thy loved
ones, and, in the presence of Thy favoured ones, to be nothingness itself.

Verily art Thou the Helper, the Sustainer, the Exalted, the Most Generous.

O God, my God! I beg of Thee by the dawning of the light of Thy Beauty
that hath illumined all the earth, and by the glance of Thy divine
compassion's eye that considereth all things, and by the surging sea of
Thy bestowals in which all things are immersed, and by Thy streaming
clouds of bounty raining down gifts upon the essences of all created
things, and by the splendours of Thy mercy that existed before ever the
world was--to help Thy chosen ones to be faithful, and assist Thy loved
ones to serve at Thine exalted Threshold, and cause them to gain the
victory through the battalions of Thy might that overpowereth all things,
and reinforce them with a great fighting host from out of the Concourse on
high.

O my Lord! They are weak souls standing at Thy door; they are paupers in
Thy courtyard, desperate for Thy grace, in dire need of Thy succour,
turning their faces toward the kingdom of Thy oneness, yearning for the
bounties of Thy bestowals. O my Lord! Flood Thou their minds with Thy holy
light; cleanse Thou their hearts with the grace of Thine assistance;
gladden their bosoms with the fragrance of the joys that waft from Thy
Company above; make bright their eyes by beholding the signs and tokens of
Thy might; cause them to be the ensigns of purity, the banners of sanctity
waving high above all creatures on the summits of the earth; make Thou
their words to move hearts which are even as solid rock. May they arise to
serve Thee and dedicate themselves to the Kingdom of Thy divinity, and set
their faces toward the realm of Thy Self-Subsistence, and spread far and
wide Thy signs, and be illumined by Thy streaming lights, and unfold Thy
hidden mysteries. May they guide Thy servants unto gentle waters and to
the fountain of Thy mercy that welleth and leapeth in the midmost heart of
the Heaven of Thy oneness. May they hoist the sail of detachment upon the
Ark of Salvation, and move over the seas of Thy knowledge; may they spread
wide the pinions of unity and by their aid soar upward to the Kingdom of
Thy singleness to become servants whom the Supreme Concourse will applaud,
whose praises the dwellers in Thine all-glorious realm will utter; may
they hear the heralds of the invisible world as they raise their cry of
the Most Great Glad-Tidings; may they, in their longing to meet Thee,
invoke and pray unto Thee, intoning wondrous orisons at the dawn of
light--O my Lord Who disposest all things--shedding their tears at
morningtide and even, yearning to pass into the shadow of Thy mercy that
endeth never.

Help them, O my Lord, under all conditions, support them at all times with
Thine angels of holiness, they who are Thine invisible hosts, Thy heavenly
battalions who bring down to defeat the massed armies of this nether
world.

Verily art Thou the Mighty, the Powerful, the Strong, the
All-Encompassing, the One Who hath dominion over all that is.

O holy Lord! O Lord of loving-kindness! We stray about Thy dwelling,
longing to behold Thy beauty, and loving all Thy ways. We are hapless,
lowly, and of small account. We are paupers: show us mercy, give us
bounty; look not upon our failings, hide Thou our endless sins. Whatever
we are, still are we Thine, and what we speak and hear is praise of Thee,
and it is Thy face we seek, Thy path we follow. Thou art the Lord of
loving-kindness, we are sinners and astray and far from home. Wherefore, O
Cloud of Mercy, grant us some drops of rain. O Flowering Bed of grace,
send forth a fragrant breeze. O Sea of all bestowals, roll towards us a
great wave. O Sun of Bounty, send down a shaft of light. Grant us pity,
grant us grace. By Thy beauty, we come with no provision but our sins,
with no good deeds to tell of, only hopes. Unless Thy concealing veil doth
cover us, and Thy protection shield and cradle us, what power have these
helpless souls to rise and serve Thee, what substance have these wretched
ones to make a brave display? Thou Who art the Mighty, the All-Powerful,
help us, favour us; withered as we are, revive us with showers from Thy
clouds of grace; lowly as we are, illumine us with bright rays from the
Day-Star of Thy oneness. Cast Thou these thirsty fish into the ocean of
Thy mercy, guide Thou this lost caravan to the shelter of Thy singleness;
to the wellspring of guidance lead Thou the ones who have wandered far
astray, and grant to those who have missed the path a haven within the
precincts of Thy might. Lift Thou to these parched lips the bounteous and
soft-flowing waters of heaven, raise up these dead to everlasting life.
Grant Thou to the blind eyes that will see. Make Thou the deaf to hear,
the dumb to speak. Set Thou the dispirited ablaze, make Thou the heedless
mindful, warn Thou the proud, awaken those who sleep.

Thou art the Mighty, Thou art the Bestower, Thou art the Loving. Verily
Thou art the Beneficent, the Most Exalted.

O ye loved ones of God, ye helpers of this evanescent Servant! When the
Sun of Reality shed its endless bounties from the Dawning-Point of all
desires, and this world of being was lit with that sacred light from pole
to pole, with such intensity did it cast down its rays that it blotted out
the Stygian dark forever, whereupon this earth of dust became the envy of
the spheres of heaven, and this lowly place took on the state and panoply
of the supernal realm. The gentle breeze of holiness blew over it,
scattering abroad sweet savours; the spring winds of heaven passed by it,
and over it, from the Source of all bestowals, were wafted fruitful airs
that carried boundless grace. Then the bright dawn rose, and there came
tidings of great joy. The divine springtime was here, pitching its tents
in this contingent world, so that all creation leapt and danced. The
withered earth brought forth immortal blooms, the dead dust woke to
everlasting life. Then came forth flowers of mystic learning, and,
bespeaking the knowledge of God, fresh greenery from the ground. The
contingent world displayed God's bounteous gifts, the visible world
reflecting the glories of realms that were hidden from sight. God's
summons was proclaimed, the table of the Eternal Covenant was readied, the
cup of the Testament was passed from hand to hand, the universal
invitation was sent forth. Then some among the people were set afire with
the wine of heaven, and some were left without a share of this greatest of
bestowals. The sight and insight of some were illumined by the light of
grace, and there were some who, hearing the anthems of unity, leapt for
joy. There were birds that began to carol in the gardens of holiness,
there were nightingales in the branches of the rose tree of heaven that
raised their plaintive cries. Then were decked and adorned both the
Kingdom on high and the earth below, and this world became the envy of
high heaven. Yet alas, alas, the neglectful have stayed fast in their
heedless sleep, and the foolish have spurned this most sacred of
bestowals. The blind remain shrouded in their veils, the deaf have no
share in what hath come to pass, the dead have no hopes of attaining
thereto, for even as He saith: 'They despair of the life to come, as the
infidels despair that the dwellers in the tombs will rise again.'(1)

As to you, O ye loved ones of God! Loose your tongues and offer Him
thanks; praise ye and glorify the Beauty of the Adored One, for ye have
drunk from this purest of chalices, and ye are cheered and set aglow with
this wine. Ye have detected the sweet scents of holiness, ye have smelled
the musk of faithfulness from Joseph's raiment. Ye have fed on the
honey-dew of loyalty from the hands of Him Who is the one alone Beloved,
ye have feasted on immortal dishes at the bounteous banquet table of the
Lord. This plenty is a special favour bestowed by a loving God, these are
blessings and rare gifts deriving from His grace. In the Gospel He saith:
'For many are called, but few are chosen.'(2) That is, to many is it
offered, but rare is the soul who is singled out to receive the great
bestowal of guidance. 'Such is the bounty of God: to whom He will He
giveth it, and of immense bounty is God.'(3)

O ye loved ones of God! From the peoples of the world, against the Candle
of the Covenant discordant winds do beat and blow. The Nightingale of
faithfulness is beset by renegades who are even as ravens of hate. The
Dove of God's remembrance is hard pressed by mindless birds of night, and
the Gazelle that dwelleth in the meadows of God's love is being hunted
down by ravening beasts. Deadly is the peril, tormenting the pain.

The beloved of the Lord must stand fixed as the mountains, firm as
impregnable walls. Unmoved must they remain by even the direst
adversities, ungrieved by the worst of disasters. Let them cling to the
hem of Almighty God, and put their faith in the Beauty of the Most High;
let them lean on the unfailing help that cometh from the Ancient Kingdom,
and depend on the care and protection of the generous Lord. Let them at
all times refresh and restore themselves with the dews of heavenly grace,
and with the breaths of the Holy Spirit revive and renew themselves from
moment to moment. Let them rise up to serve their Lord, and do all in
their power to scatter His breathings of holiness far and wide. Let them
be a mighty fortress to defend His Faith, an impregnable citadel for the
hosts of the Ancient Beauty. Let them faithfully guard the edifice of the
Cause of God from every side; let them become the bright stars of His
luminous skies. For the hordes of darkness are assailing this Cause from
every direction, and the peoples of the earth are intent on extinguishing
this evident Light. And since all the kindreds of the world are mounting
their attack, how can our attention be diverted, even for a moment?
Assuredly be cognizant of these things, be watchful, and guard the Cause
of God.

The most vital duty, in this day, is to purify your characters, to correct
your manners, and improve your conduct. The beloved of the Merciful must
show forth such character and conduct among His creatures, that the
fragrance of their holiness may be shed upon the whole world, and may
quicken the dead, inasmuch as the purpose of the Manifestation of God and
the dawning of the limitless lights of the Invisible is to educate the
souls of men, and refine the character of every living man--so that blessed
individuals, who have freed themselves from the murk of the animal world,
shall rise up with those qualities which are the adornings of the reality
of man. The purpose is that earthlings should turn into the people of
Heaven, and those who walk in darkness should come into the light, and
those who are excluded should join the inner circle of the Kingdom, and
those who are as nothing should become intimates of the everlasting Glory.
It is that the portionless should gain their share of the boundless sea,
and the ignorant drink their fill from the living fount of knowledge; that
those who thirst for blood should forsake their savagery, and those who
are barbed of claw should turn gentle and forbearing, and those who love
war should seek instead for true conciliation; it is that the brutal,
their talons razor-sharp, should enjoy the benefits of lasting peace; that
the foul should learn that there is a realm of purity, and the tainted
find their way to the rivers of holiness.

Unless these divine bestowals be revealed from the inner self of
humankind, the bounty of the Manifestation will prove barren, and the
dazzling rays of the Sun of Truth will have no effect whatever.

Wherefore, O beloved of the Lord, strive ye with heart and soul to receive
a share of His holy attributes and take your portion of the bounties of
His sanctity--that ye may become the tokens of unity, the standards of
singleness, and seek out the meaning of oneness; that ye may, in this
garden of God, lift up your voices and sing the blissful anthems of the
spirit. Become ye as the birds who offer Him their thanks, and in the
blossoming bowers of life chant ye such melodies as will dazzle the minds
of those who know. Raise ye a banner on the highest peaks of the world, a
flag of God's favour to ripple and wave in the winds of His grace; plant
ye a tree in the field of life, amid the roses of this visible world, that
will yield a fruitage fresh and sweet.

I swear by the true Teacher that if ye will act in accord with the
admonitions of God, as revealed in His luminous Tablets, this darksome
dust will mirror forth the Kingdom of heaven, and this nether world the
realm of the All-Glorious.

O ye loved ones of the Lord! Praise be to Him, the unseen, welling
bounties of the Sun of Truth encompass you on every side, and from every
direction the portals of His mercy stand ajar. Now is the time to take
advantage of these bestowals, and benefit therefrom. Know ye the value of
this time, let not this chance escape you. Stay ye entirely clear of this
dark world's concerns, and become ye known by the attributes of those
essences that make their home in the Kingdom. Then shall ye see how
intense is the glory of the heavenly Day-Star, and how blinding bright are
the tokens of bounty coming out of the invisible realm.





3: O YE BELOVED OF GOD! O YE CHILDREN OF HIS KINGDOM! ...


O ye beloved of God! O ye children of His Kingdom! Verily, verily, the new
heaven and the new earth are come. The holy City, new Jerusalem, hath come
down from on high in the form of a maid of heaven, veiled, beauteous, and
unique, and prepared for reunion with her lovers on earth. The angelic
company of the Celestial Concourse hath joined in a call that hath run
throughout the universe, all loudly and mightily acclaiming: 'This is the
City of God and His abode, wherein shall dwell the pure and holy among His
servants. He shall live with them, for they are His people and He is their
Lord.'

He hath wiped away their tears, kindled their light, rejoiced their hearts
and enraptured their souls. Death shall no more overtake them neither
shall sorrow, weeping or tribulation afflict them. The Lord God Omnipotent
hath been enthroned in His Kingdom and hath made all things new. This is
the truth and what truth can be greater than that announced by the
Revelation of St. John the Divine?

He is Alpha and Omega. He is the One that will give unto him that is
athirst of the fountain of the water of life and bestow upon the sick the
remedy of true salvation. He whom such grace aideth is verily he that
receiveth the most glorious heritage from the Prophets of God and His holy
ones. The Lord will be his God, and he His dearly-beloved son.

Rejoice, then, O ye beloved of the Lord and His chosen ones, and ye the
children of God and His people, raise your voices to laud and magnify the
Lord, the Most High; for His light hath beamed forth, His signs have
appeared and the billows of His rising ocean have scattered on every shore
many a precious pearl.





4: PRAISE BE TO HIM WHO HATH MADE THE WORLD OF BEING, ...


Praise be to Him Who hath made the world of being, and hath fashioned all
that is, Him Who hath raised up the sincere to a station of honour(4) and
hath made the invisible world to appear on the plane of the visible--yet
still, in their drunken stupor,(5) do men wander and stray.

He hath laid down the foundations of the lofty Citadel, He hath
inaugurated the Cycle of Glory, He hath brought forth a new creation on
this day that is clearly Judgement Day--and still do the heedless stay fast
in their drunken sleep.

The Bugle(6) hath sounded, the Trumpet(7) hath been blown, the Crier hath
raised his call, and all upon the earth have swooned away--but still do the
dead, in the tombs of their bodies, sleep on.

And the second clarion(8) hath sounded, there hath followed the second
blast after the first,(9) and the dread woe hath come, and every nursing
mother hath forgot the infant at her breast(10)--yet still the people,
confused and distracted, heed it not.

And the Resurrection hath dawned, and the Hour hath struck, and the Path
hath been drawn straight, and the Balance hath been set up, and all upon
the earth have been gathered together(11)--but still the people see no sign
of the way.

The light hath shone forth, and radiance floodeth Mount Sinai, and a
gentle wind bloweth from over the gardens of the Ever-Forgiving Lord; the
sweet breaths of the spirit are passing by, and those who lay buried in
the grave are rising up--and still do the heedless slumber on in their
tombs.

The flames of hell have been made to blaze, and heaven hath been brought
nigh; the celestial gardens are in flower, and fresh pools are brimming
over, and paradise gleameth in beauty--but the unaware are still mired down
in their empty dreams.

The veil hath fallen away, the curtain is lifted, the clouds have parted,
the Lord of Lords is in plain sight--yet all hath passed the sinners by.

It is He Who hath made for you the new creation,(12) and brought on the
woe(13) that surpasseth all others, and gathered the holy together in the
realm on high. Verily in this are signs for those who have eyes to see.

And among His signs is the appearance of omens and joyous prophecies, of
hints and clues, the spreading of many and various tidings, and the
anticipations of the righteous, they who have now attained their goal.

And among His signs are His splendours, rising above the horizon of
oneness, His lights streaming out from the dayspring of might, and the
announcement of the Most Great Glad-Tidings by His Herald, the One, the
Incomparable. Verily in this is a brilliant proof for the company of those
who know.

Among His signs is His being manifest, being seen by all, standing as His
own proof, and His presence among witnesses in every region, among peoples
who fell upon Him even as wolves, and compassed Him about from every side.

Among His signs is His withstanding powerful nations and all-conquering
states, and a host of enemies thirsting for His blood, intent at every
moment upon His ruin, wheresoever He might be. Verily this is a matter
deserving the scrutiny of those who ponder the signs and tokens of God.

Another of His signs is the marvel of His discourse, the eloquence of His
utterance, the rapidity with which His Writings were revealed, His words
of wisdom, His verses, His epistles, His communes, His unfolding of the
Qur'an, both the abstruse verses thereof and the clear. By thy very life!
This thing is plain as day to whoever will regard it with the eye of
justice.

Again among His signs is the dawning sun of His knowledge, and the rising
moon of His arts and skills, and His demonstrating perfection in all His
ways, as testified by the learned and accomplished of many nations.

And again among His signs is the fact that His beauty stayed inviolate,
and His human temple was protected as He revealed His splendours, despite
the massed attacks of all His foes, who came against Him in their
thousands with their darting arrows, spears and swords. Herein is verily a
wonder and a warning to any fair judge.

And among His signs is His long-suffering, His tribulations and His woes,
His agony in His chains and fetters, and His calling out at every moment:
'Come unto Me, come unto Me, ye righteous! Come unto Me, come unto Me, ye
lovers of the good! Come unto Me, come unto Me, ye dawning points of
light!' Verily the gates of mystery are opened wide--but still do the
wicked disport themselves with their vain cavillings!(14)

Yet another of His signs is the promulgation of His Book, His decisive
Holy Text wherein He reproved the kings, and His dire warning to that
one(15) whose mighty rule was felt around the world--and whose great throne
then toppled down in a matter of brief days--this being a fact clearly
established and widely known.

And among His signs is the sublimity of His grandeur, His exalted state,
His towering glory, and the shining out of His beauty above the horizon of
the Prison: so that heads were bowed before Him and voices lowered, and
humble were the faces that turned His way. This is a proof never witnessed
in the ages gone before.

Again among His signs are the extraordinary things He continually did, the
miracles He performed, the wonders appearing from Him without interruption
like the streaming down of His clouds--and the acknowledgement, even by
unbelievers, of His powerful light. By His own life! This was clearly
verified, it was demonstrated to those of every persuasion who came into
the presence of the living, the self-subsisting Lord.

And yet another of His signs is the wide-spreading rays of the sun of His
era, the rising moon of His times in the heaven of all the ages: His day,
which standeth at the summit of all days, for its rank and power, its
sciences and its arts, reaching far and wide, that have dazzled the world
and astonished the minds of men.

Verily is this a matter settled and established for all time.





5: THE WORLD'S GREAT LIGHT, ONCE RESPLENDENT UPON ALL ...


The world's great Light, once resplendent upon all mankind, hath set, to
shine everlastingly from the Abha Horizon, His Kingdom of fadeless glory,
shedding splendour upon His loved ones from on high and breathing into
their hearts and souls the breath of eternal life.

Ponder in your hearts that which He hath foretold in His Tablet of the
Divine Vision that hath been spread throughout the world. Therein He
saith: 'Thereupon she wailed and exclaimed: "May the world and all that is
therein be a ransom for Thy woes. O Sovereign of heaven and earth!
Wherefore hast Thou left Thyself in the hands of the dwellers of this
prison-city of Akka? Hasten Thou to other dominions, to Thy retreats
above, whereon the eyes of the people of names have never fallen." We
smiled and spake not. Reflect upon these most exalted words, and
comprehend the purpose of this hidden and sacred mystery.'

O ye beloved of the Lord! Beware, beware lest ye hesitate and waver. Let
not fear fall upon you, neither be troubled nor dismayed. Take ye good
heed lest this calamitous day slacken the flames of your ardour, and
quench your tender hopes. Today is the day for steadfastness and
constancy. Blessed are they that stand firm and immovable as the rock and
brave the storm and stress of this tempestuous hour. They, verily, shall
be the recipients of God's grace; they, verily, shall receive His divine
assistance, and shall be truly victorious. They shall shine amidst mankind
with a radiance which the dwellers of the Pavilion of Glory laud and
magnify. To them is proclaimed this celestial call, revealed in His Most
Holy Book: 'Let not your hearts be perturbed, O people, when the glory of
My Presence is withdrawn, and the ocean of My utterance is stilled. In My
presence amongst you there is a wisdom, and in My absence there is yet
another, inscrutable to all but God, the Incomparable, the All-Knowing.
Verily, We behold you from Our realm of glory, and shall aid whosoever
will arise for the triumph of Our Cause with the hosts of the Concourse on
high and a company of Our favoured angels.'

The Sun of Truth, that Most Great Light, hath set upon the horizon of the
world to rise with deathless splendour over the Realm of the Limitless. In
His Most Holy Book He calleth the firm and steadfast of His friends: 'Be
not dismayed, O peoples of the world, when the day-star of My beauty is
set, and the heaven of My tabernacle is concealed from your eyes. Arise to
further My Cause, and to exalt My Word amongst men.'





6: O YE PEOPLES OF THE KINGDOM! HOW MANY A SOUL ...


O ye peoples of the Kingdom! How many a soul expended all its span of life
in worship, endured the mortification of the flesh, longed to gain an
entry into the Kingdom, and yet failed, while ye, with neither toil nor
pain nor self-denial, have won the prize and entered in.

It is even as in the time of the Messiah, when the Pharisees and the pious
were left without a portion, while Peter, John and Andrew, given neither
to pious worship nor ascetic practice, won the day. Wherefore, thank ye
God for setting upon your heads the crown of glory everlasting, for
granting unto you this immeasurable grace.

The time hath come when, as a thank-offering for this bestowal, ye should
grow in faith and constancy as day followeth day, and should draw ever
nearer to the Lord, your God, becoming magnetized to such a degree, and so
aflame, that your holy melodies in praise of the Beloved will reach upward
to the Company on high; and that each one of you, even as a nightingale in
this rose garden of God, will glorify the Lord of Hosts, and become the
teacher of all who dwell on earth.





7: O YE SPIRITUAL FRIENDS OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA! A TRUSTED ...


O ye spiritual friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! A trusted messenger hath arrived
and hath, in the world of the spirit, delivered a message from God's loved
ones. This auspicious courier bringeth fragrances of great ardour and
wafteth the life-giving breezes of the love of God. He maketh the heart to
dance for joy and filleth up the soul with an ecstasy of love and rapture.
So intensely hath the glory of Divine Unity penetrated souls and hearts
that all are now bound one to another with heavenly ties, and all are even
as a single heart, a single soul. Wherefore reflections of the spirit and
impressions of the Divine are now mirrored clear and sharp in the deep
heart's core. I beg of God to strengthen these spiritual bonds as day
followeth day, and make this mystic oneness to shine ever more brightly,
until at last all shall be as troops marshalled together beneath the
banner of the Covenant within the sheltering shade of the Word of God;
that they may strive with all their might until universal fellowship,
close and warm, and unalloyed love, and spiritual relationships, will
connect all the hearts in the world. Then will all humankind, because of
this fresh and dazzling bounty, be gathered in a single homeland. Then
will conflict and dissension vanish from the face of the earth, then will
mankind be cradled in love for the beauty of the All-Glorious. Discord
will change to accord, dissension to unison. The roots of malevolence will
be torn out, the basis of aggression destroyed. The bright rays of union
will obliterate the darkness of limitations, and the splendours of heaven
will make the human heart to be even as a mine veined richly with the love
of God.

O ye loved ones of the Lord! This is the hour when ye must associate with
all the earth's peoples in extreme kindliness and love, and be to them the
signs and tokens of God's great mercy. Ye must become the very soul of the
world, the living spirit in the body of the children of men. In this
wondrous Age, at this time when the Ancient Beauty, the Most Great Name,
bearing unnumbered gifts, hath risen above the horizon of the world, the
Word of God hath infused such awesome power into the inmost essence of
humankind that He hath stripped men's human qualities of all effect, and
hath, with His all-conquering might, unified the peoples in a vast sea of
oneness.

Now is the time for the lovers of God to raise high the banners of unity,
to intone, in the assemblages of the world, the verses of friendship and
love and to demonstrate to all that the grace of God is one. Thus will the
tabernacles of holiness be upraised on the summits of the earth, gathering
all peoples into the protective shadow of the Word of Oneness. This great
bounty will dawn over the world at the time when the lovers of God shall
arise to carry out His Teachings, and to scatter far and wide the fresh,
sweet scents of universal love.

In every dispensation, there hath been the commandment of fellowship and
love, but it was a commandment limited to the community of those in mutual
agreement, not to the dissident foe. In this wondrous age, however,
praised be God, the commandments of God are not delimited, not restricted
to any one group of people, rather have all the friends been commanded to
show forth fellowship and love, consideration and generosity and
loving-kindness to every community on earth. Now must the lovers of God
arise to carry out these instructions of His: let them be kindly fathers
to the children of the human race, and compassionate brothers to the
youth, and self-denying offspring to those bent with years. The meaning of
this is that ye must show forth tenderness and love to every human being,
even to your enemies, and welcome them all with unalloyed friendship, good
cheer, and loving-kindness. When ye meet with cruelty and persecution at
another's hands, keep faith with him; when malevolence is directed your
way, respond with a friendly heart. To the spears and arrows rained upon
you, expose your breasts for a target mirror-bright; and in return for
curses, taunts and wounding words, show forth abounding love. Thus will
all peoples witness the power of the Most Great Name, and every nation
acknowledge the might of the Ancient Beauty, and see how He hath toppled
down the walls of discord, and how surely He hath guided all the peoples
of the earth to oneness; how He hath lit man's world, and made this earth
of dust to send forth streams of light.

These human creatures are even as children, they are brash and
unconcerned. These children must be reared with infinite, loving care, and
tenderly fostered in the embraces of mercy, so that they may taste the
spiritual honey-sweetness of God's love; that they may become like unto
candles shedding their beams across this darksome world, and may clearly
perceive what blazing crowns of glory the Most Great Name, the Ancient
Beauty, hath set on the brows of His beloved, what bounties He hath
bestowed on the hearts of those He holdeth dear, what a love He hath cast
into the breasts of humankind, and what treasures of friendship He hath
made to appear amongst all men.

O God, my God! Aid Thou Thy trusted servants to have loving and tender
hearts. Help them to spread, amongst all the nations of the earth, the
light of guidance that cometh from the Company on high. Verily Thou art
the Strong, the Powerful, the Mighty, the All-Subduing, the Ever-Giving.
Verily Thou art the Generous, the Gentle, the Tender, the Most Bountiful.





8: O YE BELOVED OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA AND YE HANDMAIDS OF ...


O ye beloved of 'Abdu'l-Baha and ye handmaids of the Merciful! It is early
morning, and the reviving winds of the Abha Paradise are blowing over all
creation, but they can stir only the pure of heart, and only the pure
sense can detect their fragrance. Only the perceiving eye beholdeth the
rays of the sun; only the listening ear can hear the singing of the
Concourse on high. Although the plentiful rains of spring, the bestowals
of Heaven, pour down upon all things, they can only fructify good soil;
they love not brackish ground, where no results of all the bounty can be
shown.

Today the soft and holy breathings of the Abha Realm are passing over
every land, but only the pure in heart draw nigh and derive a benefit
therefrom. It is the hope of this wronged soul that from the grace of the
Self-Subsistent One and by the manifest power of the Word of God, the
heads of the unmindful may be cleared, that they may perceive these sweet
savours which blow from secret rosebeds of the spirit.

O ye friends of God! True friends are even as skilled physicians, and the
Teachings of God are as healing balm, a medicine for the conscience of
man. They clear the head, so that a man can breathe them in and delight in
their sweet fragrance. They waken those who sleep. They bring awareness to
the unheeding, and a portion to the outcast, and to the hopeless, hope.

If in this day a soul shall act according to the precepts and the counsels
of God, he will serve as a divine physician to mankind, and like the trump
of Israfil,(16) he will call the dead of this contingent world to life;
for the confirmations of the Abha Realm are never interrupted, and such a
virtuous soul hath, to befriend him, the unfailing help of the Company on
high. Thus shall a sorry gnat become an eagle in the fulness of his
strength, and a feeble sparrow change to a royal falcon in the heights of
ancient glory.

Wherefore, look not on the degree of your capacity, ask not if you are
worthy of the task: rest ye your hopes on the help and loving-kindness,
the favours and bestowals of Baha'u'llah--may my soul be offered up for His
friends! Urge on the steed of high endeavour over the field of sacrifice,
and carry away from this wide arena the prize of divine grace.

O ye handmaids of the merciful Lord! How many queens of this world laid
down their heads on a pillow of dust and disappeared. No fruit was left of
them, no trace, no sign, not even their names. For them, no more granting
of bestowals; for them, no more living at all. Not so the handmaids who
ministered at the Threshold of God; these have shone forth like glittering
stars in the skies of ancient glory, shedding their splendours across all
the reaches of time. These have fulfilled their dearest hopes in the Abha
Paradise; they have tasted the honey of reunion in the congregation of the
Lord. Such souls as these profited from their existence here on earth:
they plucked the fruit of life. As for the rest, 'There surely came upon
them a time when they were a thing not spoken of.'

O ye lovers of this wronged one! Cleanse ye your eyes, so that ye behold
no man as different from yourselves. See ye no strangers; rather see all
men as friends, for love and unity come hard when ye fix your gaze on
otherness. And in this new and wondrous age, the Holy Writings say that we
must be at one with every people; that we must see neither harshness nor
injustice, neither malevolence, nor hostility, nor hate, but rather turn
our eyes toward the heaven of ancient glory. For each of the creatures is
a sign of God, and it was by the grace of the Lord and His power that each
did step into the world; therefore they are not strangers, but in the
family; not aliens, but friends, and to be treated as such.

Wherefore must the loved ones of God associate in affectionate fellowship
with stranger and friend alike, showing forth to all the utmost
loving-kindness, disregarding the degree of their capacity, never asking
whether they deserve to be loved. In every instance let the friends be
considerate and infinitely kind. Let them never be defeated by the malice
of the people, by their aggression and their hate, no matter how intense.
If others hurl their darts against you, offer them milk and honey in
return; if they poison your lives, sweeten their souls; if they injure
you, teach them how to be comforted; if they inflict a wound upon you, be
a balm to their sores; if they sting you, hold to their lips a refreshing
cup.

O God, my God! These are Thy feeble servants; they are Thy loyal bondsmen
and Thy handmaidens, who have bowed themselves down before Thine exalted
Utterance and humbled themselves at Thy Threshold of light, and borne
witness to Thy oneness through which the Sun hath been made to shine in
midday splendour. They have listened to the summons Thou didst raise from
out Thy hidden Realm, and with hearts quivering with love and rapture,
they have responded to Thy call.

O Lord, shower upon them all the outpourings of Thy mercy, rain down upon
them all the waters of Thy grace. Make them to grow as beauteous plants in
the garden of heaven, and from the full and brimming clouds of Thy
bestowals and out of the deep pools of Thine abounding grace make Thou
this garden to flower and keep it ever green and lustrous, ever fresh and
shimmering and fair.

Thou art verily the Mighty, the Exalted, the Powerful, He Who alone, in
the heavens and on the earth, abideth unchanged. There is none other God
save Thee, the Lord of manifest tokens and signs.





9: O THOU WHOSE HEART OVERFLOWETH WITH LOVE FOR THE ...


O thou whose heart overfloweth with love for the Lord! I address thee from
this consecrated spot, to gladden thy bosom with mine epistle to thee, for
this is such a letter as maketh the heart of him who believeth in God's
oneness to wing its flight toward the summits of bliss.

Thank thou God for having enabled thee to enter into His Kingdom of might.
Erelong will thy Lord's bounties descend upon thee, one following the
other, and He will make of thee a sign for every seeker after truth.

Hold thou fast to the Covenant of thy Lord, and as the days go by,
increase thy store of love for His beloved ones. Bend thou with tenderness
over the servitors of the All-Merciful, that thou mayest hoist the sail of
love upon the ark of peace that moveth across the seas of life. Let
nothing grieve thee, and be thou angered at none. It behoveth thee to be
content with the Will of God, and a true and loving and trusted friend to
all the peoples of the earth, without any exceptions whatever. This is the
quality of the sincere, the way of the saints, the emblem of those who
believe in the unity of God, and the raiment of the people of Baha.

Thank thou and bless thou the Lord for He hath allowed thee to offer Him
the Right of God.(17) This is verily a special favour on His part, for
thee; praise Him then for this commandment that is set forth in the
Scriptures of thy Lord, of Him that is the Ancient of Days.

Verily is He the Loving, the Tender, the Ever-Bestowing.





10: O THOU DEAR HANDMAID OF GOD! THY LETTER HATH ...


O thou dear handmaid of God! Thy letter hath been received and its
contents noted. Thou didst ask for a rule whereby to guide thy life.

Believe thou in God, and keep thine eyes fixed upon the exalted Kingdom;
be thou enamoured of the Abha Beauty; stand thou firm in the Covenant;
yearn thou to ascend into the Heaven of the Universal Light. Be thou
severed from this world, and reborn through the sweet scents of holiness
that blow from the realm of the All-Highest. Be thou a summoner to love,
and be thou kind to all the human race. Love thou the children of men and
share in their sorrows. Be thou of those who foster peace. Offer thy
friendship, be worthy of trust. Be thou a balm to every sore, be thou a
medicine for every ill. Bind thou the souls together. Recite thou the
verses of guidance. Be engaged in the worship of thy Lord, and rise up to
lead the people aright. Loose thy tongue and teach, and let thy face be
bright with the fire of God's love. Rest thou not for a moment, seek thou
to draw no easeful breath. Thus mayest thou become a sign and symbol of
God's love, and a banner of His grace.





11: SERVICE TO THE FRIENDS IS SERVICE TO THE KINGDOM OF ...


Service to the friends is service to the Kingdom of God, and consideration
shown to the poor is one of the greatest teachings of God.





12: KNOW THOU OF A CERTAINTY THAT LOVE IS THE SECRET OF ...


Know thou of a certainty that Love is the secret of God's holy
Dispensation, the manifestation of the All-Merciful, the fountain of
spiritual outpourings. Love is heaven's kindly light, the Holy Spirit's
eternal breath that vivifieth the human soul. Love is the cause of God's
revelation unto man, the vital bond inherent, in accordance with the
divine creation, in the realities of things. Love is the one means that
ensureth true felicity both in this world and the next. Love is the light
that guideth in darkness, the living link that uniteth God with man, that
assureth the progress of every illumined soul. Love is the most great law
that ruleth this mighty and heavenly cycle, the unique power that bindeth
together the divers elements of this material world, the supreme magnetic
force that directeth the movements of the spheres in the celestial realms.
Love revealeth with unfailing and limitless power the mysteries latent in
the universe. Love is the spirit of life unto the adorned body of mankind,
the establisher of true civilization in this mortal world, and the shedder
of imperishable glory upon every high-aiming race and nation.

Whatsoever people is graciously favoured therewith by God, its name shall
surely be magnified and extolled by the Concourse from on high, by the
company of angels, and the denizens of the Abha Kingdom. And whatsoever
people turneth its heart away from this Divine Love--the revelation of the
Merciful--shall err grievously, shall fall into despair, and be utterly
destroyed. That people shall be denied all refuge, shall become even as
the vilest creatures of the earth, victims of degradation and shame.

O ye beloved of the Lord! Strive to become the manifestations of the love
of God, the lamps of divine guidance shining amongst the kindreds of the
earth with the light of love and concord.

All hail to the revealers of this glorious light!





13: O THOU DAUGHTER OF THE KINGDOM! THY LETTER DATED ...


O thou daughter of the Kingdom! Thy letter dated 5 December 1918 was
received. It contained the good news that the friends of God and the
maidservants of the Merciful have gathered in summer at Green Acre, have
been engaged day and night in the commemoration of God, have served the
oneness of the world of humanity, have shown love to all religions, have
remained aloof from every religious prejudice and have been kind to all
people. The divine religions must be the cause of oneness among men, and
the means of unity and love; they must promulgate universal peace, free
man from every prejudice, bestow joy and gladness, exercise kindness to
all men and do away with every difference and distinction. Just as
Baha'u'llah addressing the world of humanity saith: 'O people! Ye are the
fruits of one tree and the leaves of one branch.' At most it is this, that
some souls are ignorant, they must be educated; some are sick, they must
be healed; some are still of tender age, they must be helped to attain
maturity, and the utmost kindness must be shown to them. This is the
conduct of the people of Baha.

I hope that thy brothers and sisters will all become the well-wishers of
the world of mankind.





14: O YE TWO BLESSED SOULS! YOUR LETTERS WERE RECEIVED. ...


O ye two blessed souls! Your letters were received. They showed that ye
have investigated the truth and have been freed from imitations and
superstitions, that ye observe with your own eyes and not with those of
others, hearken with your own ears and not with the ears of others, and
discover mysteries with the help of your own consciences and not with
those of others. For the imitator saith that such a man hath seen, such a
man hath heard, and such a conscience hath discovered; in other words he
dependeth upon the sight, the hearing and the conscience of others and
hath no will of his own.

Now, praise be to God, ye have shown will-power and have turned to the Sun
of Truth. The plain of your hearts hath been illumined by the lights of
the Lord of the Kingdom and ye have been led to the straight path, have
marched along the road that leadeth to the Kingdom, have entered the Abha
Paradise, and have secured a portion and share of the fruit of the Tree of
Life.

Blessed are ye and a goodly home awaiteth you. Upon you be greetings and
praise.





15: O CAPTIVE OF THE LOVE OF GOD! THE LETTER WHICH ...


O captive of the love of God! The letter which thou didst write at the
time of thy departure hath been received. It brought me joy; and it is my
hope that thine inner eye may be opened wide, so that unto thee the very
core of the divine mysteries may be disclosed.

Thou didst begin thy letter with a blessed phrase, saying: 'I am a
Christian.' O would that all were truly Christian! It is easy to be a
Christian on the tongue, but hard to be a true one. Today some five
hundred million souls are Christian, but the real Christian is very rare:
he is that soul from whose comely face there shineth the splendour of
Christ, and who showeth forth the perfections of the Kingdom; this is a
matter of great moment, for to be a Christian is to embody every
excellence there is. I hope that thou, too, shalt become a true Christian.
Praise thou God that at last, through the divine teachings, thou hast
obtained both sight and insight to the highest degree, and hast become
firmly rooted in certitude and faith. It is my hope that others as well
will achieve illumined eyes and hearing ears, and attain to everlasting
life: that these many rivers, each flowing along in diverse and separated
beds, will find their way back to the circumambient sea, and merge
together and rise up in a single wave of surging oneness; that the unity
of truth, through the power of God, will make these illusory differences
to vanish away. This is the one essential: for if unity be gained, all
other problems will disappear of themselves.

O honoured lady! In accordance with the divine teachings in this glorious
dispensation we should not belittle anyone and call him ignorant, saying:
'You know not, but I know'. Rather, we should look upon others with
respect, and when attempting to explain and demonstrate, we should speak
as if we are investigating the truth, saying: 'Here these things are
before us. Let us investigate to determine where and in what form the
truth can be found.' The teacher should not consider himself as learned
and others ignorant. Such a thought breedeth pride, and pride is not
conducive to influence. The teacher should not see in himself any
superiority; he should speak with the utmost kindliness, lowliness and
humility, for such speech exerteth influence and educateth the souls.

O honoured lady! For a single purpose were the Prophets, each and all,
sent down to earth; for this was Christ made manifest, for this did
Baha'u'llah raise up the call of the Lord: that the world of man should
become the world of God, this nether realm the Kingdom, this darkness
light, this satanic wickedness all the virtues of heaven--and unity,
fellowship and love be won for the whole human race, that the organic
unity should reappear and the bases of discord be destroyed and life
everlasting and grace everlasting become the harvest of mankind.

O honoured lady! Look about thee at the world: here unity, mutual
attraction, gathering together, engender life, but disunity and inharmony
spell death. When thou dost consider all phenomena, thou wilt see that
every created thing hath come into being through the mingling of many
elements, and once this collectivity of elements is dissolved, and this
harmony of components is dissevered, the life form is wiped out.

O honoured lady! In cycles gone by, though harmony was established, yet,
owing to the absence of means, the unity of all mankind could not have
been achieved. Continents remained widely divided, nay even among the
peoples of one and the same continent association and interchange of
thought were wellnigh impossible. Consequently intercourse, understanding
and unity amongst all the peoples and kindreds of the earth were
unattainable. In this day, however, means of communication have
multiplied, and the five continents of the earth have virtually merged
into one. And for everyone it is now easy to travel to any land, to
associate and exchange views with its peoples, and to become familiar,
through publications, with the conditions, the religious beliefs and the
thoughts of all men. In like manner all the members of the human family,
whether peoples or governments, cities or villages, have become
increasingly interdependent. For none is self-sufficiency any longer
possible, inasmuch as political ties unite all peoples and nations, and
the bonds of trade and industry, of agriculture and education, are being
strengthened every day. Hence the unity of all mankind can in this day be
achieved. Verily this is none other but one of the wonders of this
wondrous age, this glorious century. Of this past ages have been deprived,
for this century--the century of light--hath been endowed with unique and
unprecedented glory, power and illumination. Hence the miraculous
unfolding of a fresh marvel every day. Eventually it will be seen how
bright its candles will burn in the assemblage of man.

Behold how its light is now dawning upon the world's darkened horizon. The
first candle is unity in the political realm, the early glimmerings of
which can now be discerned. The second candle is unity of thought in world
undertakings, the consummation of which will erelong be witnessed. The
third candle is unity in freedom which will surely come to pass. The
fourth candle is unity in religion which is the corner-stone of the
foundation itself, and which, by the power of God, will be revealed in all
its splendour. The fifth candle is the unity of nations--a unity which in
this century will be securely established, causing all the peoples of the
world to regard themselves as citizens of one common fatherland. The sixth
candle is unity of races, making of all that dwell on earth peoples and
kindreds of one race. The seventh candle is unity of language, i.e., the
choice of a universal tongue in which all peoples will be instructed and
converse. Each and every one of these will inevitably come to pass,
inasmuch as the power of the Kingdom of God will aid and assist in their
realization.





16: O YE ILLUMINED LOVED ONES AND YE HANDMAIDS OF THE ...


O ye illumined loved ones and ye handmaids of the Merciful! At a time when
the sombre night of ignorance, of neglect of the divine world, of being
veiled from God, had overspread the earth, a bright morning dawned and a
rising light lit up the eastern sky. Then rose the Sun of Truth and the
splendours of the Kingdom were shed over east and west. Those who had eyes
to see rejoiced at the glad tidings and cried out: 'O blessed, blessed are
we!', and they witnessed the inner reality of all things, and uncovered
the mysteries of the Kingdom. Delivered then from their fancies and their
doubts, they beheld the light of truth, and so exhilarated did they become
from draining the chalice of God's love, that they utterly forgot the
world and their own selves. Dancing for joy they hastened to the place of
their own martyrdom and there, where men die for love, they flung away
their heads and hearts.

But those with unseeing eyes were astonished at this tumult, and they
cried, 'Where is the light?' and again, 'We see no light! We see no rising
sun! Here is no truth. This is but fantasy and nothing more.' Bat-like
they fled into the underground dark, and there, to their way of thinking,
they found a measure of security and peace.

This, however, is but the beginning of the dawn, and the heat of the
rising Orb of Truth is not yet at the fullness of its power. Once the sun
hath mounted to high noon, its fires will burn so hot as to stir even the
creeping things beneath the earth; and although it is not for them to
behold the light, yet will they all be set in frenzied motion by the
impact of the heat.

Wherefore, O ye beloved of God, offer up thanks that ye have, in the day
of the dawning, turned your faces unto the Light of the World and beheld
its splendours. Ye have received a share of the light of truth, ye have
enjoyed a portion of those blessings that endure forever; and therefore,
as a returning of thanks for this bounty, rest ye not for a moment, sit ye
not silent, carry to men's ears the glad tidings of the Kingdom, spread
far and wide the Word of God.

Act in accordance with the counsels of the Lord: that is, rise up in such
wise, and with such qualities, as to endow the body of this world with a
living soul, and to bring this young child, humanity, to the stage of
adulthood. So far as ye are able, ignite a candle of love in every
meeting, and with tenderness rejoice and cheer ye every heart. Care for
the stranger as for one of your own; show to alien souls the same loving
kindness ye bestow upon your faithful friends. Should any come to blows
with you, seek to be friends with him; should any stab you to the heart,
be ye a healing salve unto his sores; should any taunt and mock at you,
meet him with love. Should any heap his blame upon you, praise ye him;
should he offer you a deadly poison, give him the choicest honey in
exchange; and should he threaten your life, grant him a remedy that will
heal him evermore. Should he be pain itself, be ye his medicine; should he
be thorns, be ye his roses and sweet herbs. Perchance such ways and words
from you will make this darksome world turn bright at last; will make this
dusty earth turn heavenly, this devilish prison place become a royal
palace of the Lord--so that war and strife will pass and be no more, and
love and trust will pitch their tents on the summits of the world. Such is
the essence of God's admonitions; such in sum are the teachings for the
Dispensation of Baha.





17: O YE WHO ARE THE CHOSEN ONES OF THE ABHA KINGDOM! ...


O ye who are the chosen ones of the Abha Kingdom! Praise ye the Lord of
Hosts for He, riding upon the clouds, hath come down to this world out of
the heaven of the invisible realm, so that East and West were lit by the
glory of the Sun of Truth, and the call of the Kingdom was raised, and the
heralds of the realm above, with melodies of the Concourse on high, sang
out the glad tidings of the Coming. Then the whole world of being did
quiver for joy, and still the people, even as the Messiah saith, slept on:
for the day of the Manifestation, when the Lord of Hosts descended, found
them wrapped in the slumber of unknowing. As He saith in the Gospel, My
coming is even as when the thief is in the house, and the goodman of the
house watcheth not.

From amongst all mankind hath He chosen you, and your eyes have been
opened to the light of guidance and your ears attuned to the music of the
Company above; and blessed by abounding grace, your hearts and souls have
been born into new life. Thank ye and praise ye God that the hand of
infinite bestowals hath set upon your heads this gem-studded crown, this
crown whose lustrous jewels will forever flash and sparkle down all the
reaches of time.

To thank Him for this, make ye a mighty effort, and choose for yourselves
a noble goal. Through the power of faith, obey ye the teachings of God,
and let all your actions conform to His laws. Read ye The Hidden Words,
ponder the inner meanings thereof, act in accord therewith. Read, with
close attention, the Tablets of Tarazat (Ornaments), Kalimat (Words of
Paradise), Tajalliyyat (Effulgences), I_sh_raqat (Splendours), and
Bi_sh_arat (Glad Tidings), and rise up as ye are bidden in the heavenly
teachings. Thus may each one of you be even as a candle casting its light,
the centre of attraction wherever people come together; and from you, as
from a bed of flowers, may sweet scents be shed.

Raise ye a clamour like unto a roaring sea; like a prodigal cloud, rain
down the grace of heaven. Lift up your voices and sing out the songs of
the Abha Realm. Quench ye the fires of war, lift high the banners of
peace, work for the oneness of humankind and remember that religion is the
channel of love unto all peoples. Be ye aware that the children of men are
sheep of God and He their loving Shepherd, that He careth tenderly for all
His sheep and maketh them to feed in His own green pastures of grace and
giveth them to drink from the wellspring of life. Such is the way of the
Lord. Such are His bestowals. Such, from among His teachings, is His
precept of the oneness of mankind.

The portals of His blessings are opened wide and His signs are published
abroad and the glory of truth is blazing forth; inexhaustible are the
blessings. Know ye the value of this time. Strive ye with all your hearts,
raise up your voices and shout, until this dark world be filled with
light, and this narrow place of shadows be widened out, and this dust heap
of a fleeting moment be changed into a mirror for the eternal gardens of
heaven, and this globe of earth receive its portion of celestial grace.

Then will aggression crumble away, and all that maketh for disunity be
destroyed, and the structure of oneness be raised--that the Blessed Tree
may cast its shade over east and west, and the Tabernacle of the
singleness of man be set up on the high summits, and flags that betoken
love and fellowship flutter from their staffs around the world until the
sea of truth lift high its waves, and earth bring forth the roses and
sweet herbs of blessings without end, and become from pole to pole the
Abha Paradise.

These are the counsels of 'Abdu'l-Baha. It is my hope that out of the
bestowals of the Lord of Hosts ye will become the spiritual essence and
the very radiance of humankind, binding the hearts of all with bonds of
love; that through the power of the Word of God ye will bring to life the
dead now buried in the graves of their sensual desires; that ye will, with
the rays of the Sun of Truth, restore the sight of those whose inner eye
is blind; that ye will bring spiritual healing to the spiritually sick.
These things do I hope for, out of the bounties and the bestowals of the
Beloved.

At all times do I speak of you and call you to mind. I pray unto the Lord,
and with tears I implore Him to rain down all these blessings upon you,
and gladden your hearts, and make blissful your souls, and grant you
exceeding joy and heavenly delights....

O Thou loving Provider! These souls have hearkened to the summons of the
Kingdom, and have gazed upon the glory of the Sun of Truth. They have
risen upward to the refreshing skies of love; they are enamoured of Thy
nature, and they worship Thy beauty. Unto Thee have they turned
themselves, speaking together of Thee, seeking out Thy dwelling, and
thirsting for the waterbrooks of Thy heavenly realm.

Thou art the Giver, the Bestower, the Ever-loving.





18: O THOU POSSESSOR OF A SEEING HEART! ALTHOUGH, ...


O thou possessor of a seeing heart! Although, materially speaking, thou
art deprived of physical sight, yet, praise be to God, spiritual insight
is thine. Thy heart seeth and thy spirit heareth. Bodily sight is subject
to a thousand maladies and assuredly will ultimately be lost. Thus no
importance should be attached to it. But the sight of the heart is
illumined. It discerneth and discovereth the divine Kingdom. It is
everlasting and eternal. Praise God, therefore, that the sight of thy
heart is illumined, and the hearing of thy mind responsive.

Each of the meetings ye have organized, wherein ye feel heavenly emotions
and comprehend realities and significances, is like unto the firmament,
and those souls are as resplendent stars shining with the light of
guidance.

Happy is the soul that seeketh, in this brilliant era, heavenly teachings,
and blessed is the heart which is stirred and attracted by the love of
God.





19: PRAISE BE TO HIM THROUGH WHOSE SPLENDOURS THE ...


Praise be to Him through Whose splendours the earth and the heavens are
aglow, through Whose fragrant breathings the gardens of holiness that
adorn the hearts of the chosen are trembling for joy, to Him Who hath shed
His light and brightened the face of the firmament. Verily there appeared
luminous and sparkling stars, glittering, shining out, and casting forth
their rays upon the supreme horizon. They derived their grace and
brilliance from the bounties of the Abha Realm, then, stars of guidance,
they poured down their lights upon this earth.

Praise be to Him Who hath fashioned this new era, this age of majesty,
even as an unfolding pageant where the realities of all things can be
exposed to view. Now are clouds of bounty raining down and the gifts of
the loving Lord are clearly manifest; for both the seen and the unseen
worlds have been illumined, and the Promised One hath come to earth and
the beauty of the Adored One hath shone forth.

Salutations, blessings, and welcome to that Universal Reality, that
Perfect Word, that Manifest Book, that Splendour which hath dawned in the
highest heaven, that Guide of all nations, that Light of the world--the
billowing ocean of Whose abounding grace hath flooded all creation, in
such wise that the waves thereof have cast upon the sands of this visible
world their shining pearls. Now hath the Truth appeared, and falsehood
fled away; now hath the day dawned and jubilation taken over, wherefore
men's souls are sanctified, their spirits purged, their hearts rejoiced,
their minds purified, their secret thoughts made wholesome, their
consciences washed clean, their inmost selves made holy: for the Day of
Resurrection hath come to pass, and the bestowals of thy Lord, the
Forgiving, have encompassed all things. Salutations and praise be unto
those luminous, resplendent stars that are shedding down their rays from
the highest heaven, those celestial bodies of the girdling zodiac of the
Abha Realm. May glory rest upon them.

And now, O thou honoured man who hath hearkened unto the Great
Announcement, rise up to serve the Cause of God with the resistless power
of the Abha Kingdom and the breaths that blow from the spirit of the
Company on high. Grieve thou not over what the Pharisees, and the
purveyors of false rumours among writers for the press, are saying of
Baha. Call thou to mind the days of Christ, and the afflictions heaped
upon Him by the people, and all the torments and tribulations inflicted
upon His disciples. Since ye are lovers of the Abha Beauty, ye also must,
for His love's sake, incur the peoples' blame, and all that befell those
of a former age must likewise befall you. Then will the faces of the
chosen be alight with the splendours of the Kingdom of God, and will shine
down the ages, yea, down all the cycles of time, while the deniers shall
remain in their manifest loss. It will be even as was said by the Lord
Christ: they shall persecute you for My name's sake.

Remind them of these words and say unto them: 'Verily did the Pharisees
rise up against Messiah, despite the bright beauty of His face and all His
comeliness, and they cried out that He was not Messiah [Masih] but a
monster [Masi_kh_], because He had claimed to be Almighty God, the
sovereign Lord of all, and told them, 'I am God's Son, and verily in the
inmost being of His only Son, His mighty Ward, clearly revealed with all
His attributes, all His perfections, standeth the Father.' This, they
said, was open blasphemy and slander against the Lord according to the
clear and irrefutable texts of the Old Testament. Therefore they passed
the sentence upon Him, decreeing that His blood be shed, and they hanged
Him on the cross, where He cried out, 'O My beloved Lord, how long wilt
Thou abandon Me to them? Lift Me up unto Thee, shelter Me close to Thee,
make Me a dwelling by Thy throne of glory. Verily art Thou the Answerer of
prayers, and Thou art the Clement, the Merciful. O My Lord! Verily this
world with all its vastness can no longer contain Me, and I love this
cross, out of love for Thy beauty, and yearning for Thy realm on high, and
because of this fire, fanned by the gusts of Thy holiness, aflame within
My heart. Help me, O Lord, to ascend unto Thee, sustain Me that I may
reach unto Thy sacred Threshold, O My loving Lord! Verily Thou art the
Merciful, the Possessor of great bounty! Verily Thou art the Generous!
Verily Thou art the Compassionate! Verily Thou art the All-Knowing! There
is none other God save Thee, the Mighty, the Powerful!'

Never would the Pharisees have been emboldened to calumniate Him and
charge Him with that grievous sin, but for their ignorance of the inner
core of mysteries and the fact that they paid no heed to His splendours
and regarded not His proofs. Else would they have acknowledged His words,
and borne witness to the verses He revealed, confessed the truth of His
utterances, sought shelter under the protective shadow of His banner,
learned of His signs and tokens, and rejoiced in His blissful tidings.

Know thou that the Divine Essence, which is called the Invisible of the
Invisibles, never to be described, beyond the reach of mind--is sanctified
above any mention, any definition or hint or allusion, any acclamation or
praise. In the sense that It is that It is, the intellect can never grasp
It, and the soul seeking knowledge of It is but a wanderer in the desert,
and far astray. 'No vision taketh in Him, but He taketh in all vision: He
is the Subtile, the All-Informed.'(18)

When, however, thou dost contemplate the innermost essence of all things,
and the individuality of each, thou wilt behold the signs of thy Lord's
mercy in every created thing, and see the spreading rays of His Names and
Attributes throughout all the realm of being, with evidences which none
will deny save the froward and the unaware. Then wilt thou observe that
the universe is a scroll that discloseth His hidden secrets, which are
preserved in the well-guarded Tablet. And not an atom of all the atoms in
existence, not a creature from amongst the creatures but speaketh His
praise and telleth of His attributes and names, revealeth the glory of His
might and guideth to His oneness and His mercy: and none will gainsay this
who hath ears to hear, eyes to see, and a mind that is sound.

And whensoever thou dost gaze upon creation all entire, and dost observe
the very atoms thereof, thou wilt note that the rays of the Sun of Truth
are shed upon all things and shining within them, and telling of that
Day-Star's splendours, Its mysteries, and the spreading of Its lights.
Look thou upon the trees, upon the blossoms and fruits, even upon the
stones. Here too wilt thou behold the Sun's rays shed upon them, clearly
visible within them, and manifested by them.

Shouldst thou, however, turn thy gaze unto a Mirror, brilliant, stainless,
and pure, wherein the divine Beauty is reflected, therein wilt thou find
the Sun shining with Its rays, Its heat, Its disc, Its fair form all
entire. For each separate entity possesseth its allotted portion of the
solar light and telleth of the Sun, but that Universal Reality in all Its
splendour, that stainless Mirror Whose qualities are appropriate to the
qualities of the Sun revealed within It--expresseth in their entirety the
attributes of the Source of Glory. And that Universal Reality is Man, the
divine Being, the Essence that abideth forever. 'Say, Call upon God, or
call upon the All-Merciful; whichsoever ye call upon, most beauteous are
His Names.'(19)

This is the meaning of the Messiah's words, that the Father is in the
Son.(20) Dost thou not see that should a stainless mirror proclaim,
'Verily is the sun ashine within me, together with all its qualities,
tokens and signs', such an utterance by such a mirror would be neither
deceptive nor false? No, by the One Who created It, shaped It, fashioned
It, and made It to be an entity conformable to the attributes of the glory
within It! Praised be He Who created It! Praised be He Who fashioned It!
Praised be He Who made It manifest!

Such were the words uttered by Christ. On account of these words they
cavilled at and assailed Him when He said unto them, 'Verily the Son is in
the Father, and the Father is in the Son.'(21) Be thou informed of this,
and learn thou the secrets of thy Lord. As for the deniers, they are
veiled from God: they see not, they hear not, neither do they understand.
'Leave them to entertain themselves with their cavillings.'(22) Abandon
them to their wanderings along river beds where no stream flows. Like
grazing beasts they cannot tell paste from pearl. Are they not shut away
from the mysteries of thy Lord, the Clement, the Merciful?

For thy part, rejoice at this best of all glad tidings, and rise up to
exalt the Word of God and to spread abroad His sweet savours in all that
vast and mighty land. Know thou of a certainty that thy Lord will come to
thine aid with a company of the Concourse on high and hosts of the Abha
Kingdom. These will mount the attack, and will furiously assail the forces
of the ignorant, the blind. Erelong wilt thou behold the flush of daybreak
spreading from out the Most Exalted Realm, and the morn encompassing all
regions. It will put the dark to flight, and the gloom of night will fade
and pass, and the bright brow of the Faith shine forth, and the Day-Star
rise and overspread the world. On that day will the faithful rejoice, and
the steadfast be blissful; then will the slanderers take themselves off,
and the waverers be blotted out, even as deepest shadows fall away at the
first light of the breaking dawn.

Greetings be unto thee, and praise.

O God, my God! This is Thy radiant servant, Thy spiritual thrall, who hath
drawn nigh unto Thee and approached Thy presence. He hath turned his face
unto Thine, acknowledging Thy oneness, confessing Thy singleness, and he
hath called out in Thy name among the nations, and led the people to the
streaming waters of Thy mercy, O Thou Most generous Lord! To those who
asked He hath given to drink from the cup of guidance that brimmeth over
with the wine of Thy measureless grace.

O Lord, assist him under all conditions, cause him to learn Thy
well-guarded mysteries, and shower down upon him Thy hidden pearls. Make
of him a banner rippling from castle summits in the winds of Thy heavenly
aid, make of him a wellspring of crystal waters.

O my forgiving Lord! Light up the hearts with the rays of a lamp that
sheddeth abroad its beams, disclosing to those among Thy people whom Thou
hast bounteously favoured, the realities of all things.

Verily, Thou art the Mighty, the Powerful, the Protector, the Strong, the
Beneficent! Verily, Thou art the Lord of all mercies!





20: WHEN CHRIST APPEARED, TWENTY CENTURIES AGO, ALTHOUGH ...


(23)When Christ appeared, twenty centuries ago, although the Jews were
eagerly awaiting His Coming, and prayed every day, with tears, saying: 'O
God, hasten the Revelation of the Messiah,' yet when the Sun of Truth
dawned, they denied Him and rose against Him with the greatest enmity, and
eventually crucified that divine Spirit, the Word of God, and named Him
Beelzebub, the evil one, as is recorded in the Gospel. The reason for this
was that they said: 'The Revelation of Christ, according to the clear text
of the Torah, will be attested by certain signs, and so long as these
signs have not appeared, whoso layeth claim to be a Messiah is an
impostor. Among these signs is this, that the Messiah should come from an
unknown place, yet we all know this man's house in Nazareth, and can any
good thing come out of Nazareth? The second sign is that He shall rule
with a rod of iron, that is, He must act with the sword, but this Messiah
has not even a wooden staff. Another of the conditions and signs is this:
He must sit upon the throne of David and establish David's sovereignty.
Now, far from being enthroned, this man has not even a mat to sit on.
Another of the conditions is this: the promulgation of all the laws of the
Torah; yet this man has abrogated these laws, and has even broken the
sabbath day, although it is the clear text of the Torah that whosoever
layeth claim to prophethood and revealeth miracles and breaketh the
sabbath day, must be put to death. Another of the signs is this, that in
His reign justice will be so advanced that righteousness and well-doing
will extend from the human even to the animal world--the snake and the
mouse will share one hole, and the eagle and the partridge one nest, the
lion and the gazelle shall dwell in one pasture, and the wolf and the kid
shall drink from one fountain. Yet now, injustice and tyranny have waxed
so great in His time that they have crucified Him! Another of the
conditions is this, that in the days of the Messiah the Jews will prosper
and triumph over all the peoples of the world, but now they are living in
the utmost abasement and servitude in the empire of the Romans. Then how
can this be the Messiah promised in the Torah?'

In this wise did they object to that Sun of Truth, although that Spirit of
God was indeed the One promised in the Torah. But as they did not
understand the meaning of these signs, they crucified the Word of God. Now
the Baha'is hold that the recorded signs did come to pass in the
Manifestation of Christ, although not in the sense which the Jews
understood, the description in the Torah being allegorical. For instance,
among the signs is that of sovereignty. For Baha'is say that the
sovereignty of Christ was a heavenly, divine, everlasting sovereignty, not
a Napoleonic sovereignty that vanisheth in a short time. For well nigh two
thousand years this sovereignty of Christ hath been established, and until
now it endureth, and to all eternity that Holy Being will be exalted upon
an everlasting throne.

In like manner all the other signs have been made manifest, but the Jews
did not understand. Although nearly twenty centuries have elapsed since
Christ appeared with divine splendour, yet the Jews are still awaiting the
coming of the Messiah and regard themselves as true and Christ as false.





21: O THOU DISTINGUISHED PERSONAGE, THOU SEEKER AFTER ...


O thou distinguished personage, thou seeker after truth! Thy letter of 4
April 1921, hath been read with love.

The existence of the Divine Being hath been clearly established, on the
basis of logical proofs, but the reality of the Godhead is beyond the
grasp of the mind. When thou dost carefully consider this matter, thou
wilt see that a lower plane can never comprehend a higher. The mineral
kingdom, for example, which is lower, is precluded from comprehending the
vegetable kingdom; for the mineral, any such understanding would be
utterly impossible. In the same way, no matter how far the vegetable
kingdom may develop, it will achieve no conception of the animal kingdom,
and any such comprehension at its level would be unthinkable, for the
animal occupieth a plane higher than that of the vegetable: this tree
cannot conceive of hearing and sight. And the animal kingdom, no matter
how far it may evolve, can never become aware of the reality of the
intellect, which discovereth the inner essence of all things, and
comprehendeth those realities which cannot be seen; for the human plane as
compared with that of the animal is very high. And although these beings
all co-exist in the contingent world, in each case the difference in their
stations precludeth their grasp of the whole; for no lower degree can
understand a higher, such comprehension being impossible.

The higher plane, however, understandeth the lower. The animal, for
instance, comprehendeth the mineral and vegetable, the human understandeth
the planes of the animal, vegetable and mineral. But the mineral cannot
possibly understand the realms of man. And notwithstanding the fact that
all these entities co-exist in the phenomenal world, even so, no lower
degree can ever comprehend a higher.

Then how could it be possible for a contingent reality, that is, man, to
understand the nature of that pre-existent Essence, the Divine Being? The
difference in station between man and the Divine Reality is thousands upon
thousands of times greater than the difference between vegetable and
animal. And that which a human being would conjure up in his mind is but
the fanciful image of his human condition, it doth not encompass God's
reality but rather is encompassed by it. That is, man graspeth his own
illusory conceptions, but the Reality of Divinity can never be grasped:
It, Itself, encompasseth all created things, and all created things are in
Its grasp. That Divinity which man doth imagine for himself existeth only
in his mind, not in truth. Man, however, existeth both in his mind and in
truth; thus man is greater than that fanciful reality which he is able to
imagine.

The furthermost limits of this bird of clay are these: he can flutter
along for some short distance, into the endless vast; but he can never
soar upward to the Sun in the high heavens. We must, nevertheless, set
forth reasoned or inspired proofs as to the existence of the Divine Being,
that is, proofs commensurate with the understanding of man.

It is obvious that all created things are connected one to another by a
linkage complete and perfect, even, for example, as are the members of the
human body. Note how all the members and component parts of the human body
are connected one to another. In the same way, all the members of this
endless universe are linked one to another. The foot and the step, for
example, are connected to the ear and the eye; the eye must look ahead
before the step is taken. The ear must hear before the eye will carefully
observe. And whatever member of the human body is deficient, produceth a
deficiency in the other members. The brain is connected with the heart and
stomach, the lungs are connected with all the members. So is it with the
other members of the body.

And each one of these members hath its own special function. The mind
force--whether we call it pre-existent or contingent--doth direct and
co-ordinate all the members of the human body, seeing to it that each part
or member duly performeth its own special function. If, however, there be
some interruption in the power of the mind, all the members will fail to
carry out their essential functions, deficiencies will appear in the body
and the functioning of its members, and the power will prove ineffective.

Likewise, look into this endless universe: a universal power inevitably
existeth, which encompasseth all, directing and regulating all the parts
of this infinite creation; and were it not for this Director, this
Co-ordinator, the universe would be flawed and deficient. It would be even
as a madman; whereas ye can see that this endless creation carrieth out
its functions in perfect order, every separate part of it performing its
own task with complete reliability, nor is there any flaw to be found in
all its workings. Thus it is clear that a Universal Power existeth,
directing and regulating this infinite universe. Every rational mind can
grasp this fact.

Furthermore, although all created things grow and develop, yet are they
subjected to influences from without. For instance, the sun giveth heat,
the rain nourisheth, the wind bringeth life, so that man can develop and
grow. Thus it is clear that the human body is under influences from the
outside, and that without those influences man could not grow. And
likewise, those outside influences are subjected to other influences in
their turn. For example, the growth and development of a human being is
dependent upon the existence of water, and water is dependent upon the
existence of rain, and rain is dependent upon the existence of clouds, and
clouds are dependent upon the existence of the sun, which causeth land and
sea to produce vapour, the condensation of vapour forming the clouds. Thus
each one of these entities exerteth its influence and is likewise
influenced in its turn. Inescapably then, the process leadeth to One Who
influenceth all, and yet is influenced by none, thus severing the chain.
The inner reality of that Being, however, is not known, although His
effects are clear and evident.

And further, all created beings are limited, and this very limitation of
all beings proveth the reality of the Limitless; for the existence of a
limited being denoteth the existence of a Limitless One.

To sum it up, there are many such proofs, establishing the existence of
that Universal Reality. And since that Reality is pre-existent, It is
untouched by the conditions that govern phenomena; for whatever entity is
subject to circumstances and the play of events is contingent, not
pre-existent. Know then: that divinity which other communions and peoples
have conjured up, falleth within the scope of their imagination, and not
beyond it, whereas the reality of the Godhead is beyond all conceiving.

As to the Holy Manifestations of God, They are the focal points where the
signs, tokens and perfections of that sacred, pre-existent Reality appear
in all their splendour. They are an eternal grace, a heavenly glory, and
on Them dependeth the everlasting life of humankind. To illustrate: the
Sun of Truth dwelleth in a sky to which no soul hath any access, and which
no mind can reach, and He is far beyond the comprehension of all
creatures. Yet the Holy Manifestations of God are even as a looking-glass,
burnished and without stain, which gathereth streams of light out of that
Sun, and then scattereth the glory over the rest of creation. In that
polished surface, the Sun with all Its majesty standeth clearly revealed.
Thus, should the mirrored Sun proclaim, 'I am the Sun!' this is but truth;
and should It cry, 'I am not the Sun!' this is the truth as well. And
although the Day-Star, with all Its glory, Its beauty, Its perfections, be
clearly visible in that mirror without stain, still It hath not come down
from Its own lofty station in the realms above, It hath not made Its way
into the mirror; rather doth It continue to abide, as It will forever, in
the supernal heights of Its own holiness.

And further, all the earth's creatures require the bounty of the sun, for
their very existence is dependent upon solar light and heat. Should they
be deprived of the sun, they would be wiped out. This is the being with
God, as referred to in the Holy Books: man must be with his Lord.

It is clear, then, that the essential reality of God is revealed in His
perfections; and the sun, with its perfections, reflected in a mirror, is
a visible thing, an entity clearly expressing the bounty of God.

My hope is that thou wilt acquire a perceptive eye, a hearing ear, and
that the veils will be removed from thy sight.





22: O THOU WHO ART TURNING THY FACE TOWARDS GOD! ...


O thou who art turning thy face towards God! Close thine eyes to all
things else, and open them to the realm of the All-Glorious. Ask
whatsoever thou wishest of Him alone; seek whatsoever thou seekest from
Him alone. With a look He granteth a hundred thousand hopes, with a glance
He healeth a hundred thousand incurable ills, with a nod He layeth balm on
every wound, with a glimpse He freeth the hearts from the shackles of
grief. He doeth as He doeth, and what recourse have we? He carrieth out
His Will, He ordaineth what He pleaseth. Then better for thee to bow down
thy head in submission, and put thy trust in the All-Merciful Lord.





23: O THOU WHO DOST SEARCH AFTER TRUTH! THY LETTER OF ...


O thou who dost search after truth! Thy letter of 13 December 1920 hath
come.

From the days of Adam until today, the religions of God have been made
manifest, one following the other, and each one of them fulfilled its due
function, revived mankind, and provided education and enlightenment. They
freed the people from the darkness of the world of nature and ushered them
into the brightness of the Kingdom. As each succeeding Faith and Law
became revealed it remained for some centuries a richly fruitful tree and
to it was committed the happiness of humankind. However, as the centuries
rolled by, it aged, it flourished no more and put forth no fruit,
wherefore was it then made young again.

The religion of God is one religion, but it must ever be renewed. Moses,
for example, was sent forth to man and He established a Law, and the
Children of Israel, through that Mosaic Law, were delivered out of their
ignorance and came into the light; they were lifted up from their
abjectness and attained to a glory that fadeth not. Still, as the long
years wore on, that radiance passed by, that splendour set, that bright
day turned to night; and once that night grew triply dark, the star of the
Messiah dawned, so that again a glory lit the world.

Our meaning is this: the religion of God is one, and it is the educator of
humankind, but still, it needs must be made new. When thou dost plant a
tree, its height increaseth day by day. It putteth forth blossoms and
leaves and luscious fruits. But after a long time, it doth grow old,
yielding no fruitage any more. Then doth the Husbandman of Truth take up
the seed from that same tree, and plant it in a pure soil; and lo, there
standeth the first tree, even as it was before.

Note thou carefully that in this world of being, all things must ever be
made new. Look at the material world about thee, see how it hath now been
renewed. The thoughts have changed, the ways of life have been revised,
the sciences and arts show a new vigour, discoveries and inventions are
new, perceptions are new. How then could such a vital power as
religion--the guarantor of mankind's great advances, the very means of
attaining everlasting life, the fosterer of infinite excellence, the light
of both worlds--not be made new? This would be incompatible with the grace
and loving-kindness of the Lord.

Religion, moreover, is not a series of beliefs, a set of customs; religion
is the teachings of the Lord God, teachings which constitute the very life
of humankind, which urge high thoughts upon the mind, refine the
character, and lay the groundwork for man's everlasting honour.

Note thou: could these fevers in the world of the mind, these fires of war
and hate, of resentment and malice among the nations, this aggression of
peoples against peoples, which have destroyed the tranquillity of the
whole world ever be made to abate, except through the living waters of the
teachings of God? No, never!

And this is clear: a power above and beyond the powers of nature must
needs be brought to bear, to change this black darkness into light, and
these hatreds and resentments, grudges and spites, these endless wrangles
and wars, into fellowship and love amongst all the peoples of the earth.
This power is none other than the breathings of the Holy Spirit and the
mighty inflow of the Word of God.





24: O SPIRITUAL YOUTH! PRAISE THOU GOD THAT THOU HAST ...


O spiritual youth! Praise thou God that thou hast found thy way into the
Kingdom of Splendours, and hast rent asunder the veil of vain imaginings,
and that the core of the inner mystery hath been made known unto thee.

This people, all of them, have pictured a god in the realm of the mind,
and worship that image which they have made for themselves. And yet that
image is comprehended, the human mind being the comprehender thereof, and
certainly the comprehender is greater than that which lieth within its
grasp; for imagination is but the branch, while mind is the root; and
certainly the root is greater than the branch. Consider then, how all the
peoples of the world are bowing the knee to a fancy of their own
contriving, how they have created a creator within their own minds, and
they call it the Fashioner of all that is--whereas in truth it is but an
illusion. Thus are the people worshipping only an error of perception.

But that Essence of Essences, that Invisible of Invisibles, is sanctified
above all human speculation, and never to be overtaken by the mind of man.
Never shall that immemorial Reality lodge within the compass of a
contingent being. His is another realm, and of that realm no understanding
can be won. No access can be gained thereto; all entry is forbidden there.
The utmost one can say is that Its existence can be proved, but the
conditions of Its existence are unknown.

That such an Essence doth exist, the philosophers and learned doctors one
and all have understood; but whenever they tried to learn something of Its
being, they were left bewildered and dismayed, and at the end, despairing,
their hopes in ruins, they went their way, out of this life. For to
comprehend the state and the inner mystery of that Essence of Essences,
that Most Secret of Secrets, one needs must have another power and other
faculties; and such a power, such faculties would be more than humankind
can bear, wherefore no word of Him can come to them.

If, for example, one be endowed with the senses of hearing, of taste, of
smell, of touch--but be deprived of the sense of sight, it will not be
possible for one to gaze about; for sight cannot be realized through
hearing or tasting, or the sense of smell or touch. In the same way, with
the faculties at man's disposal it is beyond the realm of possibility for
him to grasp that unseeable Reality, holy and sanctified above all the
sceptics' doubts. For this, other faculties are required, other senses;
should such powers become available to him, then could a human being
receive some knowledge of that world; otherwise, never.





25: O THOU HANDMAID OF GOD! IT IS RECORDED IN EASTERN ...


O thou handmaid of God! It is recorded in eastern histories that Socrates
journeyed to Palestine and Syria and there, from men learned in the things
of God, acquired certain spiritual truths; that when he returned to
Greece, he promulgated two beliefs: one, the unity of God, and the other,
the immortality of the soul after its separation from the body; that these
concepts, so foreign to their thought, raised a great commotion among the
Greeks, until in the end they gave him poison and killed him.

And this is authentic; for the Greeks believed in many gods, and Socrates
established the fact that God is one, which obviously was in conflict with
Greek beliefs.

The Founder of monotheism was Abraham; it is to Him that this concept can
be traced, and the belief was current among the Children of Israel, even
in the days of Socrates.

The above, however, cannot be found in the Jewish histories; there are
many facts which are not included in Jewish history. Not all the events of
the life of Christ are set forth in the history of Josephus, a Jew,
although it was he who wrote the history of the times of Christ. One may
not, therefore, refuse to believe in events of Christ's day on the grounds
that they are not to be found in the history of Josephus.

Eastern histories also state that Hippocrates sojourned for a long time in
the town of Tyre, and this is a city in Syria.





26: O THOU WHO SEEKEST THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN! THY ...


O thou who seekest the Kingdom of Heaven! Thy letter hath been received
and its contents noted.

The Holy Manifestations of God possess two stations: one is the physical
station, and one the spiritual. In other words, one station is that of a
human being, and one, of the Divine Reality. If the Manifestations are
subjected to tests, it is in Their human station only, not in the
splendour of Their Divine Reality.

And further, these tests are such only from the viewpoint of mankind. That
is, to outward seeming, the human condition of the Holy Manifestations is
subjected to tests, and when Their strength and endurance have by this
means been revealed in the plenitude of power, other men receive
instruction therefrom, and are made aware of how great must be their own
steadfastness and endurance under tests and trials. For the Divine
Educator must teach by word and also by deed, thus revealing to all the
straight pathway of truth.

As to my station, it is that of the servant of Baha; 'Abdu'l-Baha, the
visible expression of servitude to the Threshold of the Abha Beauty.





27: IN CYCLES GONE BY, EACH ONE OF THE MANIFESTATIONS OF ...


In cycles gone by, each one of the Manifestations of God hath had His own
rank in the world of existence, and each hath represented a stage in the
development of humanity. But the Manifestation of the Most Great Name--may
my life be a sacrifice for His loved ones--was an expression of the coming
of age, the maturing of man's inmost reality in this world of being. For
the sun is the source and well-spring of light and heat, the focal point
of splendours, and it compriseth all the perfections that are made
manifest by the other stars which have dawned upon the world. Make thou an
effort that thou mayest take thy place under the sun and receive an
abundant share of its dazzling light. In truth do I tell thee, once thou
hast attained this station, thou shalt behold the saints bowing down their
heads in all humility before Him. Haste thou to life before death cometh;
haste thou to the spring season before autumn draweth in; and before
illness striketh, haste thou to healing--that thou mayest become a
physician of the spirit who, with the breaths of the Holy Spirit, healeth
all manner of sickness in this famed and glorious age.





28: O LEAF UPON THE TREE OF LIFE! THE TREE OF LIFE, OF ...


O leaf upon the Tree of Life! The Tree of Life, of which mention is made
in the Bible, is Baha'u'llah, and the daughters of the Kingdom are the
leaves upon that blessed Tree. Then thank thou God that thou hast become
related to that Tree, and that thou art flourishing, tender and fresh.

The gates of the Kingdom are opened wide, and every favoured soul is
seated at the banquet table of the Lord, receiving his portion of that
heavenly feast. Praised be God, thou too art present at this table, taking
thy share of the bountiful food of heaven. Thou art serving the Kingdom,
and art well acquainted with the sweet savours of the Abha Paradise.

Then strive thou with all thy might to guide the people, and eat thou of
the bread that hath come down from heaven. For this is the meaning of
Christ's words: 'I am the living bread which came down from heaven ... he
that eateth of this bread shall live forever.'(24)





29: O THOU WHO ART CAPTIVATED BY THE TRUTH AND ...


O thou who art captivated by the truth and magnetized by the Heavenly
Kingdom! Thy long letter hath come and it brought great joy, as it clearly
betokened thy strenuous efforts and high purposes. Praised be God, thou
wishest well to men, and yearnest after the Kingdom of Baha, and art
longing to see the human race press forward. It is my hope that because of
these high ideals, these noble intimations of the heart, and these tidings
of heaven, thou shalt become so luminous that down all the ages the light
of thy love for God will shed its glory.

Thou hast described thyself as a student in the school of spiritual
progress. Fortunate art thou! If these schools of progress lead to the
university of heaven, then branches of knowledge will be developed whereby
humanity will look upon the tablet of existence as a scroll endlessly
unfolding; and all created things will be seen upon that scroll as letters
and words. Then will the different planes of meaning be learned, and then
within every atom of the universe will be witnessed the signs of the
oneness of God. Then will man hear the cry of the Lord of the Kingdom, and
behold the confirmations of the Holy Spirit coming to succour him. Then
will he feel such bliss, such ecstasy, that the wide world with its
vastness will no longer contain him, and he will set out for the Kingdom
of God, and hurry along to the realm of the spirit. For once a bird hath
grown its wings, it remaineth on the ground no more, but soareth upward
into high heaven--except for those birds that are tied by the leg, or those
whose wings are broken, or mired down.

O thou seeker after truth! The world of the Kingdom is one world. The only
difference is that spring returneth over and over again, and setteth up a
great new commotion throughout all created things. Then plain and hillside
come alive, and trees turn delicately green, and leaves, blossoms and
fruits come forth in beauty, infinite and tender. Wherefore the
dispensations of past ages are intimately connected with those that follow
them: indeed, they are one and the same, but as the world groweth, so doth
the light, so doth the downpour of heavenly grace, and then the Day-Star
shineth out in noonday splendour.

O thou seeker after the Kingdom! Every divine Manifestation is the very
life of the world, and the skilled physician of each ailing soul. The
world of man is sick, and that competent Physician knoweth the cure,
arising as He doth with teachings, counsels and admonishments that are the
remedy for every pain, the healing balm to every wound. It is certain that
the wise physician can diagnose his patient's needs at any season, and
apply the cure. Wherefore, relate thou the Teachings of the Abha Beauty to
the urgent needs of this present day, and thou wilt see that they provide
an instant remedy for the ailing body of the world. Indeed, they are the
elixir that bringeth eternal health.

The treatment ordered by wise physicians of the past, and by those that
follow after, is not one and the same, rather doth it depend on what
aileth the patient; and although the remedy may change, the aim is always
to bring the patient back to health. In the dispensations gone before, the
feeble body of the world could not withstand a rigorous or powerful cure.
For this reason did Christ say: 'I have yet many things to say unto you,
matters needing to be told, but ye cannot bear to hear them now. Howbeit
when that Comforting Spirit, Whom the Father will send, shall come, He
will make plain unto you the truth.'(25)

Therefore, in this age of splendours, teachings once limited to the few
are made available to all, that the mercy of the Lord may embrace both
east and west, that the oneness of the world of humanity may appear in its
full beauty, and that the dazzling rays of reality may flood the realm of
the mind with light.

The descent of the New Jerusalem denoteth a heavenly Law, that Law which
is the guarantor of human happiness and the effulgence of the world of
God.

Emmanuel(26) was indeed the Herald of the Second Coming of Christ, and a
Summoner to the pathway of the Kingdom. It is evident that the Letter is a
member of the Word, and this membership in the Word signifieth that the
Letter is dependent for its value on the Word, that is, it deriveth its
grace from the Word; it has a spiritual kinship with the Word, and is
accounted an integral part of the Word. The Apostles were even as Letters,
and Christ was the essence of the Word Itself; and the meaning of the
Word, which is grace everlasting, cast a splendour on those Letters.
Again, since the Letter is a member of the Word, it therefore, in its
inner meaning, is consonant with the Word.

It is our hope that thou wilt in this day arise to promote that which
Emmanuel foretold. Know thou for a certainty that thou wilt succeed in
this, for the confirmations of the Holy Spirit are continually descending,
and the power of the Word will exert such an influence that the Letter
shall become the mirror in which the splendid Sun--the Word Itself--will be
reflected, and the grace and glory of the Word will illumine the whole
earth.

As for the heavenly Jerusalem that hath come to rest on the summits of the
world, and God's Holy of Holies, Whose banner is now lifted high, this
comprehendeth within itself all the perfections, all the knowledge of the
dispensations gone before. Beyond this, it heraldeth the oneness of the
children of men. It is the flag of universal peace, the spirit of eternal
life; it is the glory of the perfections of God, the circumambient grace
of all existence, the ornament bedecking all created things, the source of
inner quietude for all humankind.

Direct thine attention to the holy Tablets; read thou the I_sh_raqat,
Tajalliyyat, the Words of Paradise, the Glad Tidings, the Tarazat, the
Most Holy Book. Then wilt thou see that today these heavenly Teachings are
the remedy for a sick and suffering world, and a healing balm for the
sores on the body of mankind. They are the spirit of life, the ark of
salvation, the magnet to draw down eternal glory, the dynamic power to
motivate the inner self of man.





30: EXISTENCE IS OF TWO KINDS: ONE IS THE EXISTENCE OF ...


Existence is of two kinds: one is the existence of God which is beyond the
comprehension of man. He, the invisible, the lofty and the
incomprehensible, is preceded by no cause but rather is the Originator of
the cause of causes. He, the Ancient, hath had no beginning and is the
all-independent. The second kind of existence is the human existence. It
is a common existence, comprehensible to the human mind, is not ancient,
is dependent and hath a cause to it. The mortal substance does not become
eternal and vice versa; the human kind does not become a Creator and vice
versa. The transformation of the innate substance is impossible.

In the world of existence--that which is comprehensible--there are stages of
mortality: the first stage is the mineral world, next is the vegetable
world. In the latter world the mineral doth exist but with a distinctive
feature which is the vegetable characteristic. Likewise in the animal
world, the mineral and vegetable characteristics are present and in
addition the characteristics of the animal world are to be found, which
are the faculties of hearing and of sight. In the human world the
characteristics of the mineral, vegetable and animal worlds are found and
in addition that of the human kind, namely the intellectual
characteristic, which discovereth the realities of things and
comprehendeth universal principles.

Man, therefore, on the plane of the contingent world is the most perfect
being. By man is meant the perfect individual, who is like unto a mirror
in which the divine perfections are manifested and reflected. But the sun
doth not descend from the height of its sanctity to enter into the mirror,
but when the latter is purified and turned towards the Sun of Truth, the
perfections of this Sun, consisting of light and heat, are reflected and
manifested in that mirror. These souls are the Divine Manifestations of
God.





31: O THOU WHO ART DEAR, AND WISE! THY LETTER DATED ...


O thou who art dear, and wise! Thy letter dated 27 May 1906 hath been
received and its contents are most pleasing and have brought great joy.

Thou didst ask whether this Cause, this new and living Cause, could take
the place of the dead religious rites and ceremonials of England; whether
it would be possible, now that various groups have appeared, whose members
are highly placed divines and theologians, far superior in their
attainments to those of the past, for this new Cause so to impress the
members of such groups as to gather them and the rest into its
all-protecting shade.

O thou dear friend! Know thou that the distinguished Individual of every
age is endowed according to the perfections of His age. That Individual
who in past ages was set above His fellows was gifted according to the
virtues of His time. But in this age of splendours, this era of God, the
pre-eminent Personage, the luminous Orb, the chosen Individual will shine
out with such perfections and such power as ultimately to dazzle the minds
of every community and group. And since such a Personage is superior to
all others in spiritual perfections and heavenly attainments, and is
indeed the focal centre of divine blessings and the pivot of the circle of
light, He will encompass all others, and there is no doubt whatsoever that
He will shine out with such power as to gather every soul into His
sheltering shade.

When ye consider this matter with care, it will become apparent that this
is according to a universal law, which one can find at work in all things:
the whole attracteth the part, and in the circle, the centre is the pivot
of the compasses. Ponder thou upon the Spirit(27) : because He was the
focal centre of spiritual power, the wellspring of divine bounties,
although at the beginning He gathered unto Himself only a very few souls,
later on He was able, because of that all-subduing power that He had, to
unite within the sheltering Tabernacle of Christendom all the differing
sects. Compare the present with the past, and see how great is the
difference; thus canst thou arrive at truth and certitude.

The differences among the religions of the world are due to the varying
types of minds. So long as the powers of the mind are various, it is
certain that men's judgements and opinions will differ one from another.
If, however, one single, universal perceptive power be introduced--a power
encompassing all the rest--those differing opinions will merge, and a
spiritual harmony and oneness will become apparent. For example, when the
Christ was made manifest, the minds of the various contemporary peoples,
their views, their emotional attitudes, whether they were Romans, Greeks,
Syrians, Israelites, or others, were at variance with one another. But
once His universal power was brought to bear, it gradually succeeded,
after the lapse of three hundred years, in gathering together all those
divergent minds under the protection, and within the governance, of one
central Point, all sharing the same spiritual emotions in their hearts.

To use a metaphor, when an army is placed under various commanders, each
with his own strategy, they will obviously differ as to battle lines and
movements of the troops; but once the Supreme Commander, who is thoroughly
versed in the arts of war, taketh over, those other plans will disappear,
for the supremely gifted general will bring the whole army under his
control. This is intended only as a metaphor, not an exact comparison. Now
if you should say that each and every one of those other generals is
highly skilled in the military art, is thoroughly proficient and
experienced, and therefore will not subject himself to the rule of one
individual, no matter how indescribably great, your statement is
untenable, for the above situation is demonstrably what cometh to pass,
and there is no doubt thereof whatever.

Such is the case with the holy Manifestations of God. Such in particular
is the case with the divine reality of the Most Great Name, the Abha
Beauty. When once He standeth revealed unto the assembled peoples of the
world and appeareth with such comeliness, such enchantments--alluring as a
Joseph in the Egypt of the spirit--He enslaveth all the lovers on earth.

As to those souls who are born into this life as ethereal and radiant
entities and yet, on account of their handicaps and trials, are deprived
of great and real advantages, and leave the world without having lived to
the full--certainly this is a cause for grieving. This is the reason why
the universal Manifestations of God unveil Their countenances to man, and
endure every calamity and sore affliction, and lay down Their lives as a
ransom; it is to make these very people, the ready ones, the ones who have
capacity, to become dawning points of light, and to bestow upon them the
life that fadeth never. This is the true sacrifice: the offering of
oneself, even as did Christ, as a ransom for the life of the world.

As to the influence of holy Beings and the continuance of Their grace to
mankind after They have put away Their human form, this is, to Baha'is, an
indisputable fact. Indeed, the flooding grace, the streaming splendours of
the holy Manifestations appear after Their ascension from this world. The
exaltation of the Word, the revelation of the power of God, the conversion
of God-fearing souls, the bestowal of everlasting life--it was following
the Messiah's martyrdom that all these were increased and intensified. In
the same way, ever since the ascension of the Blessed Beauty, the
bestowals have been more abundant, the spreading light is brighter, the
tokens of the Lord's might are more powerful, the influence of the Word is
much stronger, and it will not be long before the motion, the heat, the
brilliance, the blessings of the Sun of His reality will encompass all the
earth.

Grieve thou not over the slow advance of the Baha'i Cause in that land.
This is but the early dawn. Consider how, with the Cause of Christ, three
hundred years had to go by, before its great influence was made manifest.
Today, not sixty years from its birth, the light of this Faith hath been
shed around the planet.

Regarding the health society of which thou art a member, once it cometh
under the shelter of this Faith its influence shall increase a
hundredfold.

Thou dost observe that love among the Baha'is is very great, and that love
is the main thing. Just as love's power hath been developed to such a high
degree among the Baha'is, and is far greater than among the people of
other religions, so is it with all else as well; for love is the ground of
all things.

Regarding the translation of the Books and Tablets of the Blessed Beauty,
erelong will translations be made into every tongue, with power, clarity
and grace. At such time as they are translated, conformably to the
originals, and with power and grace of style, the splendours of their
inner meanings will be shed abroad, and will illumine the eyes of all
mankind. Do thy very best to ensure that the translation is in conformity
with the original.

The Blessed Beauty proceeded to Haifa on many occasions. Thou beheldest
Him there, but thou didst not know Him at that time. It is my hope that
thou wilt attain unto the true meeting with Him, which is to behold Him
with the inner, not the outer eye.

The essence of Baha'u'llah's Teaching is all-embracing love, for love
includeth every excellence of humankind. It causeth every soul to go
forward. It bestoweth on each one, for a heritage, immortal life. Erelong
shalt thou bear witness that His celestial Teachings, the very glory of
reality itself, shall light up the skies of the world.

The brief prayer which thou didst write at the close of thy letter was
indeed original, touching and beautiful. Recite thou this prayer at all
times.





32: O YE HANDMAIDS OF THE LORD! IN THIS CENTURY--THE ...


O ye handmaids of the Lord! In this century--the century of the Almighty
Lord--the Day-Star of the Realms above, the Light of Truth, shineth in its
meridian splendour and its rays illuminate all regions. For this is the
age of the Ancient Beauty, the day of the revelation of the might and
power of the Most Great Name--may my life be offered up as a sacrifice for
His loved ones.

In the ages to come, though the Cause of God may rise and grow a
hundredfold and the shade of the Sadratu'l-Muntaha shelter all mankind,
yet this present century shall stand unrivalled, for it hath witnessed the
breaking of that Morn and the rising of that Sun. This century is, verily,
the source of His Light and the dayspring of His Revelation. Future ages
and generations shall behold the diffusion of its radiance and the
manifestations of its signs.

Wherefore, exert yourselves, haply ye may obtain your full share and
portion of His bestowals.





33: O SERVANT OF GOD! WE HAVE NOTED WHAT THOU DIDST ...


O servant of God! We have noted what thou didst write to
Jinab-i-Ibn-'Abhar, and thy question regarding the verse: 'Whoso layeth
claim to a Revelation direct from God, ere the expiration of a full
thousand years, such a man is assuredly a lying impostor.'

The meaning of this is that any individual who, before the expiry of a
full thousand years--years known and clearly established by common usage
and requiring no interpretation--should lay claim to a Revelation direct
from God, even though he should reveal certain signs, that man is
assuredly false and an impostor.

This is not a reference to the Universal Manifestation, for it is clearly
set forth in the Holy Writings that centuries, nay thousands of years,
must pass on to completion, before a Manifestation like unto this
Manifestation shall appear again.

It is possible, however, that after the completion of a full thousand
years, certain Holy Beings will be empowered to deliver a Revelation:
this, however, will not be through a Universal Manifestation. Wherefore
every day of the cycle of the Blessed Beauty is in reality equal to one
year, and every year of it is equal to a thousand years.

Consider, for example, the sun: its transit from one zodiacal sign to the
next occurreth within a short period of time, yet only after a long period
doth it attain the plenitude of its resplendency, its heat and glory, in
the sign of Leo. It must first complete one full revolution through the
other constellations before it will enter the sign of Leo again, to blaze
out in its full splendour. In its other stations, it revealeth not the
fullness of its heat and light.

The substance is, that prior to the completion of a thousand years, no
individual may presume to breathe a word. All must consider themselves to
be of the order of subjects, submissive and obedient to the commandments
of God and the laws of the House of Justice. Should any deviate by so much
as a needle's point from the decrees of the Universal House of Justice, or
falter in his compliance therewith, then is he of the outcast and
rejected.

As to the cycle of the Blessed Beauty--the times of the Greatest Name--this
is not limited to a thousand or two thousand years....

When it is said that the period of a thousand years beginneth with the
Manifestation of the Blessed Beauty and every day thereof is a thousand
years, the intent is a reference to the cycle of the Blessed Beauty, which
in this context will extend over many ages into the unborn reaches of
time.





34: O THOU WHO ART SERVING THE WORLD OF HUMANITY! ...


O thou who art serving the world of humanity! Thy letter was received and
from its contents we felt exceedingly glad. It was a decisive proof and a
brilliant evidence. It is appropriate and befitting that in this illumined
age--the age of the progress of the world of humanity--we should be
self-sacrificing and should serve the human race. Every universal cause is
divine and every particular one is temporal. The principles of the divine
Manifestations of God were, therefore, all-universal and all-inclusive.

Every imperfect soul is self-centred and thinketh only of his own good.
But as his thoughts expand a little he will begin to think of the welfare
and comfort of his family. If his ideas still more widen, his concern will
be the felicity of his fellow citizens; and if still they widen, he will
be thinking of the glory of his land and of his race. But when ideas and
views reach the utmost degree of expansion and attain the stage of
perfection, then will he be interested in the exaltation of humankind. He
will then be the well-wisher of all men and the seeker of the weal and
prosperity of all lands. This is indicative of perfection.

Thus, the divine Manifestations of God had a universal and all-inclusive
conception. They endeavoured for the sake of everyone's life and engaged
in the service of universal education. The area of their aims was not
limited--nay, rather, it was wide and all-inclusive.

Therefore, ye must also be thinking of everyone, so that mankind may be
educated, character moderated and this world may turn into a Garden of
Eden.

Love ye all religions and all races with a love that is true and sincere
and show that love through deeds and not through the tongue; for the
latter hath no importance, as the majority of men are, in speech,
well-wishers, while action is the best.





35: O ARMY OF GOD! A LETTER SIGNED JOINTLY BY ALL OF ...


O army of God! A letter signed jointly by all of you hath been received.
It was most eloquent and full of flavour, and reading it was a delight.

Ye had written of the fasting month. Fortunate are ye to have obeyed the
commandment of God, and kept this fast during the holy season. For this
material fast is an outer token of the spiritual fast; it is a symbol of
self-restraint, the withholding of oneself from all appetites of the self,
taking on the characteristics of the spirit, being carried away by the
breathings of heaven and catching fire from the love of God.

Your letter also betokened your unity and the closeness of your hearts. It
is my hope that the west, through the boundless grace that God is pouring
down in this new era, will become the east, the dawning-point of the Sun
of Truth, and western believers the daysprings of light, and manifestors
of the signs of God; that they will be guarded from the doubts of the
heedless and will stay firm and unmoveable in the Covenant and Testament;
that they will toil by day and by night until they awaken those who sleep,
and make mindful those who are unaware, and bring in the outcast to be
intimates of the inner circle, and bestow upon the destitute their portion
of eternal grace. Let them be heralds of the Kingdom, and call out to the
denizens of this nether world, and summon them to enter the realm on high.

O army of God! Today, in this world, every people is wandering astray in
its own desert, moving here and there according to the dictates of its
fancies and whims, pursuing its own particular caprice. Amongst all the
teeming masses of the earth, only this community of the Most Great Name is
free and clear of human schemes and hath no selfish purpose to promote.
Alone amongst them all, this people hath arisen with aims purified of
self, following the Teachings of God, most eagerly toiling and striving
toward a single goal: to turn this nether dust into high heaven, to make
of this world a mirror for the Kingdom, to change this world into a
different world, and cause all humankind to adopt the ways of
righteousness and a new manner of life.

O army of God! Through the protection and help vouchsafed by the Blessed
Beauty--may my life be a sacrifice to His loved ones--ye must conduct
yourselves in such a manner that ye may stand out distinguished and
brilliant as the sun among other souls. Should any one of you enter a
city, he should become a centre of attraction by reason of his sincerity,
his faithfulness and love, his honesty and fidelity, his truthfulness and
loving-kindness towards all the peoples of the world, so that the people
of that city may cry out and say: 'This man is unquestionably a Baha'i,
for his manners, his behaviour, his conduct, his morals, his nature, and
disposition reflect the attributes of the Baha'is.' Not until ye attain
this station can ye be said to have been faithful to the Covenant and
Testament of God. For He hath, through irrefutable Texts, entered into a
binding Covenant with us all, requiring us to act in accordance with His
sacred instructions and counsels.

O army of God! The time hath come for the effects and perfections of the
Most Great Name to be made manifest in this excellent age, so as to
establish, beyond any doubt, that this era is the era of Baha'u'llah, and
this age is distinguished above all other ages.

O army of God! Whensoever ye behold a person whose entire attention is
directed toward the Cause of God; whose only aim is this, to make the Word
of God to take effect; who, day and night, with pure intent, is rendering
service to the Cause; from whose behaviour not the slightest trace of
egotism or private motives is discerned--who, rather, wandereth distracted
in the wilderness of the love of God, and drinketh only from the cup of
the knowledge of God, and is utterly engrossed in spreading the sweet
savours of God, and is enamoured of the holy verses of the Kingdom of
God--know ye for a certainty that this individual will be supported and
reinforced by heaven; that like unto the morning star, he will forever
gleam brightly out of the skies of eternal grace. But if he show the
slightest taint of selfish desires and self love, his efforts will lead to
nothing and he will be destroyed and left hopeless at the last.

O army of God! Praise be to God, Baha'u'llah hath lifted the chains from
off the necks of humankind, and hath set man free from all that trammelled
him, and told him: Ye are the fruits of one tree and the leaves of one
branch; be ye compassionate and kind to all the human race. Deal ye with
strangers the same as with friends, cherish ye others just as ye would
your own. See foes as friends; see demons as angels; give to the tyrant
the same great love ye show the loyal and true, and even as gazelles from
the scented cities of _Kh_ata and _Kh_utan(28) offer up sweet musk to the
ravening wolf. Be ye a refuge to the fearful; bring ye rest and peace to
the disturbed; make ye a provision for the destitute; be a treasury of
riches for the poor; be a healing medicine for those who suffer pain; be
ye doctor and nurse to the ailing; promote ye friendship, and honour, and
conciliation, and devotion to God, in this world of non-existence.

O army of God! Make ye a mighty effort: perchance ye can flood this earth
with light, that this mud hut, the world, may become the Abha Paradise.
The dark hath taken over, and the brute traits prevail. This world of man
is now an arena for wild beasts, a field where the ignorant, the heedless,
seize their chance. The souls of men are ravening wolves and animals with
blinded eyes, they are either deadly poison or useless weeds--all except
for a very few who indeed do nurture altruistic aims and plans for the
well-being of their fellow men: but ye must in this matter--that is, the
serving of humankind--lay down your very lives, and as ye yield yourselves,
rejoice.

O army of God! The Exalted One, the Bab, gave up His life. The Blessed
Perfection gave up a hundred lives at every breath. He bore calamities. He
suffered anguish. He was imprisoned. He was chained. He was made homeless
and was banished to distant lands. Finally, then, He lived out His days in
the Most Great Prison. Likewise, a great multitude of the lovers of God
who followed this path have tasted the honey of martyrdom and they gave up
everything--life, possessions, kindred--all they had. How many homes were
reduced to rubble; how many dwellings were broken into and pillaged; how
many a noble building went to the ground; how many a palace was battered
into a tomb. And all this came about that humankind might be illumined,
that ignorance might yield to knowledge, that men of earth might become
men of heaven, that discord and dissension might be torn out by the roots,
and the Kingdom of Peace become established over all the world. Strive ye
now that this bounty become manifest, and this best-beloved of all hopes
be realized in splendour throughout the community of man.

O army of God! Beware lest ye harm any soul, or make any heart to sorrow;
lest ye wound any man with your words, be he known to you or a stranger,
be he friend or foe. Pray ye for all; ask ye that all be blessed, all be
forgiven. Beware, beware, lest any of you seek vengeance, even against one
who is thirsting for your blood. Beware, beware, lest ye offend the
feelings of another, even though he be an evil-doer, and he wish you ill.
Look ye not upon the creatures, turn ye to their Creator. See ye not the
never-yielding people, see but the Lord of Hosts. Gaze ye not down upon
the dust, gaze upward at the shining sun, which hath caused every patch of
darksome earth to glow with light.

O army of God! When calamity striketh, be ye patient and composed. However
afflictive your sufferings may be, stay ye undisturbed, and with perfect
confidence in the abounding grace of God, brave ye the tempest of
tribulations and fiery ordeals.

Last year a number of the unfaithful, both from within and from without,
both known to us and strangers, took before the Sultan of Turkey
slanderous charges against these homeless exiles, bringing against us
grave accusations with no basis in fact. The Government, conformably with
prudence, determined to look into these charges, and dispatched a
Commission of Investigation to this city. It is obvious what an
opportunity this afforded our ill-wishers, and what a storm they
unleashed, all this beyond description by tongue or pen. Only one who
witnessed it could know what a turmoil they created and what an earthquake
of anguish was the result. And notwithstanding this, the response was to
depend utterly upon God, and to remain composed, confident,
long-suffering, undisturbed, to such a degree that a person knowing
nothing of the situation would have thought us easy of heart and mind,
perfectly happy, thriving and at peace.

Then it came about that the accusers themselves, those who had made the
defamatory charges against us, joined with the members of the Commission
to investigate the accusations, so that plaintiffs, witnesses and judge
were all one and the same, and the conclusion was foregone. Nevertheless,
to be fair, it must be stated that up to now His Majesty the Sultan of
Turkey hath paid no heed to these false charges, this defamation, these
fables and traducements, and hath acted with justice....

O Thou Provider! Thou hast breathed over the friends in the West the sweet
fragrance of the Holy Spirit, and with the light of divine guidance Thou
hast lit up the western sky. Thou hast made those who were once remote to
draw near unto Thyself; Thou hast turned strangers into loving friends;
Thou hast awakened those who slept; Thou hast made the heedless mindful.

O Thou Provider! Assist Thou these noble friends to win Thy good pleasure,
and make them well-wishers of stranger and friend alike. Bring them into
the world that abideth forever; grant them a portion of heavenly grace;
cause them to be true Baha'is, sincerely of God; save them from outward
semblances, and establish them firmly in the truth. Make them signs and
tokens of the Kingdom, luminous stars above the horizons of this nether
life. Make them to be a comfort and a solace to humankind and servants to
the peace of the world. Exhilarate them with the wine of Thy counsel, and
grant that all of them may tread the path of Thy commandments.

O Thou Provider! The dearest wish of this servant of Thy Threshold is to
behold the friends of east and west in close embrace; to see all the
members of human society gathered with love in a single great assemblage,
even as individual drops of water collected in one mighty sea; to behold
them all as birds in one garden of roses, as pearls of one ocean, as
leaves of one tree, as rays of one sun.

Thou art the Mighty, the Powerful, and Thou art the God of strength, the
Omnipotent, the All-Seeing.





36: O YE TWO FAVOURED HANDMAIDS OF THE LORD! THE ...


O ye two favoured handmaids of the Lord! The letter from Mother Beecher
hath been received, and truly it spoke for you both, wherefore I address
the two of you together. This seemeth very good to me, for ye two pure
beings are even as a single precious gem, ye are two boughs branched from
a single tree; ye both adore the same Beloved, ye both are longing for the
same resplendent Sun.

My hope is that all the handmaids of God in that region will unite like
unto the waves of one unending sea; for although blown about as the wind
listeth, these are separate in themselves, yet in truth are they all at
one with the boundless deep.

How good it is if the friends be as close as sheaves of light, if they
stand together side by side in a firm unbroken line. For now have the rays
of reality from the Sun of the world of existence, united in adoration all
the worshippers of this light; and these rays have, through infinite
grace, gathered all peoples together within this wide-spreading shelter;
therefore must all souls become as one soul, and all hearts as one heart.
Let all be set free from the multiple identities that were born of passion
and desire, and in the oneness of their love for God find a new way of
life.

O ye two handmaids of God! Now is the time for you to become as bounteous
cups that are filled to overflowing, and even as the reviving gusts that
blow from the Abha Paradise, to scatter the fragrance of musk across that
land. Release yourselves from this world's life, and at every stage long
ye for non-existence; for when the ray returneth to the sun, it is wiped
out, and when the drop cometh to the sea, it vanisheth, and when the true
lover findeth his Beloved, he yieldeth up his soul.

Until a being setteth his foot in the plane of sacrifice, he is bereft of
every favour and grace; and this plane of sacrifice is the realm of dying
to the self, that the radiance of the living God may then shine forth. The
martyr's field is the place of detachment from self, that the anthems of
eternity may be upraised. Do all ye can to become wholly weary of self,
and bind yourselves to that Countenance of Splendours; and once ye have
reached such heights of servitude, ye will find, gathered within your
shadow, all created things. This is boundless grace; this is the highest
sovereignty; this is the life that dieth not. All else save this is at the
last but manifest perdition and great loss.

Praise be to God, the gate of boundless grace is opened wide, the heavenly
table is set, the servants of the Merciful and His handmaids are present
at the feast. Strive ye to receive your share of this eternal food, so
that ye shall be loved and cherished in this world and the next.





37: O YE DEAR FRIENDS OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA! A BLESSED LETTER ...


O ye dear friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! A blessed letter hath been received
from you, telling of the election of a Spiritual Assembly. It hath
rejoiced my heart to know that, God be praised, the friends in that area,
with absolute unity, fellowship and love, have held this new election and
were successful in voting for souls who are sanctified, are favoured at
the Holy Threshold and are well known amongst the friends to be staunch
and firm in the Covenant.

Now must those elected representatives arise to serve with spirituality
and joy, with purity of intent, with strong attraction to the fragrances
of the Almighty, and well supported by the Holy Spirit. Let them raise up
the banner of guidance, and as soldiers of the Company on high, let them
exalt God's Word, spread abroad His sweet savours, educate the souls of
men, and promote the Most Great Peace.

Truly, blessed souls have been elected. The moment I read their names, I
felt a thrill of spiritual joy to know that, praised be God, persons have
been raised up in that country who are servants of the Kingdom, and ready
to lay down their lives for Him Who hath neither likeness nor peer.

O ye dear friends of mine! Light up this Assembly with the splendour of
God's love. Make it ring out with the joyous music of the hallowed
spheres, make it thrive on those foods that are served at the Lord's
Supper, at the heavenly banquet table of God. Come ye together in gladness
unalloyed, and at the beginning of the meeting, recite ye this prayer:

O Thou Lord of the Kingdom! Though our bodies be gathered here together,
yet our spellbound hearts are carried away by Thy love, and yet are we
transported by the rays of Thy resplendent face. Weak though we be, we
await the revelations of Thy might and power. Poor though we be, with
neither goods nor means, still take we riches from the treasures of Thy
Kingdom. Drops though we be, still do we draw from out Thy ocean deeps.
Motes though we be, still do we gleam in the glory of Thy splendid Sun.

O Thou our Provider! Send down Thine aid, that each one gathered here may
become a lighted candle, each one a centre of attraction, each one a
summoner to Thy heavenly realms, till at last we make this nether world
the mirror image of Thy Paradise.

O ye dear friends of mine! It is incumbent upon the assemblies of those
regions to be connected one with another and to correspond with one
another, and also to communicate with the assemblies of the east, thus to
become agencies for union throughout the world.

O ye spiritual friends! Such must be your constancy that should the
evil-wishers put every believer to death and only one remain, that one,
singly and alone, will withstand all the peoples of the earth, and will go
on scattering far and wide the sweet and holy fragrances of God.
Wherefore, should any fearsome news, any word of terrifying events, reach
you from the Holy Land, see to it that ye waver not, be ye not stricken by
grief, be ye not shaken. Rather, rise ye up instantly, with iron resolve,
and serve ye the Kingdom of God.

This Servant of the Lord's Threshold hath been in peril at all times. He
is in peril now. At no time have I had any hope of safety, and my dearest
wish is this: to drink of the martyr's bounteous and brim-full cup, and
die on the field of sacrifice, delighting in that wine which is the most
precious of God's gifts. This is my highest hope, this my most vehement
desire.

We hear that the Tablets of I_sh_raqat (Splendours), Tarazat (Ornaments),
Bi_sh_arat (Glad Tidings), Tajalliyyat (Effulgences), and Kalimat (Words
of Paradise) have been translated and published in those regions. In these
Tablets will ye have a model of how to be and how to live.





38: O HANDMAID OF GOD, WHO TREMBLEST EVEN AS A FRESH ...


O handmaid of God, who tremblest even as a fresh and tender branch in the
winds of the love of God! I have read thy letter, which telleth of thine
abundant love, thine intense devotion, and of thy being occupied with the
remembrance of thy Lord.

Depend thou upon God. Forsake thine own will and cling to His, set aside
thine own desires and lay hold of His, that thou mayest become an example,
holy, spiritual, and of the Kingdom, unto His handmaids.

Know thou, O handmaid, that in the sight of Baha, women are accounted the
same as men, and God hath created all humankind in His own image, and
after His own likeness. That is, men and women alike are the revealers of
His names and attributes, and from the spiritual viewpoint there is no
difference between them. Whosoever draweth nearer to God, that one is the
most favoured, whether man or woman. How many a handmaid, ardent and
devoted, hath, within the sheltering shade of Baha, proved superior to the
men, and surpassed the famous of the earth.

The House of Justice, however, according to the explicit text of the Law
of God, is confined to men; this for a wisdom of the Lord God's, which
will erelong be made manifest as clearly as the sun at high noon.

As to you, O ye other handmaids who are enamoured of the heavenly
fragrances, arrange ye holy gatherings, and found ye Spiritual Assemblies,
for these are the basis for spreading the sweet savours of God, exalting
His Word, uplifting the lamp of His grace, promulgating His religion and
promoting His Teachings, and what bounty is there greater than this? These
Spiritual Assemblies are aided by the Spirit of God. Their defender is
'Abdu'l-Baha. Over them He spreadeth His wings. What bounty is there
greater than this? These Spiritual Assemblies are shining lamps and
heavenly gardens, from which the fragrances of holiness are diffused over
all regions, and the lights of knowledge are shed abroad over all created
things. From them the spirit of life streameth in every direction. They,
indeed, are the potent sources of the progress of man, at all times and
under all conditions. What bounty is there greater than this?





39: O HANDMAID OF GOD! THY LETTER HATH BEEN RECEIVED, ...


O handmaid of God! Thy letter hath been received, bringing its news that
an Assembly hath been established in that city.

Look ye not upon the fewness of thy numbers, rather, seek ye out hearts
that are pure. One consecrated soul is preferable to a thousand other
souls. If a small number of people gather lovingly together, with absolute
purity and sanctity, with their hearts free of the world, experiencing the
emotions of the Kingdom and the powerful magnetic forces of the Divine,
and being at one in their happy fellowship, that gathering will exert its
influence over all the earth. The nature of that band of people, the words
they speak, the deeds they do, will unleash the bestowals of Heaven, and
provide a foretaste of eternal bliss. The hosts of the Company on high
will defend them, and the angels of the Abha Paradise, in continuous
succession, will come down to their aid.

The meaning of 'angels' is the confirmations of God and His celestial
powers. Likewise angels are blessed beings who have severed all ties with
this nether world, have been released from the chains of self and the
desires of the flesh, and anchored their hearts to the heavenly realms of
the Lord. These are of the Kingdom, heavenly; these are of God, spiritual;
these are revealers of God's abounding grace; these are dawning-points of
His spiritual bestowals.

O handmaid of God! Praise be to Him, thy dear husband hath perceived the
sweet scents that blow from the gardens of heaven. Now, as day followeth
day, must thou, through the love of God, and thine own good actions, draw
him ever closer to the Faith.

Those were indeed dire events in San Francisco.(29) Disasters of this kind
should serve to awaken the people, and diminish the love of their hearts
for this inconstant world. It is in this nether world that such tragic
things take place: this is the cup that yieldeth bitter wine.





40: O YE WHOM 'ABDU'L-BAHA LOVETH! I HAVE READ YOUR ...


O ye whom 'Abdu'l-Baha loveth! I have read your reports with great joy;
they are of a nature to cheer and refresh the heart and gladden the soul.
If this Assembly, through the holy breathings of the All-Merciful and His
divine confirmations, endure and remain fixed and firm, it shall produce
notable results and it shall succeed in enterprises of great moment.

The Spiritual Assemblies to be established in this Age of God, this holy
century, have, it is indisputable, had neither peer nor likeness in the
cycles gone before. For those assemblages that wielded power were based on
the support of mighty leaders of men, while these Assemblies are based on
the support of the Beauty of Abha. The defenders and patrons of those
other assemblages were either a prince, or a king, or a chief priest, or
the mass of the people. But these Spiritual Assemblies have for their
defender, their supporter, their helper, their inspirer, the omnipotent
Lord.

Look ye not upon the present, fix your gaze upon the times to come. In the
beginning, how small is the seed, yet in the end it is a mighty tree. Look
ye not upon the seed, look ye upon the tree, and its blossoms, and its
leaves and its fruits. Consider the days of Christ, when none but a small
band followed Him; then observe what a mighty tree that seed became,
behold ye its fruitage. And now shall come to pass even greater things
than these, for this is the summons of the Lord of Hosts, this is the
trumpet-call of the living Lord, this is the anthem of world peace, this
is the standard of righteousness and trust and understanding raised up
among all the variegated peoples of the globe; this is the splendour of
the Sun of Truth, this is the holiness of the spirit of God Himself. This
most powerful of dispensations will encompass all the earth, and beneath
its banner will all peoples gather and be sheltered together. Know then
the vital import of this tiny seed that the true Husbandman hath, with the
hands of His mercy, sown in the ploughed fields of the Lord, and watered
with the rain of bestowals and bounties and is now nurturing in the heat
and light of the Day-Star of Truth.

Wherefore, O ye loved ones of God, offer up thanks unto Him, since He hath
made you the object of such bounties, and the recipients of such gifts.
Blessed are ye, glad tidings to you, for this abounding grace.





41: O THOU WHO ART STEADFAST IN THE COVENANT, AND ...


O thou who art steadfast in the Covenant, and staunch! The letter which
thou didst write ... hath been shown to me, and the opinions expressed
therein were most commendable. It is incumbent upon the Spiritual
Consultative Assembly of New York to be in complete agreement with that of
Chicago, and for these two assemblies of consultation jointly to approve
whatever they consider suitable for publication and distribution.
Following that, let them send one copy to Akka, so that it may also be
approved from here, after which the material will be returned to be
published and circulated.

The question of co-ordinating and unifying the two Spiritual Assemblies,
that of Chicago and of New York, is of the utmost importance, and once a
Spiritual Assembly is duly formed in Washington, these two Assemblies
should also establish ties of unity with that Assembly. To sum it up, it
is the desire of the Lord God that the loved ones of God and the handmaids
of the Merciful in the West should come closer together in harmony and
unity as day followeth day, and until this is accomplished, the work will
never go forward. The Spiritual Assemblies are collectively the most
effective of all instruments for establishing unity and harmony. This
matter is of the utmost importance; this is the magnet that draweth down
the confirmations of God. If once the beauty of the unity of the
friends--this Divine Beloved--be decked in the adornments of the Abha
Kingdom, it is certain that within a very short time those countries will
become the Paradise of the All-Glorious, and that out of the west the
splendours of unity will cast their bright rays over all the earth.

We are striving with heart and soul, resting neither day nor night,
seeking not a moment's ease, to make this world of man the mirror of the
unity of God. Then how much more must the beloved of the Lord reflect that
unity? And this cherished hope, this yearning wish of ours will be visibly
fulfilled only on the day when the true friends of God arise to carry out
the Teachings of the Abha Beauty--may my life be a ransom for His lovers!
One amongst His Teachings is this, that love and good faith must so
dominate the human heart that men will regard the stranger as a familiar
friend, the malefactor as one of their own, the alien even as a loved one,
the enemy as a companion dear and close. Who killeth them, him will they
call a bestower of life; who turneth away from them, him will they regard
as turning towards them; who denieth their message, him will they consider
as one acknowledging its truth. The meaning is that they must treat all
humankind even as they treat their sympathizers, their fellow-believers,
their loved ones and familiar friends.

Should such a torch light up the world community, ye will find that the
whole earth is sending forth a fragrance, that it hath become a
delightsome paradise, and the face of it the image of high heaven. Then
will the whole world be one native land, its diverse peoples one single
kind, the nations of both east and west one household.

It is my hope that such a day will come, that such a splendour will shine
forth, that such a vision will be unveiled in its full beauty.





42: O YE CO-WORKERS WHO ARE SUPPORTED BY ARMIES ...


O ye co-workers who are supported by armies from the realm of the
All-Glorious! Blessed are ye, for ye have come together in the sheltering
shade of the Word of God, and have found a refuge in the cave of His
Covenant; ye have brought peace to your hearts by making your home in the
Abha Paradise, and are lulled by the gentle winds that blow from their
source in His loving-kindness; ye have arisen to serve the Cause of God
and to spread His religion far and wide, to promote His Word and to raise
high the banners of holiness throughout all those regions.

By the life of Baha! Verily will the consummate power of the Divine
Reality breathe into you the bounties of the Holy Spirit, and aid you to
perform an exploit whose like the eye of creation hath never looked upon.

O ye League of the Covenant! Verily the Abha Beauty made a promise to the
beloved who are steadfast in the Covenant, that He would reinforce their
strivings with the strongest of supports, and succour them with His
triumphant might. Erelong shall ye see that your illumined assemblage hath
left conspicuous signs and tokens in the hearts and souls of men. Hold ye
fast to the hem of God's garment, and direct all your efforts toward
furthering His Covenant, and burning ever more brightly with the fire of
His love, that your hearts may leap for joy in the breathings of servitude
which well out from the breast of 'Abdu'l-Baha. Rally your hearts, make
firm your steps, trust in the everlasting bounties that will be shed upon
you, one following another from the Kingdom of Abha. Whensoever ye gather
in that radiant assemblage, know ye that the splendours of Baha are
shining over you. It behoveth you to seek agreement and to be united; it
behoveth you to be in close communion one with the other, at one both in
body and soul, till ye match the Pleiades or a string of lustrous pearls.
Thus will ye be solidly established; thus will your words prevail, your
star shine out, and your hearts be comforted....

Whenever ye enter the council-chamber, recite this prayer with a heart
throbbing with the love of God and a tongue purified from all but His
remembrance, that the All-Powerful may graciously aid you to achieve
supreme victory:

O God, my God! We are servants of Thine that have turned with devotion to
Thy Holy Face, that have detached ourselves from all besides Thee in this
glorious Day. We have gathered in this Spiritual Assembly, united in our
views and thoughts, with our purposes harmonized to exalt Thy Word amidst
mankind. O Lord, our God! Make us the signs of Thy Divine Guidance, the
Standards of Thine exalted Faith amongst men, servants to Thy mighty
Covenant, O Thou our Lord Most High, manifestations of Thy Divine Unity in
Thine Abha Kingdom, and resplendent stars shining upon all regions. Lord!
Aid us to become seas surging with the billows of Thy wondrous Grace,
streams flowing from Thine all-glorious Heights, goodly fruits upon the
Tree of Thy heavenly Cause, trees waving through the breezes of Thy Bounty
in Thy celestial Vineyard. O God! Make our souls dependent upon the Verses
of Thy Divine Unity, our hearts cheered with the outpourings of Thy Grace,
that we may unite even as the waves of one sea and become merged together
as the rays of Thine effulgent Light; that our thoughts, our views, our
feelings may become as one reality, manifesting the spirit of union
throughout the world. Thou art the Gracious, the Bountiful, the Bestower,
the Almighty, the Merciful, the Compassionate.





43: THE PRIME REQUISITES FOR THEM THAT TAKE COUNSEL ...


The prime requisites for them that take counsel together are purity of
motive, radiance of spirit, detachment from all else save God, attraction
to His Divine Fragrances, humility and lowliness amongst His loved ones,
patience and long-suffering in difficulties and servitude to His exalted
Threshold. Should they be graciously aided to acquire these attributes,
victory from the unseen Kingdom of Baha shall be vouchsafed to them.





44: THE MEMBERS THEREOF MUST TAKE COUNSEL TOGETHER ...


The members thereof(30) must take counsel together in such wise that no
occasion for ill-feeling or discord may arise. This can be attained when
every member expresseth with absolute freedom his own opinion and setteth
forth his argument. Should anyone oppose, he must on no account feel hurt
for not until matters are fully discussed can the right way be revealed.
The shining spark of truth cometh forth only after the clash of differing
opinions. If after discussion, a decision be carried unanimously well and
good; but if, the Lord forbid, differences of opinion should arise, a
majority of voices must prevail.





45: THE FIRST CONDITION IS ABSOLUTE LOVE AND HARMONY ...


The first condition is absolute love and harmony amongst the members of
the assembly. They must be wholly free from estrangement and must manifest
in themselves the Unity of God, for they are the waves of one sea, the
drops of one river, the stars of one heaven, the rays of one sun, the
trees of one orchard, the flowers of one garden. Should harmony of thought
and absolute unity be nonexistent, that gathering shall be dispersed and
that assembly be brought to naught. The second condition is that the
members of the assembly should unitedly elect a chairman and lay down
guide-lines and by-laws for their meetings and discussions. The chairman
should have charge of such rules and regulations and protect and enforce
them; the other members should be submissive, and refrain from conversing
on superfluous and extraneous matters. They must, when coming together,
turn their faces to the Kingdom on high and ask aid from the Realm of
Glory. They must then proceed with the utmost devotion, courtesy, dignity,
care and moderation to express their views. They must in every matter
search out the truth and not insist upon their own opinion, for
stubbornness and persistence in one's views will lead ultimately to
discord and wrangling and the truth will remain hidden. The honoured
members must with all freedom express their own thoughts, and it is in no
wise permissible for one to belittle the thought of another, nay, he must
with moderation set forth the truth, and should differences of opinion
arise a majority of voices must prevail, and all must obey and submit to
the majority. It is again not permitted that any one of the honoured
members object to or censure, whether in or out of the meeting, any
decision arrived at previously, though that decision be not right, for
such criticism would prevent any decision from being enforced. In short,
whatsoever thing is arranged in harmony and with love and purity of
motive, its result is light, and should the least trace of estrangement
prevail the result shall be darkness upon darkness.... If this be so
regarded, that assembly shall be of God, but otherwise it shall lead to
coolness and alienation that proceed from the Evil One.... Should they
endeavour to fulfil these conditions the Grace of the Holy Spirit shall be
vouchsafed unto them, and that assembly shall become the centre of the
Divine blessings, the hosts of Divine confirmation shall come to their
aid, and they shall day by day receive a new effusion of Spirit.





46: O YE WHO ARE FIRM IN THE COVENANT! 'ABDU'L-BAHA ...


O ye who are firm in the Covenant! 'Abdu'l-Baha is constantly engaged in
ideal communication with any Spiritual Assembly which is instituted
through the divine bounty, and the members of which, in the utmost
devotion, turn to the divine Kingdom and are firm in the Covenant. To them
he is whole-heartedly attached and with them he is linked by everlasting
ties. Thus correspondence with that gathering is sincere, constant and
uninterrupted.

At every instant, I beg for you assistance, bounty, and a fresh favour and
blessing, so that the confirmations of Baha'u'llah may, like unto the sea,
be constantly surging, the lights of the Sun of Truth may shine upon you
all and that ye may be confirmed in service, may become the manifestations
of bounty and that each one of you may, at dawn, turn unto the Holy Land
and may experience spiritual emotions with all intensity.





47: O YE TRUE FRIENDS! YOUR LETTER HATH BEEN RECEIVED ...


O ye true friends! Your letter hath been received and it brought great
joy. God be praised, ye had made ready an entertainment and established
the feast which is to be held every nineteen days. Whatsoever gathering is
arranged with the utmost love, and where those who attend are turning
their faces toward the Kingdom of God, and where the discourse is of the
Teachings of God, and the effect of which is to cause those present to
advance--that gathering is the Lord's, and that festive table hath come
down from heaven.

It is my hope that this feast will be given on one day out of every
nineteen, for it bringeth you closer together; it is the very well-spring
of unity and loving-kindness.

Ye observe to what a degree the world is in continual turmoil and
conflict, and to what a pass its nations have now come. Perchance will the
lovers of God succeed in upraising the banner of human unity, so that the
one-coloured tabernacle of the Kingdom of Heaven will cast its sheltering
shadow over all the earth; that misunderstandings among the world's
peoples will vanish away; that all nations will mingle one with another,
dealing with one another even as the lover with his beloved.

It is your duty to be exceedingly kind to every human being, and to wish
him well; to work for the upliftment of society; to blow the breath of
life into the dead; to act in accordance with the instructions of
Baha'u'llah and walk His path--until ye change the world of man into the
world of God.





48: O YE LOYAL SERVANTS OF THE ANCIENT BEAUTY! IN EVERY ...


O ye loyal servants of the Ancient Beauty! In every cycle and
dispensation, the feast hath been favoured and loved, and the spreading of
a table for the lovers of God hath been considered a praiseworthy act.
This is especially the case today, in this dispensation beyond compare,
this most generous of ages, when it is highly acclaimed, for it is truly
accounted among such gatherings as are held to worship and glorify God.
Here the holy verses, the heavenly odes and laudations are intoned, and
the heart is quickened, and carried away from itself.

The primary intent is to kindle these stirrings of the spirit, but at the
same time it follows quite naturally that those present should partake of
food, so that the world of the body may mirror the spirit's world, and
flesh take on the qualities of soul; and just as the spiritual delights
are here in profusion, so too the material delights.

Happy are ye, to be observing this rule, with all its mystic meanings,
thus keeping the friends of God alert and heedful, and bringing them peace
of mind, and joy.





49: THY LETTER HATH BEEN RECEIVED. THOU DIDST WRITE OF ...


Thy letter hath been received. Thou didst write of the Nineteen Day
festivity, and this rejoiced my heart. These gatherings cause the divine
table to descend from heaven, and draw down the confirmations of the
All-Merciful. My hope is that the breathings of the Holy Spirit will be
wafted over them, and that each one present shall, in great assemblies,
with an eloquent tongue and a heart flooded with the love of God, set
himself to acclaiming the rise of the Sun of Truth, the dawn of the
Day-Star that lighteth all the world.





50: YOU HAVE ASKED AS TO THE FEAST IN EVERY BAHA'I ...


You have asked as to the feast in every Baha'i month. This feast is held
to foster comradeship and love, to call God to mind and supplicate Him
with contrite hearts, and to encourage benevolent pursuits.

That is, the friends should there dwell upon God and glorify Him, read the
prayers and holy verses, and treat one another with the utmost affection
and love.





51: AS TO THE NINETEEN DAY FEAST, IT REJOICETH MIND AND ...


As to the Nineteen Day Feast, it rejoiceth mind and heart. If this feast
be held in the proper fashion, the friends will, once in nineteen days,
find themselves spiritually restored, and endued with a power that is not
of this world.





52: O SERVANT OF THE ONE TRUE GOD! THE LORD BE ...


O servant of the One true God! The Lord be praised, the loved ones of God
are found in every land, and are, one and all, neath the shadow of the
Tree of Life and under the protection of His good providence. His care and
loving-kindness surge even as the eternal billows of the sea, and His
blessings are continually showered from His eternal Kingdom.

Ours should be the prayer that His blessings may be vouchsafed in still
greater abundance, and ours to hold fast to such means as shall ensure a
fuller outpouring of His grace and a greater measure of His divine
assistance.

One of the greatest of these means is the spirit of true fellowship and
loving communion amongst the friends. Remember the saying: 'Of all
pilgrimages the greatest is to relieve the sorrow-laden heart.'





53: VERILY, 'ABDU'L-BAHA INHALETH THE FRAGRANCE OF THE ...


Verily, 'Abdu'l-Baha inhaleth the fragrance of the love of God from every
meeting place where the Word of God is uttered and proofs and arguments
set forth that shed their rays across the world, and where they recount
the tribulations of 'Abdu'l-Baha at the evil hands of those who have
violated the Covenant of God.

O handmaid of the Lord! Speak thou no word of politics; thy task
concerneth the life of the soul, for this verily leadeth to man's joy in
the world of God. Except to speak well of them, make thou no mention of
the earth's kings, and the worldly governments thereof. Rather, confine
thine utterance to spreading the blissful tidings of the Kingdom of God,
and demonstrating the influence of the Word of God, and the holiness of
the Cause of God. Tell thou of abiding joy and spiritual delights, and
godlike qualities, and of how the Sun of Truth hath risen above the
earth's horizons: tell of the blowing of the spirit of life into the body
of the world.





54: YE HAVE WRITTEN AS TO THE MEETINGS OF THE FRIENDS, AND ...


Ye have written as to the meetings of the friends, and how filled they are
with peace and joy. Of course this is so; for wherever the spiritually
minded are gathered together, there in His beauty reigneth Baha'u'llah.
Thus it is certain that such reunions will yield boundless happiness and
peace.

Today it behoveth one and all to forgo the mention of all else, and to
disregard all things. Let their speaking, let their inner state be summed
up thus: 'Keep all my words of prayer and praise confined to one refrain;
make all my life but servitude to Thee.' That is, let them concentrate all
their thoughts, all their words, on teaching the Cause of God and
spreading the Faith of God, and inspiring all to characterize themselves
with the characteristics of God; on loving mankind; on being pure and holy
in all things, and spotless in their public and private life; on being
upright and detached, and fervent, and afire. All is to be yielded up,
save only the remembrance of God; all is to be dispraised, except His
praise. Today, to this melody of the Company on high, the world will leap
and dance: 'Glory be to my Lord, the All-Glorious!' But know ye this: save
for this song of God, no song will stir the world, and save for this
nightingale-cry of truth from the Garden of God, no melody will lure away
the heart. 'Whence cometh this Singer Who speaketh the Beloved's name?'





55: IT BEFITTETH THE FRIENDS TO HOLD A GATHERING, A ...


It befitteth the friends to hold a gathering, a meeting, where they shall
glorify God and fix their hearts upon Him, and read and recite the Holy
Writings of the Blessed Beauty--may my soul be the ransom of His lovers!
The lights of the All-Glorious Realm, the rays of the Supreme Horizon,
will be cast upon such bright assemblages, for these are none other than
the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kars, the Dawning-Points of God's Remembrance, which
must, at the direction of the Most Exalted Pen, be established in every
hamlet and city... These spiritual gatherings must be held with the utmost
purity and consecration, so that from the site itself, and its earth and
the air about it, one will inhale the fragrant breathings of the Holy
Spirit.





56: WHENSOEVER A COMPANY OF PEOPLE SHALL GATHER IN A ...


Whensoever a company of people shall gather in a meeting place, shall
engage in glorifying God, and shall speak with one another of the
mysteries of God, beyond any doubt the breathings of the Holy Spirit will
blow gently over them, and each shall receive a share thereof.





57: WE HEAR THAT THOU HAST IN MIND TO EMBELLISH THY ...


We hear that thou hast in mind to embellish thy house from time to time
with a meeting of Baha'is, where some among them will engage in glorifying
the All-Glorious Lord... Know that shouldst thou bring this about, that
house of earth will become a house of heaven, and that fabric of stone a
congress of the spirit.





58: THOU HAST ASKED ABOUT PLACES OF WORSHIP AND THE ...


Thou hast asked about places of worship and the underlying reason
therefor. The wisdom in raising up such buildings is that at a given hour,
the people should know it is time to meet, and all should gather together,
and, harmoniously attuned one to another, engage in prayer; with the
result that out of this coming together, unity and affection shall grow
and flourish in the human heart.





59: 'ABDU'L-BAHA HATH LONG CHERISHED THE DESIRE THAT A ...


'Abdu'l-Baha hath long cherished the desire that a Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar
be upraised in that region. Praised be God, thanks to the strenuous
efforts of the friends, in recent days the joyful news of this hath been
announced. This service is highly acceptable at the Threshold of God, for
the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar inspiriteth the lovers of God and delighteth
their hearts, and causeth them to become steadfast and firm.

This is a matter of the utmost significance. If the erection of the House
of Worship in a public place would arouse the hostility of evil-doers,
then the meeting must, in every locality, be held in some hidden place.
Even in every hamlet, a place must be set aside as the
Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar, and even though it be underground.

Now, praised be God, ye have succeeded in this. Engage ye in the
remembrance of God at dawn; rise ye up to praise and glorify Him. Blessed
are ye, and joy be yours, O ye the righteous, for having established the
Dawning-Point of the Praises of God. Verily I ask of the Lord that He make
you standards of salvation and banners of redemption, rippling high over
the valleys and hills.





60: ALTHOUGH TO OUTWARD SEEMING THE MASHRIQU'L-ADHKAR ...


Although to outward seeming the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar is a material
structure, yet it hath a spiritual effect. It forgeth bonds of unity from
heart to heart; it is a collective centre for men's souls. Every city in
which, during the days of the Manifestation, a temple was raised up, hath
created security and constancy and peace, for such buildings were given
over to the perpetual glorification of God, and only in the remembrance of
God can the heart find rest. Gracious God! The edifice of the House of
Worship hath a powerful influence on every phase of life. Experience hath,
in the east, clearly shown this to be a fact. Even if, in some small
village, a house was designated as the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar, it produced
a marked effect; how much greater would be the impact of one especially
raised up.





61: O LORD, O THOU WHO DOST BLESS ALL THOSE WHO ...


O Lord, O Thou Who dost bless all those who stand firm in the Covenant by
enabling them, out of their love for the Light of the World, to expend
what they have as an offering to the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar, the dayspring
of Thy wide-spread rays and the proclaimer of Thine evidences, help Thou,
both in this world and the world to come, these righteous these upright
and pious ones to draw ever nearer to Thy sacred Threshold, and make
bright their faces with Thy dazzling splendours.

Verily art Thou the Generous, the Ever-Bestowing.





62: O MY WELL-BELOVED DAUGHTER OF THE KINGDOM! ...


O my well-beloved daughter of the Kingdom! The letter thou hadst written
to Dr. Esslemont was forwarded by him to the Land of Desire [The Holy
Land]. I read it all through with the greatest attention. On the one hand,
I was deeply touched, for thou hadst sheared off those fair tresses of
thine with the shears of detachment from this world and of self-sacrifice
in the path of the Kingdom of God. And on the other, I was greatly
pleased, for that dearly-beloved daughter hath evinced so great a spirit
of self-sacrifice as to offer up so precious a part of her body in the
pathway of the Cause of God. Hadst thou sought my opinion, I would in no
wise have consented that thou shouldst shear off even a single thread of
thy comely and wavy locks; nay, I myself would have contributed in thy
name for the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar. This deed of thine is, however, an
eloquent testimony to thy noble spirit of self-sacrifice. Thou hast,
verily, sacrificed thy life and great will be the spiritual results thou
shalt obtain. Rest thou confident that day by day thou shalt progress and
wax greater in firmness and in constancy. The bounties of Baha'u'llah
shall compass thee about and the joyful tidings from on high shall time
and again be imparted unto thee. And though it be thine hair that thou
hast sacrificed, yet thou shalt be filled with the Spirit, and though it
be this perishable member of thy body which thou hast laid down in the
path of God, yet thou shalt find the Divine Gift, shalt behold the
Celestial Beauty, obtain imperishable glory and attain unto everlasting
life.





63: O YE BLESSED SOULS! THE LETTER YE HAD WRITTEN TO ...


O ye blessed souls!(31) The letter ye had written to Rahmatu'llah hath
been perused. Many and various were the joyful tidings it conveyed,
namely, that through the power of faith and constancy in the Covenant,
numerous gatherings have been convened, and the loved ones are everywhere
astir and active.

'Abdu'l-Baha's ardent desire hath ever been that the soil of that hallowed
spot, which in the earliest days of the Cause hath been refreshed and made
verdant with the spring showers of grace, may so bloom and blossom as to
fill every heart with joy.

Praised be the Lord, the Cause of God hath been proclaimed and promoted
throughout the East and the West in such wise that no mind had ever
conceived that the sweet savours of the Lord would so rapidly perfume all
regions. This, verily, is only through the consummate bounties of the
ever-blessed Beauty, Whose grace and Whose triumphing power are time and
again abundantly received.

One of the wondrous events that has of late come to pass is this, that the
edifice of the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar is being raised in the very heart of
the American continent, and numerous souls from the surrounding regions
are contributing for the erection of this holy Temple. Among these is a
highly esteemed lady of the city of Manchester, who hath been moved to
offer her share.

Having no portion of goods and earthly riches, she sheared off with her
own hands the fine, long and precious tresses that adorned her head so
gracefully, and offered them for sale, that the price thereof might
promote the cause of the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar.

Consider ye, that though in the eyes of women nothing is more precious
than rich and flowing locks, yet notwithstanding this, that
highly-honoured lady hath evinced so rare and beautiful a spirit of
self-sacrifice.

And though this was uncalled for, and 'Abdu'l-Baha would not have
consented to such a deed, yet as it doth reveal so high and noble a spirit
of devotion, He was deeply touched thereby. Precious though the hair be in
the sight of western women, nay, more precious than life itself, yet she
offered it up as a sacrifice for the cause of the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar!

It is related that once in the days of the Apostle of God(32) He signified
His desire that an army should advance in a certain direction, and leave
was granted unto the faithful to raise contributions for the holy war.
Among many was one man who gave a thousand camels, each laden with corn,
another who gave half his substance, and still another who offered all
that he had. But a woman stricken in years, whose sole possession was a
handful of dates, came to the Apostle and laid at His feet her humble
contribution. Thereupon the Prophet of God--may my life be offered up as a
sacrifice unto Him--bade that this handful of dates be placed over and
above all the contributions that had been gathered, thus asserting the
merit and superiority thereof over all the rest. This was done because
that elderly woman had no other earthly possessions but these.

And in like manner this esteemed lady had nothing else to contribute but
her precious locks, and these she gloriously sacrificed in the cause of
the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar.

Ponder and reflect how mighty and potent hath the Cause of God become! A
woman of the west hath given her hair for the glory of the
Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar.

Nay, this is but a lesson unto them that perceive.

In conclusion I am greatly pleased with the loved ones in Najaf-Abad for,
from the very early dawn of the Cause unto this day they have one and all
under all conditions evinced a great spirit of self-sacrifice.

Zaynu'l-Muqarrabin hath throughout his lifetime prayed with all the
sincerity of his stainless soul on behalf of the believers in Najaf-Abad
and implored for them the grace of God and His divine confirmation.

The Lord be praised that the prayers of this gracious soul have been
answered, for the effects thereof are everywhere manifest.





64: THE MASHRIQU'L-ADHKAR IS ONE OF THE MOST VITAL ...


The Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar is one of the most vital institutions in the
world, and it hath many subsidiary branches. Although it is a House of
Worship, it is also connected with a hospital, a drug dispensary, a
traveller's hospice, a school for orphans, and a university for advanced
studies. Every Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar is connected with these five things.
My hope is that the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar will now be established in
America, and that gradually the hospital, the school, the university, the
dispensary and the hospice, all functioning according to the most
efficient and orderly procedures, will follow. Make these matters known to
the beloved of the Lord, so that they will understand how very great is
the importance of this 'Dawning-Point of the Remembrance of God.' The
Temple is not only a place for worship; rather, in every respect is it
complete and whole.

O thou dear handmaid of God! If only thou couldst know what a high station
is destined for those souls who are severed from the world, are powerfully
attracted to the Faith, and are teaching, under the sheltering shadow of
Baha'u'llah! How thou wouldst rejoice, how thou wouldst, in exultation and
rapture, spread thy wings and soar heavenward--for being a follower of such
a way, and a traveller toward such a Kingdom.

As to the terminology I used in my letter, bidding thee to consecrate
thyself to service in the Cause of God, the meaning of it is this: limit
thy thoughts to teaching the Faith. Act by day and night according to the
teachings and counsels and admonitions of Baha'u'llah. This doth not
preclude marriage. Thou canst take unto thyself a husband and at the same
time serve the Cause of God; the one doth not preclude the other. Know
thou the value of these days; let not this chance escape thee. Beg thou
God to make thee a lighted candle, so that thou mayest guide a great
multitude through this darksome world.





65: O THOU FAVOURED HANDMAID OF THE HEAVENLY KINGDOM! ...


O thou favoured handmaid of the heavenly Kingdom! Thy letter hath been
received. It conveyeth high aspirations and noble goals, saying that thou
hast in mind to make a journey to the Far East, and that thou art ready to
endure extreme hardships, in order to guide the souls, and to spread far
and wide the glad tidings of God's Kingdom. This purpose of thine
betokeneth that thou, dear handmaid of God, dost cherish the very noblest
of all aims.

When delivering the glad tidings, speak out and say: the Promised One of
all the world's peoples hath now been made manifest. For each and every
people, and every religion, await a Promised One, and Baha'u'llah is that
One Who is awaited by all; and therefore the Cause of Baha'u'llah will
bring about the oneness of mankind, and the tabernacle of unity will be
upraised on the heights of the world, and the banners of the universality
of all humankind will be unfurled on the peaks of the earth. When thou
dost loose thy tongue to deliver this great good news, this will become
the means of teaching the people.

Thy projected journey, however, is to a very far-away land, and unless a
group of persons be available, the glad tidings will not take much effect
in that place. If ye think best, travel instead to Persia, and on the way
back, go through Japan and China. This would appear to be much better, and
far more enjoyable. In any case, do whatever seemeth feasible, and it will
be approved.





66: O THOU WHO HAST SOUGHT ILLUMINATION FROM THE ...


O thou who hast sought illumination from the light of guidance! Praise
thou God that He hath directed thee to the light of truth and hath invited
thee to enter the Kingdom of Abha. Thy sight hath been illumined and thy
heart hath been turned into a rose garden. I pray for thee that thou
mayest ever grow in faith and assurance, shine like unto a torch in the
assemblies and bestow upon them the light of guidance.

Whenever an illumined assembly of the friends of God is gathered,
'Abdu'l-Baha, although bodily absent, is yet present in spirit and in
soul. I am always a traveller to America and am assuredly associating with
spiritual and illumined friends. Distance is annihilated and prevents not
the close and intimate association of two souls that are closely attached
in heart even though they may be in two different countries. I am
therefore thy close companion, attuned and in harmony with thy soul.





67: O THOU LADY OF THE KINGDOM! THY LETTER SENT FROM ...


O thou lady of the Kingdom! Thy letter sent from New York hath been
received. Its contents imparted joy and gladness for they indicated that
with a firm resolve and a pure intention thou hast determined to travel to
Paris, that thou mayest in that silent city enkindle the fire of the love
of God and in the midst of that darkness of nature shine like unto a
resplendent candle. This journey is highly praiseworthy and suitable. When
thou reachest Paris, thou must strive, no matter how small the number of
the friends may be, to institute the assembly of the Covenant and to
vivify the souls through the power of the Covenant.

Paris is exceedingly dispirited and is in a state of torpor and so far it
hath not burst into flames although the French nation is an active and
lively one. But the world of nature hath fully stretched its pavilion over
Paris and hath done away with religious sentiments. But this power of the
Covenant shall heat every freezing soul, shall bestow light upon
everything that is dark and shall secure for the captive in the hand of
nature the true freedom of the Kingdom.

Arise thou at present in Paris with the power of the Kingdom, with a
divine confirmation, with a genuine zeal and ardour and with a flame of
the love of God. Roar like unto a lion and exhibit such ecstasy and love
among these few souls that praise and glorification may continuously reach
thee from the divine Kingdom and mighty confirmations may descend upon
thee. Rest thou assured. If thou dost act accordingly and hoist the
standard of the Covenant, Paris shall burst into flame. Be constantly
attached to and seek always the confirmations of Baha'u'llah for these
turn the drop into a sea and convert the gnat into an eagle.





68: O YE WHO ARE FIRM IN THE COVENANT AND THE TESTAMENT! ...


O ye who are firm in the Covenant and the Testament! Your letter was
received and your blessed names were one by one perused. The contents of
the letter were divine inspirations and manifest bounties because they
were indicative of the union of the friends and the harmony of all hearts.

Today the most remarkable favour of God centereth around union and harmony
among the friends; so that this unity and concord may be the cause of the
promulgation of the oneness of the world of humanity, may emancipate the
world from this intense darkness of enmity and rancour, and that the Sun
of Truth may shine in full and perfect effulgence.

Today, all the peoples of the world are indulging in self-interest and
exert the utmost effort and endeavour to promote their own material
interests. They are worshipping themselves and not the divine reality, nor
the world of mankind. They seek diligently their own benefit and not the
common weal. This is because they are captives of the world of nature and
unaware of the divine teachings, of the bounty of the Kingdom and of the
Sun of Truth. But ye, praise be to God, are at present especially favoured
with this bounty, have become of the chosen, have been informed of the
heavenly instructions, have gained admittance into the Kingdom of God,
have become the recipients of unbounded blessings and have been baptized
with the Water of Life, with the fire of the love of God and with the Holy
Spirit.

Strive, therefore, with heart and soul that ye become ignited candles in
the assemblage of the world, glittering stars on the horizon of Truth and
may become the cause of the propagation of the light of the Kingdom; in
order that the world of humanity may be converted into a divine realm, the
nether world may become the world on high, the love of God and the mercy
of the Lord may raise their canopy upon the apex of the world, human souls
may become the waves of the ocean of truth, the world of humanity may grow
into one blessed tree, the verses of oneness may be chanted and the
melodies of sanctity may reach the Supreme Concourse.

Day and night I entreat and supplicate to the Kingdom of God and beg for
you infinite assistance and confirmation. Do not take into consideration
your own aptitudes and capacities, but fix your gaze on the consummate
bounty, the divine bestowal and the power of the Holy Spirit--the power
that converteth the drop into a sea and the star into a sun.

Praise be to God, the hosts of the Supreme Concourse secure the victory
and the power of the Kingdom is ready to assist and to support. Should ye
at every instant unloosen the tongue in thanksgiving and gratitude, ye
would not be able to discharge yourselves of the obligation of gratitude
for these bestowals.

Consider: eminent personages whose fame hath spread all over the world
shall, erelong, fade into utter nothingness as the result of their
deprivation of this heavenly bounty; no name and no fame shall they leave
behind, and of them no fruit and trace shall survive. But as the
effulgences of the Sun of Truth have dawned forth upon you and ye have
attained everlasting life, ye shall shine and sparkle forevermore from the
horizon of existence.

Peter was a fisherman and Mary Magdalene a peasant, but as they were
specially favoured with the blessings of Christ, the horizon of their
faith became illumined, and down to the present day they are shining from
the horizon of everlasting glory. In this station, merit and capacity are
not to be considered; nay rather, the resplendent rays of the Sun of
Truth, which have illumined these mirrors, must be taken into account.

Ye are inviting me to America. I am likewise longing to gaze upon those
illumined faces and converse and associate with those true friends. But
the magnetic power which shall draw me to those shores is the union and
harmony of the friends, their behaviour and conduct in accordance with the
teachings of God and the firmness of all in the Covenant and the
Testament.

O Divine Providence! This assemblage is composed of Thy friends who are
attracted to Thy beauty and are set ablaze by the fire of Thy love. Turn
these souls into heavenly angels, resuscitate them through the breath of
Thy Holy Spirit, grant them eloquent tongues and resolute hearts, bestow
upon them heavenly power and merciful susceptibilities, cause them to
become the promulgators of the oneness of mankind and the cause of love
and concord in the world of humanity, so that the perilous darkness of
ignorant prejudice may vanish through the light of the Sun of Truth, this
dreary world may become illumined, this material realm may absorb the rays
of the world of spirit, these different colours may merge into one colour
and the melody of praise may rise to the kingdom of Thy sanctity.

Verily, Thou art the Omnipotent and the Almighty!





69: THOU HAST WRITTEN CONCERNING ORGANIZATION. THE ...


Thou hast written concerning organization. The divine teachings and the
admonitions and exhortations of Baha'u'llah are manifestly evident. These
constitute the organization of the Kingdom and their enforcement is
obligatory. The least deviation from them is absolute error.

Thou hast written concerning my travel to America. If thou couldst see how
the waves of constant occupation are surging thou wouldst have considered
that time for travel is absolutely lacking; in times of fixed residence
partial rest is even impossible. God willing, I trust, through the bounty
of Baha'u'llah, that as soon as means for the composure of mind and of
heart are provided, I shall determine to journey and shall inform thee
about it.





70: O THOU IGNITED CANDLE! THY LETTER WAS RECEIVED. ITS ...


O thou ignited candle! Thy letter was received. Its contents imparted
spiritual gladness, for they were pervaded by spiritual sentiments and
indicated the attraction of thy heart, attachment to the Kingdom of God
and love for His divine teachings.

Verily, thou showest a high endeavour, hast a pure and sanctified purpose,
wishest naught save the good-pleasure of God, seekest nothing but the
attainment of limitless bounties, and art engaged in the promulgation of
divine teachings and the explanation of abstruse metaphysical problems. It
is my hope that, by the favour of Baha'u'llah, thou and thy respected wife
may daily increase in firmness and steadfastness, so that in that exalted
land ye may become two upraised standards and two resplendent lights.

Extensive travel in October, to the north, south, east and west,
accompanied by that candle of the love of God, Mrs. Maxwell, would be
highly acceptable. My hope is that she may entirely recover; this beloved
handmaid of God is like a flame of fire and thinks day and night of
nothing save service to God. For the present, travel throughout the
northern states, and in the winter season hasten to the states in the
south. Your service should consist of eloquent speeches delivered in
gatherings wherein ye may promulgate the divine teachings. If possible,
undertake at some time a voyage to the Hawaiian Islands.

The events which have transpired were all recorded fifty years ago in the
Tablets of Baha'u'llah--Tablets which have been printed, published and
spread throughout the world. The teachings of Baha'u'llah are the light of
this age and the spirit of this century. Expound each of them at every
gathering.

The first is investigation of truth,
The second, the oneness of mankind,
The third, universal peace,
The fourth, conformity between science and divine revelation,
The fifth, abandonment of racial, religious, worldly and political
prejudices, prejudices which destroy the foundation of mankind.
The sixth is righteousness and justice,
The seventh, the betterment of morals and heavenly education,
The eighth, the equality of the two sexes,
The ninth, the diffusion of knowledge and education,
The tenth, economic questions,

and so on and so forth. Strive that souls may attain unto the light of
guidance and hold fast unto the hem of Baha'u'llah.

The letter thou hast enclosed was perused. When man's soul is rarified and
cleansed, spiritual links are established, and from these bonds sensations
felt by the heart are produced. The human heart resembleth a mirror. When
this is purified human hearts are attuned and reflect one another, and
thus spiritual emotions are generated. This is like the world of dreams
when man is detached from things which are tangible and experienceth those
of the spirit. What amazing laws operate, and what remarkable discoveries
are made! And it may even be that detailed communications are
registered...

Finally, I hope that in Chicago the friends may become united and may
illumine that city, for therein the dawn of the Cause appeared, and in
this lieth its preference over other cities. Therefore it must be held in
respect; perchance it may, God willing, be freed from all spiritual
afflictions, and may attain unto perfect health and become a centre of the
Covenant and Testament.





71: O THOU BELOVED MAIDSERVANT OF GOD! THY LETTER ...


O thou beloved maidservant of God! Thy letter was received and its
contents revealed the fact that the friends, in perfect energy and
vitality are engaged in the propagation of the heavenly teachings. This
news hath caused intense joy and gladness. For every era hath a spirit;
the spirit of this illumined era lieth in the teachings of Baha'u'llah.
For these lay the foundation of the oneness of the world of humanity and
promulgate universal brotherhood. They are founded upon the unity of
science and religion and upon investigation of truth. They uphold the
principle that religion must be the cause of amity, union and harmony
among men. They establish the equality of both sexes and propound economic
principles which are for the happiness of individuals. They diffuse
universal education, that every soul may as much as possible have a share
of knowledge. They abrogate and nullify religious, racial, political,
patriotic and economic prejudices and the like. Those teachings that are
scattered throughout the Epistles and Tablets are the cause of the
illumination and the life of the world of humanity. Whoever promulgateth
them will verily be assisted by the Kingdom of God.

The President of the Republic, Dr. Wilson, is indeed serving the Kingdom
of God for he is restless and strives day and night that the rights of all
men may be preserved safe and secure, that even small nations, like
greater ones, may dwell in peace and comfort, under the protection of
Righteousness and Justice. This purpose is indeed a lofty one. I trust
that the incomparable Providence will assist and confirm such souls under
all conditions.





72: O THOU TRUE FRIEND! READ, IN THE SCHOOL OF GOD, THE ...


O thou true friend! Read, in the school of God, the lessons of the spirit,
and learn from love's Teacher the innermost truths. Seek out the secrets
of Heaven, and tell of the overflowing grace and favour of God.

Although to acquire the sciences and arts is the greatest glory of
mankind, this is so only on condition that man's river flow into the
mighty sea, and draw from God's ancient source His inspiration. When this
cometh to pass, then every teacher is as a shoreless ocean, every pupil a
prodigal fountain of knowledge. If, then, the pursuit of knowledge lead to
the beauty of Him Who is the Object of all Knowledge, how excellent that
goal; but if not, a mere drop will perhaps shut a man off from flooding
grace, for with learning cometh arrogance and pride, and it bringeth on
error and indifference to God.

The sciences of today are bridges to reality; if then they lead not to
reality, naught remains but fruitless illusion. By the one true God! If
learning be not a means of access to Him, the Most Manifest, it is nothing
but evident loss.

It is incumbent upon thee to acquire the various branches of knowledge,
and to turn thy face toward the beauty of the Manifest Beauty, that thou
mayest be a sign of saving guidance amongst the peoples of the world, and
a focal centre of understanding in this sphere from which the wise and
their wisdom are shut out, except for those who set foot in the Kingdom of
lights and become informed of the veiled and hidden mystery, the
well-guarded secret.





73: O DAUGHTER OF THE KINGDOM! THY LETTER HATH COME ...


O daughter of the Kingdom! Thy letter hath come and its contents make
clear the fact that thou hast directed all thy thoughts toward acquiring
light from the realms of mystery. So long as the thoughts of an individual
are scattered he will achieve no results, but if his thinking be
concentrated on a single point wonderful will be the fruits thereof.

One cannot obtain the full force of the sunlight when it is cast on a flat
mirror, but once the sun shineth upon a concave mirror, or on a lens that
is convex, all its heat will be concentrated on a single point, and that
one point will burn the hottest. Thus is it necessary to focus one's
thinking on a single point so that it will become an effective force.

Thou didst wish to celebrate the Day of Ridvan with a feast, and to have
those present on that day engage in reciting Tablets with delight and joy,
and thou didst request me to send thee a letter to be read on that day. My
