letter is this:

O ye beloved, and ye handmaids of the Merciful! This is the day when the
Day-Star of Truth rose over the horizon of life, and its glory spread, and
its brightness shone out with such power that it clove the dense and
high-piled clouds and mounted the skies of the world in all its splendour.
Hence do ye witness a new stirring throughout all created things.

See how, in this day, the scope of sciences and arts hath widened out, and
what wondrous technical advances have been made, and to what a high degree
the mind's powers have increased, and what stupendous inventions have
appeared.

This age is indeed as a hundred other ages: should ye gather the yield of
a hundred ages, and set that against the accumulated product of our times,
the yield of this one era will prove greater than that of a hundred gone
before. Take ye, for an example, the sum total of all the books that were
ever written in ages past, and compare that with the books and treatises
that our era hath produced: these books, written in our day alone, far and
away exceed the total number of volumes that have been written down the
ages. See how powerful is the influence exerted by the Day-Star of the
world upon the inner essence of all created things!

But alas, a thousand times alas! The eyes see it not, the ears are deaf,
and the hearts and minds are oblivious of this supreme bestowal. Strive ye
then, with all your hearts and souls, to awaken those who slumber, to
cause the blind to see, and the dead to rise.





74: O BIRD THAT SINGETH SWEETLY OF THE ABHA BEAUTY! IN ...


O bird that singeth sweetly of the Abha Beauty! In this new and wondrous
dispensation the veils of superstition have been torn asunder and the
prejudices of eastern peoples stand condemned. Among certain nations of
the East, music was considered reprehensible, but in this new age the
Manifest Light hath, in His holy Tablets, specifically proclaimed that
music, sung or played, is spiritual food for soul and heart.

The musician's art is among those arts worthy of the highest praise, and
it moveth the hearts of all who grieve. Wherefore, O thou _Sh_ahnaz,(33)
play and sing out the holy words of God with wondrous tones in the
gatherings of the friends, that the listener may be freed from chains of
care and sorrow, and his soul may leap for joy and humble itself in prayer
to the realm of Glory.





75: STRIVE WITH HEART AND SOUL IN ORDER TO BRING ABOUT ...


Strive with heart and soul in order to bring about union and harmony among
the white and the black and prove thereby the unity of the Baha'i world
wherein distinction of colour findeth no place, but where hearts only are
considered. Praise be to God, the hearts of the friends are united and
linked together, whether they be from the east or the west, from north or
from south, whether they be German, French, Japanese, American, and
whether they pertain to the white, the black, the red, the yellow or the
brown race. Variations of colour, of land and of race are of no importance
in the Baha'i Faith; on the contrary, Baha'i unity overcometh them all and
doeth away with all these fancies and imaginations.





76: O THOU WHO HAST AN ILLUMINED HEART! THOU ART EVEN ...


O thou who hast an illumined heart! Thou art even as the pupil of the eye,
the very wellspring of the light, for God's love hath cast its rays upon
thine inmost being and thou hast turned thy face toward the Kingdom of thy
Lord.

Intense is the hatred, in America, between black and white, but my hope is
that the power of the Kingdom will bind these two in friendship, and serve
them as a healing balm.

Let them look not upon a man's colour but upon his heart. If the heart be
filled with light, that man is nigh unto the threshold of his Lord; but if
not, that man is careless of his Lord, be he white or be he black.





77: O THOU REVERED MAIDSERVANT OF GOD! THY LETTER ...


O thou revered maidservant of God! Thy letter from Los Angeles was
received. Thank divine Providence that thou hast been assisted in service
and hast been the cause of the promulgation of the oneness of the world of
humanity, so that the darkness of differences among men may be dissipated,
and the pavilion of the unity of nations may cast its shadow over all
regions. Without such unity, rest and comfort, peace and universal
reconciliation are unachievable. This illumined century needeth and
calleth for its fulfilment. In every century a particular and central
theme is, in accordance with the requirements of that century, confirmed
by God. In this illumined age that which is confirmed is the oneness of
the world of humanity. Every soul who serveth this oneness will
undoubtedly be assisted and confirmed.

I hope that in the assemblies thou mayest sing praises with a sweet melody
and thus become the cause of joy and gladness to all.





78: O THOU WHO ART PURE IN HEART, SANCTIFIED IN SPIRIT, ...


O thou who art pure in heart, sanctified in spirit, peerless in character,
beauteous in face! Thy photograph hath been received revealing thy
physical frame in the utmost grace and the best appearance. Thou art dark
in countenance and bright in character. Thou art like unto the pupil of
the eye which is dark in colour, yet it is the fount of light and the
revealer of the contingent world.

I have not forgotten nor will I forget thee. I beseech God that He may
graciously make thee the sign of His bounty amidst mankind, illumine thy
face with the light of such blessings as are vouchsafed by the merciful
Lord, single thee out for His love in this age which is distinguished
among all the past ages and centuries.





79: O RESPECTED PERSONAGE! I HAVE READ YOUR WORK, ...


O respected personage! I have read your work, The Gospel of Wealth,(34)
and noted therein truly apposite and sound recommendations for easing the
lot of humankind.

To state the matter briefly, the Teachings of Baha'u'llah advocate
voluntary sharing, and this is a greater thing than the equalization of
wealth. For equalization must be imposed from without, while sharing is a
matter of free choice.

Man reacheth perfection through good deeds, voluntarily performed, not
through good deeds the doing of which was forced upon him. And sharing is
a personally chosen righteous act: that is, the rich should extend
assistance to the poor, they should expend their substance for the poor,
but of their own free will, and not because the poor have gained this end
by force. For the harvest of force is turmoil and the ruin of the social
order. On the other hand voluntary sharing, the freely-chosen expending of
one's substance, leadeth to society's comfort and peace. It lighteth up
the world; it bestoweth honour upon humankind.

I have seen the good effects of your own philanthropy in America, in
various universities, peace gatherings, and associations for the promotion
of learning, as I travelled from city to city. Wherefore do I pray on your
behalf that you shall ever be encompassed by the bounties and blessings of
heaven, and shall perform many philanthropic deeds in East and West. Thus
may you gleam as a lighted taper in the Kingdom of God, may attain honour
and everlasting life, and shine out as a bright star on the horizon of
eternity.





80: O THOU WHO ART TURNING THY FACE TO GOD! THY ...


O thou who art turning thy face to God! Thy letter was received. From its
contents it became known that thy wish is to serve the poor. What wish
better than this! Those souls who are of the Kingdom eagerly wish to be of
service to the poor, to sympathize with them, to show kindness to the
miserable and to make their lives fruitful. Happy art thou that thou hast
such a wish.

Convey on my behalf to thy two children the utmost kindness and love.
Their letters have been received but, as I have no time, separate letters
cannot be written at present. Show them on my behalf the utmost kindness.





81: THOSE SOULS WHO DURING THE WAR HAVE SERVED THE ...


Those souls who during the war have served the poor and have been in the
Red Cross Mission work, their services are accepted at the Kingdom of God
and are the cause of their everlasting life. Convey to them these glad
tidings.





82: O THOU WHO ART FIRM IN THE COVENANT, THY LETTER ...


O thou who art firm in the Covenant, thy letter was received. Thou hast
exerted a great effort for that prisoner, perchance it may prove to be
fruitful. Tell him, however: 'The denizens of the world are confined in
the prison of nature--a prison that is continuous and eternal. If thou art
at present restrained within the limits of a temporary prison, be not
grieved at this; my hope is that thou mayest be emancipated from the
prison of nature and may attain unto the court of everlasting life. Pray
to God day and night and beg forgiveness and pardon. The omnipotence of
God shall solve every difficulty.'





83: CONVEY ON BEHALF OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA TO THY RESPECTED ...


Convey on behalf of 'Abdu'l-Baha to thy respected wife my Abha greetings,
and say: 'Kindness, training and education extended to prisoners is
exceedingly important. Therefore as thou hast exerted an effort in this,
hast awakened some of them, and hast been the cause of the turning of
their faces to the divine Kingdom, this praiseworthy deed is highly
acceptable. Assuredly persevere. Convey on my behalf to the two prisoners
in San Quentin the utmost kindness, and tell them: 'That prison in the
sight of wise souls is a school of training and development. Ye must
strive with heart and soul that ye may become renowned in character and
knowledge.'





84: O THOU DEAR HANDMAID OF GOD! THY LETTER HATH ...


O thou dear handmaid of God! Thy letter hath been received, and its
contents were noted.

Marriage, among the mass of the people, is a physical bond, and this union
can only be temporary, since it is foredoomed to a physical separation at
the close.

Among the people of Baha, however, marriage must be a union of the body
and of the spirit as well, for here both husband and wife are aglow with
the same wine, both are enamoured of the same matchless Face, both live
and move through the same spirit, both are illumined by the same glory.
This connection between them is a spiritual one, hence it is a bond that
will abide forever. Likewise do they enjoy strong and lasting ties in the
physical world as well, for if the marriage is based both on the spirit
and the body, that union is a true one, hence it will endure. If, however,
the bond is physical and nothing more, it is sure to be only temporary,
and must inexorably end in separation.

When, therefore, the people of Baha undertake to marry, the union must be
a true relationship, a spiritual coming together as well as a physical
one, so that throughout every phase of life, and in all the worlds of God,
their union will endure; for this real oneness is a gleaming out of the
love of God.

In the same way, when any souls grow to be true believers, they will
attain a spiritual relationship with one another, and show forth a
tenderness which is not of this world. They will, all of them, become
elated from a draught of divine love, and that union of theirs, that
connection, will also abide forever. Souls, that is, who will consign
their own selves to oblivion, strip from themselves the defects of
humankind, and unchain themselves from human bondage, will beyond any
doubt be illumined with the heavenly splendours of oneness, and will all
attain unto real union in the world that dieth not.





85: AS FOR THE QUESTION REGARDING MARRIAGE UNDER THE ...


As for the question regarding marriage under the Law of God: first thou
must choose one who is pleasing to thee, and then the matter is subject to
the consent of father and mother. Before thou makest thy choice, they have
no right to interfere.





86: BAHA'I MARRIAGE IS THE COMMITMENT OF THE TWO ...


Baha'i marriage is the commitment of the two parties one to the other, and
their mutual attachment of mind and heart. Each must, however, exercise
the utmost care to become thoroughly acquainted with the character of the
other, that the binding covenant between them may be a tie that will
endure forever. Their purpose must be this: to become loving companions
and comrades and at one with each other for time and eternity....

The true marriage of Baha'is is this, that husband and wife should be
united both physically and spiritually, that they may ever improve the
spiritual life of each other, and may enjoy everlasting unity throughout
all the worlds of God. This is Baha'i marriage.





87: O THOU MEMENTO OF HIM WHO DIED FOR THE BLESSED ...


O thou memento of him who died for the Blessed Beauty! In recent days, the
joyful news of thy marriage to that luminous leaf hath been received, and
hath infinitely gladdened the hearts of the people of God. With all
humility, prayers of supplication have been offered at the Holy Threshold,
that this marriage may be a harbinger of joy to the friends, that it may
be a loving bond for all eternity, and yield everlasting benefits and
fruits.

From separation doth every kind of hurt and harm proceed, but the union of
created things doth ever yield most laudable results. From the pairing of
even the smallest particles in the world of being are the grace and bounty
of God made manifest; and the higher the degree, the more momentous is the
union. 'Glory be to Him Who hath created all the pairs, of such things as
earth produceth, and out of men themselves, and of things beyond their
ken.'(35) And above all other unions is that between human beings,
especially when it cometh to pass in the love of God. Thus is the primal
oneness made to appear; thus is laid the foundation of love in the spirit.
It is certain that such a marriage as yours will cause the bestowals of
God to be revealed. Wherefore do we offer you felicitations and call down
blessings upon you and beg of the Blessed Beauty, through His aid and
favour, to make that wedding feast a joy to all and adorn it with the
harmony of Heaven.

O my Lord, O my Lord! These two bright orbs are wedded in Thy love,
conjoined in servitude to Thy Holy Threshold, united in ministering to Thy
Cause. Make Thou this marriage to be as threading lights of Thine
abounding grace, O my Lord, the All-Merciful, and luminous rays of Thy
bestowals, O Thou the Beneficent, the Ever-Giving, that there may branch
out from this great tree boughs that will grow green and flourishing
through the gifts that rain down from Thy clouds of grace.

Verily Thou art the Generous, verily Thou art the Almighty, verily Thou
art the Compassionate, the All-Merciful.





88: O YE MY TWO BELOVED CHILDREN! THE NEWS OF YOUR ...


O ye my two beloved children! The news of your union, as soon as it
reached me, imparted infinite joy and gratitude. Praise be to God, those
two faithful birds have sought shelter in one nest. I beseech God that He
may enable them to raise an honoured family, for the importance of
marriage lieth in the bringing up of a richly blessed family, so that with
entire gladness they may, even as candles, illuminate the world. For the
enlightenment of the world dependeth upon the existence of man. If man did
not exist in this world, it would have been like a tree without fruit. My
hope is that you both may become even as one tree, and may, through the
outpourings of the cloud of loving-kindness, acquire freshness and charm,
and may blossom and yield fruit, so that your line may eternally endure.

Upon ye be the Glory of the Most Glorious.





89: O THOU WHO ART FIRM IN THE COVENANT! THE LETTER ...


O thou who art firm in the Covenant! The letter thou hadst written on 2
May 1919 was received. Praise thou God that in tests thou art firm and
steadfast and art holding fast to the Abha Kingdom. Thou art not shaken by
any affliction or disturbed by any calamity. Not until man is tried doth
the pure gold distinctly separate from the dross. Torment is the fire of
test wherein the pure gold shineth resplendently and the impurity is
burned and blackened. At present thou art, praise be to God, firm and
steadfast in tests and trials and art not shaken by them.

Thy wife is not in harmony with thee, but praise be to God, the Blessed
Beauty is pleased with thee and is conferring upon thee the utmost bounty
and blessings. But still try to be patient with thy wife, perchance she
may be transformed and her heart may be illumined. The contribution thou
hast made for teaching is highly acceptable and it shall be eternally
mentioned in the divine Kingdom for it is the cause of the diffusion of
fragrances and the exaltation of the Word of God.





90: O GOD, MY GOD! THIS THY HANDMAID IS CALLING ...


O God, my God! This Thy handmaid is calling upon Thee, trusting in Thee,
turning her face unto Thee, imploring Thee to shed Thy heavenly bounties
upon her, and to disclose unto her Thy spiritual mysteries, and to cast
upon her the lights of Thy Godhead.

O my Lord! Make the eyes of my husband to see. Rejoice Thou his heart with
the light of the knowledge of Thee, draw Thou his mind unto Thy luminous
beauty, cheer Thou his spirit by revealing unto him Thy manifest
splendours.

O my Lord! Lift Thou the veil from before his sight. Rain down Thy
plenteous bounties upon him, intoxicate him with the wine of love for
Thee, make him one of Thy angels whose feet walk upon this earth even as
their souls are soaring through the high heavens. Cause him to become a
brilliant lamp, shining out with the light of Thy wisdom in the midst of
Thy people.

Verily Thou art the Precious, the Ever-Bestowing, the Open of Hand.





91: O THOU WHO HAST BOWED THYSELF DOWN IN PRAYER ...


O thou who hast bowed thyself down in prayer before the Kingdom of God!
Blessed art thou, for the beauty of the divine Countenance hath enraptured
thy heart, and the light of inner wisdom hath filled it full, and within
it shineth the brightness of the Kingdom. Know thou that God is with thee
under all conditions, and that He guardeth thee from the changes and
chances of this world and hath made thee a handmaid in His mighty
vineyard....

As to thy respected husband: it is incumbent upon thee to treat him with
great kindness, to consider his wishes and be conciliatory with him at all
times, till he seeth that because thou hast directed thyself toward the
Kingdom of God, thy tenderness for him and thy love for God have but
increased, as well as thy concern for his wishes under all conditions.

I beg of the Almighty to keep thee firmly established in His love, and
ever shedding abroad the sweet breaths of holiness in all those regions.





92: O YE TWO BELIEVERS IN GOD! THE LORD, PEERLESS IS ...


O ye two believers in God! The Lord, peerless is He, hath made woman and
man to abide with each other in the closest companionship, and to be even
as a single soul. They are two helpmates, two intimate friends, who should
be concerned about the welfare of each other.

If they live thus, they will pass through this world with perfect
contentment, bliss, and peace of heart, and become the object of divine
grace and favour in the Kingdom of heaven. But if they do other than this,
they will live out their lives in great bitterness, longing at every
moment for death, and will be shamefaced in the heavenly realm.

Strive, then, to abide, heart and soul, with each other as two doves in
the nest, for this is to be blessed in both worlds.





93: O THOU MAIDSERVANT OF GOD! EVERY WOMAN WHO ...


O thou maidservant of God! Every woman who becometh the maidservant of God
outshineth in glory the empresses of the world, for she is related to God,
and her sovereignty is everlasting, whereas a handful of dust will
obliterate the name and fame of those empresses. In other words, as soon
as they go down to the grave they are reduced to naught. The maidservants
of God's Kingdom, on the other hand, enjoy eternal sovereignty unaffected
by the passing of ages and generations.

Consider how many empresses have come and gone since the time of Christ.
Each was the ruler of a country but now all trace and name of them is
lost, while Mary Magdalene, who was only a peasant and a maidservant of
God, still shineth from the horizon of everlasting glory. Strive thou,
therefore, to remain the maidservant of God.

Thou hast praised the Convention. This Convention shall acquire great
importance in future, for it is serving the divine Kingdom and the world
of mankind. It promulgateth universal peace and layeth the basis of the
oneness of mankind; it freeth the souls from religious, racial and worldly
prejudices and gathereth them under the shade of the one-coloured pavilion
of God. Praise thou God, therefore, that thou hast attended such a
Convention and hast listened to the divine Teachings.





94: O HANDMAIDS OF THE BEAUTY OF ABHA! YOUR LETTER ...


O handmaids of the beauty of Abha! Your letter hath come, and its perusal
brought great joy. Praised be God, the women believers have organized
meetings where they will learn how to teach the Faith, will spread the
sweet savours of the Teachings and make plans for training the children.

This gathering must be completely spiritual. That is, the discussions must
be confined to marshalling clear and conclusive proofs that the Sun of
Truth hath indeed arisen. And further, those present should concern
themselves with every means of training the girl children; with teaching
the various branches of knowledge, good behaviour, a proper way of life,
the cultivation of a good character, chastity and constancy, perseverance,
strength, determination, firmness of purpose; with household management,
the education of children, and whatever especially applieth to the needs
of girls--to the end that these girls, reared in the stronghold of all
perfections, and with the protection of a goodly character, will, when
they themselves become mothers, bring up their children from earliest
infancy to have a good character and conduct themselves well.

Let them also study whatever will nurture the health of the body and its
physical soundness, and how to guard their children from disease.

When matters are thus well arranged, every child will become a peerless
plant in the gardens of the Abha Paradise.





95: O HANDMAIDS OF THE LORD! THE SPIRITUAL ASSEMBLAGE ...


O handmaids of the Lord! The spiritual assemblage that ye established in
that illumined city is most propitious. Ye have made great strides; ye
have surpassed the others, have arisen to serve the Holy Threshold, and
have won heavenly bestowals. Now with all spiritual zeal must ye gather in
that enlightened assemblage and recite the Holy Writings and engage in
remembering the Lord. Set ye forth His arguments and proofs. Work ye for
the guidance of the women in that land, teach the young girls and the
children, so that the mothers may educate their little ones from their
earliest days, thoroughly train them, rear them to have a goodly character
and good morals, guide them to all the virtues of humankind, prevent the
development of any behaviour that would be worthy of blame, and foster
them in the embrace of Baha'i education. Thus shall these tender infants
be nurtured at the breast of the knowledge of God and His love. Thus shall
they grow and flourish, and be taught righteousness and the dignity of
humankind, resolution and the will to strive and to endure. Thus shall
they learn perseverance in all things, the will to advance, high
mindedness and high resolve, chastity and purity of life. Thus shall they
be enabled to carry to a successful conclusion whatsoever they undertake.

Let the mothers consider that whatever concerneth the education of
children is of the first importance. Let them put forth every effort in
this regard, for when the bough is green and tender it will grow in
whatever way ye train it. Therefore is it incumbent upon the mothers to
rear their little ones even as a gardener tendeth his young plants. Let
them strive by day and by night to establish within their children faith
and certitude, the fear of God, the love of the Beloved of the worlds, and
all good qualities and traits. Whensoever a mother seeth that her child
hath done well, let her praise and applaud him and cheer his heart; and if
the slightest undesirable trait should manifest itself, let her counsel
the child and punish him, and use means based on reason, even a slight
verbal chastisement should this be necessary. It is not, however,
permissible to strike a child, or vilify him, for the child's character
will be totally perverted if he be subjected to blows or verbal abuse.





96: O HANDMAIDS OF THE MERCIFUL! RENDER YE THANKS ...


O handmaids of the Merciful! Render ye thanks unto the Ancient Beauty that
ye have been raised up and gathered together in this mightiest of
centuries, this most illumined of ages. As befitting thanks for such a
bounty, stand ye staunch and strong in the Covenant and, following the
precepts of God and the holy Law, suckle your children from their infancy
with the milk of a universal education, and rear them so that from their
earliest days, within their inmost heart, their very nature, a way of life
will be firmly established that will conform to the divine Teachings in
all things.

For mothers are the first educators, the first mentors; and truly it is
the mothers who determine the happiness, the future greatness, the
courteous ways and learning and judgement, the understanding and the faith
of their little ones.





97: THERE ARE CERTAIN PILLARS WHICH HAVE BEEN ESTABLISHED ...


There are certain pillars which have been established as the unshakeable
supports of the Faith of God. The mightiest of these is learning and the
use of the mind, the expansion of consciousness, and insight into the
realities of the universe and the hidden mysteries of Almighty God.

To promote knowledge is thus an inescapable duty imposed on every one of
the friends of God. It is incumbent upon that Spiritual Assembly, that
assemblage of God, to exert every effort to educate the children, so that
from infancy they will be trained in Baha'i conduct and the ways of God,
and will, even as young plants, thrive and flourish in the soft-flowing
waters that are the counsels and admonitions of the Blessed Beauty.





98: WERE THERE NO EDUCATOR, ALL SOULS WOULD REMAIN ...


Were there no educator, all souls would remain savage, and were it not for
the teacher, the children would be ignorant creatures.

It is for this reason that, in this new cycle, education and training are
recorded in the Book of God as obligatory and not voluntary. That is, it
is enjoined upon the father and mother, as a duty, to strive with all
effort to train the daughter and the son, to nurse them from the breast of
knowledge and to rear them in the bosom of sciences and arts. Should they
neglect this matter, they shall be held responsible and worthy of reproach
in the presence of the stern Lord.





99: THOU DIDST WRITE AS TO THE CHILDREN: FROM THE VERY ...


Thou didst write as to the children: from the very beginning, the children
must receive divine education and must continually be reminded to remember
their God. Let the love of God pervade their inmost being, commingled with
their mother's milk.





100: MY WISH IS THAT THESE CHILDREN SHOULD RECEIVE A ...


My wish is that these children should receive a Baha'i education, so that
they may progress both here and in the Kingdom, and rejoice thy heart.

In a time to come, morals will degenerate to an extreme degree. It is
essential that children be reared in the Baha'i way, that they may find
happiness both in this world and the next. If not, they shall be beset by
sorrows and troubles, for human happiness is founded upon spiritual
behaviour.





101: O YE WHO HAVE PEACE OF SOUL! AMONG THE DIVINE ...


O ye who have peace of soul! Among the divine Texts as set forth in the
Most Holy Book and also in other Tablets is this: it is incumbent upon the
father and mother to train their children both in good conduct and the
study of books; study, that is, to the degree required, so that no child,
whether girl or boy, will remain illiterate. Should the father fail in his
duty he must be compelled to discharge his responsibility, and should he
be unable to comply, let the House of Justice take over the education of
the children; in no case is a child to be left without an education. This
is one of the stringent and inescapable commandments to neglect which
would draw down the wrathful indignation of Almighty God.





102: O TRUE COMPANIONS! ALL HUMANKIND ARE AS CHILDREN ...


O true companions! All humankind are as children in a school, and the
Dawning-Points of Light, the Sources of divine revelation, are the
teachers, wondrous and without peer. In the school of realities they
educate these sons and daughters, according to teachings from God, and
foster them in the bosom of grace, so that they may develop along every
line, show forth the excellent gifts and blessings of the Lord, and
combine human perfections; that they may advance in all aspects of human
endeavour, whether outward or inward, hidden or visible, material or
spiritual, until they make of this mortal world a widespread mirror, to
reflect that other world which dieth not.

O ye friends of God! Because, in this most momentous of ages, the Sun of
Truth hath risen at the highest point of the spring equinox, and cast its
rays on every clime, it shall kindle such tremulous excitement, it shall
release such vibrations in the world of being, it shall stimulate such
growth and development, it shall stream out with such a glory of light,
and clouds of grace shall pour down such plentiful waters, and fields and
plains shall teem with such a galaxy of sweet-smelling plants and blooms,
that this lowly earth will become the Abha Kingdom, and this nether world
the world above. Then will this fleck of dust be as the vast circle of the
skies, this human place the palace-court of God, this spot of clay the
dayspring of the endless favours of the Lord of Lords.

Wherefore, O loved ones of God! Make ye a mighty effort till you
yourselves betoken this advancement and all these confirmations, and
become focal centres of God's blessings, daysprings of the light of His
unity, promoters of the gifts and graces of civilized life. Be ye in that
land vanguards of the perfections of humankind; carry forward the various
branches of knowledge, be active and progressive in the field of
inventions and the arts. Endeavour to rectify the conduct of men, and seek
to excel the whole world in moral character. While the children are yet in
their infancy feed them from the breast of heavenly grace, foster them in
the cradle of all excellence, rear them in the embrace of bounty. Give
them the advantage of every useful kind of knowledge. Let them share in
every new and rare and wondrous craft and art. Bring them up to work and
strive, and accustom them to hardship. Teach them to dedicate their lives
to matters of great import, and inspire them to undertake studies that
will benefit mankind.





103: THE EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF CHILDREN IS AMONG ...


The education and training of children is among the most meritorious acts
of humankind and draweth down the grace and favour of the All-Merciful,
for education is the indispensable foundation of all human excellence and
alloweth man to work his way to the heights of abiding glory. If a child
be trained from his infancy, he will, through the loving care of the Holy
Gardener, drink in the crystal waters of the spirit and of knowledge, like
a young tree amid the rilling brooks. And certainly he will gather to
himself the bright rays of the Sun of Truth, and through its light and
heat will grow ever fresh and fair in the garden of life.

Therefore must the mentor be a doctor as well: that is, he must, in
instructing the child, remedy its faults; must give him learning, and at
the same time rear him to have a spiritual nature. Let the teacher be a
doctor to the character of the child, thus will he heal the spiritual
ailments of the children of men.

If, in this momentous task, a mighty effort be exerted, the world of
humanity will shine out with other adornings, and shed the fairest light.
Then will this darksome place grow luminous, and this abode of earth turn
into Heaven. The very demons will change to angels then, and wolves to
shepherds of the flock, and the wild-dog pack to gazelles that pasture on
the plains of oneness, and ravening beasts to peaceful herds, and birds of
prey, with talons sharp as knives, to songsters warbling their sweet
native notes.

For the inner reality of man is a demarcation line between the shadow and
the light, a place where the two seas meet;(36) it is the lowest point on
the arc of descent,(37) and therefore is it capable of gaining all the
grades above. With education it can achieve all excellence; devoid of
education it will stay on, at the lowest point of imperfection.

Every child is potentially the light of the world--and at the same time its
darkness; wherefore must the question of education be accounted as of
primary importance. From his infancy, the child must be nursed at the
breast of God's love, and nurtured in the embrace of His knowledge, that
he may radiate light, grow in spirituality, be filled with wisdom and
learning, and take on the characteristics of the angelic host.

Since ye have been assigned to this holy task, ye must therefore exert
every effort to make that school famed in all respects throughout the
world; to make it the cause of exalting the Word of the Lord.





104: O LOVED ONES OF GOD AND HANDMAIDS OF THE ...


O loved ones of God and handmaids of the Merciful! A large body of
scholars is of the opinion that variations among minds and differing
degrees of perception are due to differences in education, training and
culture. That is, they believe that minds are equal to begin with, but
that training and education will result in mental variations and differing
levels of intelligence, and that such variations are not an inherent
component of the individuality but are the result of education: that no
one hath any inborn superiority over another....

The Manifestations of God are likewise in agreement with the view that
education exerteth the strongest possible influence on humankind. They
affirm, however, that differences in the level of intelligence are innate;
and this fact is obvious, and not worth debating. For we see that children
of the same age, the same country, the same race, indeed of the same
family, and trained by the same individual, still are different as to the
degree of their comprehension and intelligence. One will make rapid
progress, one will receive instruction only gradually, one will remain at
the lowest stage of all. For no matter how much you may polish a shell, it
will not turn into a gleaming pearl, nor can you change a dull pebble into
a gem whose pure rays will light the world. Never, through training and
cultivation, will the colocynth and the bitter tree(38) change into the
Tree of Blessedness.(39) That is to say, education cannot alter the inner
essence of a man, but it doth exert tremendous influence, and with this
power it can bring forth from the individual whatever perfections and
capacities are deposited within him. A grain of wheat, when cultivated by
the farmer, will yield a whole harvest, and a seed, through the gardener's
care, will grow into a great tree. Thanks to a teacher's loving efforts,
the children of the primary school may reach the highest levels of
achievement; indeed, his benefactions may lift some child of small account
to an exalted throne. Thus is it clearly demonstrated that by their
essential nature, minds vary as to their capacity, while education also
playeth a great role and exerteth a powerful effect on their development.





105: AS TO THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THAT MATERIAL CIVILIZATION ...


As to the difference between that material civilization now prevailing,
and the divine civilization which will be one of the benefits to derive
from the House of Justice, it is this: material civilization, through the
power of punitive and retaliatory laws, restraineth the people from
criminal acts; and notwithstanding this, while laws to retaliate against
and punish a man are continually proliferating, as ye can see, no laws
exist to reward him. In all the cities of Europe and America, vast
buildings have been erected to serve as jails for the criminals.

Divine civilization, however, so traineth every member of society that no
one, with the exception of a negligible few, will undertake to commit a
crime. There is thus a great difference between the prevention of crime
through measures that are violent and retaliatory, and so training the
people, and enlightening them, and spiritualizing them, that without any
fear of punishment or vengeance to come, they will shun all criminal acts.
They will, indeed, look upon the very commission of a crime as a great
disgrace and in itself the harshest of punishments. They will become
enamoured of human perfections, and will consecrate their lives to
whatever will bring light to the world and will further those qualities
which are acceptable at the Holy Threshold of God.

See then how wide is the difference between material civilization and
divine. With force and punishments, material civilization seeketh to
restrain the people from mischief, from inflicting harm on society and
committing crimes. But in a divine civilization, the individual is so
conditioned that with no fear of punishment, he shunneth the perpetration
of crimes, seeth the crime itself as the severest of torments, and with
alacrity and joy, setteth himself to acquiring the virtues of humankind,
to furthering human progress, and to spreading light across the world.





106: AMONG THE GREATEST OF ALL SERVICES THAT CAN POSSIBLY ...


Among the greatest of all services that can possibly be rendered by man to
Almighty God is the education and training of children, young plants of
the Abha Paradise, so that these children, fostered by grace in the way of
salvation, growing like pearls of divine bounty in the shell of education,
will one day bejewel the crown of abiding glory.

It is, however, very difficult to undertake this service, even harder to
succeed in it. I hope that thou wilt acquit thyself well in this most
important of tasks, and successfully carry the day, and become an ensign
of God's abounding grace; that these children, reared one and all in the
holy Teachings, will develop natures like unto the sweet airs that blow
across the gardens of the All-Glorious, and will waft their fragrance
around the world.





107: IT IS THE HOPE OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA THAT THOSE YOUTHFUL ...


It is the hope of 'Abdu'l-Baha that those youthful souls in the schoolroom
of the deeper knowledge will be tended by one who traineth them to love.
May they all, throughout the reaches of the spirit, learn well of the
hidden mysteries; so well that in the Kingdom of the All-Glorious, each
one of them, even as a nightingale endowed with speech, will cry out the
secrets of the Heavenly Realm, and like unto a longing lover pour forth
his sore need and utter want of the Beloved.





108: YE SHOULD CONSIDER THE QUESTION OF GOODLY ...


Ye should consider the question of goodly character as of the first
importance. It is incumbent upon every father and mother to counsel their
children over a long period, and guide them unto those things which lead
to everlasting honour.

Encourage ye the school children, from their earliest years, to deliver
speeches of high quality, so that in their leisure time they will engage
in giving cogent and effective talks, expressing themselves with clarity
and eloquence.





109: O YE RECIPIENTS OF THE FAVOURS OF GOD! IN THIS NEW ...


O ye recipients of the favours of God! In this new and wondrous Age, the
unshakeable foundation is the teaching of sciences and arts. According to
explicit Holy Texts, every child must be taught crafts and arts, to the
degree that is needful. Wherefore, in every city and village, schools must
be established and every child in that city or village is to engage in
study to the necessary degree.

It followeth that whatever soul shall offer his aid to bring this about
will assuredly be accepted at the heavenly Threshold, and extolled by the
Company on high.

Since ye have striven hard toward this all-important end, it is my hope
that ye will reap your reward from the Lord of clear tokens and signs, and
that the glances of heavenly grace will turn your way.





110: AS TO THE ORGANIZATION OF THE SCHOOLS: IF POSSIBLE ...


As to the organization of the schools: if possible the children should all
wear the same kind of clothing, even if the fabric is varied. It is
preferable that the fabric as well should be uniform; if, however, this is
not possible, there is no harm done. The more cleanly the pupils are, the
better; they should be immaculate. The school must be located in a place
where the air is delicate and pure. The children must be carefully trained
to be most courteous and well-behaved. They must be constantly encouraged
and made eager to gain all the summits of human accomplishment, so that
from their earliest years they will be taught to have high aims, to
conduct themselves well, to be chaste, pure, and undefiled, and will learn
to be of powerful resolve and firm of purpose in all things. Let them not
jest and trifle, but earnestly advance unto their goals, so that in every
situation they will be found resolute and firm.

Training in morals and good conduct is far more important than book
learning. A child that is cleanly, agreeable, of good character,
well-behaved--even though he be ignorant--is preferable to a child that is
rude, unwashed, ill-natured, and yet becoming deeply versed in all the
sciences and arts. The reason for this is that the child who conducts
himself well, even though he be ignorant, is of benefit to others, while
an ill-natured, ill-behaved child is corrupted and harmful to others, even
though he be learned. If, however, the child be trained to be both learned
and good, the result is light upon light.

Children are even as a branch that is fresh and green; they will grow up
in whatever way ye train them. Take the utmost care to give them high
ideals and goals, so that once they come of age, they will cast their
beams like brilliant candles on the world, and will not be defiled by
lusts and passions in the way of animals, heedless and unaware, but
instead will set their hearts on achieving everlasting honour and
acquiring all the excellences of humankind.





111: THE ROOT CAUSE OF WRONGDOING IS IGNORANCE, AND ...


The root cause of wrongdoing is ignorance, and we must therefore hold fast
to the tools of perception and knowledge. Good character must be taught.
Light must be spread afar, so that, in the school of humanity, all may
acquire the heavenly characteristics of the spirit, and see for themselves
beyond any doubt that there is no fiercer hell, no more fiery abyss, than
to possess a character that is evil and unsound; no more darksome pit nor
loathsome torment than to show forth qualities which deserve to be
condemned.

The individual must be educated to such a high degree that he would rather
have his throat cut than tell a lie, and would think it easier to be
slashed with a sword or pierced with a spear than to utter calumny or be
carried away by wrath.

Thus will be kindled the sense of human dignity and pride, to burn away
the reapings of lustful appetites. Then will each one of God's beloved
shine out as a bright moon with qualities of the spirit, and the
relationship of each to the Sacred Threshold of his Lord will be not
illusory but sound and real, will be as the very foundation of the
building, not some embellishment on its facade.

It followeth that the children's school must be a place of utmost
discipline and order, that instruction must be thorough, and provision
must be made for the rectification and refinement of character; so that,
in his earliest years, within the very essence of the child, the divine
foundation will be laid and the structure of holiness raised up.

Know that this matter of instruction, of character rectification and
refinement, of heartening and encouraging the child, is of the utmost
importance, for such are basic principles of God.

Thus, if God will, out of these spiritual schools illumined children will
arise, adorned with all the fairest virtues of humankind, and will shed
their light not only across Persia, but around the world.

It is extremely difficult to teach the individual and refine his character
once puberty is passed. By then, as experience hath shown, even if every
effort be exerted to modify some tendency of his, it all availeth nothing.
He may, perhaps, improve somewhat today; but let a few days pass and he
forgetteth, and turneth backward to his habitual condition and accustomed
ways. Therefore it is in early childhood that a firm foundation must be
laid. While the branch is green and tender it can easily be made straight.

Our meaning is that qualities of the spirit are the basic and divine
foundation, and adorn the true essence of man; and knowledge is the cause
of human progress. The beloved of God must attach great importance to this
matter, and carry it forward with enthusiasm and zeal.





112: IN THIS HOLY CAUSE THE QUESTION OF ORPHANS HATH ...


In this holy Cause the question of orphans hath the utmost importance. The
greatest consideration must be shown towards orphans; they must be taught,
trained and educated. The Teachings of Baha'u'llah, especially, must by
all means be given to them as far as is possible.

I supplicate God that thou mayest become a kind parent to orphaned
children, quickening them with the fragrances of the Holy Spirit, so that
they will attain the age of maturity as true servants of the world of
humanity and as bright candles in the assemblage of mankind.





113: O HANDMAID OF GOD!... TO THE MOTHERS MUST BE ...


O handmaid of God!... To the mothers must be given the divine Teachings
and effective counsel, and they must be encouraged and made eager to train
their children, for the mother is the first educator of the child. It is
she who must, at the very beginning, suckle the newborn at the breast of
God's Faith and God's Law, that divine love may enter into him even with
his mother's milk, and be with him till his final breath.

So long as the mother faileth to train her children, and start them on a
proper way of life, the training which they receive later on will not take
its full effect. It is incumbent upon the Spiritual Assemblies to provide
the mothers with a well-planned programme for the education of children,
showing how, from infancy, the child must be watched over and taught.
These instructions must be given to every mother to serve her as a guide,
so that each will train and nurture her children in accordance with the
Teachings.

Thus will these young plants in the garden of God's love grow and flourish
under the warmth of the Sun of Truth, the gentle spring winds of Heaven,
and their mother's guiding hand. Thus, in the Abha Paradise, will each
become a tree, bearing his clustered fruit, and each one, in this new and
wondrous season, out of the bounties of the spring, will become possessed
of all beauty and grace.





114: O YE LOVING MOTHERS, KNOW YE THAT IN GOD'S SIGHT, ...


O ye loving mothers, know ye that in God's sight, the best of all ways to
worship Him is to educate the children and train them in all the
perfections of humankind; and no nobler deed than this can be imagined.





115: O YE TWO WELL-LOVED HANDMAIDS OF GOD! WHATEVER ...


O ye two well-loved handmaids of God! Whatever a man's tongue speaketh,
that let him prove by his deeds. If he claimeth to be a believer, then let
him act in accordance with the precepts of the Abha Kingdom.

Praised be God, ye two have demonstrated the truth of your words by your
deeds, and have won the confirmations of the Lord God. Every day at first
light, ye gather the Baha'i children together and teach them the communes
and prayers. This is a most praiseworthy act, and bringeth joy to the
children's hearts: that they should, at every morn, turn their faces
toward the Kingdom and make mention of the Lord and praise His Name, and
in the sweetest of voices, chant and recite.

These children are even as young plants, and teaching them the prayers is
as letting the rain pour down upon them, that they may wax tender and
fresh, and the soft breezes of the love of God may blow over them, making
them to tremble with joy.

Blessedness awaiteth you, and a fair haven.





116: O THOU DAUGHTER OF THE KINGDOM! THY LETTERS ...


O thou daughter of the Kingdom! Thy letters were received. Their contents
indicated that thy mother hath ascended to the invisible realm and that
thou hast been left alone. Thy wish is to serve thy father, who is dear to
thee, and also to serve the Kingdom of God, and thou art perplexed as to
which of the two thou shouldst do. Assuredly engage in service to thy
father, and as well, whenever thou findest time, diffuse the divine
fragrances.





117: O DEAR ONE OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA! BE THE SON OF THY ...


O dear one of 'Abdu'l-Baha! Be the son of thy father and be the fruit of
that tree. Be a son that hath been born of his soul and heart and not only
of water and clay. A real son is such a one as hath branched from the
spiritual part of man. I ask God that thou mayest be at all times
confirmed and strengthened.





118: O YE YOUNG BAHA'I CHILDREN, YE SEEKERS AFTER TRUE ...


O ye young Baha'i children, ye seekers after true understanding and
knowledge! A human being is distinguished from an animal in a number of
ways. First of all, he is made in the image of God, in the likeness of the
Supernal Light, even as the Torah saith, 'Let us make man in our image,
after our likeness.'(40) This divine image betokeneth all the qualities of
perfection whose lights, emanating from the Sun of Truth, illumine the
realities of men. And among the greatest of these attributes of perfection
are wisdom and knowledge. Ye must therefore put forth a mighty effort,
striving by night and day and resting not for a moment, to acquire an
abundant share of all the sciences and arts, that the Divine Image, which
shineth out from the Sun of Truth, may illumine the mirror of the hearts
of men.

It is the longing desire of 'Abdu'l-Baha to see each one of you accounted
as the foremost professor in the academies, and in the school of inner
significances, each one becoming a leader in wisdom.





119: IT IS INCUMBENT UPON BAHA'I CHILDREN TO SURPASS ...


It is incumbent upon Baha'i children to surpass other children in the
acquisition of sciences and arts, for they have been cradled in the grace
of God.

Whatever other children learn in a year, let Baha'i children learn in a
month. The heart of 'Abdu'l-Baha longeth, in its love, to find that Baha'i
young people, each and all, are known throughout the world for their
intellectual attainments. There is no question but that they will exert
all their efforts, their energies, their sense of pride, to acquire the
sciences and arts.





120: O MY DEAR CHILDREN! YOUR LETTER WAS RECEIVED. A ...


O my dear children! Your letter was received. A degree of joy was attained
that is beyond words or writing that, praise be to God, the power of the
Kingdom of God hath trained such children who, from their early childhood,
eagerly wish to acquire Baha'i education that they may, from the period of
their childhood, engage in service to the world of humanity.

My highest wish and desire is that ye who are my children may be educated
according to the teachings of Baha'u'llah and may receive a Baha'i
training; that ye may each become a lighted candle in the world of
humanity, may be devoted to the service of all mankind, may give up your
rest and comfort, so that ye may become the cause of the tranquillity of
the world of creation.

Such is my hope for you and I trust that ye may become the cause of my joy
and gladness in the Kingdom of God.





121: O THOU WHOSE YEARS ARE FEW, YET WHOSE MENTAL ...


O thou whose years are few, yet whose mental gifts are many! How many a
child, though young in years, is yet mature and sound in judgement! How
many an aged person is ignorant and confused! For growth and development
depend on one's powers of intellect and reason, not on one's age or length
of days.

Although still in the season of childhood, yet hast thou recognized thy
Lord, while myriads of women are oblivious of Him and are shut away from
His heavenly Kingdom and deprived of His bestowals. Render thou thanks
unto thy Lord for this wondrous gift.

I beg of God to heal thy mother, who is honoured in the Kingdom of heaven.





122: AS TO THY QUESTION REGARDING THE EDUCATION OF ...


As to thy question regarding the education of children: it behoveth thee
to nurture them at the breast of the love of God, and urge them onward to
the things of the spirit, that they may turn their faces unto God; that
their ways may conform to the rules of good conduct and their character be
second to none; that they make their own all the graces and praiseworthy
qualities of humankind; acquire a sound knowledge of the various branches
of learning, so that from the very beginning of life they may become
spiritual beings, dwellers in the Kingdom, enamoured of the sweet breaths
of holiness, and may receive an education religious, spiritual, and of the
Heavenly Realm. Verily will I call upon God to grant them a happy outcome
in this.





123: O THOU WHO GAZEST UPON THE KINGDOM OF GOD! ...


O thou who gazest upon the Kingdom of God! Thy letter was received and we
note that thou art engaged in teaching the children of the believers, that
these tender little ones have been learning The Hidden Words and the
prayers and what it meaneth to be a Baha'i.

The instruction of these children is even as the work of a loving gardener
who tendeth his young plants in the flowering fields of the All-Glorious.
There is no doubt that it will yield the desired results; especially is
this true of instruction as to Baha'i obligations and Baha'i conduct, for
the little children must needs be made aware in their very heart and soul
that "Baha'i" is not just a name but a truth. Every child must be trained
in the things of the spirit, so that he may embody all the virtues and
become a source of glory to the Cause of God. Otherwise, the mere word
"Baha'i", if it yield no fruit, will come to nothing.

Strive then to the best of thine ability to let these children know that a
Baha'i is one who embodieth all the perfections, that he must shine out
like a lighted taper--not be darkness upon darkness and yet bear the name
"Baha'i".

Name thou this school the Baha'i Sunday School.(41)





124: THE SUNDAY SCHOOL FOR THE CHILDREN IN WHICH THE ...


The Sunday school for the children in which the Tablets and Teachings of
Baha'u'llah are read, and the Word of God is recited for the children is
indeed a blessed thing. Thou must certainly continue this organized
activity without cessation, and attach importance to it, so that day by
day it may grow and be quickened with the breaths of the Holy Spirit. If
this activity is well organized, rest thou assured that it will yield
great results. Firmness and steadfastness, however, are necessary,
otherwise it will continue for some time, but later be gradually
forgotten. Perseverance is an essential condition. In every project
firmness and steadfastness will undoubtedly lead to good results;
otherwise it will exist for some days, and then be discontinued.





125: THE CHANGING OF TEACHERS SHOULD BE NEITHER TOO ...


The changing of teachers should be neither too frequent nor too much
delayed; moderation is preferable. Holding your meetings when it is the
time of prayer in other churches is not advisable; it would lead to
alienation, since the Baha'i children who have their own Sunday school
would be deprived of it if they tried to attend other Sunday schools.
Moreover, the admission of children of non-Baha'i parents to the school
for Baha'i children is permissible. And if, in this school, an outline of
the fundamental principles underlying all religions be set forth for the
information of the children, it can do no harm.

As the children are few in number, it is not possible to have different
classes and naturally only one is necessary. Concerning the last question
regarding differences among children, act as ye deem advisable.





126: THY LETTER WAS RECEIVED. PRAISE BE TO GOD IT ...


Thy letter was received. Praise be to God it imparted the good news of thy
health and safety and indicated that thou art ready to enter an
agricultural school. This is highly suitable. Strive as much as possible
to become proficient in the science of agriculture, for in accordance with
the divine teachings the acquisition of sciences and the perfection of
arts are considered acts of worship. If a man engageth with all his power
in the acquisition of a science or in the perfection of an art, it is as
if he has been worshipping God in churches and temples. Thus as thou
enterest a school of agriculture and strivest in the acquisition of that
science thou art day and night engaged in acts of worship--acts that are
accepted at the threshold of the Almighty. What bounty greater than this
that science should be considered as an act of worship and art as service
to the Kingdom of God.





127: O THOU SERVANT OF THE ONE TRUE GOD! IN THIS ...


O thou servant of the One true God! In this universal dispensation man's
wondrous craftsmanship is reckoned as worship of the Resplendent Beauty.
Consider what a bounty and blessing it is that craftsmanship is regarded
as worship. In former times, it was believed that such skills were
tantamount to ignorance, if not a misfortune, hindering man from drawing
nigh unto God. Now consider how His infinite bestowals and abundant
favours have changed hell-fire into blissful paradise, and a heap of dark
dust into a luminous garden.

It behoveth the craftsmen of the world at each moment to offer a thousand
tokens of gratitude at the Sacred Threshold, and to exert their highest
endeavour and diligently pursue their professions so that their efforts
may produce that which will manifest the greatest beauty and perfection
before the eyes of all men.





128: THY LETTER WAS RECEIVED. I HOPE THAT THOU MAYEST ...


Thy letter was received. I hope that thou mayest be protected and assisted
under the providence of the True One, be occupied always in mentioning the
Lord and display effort to complete thy profession. Thou must endeavour
greatly so that thou mayest become unique in thy profession and famous in
those parts, because attaining perfection in one's profession in this
merciful period is considered to be worship of God. And whilst thou art
occupied with thy profession, thou canst remember the True One.





129: O FRIENDS OF THE PURE AND OMNIPOTENT GOD! TO ...


O Friends of the Pure and Omnipotent God! To be pure and holy in all
things is an attribute of the consecrated soul and a necessary
characteristic of the unenslaved mind. The best of perfections is
immaculacy and the freeing of oneself from every defect. Once the
individual is, in every respect, cleansed and purified, then will he
become a focal centre reflecting the Manifest Light.

First in a human being's way of life must be purity, then freshness,
cleanliness, and independence of spirit. First must the stream bed be
cleansed, then may the sweet river waters be led into it. Chaste eyes
enjoy the beatific vision of the Lord and know what this encounter
meaneth; a pure sense inhaleth the fragrances that blow from the rose
gardens of His grace; a burnished heart will mirror forth the comely face
of truth.

This is why, in Holy Scriptures, the counsels of heaven are likened to
water, even as the Qur'an saith: 'And pure water send We down from
Heaven,'(42) and the Gospel: 'Except a man be baptized of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.'(43) Thus is it clear
that the Teachings which come from God are heavenly outpourings of grace;
they are rain-showers of divine mercy, and they cleanse the human heart.

My meaning is this, that in every aspect of life, purity and holiness,
cleanliness and refinement, exalt the human condition and further the
development of man's inner reality. Even in the physical realm,
cleanliness will conduce to spirituality, as the Holy Writings clearly
state. And although bodily cleanliness is a physical thing, it hath,
nevertheless, a powerful influence on the life of the spirit. It is even
as a voice wondrously sweet, or a melody played: although sounds are but
vibrations in the air which affect the ear's auditory nerve, and these
vibrations are but chance phenomena carried along through the air, even
so, see how they move the heart. A wondrous melody is wings for the
spirit, and maketh the soul to tremble for joy. The purport is that
physical cleanliness doth also exert its effect upon the human soul.

Observe how pleasing is cleanliness in the sight of God, and how
specifically it is emphasized in the Holy Books of the Prophets; for the
Scriptures forbid the eating or the use of any unclean thing. Some of
these prohibitions were absolute, and binding upon all, and whoso
transgressed the given law was abhorred of God and anathematized by the
believers. Such, for example, were things categorically forbidden, the
perpetration of which was accounted a most grievous sin, among them
actions so loathsome that it is shameful even to speak their name.

But there are other forbidden things which do not cause immediate harm,
and the injurious effects of which are only gradually produced: such acts
are also repugnant to the Lord, and blameworthy in His sight, and
repellent. The absolute unlawfulness of these, however, hath not been
expressly set forth in the Text, but their avoidance is necessary to
purity, cleanliness, the preservation of health, and freedom from
addiction.

Among these latter is smoking tobacco, which is dirty, smelly,
offensive--an evil habit, and one the harmfulness of which gradually
becometh apparent to all. Every qualified physician hath ruled--and this
hath also been proven by tests--that one of the components of tobacco is a
deadly poison, and that the smoker is vulnerable to many and various
diseases. This is why smoking hath been plainly set forth as repugnant
from the standpoint of hygiene.

The Bab, at the outset of His mission, explicitly prohibited tobacco, and
the friends one and all abandoned its use. But since those were times when
dissimulation was permitted, and every individual who abstained from
smoking was exposed to harassment, abuse and even death--the friends, in
order not to advertise their beliefs, would smoke. Later on, the Book of
Aqdas was revealed, and since smoking tobacco was not specifically
forbidden there, the believers did not give it up. The Blessed Beauty,
however, always expressed repugnance for it, and although, in the early
days, there were reasons why He would smoke a little tobacco, in time He
completely renounced it, and those sanctified souls who followed Him in
all things also abandoned its use.

My meaning is that in the sight of God, smoking tobacco is deprecated,
abhorrent, filthy in the extreme; and, albeit by degrees, highly injurious
to health. It is also a waste of money and time, and maketh the user a
prey to a noxious addiction. To those who stand firm in the Covenant, this
habit is therefore censured both by reason and experience, and renouncing
it will bring relief and peace of mind to all men. Furthermore, this will
make it possible to have a fresh mouth and unstained fingers, and hair
that is free of a foul and repellent smell. On receipt of this missive,
the friends will surely, by whatever means and even over a period of time,
forsake this pernicious habit. Such is my hope.

As to opium, it is foul and accursed. God protect us from the punishment
He inflicteth on the user. According to the explicit Text of the Most Holy
Book, it is forbidden, and its use is utterly condemned. Reason showeth
that smoking opium is a kind of insanity, and experience attesteth that
the user is completely cut off from the human kingdom. May God protect all
against the perpetration of an act so hideous as this, an act which layeth
in ruins the very foundation of what it is to be human, and which causeth
the user to be dispossessed for ever and ever. For opium fasteneth on the
soul, so that the user's conscience dieth, his mind is blotted away, his
perceptions are eroded. It turneth the living into the dead. It quencheth
the natural heat. No greater harm can be conceived than that which opium
inflicteth. Fortunate are they who never even speak the name of it; then
think how wretched is the user.

O ye lovers of God! In this, the cycle of Almighty God, violence and
force, constraint and oppression, are one and all condemned. It is,
however, mandatory that the use of opium be prevented by any means
whatsoever, that perchance the human race may be delivered from this most
powerful of plagues. And otherwise, woe and misery to whoso falleth short
of his duty to his Lord.(44)

O Divine Providence! Bestow Thou in all things purity and cleanliness upon
the people of Baha. Grant that they be freed from all defilement, and
released from all addictions. Save them from committing any repugnant act,
unbind them from the chains of every evil habit, that they may live pure
and free, wholesome and cleanly, worthy to serve at Thy Sacred Threshold
and fit to be related to their Lord. Deliver them from intoxicating drinks
and tobacco, save them, rescue them, from this opium that bringeth on
madness, suffer them to enjoy the sweet savours of holiness, that they may
drink deep of the mystic cup of heavenly love and know the rapture of
being drawn ever closer unto the Realm of the All-Glorious. For it is even
as Thou hast said: 'All that thou hast in thy cellar will not appease the
thirst of my love--bring me, O cup-bearer, of the wine of the spirit a cup
full as the sea!'

O ye, God's loved ones! Experience hath shown how greatly the renouncing
of smoking, of intoxicating drink, and of opium, conduceth to health and
vigour, to the expansion and keenness of the mind and to bodily strength.
There is today a people(45) who strictly avoid tobacco, intoxicating
liquor and opium. This people is far and away superior to the others, for
strength and physical courage, for health, beauty and comeliness. A single
one of their men can stand up to ten men of another tribe. This hath
proved true of the entire people: that is, member for member, each
individual of this community is in every respect superior to the
individuals of other communities.

Make ye then a mighty effort, that the purity and sanctity which, above
all else, are cherished by 'Abdu'l-Baha, shall distinguish the people of
Baha; that in every kind of excellence the people of God shall surpass all
other human beings; that both outwardly and inwardly they shall prove
superior to the rest; that for purity, immaculacy, refinement, and the
preservation of health, they shall be leaders in the vanguard of those who
know. And that by their freedom from enslavement, their knowledge, their
self-control, they shall be first among the pure, the free and the wise.





130: O THOU DISTINGUISHED PHYSICIAN!... PRAISE BE ...


O thou distinguished physician!... Praise be to God that thou hast two
powers: one to undertake physical healing and the other spiritual healing.
Matters related to man's spirit have a great effect on his bodily
condition. For instance, thou shouldst impart gladness to thy patient,
give him comfort and joy, and bring him to ecstasy and exultation. How
often hath it occurred that this hath caused early recovery. Therefore,
treat thou the sick with both powers. Spiritual feelings have a surprising
effect on healing nervous ailments.





131: WHEN GIVING MEDICAL TREATMENT TURN TO THE ...


When giving medical treatment turn to the Blessed Beauty, then follow the
dictates of thy heart. Remedy the sick by means of heavenly joy and
spiritual exultation, cure the sorely afflicted by imparting to them
blissful glad tidings and heal the wounded through His resplendent
bestowals. When at the bedside of a patient, cheer and gladden his heart
and enrapture his spirit through celestial power. Indeed, such a heavenly
breath quickeneth every mouldering bone and reviveth the spirit of every
sick and ailing one.





132: ALTHOUGH ILL HEALTH IS ONE OF THE UNAVOIDABLE CONDITIONS ...


Although ill health is one of the unavoidable conditions of man, truly it
is hard to bear. The bounty of good health is the greatest of all gifts.





133: THERE ARE TWO WAYS OF HEALING SICKNESS, MATERIAL ...


There are two ways of healing sickness, material means and spiritual
means. The first is by the treatment of physicians; the second consisteth
in prayers offered by the spiritual ones to God and in turning to Him.
Both means should be used and practised.

Illnesses which occur by reason of physical causes should be treated by
doctors with medical remedies; those which are due to spiritual causes
disappear through spiritual means. Thus an illness caused by affliction,
fear, nervous impressions, will be healed more effectively by spiritual
rather than by physical treatment. Hence, both kinds of treatment should
be followed; they are not contradictory. Therefore thou shouldst also
accept physical remedies inasmuch as these too have come from the mercy
and favour of God, Who hath revealed and made manifest medical science so
that His servants may profit from this kind of treatment also. Thou
shouldst give equal attention to spiritual treatments, for they produce
marvellous effects.

Now, if thou wishest to know the true remedy which will heal man from all
sickness and will give him the health of the divine kingdom, know that it
is the precepts and teachings of God. Focus thine attention upon them.





134: O THOU WHO ART ATTRACTED TO THE FRAGRANT BREATHINGS ...


O thou who art attracted to the fragrant breathings of God! I have read
thy letter addressed to Mrs. Lua Getsinger. Thou hast indeed examined with
great care the reasons for the incursion of disease into the human body.
It is certainly the case that sins are a potent cause of physical
ailments. If humankind were free from the defilements of sin and
waywardness, and lived according to a natural, inborn equilibrium, without
following wherever their passions led, it is undeniable that diseases
would no longer take the ascendant, nor diversify with such intensity.

But man hath perversely continued to serve his lustful appetites, and he
would not content himself with simple foods. Rather, he prepared for
himself food that was compounded of many ingredients, of substances
differing one from the other. With this, and with the perpetrating of vile
and ignoble acts, his attention was engrossed, and he abandoned the
temperance and moderation of a natural way of life. The result was the
engendering of diseases both violent and diverse.

For the animal, as to its body, is made up of the same constituent
elements as man. Since, however, the animal contenteth itself with simple
foods and striveth not to indulge its importunate urges to any great
degree, and committeth no sins, its ailments relative to man's are few. We
see clearly, therefore, how powerful are sin and contumacy as pathogenic
factors. And once engendered these diseases become compounded, multiply,
and are transmitted to others. Such are the spiritual, inner causes of
sickness.

The outer, physical causal factor in disease, however, is a disturbance in
the balance, the proportionate equilibrium of all those elements of which
the human body is composed. To illustrate: the body of man is a compound
of many constituent substances, each component being present in a
prescribed amount, contributing to the essential equilibrium of the whole.
So long as these constituents remain in their due proportion, according to
the natural balance of the whole--that is, no component suffereth a change
in its natural proportionate degree and balance, no component being either
augmented or decreased--there will be no physical cause for the incursion
of disease.

For example, the starch component must be present to a given amount, and
the sugar to a given amount. So long as each remaineth in its natural
proportion to the whole, there will be no cause for the onset of disease.
When, however, these constituents vary as to their natural and due
amounts--that is, when they are augmented or diminished--it is certain that
this will provide for the inroads of disease.

This question requireth the most careful investigation. The Bab hath said
that the people of Baha must develop the science of medicine to such a
high degree that they will heal illnesses by means of foods. The basic
reason for this is that if, in some component substance of the human body,
an imbalance should occur, altering its correct, relative proportion to
the whole, this fact will inevitably result in the onset of disease. If,
for example, the starch component should be unduly augmented, or the sugar
component decreased, an illness will take control. It is the function of a
skilled physician to determine which constituent of his patient's body
hath suffered diminution, which hath been augmented. Once he hath
discovered this, he must prescribe a food containing the diminished
element in considerable amounts, to re-establish the body's essential
equilibrium. The patient, once his constitution is again in balance, will
be rid of his disease.

The proof of this is that while other animals have never studied medical
science, nor carried on researches into diseases or medicines, treatments
or cures--even so, when one of them falleth a prey to sickness, nature
leadeth it, in fields or desert places, to the very plant which, once
eaten, will rid the animal of its disease. The explanation is that if, as
an example, the sugar component in the animal's body hath decreased,
according to a natural law the animal hankereth after a herb that is rich
in sugar. Then, by a natural urge, which is the appetite, among a thousand
different varieties of plants across the field, the animal will discover
and consume that herb which containeth a sugar component in large amounts.
Thus the essential balance of the substances composing its body is
re-established, and the animal is rid of its disease.

This question requireth the most careful investigation. When
highly-skilled physicians shall fully examine this matter, thoroughly and
perseveringly, it will be clearly seen that the incursion of disease is
due to a disturbance in the relative amounts of the body's component
substances, and that treatment consisteth in adjusting these relative
amounts, and that this can be apprehended and made possible by means of
foods.

It is certain that in this wonderful new age the development of medical
science will lead to the doctors' healing their patients with foods. For
the sense of sight, the sense of hearing, of taste, of smell, of touch--all
these are discriminative faculties, their purpose being to separate the
beneficial from whatever causeth harm. Now, is it possible that man's
sense of smell, the sense that differentiates odours, should find some
odour repugnant, and that odour be beneficial to the human body? Absurd!
Impossible! In the same way, could the human body, through the faculty of
sight--the differentiator among things visible--benefit from gazing upon a
revolting mass of excrement? Never! Again, if the sense of taste, likewise
a faculty that selecteth and rejecteth, be offended by something, that
thing is certainly not beneficial; and if, at the outset, it may yield
some advantage, in the long run its harmfulness will be established.

And likewise, when the constitution is in a state of equilibrium, there is
no doubt that whatever is relished will be beneficial to health. Observe
how an animal will graze in a field where there are a hundred thousand
kinds of herbs and grasses, and how, with its sense of smell, it snuffeth
up the odours of the plants, and tasteth them with its sense of taste;
then it consumeth whatever herb is pleasurable to these senses, and
benefiteth therefrom. Were it not for this power of selectivity, the
animals would all be dead in a single day; for there are a great many
poisonous plants, and animals know nothing of the pharmacopoeia. And yet,
observe what a reliable set of scales they have, by means of which to
differentiate the good from the injurious. Whatever constituent of their
body hath decreased, they can rehabilitate by seeking out and consuming
some plant that hath an abundant store of that diminished element; and
thus the equilibrium of their bodily components is re-established, and
they are rid of their disease.

At whatever time highly-skilled physicians shall have developed the
healing of illnesses by means of foods, and shall make provision for
simple foods, and shall prohibit humankind from living as slaves to their
lustful appetites, it is certain that the incidence of chronic and
diversified illnesses will abate, and the general health of all mankind
will be much improved. This is destined to come about. In the same way, in
the character, the conduct and the manners of men, universal modifications
will be made.





135: ACCORDING TO THE EXPLICIT DECREE OF BAHA'U'LLAH ...


According to the explicit decree of Baha'u'llah one must not turn aside
from the advice of a competent doctor. It is imperative to consult one
even if the patient himself be a well-known and eminent physician. In
short, the point is that you should maintain your health by consulting a
highly-skilled physician.





136: IT IS INCUMBENT UPON EVERYONE TO SEEK MEDICAL ...


It is incumbent upon everyone to seek medical treatment and to follow the
doctor's instructions, for this is in compliance with the divine
ordinance, but, in reality, He Who giveth healing is God.





137: O THOU WHO ART VOICING THE PRAISES OF THY LORD! ...


O thou who art voicing the praises of thy Lord! I have read thy letter,
wherein thou didst express astonishment at some of the laws of God, such
as that concerning the hunting of innocent animals, creatures who are
guilty of no wrong.

Be thou not surprised at this. Reflect upon the inner realities of the
universe, the secret wisdoms involved, the enigmas, the
inter-relationships, the rules that govern all. For every part of the
universe is connected with every other part by ties that are very powerful
and admit of no imbalance, nor any slackening whatever. In the physical
realm of creation, all things are eaters and eaten: the plant drinketh in
the mineral, the animal doth crop and swallow down the plant, man doth
feed upon the animal, and the mineral devoureth the body of man. Physical
bodies are transferred past one barrier after another, from one life to
another, and all things are subject to transformation and change, save
only the essence of existence itself--since it is constant and immutable,
and upon it is founded the life of every species and kind, of every
contingent reality throughout the whole of creation.

Whensoever thou dost examine, through a microscope, the water man
drinketh, the air he doth breathe, thou wilt see that with every breath of
air, man taketh in an abundance of animal life, and with every draught of
water, he also swalloweth down a great variety of animals. How could it
ever be possible to put a stop to this process? For all creatures are
eaters and eaten, and the very fabric of life is reared upon this fact.
Were it not so, the ties that interlace all created things within the
universe would be unravelled.

And further, whensoever a thing is destroyed, and decayeth, and is cut off
from life, it is promoted into a world that is greater than the world it
knew before. It leaveth, for example, the life of the mineral and goeth
forward into the life of the plant; then it departeth out of the vegetable
life and ascendeth into that of the animal, following which it forsaketh
the life of the animal and riseth into the realm of human life, and this
is out of the grace of thy Lord, the Merciful, the Compassionate.

I beg of God that He will assist thee to comprehend the mysteries that lie
at the heart of creation, and will draw away the veil from before thine
eyes and thy sister's, that the well-guarded secret may be disclosed unto
thee, and the hidden mystery be revealed as clear as the sun at noonday;
that He will aid thy sister and thy husband to enter the Kingdom of God,
and will heal thee of every ill, whether physical or spiritual, that
assaileth one in this life.





138: O YE BELOVED OF THE LORD! THE KINGDOM OF GOD ...


O ye beloved of the Lord! The Kingdom of God is founded upon equity and
justice, and also upon mercy, compassion, and kindness to every living
soul. Strive ye then with all your heart to treat compassionately all
humankind--except for those who have some selfish, private motive, or some
disease of the soul. Kindness cannot be shown the tyrant, the deceiver, or
the thief, because, far from awakening them to the error of their ways, it
maketh them to continue in their perversity as before. No matter how much
kindliness ye may expend upon the liar, he will but lie the more, for he
believeth you to be deceived, while ye understand him but too well, and
only remain silent out of your extreme compassion.

Briefly, it is not only their fellow human beings that the beloved of God
must treat with mercy and compassion, rather must they show forth the
utmost loving-kindness to every living creature. For in all physical
respects, and where the animal spirit is concerned, the selfsame feelings
are shared by animal and man. Man hath not grasped this truth, however,
and he believeth that physical sensations are confined to human beings,
wherefore is he unjust to the animals, and cruel.

And yet in truth, what difference is there when it cometh to physical
sensations? The feelings are one and the same, whether ye inflict pain on
man or on beast. There is no difference here whatever. And indeed ye do
worse to harm an animal, for man hath a language, he can lodge a
complaint, he can cry out and moan; if injured he can have recourse to the
authorities and these will protect him from his aggressor. But the hapless
beast is mute, able neither to express its hurt nor take its case to the
authorities. If a man inflict a thousand ills upon a beast, it can neither
ward him off with speech nor hale him into court. Therefore is it
essential that ye show forth the utmost consideration to the animal, and
that ye be even kinder to him than to your fellow man.

Train your children from their earliest days to be infinitely tender and
loving to animals. If an animal be sick, let the children try to heal it,
if it be hungry, let them feed it, if thirsty, let them quench its thirst,
if weary, let them see that it rests.

Most human beings are sinners, but the beasts are innocent. Surely those
without sin should receive the most kindness and love--all except animals
which are harmful, such as bloodthirsty wolves, such as poisonous snakes,
and similar pernicious creatures, the reason being that kindness to these
is an injustice to human beings and to other animals as well. If, for
example, ye be tender-hearted toward a wolf, this is but tyranny to a
sheep, for a wolf will destroy a whole flock of sheep. A rabid dog, if
given the chance, can kill a thousand animals and men. Therefore,
compassion shown to wild and ravening beasts is cruelty to the peaceful
ones--and so the harmful must be dealt with. But to blessed animals the
utmost kindness must be shown, the more the better. Tenderness and
loving-kindness are basic principles of God's heavenly Kingdom. Ye should
most carefully bear this matter in mind.





139: O THOU HANDMAID OF GOD! THE HEAVENLY GLAD ...


O thou handmaid of God! The heavenly glad tidings must be delivered with
the utmost dignity and magnanimity. And until a soul ariseth with
qualities which are essential for the bearer of these tidings, his words
will take no effect.

O bondswoman of God! The human spirit possesseth wondrous powers, but it
should be reinforced by the Holy Spirit. What thou hearest other than this
is pure imagination. If, however, it be assisted by the bounty of the Holy
Spirit, then will its strength be a thing to marvel at. Then will that
human spirit uncover realities, and unravel mysteries. Turn thy heart
fully to the Holy Spirit, and invite others to do the same; then shall ye
witness wonderful results.

O handmaid of God! The stars in the sky do not exert any spiritual
influence on this world of dust; but all the members and parts of the
universe are very strongly linked together in that limitless space, and
this connection produceth a reciprocity of material effects. Outside the
bounty of the Holy Spirit, whatsoever thou hearest as to the effect of
trances, or the mediums' trumpets, conveying the singing voices of the
dead, is imagination pure and simple. As to the bounty of the Holy Spirit,
however, relate whatsoever thou wilt--it cannot be overstated; believe,
therefore, whatsoever thou hearest of this. But the persons referred to,
the trumpet-people, are entirely shut out from this bounty and receive no
portion thereof; their way is an illusion.

O handmaid of God! Prayers are granted through the universal
Manifestations of God. Nevertheless, where the wish is to obtain material
things, even where the heedless are concerned, if they supplicate, humbly
imploring God's help--even their prayer hath an effect.

O handmaid of God! Although the reality of Divinity is sanctified and
boundless, the aims and needs of the creatures are restricted. God's grace
is like the rain that cometh down from heaven: the water is not bounded by
the limitations of form, yet on whatever place it poureth down, it taketh
on limitations--dimensions, appearance, shape--according to the
characteristics of that place. In a square pool, the water, previously
unconfined, becometh a square; in a six-sided pool it becometh a hexagon,
in an eight-sided pool an octagon, and so forth. The rain itself hath no
geometry, no limits, no form, but it taketh on one form or another,
according to the restrictions of its vessel. In the same way, the Holy
Essence of the Lord God is boundless, immeasurable, but His graces and
splendours become finite in the creatures, because of their limitations,
wherefore the prayers of given persons will receive favourable answers in
certain cases.

O handmaid of God! It is with the Lord Christ even as with Adam. Did the
first human being who came into existence on this earth have a father or
mother? It is certain that he had neither. But Christ lacked only a
father.

O handmaid of God! The prayers which were revealed to ask for healing
apply both to physical and spiritual healing. Recite them, then, to heal
both the soul and the body. If healing is right for the patient, it will
certainly be granted; but for some ailing persons, healing would only be
the cause of other ills, and therefore wisdom doth not permit an
affirmative answer to the prayer.

O handmaid of God! The power of the Holy Spirit healeth both physical and
spiritual ailments.

O handmaid of God! It is recorded in the Torah: And I will give you the
valley of Achor for a door of hope. This valley of Achor is the city of
Akka, and whoso hath interpreted this otherwise is of those who know not.





140: THOU DIDST ASK AS TO THE TRANSFIGURATION OF JESUS, ...


Thou didst ask as to the transfiguration of Jesus, with Moses and Elias
and the Heavenly Father on Mount Tabor, as referred to in the Bible. This
occurrence was perceived by the disciples with their inner eye, wherefore
it was a secret hidden away, and was a spiritual discovery of theirs.
Otherwise, if the intent be that they witnessed physical forms, that is,
witnessed that transfiguration with their outward eyes, then there were
many others at hand on that plain and mountain, and why did they fail to
behold it? And why did the Lord charge them that they should tell no man?
It is clear that this was a spiritual vision and a scene of the Kingdom.
Wherefore did the Messiah bid them to keep this hidden, 'till the Son of
Man were risen from the dead,'(46)--that is, until the Cause of God should
be exalted, and the Word of God prevail, and the reality of Christ rise
up.





141: O THOU YEARNING FLAME, THOU WHO ART AFIRE WITH ...


O thou yearning flame, thou who art afire with the love of God! I have
read thy letter, and its contents, well-expressed and eloquent, delighted
my heart, showing as they did thy deep sincerity in the Cause of God, thy
persevering steps along the pathway of His Kingdom, and thy staunchness in
His Faith--for of all great things, this is the greatest in His sight.

How many a soul hath turned itself unto the Lord and entered into the
protective shadow of His Word, and become famed throughout the world--for
example, Judas Iscariot. And then, when the tests grew harsh and the
violence thereof intensified, their feet slipped on the pathway and they
turned backward from the Faith after having acknowledged its truth, and
they denied it, and fell away from harmony and love into mischief and
hate. Thus became visible the power of tests, which maketh mighty pillars
to tremble and shake.

Judas Iscariot was the greatest of the disciples, and he summoned the
people to Christ. Then it seemed to him that Jesus was showing increasing
regard to the Apostle Peter, and when Jesus said, 'Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock I will build My church,' these words addressed to Peter,
and this singling out of Peter for special honour, had a marked effect on
the Apostle, and kindled envy within the heart of Judas. For this reason
he who had once drawn nigh did turn aside, and he who had believed in the
Faith denied it, and his love changed to hate, until he became a cause of
the crucifixion of that glorious Lord, that manifest Splendour. Such is
the outcome of envy, the chief reason why men turn aside from the Straight
Path. So hath it occurred, and will occur, in this great Cause. But it
doth not matter, for it engendereth loyalty in the rest, and maketh souls
to arise who waver not, who are fixed and unshakeable as the mountains in
their love for the Manifest Light.

Convey thou unto the handmaids of the Merciful the message that when a
test turneth violent they must stand unmoved, and faithful to their love
for Baha. In winter come the storms, and the great winds blow, but then
will follow spring in all its beauty, adorning hill and plain with
perfumed plants and red anemones, fair to see. Then will the birds trill
out upon the branches their songs of joy, and sermonize in lilting tones
from the pulpits of the trees. Erelong shall ye bear witness that the
lights are streaming forth, the banners of the realm above are waving, the
sweet scents of the All-Merciful are wafted abroad, the hosts of the
Kingdom are marching down, the angels of heaven are rushing forward, and
the Holy Spirit is breathing upon all those regions. On that day thou
shalt behold the waverers, men and women alike, frustrated of their hopes
and in manifest loss. This is decreed by the Lord, the Revealer of Verses.

As to thee, blessed art thou, for thou art steadfast in the Cause of God,
firm in His Covenant. I beg of Him to bestow upon thee a spiritual soul,
and the life of the Kingdom, and to make thee a leaf verdant and
flourishing on the Tree of Life, that thou mayest serve the handmaids of
the Merciful with spirituality and good cheer.

Thy generous Lord will assist thee to labour in His vineyard and will
cause thee to be the means of spreading the spirit of unity among His
handmaids. He will make thine inner eye to see with the light of
knowledge, He will forgive thy sins and transform them into goodly deeds.
Verily He is the Forgiving, the Compassionate, the Lord of immeasurable
grace.





142: O THOU DEAR HANDMAID OF GOD! PRAISE THOU GOD, ...


O thou dear handmaid of God! Praise thou God, because thou art favoured at
His Holy Threshold, and cherished in the Kingdom of His might. Thou art
the head of an assembly which is the very imprint of the Company on high,
the mirror-image of the all-glorious realm. Strive thou with heart and
soul, in prayerful humility and self-effacement, to uphold the Law of God
and spread His sweet savours abroad. Endeavour thou to become the true
president of the assemblies of spiritual souls, and a companion to the
angels in the realm of the All-Merciful.

Thou didst ask as to the tenth to the seventeenth verses of the
twenty-first chapter of Saint John the Divine's Revelation. Know thou that
according to mathematical principles, the firmament of this earth's
brilliant day-star hath been divided among twelve constellations, which
they call the twelve zodiacal signs. In the same way, the Sun of Truth
shineth out from and sheddeth its bounties through twelve stations of
holiness, and by these heavenly signs are meant those stainless and
unsullied personages who are the very well-springs of sanctity, and the
dawning-points proclaiming the oneness of God.

Consider how in the days of the Interlocutor (Moses), there were twelve
holy beings who were leaders of the twelve tribes; and likewise in the
dispensation of the Spirit (Christ), note that there were twelve Apostles
gathered within the sheltering shade of that supernal Light, and from
those splendid dawning-points the Sun of Truth shone forth even as the sun
in the sky. Again, in the days of Muhammad, observe that there were twelve
dawning-points of holiness, the manifestors of God's confirming help. Such
is the way of it.

Accordingly did Saint John the Divine tell of twelve gates in his vision,
and twelve foundations. By 'that great city, the holy Jerusalem,
descending out of heaven from God' is meant the holy Law of God, and this
is set forth in many Tablets and still to be read in the Scriptures of the
Prophets of the past: for instance, that Jerusalem was seen going out into
the wilderness.

The meaning of the passage is that this heavenly Jerusalem hath twelve
gates, through which the blessed enter into the City of God. These gates
are souls who are as guiding stars, as portals of knowledge and grace; and
within these gates there stand twelve angels. By 'angel' is meant the
power of the confirmations of God--that the candle of God's confirming
power shineth out from the lamp-niche of those souls--meaning that every
one of those beings will be granted the most vehement confirming support.

These twelve gates surround the entire world, that is they are a shelter
for all creatures. And further, these twelve gates are the foundation of
the City of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and on each one of these
foundations is written the name of one of the Apostles of Christ. That is
to say, each one maketh manifest the perfections, the joyous message, and
the excellency of that holy Being.

In brief, the Scripture saith: 'And he that talked with me had a rod made
out of gold, that is, a measure, wherewith he measured the city and the
gates thereof and the towers thereof.' The meaning is that certain
personages guided the people with a staff grown out of the earth, and
shepherded them with a rod, like unto the rod of Moses. Others trained and
shepherded the people with a rod of iron, as in the dispensation of
Muhammad. And in this present cycle, because it is the mightiest of
Dispensations, that rod grown out of the vegetable kingdom and that rod of
iron will be transformed into a rod of purest gold, taken from out the
endless treasure houses in the Kingdom of the Lord. By this rod will the
people be trained.

Note well the difference: at one time the Teachings of God were as a
staff, and by this means the Holy Scriptures were spread abroad, the Law
of God was promulgated and His Faith established. Then followed a time
when the staff of the true Shepherd was as iron. And today, in this new
and splendid age, the rod is even as pure gold. How wide is the difference
here! Know, then, how much ground hath been gained by the Law of God and
His Teachings in this dispensation, how they have reached such heights
that they far transcend the dispensations gone before: truly this rod is
purest gold, while those of other days were of iron and wood.

This is a brief answer that hath been written for thee, because there was
no time for more. It is certain that thou wilt forgive me. The handmaids
of God must rise to such a station that they will, by themselves and
unaided, comprehend these inner meanings, and be able to expound at full
length every single word; a station where, out of the truth of their
inmost hearts, a spring of wisdom will well up, and jet forth even as a
fountain that leapeth from its own original source.





143: O THOU WHO HAST DRAWN NIGH UNTO THE SPIRIT OF ...


O thou who hast drawn nigh unto the spirit of Christ in the Kingdom of
God! Verily the body is composed of physical elements, and every composite
must needs be decomposed. The spirit, however, is a single essence, fine
and delicate, incorporeal, everlasting, and of God. For this reason whoso
looketh for Christ in His physical body hath looked in vain, and will be
shut away from Him as by a veil. But whoso yearneth to find Him in the
spirit will grow from day to day in joy and desire and burning love, in
closeness to Him, and in beholding Him clear and plain. In this new and
wondrous day, it behoveth thee to seek after the spirit of Christ.

Verily the heaven into which the Messiah rose up was not this unending
sky, rather was His heaven the Kingdom of His beneficent Lord. Even as He
Himself hath said, 'I came down from heaven,'(47) and again, 'The Son of
Man is in heaven.'(48) Hence it is clear that His heaven is beyond all
directional points; it encircleth all existence, and is raised up for
those who worship God. Beg and implore thy Lord to lift thee up into that
heaven, and give thee to eat of its food, in this age of majesty and
might.

Know thou that the people, even unto this day, have failed to unravel the
hidden secrets of the Book. They imagine that Christ was excluded from His
heaven in the days when He walked the earth, that He fell from the heights
of His sublimity, and afterwards mounted to those upper reaches of the
sky, to the heaven which doth not exist at all, for it is but space. And
they are waiting for Him to come down from there again, riding upon a
cloud, and they imagine that there are clouds in that infinite space and
that He will ride thereon and by that means He will descend. Whereas the
truth is that a cloud is but vapour that riseth out of the earth, and it
doth not come down from heaven. Rather, the cloud referred to in the
Gospel is the human body, so called because the body is as a veil to man,
which, even as a cloud, preventeth him from beholding the Sun of Truth
that shineth from the horizon of Christ.

I beg of God to open before thine eyes the gates of discoveries and
perceptions, that thou mayest become informed of His mysteries in this
most manifest of days.

I am most eager to meet thee, but the times are not propitious. God
willing, we shall let thee know of a better time, when thou canst come
rejoicing.





144: O LOVER OF HUMANKIND! THY LETTER HATH BEEN ...


O lover of humankind! Thy letter hath been received, and it telleth, God
be praised, of thy health and well-being. It appeareth, from thine answer
to a previous letter, that feelings of affection were being established
between thyself and the friends.

One must see in every human being only that which is worthy of praise.
When this is done, one can be a friend to the whole human race. If,
however, we look at people from the standpoint of their faults, then being
a friend to them is a formidable task.

It happened one day in the time of Christ--may the life of the world be a
sacrifice unto Him--that He passed by the dead body of a dog, a carcass
reeking, hideous, the limbs rotting away. One of those present said: 'How
foul its stench!' And another said: 'How sickening! How loathsome!' To be
brief, each one of them had something to add to the list.

But then Christ Himself spoke, and He told them: 'Look at that dog's
teeth! How gleaming white!'

The Messiah's sin-covering gaze did not for a moment dwell upon the
repulsiveness of that carrion. The one element of that dead dog's carcass
which was not abomination was the teeth: and Jesus looked upon their
brightness.

Thus is it incumbent upon us, when we direct our gaze toward other people,
to see where they excel, not where they fail.

Praise be to God, thy goal is to promote the well-being of humankind and
to help the souls to overcome their faults. This good intention will
produce laudable results.





145: THOU DIDST WRITE AS TO THE QUESTION OF SPIRITUAL ...


Thou didst write as to the question of spiritual discoveries. The spirit
of man is a circumambient power that encompasseth the realities of all
things. Whatsoever thou dost see about thee--wondrous products of human
workmanship, inventions, discoveries and like evidences--each one of these
was once a secret hidden away in the realm of the unknown. The human
spirit laid that secret bare, and drew it forth from the unseen into the
visible world. There is, for example, the power of steam, and photography
and the phonograph, and wireless telegraphy, and advances in mathematics:
each and every one of these was once a mystery, a closely guarded secret,
yet the human spirit unravelled these secrets and brought them out of the
invisible into the light of day. Thus is it clear that the human spirit is
an all-encompassing power that exerteth its dominion over the inner
essences of all created things, uncovering the well kept mysteries of the
phenomenal world.

The divine spirit, however, doth unveil divine realities and universal
mysteries that lie within the spiritual world. It is my hope that thou
wilt attain unto this divine spirit, so that thou mayest uncover the
secrets of the other world, as well as the mysteries of the world below.

Thou didst ask as to chapter 14, verse 30 of the Gospel of John, where the
Lord Christ saith, 'Hereafter I will not talk much with you: for the
Prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in Me.' The Prince of this
world is the Blessed Beauty; and 'hath nothing in Me' signifieth: after Me
all will draw grace from Me, but He is independent of Me, and will draw no
grace from Me. That is, He is rich beyond any grace of Mine.

As to thy question regarding discoveries made by the soul after it hath
put off its human form: certainly, that world is a world of perceptions
and discoveries, for the interposed veil will be lifted away and the human
spirit will gaze upon souls that are above, below, and on a par with
itself. It is similar to the condition of a human being in the womb, where
his eyes are veiled, and all things are hidden away from him. Once he is
born out of the uterine world and entereth this life, he findeth it, with
relation to that of the womb, to be a place of perceptions and
discoveries, and he observeth all things through his outer eye. In the
same way, once he hath departed this life, he will behold, in that world
whatsoever was hidden from him here: but there he will look upon and
comprehend all things with his inner eye. There will he gaze on his
fellows and his peers, and those in the ranks above him, and those below.
As for what is meant by the equality of souls in the all-highest realm, it
is this: the souls of the believers, at the time when they first become
manifest in the world of the body, are equal, and each is sanctified and
pure. In this world, however, they will begin to differ one from another,
some achieving the highest station, some a middle one, others remaining at
the lowest stage of being. Their equal status is at the beginning of their
existence; the differentiation followeth their passing away.

Thou didst write as to Seir. Seir is a locality near Nazareth in Galilee.

As to the statement of Job, chapter 19, verses 25-27, 'I know that my
Redeemer liveth, and that He shall stand at the latter day upon the
earth,' the meaning here is: I shall not be abased, I have a Sustainer and
a Guardian, and my Helper, my Defender will in the end be made manifest.
And although now my flesh be weak and clothed with worms, yet shall I be
healed, and with these mine own eyes, that is, mine inner sight, I shall
behold Him. This did Job say after they had reproached him, and he himself
had lamented the harms that his tribulations had wreaked upon him. And
even when, from the terrible inroads of the sickness, his body was covered
with worms, he sought to tell those about him that still he would be fully
healed, and that in his very body, with his very eyes, he would gaze on
his Redeemer.

As to the woman in the Revelation of Saint John, chapter 12, who fled into
the wilderness, and the great wonder appearing in the heavens--that woman
clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet: what is meant by the
woman is the Law of God. For according to the terminology of the Holy
Books, this reference is to the Law, the woman being its symbol here. And
the two luminaries, the sun and the moon, are the two thrones, the Turkish
and the Persian, these two being under the rule of the Law of God. The sun
is the symbol of the Persian Empire, and the moon, that is, the crescent,
of the Turkish. The twelve-fold crown is the twelve Imams, who, even as
the Apostles, supported the Faith of God. The newborn Child is the Beauty
of the Adored One,(49) come forth out of the Law of God. He then saith
that the woman fled into the wilderness, that is, the Law of God was
carried out of Palestine to the desert of Hijaz, where it remained 1260
years--that is, until the advent of the promised Child. And as is well
known, in the Holy Books, every day is accounted as one year.





146: O THOU HANDMAID AFIRE WITH THE LOVE OF GOD! I ...


O thou handmaid afire with the love of God! I have considered thine
excellent letter, and thanked God for thy safe arrival in that great city.
I beg of Him, through His unfailing aid, to cause this return of thine to
exert a powerful effect. Such a thing can only come about if thou dost
divest thyself of all attachment to this world, and dost put on the
vesture of holiness; if thou dost limit all thy thoughts and all thy words
to the remembrance of God and His praise; to spreading His sweet savours
abroad, and performing righteous acts; and if thou dost devote thyself to
awakening the heedless and restoring sight to the blind, hearing to the
deaf, speech to the mute, and through the power of the spirit, giving life
to the dead.

For even as Christ said of them in the Gospel, the people are blind, they
are deaf, they are dumb; and He said: 'I will heal them.'

Be thou kind and compassionate to thine enfeebled mother, and speak to her
of the Kingdom, that her heart may rejoice.

Give thou my greetings to Miss Ford. Convey to her the glad tidings that
these are the days of the Kingdom of God. Say unto her: Blessed art thou
for thy noble aims, blessed art thou for thy goodly deeds, blessed art
thou for thy spiritual nature. Verily do I love thee on account of these
thine aims and qualities and deeds. Tell her further: Remember the
Messiah, and His days on earth, and His abasement, and His tribulations,
and how the people paid Him no mind. Remember how the Jews would hold Him
up to ridicule, and mock at Him, and address Him with: 'Peace be upon
thee, King of the Jews! Peace be upon thee, King of Kings!' How they would
say that He was mad, and would ask how the Cause of that crucified One
could ever spread out to the easts of the world and the wests thereof.
None followed Him then, save only a few souls who were fishermen,
carpenters, and other plain folk. Alas, alas, for such delusions!

And see what happened then: how their mighty banners were reversed, and in
their place His most exalted standard lifted up; how all the bright stars
in that heaven of honour and pride did set; how they sank in the west of
all that vanisheth--while His brilliant Orb still shineth down out of skies
of undying glory, as the centuries and the ages roll by. Be ye then
admonished, ye that have eyes to see! Erelong shall ye behold even greater
things than this.

Know thou that all the powers combined have not the power to establish
universal peace, nor to withstand the overmastering dominion, at every
time and season, of these endless wars. Erelong, however, shall the power
of heaven, the dominion of the Holy Spirit, hoist on the high summits the
banners of love and peace, and there above the castles of majesty and
might shall those banners wave in the rushing winds that blow out of the
tender mercy of God.

Convey thou my greetings to Mrs. Florence, and tell her: The diverse
congregations have given up the ground of their belief, and adopted
doctrines that are of no account in the sight of God. They are even as the
Pharisees who both prayed and fasted, and then did sentence Jesus Christ
to death. By the life of God! This thing is passing strange!

As to thee, O handmaid of God, softly recite thou this commune to thy
Lord, and say unto Him:

O God, my God! Fill up for me the cup of detachment from all things, and
in the assembly of Thy splendours and bestowals, rejoice me with the wine
of loving Thee. Free me from the assaults of passion and desire, break off
from me the shackles of this nether world, draw me with rapture unto Thy
supernal realm, and refresh me amongst the handmaids with the breathings
of Thy holiness.

O Lord, brighten Thou my face with the lights of Thy bestowals, light Thou
mine eyes with beholding the signs of Thine all-subduing might; delight my
heart with the glory of Thy knowledge that encompasseth all things,
gladden Thou my soul with Thy soul-reviving tidings of great joy, O Thou
King of this world and the Kingdom above, O Thou Lord of dominion and
might, that I may spread abroad Thy signs and tokens, and proclaim Thy
Cause, and promote Thy Teachings, and serve Thy Law, and exalt Thy Word.

Thou art verily the Powerful, the Ever-Giving, the Able, the Omnipotent.

As to the fundamentals of teaching the Faith: know thou that delivering
the Message can be accomplished only through goodly deeds and spiritual
attributes, an utterance that is crystal clear and the happiness reflected
from the face of that one who is expounding the Teachings. It is essential
that the deeds of the teacher should attest the truth of his words. Such
is the state of whoso doth spread abroad the sweet savours of God and the
quality of him who is sincere in his faith.

Once the Lord hath enabled thee to attain this condition, be thou assured
that He will inspire thee with words of truth, and will cause thee to
speak through the breathings of the Holy Spirit.





147: REFLECT UPON THE PAST EVENTS OF THE TIME OF ...


Reflect upon the past events of the time of Christ, and the present events
shall become clear and manifest.





148: O YE SONS AND DAUGHTERS OF THE KINGDOM! ...


O ye sons and daughters of the Kingdom! Thankful, the birds of the spirit
seek only to fly in the high heavens and to sing out their songs with
wondrous art. But the pitiable earthworms love only to tunnel into the
ground, and what a mighty struggle they make to get themselves down into
its depths! Even so are the sons of earth. Their highest aim is to augment
their means of continuing on, in this vanishing world, this death in life;
and this despite the fact that they are bound hand and foot by a thousand
cares and sorrows, and never safe from danger, not even for the twinkling
of an eye; never at any time secure, even from sudden death. Wherefore,
after a brief span, are they utterly effaced, and no sign remaineth to
tell of them, and no word of them is ever heard again.

Then let you engage in the praise of Baha'u'llah, for it is through His
grace and succour that ye have become sons and daughters of the Kingdom;
it is thanks to Him that ye are now songsters in the meadows of truth, and
have soared upward to the heights of the glory that abideth forever. Ye
have found your place in the world that dieth not; the breaths of the Holy
Spirit have blown upon you; ye have taken on another life, ye have gained
access to the Threshold of God.

Wherefore, with great gladness, establish ye spiritual assemblies, and
engage ye in uttering the praise and glorification of the Lord, and
calling Him Holy and Most Great. Lift up to the realm of the All-Glorious
your suppliant cries for help, and voice ye at every moment a myriad
thanks for having won this abounding favour and exceeding grace.





149: O THOU WHO HAST EYES TO SEE! THAT WHICH THOU ...


O thou who hast eyes to see! That which thou didst witness is the very
truth, and it pertaineth to the realm of vision.

The perfume is intimately commingled and blended with the bud, and once
the bud hath opened the sweet scent of it is spread abroad. The herb is
not without its fruit, although it seemeth so, for in this garden of God
every plant exerteth its own influence and hath its own properties, and
every plant can even match the laughing, hundred-petalled rose in
rejoicing the sense with its fragrance. Be thou assured of this. Although
the pages of a book know nothing of the words and the meanings traced upon
them, even so, because of their connection with these words, friends pass
them reverently from hand to hand. This connection, furthermore, is purest
bounty.

When the human soul soareth out of this transient heap of dust and riseth
into the world of God, then veils will fall away, and verities will come
to light, and all things unknown before will be made clear, and hidden
truths be understood.

Consider how a being, in the world of the womb, was deaf of ear and blind
of eye, and mute of tongue; how he was bereft of any perceptions at all.
But once, out of that world of darkness, he passed into this world of
light, then his eye saw, his ear heard, his tongue spoke. In the same way,
once he hath hastened away from this mortal place into the Kingdom of God,
then he will be born in the spirit; then the eye of his perception will
open, the ear of his soul will hearken, and all the truths of which he was
ignorant before will be made plain and clear.

An observant traveller passing along a way will certainly recall his
discoveries to mind, unless some accident befall him and efface the
memory.





150: O THOU HANDMAID AFLAME WITH THE FIRE OF GOD'S ...


O thou handmaid aflame with the fire of God's love! Grieve thou not over
the troubles and hardships of this nether world, nor be thou glad in times
of ease and comfort, for both shall pass away. This present life is even
as a swelling wave, or a mirage, or drifting shadows. Could ever a
distorted image on the desert serve as refreshing waters? No, by the Lord
of Lords! Never can reality and the mere semblance of reality be one, and
wide is the difference between fancy and fact, between truth and the
phantom thereof.

Know thou that the Kingdom is the real world, and this nether place is
only its shadow stretching out. A shadow hath no life of its own; its
existence is only a fantasy, and nothing more; it is but images reflected
in water, and seeming as pictures to the eye.

Rely upon God. Trust in Him. Praise Him, and call Him continually to mind.
He verily turneth trouble into ease, and sorrow into solace, and toil into
utter peace. He verily hath dominion over all things.

If thou wouldst hearken to my words, release thyself from the fetters of
whatsoever cometh to pass. Nay rather, under all conditions thank thou thy
loving Lord, and yield up thine affairs unto His Will that worketh as He
pleaseth. This verily is better for thee than all else, in either world.





151: O THOU BELIEVER IN THE ONENESS OF GOD! KNOW ...


O thou believer in the oneness of God! Know thou that nothing profiteth a
soul save the love of the All-Merciful, nothing lighteth up a heart save
the splendour that shineth from the realm of the Lord.

Forsake thou every other concern, let oblivion overtake the memory of all
else. Confine thy thoughts to whatever will lift up the human soul to the
Paradise of heavenly grace, and make every bird of the Kingdom wing its
way unto the Supreme Horizon, the central point of everlasting honour in
this contingent world.





152: AS TO THE QUESTION REGARDING THE SOUL OF A MURDERER, ...


As to the question regarding the soul of a murderer, and what his
punishment would be, the answer given was that the murderer must expiate
his crime: that is, if they put the murderer to death, his death is his
atonement for his crime, and following the death, God in His justice will
impose no second penalty upon him, for divine justice would not allow
this.





153: O THOU HANDMAID OF GOD! IN THIS DAY, TO THANK ...


O thou handmaid of God! In this day, to thank God for His bounties
consisteth in possessing a radiant heart, and a soul open to the
promptings of the spirit. This is the essence of thanksgiving.

As for offering thanks by speaking out or writing, although this is indeed
acceptable, yet when compared with that other thanksgiving, it is only a
semblance and unreal; for the essential thing is these intimations of the
spirit, these emanations from the deep recess of the heart. It is my hope
that thou wilt be favoured therewith.

Regarding one's lack of capacity and one's undeserving on the Day of
Resurrection, this does not cause one to be shut out from gifts and
bounties; for this is not the Day of Justice but the Day of Grace, while
justice is allotting to each whatever is his due. Then look thou not at
the degree of thy capacity, look thou at the boundless favour of
Baha'u'llah; all-encompassing is His bounty, and consummate His grace.

I ask of God that with His assistance and strong support thou mayest teach
the inner meanings of the Torah with eloquence, understanding, vigour and
skill. Turn thy face toward the Kingdom of God, ask for the bestowals of
the Holy Spirit, speak, and the confirmations of the Spirit will come.

As for that mighty solar orb which thou didst behold in thy dream, that
was the Promised One, and its spreading rays were His bounties, and the
translucent surface of the mass of water signifieth hearts that are
undefiled and pure, while the surging waves denote the great excitement of
those hearts and the fact that they were shaken and deeply moved, that is,
the waves are the stirrings of the spirit and holy intimations of the
soul. Praise thou God that in the world of the dream thou hast witnessed
such disclosures.

With reference to what is meant by an individual becoming entirely
forgetful of self: the intent is that he should rise up and sacrifice
himself in the true sense, that is, he should obliterate the promptings of
the human condition, and rid himself of such characteristics as are worthy
of blame and constitute the gloomy darkness of this life on earth--not that
he should allow his physical health to deteriorate and his body to become
infirm.

I do earnestly and humbly supplicate at the Holy Threshold that heavenly
blessings and divine forgiveness will encompass thy dear mother, as well
as thy loving sisters and relatives. Especially do I pray on behalf of thy
betrothed, who hath suddenly hastened away from this world into the next.





154: O THOU SON OF THE KINGDOM! THY MOST AGREEABLE ...


O thou son of the Kingdom! Thy most agreeable letters, with their pleasing
style, ever gladden our hearts. When the song is of the Kingdom, it
rejoiceth the soul.

Praise thou God that thou hast travelled to that country(50) for the
purpose of raising up His Word and spreading abroad the holy fragrance of
His Kingdom, and that thou art serving as a gardener in the gardens of
heaven. Erelong shall thine efforts be crowned with success.

O thou son of the Kingdom! All things are beneficial if joined with the
love of God; and without His love all things are harmful, and act as a
veil between man and the Lord of the Kingdom. When His love is there,
every bitterness turneth sweet, and every bounty rendereth a wholesome
pleasure. For example, a melody, sweet to the ear, bringeth the very
spirit of life to a heart in love with God, yet staineth with lust a soul
engrossed in sensual desires. And every branch of learning, conjoined with
the love of God, is approved and worthy of praise; but bereft of His love,
learning is barren--indeed, it bringeth on madness. Every kind of
knowledge, every science, is as a tree: if the fruit of it be the love of
God, then is it a blessed tree, but if not, that tree is but dried-up
wood, and shall only feed the fire.

O thou loyal servant of God and thou spiritual healer of man! Whensoever
thou dost attend a patient, turn thy face toward the Lord of the heavenly
Kingdom, ask the Holy Spirit to come to thine aid, then heal thou the
sickness.





155: O THOU FLAME OF GOD'S LOVE! WHAT THOU HAST ...


O thou flame of God's love! What thou hast written hath brought great joy,
for thy letter was as a garden from which roses of inner meanings spread
abroad the sweet exhalations of the love of God. In the same way, my
answers will serve as rainshowers and dew, to bestow on those spiritual
plants that have blossomed in the garden of thy heart more freshness and
delicate beauty than words can tell.

Thou didst write of afflictive tests that have assailed thee. To the loyal
soul, a test is but God's grace and favour; for the valiant doth joyously
press forward to furious battle on the field of anguish, when the coward,
whimpering with fright, will tremble and shake. So too, the proficient
student, who hath with great competence mastered his subjects and
committed them to memory, will happily exhibit his skills before his
examiners on the day of his tests. So too will solid gold wondrously gleam
and shine out in the assayer's fire.

It is clear, then, that tests and trials are, for sanctified souls, but
God's bounty and grace, while to the weak, they are a calamity, unexpected
and sudden.

These tests, even as thou didst write, do but cleanse the spotting of self
from off the mirror of the heart, till the Sun of Truth can cast its rays
thereon; for there is no veil more obstructive than the self, and however
tenuous that veil may be, at the last it will completely shut a person
out, and deprive him of his portion of eternal grace.

O thou enraptured handmaid of the Lord! When the believers, men and women,
pass in thought before my eyes, I feel myself warmed at the fire of God's
love, and I pray that the Almighty will succour those holy souls with His
invisible hosts. Praised be the Lord that the prophecies of all His
Manifestations have now been clearly fulfilled, in this greatest of all
days, this holy and blessed age.

O thou enraptured handmaid of God! Nearness is verily of the soul, not of
the body; and the help that is sought, and the help that cometh, is not
material but of the spirit; nevertheless it is my hope that thou wilt
attain to nearness in every sense. The bounties of God will verily
encompass a sanctified soul even as the sun's light doth the moon and
stars: be thou assured of this.

Waft thou to each one of the believers, men and women alike, fragrant
breaths of holiness on behalf of 'Abdu'l-Baha. Inspire them all and urge
them on to shed abroad the sweet savours of the Lord.





156: O THOU SERVANT OF THE HOLY THRESHOLD! WE HAVE ...


O thou servant of the Holy Threshold! We have read what flowed out from
thy pen in thy love for God, and found the contents of thy letter most
pleasing. My hope is that through the bounty of God, the breaths of the
All-Merciful will at all times refresh and renew thee.

Thou didst write of reincarnation. A belief in reincarnation goeth far
back into the ancient history of almost all peoples, and was held even by
the philosophers of Greece, the Roman sages, the ancient Egyptians, and
the great Assyrians. Nevertheless such superstitions and sayings are but
absurdities in the sight of God.

The major argument of the reincarnationists was this, that according to
the justice of God, each must receive his due: whenever a man is afflicted
with some calamity, for example, this is because of some wrong he hath
committed. But take a child that is still in its mother's womb, the embryo
but newly formed, and that child is blind, deaf, lame, defective--what sin
hath such a child committed, to deserve its afflictions? They answer that,
although to outward seeming the child, still in the womb, is guilty of no
sin--nevertheless he perpetrated some wrong when in his previous form, and
thus he came to deserve his punishment.

These individuals, however, have overlooked the following point. If
creation went forward according to only one rule, how could the
all-encompassing Power make Itself felt? How could the Almighty be the One
Who 'doeth as He pleaseth and ordaineth as He willeth'?(51)

Briefly, a return is indeed referred to in the Holy Scriptures, but by
this is meant the return of the qualities, conditions, effects,
perfections, and inner realities of the lights which recur in every
dispensation. The reference is not to specific, individual souls and
identities.

It may be said, for instance, that this lamplight is last night's come
back again, or that last year's rose hath returned to the garden this
year. Here the reference is not to the individual reality, the fixed
identity, the specialized being of that other rose, rather doth it mean
that the qualities, the distinctive characteristics of that other light,
that other flower, are present now, in these. Those perfections, that is,
those graces and gifts of a former springtime are back again this year. We
say, for example, that this fruit is the same as last year's; but we are
thinking only of the delicacy, bloom and freshness, and the sweet taste of
it; for it is obvious that that impregnable centre of reality, that
specific identity, can never return.

What peace, what ease and comfort did the Holy Ones of God ever discover
during Their sojourn in this nether world, that They should continually
seek to come back and live this life again? Doth not a single turn at this
anguish, these afflictions, these calamities, these body blows, these dire
straits, suffice, that They should wish for repeated visits to the life of
this world? This cup was not so sweet that one would care to drink of it a
second time.

Therefore do the lovers of the Abha Beauty wish for no other recompense
but to reach that station where they may gaze upon Him in the Realm of
Glory, and they walk no other path save over desert sands of longing for
those exalted heights. They seek that ease and solace which will abide
forever, and those bestowals that are sanctified beyond the understanding
of the worldly mind.

When thou lookest about thee with a perceptive eye, thou wilt note that on
this dusty earth all humankind are suffering. Here no man is at rest as a
reward for what he hath performed in former lives; nor is there anyone so
blissful as seemingly to pluck the fruit of bygone anguish. And if a human
life, with its spiritual being, were limited to this earthly span, then
what would be the harvest of creation? Indeed, what would be the effects
and the outcomes of Divinity Itself? Were such a notion true, then all
created things, all contingent realities, and this whole world of
being--all would be meaningless. God forbid that one should hold to such a
fiction and gross error.

For just as the effects and the fruitage of the uterine life are not to be
found in that dark and narrow place, and only when the child is
transferred to this wide earth do the benefits and uses of growth and
development in that previous world become revealed--so likewise reward and
punishment, heaven and hell, requital and retribution for actions done in
this present life, will stand revealed in that other world beyond. And
just as, if human life in the womb were limited to that uterine world,
existence there would be nonsensical, irrelevant--so too if the life of
this world, the deeds here done and their fruitage, did not come forth in
the world beyond, the whole process would be irrational and foolish.

Know then that the Lord God possesseth invisible realms which the human
intellect can never hope to fathom nor the mind of man conceive. When once
thou hast cleansed the channel of thy spiritual sense from the pollution
of this worldly life, then wilt thou breathe in the sweet scents of
holiness that blow from the blissful bowers of that heavenly land.

The Glory rest upon thee, and upon whosoever turneth toward and gazeth on
the Kingdom of the All-Glorious, which the Lord hath sanctified beyond the
understanding of those who are neglectful of Him, and hath hid from the
eyes of those who show Him pride.





157: O YE WHO ARE STRONGLY ATTRACTED! O YE WHO ARE ...


O ye who are strongly attracted! O ye who are mindful! O ye who are
advancing unto the Kingdom of God! Verily with all my heart and soul and
with all lowliness do I supplicate the Lord God to make of you ensigns of
guidance, banners of righteousness, well-springs of understanding and
knowledge, that through you He may lead the seekers unto the straight path
and guide them to the broad way of truth in this mightiest of ages.

O ye loved ones of God! Know ye that the world is even as a mirage rising
over the sands, that the thirsty mistaketh for water. The wine of this
world is but a vapour in the desert, its pity and compassion but toil and
trouble, the repose it proffereth only weariness and sorrow. Abandon it to
those who belong to it, and turn your faces unto the Kingdom of your Lord
the All-Merciful, that His grace and bounty may cast their dawning
splendours over you, and a heavenly table may be sent down for you, and
your Lord may bless you, and shower His riches upon you to gladden your
bosoms and fill your hearts with bliss, to attract your minds, and cleanse
your souls, and console your eyes.

O ye loved ones of God! Is there any giver save God? He singleth out for
His mercy whomsoever He willeth. Erelong will He open before you the gates
of His knowledge and fill up your hearts with His love. He will cheer your
souls with the gentle winds of His holiness and make bright your faces
with the splendours of His lights, and exalt the memory of you amongst all
peoples. Your Lord is verily the Compassionate, the Merciful.

He will come to your aid with invisible hosts, and support you with armies
of inspiration from the Concourse above; He will send unto you sweet
perfumes from the highest Paradise, and waft over you the pure breathings
that blow from the rose gardens of the Company on high. He will breathe
into your hearts the spirit of life, cause you to enter the Ark of
salvation, and reveal unto you His clear tokens and signs. Verily is this
abounding grace. Verily is this the victory that none can deny.





158: GRIEVE THOU NOT OVER THE ASCENSION OF MY BELOVED ...


Grieve thou not over the ascension of my beloved Breakwell, for he hath
risen unto a rose garden of splendours within the Abha Paradise, sheltered
by the mercy of his mighty Lord, and he is crying at the top of his voice:
'O that my people could know how graciously my Lord hath forgiven me, and
made me to be of those who have attained His Presence!'(52)

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Where now is thy fair face? Where is thy fluent tongue? Where thy clear
brow? Where thy bright comeliness?

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Where is thy fire, blazing with God's love? Where is thy rapture at His
holy breaths? Where are thy praises, lifted unto Him? Where is thy rising
up to serve His Cause?

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Where are thy beauteous eyes? Thy smiling lips? The princely cheek? The
graceful form?

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Thou hast quit this earthly world and risen upward to the Kingdom, thou
hast reached unto the grace of the invisible realm, and offered thyself at
the threshold of its Lord.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Thou hast left the lamp that was thy body here, the glass that was thy
human form, thy earthy elements, thy way of life below.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Thou hast lit a flame within the lamp of the Company on high, thou hast
set foot in the Abha Paradise, thou hast found a shelter in the shadow of
the Blessed Tree, thou hast attained His meeting in the haven of Heaven.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Thou art now a bird of Heaven, thou hast quit thine earthly nest, and
soared away to a garden of holiness in the kingdom of thy Lord. Thou hast
risen to a station filled with light.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Thy song is even as birdsong now, thou pourest forth verses as to the
mercy of thy Lord; of Him Who forgiveth ever, thou wert a thankful
servant, wherefore hast thou entered into exceeding bliss.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Thy Lord hath verily singled thee out for His love, and hath led thee into
His precincts of holiness, and made thee to enter the garden of those who
are His close companions, and hath blessed thee with beholding His beauty.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Thou hast won eternal life, and the bounty that faileth never, and a life
to please thee well, and plenteous grace.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

Thou art become a star in the supernal sky, and a lamp amid the angels of
high Heaven; a living spirit in the most exalted Kingdom, throned in
eternity.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

I ask of God to draw thee ever closer, hold thee ever faster; to rejoice
thy heart with nearness to His presence, to fill thee with light and still
more light, to grant thee still more beauty, and to bestow upon thee power
and great glory.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!

At all times do I call thee to mind. I shall never forget thee. I pray for
thee by day, by night; I see thee plain before me, as if in open day.

O Breakwell, O my dear one!





159: AS TO THY QUESTION, DOTH EVERY SOUL WITHOUT ...


As to thy question, doth every soul without exception achieve life
everlasting? Know thou that immortality belongeth to those souls in whom
hath been breathed the spirit of life from God. All save these are
lifeless--they are the dead, even as Christ hath explained in the Gospel
text. He whose eyes the Lord hath opened will see the souls of men in the
stations they will occupy after their release from the body. He will find
the living ones thriving within the precincts of their Lord, and the dead
sunk down in the lowest abyss of perdition.

Know thou that every soul is fashioned after the nature of God, each being
pure and holy at his birth. Afterwards, however, the individuals will vary
according to what they acquire of virtues or vices in this world. Although
all existent beings are in their very nature created in ranks or degrees,
for capacities are various, nevertheless every individual is born holy and
pure, and only thereafter may he become defiled.

And further, although the degrees of being are various, yet all are good.
Observe the human body, its limbs, its members, the eye, the ear, the
organs of smell, of taste, the hands, the fingernails. Notwithstanding the
differences among all these parts, each one within the limitations of its
own being participateth in a coherent whole. If one of them faileth it
must be healed, and should no remedy avail, that part must be removed.





160: O THOU SINCERE AND LOYAL HANDMAID OF THE LORD! ...


O thou sincere and loyal handmaid of the Lord! I have read thy letter.
Thou art truly attached to the Kingdom and devoted to the All-Glorious
Horizon. I beg of God in His bounty to make thee to burn ever more
brightly in the fire of His love, as each day passeth by.

Thou wert, it appeareth, in doubt as to whether to write, or to teach the
Faith. Teaching the Faith is essential, and for the present teaching is
preferable for thee. Whensoever thou dost find an opportunity, loose thy
tongue and guide the human race.

Thou didst ask as to acquiring knowledge: read thou the Books and Tablets
of God, and the articles written to demonstrate the truth of this Faith.
Included among them are the Iqan, which hath been translated into English,
the works of Mirza Abu'l-Fadl, and those of some others among the
believers. In the days to come a great number of holy Tablets and other
sacred writings will be translated, and thou shouldst read these as well.
Likewise, ask thou of God that the magnet of His love should draw unto
thee the knowledge of Him. Once a soul becometh holy in all things,
purified, sanctified, the gates of the knowledge of God will open wide
before his eyes.

Thou hast written of the dear handmaid of God, Mrs. Goodall. That soul
enraptured of God is truly serving the Faith at all times, and doing
whatever she can to scatter abroad the heavenly splendours. If she
continue in this same way, very great results will follow in a time to
come. The main thing is to remain staunch and firmly rooted, and persevere
to the end. It is my hope that through the high endeavours of the
handmaids of the Lord, those foothills and that ocean(53) shore will grow
so bright with the love of God as to cast their beams to the ends of the
earth.

Thou didst ask whether, at the advent of the Kingdom of God, every soul
was saved. The Sun of Truth hath shone forth in splendour over all the
world, and its luminous rising is man's salvation and his eternal life--but
only he is of the saved who hath opened wide the eye of his discernment
and beheld that glory.

Likewise didst thou ask whether, in this Baha'i Dispensation, the
spiritual will ultimately prevail. It is certain that spirituality will
defeat materialism, that the heavenly will subdue the human, and that
through divine education the masses of mankind generally will take great
steps forward in all degrees of life--except for those who are blind and
deaf and mute and dead. How can such as they understand the light? Though
the sun's rays illumine every darkest corner of the globe, still the blind
can have no share in the glory, and though the rain of heavenly mercy come
down in torrents over all the earth, no shrub or flower will bloom from a
barren land.





161: O THOU WHO SEEKEST THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN! ...


O thou who seekest the Kingdom of heaven! This world is even as the body
of man, and the Kingdom of God is as the spirit of life. See how dark and
narrow is the physical world of man's body, and what a prey it is to
diseases and ills. On the other hand, how fresh and bright is the realm of
the human spirit. Judge thou from this metaphor how the world of the
Kingdom hath shone down, and how its laws have been made to work in this
nether realm. Although the spirit is hidden from view, still its
commandments shine out like rays of light upon the world of the human
body. In the same way, although the Kingdom of heaven is hidden from the
sight of this unwitting people, still, to him who seeth with the inner
eye, it is plain as day.

Wherefore dwell thou ever in the Kingdom, and be thou oblivious of this
world below. Be thou so wholly absorbed in the emanations of the spirit
that nothing in the world of man will distract thee.





162: O YE DEAR FRIENDS OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA! AT ALL TIMES ...


O ye dear friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! At all times do I await your good news,
longing as I do to hear that ye are making progress from day to day, and
are becoming ever more illumined by the light of guidance.

The blessings of Baha'u'llah are a shoreless sea, and even life
everlasting is only a dewdrop therefrom. The waves of that sea are
continually lapping against the hearts of the friends, and from those
waves there come intimations of the spirit and ardent pulsings of the
soul, until the heart giveth way, and willing or not, turneth humbly in
prayer unto the Kingdom of the Lord. Wherefore do all ye can to disengage
your inner selves, that ye may at every moment reflect new splendours from
the Sun of Truth.

Ye live, all of you, within the heart of 'Abdu'l-Baha, and with every
breath do I turn my face toward the Threshold of Oneness and call down
blessings upon you, each and all.





163: O YE TWO SEEKERS AFTER TRUTH! YOUR LETTER WAS ...


O ye two seekers after truth! Your letter was received and its contents
noted. As for the letters ye had previously sent, not all were received,
while some reached here at a time when the cruelty of the oppressors had
so intensified that it was not possible to send a reply. Now this present
