letter is here, and we are able to answer it, and I have therefore set
about writing, in spite of much pressing business, so that ye will know
that ye are loved amongst us, and also accepted in the Kingdom of God.

Your questions, however, can be answered only briefly, since there is no
time for a detailed reply. The answer to the first question: the souls of
the children of the Kingdom, after their separation from the body, ascend
unto the realm of everlasting life. But if ye ask as to the place, know ye
that the world of existence is a single world, although its stations are
various and distinct. For example, the mineral life occupieth its own
plane, but a mineral entity is without any awareness at all of the
vegetable kingdom, and indeed, with its inner tongue denieth that there is
any such kingdom. In the same way, a vegetable entity knoweth nothing of
the animal world, remaining completely heedless and ignorant thereof, for
the stage of the animal is higher than that of the vegetable, and the
vegetable is veiled from the animal world and inwardly denieth the
existence of that world--all this while animal, vegetable and mineral dwell
together in the one world. In the same way the animal remaineth totally
unaware of that power of the human mind which graspeth universal ideas and
layeth bare the secrets of creation--so that a man who liveth in the east
can make plans and arrangements for the west; can unravel mysteries;
although located on the continent of Europe can discover America; although
sited on the earth can lay hold of the inner realities of the stars of
heaven. Of this power of discovery which belongeth to the human mind, this
power which can grasp abstract and universal ideas, the animal remaineth
totally ignorant, and indeed denieth its existence.

In the same way, the denizens of this earth are completely unaware of the
world of the Kingdom and deny the existence thereof. They ask, for
example: 'Where is the Kingdom? Where is the Lord of the Kingdom?' These
people are even as the mineral and the vegetable, who know nothing
whatever of the animal and the human realm; they see it not; they find it
not. Yet the mineral and vegetable, the animal and man, are all living
here together in this world of existence.

As to the second question: the tests and trials of God take place in this
world, not in the world of the Kingdom.

The answer to the third question is this, that in the other world the
human reality doth not assume a physical form, rather doth it take on a
heavenly form, made up of elements of that heavenly realm.

And the answer to the fourth question: the centre of the Sun of Truth is
in the supernal world--the Kingdom of God. Those souls who are pure and
unsullied, upon the dissolution of their elemental frames, hasten away to
the world of God, and that world is within this world. The people of this
world, however, are unaware of that world, and are even as the mineral and
the vegetable that know nothing of the world of the animal and the world
of man.

The answer to the fifth question is this: Baha'u'llah hath raised up the
tabernacle of the oneness of mankind. Whoso seeketh shelter under this
roof will certainly come forth from other dwellings.

And to the sixth question: if on some point or other a difference ariseth
among two conflicting groups, let them refer to the Centre of the Covenant
for a solution to the problem.

And the seventh question: Baha'u'llah hath been made manifest to all
mankind and He hath invited all to the table of God, the banquet of Divine
bounty. Today, however, most of those who sit at that table are the poor,
and this is why Christ hath said blessed are the poor, for riches do
prevent the rich from entering the Kingdom; and again, He saith, 'It is
easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of God.'(54) If, however, the wealth of this
world, and worldly glory and repute, do not block his entry therein, that
rich man will be favoured at the Holy Threshold and accepted by the Lord
of the Kingdom.

In brief, Baha'u'llah hath become manifest to educate all the peoples of
the world. He is the Universal Educator, whether of the rich or the poor,
whether of black or white, or of peoples from east or west, or north or
south.

Among those who visit Akka, some have made great forward strides.
Lightless candles, they were set alight; withered, they began to bloom;
dead, they were recalled to life and went home with tidings of great joy.
But others, in truth, have simply passed through; they have only taken a
tour.

O ye twain who are strongly attracted to the Kingdom, thank ye God that ye
have made your home a Baha'i centre and a gathering place for the friends.





164: O YE TWO FAITHFUL AND ASSURED SOULS! THE LETTER ...


O ye two faithful and assured souls! The letter was received. Praise be to
God, it imparted good tidings. California is ready for the promulgation of
the Teachings of God. My hope is that ye may strive with heart and soul
that the sweet scent may perfume the nostrils....

Convey on my behalf to Mrs. Chase respectful greetings and say: 'Mr. Chase
is a twinkling star above the horizon of Truth, but at present it is still
behind the clouds; soon these shall be dispersed and the radiance of that
star shall illumine the state of California. Appreciate thou this bounty
that thou hast been his wife and companion in life.'

Every year on the anniversary of the ascension(55) of that blessed soul
the friends must visit his tomb on behalf of 'Abdu'l-Baha and in the
utmost lowliness and humility should with all respect lay on his grave
wreaths of flowers and spend all the day in quiet prayer, while turning
their faces toward the Kingdom of Signs and mentioning and praising the
attributes of that illustrious person.





165: O MY GOD! O MY GOD! VERILY THY SERVANT, ...


O my God! O my God! Verily Thy servant, humble before the majesty of Thy
divine supremacy, lowly at the door of Thy oneness, hath believed in Thee
and in Thy verses, hath testified to Thy word, hath been enkindled with
the fire of Thy love, hath been immersed in the depths of the ocean of Thy
knowledge, hath been attracted by Thy breezes, hath relied upon Thee, hath
turned his face to Thee, hath offered his supplications to Thee, and hath
been assured of Thy pardon and forgiveness. He hath abandoned this mortal
life and hath flown to the kingdom of immortality, yearning for the favour
of meeting Thee.

O Lord, glorify his station, shelter him under the pavilion of Thy supreme
mercy, cause him to enter Thy glorious paradise, and perpetuate his
existence in Thine exalted rose garden, that he may plunge into the sea of
light in the world of mysteries.

Verily, Thou art the Generous, the Powerful, the Forgiver and the
Bestower.

O thou assured soul, thou maidservant of God...! Be not grieved at the
death of thy respected husband. He hath, verily, attained the meeting of
his Lord at the seat of Truth in the presence of the potent King. Do not
suppose that thou hast lost him. The veil shall be lifted and thou shalt
behold his face illumined in the Supreme Concourse. Just as God, the
Exalted, hath said, 'Him will we surely quicken to a happy life.' Supreme
importance should be attached, therefore, not to this first creation but
rather to the future life.





166: O SERVANT OF BAHA! BE SELF-SACRIFICING IN THE PATH ...


O servant of Baha! Be self-sacrificing in the path of God, and wing thy
flight unto the heavens of the love of the Abha Beauty, for any movement
animated by love moveth from the periphery to the centre, from space to
the Day-Star of the universe. Perchance thou deemest this to be difficult,
but I tell thee that such cannot be the case, for when the motivating and
guiding power is the divine force of magnetism it is possible, by its aid,
to traverse time and space easily and swiftly. Glory be upon the people of
Baha.





167: THOU HADST ASKED ABOUT FATE, PREDESTINATION AND ...


Thou hadst asked about fate, predestination and will. Fate and
predestination consist in the necessary and indispensable relationships
which exist in the realities of things. These relationships have been
placed in the realities of existent beings through the power of creation
and every incident is a consequence of the necessary relationship. For
example, God hath created a relation between the sun and the terrestrial
globe that the rays of the sun should shine and the soil should yield.
These relationships constitute predestination, and the manifestation
thereof in the plane of existence is fate. Will is that active force which
controlleth these relationships and these incidents. Such is the epitome
of the explanation of fate and predestination. I have no time for a
detailed explanation. Ponder over this; the reality of fate,
predestination and will shall be made manifest.





168: O THOU LADY OF THE KINGDOM! PRAISE THOU GOD ...


O thou lady of the Kingdom! Praise thou God that in this age, the age of
the dispensation of Baha'u'llah, thou hast been awakened, hast been made
aware of the Manifestation of the Lord of Hosts. All the people of the
world are buried in the graves of nature, or are slumbering, heedless and
unaware. Just as Christ saith: 'I may come when you are not aware. The
coming of the Son of Man is like the coming of a thief into a house, the
owner of which is utterly unaware.'

In brief, my hope is that from the bounties of Baha'u'llah, thou mayest
daily advance in the Kingdom, that thou mayest become a heavenly angel,
confirmed by the breaths of the Holy Spirit, and mayest erect a structure
that shall eternally remain firm and unshakeable....

These days are very precious; grasp the present opportunity and ignite a
candle that shall never be extinguished, and which shall pour out its
light eternally illuminating the world of mankind!





169: O YE TWO PATIENT SOULS! YOUR LETTER WAS RECEIVED. ...


O ye two patient souls! Your letter was received. The death of that
beloved youth and his separation from you have caused the utmost sorrow
and grief; for he winged his flight in the flower of his age and the bloom
of his youth to the heavenly nest. But he hath been freed from this
sorrow-stricken shelter and hath turned his face toward the everlasting
nest of the Kingdom, and, being delivered from a dark and narrow world,
hath hastened to the sanctified realm of light; therein lieth the
consolation of our hearts.

The inscrutable divine wisdom underlieth such heart-rending occurrences.
It is as if a kind gardener transferreth a fresh and tender shrub from a
confined place to a wide open area. This transfer is not the cause of the
withering, the lessening or the destruction of that shrub; nay, on the
contrary, it maketh it to grow and thrive, acquire freshness and delicacy,
become green and bear fruit. This hidden secret is well known to the
gardener, but those souls who are unaware of this bounty suppose that the
gardener, in his anger and wrath, hath uprooted the shrub. Yet to those
who are aware, this concealed fact is manifest, and this predestined
decree is considered a bounty. Do not feel grieved or disconsolate,
therefore, at the ascension of that bird of faithfulness; nay, under all
circumstances pray for that youth, supplicating for him forgiveness and
the elevation of his station.

I hope that ye will attain the utmost patience, composure and resignation,
and I entreat and implore at the Threshold of Oneness, begging for
forgiveness and pardon. My hope from the infinite bounties of God is that
He may shelter this dove of the garden of faith, and cause him to abide on
the branch of the Supreme Concourse, that he may sing in the best of
melodies the praise and glorification of the Lord of Names and Attributes.





170: O THOU SEEKER OF THE KINGDOM! THY LETTER WAS ...


O thou seeker of the Kingdom! Thy letter was received. Thou hast written
of the severe calamity that hath befallen thee--the death of thy respected
husband. That honourable man hath been so subjected to the stress and
strain of this world that his greatest wish was for deliverance from it.
Such is this mortal abode: a storehouse of afflictions and suffering. It
is ignorance that binds man to it, for no comfort can be secured by any
soul in this world, from monarch down to the most humble commoner. If once
this life should offer a man a sweet cup, a hundred bitter ones will
follow; such is the condition of this world. The wise man, therefore, doth
not attach himself to this mortal life and doth not depend upon it; at
some moments, even, he eagerly wisheth for death that he may thereby be
freed from these sorrows and afflictions. Thus it is seen that some, under
extreme pressure of anguish, have committed suicide.

As to thy husband, rest assured. He will be immersed in the ocean of
pardon and forgiveness and will become the recipient of bounty and favour.
Strive thine utmost to give his child a Baha'i training so that when he
attaineth maturity he may be merciful, illumined and heavenly.





171: O THOU BELOVED MAIDSERVANT OF GOD, ALTHOUGH ...


O thou beloved maidservant of God, although the loss of a son is indeed
heart-breaking and beyond the limits of human endurance, yet one who
knoweth and understandeth is assured that the son hath not been lost but,
rather, hath stepped from this world into another, and she will find him
in the divine realm. That reunion shall be for eternity, while in this
world separation is inevitable and bringeth with it a burning grief.

Praise be unto God that thou hast faith, art turning thy face toward the
everlasting Kingdom and believest in the existence of a heavenly world.
Therefore be thou not disconsolate, do not languish, do not sigh, neither
wail nor weep; for agitation and mourning deeply affect his soul in the
divine realm.

That beloved child addresseth thee from the hidden world: 'O thou kind
Mother, thank divine Providence that I have been freed from a small and
gloomy cage and, like the birds of the meadows, have soared to the divine
world--a world which is spacious, illumined, and ever gay and jubilant.
Therefore, lament not, O Mother, and be not grieved; I am not of the lost,
nor have I been obliterated and destroyed. I have shaken off the mortal
form and have raised my banner in this spiritual world. Following this
separation is everlasting companionship. Thou shalt find me in the heaven
of the Lord, immersed in an ocean of light.'





172: PRAISE BE TO GOD, THY HEART IS ENGAGED IN THE ...


Praise be to God, thy heart is engaged in the commemoration of God, thy
soul is gladdened by the glad tidings of God and thou art absorbed in
prayer. The state of prayer is the best of conditions, for man is then
associating with God. Prayer verily bestoweth life, particularly when
offered in private and at times, such as midnight, when freed from daily
cares.





173: THOSE SOULS THAT, IN THIS DAY, ENTER THE DIVINE ...


Those souls that, in this day, enter the divine kingdom and attain
everlasting life, although materially dwelling on earth, yet in reality
soar in the realm of heaven. Their bodies may linger on earth but their
spirits travel in the immensity of space. For as thoughts widen and become
illumined, they acquire the power of flight and transport man to the
kingdom of God.





174: O YE SPIRITUAL FRIENDS OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA! THE LETTER ...


O ye spiritual friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha! The letter ye had written hath
been noted; its contents were most pleasing and bespoke your firmness and
steadfastness in the Cause of God.

That Assembly resteth in the sheltering shade of the Lord of all bounties,
and it is my hope that, as beseemeth that body, it will be favoured and
invigorated by the breathings of the Holy Spirit, and that day by day ye
will love God in ever greater measure, and become more tightly bound to
the Beauty that abideth forever, to Him Who is the Light of the world. For
love of God and spiritual attraction do cleanse and purify the human heart
and dress and adorn it with the spotless garment of holiness; and once the
heart is entirely attached to the Lord, and bound over to the Blessed
Perfection, then will the grace of God be revealed.

This love is not of the body but completely of the soul. And those souls
whose inner being is lit by the love of God are even as spreading rays of
light, and they shine out like stars of holiness in a pure and crystalline
sky. For true love, real love, is the love for God, and this is sanctified
beyond the notions and imaginings of men.

Let God's beloved, each and every one, be the essence of purity, the very
life of holiness, so that in every country they may become famed for their
sanctity, independence of spirit, and meekness. Let them be cheered by
draughts from the eternal cup of love for God, and make merry as they
drink from the wine-vaults of Heaven. Let them behold the Blessed Beauty,
and feel the flame and rapture of that meeting, and be struck dumb with
awe and wonder. This is the station of the sincere; this is the way of the
loyal; this is the brightness that shineth on the faces of those nigh unto
God.

Wherefore must the friends of God, with utter sanctity, with one accord,
rise up in the spirit, in unity with one another, to such a degree that
they will become even as one being and one soul. On such a plane as this,
physical bodies play no part, rather doth the spirit take over and rule;
and when its power encompasseth all then is spiritual union achieved.
Strive ye by day and night to cultivate your unity to the fullest degree.
Let your thoughts dwell on your own spiritual development, and close your
eyes to the deficiencies of other souls. Act ye in such wise, showing
forth pure and goodly deeds, and modesty and humility, that ye will cause
others to be awakened.

Never is it the wish of 'Abdu'l-Baha to see any being hurt, nor will He
make anyone to grieve; for man can receive no greater gift than this, that
he rejoice another's heart. I beg of God that ye will be bringers of joy,
even as are the angels in Heaven.





175: MORTAL CHARM SHALL FADE AWAY, ROSES SHALL GIVE ...


Mortal charm shall fade away, roses shall give way to thorns, and beauty
and youth shall live their day and be no more. But that which eternally
endureth is the Beauty of the True One, for its splendour perisheth not
and its glory lasteth for ever; its charm is all-powerful and its
attraction infinite. Well is it then with that countenance that reflecteth
the splendour of the Light of the Beloved One! The Lord be praised, thou
hast been illumined with this Light, hast acquired the pearl of true
knowledge, and hast spoken the Word of Truth.





176: O THOU WHO ART ATTRACTED TO THE KINGDOM OF ...


O thou who art attracted to the Kingdom of God! Every soul seeketh an
object and cherisheth a desire, and day and night striveth to attain his
aim. One craveth riches, another thirsteth for glory and still another
yearneth for fame, for art, for prosperity and the like. Yet finally all
are doomed to loss and disappointment. One and all they leave behind them
all that is theirs and empty-handed hasten to the realm beyond, and all
their labours shall be in vain. To dust they shall all return, denuded,
depressed, disheartened and in utter despair.

But, praised be the Lord, thou art engaged in that which secureth for thee
a gain that shall eternally endure; and that is naught but thine
attraction to the Kingdom of God, thy faith, and thy knowledge, the
enlightenment of thine heart, and thine earnest endeavour to promote the
Divine Teachings.

Verily this gift is imperishable and this wealth is a treasure from on
high!





177: O LIVING FLAME OF HEAVENLY LOVE! THINE HEART ...


O living flame of heavenly love! Thine heart hath been so fired with the
love of God that from ten thousand leagues afar its warmth and radiance
may be felt and seen. The fire lit by mortal hand imparteth light and
warmth to but a little space, whereas that sacred flame which the Hand of
God hath kindled, though burning in the east, will set aflame the west and
give warmth to both the north and the south; nay, it shall rise from this
world to glow with the hottest flame in the realms on high, flooding with
light the Kingdom of eternal glory.

Happy art thou to have obtained so heavenly a gift. Blessed art thou to be
favoured with His divine bestowals.

The glory of God rest upon thee and upon them that hold fast unto the sure
handle of His Will and holy Covenant.





178: O MAIDSERVANT OF GOD! THY LETTER DATED 9 ...


O maidservant of God! Thy letter dated 9 December 1918 was received. Its
contents were noted. Never lose thy trust in God. Be thou ever hopeful,
for the bounties of God never cease to flow upon man. If viewed from one
perspective they seem to decrease, but from another they are full and
complete. Man is under all conditions immersed in a sea of God's
blessings. Therefore, be thou not hopeless under any circumstances, but
rather be firm in thy hope.

Attendance at the gatherings of the friends is specifically to keep them
alert, vigilant, loving and attracted to the divine Kingdom.

If thou hast a full and eager desire to travel to Phillsburg, Montana,
thou art permitted, perchance thou mayest be able to ignite a candle amid
that group of miners and may make them awake and vigilant so that they may
turn to God and may acquire a share from the Bounty of the divine Kingdom.





179: STRIVE AS MUCH AS YE CAN TO TURN WHOLLY TOWARD ...


Strive as much as ye can to turn wholly toward the Kingdom, that ye may
acquire innate courage and ideal power.





180: I HOPE THAT IN THIS NETHER WORLD THOU SHALT ATTAIN ...


I hope that in this nether world thou shalt attain unto heavenly light,
thou wilt free the souls from the gloom of nature, which is the animal
kingdom, and cause them to reach lofty stations in the human kingdom.
Today all people are immersed in the world of nature. That is why thou
dost see jealousy, greed, the struggle for survival, deception, hypocrisy,
tyranny, oppression, disputes, strife, bloodshed, looting and pillaging,
which all emanate from the world of nature. Few are those who have been
freed from this darkness, who have ascended from the world of nature to
the world of man, who have followed the divine Teachings, have served the
world of humanity, are resplendent, merciful, illumined and like unto a
rose garden. Strive thine utmost to become godlike, characterized with His
attributes, illumined and merciful, that thou mayest be freed from every
bond and become attached at heart to the Kingdom of the incomparable Lord.
This is Baha'i bounty, and this is heavenly light.





181: REGARDING THE STATEMENT IN THE HIDDEN WORDS, ...


Regarding the statement in The Hidden Words, that man must renounce his
own self, the meaning is that he must renounce his inordinate desires, his
selfish purposes and the promptings of his human self, and seek out the
holy breathings of the spirit, and follow the yearnings of his higher
self, and immerse himself in the sea of sacrifice, with his heart fixed
upon the beauty of the All-Glorious.

As for the reference in The Hidden Words regarding the Covenant entered
into on Mount Paran, this signifieth that in the sight of God the past,
the present and the future are all one and the same--whereas, relative to
man, the past is gone and forgotten, the present is fleeting, and the
future is within the realm of hope. And it is a basic principle of the Law
of God that in every Prophetic Mission, He entereth into a Covenant with
all believers--a Covenant that endureth until the end of that Mission,
until the promised day when the Personage stipulated at the outset of the
Mission is made manifest. Consider Moses, He Who conversed with God.
Verily, upon Mount Sinai, Moses entered into a Covenant regarding the
Messiah, with all those souls who would live in the day of the Messiah.
And those souls, although they appeared many centuries after Moses, were
nevertheless--so far as the Covenant, which is outside time, was
concerned--present there with Moses. The Jews, however, were heedless of
this and remembered it not, and thus they suffered a great and clear loss.

As to the reference in the Arabic Hidden Words that the human being must
become detached from self, here too the meaning is that he should not seek
out anything whatever for his own self in this swiftly-passing life, but
that he should cut the self away, that is, he should yield up the self and
all its concerns on the field of martyrdom, at the time of the coming of
the Lord.





182: O YE WHO ARE HOLDING FAST UNTO THE COVENANT AND ...


O ye who are holding fast unto the Covenant and Testament! This day, from
the realms of the All-Glorious, from the Kingdom of Holiness where
hosannas of glorification and praise rise up, the Company on high direct
their gaze upon you. Whensoever their gaze lighteth upon gatherings of
those who are steadfast in the Covenant and Testament, then do they utter
their cry, 'Glad tidings! Glad tidings!' Then, exulting, do they lift up
their voices, and shout, 'O ye spiritual communion! O ye gathering of God!
Blessed are ye! Glad tidings be unto you! Bright be your faces, and be ye
of good cheer, for ye cling to the Covenant of the Beloved of all the
worlds, ye are on fire with the wine of His Testament. Ye have plighted
your troth to the Ancient of Days, ye have drunk deep from the chalice of
loyalty. Ye have guarded and defended the Cause of God; ye have not been a
cause of dividing up His Word; ye have not brought His Faith low, but have
striven to glorify His Holy Name; ye have not allowed the Blessed Cause to
be exposed to the derision of the people. Ye have not permitted the
Designated Station to be humbled, nor been willing to see the Centre of
Authority discredited or exposed to mockery and persecution. Ye have
striven to keep the Word whole and one. Ye have passed through the portals
of mercy. Ye have not let the Blessed Beauty slip from your minds, to fade
unremembered.'

The Glory rest upon you.





183: O THOU DAUGHTER OF THE KINGDOM! THY LETTER WAS ...


O thou daughter of the Kingdom! Thy letter was received. It was like the
melody of the divine nightingale, whose song delighteth the hearts. This
is because its contents indicated faith, assurance and firmness in the
Covenant and the Testament. Today the dynamic power of the world of
existence is the power of the Covenant which like unto an artery pulsateth
in the body of the contingent world and protecteth Baha'i unity.

The Baha'is are commanded to establish the oneness of mankind; if they
cannot unite around one point how will they be able to bring about the
unity of mankind?

The purpose of the Blessed Beauty in entering into this Covenant and
Testament was to gather all existent beings around one point so that the
thoughtless souls, who in every cycle and generation have been the cause
of dissension, may not undermine the Cause. He hath, therefore, commanded
that whatever emanateth from the Centre of the Covenant is right and is
under His protection and favour, while all else is error.

Praise be to God, thou art firm in the Covenant and the Testament.





184: O YE BLESSED SOULS! ALTHOUGH YE ARE UNDERGOING ...


O ye blessed souls! Although ye are undergoing crucial tests in view of
the repeated and assiduous attempts of some people to shake the faith of
the friends in Los Angeles, yet ye are under the guarding eye of the
bounty of Baha'u'llah and are assisted by legions of angels.

Walk, therefore, with a sure step and engage with the utmost assurance and
confidence in the promulgation of the divine fragrances, the glorification
of the Word of God and firmness in the Covenant. Rest ye assured that if a
soul ariseth in the utmost perseverance and raiseth the Call of the
Kingdom and resolutely promulgateth the Covenant, be he an insignificant
ant he shall be enabled to drive away the formidable elephant from the
arena, and if he be a feeble moth he shall cut to pieces the plumage of
the rapacious vulture.

Endeavour, therefore, that ye may scatter and disperse the army of doubt
and of error with the power of the holy utterances. This is my exhortation
and this is my counsel. Do not quarrel with anybody, and shun every form
of dispute. Utter the Word of God. If he accepteth it the desired purpose
is attained, and if he turneth away leave him to himself and trust to God.

Such is the attribute of those who are firm in the Covenant.





185: O YE FRIENDS AND MAIDSERVANTS OF THE MERCIFUL! ...


O ye friends and maidservants of the Merciful! From the Spiritual Assembly
of Los Angeles a letter hath been received. It was indicative of the fact
that the blessed souls in California, like unto an immovable mountain, are
withstanding the gale of violation, have, like unto blessed trees, been
planted in the soil of the Covenant and are most firm and steadfast. The
hope is entertained, therefore, that through the blessings of the Sun of
Truth they may daily increase in their firmness and steadfastness. The
tests of every dispensation are in direct proportion to the greatness of
the Cause, and as heretofore such a manifest Covenant, written by the
Supreme Pen, hath not been entered upon, the tests are proportionately
more severe. These trials cause the feeble souls to waver while those who
are firm are not affected. These agitations of the violators are no more
than the foam of the ocean, which is one of its inseparable features; but
the ocean of the Covenant shall surge and shall cast ashore the bodies of
the dead, for it cannot retain them. Thus it is seen that the ocean of the
Covenant hath surged and surged until it hath thrown out the dead
bodies--souls that are deprived of the Spirit of God and are lost in
passion and self and are seeking leadership. This foam of the ocean shall
not endure and shall soon disperse and vanish, while the ocean of the
Covenant shall eternally surge and roar....

From the early days of creation down to the present time, throughout all
the divine dispensations, such a firm and explicit Covenant hath not been
entered upon. In view of this fact is it possible for this foam to remain
on the surface of the ocean of the Covenant? No, by God! The violators are
trampling upon their own dignity, are uprooting their own foundations and
are proud at being upheld by flatterers who exert a great effort to shake
the faith of feeble souls. But this action of theirs is of no consequence;
it is a mirage and not water, foam and not the sea, mist and not a cloud,
illusion and not reality. All this ye shall soon see.

Praise be to God, ye are firm and steadfast; be ye thankful that like unto
blessed trees ye are firmly planted in the soil of the Covenant. It is
sure that every firm one will grow, will yield new fruits and will
increase daily in freshness and grace. Reflect upon all the writings of
Baha'u'llah, whether epistles or prayers, and ye shall surely come across
a thousand passages wherein Baha'u'llah prays: 'O God! Bring to naught the
violators of the Covenant and defeat the oppressors of the Testament.' 'He
who denieth the Covenant and the Testament is rejected by God, and he who
remaineth firm and steadfast therein is favoured at the Threshold of
Oneness.' Such sayings and prayers abound, refer to them and ye shall
know.

Never be depressed. The more ye are stirred by violation, the more deepen
ye in firmness and steadfastness, and be assured that the divine hosts
shall conquer, for they are assured of the victory of the Abha Kingdom.
Throughout all regions the standard of firmness and steadfastness is
upraised and the flag of violation is debased, for only a few weak souls
have been led away by the flattery and the specious arguments of the
violators who are outwardly with the greatest care exhibiting firmness but
inwardly are engaged in agitating souls. Only a few who are the leaders of
those who stir and agitate are outwardly known as violators while the
rest, through subtle means, deceive the souls, for outwardly they assert
their firmness and steadfastness in the Covenant but when they come across
responsive ears they secretly sow the seeds of suspicion. The case of all
of them resembleth the violation of the Covenant by Judas Iscariot and his
followers. Consider: hath any result or trace remained after them? Not
even a name hath been left by his followers and although a number of Jews
sided with him it was as if he had no followers at all. This Judas
Iscariot who was the leader of the apostles betrayed Christ for thirty
pieces of silver. Take heed, O ye people of perception!

At this time these insignificant violators will surely betray the Centre
of the Covenant for the large sum which by every subtle means they have
begged. It is now thirty years since Baha'u'llah ascended, and in that
time these violators have striven with might and main. What have they
achieved? Under all conditions those who have remained firm in the
Covenant have conquered, while the violators have met defeat,
disappointment and dejection. After the ascension of 'Abdu'l-Baha, no
trace of them shall remain. These souls are ignorant of what will happen
and are proud of their own fancies.

In short, O ye friends of God and maidservants of the Merciful! The hand
of divine bounty hath placed upon your heads a jewelled crown, the
precious gems of which shall shine eternally over all regions. Appreciate
this bounty, loose your tongues in praise and thanksgiving, and engage in
the promulgation of the divine teachings, for this is the spirit of life
and the means of salvation.





186: O THOU WHO ART FIRM IN THE COVENANT! THREE ...


O thou who art firm in the Covenant! Three consecutive letters have been
received from thee. From their contents it became known that in Cleveland
the hearts are afflicted by the murky breaths of the Covenant-breakers and
harmony hath decreased among the friends. Gracious God! A hundred times it
hath been foretold that the violators are lying in ambush and by every
means desire to cause dissension among the friends so that this dissension
may end in violation of the Covenant. How is it that, notwithstanding this
warning, the friends have neglected this explicit statement?

The point at issue is clear, direct and of utmost brevity. Either
Baha'u'llah was wise, omniscient and aware of what would ensue, or was
ignorant and in error. He entered, by His supreme pen, into such a firm
Covenant and Testament with all the Baha'is, first with the A_gh_san, the
Afnan and His kindred, and commanded them to obey and turn toward Him. By
His supreme pen He hath explicitly declared that the object of the
following verse of the Kitab-i-Aqdas is the Most Great Branch:

'When the ocean of My presence hath ebbed and the Book of My Revelation is
ended, turn your faces toward Him Whom God hath purposed, Who hath
branched from this Ancient Root.' Its meaning briefly is this: that after
My ascension it is incumbent upon the A_gh_san, the Afnan and the kindred,
and all the friends of God, to turn their faces to Him Who hath branched
from the Ancient Root.

He also plainly saith in the Kitab-i-Aqdas: 'O ye people of the world!
When the Mystic Dove will have winged its flight from its Sanctuary of
Praise and sought its far-off goal, its hidden habitation, refer ye
whatsoever ye understand not in the Book to Him Who hath branched from
this mighty Stock.' Addressing all the people of the world He saith: When
the Mystic Dove flieth away from the orchard of praise to the Most Supreme
and Invisible Station--that is, when the Blessed Beauty turneth away from
the contingent world towards the invisible realm--refer whatever ye do not
understand in the Book to Him Who hath branched from the Ancient Root.
That is, whatever He saith is the very truth.

And in the Book of the Covenant He explicitly saith that the object of
this verse 'Who hath branched from this Ancient Root' is the Most Mighty
Branch. And He commandeth all the A_gh_san, the Afnan, the kindred and the
Baha'is to turn toward Him. Now, either one must say that the Blessed
Beauty hath made a mistake, or He must be obeyed. 'Abdu'l-Baha hath no
command for the people to obey save the diffusion of the fragrances of
God, the exaltation of His Word, the promulgation of the oneness of the
world of humanity, the establishment of universal peace, and other of the
commands of God. These are divine commands and have nothing to do with
'Abdu'l-Baha. Whoever wisheth may accept them, and anyone who rejecteth
them may do as he pleaseth.

Now some of the mischief-makers, with many stratagems, are seeking
leadership, and in order to reach this position they instil doubts among
the friends that they may cause differences, and that these differences
may result in their drawing a party to themselves. But the friends of God
must be awake and must know that the scattering of these doubts hath as
its motive personal desires and the achievement of leadership.

Do not disrupt Baha'i unity, and know that this unity cannot be maintained
save through faith in the Covenant of God.

Thou hast the desire to travel that thou mayest spread the fragrances of
God. This is highly suitable. Assuredly divine confirmations will assist
thee and the power of the Covenant and Testament will secure for thee
triumph and victory.





187: O THOU WHO ART FIRM IN THE COVENANT! THY LETTER ...


O thou who art firm in the Covenant! Thy letter was received. Thou hast
expressed satisfaction with the Convention, that this gathering hath been
the means of the elevation of the Cause of God and the demonstration of
the power of His Word. The greatness of the Cause will clear away these
differences and may be compared to health in the body of man which, when
established, cureth all disease and weakness. Our hope is that no trace of
opposition may remain; but some of the friends in America are restless in
their fresh ambitions and strive and seek under the ground and in the air
to discover anything that breedeth dissension.

Praise be to God, all such doors are closed in the Cause of Baha'u'llah
for a special authoritative Centre hath been appointed--a Centre that
solveth all difficulties and wardeth off all differences. The Universal
House of Justice, likewise, wardeth off all differences and whatever it
prescribeth must be accepted and he who transgresseth is rejected. But
this Universal House of Justice which is the Legislature hath not yet been
instituted.

Thus it is seen that no means for dissension hath been left, but carnal
desires are the cause of difference as it is the case with the violators.
These do not doubt the validity of the Covenant but selfish motives have
dragged them to this condition. It is not that they do not know what they
do--they are perfectly aware and still they exhibit opposition.

In short, the ocean of the Covenant is tumultuous and wide. It casteth
ashore the foam of violation and thus rest ye assured. Be engaged in the
furtherance of the Ma_sh_riqu'l-A_dh_kar and prepare the means for the
diffusion of the divine fragrances. Be not engaged in anything but this,
for otherwise thou shalt dissipate thine attention and the work will not
advance.





188: O YE THE CHERISHED LOVED ONES OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA! ...


O ye the cherished loved ones of 'Abdu'l-Baha! It is a long time now since
my inward ear hath heard any sweet melodies out of certain regions, or my
heart been gladdened; and this despite the fact that ye are ever present
in my thoughts and standing clearly visible before my sight. Filled to
overflowing is the goblet of my heart with the wine of the love I bear
you, and my yearning to set eyes upon you streameth like the spirit
through my arteries and veins. From this it is clear how great is my
affliction. At this time and throughout this tempest of calamities now
tossing its waves to high heaven, cruel and incessant darts are being
hurled against me from every point of the compass, and at every moment,
here in the Holy Land, terrifying news is received, and every day bringeth
its quota of horror. The Centre of Sedition had imagined that it needed
but his arrogant rebellion to bring down the Covenant and Testament in
ruins; it needed but this, so he thought, to turn the righteous away from
the Holy Will. Wherefore he sent out far and wide his leaflets of doubt,
devising many a secret scheme. Now he would cry out that God's edifice had
been subverted and His divine commands annulled, and that accordingly, the
Covenant and Testament was abolished. Again he would set himself to
sighing and groaning that he was being held a prisoner and was kept hungry
and thirsty day and night. Another day he would raise an uproar, saying
that the oneness of God had been denied, since another Manifestation had
been proclaimed, prior to the expiration of a thousand years.

When he saw that his calumnies had no effect, he gradually formed a plan
to incite a disturbance. He began stirring up mischief, and went knocking
at every door. He started making false accusations to the officials of the
Government. He approached some of the foreigners, made himself their
intimate, and together with them prepared a document and presented it to
the Seat of the Sultanate, bringing consternation to the authorities.
Among the many slanderous charges was this, that this hapless one had
raised up a standard of revolt, a flag bearing the words Ya Baha'u'l-Abha;
that I had paraded this throughout the countryside, to every city, town
and village, and even among the desert tribes, and had summoned all the
inhabitants to unite under this flag.

O my Lord, verily I seek refuge with Thee from the very thought of such an
act, which is contrary to all the commandments of Baha'u'llah, and which
would indeed be a mighty wrong that none but a grievous sinner would ever
perpetrate. For Thou hast made it incumbent upon us to obey the rulers and
kings.

Another of his slanders was that the Shrine on Mount Carmel was a fortress
that I had built strong and impregnable--this when the building under
construction compriseth six rooms--and that I had named it Medina the
Resplendent, while I had named the Holy Tomb(56) Mecca the Glorified. Yet
another of his calumnies was that I had established an independent
sovereignty, and that--God forbid! God forbid! God forbid!--I had summoned
all the believers to join me in this massive wrongdoing. How dire, O my
Lord, is his slander!

Yet again, he claimeth that since the Holy Shrine hath become a point
visited by pilgrims from all over the world, great damage will accrue to
this Government and people. He, the Centre of Sedition, averreth that he
himself hath had no hand in all these matters, that he is a Sunni of the
Sunnites and a devoted follower of Abu-Bakr and Umar, and regardeth
Baha'u'llah as only a pious man and a mystic; all these things, he saith,
were set afoot by this wronged one.

To be brief, a Commission of Investigation was appointed by the Sultan,
may the glory of his reign endure. The Commission journeyed hither and
immediately upon arrival betook themselves to the house of one of the
accusers. They then summoned the group who, working with my brother, had
prepared the accusatory document and asked them whether it was true. The
group explained the contents of the document, stated that everything they
had reported therein was nothing but the truth, and added further
accusations. Thus they functioned at one and the same time as plaintiffs,
witnesses, and judge.

The Commission hath now returned to the seat of the Caliphate, and reports
of a most frightful nature are coming in daily from that city. However,
praised be God, 'Abdu'l-Baha remaineth composed and unperturbed. To none
do I bear ill will because of this defamation. I have made all my affairs
conditioned upon His irresistible Will and I am waiting, indeed in perfect
happiness, to offer my life and prepared for whatever dire affliction may
be in store. Praise be to God, the loving believers also accept and remain
submissive to God's Will, content with it, radiantly acquiescent, offering
thanks.

The Centre of Sedition hath imagined that once the blood of this wronged
one is spilled out, once I have been cast away on the wide desert sands or
drowned in the Mediterranean Sea--nameless, gone without trace, with none
to tell of me--then would he at last have a field where he could urge his
steed ahead, and with his mallet of lies and doubts, hit hard at the polo
ball of his ambitions, and carry off the prize.

Far from it! For even if the sweet musk-scent of faithfulness should pass,
and leave no trace behind, who would be drawn by the stench of perfidy?
And even if some gazelle of heaven were to be ripped apart by dogs and
wolves, who would go running to seek out a ravening wolf? Even should the
day of the Mystic Nightingale draw to its close, who would ever lend his
ear to the raven's croak, or the cawing of the crow? What an empty
supposition is his! What a foolish presumption! 'Their works are like the
vapour in a desert which the thirsty dreameth to be water, until when he
cometh unto it, he findeth nothing.'(57)

O ye loved ones of God! Be ye firm of foot, and fixed of heart, and
through the power of the Blessed Beauty's help, stand ye committed to your
purpose. Serve ye the Cause of God. Face ye all nations of the world with
the constancy and the endurance of the people of Baha, that all men may be
astounded and ask how this could be, that your hearts are as well-springs
of confidence and faith, and as mines so rich in the love of God. Be ye
so, that ye shall neither fail nor falter on account of these tragedies in
the Holy Land; let not these dread events make you despondent. And if all
the believers be put to the sword, and only one be left, let that one cry
out in the name of the Lord and tell the joyous tidings; let that one rise
up and confront all the peoples of the earth.

Gaze ye not upon the dire happenings at this Illumined Spot. The Holy Land
is in danger at all times, and here, the tide of calamities is ever at the
flood; for this upraised call hath now been heard around the world, and
the fame of it hath gone forth to the ends of the earth. It is because of
this that foes, both from within and from without, have turned themselves
with subtlety and craft to spreading slander. It is clear that such a
place as this would be exposed to danger, for there is no defender here,
none to arise and take our side in the face of calumny: here are only a
few souls that are homeless, hapless, held captive in this stronghold. No
champion have they; there is none to succour them, none to ward off the
arrows of lies, the darts of defamation that are hurled against them: none
except God.

It behoveth you to ponder on all those well-beloved ones who hastened to
the holy field of sacrifice, those precious souls who offered up their
lives. Bear ye in mind what streams of sacred blood were poured away, how
many a righteous heart was commingled with its gore, how many a breast was
the target of tyranny's spear, how many a chaste body was ripped to
shreds. How then could it be right for us even to think of saving
ourselves! To curry favour with stranger or kin, and make a show of
compromise! Should we not, rather, take the pathway of the righteous, and
follow in the footsteps of those great ones gone before?

These few brief days shall pass away, this present life shall vanish from
our sight; the roses of this world shall be fresh and fair no more, the
garden of this earth's triumphs and delights shall droop and fade. The
spring season of life shall turn into the autumn of death, the bright joy
of palace halls give way to moonless dark within the tomb. And therefore
is none of this worth loving at all, and to this the wise will not anchor
his heart.

He who hath knowledge and power will rather seek out the glory of heaven,
and spiritual distinction, and the life that dieth not. And such a one
longeth to approach the sacred Threshold of God; for in the tavern of this
swiftly-passing world the man of God will not lie drunken, nor will he
even for a moment take his ease, nor stain himself with any fondness for
this earthly life.

Nay rather, the friends are stars in the high heavens of guidance,
celestial bodies in the skies of divine grace, who with all their powers
put the dark to flight. They break down the foundations of malevolence and
hate. They cherish but one desire for the world and all its peoples:
well-being and peace. By them, the ramparts of warfare and aggression are
battered down. They have truthfulness and honest dealing and friendship
for their goal, and kindness even toward a vicious foe; until at last they
change this prison of treachery, the world, into a mansion of utmost
trust, and turn this gaol-house of hatred and malevolence and spite, into
God's Paradise.

O ye loving friends! Strive ye with heart and soul to make this world the
mirror-image of the Kingdom, that this nether world may teem with the
blessings of the world of God, that the voices of the Company on high may
be raised in acclamation, and signs and tokens of the bounties and
bestowals of Baha'u'llah may encompass all the earth.

Jinab-i-'Amin hath expressed the greatest admiration for you honoured men
and enlightened women, naming and commending you each by each, telling at
length of the firmness and constancy ye all have shown, saying that, God
be praised, in all Persia the men and women are standing together,
straight, strong, unmoveable--a mighty edifice solidly raised up; and that
ye are engaged with love and joy in spreading abroad the sweet savours of
the Lord.

These were tidings of great joy, especially as they have reached me in
these days of extreme peril. For the dearest wish of this wronged one is
that the friends be spiritual of heart and illumined of mind, and once
this grace is granted me, calamity, however afflictive, is but bounty
pouring down upon me, like copious rain.

O God, my God! Thou seest me plunged in an ocean of anguish, held fast to
the fires of tyranny, and weeping in the darkness of the night. Sleepless
I toss and turn upon my bed, mine eyes straining to behold the morning
light of faithfulness and trust. I agonize even as a fish, its inward
parts afire as it leapeth about in terror upon the sand, yet I ever look
for Thy bestowals to appear from every side.

O God, my God! Make thou the believers in other lands to partake of Thine
abounding grace, deliver Thou, by Thine unfailing help and bounty, whoso
among Thy loved ones in the farthermost climes sigheth over the bitter
cruelty of his foe. O Lord, they are the captives of Thy love, the
prisoners taken by Thy troops. They are the birds that fly in the heavens
of Thy guidance, the whales that swim in the ocean of Thy bestowals, the
stars that sparkle on the horizon of Thy gifts. They are the defenders of
the fortress of Thy law. They are the banners of Thy remembrance amongst
men. They are the deep wells of Thy divine compassion, the fountains of
Thy favours, the well-springs of Thy grace.

Keep them ever in safety beneath Thine all-protecting eye. Assist them to
exalt Thy Word; make Thou their hearts to be constant in Thy love;
strengthen Thou their backs that they may serve Thee well; in servitude,
strengthen Thou their powers.

Spread Thou through them Thy sweet savours far and wide; expound through
them Thy Holy Writ; make known through them Thine Utterance; fulfil
through them Thy Words; through them pour out Thy mercy.

Thou art verily the Mighty, the Powerful. Thou art verily the Clement, the
Compassionate.





189: TODAY, EVERY WISE, VIGILANT AND FORESIGHTED PERSON ...


Today, every wise, vigilant and foresighted person is awakened, and to him
are unveiled the mysteries of the future which show that nothing save the
power of the Covenant is able to stir and move the heart of humanity, just
as the New and Old Testaments propounded throughout all regions the Cause
of Christ and were the pulsating power in the body of the human world. A
tree that hath a root shall bear fruit, while the tree that hath none, no
matter how high and hardy it may be, will eventually wither, perish and
become but a log fit for the fire.

The Covenant of God is like unto a vast and fathomless ocean. A billow
shall rise and surge therefrom and shall cast ashore all accumulated foam.

Praise be to God that the highest wish entertained by heedful souls is the
exaltation of the Word of God and the propagation of divine fragrances.
This is, verily, the secure and firm foundation.

Now, like unto the morn, the light of the Sun of Truth hath been shed
abroad. Effort must be made that slumbering souls may be awakened, the
heedless become vigilant, and that the divine teachings, which constitute
the spirit of this age, may reach the ears of the people of the world, may
be propagated in the press and set forth with brilliance and eloquence in
the assemblages of men.

One's conduct must be like the conduct of Paul, and one's faith similar to
that of Peter. This musk-scented breeze shall perfume the nostrils of the
people of the world, and this spirit shall resuscitate the dead.

The offensive odour of violation hath temporarily arrested the onward
movement of the Cause, for otherwise the divine teachings, like unto the
rays of the sun, would immediately spread and permeate all regions.

Thou intendest to print and publish the addresses of 'Abdu'l-Baha which
thou hast compiled. This is indeed very advisable. This service shall
cause thee to acquire an effulgent face in the Abha Kingdom, and shall
make thee the object of the praise and gratitude of the friends in the
East as well as in the West. But it is to be undertaken with the utmost
care, so that the exact text may be reproduced and will exclude all
deviations and corruptions committed by former translators.





190: THOU SEEST ME, O MY GOD, BOWED DOWN IN LOWLINESS, ...


Thou seest me, O my God, bowed down in lowliness, humbling myself before
Thy commandments, submitting to Thy sovereignty, trembling at the might of
Thy dominion, fleeing from Thy wrath, entreating Thy grace, relying upon
Thy forgiveness, shaking with awe at Thy fury. I implore Thee with a
throbbing heart, with streaming tears and a yearning soul, and in complete
detachment from all things, to make Thy lovers as rays of light across Thy
realms, and to aid Thy chosen servants to exalt Thy Word, that their faces
may turn beauteous and bright with splendour, that their hearts may be
filled with mysteries, and that every soul may lay down its burden of sin.
Guard them then from the aggressor, from him who hath become a shameless
and blasphemous doer of wrong.

Verily Thy lovers thirst, O my Lord; lead them to the wellspring of bounty
and grace. Verily, they hunger; send down unto them Thy heavenly table.
Verily, they are naked; robe them in the garments of learning and
knowledge.

Heroes are they, O my Lord, lead them to the field of battle. Guides are
they, make them to speak out with arguments and proofs. Ministering
servants are they, cause them to pass round the cup that brimmeth with the
wine of certitude. O my God, make them to be songsters that carol in fair
gardens, make them lions that couch in the thickets, whales that plunge in
the vasty deep.

Verily Thou art He of abounding grace. There is none other God save Thee,
the Mighty, the Powerful, the Ever-Bestowing.

O ye my spiritual friends! For some time now the pressures have been
severe, the restrictions as shackles of iron. This hapless wronged one was
left single and alone, for all the ways were barred. Friends were
forbidden access to me, the trusted were shut away, the foe compassed me
about, the evil watchers were fierce and bold. At every instant, fresh
affliction. At every breath, new anguish. Both kin and stranger on the
attack; indeed, one-time lovers, faithless and unpitying, were worse than
foes as they rose up to harass me. None was there to defend 'Abdu'l-Baha,
no helper, no protector, no ally, no champion. I was drowning in a
shoreless sea, and ever beating upon my ears were the raven-croaking
voices of the disloyal.

At every daybreak, triple darkness. At eventide, stone-hearted tyranny.
And never a moment's peace, and never any balm for the spear's red wounds.
From moment to moment, word would come of my exile to the Fezzan sands;
from hour to hour, I was to be cast into the endless sea. Now they would
say that these homeless wanderers were ruined at last; again that the
cross would soon be put to use. This wasted frame of mine was to be made
the target for bullet or arrow; or again, this failing body was to be cut
to ribbons by the sword.

Our alien acquaintances could not contain themselves for joy, and our
treacherous friends exulted. 'Praise be to God,' one would exclaim, 'Here
is our dream come true.' And another, 'God be thanked, our spear-head
found the heart.'

Affliction beat upon this captive like the heavy rains of spring, and the
victories of the malevolent swept down in a relentless flood, and still
'Abdu'l-Baha remained happy and serene, and relied on the grace of the
All-Merciful. That pain, that anguish, was a paradise of all delights;
those chains were the necklace of a king on a throne in heaven. Content
with God's will, utterly resigned, my heart surrendered to whatever fate
had in store, I was happy. For a boon companion, I had great joy.

Finally a time came when the friends turned inconsolable, and abandoned
all hope. It was then the morning dawned, and flooded all with unending
light. The towering clouds were scattered, the dismal shadows fled. In
that instant the fetters fell away, the chains were lifted off the neck of
this homeless one and hung round the neck of the foe. Those dire straits
were changed to ease, and on the horizon of God's bounties the sun of hope
rose up. All this was out of God's grace and His bestowals.

And yet, from one point of view, this wanderer was saddened and
despondent. For what pain, in the time to come, could I seek comfort? At
the news of what granted wish could I rejoice? There was no more tyranny,
no more affliction, no tragical events, no tribulations. My only joy in
this swiftly-passing world was to tread the stony path of God and to
endure hard tests and all material griefs. For otherwise, this earthly
life would prove barren and vain, and better would be death. The tree of
being would produce no fruit; the sown field of this existence would yield
no harvest. Thus it is my hope that once again some circumstance will make
my cup of anguish to brim over, and that beauteous Love, that Slayer of
souls, will dazzle the beholders again. Then will this heart be blissful,
this soul be blessed.

O Divine Providence! Lift to Thy lovers' lips a cup brimful of anguish. To
the yearners on Thy pathway, make sweetness but a sting, and poison
honey-sweet. Set Thou our heads for ornaments on the points of spears.
Make Thou our hearts the targets for pitiless arrows and darts. Raise Thou
this withered soul to life on the martyr's field, make Thou his faded
heart to drink the draught of tyranny, and thus grow fresh and fair once
more. Make him to be drunk with the wine of Thine Eternal Covenant, make
him a reveller holding high his cup. Help him to fling away his life;
grant that for Thy sake, he be offered up.

Thou art the Mighty, the Powerful. Thou art the Knower, the Seer, the
Hearer.





191: O THOU WHO HAST BEEN SORE AFFLICTED ON THE PATHWAY ...


O thou who hast been sore afflicted on the pathway of the Covenant!
Anguish and torment, when suffered on the pathway of the Lord, Him of
manifest signs, is only favour and grace; affliction is but mercy, and
grief a gift from God. Poison is sugar on the tongue, and wrath is
kindness, nourishing the soul.

Then praise thou Him, the loving Provider, for having ordained this dire
affliction, which is but bounty unalloyed.

If I, like Abraham, through flames must go,
Or yet like John(58) a bloodstained road must run;
If, Joseph-like, Thou'd cast me in a well,
Or shut me up within a prison cell--
Or make me e'en as poor as Mary's Son--
I will not go from Thee,
But ever stand
My soul and body bowed to Thy command.





192: TODAY, THE LORD OF HOSTS IS THE DEFENDER OF THE ...


Today, the Lord of Hosts is the defender of the Covenant, the forces of
the Kingdom protect it, heavenly souls tender their services, and heavenly
angels promulgate and spread it broadcast. If it is considered with
insight, it will be seen that all the forces of the universe, in the last
analysis serve the Covenant. In the future it shall be made evident and
manifest. In view of this fact, what can these weak and feeble souls
achieve? Hardy plants that are destitute of roots and are deprived of the
outpourings of the cloud of mercy will not last. What then may be expected
from feeble weeds?...





193: IT IS DAYBREAK, AND FROM THE RISING-POINT OF THE ...


It is daybreak, and from the rising-point of the invisible realms of God,
the light of unity is dawning; and streaming and beating down from the
hidden world of the Kingdom of oneness there cometh a flood of abounding
grace. Glad tidings of the Kingdom are sounding from every side, and
wafting in from every direction are the first morning signs of the
exalting of God's Word and the upraising of His Cause. The word of unity
is spreading, the verses of oneness are being sung, the sea of God's
bestowals is tossing high its waves, and in plunging cataracts His
blessings are pouring down.

The confirmations of Him Who is the Ever-Forgiving have wrapped every
clime in light, the armies of the Company on high are rushing forward to
do battle at the side of the friends of the Lord and carry the day, the
fame of the Ancient Beauty--may my life be offered up for His loved
ones--resoundeth from pole to pole and word of the Holy Cause hath spread
to east and west.

All these things bring joy to the heart, and yet 'Abdu'l-Baha is sunk deep
in an ocean of grief, and pain and anguish have so affected my limbs and
members that utter weakness hath overtaken my whole body. Note ye that
when, singly and alone, with none to second me, I upraised the call of God
around the world, the peoples thereof rose up to oppose, to dispute, to
deny. On one side, it is clear how the religionists of the past have
mounted their attack at all points; again, there cometh word of the lying
mockers and the extreme limits to which they are going to pull out the
Divine Tree by the roots. What malicious and slanderous charges they bring
against the Ancient Beauty, what pamphlets filled with wicked and depraved
allegations they are busily writing and spreading against the Most Great
Name! And now, in deepest secrecy, they are straining every nerve to deal
this Faith a fearsome blow.

Again have the prideful devised all manner of plots and schemes to
completely disable the Cause of God and to erase the name of 'Abdu'l-Baha
from the Book of Life.

And now, added to all these tribulations, these miseries, these enemy
attacks, there hath arisen a dust cloud of ill will amongst the believers
themselves. This in spite of the fact that the Cause of the Ancient Beauty
is the very essence of love, the very channel of oneness, existing only
that all may become the waves of one sea, and bright stars of the same
endless sky, and pearls within the shell of singleness, and gleaming
jewels quarried from the mines of unity; that they may become servants one
to another, adore one another, bless one another, praise one another; that
each one may loose his tongue and extol the rest without exception, each
one voice his gratitude to all the rest; that all should lift up their
eyes to the horizon of glory, and remember that they are linked to the
Holy Threshold; that they should see nothing but good in one another, hear
nothing but praise of one another, and speak no word of one another save
only to praise.

There are indeed certain ones who tread this way of righteousness, and God
be thanked, these are strengthened and supported by heavenly power in
every land. But others have not arisen as they ought to this gloried and
exalted station, and this doth lay upon the heart of 'Abdu'l-Baha a heavy
burden of grief, of inconceivable grief. For no tempest more perilous than
this could ever assail the Cause of God, nor could anything else so
diminish the influence of His Word.

It behoveth all the beloved of God to become as one, to gather together
under the protection of a single flag, to stand for a uniform body of
opinion, to follow one and the same pathway, to hold fast to a single
resolve. Let them forget their divergent theories and put aside their
conflicting views since, God be praised, our purpose is one, our goal is
one. We are the servants of one Threshold, we all draw our nourishment
from the same one Source, we all are gathered in the shade of the same
high Tabernacle, we all are sheltered under the one celestial Tree.

O beloved of the Lord! If any soul speak ill of an absent one, the only
result will clearly be this: he will dampen the zeal of the friends and
tend to make them indifferent. For backbiting is divisive, it is the
leading cause among the friends of a disposition to withdraw. If any
individual should speak ill of one who is absent, it is incumbent on his
hearers, in a spiritual and friendly manner, to stop him, and say in
effect: would this detraction serve any useful purpose? Would it please
the Blessed Beauty, contribute to the lasting honour of the friends,
promote the holy Faith, support the Covenant, or be of any possible
benefit to any soul? No, never! On the contrary, it would make the dust to
settle so thickly on the heart that the ears would hear no more, and the
eyes would no longer behold the light of truth.

If, however, a person setteth about speaking well of another, opening his
lips to praise another, he will touch an answering chord in his hearers
and they will be stirred up by the breathings of God. Their hearts and
souls will rejoice to know that, God be thanked, here is a soul in the
Faith who is a focus of human perfections, a very embodiment of the
bounties of the Lord, one whose tongue is eloquent, and whose face
shineth, in whatever gathering he may be, one who hath victory upon his
brow, and who is a being sustained by the sweet savours of God.

Now which is the better way? I swear this by the beauty of the Lord:
whensoever I hear good of the friends, my heart filleth up with joy; but
whensoever I find even a hint that they are on bad terms one with another,
I am overwhelmed by grief. Such is the condition of 'Abdu'l-Baha. Then
judge from this where your duty lieth.

God be praised, wherever we turn, the Ancient Beauty hath opened wide the
gates of grace, and hath in unmistakable words announced glad tidings of
victory through the Lord's sustaining help. Through love hath He carried
off the hearts of the believers, and He hath entrusted their triumph to
the armies of the Concourse on high.

Now amidst all the peoples of the world must the beloved arise, with a
heart even as the day-star, a strong inward urge, a shining brow, a
musk-scented breath, a tongue speaking ever of God, an exposition
crystal-clear, a high resolve, a power born of heaven, a spiritual
character, a confirmation nothing short of the divine. Let them one and
all become as a splendour on the horizon of heaven, and in the skies of
the world a dazzling star. Let them be fruitful trees in the celestial
bowers, sweet-scented blooms in the divine gardens; let them be verses of
perfection on the page of the universe, words of oneness in the Book of
Life. This is the first age, and the early beginnings of the dispensation
of the Most Great Light, wherefore, within this century, virtues must be
acquired, goodly qualities must be perfected within this span of time. In
these very days the Abha Paradise must pitch its pavilions on the plains
of the world. The lights of reality must now be revealed, and the secrets
of God's bestowals must now be made known, and now must the olden grace
shine forth and this world change into the pleasure-ground of heaven, the
garden of God. And out of pure hearts, and through heavenly bounties, all
the perfections, qualities and attributes of the divine must now be made
manifest.

At all times doth 'Abdu'l-Baha supplicate and with tears entreat the
Almighty at the sacred Threshold, and crieth out:

O Thou kind Lord! We are servants of Thy Threshold, taking shelter at Thy
holy Door. We seek no refuge save only this strong pillar, turn nowhere
for a haven but unto Thy safekeeping. Protect us, bless us, support us,
make us such that we shall love but Thy good pleasure, utter only Thy
praise, follow only the pathway of truth, that we may become rich enough
to dispense with all save Thee, and receive our gifts from the sea of Thy
beneficence, that we may ever strive to exalt Thy Cause and to spread Thy
sweet savours far and wide, that we may become oblivious of self and
occupied only with Thee, and disown all else and be caught up in Thee.

O Thou Provider, O Thou Forgiver! Grant us Thy grace and loving-kindness,
Thy gifts and Thy bestowals, and sustain us, that we may attain our goal.
Thou art the Powerful, the Able, the Knower, the Seer; and verily Thou art
the Generous, and verily Thou art the All-Merciful, and verily Thou art
the Ever-Forgiving, He to Whom repentance is due, He Who forgiveth even
the most grievous of sins.





194: O YE THE SINCERE LOVED ONES OF THE ABHA BEAUTY! ...


O ye the sincere loved ones of the Abha Beauty! In these days the Cause of
God, the world over, is fast growing in power and, day by day, is
spreading further and further to the utmost bounds of the earth. Its
enemies, therefore, from all the kindreds and peoples of the world, are
growing aggressive, malevolent, envious and bitterly hostile. It is
incumbent upon the loved ones of God to exercise the greatest care and
prudence in all things, whether great or small, to take counsel together
and unitedly resist the onslaught of the stirrers up of strife and the
movers of mischief. They must endeavour to consort in a friendly spirit
with everyone, must follow moderation in their conduct, must have respect
and consideration one for another and show loving-kindness and tender
regard to all the peoples of the world. They must be patient and
long-suffering, that they may grow to become the divine magnets of the
Abha Kingdom and acquire the dynamic power of the hosts of the realm on
high.

The fleeting hours of man's life on earth pass swiftly by and the little
that still remaineth shall come to an end, but that which endureth and
lasteth for evermore is the fruit that man reapeth from his servitude at
the Divine Threshold. Behold the truth of this saying, how abundant and
glorious are the proofs thereof in the world of being!

The glory of glories rest upon the people of Baha!





195: O THOU EXALTED BOUGH OF THE DIVINE LOTE-TREE! ...


O thou exalted bough of the divine Lote-Tree! ...When thou art disdained
and rejected by the wicked doers be not cast down; and at the power and
stiffneckedness of the presumptuous be neither vexed nor sick at heart;
for such is the way of heedless souls, from time out of mind. 'O the
misery of men! No Messenger cometh unto them but they laugh Him to
scorn!'(59)

Indeed, the attacks and the obstructiveness of the ignorant but cause the
Word of God to be exalted, and spread His signs and tokens far and wide.
Were it not for this opposition by the disdainful, this obduracy of the
slanderers, this shouting from the pulpits, this crying and wailing of
great and small alike, these accusations of unbelief levelled by the
ignorant, this uproar from the foolish--how could news of the advent of the
Primal Point and the bright dawning of the Day-Star of Baha ever have
reached to east and west? How else could the planet have been rocked from
pole to pole? How else could Persia have become the focal point of
scattering splendours, and Asia Minor the radiating heart of the beauty of
the Lord? However else could the flame of the Manifestation have spread
into the south? By what means could the cries of God have been heard in
the far north? How else could His summons have been heard in the
continents of America and of Africa the dark? How else could the cock-crow
of Heaven have penetrated those ears? How else could the sweet parrots of
India have come upon this sugar, or nightingales have lifted up their
warblings out of the land of 'Iraq? What else could set the east and west
to dancing, how else could this Consecrated Spot become the throne of the
Beauty of God? How else could Sinai behold this burning brightness, how
could the Advent's flame adorn that mount? How else could the Holy Land be
made the footstool of God's beauty, and the holy vale of Towa(60) become
the site of excellence and grace, the sacred spot where Moses put off His
shoes? How could the breaths of heaven be carried across the Vale of
Holiness, how could the sweet-scented, airy streams that blow out of the
Abha gardens ever be perceived by those that dwell on the Verdant Isle?
How else could the pledges of the Prophets, the joyous tidings of the holy
Seers of old, the stirring promises given unto this Sacred Place by the
Manifestations of God, ever have been fulfilled?

How else could the Tree of Anisa have been planted here, the flag of the
Testament be flown, the intoxicating cup of the Covenant be lifted to
these lips? All these blessings and bestowals, the very means of
proclaiming the Faith, have come about through the scorn of the ignorant,
the opposition of the foolish, the stubbornness of the dull-witted, the
violence of the aggressor. Had it not been for these things, the news of
the Bab's advent would not, to this day, have reached even into lands hard
by. Wherefore we should never grieve over the blindness of the unwitting,
the attacks of the foolish, the hostility of the low and base, the
heedlessness of the divines, the charges of infidelity brought against us
by the empty of mind. Such too was their way in ages past, nor would it be
thus if they were of those who know; but they are benighted, and they come
not close to understanding what is told them.(61)

Wherefore doth it befit thyself, an offshoot of the Holy Tree of God,
branched out from that mighty Trunk--and it behoveth ourselves as well--so
to burn, through the sustaining grace of the Ancient Beauty--may my life be
offered up for His Most Holy Shrine--with this kindled flame out of heaven,
that we will light the fire of God's love from pole to pole. Let us take
for our example the great and sacred Tree of the exalted Bab--may my life
be offered up for Him. Like Him let us bare our breasts to the shafts of
agony, like Him make our hearts to be targets for the spears decreed by
God. Let us, like candles, burn away; as moths, let us scorch our wings;
as the field larks, vent our plaintive cries; as the nightingales, burst
forth in lamentations.

Even as the clouds let us shed down tears, and as the lightning flashes
let us laugh at our coursings through east and west. By day, by night, let
us think but of spreading the sweet savours of God. Let us not keep on
forever with our fancies and illusions, with our analysing and
interpreting and circulating of complex dubieties. Let us put aside all
thoughts of self; let us close our eyes to all on earth, let us neither
make known our sufferings nor complain of our wrongs. Rather let us become
oblivious of our own selves, and drinking down the wine of heavenly grace,
let us cry out our joy, and lose ourselves in the beauty of the
All-Glorious.

O thou Afnan of the divine Lote-Tree! We must strive, each one of us, to
become as fecund boughs and to yield an ever sweeter and more wholesome
fruit, that the branch may prove itself to be a continuation of the root,
and the part be in harmony with the whole. It is my hope that out of the
bounty of the Greatest Name and the loving-kindness of the Primal
Point--may my soul be offered up for Them both--we shall become the means of
exalting the Word of God around the world; that we may ever render
services unto the Source of our Cause and spread over all the canopy of
the true and holy zeal of the Lord. That from over the fields of grace, we
may make zephyrs to blow, bringing to man the sweet scents that come from
the gardens of God. That we may make of this world the Abha Paradise, and
change this nether place into the Kingdom of Heaven.

It is true that every one of God's servants, and in particular those who
are on fire with the Faith, have been allotted this task of servitude to
Almighty God; still, the duty imposed upon us is greater than that which
hath been laid upon the rest. To Him do we look for grace and favour and
strength.

All praise and thanksgiving be unto the Blessed Beauty, for calling into
action the armies of His Abha Kingdom, and sending forth to us His
never-interrupted aid, dependable as the rising stars. In every region of
the earth hath He supported this single, lonely servant, at every moment
hath He made known to me the signs and tokens of His love. He hath cast
into a stupor all those who are clinging to their vain illusions, and made
them infamous in the sight of high and low. He hath caused those who run
after their fads and fancies to become objects of general reproach, and
hath exposed the arrogant to public view; He hath made those of the
friends who proved infirm of faith to serve as a warning to every
beholder, and hath caused the leaders of those who waver to love but
themselves and sink down in self-conceit. Meanwhile, by the power of His
might, He hath made this broken-winged bird to rise up before all who
dwell on earth. He hath shattered the serried ranks of the rebellious, and
hath given the victory to the hosts of salvation, and breathed into the
hearts of those who stand firm in the Covenant and Testament the breath of
everlasting life.

Convey thou the greetings of Abha to each one of the Afnan, branched from
the Holy Tree. The glory rest upon thee and upon all the Afnan who remain
faithful and true to the Covenant.





196: O THOU WHO ART STEADFAST IN THE COVENANT! THY ...


O thou who art steadfast in the Covenant! Thy letter of 9 September 1909
hath been received. Be thou neither grieved nor despondent over what hath
come to pass. This trouble overtook thee as thou didst walk the path of
God, wherefore it should bring thee joy. We addressed the friends in
writing ere this, and made a verbal statement as well, to the effect that
the friends in the West will unquestionably have their share of the
calamities befalling the friends in the East. It is inevitable that,
walking the pathway of Baha'u'llah, they too will become targets for
persecution by the oppressors.

Consider how at the beginning of the Christian era the Apostles were
afflicted, and what torments they endured in the pathway of Christ. Every
day of their lives they were targets for the Pharisees' darts of mockery,
vilification and abuse. They bore great hardship; they saw prison; and
most of them carried to their lips the sweet cup of martyrdom.

Now ye, as well, must certainly become my partners to some slight degree,
and accept your share of tests and sorrows. But these episodes shall pass
away, while that abiding glory and eternal life shall remain unchanged
forever. Moreover, these afflictions shall be the cause of great
advancement.

I ask of God that thou, His husbandman, shalt plough the hard and stony
ground, and water it, and scatter seeds therein--for this will show how
skilful is the farmer, while any man can sow and till where the ground is
soft, and clear of brambles and thorns.





197: O THOU SERVANT OF GOD! DO NOT GRIEVE AT THE ...


O thou servant of God! Do not grieve at the afflictions and calamities
that have befallen thee. All calamities and afflictions have been created
for man so that he may spurn this mortal world--a world to which he is much
attached. When he experienceth severe trials and hardships, then his
nature will recoil and he will desire the eternal realm--a realm which is
sanctified from all afflictions and calamities. Such is the case with the
man who is wise. He shall never drink from a cup which is at the end
distasteful, but, on the contrary, he will seek the cup of pure and limpid
water. He will not taste of the honey that is mixed with poison.

Praise thou God, that thou hast been tried and hast experienced such a
test. Be patient and grateful. Turn thy face to the divine Kingdom and
strive that thou mayest acquire merciful characteristics, mayest become
illumined and acquire the attributes of the Kingdom and of the Lord.
Endeavour to become indifferent to the pleasures of this world and to its
comfort, to remain firm and steadfast in the Covenant and to promulgate
the Cause of God.

This is the cause of the exaltation of man, the cause of his glory and of
his salvation.





198: O THOU WHO ART ENAMOURED OF THE BREATHS OF GOD! ...


O thou who art enamoured of the breaths of God! I have read thy letter,
which cried out with thy love for God and thine irresistible attraction to
His Beauty, and its wondrous theme did cheer my heart.

The intent of what I wrote to thee in my previous letter was this, that
when exalting the Word of God, there are trials to be met with, and
calamities; and that in loving Him, at every moment there are hardships,
torments, afflictions.

It behoveth the individual first to value these ordeals, willingly accept
them, and eagerly welcome them; only then should he proceed with teaching
the Faith and exalting the Word of God.

In such a state, no matter what may befall him in his love for
God--harassment, reproach, vilification, curses, beatings, imprisonment,
death--he will never be cast down, and his passion for the Divine Beauty
will but gain in strength. This was what I meant.

Otherwise, woe and misery to the soul that seeketh after comforts, riches,
and earthly delights while neglecting to call God to mind! Because
calamities encountered in God's pathway are, to 'Abdu'l-Baha, but favour
and grace, and in one of His Tablets the all-glorious Beauty hath
declared: 'I never passed a tree but Mine heart addressed it saying: "O
would that thou wert cut down in My name, and My body crucified upon
thee!"' These were the words of the Most Great Name. This is His path.
This is the way to His Realm of Might.





199: O YE SINCERE ONES, YE LONGING ONES, YE WHO ARE ...


O ye sincere ones, ye longing ones, ye who are drawn as if magnetized, ye
who have risen up to serve the Cause of God, to exalt His Word and scatter
His sweet savours far and wide! I have read your excellent letter,
beautiful as to style, eloquent as to words, profound as to meaning, and I
praised God and thanked Him for having come to your aid and enabled you to
serve Him in His widespreading vineyard.

Erelong shall your faces be bright with the radiance of your supplications
and your worship of God, your prayers unto Him, and your humility and
selflessness in the presence of the friends. He will make of your
assemblage a magnet that will draw unto you the bright rays of divine
confirmations that shine out from His kingdom of glory.

It is incumbent upon you to ponder in your hearts and meditate upon His
words, and humbly to call upon Him, and to put away self in His heavenly
Cause. These are the things that will make of you signs of guidance unto
all mankind, and brilliant stars shining down from the all-highest
horizon, and towering trees in the Abha Paradise.

Know ye that 'Abdu'l-Baha dwelleth in continual delight. To have been
lodged in this faraway prison is for me exceeding joy. By the life of
Baha! This prison is my supernal paradise; it is my cherished goal, the
comfort of my bosom, the bliss of my heart; it is my refuge, my shelter,
my asylum, my safe haven, and within it do I exult amid the hosts of
heaven and the Company on high.

Rejoice in my bondage, O ye friends of God, for it soweth the seeds of
freedom; rejoice at my imprisonment, for it is the well-spring of
salvation; be ye glad on account of my travail, for it leadeth to eternal
ease. By the Lord God! I would not exchange this prison for the throne of
the whole world, nor give up this confinement for pleasures and pastimes
in all the fair gardens on earth. My hope is that out of the Lord's
abundant grace, His munificence and loving-kindness, I may, in His
pathway, be hanged against the sky, that my heart may become the target
for a thousand bullets, or that I may be cast into the depths of the sea,
or be left to perish on desert sands. This is what I long for most; this
is my supreme desire; it refresheth my soul, it is balm for my breast, it
is the very solace of mine eyes.

As for you, O ye lovers of God, make firm your steps in His Cause, with
such resolve that ye shall not be shaken though the direst of calamities
assail the world. By nothing, under no conditions, be ye perturbed. Be ye
anchored fast as the high mountains, be stars that dawn over the horizon
of life, be bright lamps in the gatherings of unity, be souls humble and
lowly in the presence of the friends, be innocent in heart. Be ye symbols
of guidance and lights of godliness, severed from the world, clinging to
the handhold that is sure and strong, spreading abroad the spirit of life,
riding the Ark of salvation. Be ye daysprings of generosity,
dawning-points of the mysteries of existence, sites where inspiration
alighteth, rising-places of splendours, souls that are sustained by the
Holy Spirit, enamoured of the Lord, detached from all save Him, holy above
the characteristics of humankind, clothed in the attributes of the angels
of heaven, that ye may win for yourselves the highest bestowal of all, in
this new time, this wondrous age.

By the life of Baha! Only he who is severed from the world shall achieve
this ultimate grace, he who is a captive of divine love, empty of passion
and self, from every aspect true unto his God, humble, lowly,
supplicating, in tears, submissive in the presence of the Lord.





200: O MY SPIRITUAL LOVED ONES! AT A TIME WHEN AN ...


O my spiritual loved ones! At a time when an ocean of trials and
tribulations was surging up and flinging its waves to the heavens, when
multitudes were assailing us and the tyrannical were inflicting upon us
crushing wrongs--at such a time a band of individuals, intent on defaming
us, allied themselves with our unkind brother, brought out a treatise that
was filled with slanderous charges, and levelled accusations and calumnies
against us.

In this way they alarmed and confused the government authorities, and it
is obvious what the condition of this captive then became, in this
dilapidated fortress, and what terrible harm and mischief was done, far
worse than words can tell. In spite of everything, this homeless prisoner
remained inwardly tranquil and secure, trusting in the peerless Lord,
yearning for whatever afflictions might have to be encountered in the
pathway of God's love. For bolts of hate are, in our sight, but a gift of
pearls from Him, and mortal poison but a healing draught.

Such was our state when a letter came to us from the American friends.(62)
They had covenanted together, so they wrote, to remain at one in all
things, and the signatories one and all had pledged themselves to make
sacrifices in the pathway of the love of God, thus to achieve eternal
life. At the very moment when this letter was read, together with the
signatures at its close, 'Abdu'l-Baha experienced a joy so vehement that
no pen can describe it, and thanked God that friends have been raised up
in that country who will live together in perfect harmony, in the best of
fellowship, in full agreement, closely knit, united in their efforts.

The more this compact is reinforced, the happier and the better shall all
things be, for it will draw unto itself the confirmations of God. If the
lovers of the Lord are hoping for grace to win as their friends the
Company on high, they must do all they can to strengthen this compact, for
such an alliance for brotherhood and unity is even as watering the Tree of
Life: it is life everlasting.

O ye lovers of God! Make firm your steps; fulfil your pledge to one
another; go forth in harmony to scatter abroad the sweet savours of God's
love, and to establish His Teachings, until ye breathe a soul into the
dead body of this world, and bring true healing in the physical and
spiritual realms to everyone who aileth.

O ye lovers of God! The world is even as a human being who is diseased and
impotent, whose eyes can see no longer, whose ears have gone deaf, all of
whose powers are corroded and used up. Wherefore must the friends of God
be competent physicians who, following the holy Teachings, will nurse this
patient back to health. Perhaps, God willing, the world will mend, and
become permanently whole, and its exhausted faculties will be restored,
and its person will take on such vigour, freshness and verdancy that it
will shine out with comeliness and grace.

The first remedy of all is to guide the people aright, so that they will
turn themselves unto God, and listen to His counsellings, and go forth
with hearing ears and seeing eyes. Once this speedily effective draught is
given them, then, in accordance with the Teachings, they must be led to
acquire the characteristics and the behaviour of the Concourse on high,
and encouraged to seek out all the bounties of the Abha Realm. They must
cleanse their hearts from even the slightest trace of hatred and spite,
and they must set about being truthful and honest, conciliatory and loving
to all humankind--so that East and West will, even as two lovers, hold each
other close; that hatred and hostility will perish from the earth, and
universal peace be firmly rooted in their place.

O ye lovers of God! Be kind to all peoples; care for every person; do all
ye can to purify the hearts and minds of men; strive ye to gladden every
soul. To every meadow be a shower of grace, to every tree the water of
life; be as sweet musk to the sense of humankind, and to the ailing be a
fresh, restoring breeze. Be pleasing waters to all those who thirst, a
careful guide to all who have lost their way; be father and mother to the
orphan, be loving sons and daughters to the old, be an abundant treasure
to the poor. Think ye of love and good fellowship as the delights of
heaven, think ye of hostility and hatred as the torments of hell.

Indulge not your bodies with rest, but work with all your souls, and with
all your hearts cry out and beg of God to grant you His succour and grace.
Thus may ye make this world the Abha Paradise, and this globe of earth the
parade ground of the realm on high. If only ye exert the effort, it is
certain that these splendours will shine out, these clouds of mercy will
shed down their rain, these life-giving winds will rise and blow, this
sweet-smelling musk will be scattered far and wide.

O ye lovers of God! Do not dwell on what is coming to pass in this holy
place, and be ye in no wise alarmed. Whatsoever may happen is for the
best, because affliction is but the essence of bounty, and sorrow and toil
are mercy unalloyed, and anguish is peace of mind, and to make a sacrifice
is to receive a gift, and whatsoever may come to pass hath issued from
God's grace.

See ye, therefore, to your own tasks: guide ye the people and educate them
in the ways of 'Abdu'l-Baha. Deliver to mankind this joyous message from
the Abha Realm. Rest not, by day or night; seek ye no moment's peace.
Strive ye with all your might to bring to men's ears these happy tidings.
In your love for God and your attachment to 'Abdu'l-Baha, accept ye every
tribulation, every sorrow. Endure the aggressor's taunts, put up with the
enemy's reproaches. Follow in the footsteps of 'Abdu'l-Baha, and in the
pathway of the Abha Beauty, long at every moment to give up your lives.
Shine out like the day-star, be unresting as the sea; even as the clouds
of heaven, shed ye life upon field and hill, and like unto April winds,
blow freshness through those human trees, and bring them to their
blossoming.





201: O THOU WHO ART CARRIED AWAY BY THE LOVE OF GOD! ...


O thou who art carried away by the love of God! The Sun of Truth hath
risen above the horizon of this world and cast down its beams of guidance.
Eternal grace is never interrupted, and a fruit of that everlasting grace
is universal peace. Rest thou assured that in this era of the spirit, the
Kingdom of Peace will raise up its tabernacle on the summits of the world,
and the commandments of the Prince of Peace will so dominate the arteries
and nerves of every people as to draw into His sheltering shade all the
nations on earth. From springs of love and truth and unity will the true
Shepherd give His sheep to drink.

O handmaid of God, peace must first be established among individuals,
until it leadeth in the end to peace among nations. Wherefore, O ye
Baha'is, strive ye with all your might to create, through the power of the
Word of God, genuine love, spiritual communion and durable bonds among
individuals. This is your task.





202: O YE LOVERS OF TRUTH, YE SERVANTS OF HUMANKIND! ...


O ye lovers of truth, ye servants of humankind! Out of the flowering of
your thoughts and hopes, fragrant emanations have come my way, wherefore
an inner sense of obligation compelleth me to pen these words.

Ye observe how the world is divided against itself, how many a land is red
with blood and its very dust is caked with human gore. The fires of
conflict have blazed so high that never in early times, not in the Middle
Ages, not in recent centuries hath there ever been such a hideous war, a
war that is even as millstones, taking for grain the skulls of men. Nay,
even worse, for flourishing countries have been reduced to rubble, cities
have been levelled with the ground, and many a once prosperous village
hath been turned into ruin. Fathers have lost their sons, and sons their
fathers. Mothers have wept away their hearts over dead children. Children
have been orphaned, women left to wander, vagrants without a home. From
every aspect, humankind hath sunken low. Loud are the piercing cries of
fatherless children; loud the mothers' anguished voices, reaching to the
skies.

And the breeding-ground of all these tragedies is prejudice: prejudice of
race and nation, of religion, of political opinion; and the root cause of
prejudice is blind imitation of the past--imitation in religion, in racial
attitudes, in national bias, in politics. So long as this aping of the
past persisteth, just so long will the foundations of the social order be
blown to the four winds, just so long will humanity be continually exposed
to direst peril.

Now, in such an illumined age as ours, when realities previously unknown
to man have been laid bare, and the secrets of created things have been
disclosed, and the Morn of Truth hath broken and lit up the world--is it
admissible that men should be waging a frightful war that is bringing
humanity down to ruin? No, by the Lord God!

Christ Jesus summoned all mankind to amity and peace. Unto Peter He said:
'Put up thy sword into the sheath.'(63) Such was the bidding and counsel
of the Lord Christ; and yet today the Christians one and all have drawn
their swords from out the scabbard. How wide is the discrepancy between
such acts and the clear Gospel text!

Sixty years ago Baha'u'llah rose up, even as the Day-Star, over Persia. He
declared that the skies of the world were dark, that this darkness boded
evil, and that terrible wars would come. From the prison at Akka, He
addressed the German Emperor in the clearest of terms, telling him that a
great war was on the way and that his city of Berlin would break forth in
lamentation and wailing. Likewise did He write to the Turkish sovereign,
although He was that Sultan's victim and a captive in his prison--that is,
He was being held prisoner in the Fortress at Akka--and clearly stated that
Constantinople would be overtaken by a sudden and radical change, so great
that the women and children of that city would mourn and cry aloud. In
brief, He addressed such words to all the monarchs and the presidents, and
everything came to pass, exactly as He had foretold.

There have issued, from His mighty Pen, various teachings for the
prevention of war, and these have been scattered far and wide.

The first is the independent investigation of truth; for blind imitation
of the past will stunt the mind. But once every soul inquireth into truth,
society will be freed from the darkness of continually repeating the past.

His second principle is the oneness of mankind: that all men are the sheep
of God, and God is their loving Shepherd, caring most tenderly for all
without favouring one or another. 'No difference canst thou see in the
creation of the God of mercy';(64) all are His servants, all implore His
grace.

His third teaching is that religion is a mighty stronghold, but that it
must engender love, not malevolence and hate. Should it lead to malice,
spite, and hate, it is of no value at all. For religion is a remedy, and
if the remedy bring on disease, then put it aside. Again, as to religious,
racial, national and political bias: all these prejudices strike at the
very root of human life; one and all they beget bloodshed, and the
ruination of the world. So long as these prejudices survive, there will be
continuous and fearsome wars.

To remedy this condition there must be universal peace. To bring this
about, a Supreme Tribunal must be established, representative of all
governments and peoples; questions both national and international must be
referred thereto, and all must carry out the decrees of this Tribunal.
Should any government or people disobey, let the whole world arise against
that government or people.

Yet another of the teachings of Baha'u'llah is the equality of men and
women and their equal sharing in all rights. And there are many similar
principles. It hath now become evident that these teachings are the very
life and soul of the world.

Ye who are servants of the human race, strive ye with all your heart to
deliver mankind out of this darkness and these prejudices that belong to
the human condition and the world of nature, so that humanity may find its
way into the light of the world of God.

Praise be to Him, ye are acquainted with the various laws, institutions
and principles of the world; today nothing short of these divine teachings
can assure peace and tranquillity to mankind. But for these teachings,
this darkness shall never vanish, these chronic diseases shall never be
healed; nay, they shall grow fiercer from day to day. The Balkans will
remain discontented. Its restlessness will increase. The vanquished Powers
will continue to agitate. They will resort to every measure that may
rekindle the flame of war. Movements, newly-born and world-wide in their
range, will exert their utmost effort for the advancement of their
designs. The Movement of the Left will acquire great importance. Its
influence will spread.

Strive ye, therefore, with the help of God, with illumined minds and
hearts and a strength born of heaven, to become a bestowal from God to
man, and to call into being for all humankind, comfort and peace.





203: O THOU WHO ART ENAMOURED OF THE COVENANT! ...


O thou who art enamoured of the Covenant! The Blessed Beauty hath promised
this servant that souls would be raised up who would be the very
embodiments of guidance, and banners of the Concourse on high, torches of
God's oneness, and stars of His pure truth, shining in the heavens where
God reigneth alone. They would give sight to the blind, and would make the
deaf to hear; they would raise the dead to life. They would confront all
the peoples of the earth, pleading their Cause with proofs of the Lord of
the seven spheres.

It is my hope that in His bounty He will soon raise up these souls, that
His Cause may be exalted. The lodestone which will attract this grace is
staunchness in the Covenant. Render thou thanks unto God that thou art
firmest of the firm.

O my God, aid Thou Thy servant to raise up the Word, and to refute what is
vain and false, to establish the truth, to spread the sacred verses
abroad, reveal the splendours, and make the morning's light to dawn in the
hearts of the righteous.

Thou art verily the Generous, the Forgiving.





204: O PHOENIX OF THAT IMMORTAL FLAME KINDLED IN THE ...


O phoenix of that immortal flame kindled in the sacred Tree!
Baha'u'llah--may my life, my soul, my spirit be offered up as a sacrifice
unto His lowly servants--hath, during His last days on earth, given the
most emphatic promise that, through the outpourings of the grace of God
and the aid and assistance vouchsafed from His Kingdom on high, souls will
arise and holy beings appear who, as stars, would adorn the firmament of
divine guidance; illumine the dayspring of loving-kindness and bounty;
manifest the signs of the unity of God; shine with the light of sanctity
and purity; receive their full measure of divine inspiration; raise high
the sacred torch of faith; stand firm as the rock and immoveable as the
mountain; and grow to become luminaries in the heavens of His Revelation,
mighty channels of His grace, means for the bestowal of God's bountiful
care, heralds calling forth the name of the One true God, and establishers
of the world's supreme foundation.

These shall labour ceaselessly, by day and by night, shall heed neither
trials nor woe, shall suffer no respite in their efforts, shall seek no
repose, shall disregard all ease and comfort, and, detached and unsullied,
shall consecrate every fleeting moment of their lives to the diffusion of
the divine fragrance and the exaltation of God's holy Word. Their faces
will radiate heavenly gladness, and their hearts be filled with joy. Their
souls will be inspired, and their foundation stand secure. They shall
scatter in the world, and travel throughout all regions. They shall raise
their voices in every assembly, and adorn and revive every gathering. They
shall speak in every tongue, and interpret every hidden meaning. They
shall reveal the mysteries of the Kingdom, and manifest unto everyone the
signs of God. They shall burn brightly even as a candle in the heart of
every assembly, and beam forth as a star upon every horizon. The gentle
breezes wafted from the garden of their hearts shall perfume and revive
the souls of men, and the revelations of their minds, even as showers,
will reinvigorate the peoples and nations of the world.

I am waiting, eagerly waiting for these holy ones to appear; and yet, how
long will they delay their coming? My prayer and ardent supplication, at
eventide and at dawn, is that these shining stars may soon shed their
radiance upon the world, that their sacred countenances may be unveiled to
mortal eyes, that the hosts of divine assistance may achieve their
victory, and the billows of grace, rising from His oceans above, may flow
upon all mankind. Pray ye also and supplicate unto Him that through the
bountiful aid of the Ancient Beauty these souls may be unveiled to the
eyes of the world.

The glory of God rest upon thee, and upon him whose face is illumined with
that everlasting light that shineth from His Kingdom of Glory.





205: O YE RESPECTED SOULS! FROM THE CONTINUAL IMITATION ...


O ye respected souls! From the continual imitation of ancient and worn-out
ways, the world had grown dark as darksome night. The fundamentals of the
divine Teachings had passed from memory; their pith and heart had been
totally forgotten, and the people were holding on to husks. The nations
had, like tattered garments long outworn, fallen into a pitiful condition.

Out of this pitch blackness there dawned the morning splendour of the
Teachings of Baha'u'llah. He hath dressed the world with a garment new and
fair, and that new garment is the principles which have come down from
God.

Now the new age is here and creation is reborn. Humanity hath taken on new
life. The autumn hath gone by, and the reviving spring is here. All things
are now made new. Arts and industries have been reborn, there are new
discoveries in science, and there are new inventions; even the details of
human affairs, such as dress and personal effects--even weapons--all these
have likewise been renewed. The laws and procedures of every government
have been revised. Renewal is the order of the day.

And all this newness hath its source in the fresh outpourings of wondrous
grace and favour from the Lord of the Kingdom, which have renewed the
world. The people, therefore, must be set completely free from their old
patterns of thought, that all their attention may be focused upon these
new principles, for these are the light of this time and the very spirit
of this age.

Unless these Teachings are effectively spread among the people, until the
old ways, the old concepts, are gone and forgotten, this world of being
will find no peace, nor will it reflect the perfections of the Heavenly
Kingdom. Strive ye with all your hearts to make the heedless conscious, to
waken those who sleep, to bring knowledge to the ignorant, to make the
blind to see, the deaf to hear, and restore the dead to life.

It behoveth you to show forth such power, such endurance, as to astonish
all beholders. The confirmations of the Kingdom are with you. Upon you be
the glory of the All-Glorious.





206: PRAISE BE TO HIM WHO HATH RENT THE DARK ASUNDER, ...


Praise be to Him Who hath rent the dark asunder, hath blotted out the
night, hath drawn aside the coverings and torn away the veils; Whose light
thereupon shone out, Whose signs and tokens were spread abroad, and His
mysteries laid bare. Then did His clouds part and loaded down the earth
with His bounties and bestowals, and made all things sweet with rain, and
caused the fresh greenery of knowledge and the hyacinths of certitude to
spring forth and to shake and tremble for joy, till the whole world was
scented with the fragrance of His holiness.

Salutations and praise, blessings and glory be upon those divine
realities, those sacred windflowers that have come forth out of this
supreme bestowal, this flooding grace that hath roared like a clashing sea
of gifts and bounties, tossing its waves to the high heavens.

O God, my God! Praise be unto Thee for kindling the fire of divine love in
the Holy Tree on the summit of the loftiest mount: that Tree which is
'neither of the east nor of the west,'(65) that fire which blazed out till
the flame of it soared upward to the Concourse on high, and from it those
realities caught the light of guidance, and cried out: 'Verily have we
perceived a fire on the slope of Mount Sinai.'(66)

O God, my God! Increase Thou this fire, as day followeth day, till the
blast of it setteth in motion all the earth. O Thou, my Lord! Kindle the
light of Thy love in every heart, breathe into men's souls the spirit of
Thy knowledge, gladden their breasts with the verses of Thy oneness. Call
Thou to life those who dwell in their tombs, warn Thou the prideful, make
happiness world-wide, send down Thy crystal waters, and in the assemblage
of manifest splendours, pass round that cup which is 'tempered at the
camphor fountain.'(67)

Verily art Thou the Giving, the Forgiving, the Ever-Bestowing. Verily art
Thou the Merciful, the Compassionate.

O ye loved ones of God! The wine-cup of Heaven overfloweth, the banquet of
God's Covenant is bright with festive lights, the dawn of all bestowals is
breaking, the gentle winds of grace are blowing, and out of the invisible
world come good tidings of bounties and gifts. In flower-spangled meadows
hath the divine springtime pitched its tents, and the spiritual are
inhaling sweet scents from the Sheba of the spirit, carried their way by
the east wind. Now doth the mystic nightingale carol its odes, and buds of
inner meaning are bursting into blossoms delicate and fair. The field
larks are become the festival's musicians, and lifting wondrous voices
they cry and sing to the melodies of the Company on high, 'Blessed are ye!
Glad Tidings! Glad Tidings!' And they urge on the revellers of the Abha
Paradise to drink their fill, and they eloquently hold forth upon the
celestial tree, and utter their sacred cries. All this, that withered
souls who tread the desert of the heedless, and faded ones lost in the
sands of unconcern, may come to throbbing life again, and present
themselves at the feasts and revels of the Lord God.

Praise be to Him! The renown of His Cause hath reached to east and west,
and word of the power of the Abha Beauty hath quickened north and south.
That cry from the American continent is a choir of holiness, that shout
from far and near that riseth even to the Company on high is 'Ya
Baha'u'l-Abha!' Now is the east lit up with a glory, and the west
rose-sweet, and all the earth is fragrant with ambergris, and the winds
that blow over the Holy Shrine are laden with musk. Erelong shall ye see
that even the darkest lands are bright, and the continents of Europe and
Africa have turned into gardens of flowers, and forests of blossoming
trees.

But since the dawning of this Day-Star was in Persia, and since from that
orient the sun shone upon the west, it is our fondest hope that the flames
of love's fire should blaze ever more vehemently in that land, and that
there the splendour of this Holy Faith should grow ever more intense. May
the tumult of God's Cause so shake that land to its foundations, may the
spiritual force of His Word so manifest itself, as to make Iran the core
and focus of well-being and peace. May rectitude and conciliation, and
love and trust, issuing forth from Iran, bring immortality to all on
earth. May she raise on the highest summits the banner of public order, of
purest spirituality, of universal peace.

O ye loved ones of God! In this, the Baha'i dispensation, God's Cause is
spirit unalloyed. His Cause belongeth not to the material world. It cometh
neither for strife nor war, nor for acts of mischief or of shame; it is
neither for quarrelling with other Faiths, nor for conflicts with the
nations. Its only army is the love of God, its only joy the clear wine of
His knowledge, its only battle the expounding of the Truth; its one
crusade is against the insistent self, the evil promptings of the human
heart. Its victory is to submit and yield, and to be selfless is its
everlasting glory. In brief, it is spirit upon spirit:

Unless ye must,

Bruise not the serpent in the dust,

How much less wound a man.

And if ye can,

No ant should ye alarm,

Much less a brother harm.

Let all your striving be for this, to become the source of life and
immortality, and peace and comfort and joy, to every human soul, whether
one known to you or a stranger, one opposed to you or on your side. Look
ye not upon the purity or impurity of his nature: look ye upon the
all-embracing mercy of the Lord, the light of Whose grace hath embosomed
the whole earth and all who dwell thereon, and in the plenitude of Whose
bounty are immersed both the wise and the ignorant. Stranger and friend
alike are seated at the table of His favour. Even as the believer, the
denier who turneth away from God doth at the same time cup his hands and
drink from the sea of His bestowals.

It behoveth the loved ones of the Lord to be the signs and tokens of His
universal mercy and the embodiments of His own excelling grace. Like the
sun, let them cast their rays upon garden and rubbish heap alike, and even
as clouds in spring, let them shed down their rain upon flower and thorn.
Let them seek but love and faithfulness, let them not follow the ways of
unkindness, let their talk be confined to the secrets of friendship and of
peace. Such are the attributes of the righteous, such is the
distinguishing mark of those who serve His Threshold.

The Abha Beauty endured the most afflictive of calamities. He bore
countless agonies and ills. He enjoyed not a moment's peace, drew not an
easeful breath. He wandered, homeless, over desert sands and mountain
slopes; He was shut in a fortress, and a prison cell. But to Him, His
pauper's mat of straw was an eternal throne of glory, and His heavy chains
a sovereign's carcanet. By day, by night, He lived under a whirring sword,
and He was ready from moment to moment for death on the cross. He bore all
this that He might purify the world, and deck it out with the tender
mercies of the Lord God; that He might set it at rest; that conflict and
aggression might be put to flight, the lance and the keen blade be
exchanged for loving fellowship, malevolence and war turn into safety and
gentleness and love, that battlefields of hate and wrath should become
gardens of delight, and places where once the blood-drenched armies
clashed, be fragrant pleasure grounds; that warfare should be seen as
shame, and the resort to arms, even as a loathsome sickness, be shunned by
every people; that universal peace raise its pavilions on the loftiest
mounts, and war be made to perish forever from the earth.

Wherefore must the loved ones of God, laboriously, with the waters of
their striving, tend and nourish and foster this tree of hope. In
whatsoever land they dwell, let them with a whole heart befriend and be
companions to those who are either close to them, or far removed. Let
them, with qualities like unto those of heaven, promote the institutions
and the religion of God. Let them never lose heart, never be despondent,
never feel afflicted. The more antagonism they meet, the more let them
show their own good faith; the more torments and calamities they have to
face, the more generously let them pass round the bounteous cup. Such is
the spirit which will become the life of the world, such is the spreading
light at its heart: and he who may be and do other than this is not worthy
to serve at the Holy Threshold of the Lord.

O ye loved ones of God! The Sun of Truth is shining down from invisible
skies; know ye the value of these days. Lift up your heads, and grow ye
cypress-tall in these swift-running streams. Take ye joy in the beauty of
the narcissus of Najd, for night will fall and it will be no more....

O ye loved ones of God! Praise be to Him, the bright banner of the
Covenant is flying higher every day, while the flag of perfidy hath been
reversed, and hangeth at half-mast. The benighted attackers have been
shaken to their core; they are now as ruined sepulchres, and even as blind
creatures that dwell beneath the earth they creep and crawl about a corner
of the tomb, and out of that hole, from time to time, like unto savage
beasts, do they jibber and howl. Glory be to God! How can the darkness
hope to overcome the light, how can a magician's cords hold fast 'a
serpent plain for all to see'? 'Then lo! It swallowed up their lying
wonders.'(68) Alas for them! They have deluded themselves with a fable,
and to indulge their appetites they have done away with their own selves.
They gave up everlasting glory in exchange for human pride, and they
sacrificed greatness in both worlds to the demands of the insistent self.
This is that of which We have forewarned you. Erelong shall ye behold the
foolish in manifest loss.

O my Lord and my Hope! Help Thou Thy loved ones to be steadfast in Thy
mighty Covenant, to remain faithful to Thy manifest Cause, and to carry
out the commandments Thou didst set down for them in Thy Book of
Splendours; that they may become banners of guidance and lamps of the
Company above, wellsprings of Thine infinite wisdom, and stars that lead
aright, as they shine down from the supernal sky.

Verily art Thou the Invincible, the Almighty, the All-Powerful.





207: O YE WHO HAVE TURNED YOUR FACES TOWARD THE ...


O ye who have turned your faces toward the Exalted Beauty! By night, by
day, at morningtide and sunset, when darkness draweth on, and at early
light I remember, and ever have remembered, in the realms of my mind and
heart, the loved ones of the Lord. I beg of Him to bestow His
confirmations upon those loved ones, dwellers in that pure and holy land,
and to grant them successful outcomes in all things: that in their
character, their behaviour, their words, their way of life, in all they
are and do, He will make them to achieve distinction among men; that He
will gather them into the world community, their hearts filled with
ecstasy and fervour and yearning love, with knowledge and certitude, with
steadfastness and unity, their faces beauteous and bright.

O ye beloved of the Lord! This day is the day of union, the day of the
ingathering of all mankind. 'Verily God loveth those who, as though they
were a solid wall, do battle for His Cause in serried lines!'(69) Note
that He saith 'in serried lines'--meaning crowded and pressed together, one
locked to the next, each supporting his fellows. To do battle, as stated
in the sacred verse, doth not, in this greatest of all dispensations, mean
to go forth with sword and spear, with lance and piercing arrow--but rather
weaponed with pure intent, with righteous motives, with counsels helpful
and effective, with godly attributes, with deeds pleasing to the Almighty,
with the qualities of heaven. It signifieth education for all mankind,
guidance for all men, the spreading far and wide of the sweet savours of
the spirit, the promulgation of God's proofs, the setting forth of
arguments conclusive and divine, the doing of charitable deeds.

Whensoever holy souls, drawing on the powers of heaven, shall arise with
such qualities of the spirit, and march in unison, rank on rank, every one
of those souls will be even as one thousand, and the surging waves of that
mighty ocean will be even as the battalions of the Concourse on high. What
a blessing that will be--when all shall come together, even as once
separate torrents, rivers and streams, running brooks and single drops,
when collected together in one place will form a mighty sea. And to such a
degree will the inherent unity of all prevail, that the traditions, rules,
customs and distinctions in the fanciful life of these populations will be
effaced and vanish away like isolated drops, once the great sea of oneness
doth leap and surge and roll.

I swear by the Ancient Beauty, that at such a time overwhelming grace will
so encircle all, and the sea of grandeur will so overflow its shores, that
the narrowest strip of water will grow wide as an endless sea, and every
merest drop will be even as the shoreless deep.

O ye loved ones of God! Struggle and strive to reach that high station,
and to make a splendour so to shine across these realms of earth that the
rays of it will be reflected back from a dawning-point on the horizon of
eternity. This is the very foundation of the Cause of God. This is the
very pith of the Law of God. This is the mighty structure raised up by the
Manifestations of God. This is why the orb of God's world dawneth. This is
why the Lord establisheth Himself on the throne of His human body.

O ye loved ones of God! See how the Exalted One(70)--may the souls of all
on earth be a ransom for Him--for this high purpose made His blessed heart
the target for affliction's spears; and because the real intent of the
Ancient Beauty--for Him may the souls of the Concourse on high be offered
up--was to win this same supernal goal, the Exalted One bared His holy
breast for a target to a myriad bullets fired by the people of malice and
hate, and with utter meekness died the martyr's death. On the dust of this
pathway the holy blood of thousands upon thousands of sacred souls gushed
out, and many a time the blessed body of a loyal lover of God was hanged
to the gallows tree.

The Abha Beauty Himself--may the spirit of all existence be offered up for
His loved ones--bore all manner of ordeals, and willingly accepted for
Himself intense afflictions. No torment was there left that His sacred
form was not subjected to, no suffering that did not descend upon Him. How
many a night, when He was chained, did He go sleepless because of the
weight of His iron collar; how many a day the burning pain of the stocks
and fetters gave Him no moment's peace. From Niyavaran to Tihran they made
Him run--He, that embodied spirit, He Who had been accustomed to repose
against cushions of ornamented silk--chained, shoeless, His head bared; and
down under the earth, in the thick darkness of that narrow dungeon, they
shut Him up with murderers, rebels and thieves. Ever and again they
assailed Him with a new torment, and all were certain that from one moment
to the next He would suffer a martyr's death. After some time they
banished Him from His native land, and sent Him to countries alien and far
away. During many a year in 'Iraq, no moment passed but the arrow of a new
anguish struck His holy heart; with every breath a sword came down upon
that sacred body, and He could hope for no moment of security and rest.
From every side His enemies mounted their attack with unrelenting hate;
and singly and alone He withstood them all. After all these tribulations,
these body blows, they flung Him out of 'Iraq in the continent of Asia, to
the continent of Europe, and in that place of bitter exile, of wretched
hardships, to the wrongs that were heaped upon Him by the people of the
Qur'an were now added the virulent persecutions, the powerful attacks, the
plottings, the slanders, the continual hostilities, the hate and malice,
of the people of the Bayan. My pen is powerless to tell it all; but ye
have surely been informed of it. Then, after twenty-four years in this,
the Most Great Prison, in agony and sore affliction, His days drew to a
close.

To sum it up, the Ancient Beauty was ever, during His sojourn in this
transitory world, either a captive bound with chains, or living under a
sword, or subjected to extreme suffering and torment, or held in the Most
Great Prison. Because of His physical weakness, brought on by His
afflictions, His blessed body was worn away to a breath; it was light as a
cobweb from long grieving. And His reason for shouldering this heavy load
and enduring all this anguish, which was even as an ocean that hurleth its
waves to high heaven--His reason for putting on the heavy iron chains and
for becoming the very embodiment of utter resignation and meekness, was to
lead every soul on earth to concord, to fellow-feeling, to oneness; to
make known amongst all peoples the sign of the singleness of God, so that
at last the primal oneness deposited at the heart of all created things
would bear its destined fruit, and the splendour of 'No difference canst
thou see in the creation of the God of Mercy,'(71) would cast abroad its
rays.

Now is the time, O ye beloved of the Lord, for ardent endeavour. Struggle
ye, and strive. And since the Ancient Beauty was exposed by day and night
on the field of martyrdom, let us in our turn labour hard, and hear and
ponder the counsels of God; let us fling away our lives, and renounce our
brief and numbered days. Let us turn our eyes away from empty fantasies of
this world's divergent forms, and serve instead this pre-eminent purpose,
this grand design. Let us not, because of our own imaginings, cut down
this tree that the hand of heavenly grace hath planted; let us not, with
the dark clouds of our illusions, our selfish interests, blot out the
glory that streameth from the Abha Realm. Let us not be as barriers that
wall out the rolling ocean of Almighty God. Let us not prevent the pure,
sweet scents from the garden of the All-Glorious Beauty from blowing far
and wide. Let us not, on this day of reunion, shut out the vernal downpour
of blessings from on high. Let us not consent that the splendours of the
Sun of Truth should ever fade and disappear. These are the admonitions of
God, as set forth in His Holy Books, His Scriptures, His Tablets that tell
out His counsellings to the sincere.

The glory rest upon you, and God's mercy, and God's blessings.





208: O YE SERVANTS OF THE SACRED THRESHOLD! THE ...


O ye servants of the Sacred Threshold! The triumphant hosts of the
Celestial Concourse, arrayed and marshalled in the Realms above, stand
ready and expectant to assist and assure victory to that valiant horseman
who with confidence spurs on his charger into the arena of service. Well
is it with that fearless warrior, who armed with the power of true
Knowledge, hastens unto the field, disperses the armies of ignorance, and
scatters the hosts of error, who holds aloft the Standard of Divine
Guidance, and sounds the Clarion of Victory. By the righteousness of the
Lord! He hath achieved a glorious triumph and obtained the true victory.





209: O YE SERVANTS OF THE BLESSED BEAUTY!... IT IS CLEAR ...


O ye servants of the Blessed Beauty!... It is clear that in this day,
confirmations from the unseen world are encompassing all those who deliver
the divine Message. Should the work of teaching lapse, these confirmations
would be entirely cut off, since it is impossible for the loved ones of
God to receive assistance unless they teach.

Under all conditions, the teaching must be carried forward, but with
wisdom. If the work cannot proceed openly, then let them teach in private,
and thus engender spirituality and fellowship among the children of men.
If, for example, each and every one of the believers would become a true
friend to one of the unheeding, and, conducting himself with absolute
rectitude, associate with this soul, treat him with the utmost kindness,
himself exemplify the divine instructions he hath received, the good
qualities and behaviour patterns, and at all times act in accord with the
admonitions of God--it is certain that little by little he will succeed in
awakening that previously heedless individual, and in changing his
ignorance to knowledge of the truth.

Souls are inclined toward estrangement. Steps should first be taken to do
away with this estrangement, for only then will the Word take effect. If a
believer showeth kindness to one of the neglectful, and, with great love,
gradually leadeth him to an understanding of the validity of the Holy
Cause, so that he may come to know the fundamentals of God's Faith and the
implications thereof--such a one will certainly be transformed, excepting
only those seldom-encountered individuals who are even as ashes, whose
hearts are 'hard as rocks, or harder still.'(72)

If every one of the friends should strive in this way to guide one soul
aright, the number of believers will double every year; and this can be
accomplished with prudence and wisdom, and no harm whatever would result
therefrom.

Furthermore, the teachers must travel about, and if spreading the Message
openly should cause a disturbance, then instead, let them stimulate and
train the believers, inspire them, delight them, rejoice their hearts,
revive and refresh them with the sweet savours of holiness.





210: O YE ROSES IN THE GARDEN OF GOD'S LOVE! O YE ...


O ye roses in the garden of God's love! O ye bright lamps in the
assemblage of His knowledge! May the soft breathings of God pass over you,
may the Glory of God illumine the horizon of your hearts. Ye are the waves
of the deep sea of knowledge, ye are the massed armies on the plains of
certitude, ye are the stars in the skies of God's compassion, ye are the
stones that put the people of perdition to flight, ye are clouds of divine
pity over the gardens of life, ye are the abundant grace of God's oneness
that is shed upon the essences of all created things.

On the outspread tablet of this world, ye are the verses of His
singleness; and atop lofty palace towers, ye are the banners of the Lord.
In His bowers are ye the blossoms and sweet-smelling herbs, in the rose
garden of the spirit the nightingales that utter plaintive cries. Ye are
the birds that soar upward into the firmament of knowledge, the royal
falcons on the wrist of God.

Why then are ye quenched, why silent, why leaden and dull? Ye must shine
forth like the lightning, and raise up a clamouring like unto the great
sea. Like a candle must ye shed your light, and even as the soft breezes
of God must ye blow across the world. Even as sweet breaths from heavenly
bowers, as musk-laden winds from the gardens of the Lord, must ye perfume
the air for the people of knowledge, and even as the splendours shed by
the true Sun, must ye illumine the hearts of humankind. For ye are the
life-laden winds, ye are the jessamine-scents from the gardens of the
saved. Bring then life to the dead, and awaken those who slumber. In the
darkness of the world be ye radiant flames; in the sands of perdition, be
ye well-springs of the water of life, be ye guidance from the Lord God.
Now is the time to serve, now is the time to be on fire. Know ye the value
of this chance, this favourable juncture that is limitless grace, ere it
slip from your hands.

Soon will our handful of days, our vanishing life, be gone, and we shall
pass, empty-handed, into the hollow that is dug for those who speak no
more; wherefore must we bind our hearts to the manifest Beauty, and cling
to the lifeline that faileth never. We must gird ourselves for service,
kindle love's flame, and burn away in its heat. We must loose our tongues
till we set the wide world's heart afire, and with bright rays of guidance
blot out the armies of the night, and then, for His sake, on the field of
sacrifice, fling down our lives.

Thus let us scatter over every people the treasured gems of the
recognition of God, and with the decisive blade of the tongue, and the
sure arrows of knowledge, let us defeat the hosts of self and passion, and
hasten onward to the site of martyrdom, to the place where we die for the
Lord. And then, with flying flags, and to the beat of drums, let us pass
into the realm of the All-Glorious, and join the Company on high.

Well is it with the doers of great deeds.





211: WHEN THE FRIENDS DO NOT ENDEAVOUR TO SPREAD THE ...


When the friends do not endeavour to spread the message, they fail to
remember God befittingly, and will not witness the tokens of assistance
and confirmation from the Abha Kingdom nor comprehend the divine
mysteries. However, when the tongue of the teacher is engaged in teaching,
he will naturally himself be stimulated, will become a magnet attracting
the divine aid and bounty of the Kingdom, and will be like unto the bird
at the hour of dawn, which itself becometh exhilarated by its own singing,
its warbling and its melody.





212: IT IS AT SUCH TIMES THAT THE FRIENDS OF GOD AVAIL ...


It is at such times that the friends of God avail themselves of the
occasion, seize the opportunity, rush forth and win the prize. If their
task is to be confined to good conduct and advice, nothing will be
accomplished. They must speak out, expound the proofs, set forth clear
arguments, draw irrefutable conclusions establishing the truth of the
manifestation of the Sun of Reality.





213: THE TEACHING WORK SHOULD UNDER ALL CONDITIONS BE ...


The teaching work should under all conditions be actively pursued by the
believers because divine confirmations are dependent upon it. Should a
Baha'i refrain from being fully, vigorously and wholeheartedly involved in
the teaching work he will undoubtedly be deprived of the blessings of the
Abha Kingdom. Even so, this activity should be tempered with wisdom--not
that wisdom which requireth one to be silent and forgetful of such an
obligation, but rather that which requireth one to display divine
tolerance, love, kindness, patience, a goodly character, and holy deeds.
In brief, encourage the friends individually to teach the Cause of God and
draw their attention to this meaning of wisdom mentioned in the Writings,
which is itself the essence of teaching the Faith--but all this to be done
with the greatest tolerance, so that heavenly assistance and divine
confirmation may aid the friends.





214: FOLLOW THOU THE WAY OF THY LORD, AND SAY NOT ...


Follow thou the way of thy Lord, and say not that which the ears cannot
bear to hear, for such speech is like luscious food given to small
children. However palatable, rare and rich the food may be, it cannot be
assimilated by the digestive organs of a suckling child. Therefore unto
every one who hath a right, let his settled measure be given.

'Not everything that a man knoweth can be disclosed, nor can everything
that he can disclose be regarded as timely, nor can every timely utterance
be considered as suited to the capacity of those who hear it.' Such is the
consummate wisdom to be observed in thy pursuits. Be not oblivious
thereof, if thou wishest to be a man of action under all conditions. First
diagnose the disease and identify the malady, then prescribe the remedy,
for such is the perfect method of the skilful physician.





215: MY HOPE FROM THE GRACE OF THE ONE TRUE LORD ...


My hope from the grace of the One true Lord is that thou wilt be enabled
to spread the fragrances of God among the tribes. This is extremely
important....

If thou succeedest in rendering this service thou shalt excel and be the
leader in the field.





216: REST ASSURED THAT THE BREATHINGS OF THE HOLY SPIRIT ...


Rest assured that the breathings of the Holy Spirit will loosen thy
tongue. Speak, therefore; speak out with great courage at every meeting.
When thou art about to begin thine address, turn first to Baha'u'llah, and
ask for the confirmations of the Holy Spirit, then open thy lips and say
whatever is suggested to thy heart; this, however, with the utmost
courage, dignity and conviction. It is my hope that from day to day your
gatherings will grow and flourish, and that those who are seeking after
truth will hearken therein to reasoned arguments and conclusive proofs. I
am with you heart and soul at every meeting; be sure of this.





217: THE TEACHER, WHEN TEACHING, MUST BE HIMSELF ...


The teacher, when teaching, must be himself fully enkindled, so that his
utterance, like unto a flame of fire, may exert influence and consume the
veil of self and passion. He must also be utterly humble and lowly so that
others may be edified, and be totally self-effaced and evanescent so that
he may teach with the melody of the Concourse on high--otherwise his
teaching will have no effect.





218: O YE CLOSE AND DEAR FRIENDS OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA! ...


O ye close and dear friends of 'Abdu'l-Baha!

In the Orient scatter perfumes,
And shed splendours on the West.
Carry light unto the Bulgar,
And the Slav with life invest.

One year after the ascension of Baha'u'llah, there came this verse from
the lips of the Centre of the Covenant. The Covenant-breakers found it
strange indeed, and they treated it with scorn. Yet, praised be God, its
effects are now manifest, its power revealed, its import clear; for by
God's grace, today both East and West are trembling for joy, and now, from
sweet waftings of holiness, the whole earth is scented with musk.

The Blessed Beauty, in unmistakable language, hath made this promise in
His Book: 'We behold you from Our realm of glory, and shall aid whosoever
will arise for the triumph of Our Cause with the hosts of the Concourse on
high and a company of Our favoured angels.'(73)

God be thanked, that promised aid hath been vouchsafed, as is plain for
all to see, and it shineth forth as clear as the sun in the heavens.

Wherefore, O ye friends of God, redouble your efforts, strain every nerve,
till ye triumph in your servitude to the Ancient Beauty, the Manifest
Light, and become the cause of spreading far and wide the rays of the
Day-Star of Truth. Breathe ye into the world's worn and wasted body the
fresh breath of life, and in the furrows of every region sow ye holy seed.
Rise up to champion this Cause; open your lips and teach. In the meeting
place of life be ye a guiding candle; in the skies of this world be
dazzling stars; in the gardens of unity be birds of the spirit, singing of
inner truths and mysteries.

Expend your every breath of life in this great Cause and dedicate all your
days to the service of Baha, so that in the end, safe from loss and
deprivation, ye will inherit the heaped-up treasures of the realms above.
For the days of a man are full of peril and he cannot rely on so much as a
moment more of life; and still the people, who are even as a wavering
mirage of illusions, tell themselves that in the end they shall reach the
heights. Alas for them! The men of bygone times hugged these same fancies
to their breasts, until a wave flicked over them and they returned to
dust, and they found themselves excluded and bereft--all save those souls
who had freed themselves from self and had flung away their lives in the
pathway of God. Their bright star shone out in the skies of ancient glory,
and the handed-down memories of all the ages are the proof of what I say.

Wherefore, rest ye neither day nor night and seek no ease. Tell ye the
secrets of servitude, follow the pathway of service, till ye attain the
promised succour that cometh from the realms of God.

O friends! Black clouds have shrouded all this earth, and the darkness of
hatred and malice, of cruelty and aggression and defilement is spreading
far and wide. The people, one and all, live out their lives in a heedless
stupor and the chief virtues of man are held to be his rapacity and his
thirst for blood. Out of all the mass of humankind God hath chosen the
friends, and He hath favoured them with His guidance and boundless grace.
His purpose is this, that we, all of us, should strive with our whole
hearts to offer ourselves up, guide others to His path, and train the
souls of men--until these frenzied beasts change to gazelles in the meadows
of oneness, and these wolves to lambs of God, and these brutish creatures
to angelic hosts; till the fires of hatred are quenched, and the flame
coming out of the sheltered vale of the Holy Shrine doth shed its
splendours; till the foul odour of the tyrant's dunghill is blown away,
and yieldeth to the pure, sweet scents that stream from the rosebeds of
faith and trust. On that day will the weak of intellect draw on the bounty
of the divine, Universal Mind, and they whose life is but abomination will
seek out these cleansing, holy breaths.

But there needs must be souls who will manifest such bestowals, there
needs must be husbandmen to till these fields, gardeners for these
gardens, there needs must be fish to swim in this sea, stars to gleam in
these heavens. These ailing ones must be tended by spiritual physicians,
these who are the lost need gentle guides--so that from such souls the
bereft may receive their portion, and the deprived obtain their share, and
the poor discover in such as they unmeasured wealth, and the seekers hear
from them unanswerable proofs.

O my Lord, my Defender, my Help in peril! Lowly do I entreat Thee, ailing
do I come unto Thee to be healed, humbly do I cry out to Thee with my
tongue, my soul, my spirit:

O God, my God! The gloom of night hath shrouded every region, and all the
earth is shut away behind thick clouds. The peoples of the world are sunk
in the black depths of vain illusions, while their tyrants wallow in
cruelty and hate. I see nothing but the glare of searing fires that blaze
upward from the nethermost abyss, I hear nothing save the thunderous roar
that belloweth out from thousands upon thousands of fiery weapons of
assault, while every land is crying aloud in its secret tongue: 'My riches
avail me nothing, and my sovereignty hath perished!'

O my Lord, the lamps of guidance have gone out. The flames of passion are
mounting high, and malevolence is ever gaining on the world. Malice and
hate have overspread the face of the whole earth, and I find no souls
except Thine own oppressed small band who are raising up this cry:

Make haste to love! Make haste to trust! Make haste to give! To guidance
come!

Come ye for harmony! To behold the Star of Day! Come here for kindliness,
for ease! Come here for amity and peace!

Come and cast down your weapons of wrath, till unity is won! Come and in
the Lord's true path each one help each one.

Verily with exceeding joy, with heart and soul, do these oppressed of
Thine offer themselves up for all mankind in every land. Thou seest them,
O my Lord, weeping over the tears Thy people shed, mourning the grief of
Thy children, condoling with humankind, suffering because of the
calamities that beset all the denizens of the earth.

O my Lord, wing them with victory that they may soar upward to salvation,
strengthen their loins in service to Thy people, and their backs in
servitude to Thy Threshold of Holiness.

Verily Thou art the Generous, verily Thou art the Merciful! There is none
other God save Thee, the Clement, the Pitiful, the Ancient of Days!





219: O YE SONS AND DAUGHTERS OF THE KINGDOM! YOUR ...


O ye sons and daughters of the Kingdom! Your letter, which was surely
inspired of heaven, hath been received. Its contents were most pleasing,
its sentiments arising out of luminous hearts.

The believers in London are indeed steadfast and true, they are resolute,
they are constant in service; when put to the test, they do not falter,
nor doth their fire abate with the passage of time; rather, they are
Baha'is. They are of heaven, they are filled with light, they are of God.
Without any doubt they will become the cause of raising high the Word of
God, and advancing the oneness of the world of man; of promoting the
teachings of God, and spreading far and near the equality of every member
of the human race.

It is easy to approach the Kingdom of Heaven, but hard to stand firm and
staunch within it, for the tests are rigorous, and heavy to bear. But the
English remain steadfast under all conditions, neither at the first sign
of trouble do their footsteps slip. They are not changeable, playing fast
and loose with some project and soon giving it up. They do not, for some
trivial reason, fail in enthusiasm and zeal, their interest gone. No, in
all they do, they are stable, rock-solid and staunch.

Although ye dwell in western lands, still, praise be to God, ye did hear
His call from out the east and, even as Moses, did warm your hands at the
fire kindled in the Asian Tree. Ye did find the true path, were lit like
unto lamps, and have come into the Kingdom of God. And now have ye arisen,
out of gratitude for these blessings, and ye are asking God's help for all
the peoples of the earth, that their eyes as well may behold the
splendours of the Abha Realm, and their hearts, even as mirrors, reflect
the bright rays of the Sun of Truth.

It is my hope that the breaths of the Holy Spirit will so be breathed into
your hearts that your tongues will disclose the mysteries, and set forth
and expound the inner meanings of the Holy Books; that the friends will
become physicians, and will, through the potent medicine of the heavenly
Teachings, heal the long-standing diseases that afflict the body of this
world; that they will make the blind to see, the deaf to hear, the dead to
come alive; that they will awaken those who are sound asleep.

Rest ye assured that the confirmations of the Holy Spirit will descend
upon you, and that the armies of the Abha Kingdom will grant you the
victory.





220: THE LORD OF ALL MANKIND HATH FASHIONED THIS ...


The Lord of all mankind hath fashioned this human realm to be a Garden of
Eden, an earthly paradise. If, as it must, it findeth the way to harmony
and peace, to love and mutual trust, it will become a true abode of bliss,
a place of manifold blessings and unending delights. Therein shall be
revealed the excellence of humankind, therein shall the rays of the Sun of
Truth shine forth on every hand.

Remember how Adam and the others once dwelt together in Eden. No sooner,
however, did a quarrel break out between Adam and Satan than they were,
one and all, banished from the Garden, and this was meant as a warning to
the human race, a means of telling humankind that dissension--even with the
Devil--is the way to bitter loss. This is why, in our illumined age, God
teacheth that conflicts and disputes are not allowable, not even with
Satan himself.

Gracious God! Even with such a lesson before him, how heedless is man!
Still do we see his world at war from pole to pole. There is war among the
religions; war among the nations; war among the peoples; war among the
rulers. What a welcome change would it be, if only these black clouds
would lift from off the skies of the world, so that the light of reality
could be shed abroad! If only the darksome dust of this continual fighting
and killing could settle forever, and the sweet winds of God's
loving-kindness could blow from out the well-spring of peace. Then would
this world become another world, and the earth would shine with the light
of her Lord.

If there is any hope, it is solely in the bounties of God: that His
strengthening grace will come, and the struggling and contending will
cease, and the acid bite of blood-dripping steel will be turned into the
honey-dew of friendship and probity and trust. How sweet would that day be
in the mouth, how fragrant as musk the scent thereof.

God grant that the new year will bring a promise of the new peace. May He
enable this distinguished assemblage to conclude a fair treaty and
establish a just covenant, that you may be blessed forever, across the
unborn reaches of time.

[Addressed to the readers of The Christian Commonwealth, 1 January 1913]





221: O YE WHO ARE STEADFAST IN THE COVENANT! THE ...


O ye who are steadfast in the Covenant! The pilgrim hath made mention of
each one of you, and hath asked for a separate letter addressed to each,
but this wanderer in the wilderness of God's love is withheld from
correspondence by a thousand preoccupations and concerns; and since out of
the easts and the wests of the earth there poureth a mounting flood of
letters upon him, it would be impossible to send a separate letter to each
one, wherefore this one letter is addressed to each of you, that it may,
as sealed wine, rejoice your souls and warm your hearts.

O ye steadfast loved ones! The grace of God is beating down upon mankind,
even as the rains in spring, and the rays of the manifest Light have made
this earth to be the envy of heaven. But alas, the blind are deprived of
this bounty, the heedless are closed off from it, the withered despair of
it, the faded are dying away--so that even as flooding waters, this endless
stream of grace passeth back into its primal source in a hidden sea. Only
a few receive this grace and take their share of it. Wherefore, let us put
our hopes in whatever the strong arm of the Beloved can bring about.

We trust that in a time to come the slumberers will waken, and the
heedless will be made aware, and the excluded will become initiates in the
mysteries. Now must the friends work on with heart and soul and put forth
a mighty effort, until the ramparts of dissension are toppled down and the
glories of the oneness of humanity lead all to unity.

Today the one overriding need is unity and harmony among the beloved of
the Lord, for they should have among them but one heart and soul and
should, so far as in them lieth, unitedly withstand the hostility of all
the peoples of the world; they must bring to an end the benighted
prejudices of all nations and religions and must make known to every
member of the human race that all are the leaves of one branch, the fruits
of one bough.

Until such time, however, as the friends establish perfect unity among
themselves, how can they summon others to harmony and peace?

That soul which hath itself not come alive,

Can it then hope another to revive? Reflect ye as to other than human
forms of life and be ye

admonished thereby: those clouds that drift apart cannot produce the
bounty of the rain, and are soon lost; a flock of sheep, once scattered,
falleth prey to the wolf, and birds that fly alone will be caught fast in
the claws of the hawk. What greater demonstration could there be that
unity leadeth to flourishing life, while dissension and withdrawing from
the others, will lead only to misery; for these are the sure ways to
bitter disappointment and ruin.

The holy Manifestations of God were sent down to make visible the oneness
of humanity. For this did They endure unnumbered ills and tribulations,
that a community from amongst mankind's divergent peoples could gather
within the shadow of the Word of God and live as one, and could, with
delight and grace, demonstrate on earth the unity of humankind. Therefore
must the desire of the friends be this, to bring together and unify all
peoples, that all may receive a generous drink of this pure wine from this
cup that is 'tempered at the camphor fountain.'(74) Let them make the
differing populations to be as one and induce the hostile and murderous
kindreds of the earth to love one another instead. Let them loose from
their shackles the captives of sensual desires and cause the excluded to
become intimates of the mysteries. Let them give to the bereft a share of
the blessings of these days; let them guide the portionless to
inexhaustible treasure. This grace can come about through words and ways
and deeds that are of the Unseen Kingdom but, lacking such, it can never
be.

The confirmations of God are the surety for these blessings; the sacred
bounty of God bestoweth these great gifts. The friends of God are
supported by the Kingdom on high and they win their victories through the
massed armies of the most great guidance. Thus for them every difficulty
will be made smooth, every problem will most easily be solved.

Note ye how easily, where unity existeth in a given family, the affairs of
that family are conducted; what progress the members of that family make,
how they prosper in the world. Their concerns are in order, they enjoy
comfort and tranquillity, they are secure, their position is assured, they
come to be envied by all. Such a family but addeth to its stature and its
lasting honour, as day succeedeth day. And if we widen out the sphere of
unity a little to include the inhabitants of a village who seek to be
loving and united, who associate with and are kind to one another, what
great advances they will be seen to make, how secure and protected they
will be. Then let us widen out the sphere a little more, let us take the
inhabitants of a city, all of them together: if they establish the
strongest bonds of unity among themselves, how far they will progress,
even in a brief period and what power they will exert. And if the sphere
of unity be still further widened out, that is, if the inhabitants of a
whole country develop peaceable hearts, and if with all their hearts and
souls they yearn to cooperate with one another and to live in unity, and
if they become kind and loving to one another, that country will achieve
undying joy and lasting glory. Peace will it have, and plenty, and vast
wealth.

Note then: if every clan, tribe, community, every nation, country,
territory on earth should come together under the single-hued pavilion of
the oneness of mankind, and by the dazzling rays of the Sun of Truth
should proclaim the universality of man; if they should cause all nations
and all creeds to open wide their arms to one another, establish a World
Council, and proceed to bind the members of society one to another by
strong mutual ties, what would happen then? There is no doubt whatsoever
that the divine Beloved, in all His endearing beauty, and with Him a
massive host of heavenly confirmations and human blessings and bestowals,
would appear in His full glory before the assemblage of the world.

Wherefore, O ye beloved of the Lord, bestir yourselves, do all in your
power to be as one, to live in peace, each with the others: for ye are all
the drops from but one ocean, the foliage of one tree, the pearls from a
single shell, the flowers and sweet herbs from the same one garden. And
achieving that, strive ye to unite the hearts of those who follow other
faiths.

For one another must ye give up even life itself. To every human being
must ye be infinitely kind. Call none a stranger; think none to be your
foe. Be ye as if all men were your close kin and honoured friends. Walk ye
in such wise that this fleeting world will change into a splendour and
this dismal heap of dust become a palace of delights. Such is the counsel
of 'Abdu'l-Baha, this hapless servant.





222: O YE HOMELESS AND WANDERERS IN THE PATH OF GOD! ...


O ye homeless and wanderers in the Path of God! Prosperity, contentment,
and freedom, however much desired and conducive to the gladness of the
human heart, can in no wise compare with the trials of homelessness and
adversity in the pathway of God; for such exile and banishment are blessed
by the divine favour, and are surely followed by the mercy of Providence.
The joy of tranquillity in one's home, and the sweetness of freedom from
all cares shall pass away, whilst the blessing of homelessness shall
endure forever, and its far-reaching results shall be made manifest.

Abraham's migration from His native land caused the bountiful gifts of the
All-Glorious to be made manifest, and the setting of Canaan's brightest
star unfolded to the eyes the radiance of Joseph. The flight of Moses, the
Prophet of Sinai, revealed the Flame of the Lord's burning Fire, and the
rise of Jesus breathed the breaths of the Holy Spirit into the world. The
departure of Muhammad, the Beloved of God, from the city of His birth was
the cause of the exaltation of God's Holy Word, and the banishment of the
Sacred Beauty led to the diffusion of the light of His divine Revelation
throughout all regions.

Take ye good heed, O people of insight!





223: O YE SONS AND DAUGHTERS OF THE KINGDOM! YOUR ...


O ye sons and daughters of the Kingdom! Your letter was received. From its
contents it was known that, praise be to God, your hearts are in the
utmost purity and your souls rejoice in the glad tidings of God. The mass
of the people are occupied with self and worldly desire, are immersed in
the ocean of the nether world and are captives of the world of nature,
save those souls who have been freed from the chains and fetters of the
material world and, like unto swift-flying birds, are soaring in this
unbounded realm. They are awake and vigilant, they shun the obscurity of
the world of nature, their highest wish centereth on the eradication from
among men of the struggle for existence, the shining forth of the
spirituality and the love of the realm on high, the exercise of utmost
kindness among peoples, the realization of an intimate and close
connection between religions and the practice of the ideal of
self-sacrifice. Then will the world of humanity be transformed into the
Kingdom of God.

O ye friends, exert ye an effort! Every expenditure is in need of an
income. This day, in the world of humanity, men are all the time
expending, for war is nothing but the consumption of men and of wealth. At
least engage ye in a deed of profit to the world of humanity that ye may
partially compensate for that loss. Perchance, through the divine
confirmations, ye may be assisted in promulgating amity and concord among
men, in substituting love for enmity, in causing universal peace to result
from universal war and in converting loss and rancour into profit and
love. This wish will be realized through the power of the Kingdom.





224: O THOU SERVANT OF GOD! THY LETTER WAS RECEIVED. ...


O thou servant of God! Thy letter was received. Its contents were lofty
and sublime, and its aim high and far-reaching. The world of humanity is
in need of great improvement, for it is a material jungle wherein trees
without fruit flourish and useless weeds abound. If at all there is a tree
that beareth fruit it is overshadowed by the fruitless ones, and if a
flower groweth in this jungle it is hidden and concealed. The world of
mankind is in need of expert gardeners who may convert these forests into
delectable rose gardens, may substitute for these barren trees ones that
yield fruit, and may replace these useless weeds with roses and fragrant
herbs. Thus active souls and vigilant people rest neither by day nor by
night; they strive to be closely linked to the divine Kingdom and thereby
become the manifestations of infinite bounty and ideal gardeners for these
forests. Thus the world of humanity will be wholly transformed and the
merciful bounties become manifest.





225: O YE CONCOURSE OF THE KINGDOM OF ABHA! TWO ...


O ye concourse of the Kingdom of Abha! Two calls to success and prosperity
are being raised from the heights of the happiness of mankind, awakening
the slumbering, granting sight to the blind, causing the heedless to
become mindful, bestowing hearing upon the deaf, unloosing the tongue of
the mute and resuscitating the dead.

The one is the call of civilization, of the progress of the material
world. This pertaineth to the world of phenomena, promoteth the principles
of material achievement, and is the trainer for the physical
accomplishments of mankind. It compriseth the laws, regulations, arts and
sciences through which the world of humanity hath developed; laws and
regulations which are the outcome of lofty ideals and the result of sound
minds, and which have stepped forth into the arena of existence through
the efforts of the wise and cultured in past and subsequent ages. The
propagator and executive power of this call is just government.

The other is the soul-stirring call of God, Whose spiritual teachings are
safeguards of the everlasting glory, the eternal happiness and
illumination of the world of humanity, and cause attributes of mercy to be
revealed in the human world and the life beyond.

This second call is founded upon the instructions and exhortations of the
Lord and the admonitions and altruistic emotions belonging to the realm of
morality which, like unto a brilliant light, brighten and illumine the
lamp of the realities of mankind. Its penetrative power is the Word of
God.

However, until material achievements, physical accomplishments and human
virtues are reinforced by spiritual perfections, luminous qualities and
characteristics of mercy, no fruit or result shall issue therefrom, nor
will the happiness of the world of humanity, which is the ultimate aim, be
attained. For although, on the one hand, material achievements and the
development of the physical world produce prosperity, which exquisitely
manifests its intended aims, on the other hand dangers, severe calamities
and violent afflictions are imminent.

Consequently, when thou lookest at the orderly pattern of kingdoms, cities
and villages, with the attractiveness of their adornments, the freshness
of their natural resources, the refinement of their appliances, the ease
of their means of travel, the extent of knowledge available about the
world of nature, the great inventions, the colossal enterprises, the noble
discoveries and scientific researches, thou wouldst conclude that
civilization conduceth to the happiness and the progress of the human
world. Yet shouldst thou turn thine eye to the discovery of destructive
and infernal machines, to the development of forces of demolition and the
invention of fiery implements, which uproot the tree of life, it would
become evident and manifest unto thee that civilization is conjoined with
barbarism. Progress and barbarism go hand in hand, unless material
civilization be confirmed by Divine Guidance, by the revelations of the
All-Merciful and by godly virtues, and be reinforced by spiritual conduct,
by the ideals of the Kingdom and by the outpourings of the Realm of Might.

Consider now, that the most advanced and civilized countries of the world
have been turned into arsenals of explosives, that the continents of the
globe have been transformed into huge camps and battlefields, that the
peoples of the world have formed themselves into armed nations, and that
the governments of the world are vying with each other as to who will
first step into the field of carnage and bloodshed, thus subjecting
mankind to the utmost degree of affliction.

Therefore, this civilization and material progress should be combined with
the Most Great Guidance so that this nether world may become the scene of
the appearance of the bestowals of the Kingdom, and physical achievements
may be conjoined with the effulgences of the Merciful. This in order that
the beauty and perfection of the world of man may be unveiled and be
manifested before all in the utmost grace and splendour. Thus everlasting
glory and happiness shall be revealed.

Praise be to God, throughout succeeding centuries and ages the call of
civilization hath been raised, the world of humanity hath been advancing
and progressing day by day, various countries have been developing by
leaps and bounds, and material improvements have increased, until the
world of existence obtained universal capacity to receive the spiritual
teachings and to hearken to the Divine Call. The suckling babe passeth
through various physical stages, growing and developing at every stage,
until its body reacheth the age of maturity. Having arrived at this stage
it acquireth the capacity to manifest spiritual and intellectual
perfections. The lights of comprehension, intelligence and knowledge
become perceptible in it and the powers of its soul unfold. Similarly, in
the contingent world, the human species hath undergone progressive
physical changes and, by a slow process, hath scaled the ladder of
civilization, realizing in itself the wonders, excellencies and gifts of
humanity in their most glorious form, until it gained the capacity to
express the splendours of spiritual perfections and divine ideals and
became capable of hearkening to the call of God. Then at last the call of
the Kingdom was raised, the spiritual virtues and perfections were
revealed, the Sun of Reality dawned, and the teachings of the Most Great
Peace, of the oneness of the world of humanity and of the universality of
men, were promoted. We hope that the effulgence of these rays shall become
more and more intense, and the ideal virtues more resplendent, so that the
goal of this universal human process will be attained and the love of God
will appear in the utmost grace and beauty and bedazzle all hearts.

O ye beloved of God! Know ye, verily, that the happiness of mankind lieth
in the unity and the harmony of the human race, and that spiritual and
material developments are conditioned upon love and amity among all men.
Consider ye the living creatures, namely those which move upon the earth
and those which fly, those which graze and those which devour. Among the
beasts of prey each kind liveth apart from other species of its genus,
observing complete antagonism and hostility; and whenever they meet they
immediately fight and draw blood, gnashing their teeth and baring their
claws. This is the way in which ferocious beasts and bloodthirsty wolves
behave, carnivorous animals that live by themselves and fight for their
lives. But the docile, good-natured and gentle animals, whether they
belong to the flying or grazing species, associate with one another in
complete affinity, united in their flocks, and living their lives with
enjoyment, happiness and contentment. Such are the birds that are
satisfied with and grateful for a few grains; they live in complete
gladness, and break into rich and melodious song while soaring over
meadows, plains, hills and mountains. Similarly those animals which graze,
like the sheep, the antelope and the gazelle, consort in the greatest
amity, intimacy and unity while living in their plains and prairies in a
condition of complete contentment. But dogs, wolves, tigers, hyenas and
those other beasts of prey, are alienated from each other as they hunt and
roam about alone. The creatures of the fields and birds of the air do not
even shun or molest one another when they come upon their mutual grazing
and resting grounds but accept each other with friendliness, unlike the
devouring beasts who immediately tear each other apart when one intrudes
upon the other's cave or lair; yea, even if one merely passeth by the
abode of another the latter at once rusheth out to attack and if possible
kill the former.

Therefore, it hath been made clear and manifest that in the animal kingdom
also love and affinity are the fruits of a gentle disposition, a pure
nature and praiseworthy character, while discord and isolation are
characteristic of the fierce beasts of the wild.

The Almighty hath not created in man the claws and teeth of ferocious
animals, nay rather hath the human form been fashioned and set with the
most comely attributes and adorned with the most perfect virtues. The
honour of this creation and the worthiness of this garment therefore
require man to have love and affinity for his own kind, nay rather, to act
towards all living creatures with justice and equity.

Similarly, consider how the cause of the welfare, happiness, joy and
comfort of humankind are amity and union, whereas dissension and discord
are most conducive to hardship, humiliation, agitation and failure.

But a thousand times alas, that man is negligent and unaware of these
facts, and daily doth he strut abroad with the characteristics of a wild
beast. Lo! At one moment he turneth into a ferocious tiger; at the next he
becometh a creeping, venomous viper! But the sublime achievements of man
reside in those qualities and attributes that exclusively pertain to the
angels of the Supreme Concourse. Therefore, when praiseworthy qualities
and high morals emanate from man, he becometh a heavenly being, an angel
of the Kingdom, a divine reality and a celestial effulgence. On the other
hand, when he engageth in warfare, quarrelling and bloodshed, he becometh
viler than the most fierce of savage creatures, for if a bloodthirsty wolf
devoureth a lamb in a single night, man slaughtereth a hundred thousand in
the field of battle, strewing the ground with their corpses and kneading
the earth with their blood.

In short, man is endowed with two natures: one tendeth towards moral
sublimity and intellectual perfection, while the other turneth to bestial
degradation and carnal imperfections. If ye travel the countries of the
globe ye shall observe on one side the remains of ruin and destruction,
while on the other ye shall see the signs of civilization and development.
Such desolation and ruin are the result of war, strife and quarrelling,
while all development and progress are fruits of the lights of virtue,
co-operation and concord.

If one were to travel through the deserts of Central Asia he would observe
how many cities, once great and prosperous like Paris and London, are now
demolished and razed to the ground. From the Caspian Sea to the River Oxus
there stretch wild and desolate plains, deserts, wildernesses and valleys.
For two days and two nights the Russian railway traverseth the ruined
cities and uninhabited villages of that wasteland. Formerly that plain
bore the fruit of the finest civilizations of the past. Tokens of
development and refinement were apparent all around, arts and sciences
were well protected and promoted, professions and industries flourished,
commerce and agriculture had reached a high stage of efficiency, and the
foundations of government and statesmanship were laid on a strong and
solid basis. Today that vast stretch of land hath become mostly the
shelter and asylum of Turkoman tribes, and an arena for the ferocious
display of wild beasts. The ancient cities of that plain, such as Gurgan,
Nissa, Abivard and _Sh_ahristan, famous throughout the world for their
arts, sciences, culture, industry, and well known for their wealth,
greatness, prosperity and distinction, have given way to a wilderness
wherein no voice is heard save the roaring of wild beasts and where
bloodthirsty wolves roam at will. This destruction and desolation was
brought about by war and strife, dissension and discord between the
Persians and the Turks, who differed in their religion and customs. So
rigid was the spirit of religious prejudice that the faithless leaders
sanctioned the shedding of innocent blood, the ruin of property and the
desecration of family honour. This is to cite only one illustration.

Consequently, when thou traversest the regions of the world, thou shalt
conclude that all progress is the result of association and co-operation,
while ruin is the outcome of animosity and hatred. Notwithstanding this,
the world of humanity doth not take warning, nor doth it awake from the
slumber of heedlessness. Man is still causing differences, quarrels and
strife in order to marshal the cohorts of war and, with his legions, rush
into the field of bloodshed and slaughter.

Then again, consider the phenomenon of composition and decomposition, of
existence and non-existence. Every created thing in the contingent world
is made up of many and varied atoms, and its existence is dependent on the
composition of these. In other words, through the divine creative power a
conjunction of simple elements taketh place so that from this composition
a distinct organism is produced. The existence of all things is based upon
this principle. But when the order is deranged, decomposition is produced
and disintegration setteth in, then that thing ceaseth to exist. That is,
the annihilation of all things is caused by decomposition and
disintegration. Therefore attraction and composition between the various
elements is the means of life, and discord, decomposition and division
produce death. Thus the cohesive and attractive forces in all things lead
to the appearance of fruitful results and effects, while estrangement and
alienation of things lead to disturbance and annihilation. Through
affinity and attraction all living things like plants, animals and men
come into existence, while division and discord bring about decomposition
and destruction.

Consequently, that which is conducive to association and attraction and
unity among the sons of men is the means of the life of the world of
humanity, and whatever causeth division, repulsion and remoteness leadeth
to the death of humankind.

And if, as thou passest by fields and plantations, thou observest that the
plants, flowers and sweet-smelling herbs are growing luxuriantly together,
forming a pattern of unity, this is an evidence of the fact that that
plantation and garden is flourishing under the care of a skilful gardener.
But when thou seest it in a state of disorder and irregularity thou
inferrest that it hath lacked the training of an efficient farmer and thus
hath produced weeds and tares.

It therefore becometh manifest that amity and cohesion are indicative of
the training of the Real Educator, and dispersion and separation a proof
of savagery and deprivation of divine education.

A critic may object, saying that peoples, races, tribes and communities of
the world are of different and varied customs, habits, tastes, character,
inclinations and ideas, that opinions and thoughts are contrary to one
another, and how, therefore, is it possible for real unity to be revealed
and perfect accord among human souls to exist?

In answer we say that differences are of two kinds. One is the cause of
annihilation and is like the antipathy existing among warring nations and
conflicting tribes who seek each other's destruction, uprooting one
another's families, depriving one another of rest and comfort and
unleashing carnage. The other kind which is a token of diversity is the
essence of perfection and the cause of the appearance of the bestowals of
the Most Glorious Lord.

Consider the flowers of a garden: though differing in kind, colour, form
and shape, yet, inasmuch as they are refreshed by the waters of one
spring, revived by the breath of one wind, invigorated by the rays of one
sun, this diversity increaseth their charm, and addeth unto their beauty.
Thus when that unifying force, the penetrating influence of the Word of
God, taketh effect, the difference of customs, manners, habits, ideas,
opinions and dispositions embellisheth the world of humanity. This
diversity, this difference is like the naturally created dissimilarity and
variety of the limbs and organs of the human body, for each one
contributeth to the beauty, efficiency and perfection of the whole. When
these different limbs and organs come under the influence of man's
sovereign soul, and the soul's power pervadeth the limbs and members,
veins and arteries of the body, then difference reinforceth harmony,
diversity strengtheneth love, and multiplicity is the greatest factor for
co-ordination.

How unpleasing to the eye if all the flowers and plants, the leaves and
blossoms, the fruits, the branches and the trees of that garden were all
of the same shape and colour! Diversity of hues, form and shape, enricheth
and adorneth the garden, and heighteneth the effect thereof. In like
manner, when divers shades of thought, temperament and character, are
brought together under the power and influence of one central agency, the
beauty and glory of human perfection will be revealed and made manifest.
Naught but the celestial potency of the Word of God, which ruleth and
transcendeth the realities of all things, is capable of harmonizing the
divergent thoughts, sentiments, ideas, and convictions of the children of
men. Verily, it is the penetrating power in all things, the mover of souls
and the binder and regulator in the world of humanity.

Praise be to God, today the splendour of the Word of God hath illumined
every horizon, and from all sects, races, tribes, nations, and communities
souls have come together in the light of the Word, assembled, united and
agreed in perfect harmony. Oh! What a great number of meetings are held
adorned with souls from various races and diverse sects! Anyone attending
these will be struck with amazement, and might suppose that these souls
are all of one land, one nationality, one community, one thought, one
belief and one opinion; whereas, in fact, one is an American, the other an
African, one cometh from Asia and another from Europe, one is a native of
India, another is from Turkestan, one is an Arab, another a Tajik, another
a Persian and yet another a Greek. Notwithstanding such diversity they
associate in perfect harmony and unity, love and freedom; they have one
voice, one thought and one purpose. Verily, this is from the penetrative
power of the Word of God! If all the forces of the universe were to
combine they would not be able thus to gather a single assemblage so
imbued with the sentiments of love, affection, attraction and enkindlement
as to unite the members of different races and to raise up from the heart
of the world a voice that shall dispel war and strife, uproot dissension
and disputation, usher in the era of universal peace and establish unity
and concord amongst men.

Can any power withstand the penetrative influence of the Word of God? Nay,
by God! The proof is clear and the evidence is complete! If anyone looketh
with the eyes of justice he shall be struck with wonder and amazement and
will testify that all the peoples, sects and races of the world should be
glad, content and grateful for the teachings and admonitions of
Baha'u'llah. For these divine injunctions tame every ferocious beast,
transform the creeping insect into a soaring bird, cause human souls to
become angels of the Kingdom, and make the human world a focus for the
qualities of mercy.

Furthermore each and every one is required to show obedience, submission
and loyalty towards his own government. Today no state in the world is in
a condition of peace or tranquillity, for security and trust have vanished
from among the people. Both the governed and the governors are alike in
danger. The only group of people which today submitteth peacefully and
loyally to the laws and ordinances of government and dealeth honestly and
frankly with the people, is none other than this wronged community. For
while all sects and races in Persia and Turkestan are absorbed in
promoting their own interests and only obey their governments either with
the hope of reward or from fear of punishment, the Baha'is are the
well-wishers of the government, obedient to its laws and bearing love
towards all peoples.

Such obedience and submission is made incumbent and obligatory upon all by
the clear Text of the Abha Beauty. Therefore the believers, in obedience
to the command of the True One, show the utmost sincerity and goodwill
towards all nations; and should any soul act contrary to the laws of the
government he would consider himself responsible before God, deserving
divine wrath and chastisement for his sin and wrongdoing. It is
astonishing that, in spite of this, some of the officials of the
government consider the Baha'is to be ill-wishers while they regard the
members of other communities as their well-wishers. Gracious God!
Recently, when there was general revolution and agitation in Tihran and in
other provinces of Persia, it was proven that not a single Baha'i had
taken part nor intervened in these affairs. For this reason they were
reproached by the ignorant because they had obeyed the command of the
Blessed Perfection and refrained absolutely from interference in political
matters. They were not associated with any party, but busied themselves
with their own affairs and professions and discharged their own duties.

All the friends of God bear witness to the fact that 'Abdu'l-Baha is, from
every standpoint, the well-wisher of all governments and nations, and
prayeth sincerely for their progress and advancement, especially for the
two great states of the east, for these two countries are the native land
and the place of exile of Baha'u'llah. In all epistles and writings he
hath commended and praised these two governments and hath supplicated
divine confirmations for them from the Threshold of the One true God. The
Abha Beauty--may my life be a sacrifice for His loved ones--hath offered
prayers on behalf of Their Imperial Majesties. Gracious God! How strange
that, notwithstanding these conclusive proofs, every day some event
transpireth and difficulties arise. But we, and the friends of God, should
on no account slacken our efforts to be loyal, sincere and men of good
will. We should at all times manifest our truthfulness and sincerity, nay
rather, we must be constant in our faithfulness and trustworthiness, and
occupy ourselves in offering prayers for the good of all.

O ye beloved of God, these are days for steadfastness, for firmness and
perseverance in the Cause of God. Ye must not focus your attention upon
the person of 'Abdu'l-Baha, for erelong he will bid you farewell. Rather
must ye fix your gaze upon the Word of God. If the Word of God is being
promoted, rejoice and be happy and thankful, though 'Abdu'l-Baha himself
be threatened by the sword or burdened by the weight of chains and
fetters. For the Holy Temple of the Cause of God is important, not the
physical body of 'Abdu'l-Baha. The friends of God must arise with such
steadfastness that if, at any moment, a hundred souls like 'Abdu'l-Baha
become the target for the arrows of affliction, they will not shift or
waver in their resolve, their determination, their enkindlement, their
devotion and service in the Cause of God. 'Abdu'l-Baha is himself a
servant at the Threshold of the Blessed Beauty and a manifestation of pure
and utter servitude at the Threshold of the Almighty. He hath no other
station or title, no other rank or power. This is my ultimate Purpose, my
eternal Paradise, my holiest Temple and my Sadratu'l-Muntaha. With the
Abha Blessed Beauty and the Exalted One, His Herald--may my life be a
sacrifice for Them both--hath ended the appearance of God's independent and
universal Manifestation. And for a thousand years all shall be illumined
by His lights and be sustained by the ocean of His favours.

O ye lovers of God! This, verily, is my last wish and my admonition unto
you. Blessed, therefore, is he who is aided by God to follow that which is
inscribed upon this scroll whose words are sanctified from the symbols
current amongst men.





226: O THOU SERVANT OF GOD! THY LETTER WAS RECEIVED, ...


O thou servant of God! Thy letter was received, and was the cause of
gladness. Thou hast expressed thine ardent wish that I should attend the
Peace Congress. I do not present myself at such political conferences, for
the establishment of peace is unachievable save through the power of the
Word of God. When a conference is convened, representative of all nations
and working under the influence of the Word of God, then universal peace
will be established but otherwise it is impossible.

At present it is certain that temporary peace is established but it is not
lasting. All governments and nations have become tired of war, of the
difficulties of travel, of huge expenditures, of the loss of life, of the
affliction of women, of the great number of orphans, and they are driven
by force to peace. But this peace is not permanent, it is temporary.

We hope that the power of the Word of God will establish a peace that
shall eternally remain effective and secure.





227: O YE ESTEEMED ONES WHO ARE PIONEERS AMONG THE ...


(75) O ye esteemed ones who are pioneers among the well-wishers of the
world of humanity!

The letters which ye sent during the war were not received, but a letter
dated February 11th, 1916, has just come to hand, and immediately an
answer is being written. Your intention deserves a thousand praises,
because you are serving the world of humanity, and this is conducive to
the happiness and welfare of all. This recent war has proved to the world
and the people that war is destruction while universal peace is
construction; war is death while peace is life; war is rapacity and
bloodthirstiness while peace is beneficence and humaneness; war is an
appurtenance of the world of nature while peace is of the foundation of
the religion of God; war is darkness upon darkness while peace is heavenly
light; war is the destroyer of the edifice of mankind while peace is the
everlasting life of the world of humanity; war is like a devouring wolf
while peace is like the angels of heaven; war is the struggle for
existence while peace is mutual aid and co-operation among the peoples of
the world and the cause of the good-pleasure of the True One in the
heavenly realm.

There is not one soul whose conscience does not testify that in this day
there is no more important matter in the world than that of universal
peace. Every just one bears witness to this and adores that esteemed
Assembly because its aim is that this darkness may be changed into light,
this bloodthirstiness into kindness, this torment into bliss, this
hardship into ease and this enmity and hatred into fellowship and love.
Therefore, the effort of those esteemed souls is worthy of praise and
commendation.

But the wise souls who are aware of the essential relationships emanating
from the realities of things consider that one single matter cannot, by
itself, influence the human reality as it ought and should, for until the
minds of men become united, no important matter can be accomplished. At
present universal peace is a matter of great importance, but unity of
conscience is essential, so that the foundation of this matter may become
secure, its establishment firm and its edifice strong.

Therefore Baha'u'llah, fifty years ago, expounded this question of
universal peace at a time when He was confined in the fortress of Akka and
was wronged and imprisoned. He wrote about this important matter of
universal peace to all the great sovereigns of the world, and established
it among His friends in the orient. The horizon of the east was in utter
darkness, nations displayed the utmost hatred and enmity towards each
other, religions thirsted for each other's blood, and it was darkness upon
darkness. At such a time Baha'u'llah shone forth like the sun from the
horizon of the east and illumined Persia with the lights of these
teachings.

Among His teachings was the declaration of universal peace. People of
different nations, religions and sects who followed Him came together to
such an extent that remarkable gatherings were instituted consisting of
the various nations and religions of the east. Every soul who entered
these gatherings saw but one nation, one teaching, one pathway, one order,
for the teachings of Baha'u'llah were not limited to the establishment of
universal peace. They embraced many teachings which supplemented and
supported that of universal peace.

Among these teachings was the independent investigation of reality so that
the world of humanity may be saved from the darkness of imitation and
attain to the truth; may tear off and cast away this ragged and outgrown
garment of a thousand years ago and may put on the robe woven in the
utmost purity and holiness in the loom of reality. As reality is one and
cannot admit of multiplicity, therefore different opinions must ultimately
become fused into one.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is the oneness of the world of
humanity; that all human beings are the sheep of God and He is the kind
Shepherd. This Shepherd is kind to all the sheep, because He created them
all, trained them, provided for them and protected them. There is no doubt
that the Shepherd is kind to all the sheep and should there be among these
sheep ignorant ones, they must be educated; if there be children, they
must be trained until they reach maturity; if there be sick ones, they
must be cured. There must be no hatred and enmity, for as by a kind
physician these ignorant, sick ones should be treated.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is that religion must be the cause
of fellowship and love. If it becomes the cause of estrangement then it is
not needed, for religion is like a remedy; if it aggravates the disease
then it becomes unnecessary.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is that religion must be in
conformity with science and reason, so that it may influence the hearts of
men. The foundation must be solid and must not consist of imitations.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is that religious, racial,
political, economic and patriotic prejudices destroy the edifice of
humanity. As long as these prejudices prevail, the world of humanity will
not have rest. For a period of 6,000 years history informs us about the
world of humanity. During these 6,000 years the world of humanity has not
been free from war, strife, murder and bloodthirstiness. In every period
war has been waged in one country or another and that war was due to
either religious prejudice, racial prejudice, political prejudice or
patriotic prejudice. It has therefore been ascertained and proved that all
prejudices are destructive of the human edifice. As long as these
prejudices persist, the struggle for existence must remain dominant, and
bloodthirstiness and rapacity continue. Therefore, even as was the case in
the past, the world of humanity cannot be saved from the darkness of
nature and cannot attain illumination except through the abandonment of
prejudices and the acquisition of the morals of the Kingdom.

If this prejudice and enmity are on account of religion consider that
religion should be the cause of fellowship, otherwise it is fruitless. And
if this prejudice be the prejudice of nationality consider that all
mankind are of one nation; all have sprung from the tree of Adam, and Adam
is the root of the tree. That tree is one and all these nations are like
branches, while the individuals of humanity are like leaves, blossoms and
fruits thereof. Then the establishment of various nations and the
consequent shedding of blood and destruction of the edifice of humanity
result from human ignorance and selfish motives.

As to the patriotic prejudice, this is also due to absolute ignorance, for
the surface of the earth is one native land. Every one can live in any
spot on the terrestrial globe. Therefore all the world is man's
birthplace. These boundaries and outlets have been devised by man. In the
creation, such boundaries and outlets were not assigned. Europe is one
continent, Asia is one continent, Africa is one continent, Australia is
one continent, but some of the souls, from personal motives and selfish
interests, have divided each one of these continents and considered a
certain part as their own country. God has set up no frontier between
France and Germany; they are continuous. Yea, in the first centuries,
selfish souls, for the promotion of their own interests, have assigned
boundaries and outlets and have, day by day, attached more importance to
these, until this led to intense enmity, bloodshed and rapacity in
subsequent centuries. In the same way this will continue indefinitely, and
if this conception of patriotism remains limited within a certain circle,
it will be the primary cause of the world's destruction. No wise and just
person will acknowledge these imaginary distinctions. Every limited area
which we call our native country we regard as our motherland, whereas the
terrestrial globe is the motherland of all, and not any restricted area.
In short, for a few days we live on this earth and eventually we are
buried in it, it is our eternal tomb. Is it worth while that we should
engage in bloodshed and tear one another to pieces for this eternal tomb?
Nay, far from it, neither is God pleased with such conduct nor would any
sane man approve of it.

Consider! The blessed animals engage in no patriotic quarrels. They are in
the utmost fellowship with one another and live together in harmony. For
example, if a dove from the east and a dove from the west, a dove from the
north and a dove from the south chance to arrive, at the same time, in one
spot, they immediately associate in harmony. So is it with all the blessed
animals and birds. But the ferocious animals, as soon as they meet, attack
and fight with each other, tear each other to pieces and it is impossible
for them to live peaceably together in one spot. They are all unsociable
and fierce, savage and combative fighters.

Regarding the economic prejudice, it is apparent that whenever the ties
between nations become strengthened and the exchange of commodities
accelerated, and any economic principle is established in one country, it
will ultimately affect the other countries and universal benefits will
result. Then why this prejudice?

As to the political prejudice, the policy of God must be followed and it
is indisputable that the policy of God is greater than human policy. We
must follow the Divine policy and that applies alike to all individuals.
He treats all individuals alike: no distinction is made, and that is the
foundation of the Divine Religions.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is the origination of one language
that may be spread universally among the people. This teaching was
revealed from the pen of Baha'u'llah in order that this universal language
may eliminate misunderstandings from among mankind.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is the equality of women and men.
The world of humanity has two wings--one is women and the other men. Not
until both wings are equally developed can the bird fly. Should one wing
remain weak, flight is impossible. Not until the world of women becomes
equal to the world of men in the acquisition of virtues and perfections,
can success and prosperity be attained as they ought to be.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is voluntary sharing of one's
property with others among mankind. This voluntary sharing is greater than
equality, and consists in this, that man should not prefer himself to
others, but rather should sacrifice his life and property for others. But
this should not be introduced by coercion so that it becomes a law and man
is compelled to follow it. Nay, rather, man should voluntarily and of his
own choice sacrifice his property and life for others, and spend willingly
for the poor, just as is done in Persia among the Baha'is.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is man's freedom, that through the
ideal Power he should be free and emancipated from the captivity of the
world of nature; for as long as man is captive to nature he is a ferocious
animal, as the struggle for existence is one of the exigencies of the
world of nature. This matter of the struggle for existence is the
fountain-head of all calamities and is the supreme affliction.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is that religion is a mighty
bulwark. If the edifice of religion shakes and totters, commotion and
chaos will ensue and the order of things will be utterly upset, for in the
world of mankind there are two safeguards that protect man from
wrongdoing. One is the law which punishes the criminal; but the law
prevents only the manifest crime and not the concealed sin; whereas the
ideal safeguard, namely, the religion of God, prevents both the manifest
and the concealed crime, trains man, educates morals, compels the adoption
of virtues and is the all-inclusive power which guarantees the felicity of
the world of mankind. But by religion is meant that which is ascertained
by investigation and not that which is based on mere imitation, the
foundations of Divine Religions and not human imitations.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is that although material
civilization is one of the means for the progress of the world of mankind,
yet until it becomes combined with Divine civilization, the desired
result, which is the felicity of mankind, will not be attained. Consider!
These battleships that reduce a city to ruins within the space of an hour
are the result of material civilization; likewise the Krupp guns, the
Mauser rifles, dynamite, submarines, torpedo boats, armed aircraft and
bombers--all these weapons of war are the malignant fruits of material
civilization. Had material civilization been combined with Divine
civilization, these fiery weapons would never have been invented. Nay,
rather, human energy would have been wholly devoted to useful inventions
and would have been concentrated on praiseworthy discoveries. Material
civilization is like a lamp-glass. Divine civilization is the lamp itself
and the glass without the light is dark. Material civilization is like the
body. No matter how infinitely graceful, elegant and beautiful it may be,
it is dead. Divine civilization is like the spirit, and the body gets its
life from the spirit, otherwise it becomes a corpse. It has thus been made
evident that the world of mankind is in need of the breaths of the Holy
Spirit. Without the spirit the world of mankind is lifeless, and without
this light the world of mankind is in utter darkness. For the world of
nature is an animal world. Until man is born again from the world of
nature, that is to say, becomes detached from the world of nature, he is
essentially an animal, and it is the teachings of God which convert this
animal into a human soul.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah is the promotion of education.
Every child must be instructed in sciences as much as is necessary. If the
parents are able to provide the expenses of this education, it is well,
otherwise the community must provide the means for the teaching of that
child.

And among the teachings of Baha'u'llah are justice and right. Until these
are realized on the plane of existence, all things shall be in disorder
and remain imperfect. The world of mankind is a world of oppression and
cruelty, and a realm of aggression and error.

In fine, such teachings are numerous. These manifold principles, which
constitute the greatest basis for the felicity of mankind and are of the
bounties of the Merciful, must be added to the matter of universal peace
and combined with it, so that results may accrue. Otherwise the
realization of universal peace by itself in the world of mankind is
difficult. As the teachings of Baha'u'llah are combined with universal
peace, they are like a table provided with every kind of fresh and
delicious food. Every soul can find, at that table of infinite bounty,
that which he desires. If the question is restricted to universal peace
alone, the remarkable results which are expected and desired will not be
attained. The scope of universal peace must be such that all the
communities and religions may find their highest wish realized in it. The
teachings of Baha'u'llah are such that all the communities of the world,
whether religious, political or ethical, ancient or modern, find in them
the expression of their highest wish.

For example, the people of religions find, in the teachings of
Baha'u'llah, the establishment of Universal Religion--a religion that
perfectly conforms with present conditions, which in reality effects the
immediate cure of the incurable disease, which relieves every pain, and
bestows the infallible antidote for every deadly poison. For if we wish to
arrange and organize the world of mankind in accordance with the present
religious imitations and thereby to establish the felicity of the world of
mankind, it is impossible and impracticable--for example, the enforcement
of the laws of the Torah and also of the other religions in accordance
with present imitations. But the essential basis of all the Divine
Religions which pertains to the virtues of the world of mankind and is the
foundation of the welfare of the world of man, is found in the teachings
of Baha'u'llah in the most perfect presentation.

Similarly, with regard to the peoples who clamour for freedom: the
moderate freedom which guarantees the welfare of the world of mankind and
maintains and preserves the universal relationships, is found in its
fullest power and extension in the teachings of Baha'u'llah.

So with regard to political parties: that which is the greatest policy
directing the world of mankind, nay, rather, the Divine policy, is found
in the teachings of Baha'u'llah.

Likewise with regard to the party of 'equality' which seeks the solution
of the economic problems: until now all proposed solutions have proved
impracticable except the economic proposals in the teachings of
Baha'u'llah which are practicable and cause no distress to society.

So with the other parties: when ye look deeply into this matter, ye will
discover that the highest aims of those parties are found in the teachings
of Baha'u'llah. These teachings constitute the all-inclusive power among
all men and are practicable. But there are some teachings of the past,
such as those of the Torah, which cannot be carried out at the present
day. It is the same with the other religions and the tenets of the various
sects and the different parties.

For example, the question of universal peace, about which Baha'u'llah says
that the Supreme Tribunal must be established: although the League of
Nations has been brought into existence, yet it is incapable of
establishing universal peace. But the Supreme Tribunal which Baha'u'llah
has described will fulfil this sacred task with the utmost might and
power. And His plan is this: that the national assemblies of each country
and nation--that is to say parliaments--should elect two or three persons
who are the choicest men of that nation, and are well informed concerning
international laws and the relations between governments and aware of the
essential needs of the world of humanity in this day. The number of these
representatives should be in proportion to the number of inhabitants of
that country. The election of these souls who are chosen by the national
assembly, that is, the parliament, must be confirmed by the upper house,
the congress and the cabinet and also by the president or monarch so these
persons may be the elected ones of all the nation and the government. From
among these people the members of the Supreme Tribunal will be elected,
and all mankind will thus have a share therein, for every one of these
delegates is fully representative of his nation. When the Supreme Tribunal
gives a ruling on any international question, either unanimously or by
majority rule, there will no longer be any pretext for the plaintiff or
ground of objection for the defendant. In case any of the governments or
nations, in the execution of the irrefutable decision of the Supreme
Tribunal, be negligent or dilatory, the rest of the nations will rise up
against it, because all the governments and nations of the world are the
supporters of this Supreme Tribunal. Consider what a firm foundation this
is! But by a limited and restricted League the purpose will not be
realized as it ought and should. This is the truth about the situation,
which has been stated....





228: O SERVANT OF THE THRESHOLD OF BAHA'U'LLAH! THY ...


O Servant of the Threshold of Baha'u'llah! Thy letter dated 14 June 1920
hath been received. A letter from some of the members of the Peace
Committee hath also been received and an answer hath been written to them.
Deliver it to them.

It is evident that this meeting is not what it is reputed to be and is
unable to order and arrange affairs in the manner which is befitting and
necessary. However that may be, the matter in which they are engaged is
nevertheless of the greatest importance. The meeting at The Hague should
have such power and influence that its word will have an effect on the
governments and nations. Point out to the revered members gathered there
that the Hague Conference held before the war had as its President the
Emperor of Russia, and its members were men of the greatest eminence.
Nevertheless this did not prevent such a terrible war. Now how will it be?
For in the future another war, fiercer than the last, will assuredly break
out; verily, of this there is no doubt whatever. What can the Hague
meeting do?

But the fundamental principles laid down by Baha'u'llah are day by day
spreading. Deliver the answer to their letter and express the greatest
love and kindness, and leave them to their own affairs. In any case they
ought to be pleased with you, and subject to their approval you may print
and distribute that detailed epistle of mine which hath already been
translated into English.

As to the Esperantists, associate with them. Whenever you find one with
capacity, convey to him the fragrances of Life. In all the meetings
converse about the teachings of Baha'u'llah, because this will be
effective today in the western countries. And if they ask regarding your
belief in Baha'u'llah, you should reply that we consider Him as the
foremost Teacher and Educator of the world in this age, and make clear,
explaining in detail, that these teachings regarding universal peace and
other subjects were revealed by the pen of Baha'u'llah fifty years ago and
have already been published in Persia and India and spread abroad
throughout the whole world. In the beginning all were incredulous about
the idea of universal peace, considering it an impossibility. Further,
speak of the greatness of Baha'u'llah, of the events that took place in
Persia and Turkey, of the astonishing influence that He exerted, of the
contents of the Epistles which He addressed to all the sovereigns, and of
their fulfilment. Also speak of the spread of the Baha'i Cause. Associate
with the Committee of Universal Peace at The Hague as much as possible,
showing them every courtesy.

It is evident that the Esperantists are receptive and thou art familiar
with and expert in their language. Communicate also with the Esperantists
of Germany and other places. The literature which thou circulatest should
deal only with the teachings. The dissemination of other literature is at
present not advisable. My hope is that the divine confirmations may
continually assist thee....

Grieve not over the apathy and coldness of the Hague meeting. Put thy
trust in God. Our hope is that among the people the Esperanto language may
hereafter have a powerful effect. Thou hast now sown the seed. Assuredly
it will grow. Its growth dependeth upon God.





229: O SINCERE SERVANT OF THE TRUE ONE! I HEAR THOU ...


O sincere servant of the True One! I hear thou art grieved and distressed
at the happenings of the world and the vicissitudes of fortune. Wherefore
this fear and sorrow? The true lovers of the Abha Beauty, and they that
have quaffed the Cup of the Covenant fear no calamity, nor feel depressed
in the hour of trial. They regard the fire of adversity as their garden of
delight, and the depth of the sea the expanse of heaven.

Thou who art neath the shelter of God, and under the shadow of the Tree of
His Covenant, why sorrow and repine? Rest thou assured and feel confident.
Observe the written commandments of thy Lord with joy and peace, with
earnestness and sincerity; and be thou the well-wisher of thy country and
thy government. His grace shall assist thee at all times, His blessings
shall be bestowed upon thee, and thy heart's desire shall be realized.

By the Ancient Beauty!--may my life be a sacrifice for His loved ones--Were
the friends to realize what a glorious sovereignty the Lord hath destined
for them in His Kingdom, surely they would be filled with ecstasy, would
behold themselves crowned with immortal glory and carried away with
transports of delight. Erelong it shall be made manifest how brilliantly
the light of His bountiful care and mercy hath shone upon His loved ones,
and what a turbulent ocean hath been stirred in their hearts! Then will
they clamour and exclaim: Happy are we; let all the world rejoice!





230: O RESPECTED PERSONAGE! THY SECOND LETTER DATED ...


O respected personage! Thy second letter dated 19 December 1918 was
received. It was the cause of great joy and gladness, for it showed thy
firmness and steadfastness in the Covenant and Testament and thy yearning
to raise the call of the Kingdom of God. Today the call of the Kingdom is
the magnetic power which draweth to itself the world of mankind, for
capacity in men is great. Divine teachings constitute the spirit of this
age, nay rather the sun of this age. Every soul must endeavour that the
veils that cover men's eyes may be torn asunder and that instantly the sun
may be seen and that heart and sight may be illumined thereby.

Now, through the aid and bounty of God, this power of guidance and this
merciful bestowal are found in thee. Arise, therefore, in the utmost Power
that thou mayest bestow spirit upon mouldering bones, give sight to the
blind, balm and freshness to the depressed, and liveliness and grace to
the dispirited. Every lamp will eventually be extinguished save the lamp
of the Kingdom, which increaseth day by day in splendour. Every call shall
ultimately weaken except the call to the Kingdom of God, which day unto
day is raised. Every path shall finally be twisted except the road of the
Kingdom, which straighteneth day by day. Undoubtedly heavenly melody is
not to be measured with an earthly one, and artificial lights are not to
be compared with the heavenly Sun. Hence one must exert endeavour in
whatever is lasting and permanent so that one may more and more be
illumined, strengthened and revived....

I pray and supplicate the Divine Kingdom that thy father, mother and
brother may, through the light of guidance, enter the Kingdom of God.





231: O THOU BLOSSOM ON THE TREE OF LIFE! HAPPY ART ...


O thou blossom on the Tree of Life! Happy art thou to have girded thy
loins in service; to have risen with all thy power in the promulgation of
the divine teachings, to have convened gatherings and to have striven for
the exaltation of the Word of God.

In this mortal world every important matter hath an end; and every
remarkable achievement a termination; none having permanent existence. For
instance, consider how the important achievements of the ancient world
have been totally exterminated and not a trace remaineth therefrom save
the great Cause of the Kingdom of God, which hath no beginning and will
have no end. At most, it is only renewed. At the beginning of each renewal
it commandeth no attention in the sight of the people, but when once
definitely established, it will daily advance and in its daily exaltation
will reach the supreme heavens.

For instance, consider the day of Christ, which was the day of the renewal
of the Kingdom of God. The people of the world attached no importance to
it and did not realize its significance to such an extent that the
sepulchre of Christ remained lost and unknown for three hundred years,
until the maidservant of God, Helen, the mother of Constantine arrived and
discovered the sacred spot.

My purpose in all this is to show how unobservant are the people of the
world and how ignorant, and on the day of the establishment of the
Kingdom, they remain heedless and negligent.

Erelong the power of the Kingdom will encompass all the world and then
they will be awakened and will cry and lament over those who were
oppressed and martyred, and will sigh and moan. Such is the nature of
people.





232: AS TO PRESIDENT WILSON, THE FOURTEEN PRINCIPLES ...


As to President Wilson, the fourteen principles which he hath enunciated
are mostly found in the teachings of Baha'u'llah and I therefore hope that
he will be confirmed and assisted. Now is the dawn of universal peace; my
hope is that its morn will fully break, converting the gloom of war, of
strife and of wrangling among men into the light of union, of harmony and
of affection.





233: O YE FAITHFUL FRIENDS, O YE SINCERE SERVANTS OF ...


O ye faithful friends, O ye sincere servants of Baha'u'llah! Now, in the
midwatches of the night, when eyes are closed in slumber and all have laid
their heads upon the couch of rest and deep sleep, 'Abdu'l-Baha is wakeful
within the precincts of the Hallowed Shrine and, in the ardour of his
invocation uttereth this, his prayer:

O Thou kind and loving Providence! The east is astir and the west surgeth
even as the eternal billows of the sea. The gentle breezes of holiness are
diffused and, from the Unseen Kingdom, the rays of the Orb of Truth shine
forth resplendent. The anthems of divine unity are being chanted and the
ensigns of celestial might are waving. The angelic Voice is raised and,
even as the roaring of the leviathan, soundeth the call to selflessness
and evanescence. The triumphal cry Ya Baha'u'l-Abha resoundeth on every
side, and the call Ya 'Aliyyu'l-A'la ringeth throughout all regions. No
stir is there in the world save that of the Glory of the One Ravisher of
Hearts, and no tumult is there save the surging of the love of Him, the
Incomparable, the Well-Beloved.

The beloved of the Lord, with their musk-scented breath, burn like bright
candles in every clime, and the friends of the All-Merciful, even as
unfolding flowers, can be found in all regions. Not for a moment do they
rest; they breathe not but in remembrance of Thee, and crave naught but to
serve Thy Cause. In the meadows of truth they are as sweet-singing
nightingales, and in the flower-garden of guidance they are even as
brightly-coloured blossoms. With mystic flowers they adorn the walks of
the Garden of Reality; as swaying cypresses they line the riverbanks of
the Divine Will. Above the horizon of being they shine as radiant stars;
in the firmament of the world they gleam as resplendent orbs.
Manifestations of celestial grace are they, and daysprings of the light of
divine assistance.

Grant, O Thou Loving Lord, that all may stand firm and steadfast, shining
with everlasting splendour, so that, at every breath, gentle breezes may
blow from the bowers of Thy loving-kindness, that from the ocean of Thy
grace a mist may rise, that the kindly showers of Thy love may bestow
freshness, and the zephyr waft its perfume from the rose garden of divine
unity.

Vouchsafe, O Best Beloved of the World, a ray from Thy Splendour. O
Well-Beloved of mankind, shed upon us the light of Thy Countenance.

O God Omnipotent, do Thou shield us and be our refuge and, O Lord of
Being, show forth Thy might and Thy dominion.

O Thou loving Lord, the movers of sedition are in some regions astir and
active, and by night and day are inflicting a grievous wrong.

Even as wolves, tyrants are lying in wait, and the wronged, innocent flock
hath neither help nor succour. Hounds are on the trail of the gazelles of
the fields of divine unity, and the pheasant in the mountains of heavenly
guidance is pursued by the ravens of envy.

O Thou divine Providence, preserve and protect us! O Thou Who art our
Shield, save us and defend us! Keep us beneath Thy Shelter, and by Thy
Help save us from all ills. Thou art, indeed, the True Protector, the
Unseen Guardian, the Celestial Preserver, and the Heavenly Loving Lord.

O ye beloved of the Lord! On one side the standard of the One True God is
unfurled and the Voice of the Kingdom raised. The Cause of God is
spreading, and manifest in splendour are the wonders from on high. The
east is illumined and the west perfumed; fragrant with ambergris is the
north, and musk-scented the south.

On the other side the faithless wax in hate and rancour, ceaselessly
stirring up grievous sedition and mischief. No day goeth by but someone
raiseth the standard of revolt and spurreth his charger into the arena of
discord. No hour passeth but the vile adder bareth its fangs and
scattereth its deadly venom.

The beloved of the Lord are wrapped in utter sincerity and devotion,
unmindful of this rancour and malice. Smooth and insidious are these
snakes, these whisperers of evil, artful in their craft and guile. Be ye
on your guard and ever wakeful! Quick-witted and keen of intellect are the
faithful, and firm and steadfast are the assured. Act ye with all
circumspection!

'Fear ye the sagacity of the faithful, for he seeth with the divine
light!'

Beware lest any soul privily cause disruption or stir up strife. In the
Impregnable Stronghold be ye brave warriors, and for the Mighty Mansion a
valiant host. Exercise the utmost care, and day and night be on your
guard, that thereby the tyrant may inflict no harm.

Study the Tablet of the Holy Mariner that ye may know the truth and
consider that the Blessed Beauty hath fully foretold future events. Let
them who perceive take warning. Verily in this is a bounty for the
sincere!

Even as dust upon the Sacred Threshold, in utter humility and lowliness,
'Abdu'l-Baha is engaged in the promulgation of His signs in the daytime
and in the night season. Whensoever he findeth time he prayeth ardently,
and beseecheth Him tearfully and fervently, saying:

O Thou divine Providence, pitiful are we, grant us Thy succour; homeless
wanderers, give us Thy shelter; scattered, do Thou unite us; astray,
gather us to Thy fold; bereft, do Thou bestow upon us a share and portion;
athirst, lead us to the well-spring of Life; frail, strengthen us that we
may arise to help Thy Cause and offer ourselves as a living sacrifice in
the pathway of guidance.

The faithless, however, by day and night, openly and privily do their
utmost to shake the foundations of the Cause, to root out the Blessed
Tree, to deprive this servant of service, to kindle secret sedition and
strife and to annihilate 'Abdu'l-Baha. Outwardly they appear as sheep, yet
inwardly they are naught but ravening wolves. Sweet in words, they are but
at heart a deadly poison.

O ye beloved ones, guard the Cause of God! Let no sweetness of tongue
beguile you--nay, rather consider the motive of every soul, and ponder the
thought he cherisheth. Be ye straightway mindful and on your guard. Avoid
him, yet be not aggressive! Refrain from censure and from slander, and
leave him in the Hand of God. Upon you rest the Glory of Glories.





234: O THOU WHO ART ENRAPTURED BY THE SWEET BREATHINGS ...


O thou who art enraptured by the sweet breathings of the Lord! I have
noted the contents of thine eloquent letter, and have learned that thou
sheddest tears and thy heart is afire from grieving over the imprisonment
of 'Abdu'l-Baha.

O thou handmaid of God! This prison is sweeter to me and more to be
desired than a garden of flowers; to me, this bondage is better than the
freedom to go my way, and I find this narrow place more spacious than wide
and open plains. Do not grieve over me. And should my Lord decree that I
be blessed with sweet martyrdom's cup, this would but mean receiving what
I long for most.

Fear not if this Branch be severed from this material world and cast aside
its leaves; nay, the leaves thereof shall flourish, for this Branch will
grow after it is cut off from this world below, it shall reach the
loftiest pinnacles of glory, and it shall bear such fruits as will perfume
the world with their fragrance.





235: O GOD, MY GOD! ILLUMINE THE BROWS OF THY TRUE ...


O God, my God! Illumine the brows of Thy true lovers and support them with
angelic hosts of certain triumph. Set firm their feet on Thy straight
path, and out of Thine ancient bounty open before them the portals of Thy
blessings; for they are expending on Thy pathway what Thou hast bestowed
upon them, safeguarding Thy Faith, putting their trust in their
remembrance of Thee, offering up their hearts for love of Thee, and
withholding not what they possess in adoration for Thy Beauty and in their
search for ways to please Thee.

O my Lord! Ordain for them a plenteous share, a destined recompense and
sure reward.

Verily, Thou art the Sustainer, the Helper, the Generous, the Bountiful,
the Ever-Bestowing.





236: O THOU, MY GOD, WHO GUIDEST THE SEEKER TO THE ...


O Thou, my God, Who guidest the seeker to the pathway that leadeth aright,
Who deliverest the lost and blinded soul out of the wastes of perdition,
Thou Who bestowest upon the sincere great bounties and favours, Who
guardest the frightened within Thine impregnable refuge, Who answerest,
from Thine all-highest horizon, the cry of those who cry out unto Thee.
Praised be Thou, O my Lord! Thou hast guided the distracted out of the
death of unbelief, and hast brought those who draw nigh unto Thee to the
journey's goal, and hast rejoiced the assured among Thy servants by
granting them their most cherished desires, and hast, from Thy Kingdom of
beauty, opened before the faces of those who yearn after Thee the gates of
reunion, and hast rescued them from the fires of deprivation and loss--so
that they hastened unto Thee and gained Thy presence, and arrived at Thy
welcoming door, and received of gifts an abundant share.

O my Lord, they thirsted, Thou didst lift to their parched lips the waters
of reunion. O Tender One, Bestowing One, Thou didst calm their pain with
the balm of Thy bounty and grace, and didst heal their ailments with the
sovereign medicine of Thy compassion. O Lord, make firm their feet on Thy
straight path, make wide for them the needle's eye, and cause them,
dressed in royal robes, to walk in glory for ever and ever.

Verily art Thou the Generous, the Ever-Giving, the Precious, the Most
Bountiful. There is none other God but Thee, the Mighty, the Powerful, the
Exalted, the Victorious.

O my spiritual loved ones! Praise be to God, ye have thrust the veils
aside and recognized the compassionate Beloved, and have hastened away
from this abode to the placeless realm. Ye have pitched your tents in the
world of God, and to glorify Him, the Self-Subsistent, ye have raised
sweet voices and sung songs that pierced the heart. Well done! A thousand
times well done! For ye have beheld the Light made manifest, and in your
reborn beings ye have raised the cry, 'Blessed be the Lord, the best of
all creators!' Ye were but babes in the womb, then were ye sucklings, and
from a precious breast ye drew the milk of knowledge, then came ye to your
full growth, and won salvation. Now is the time for service, and for
servitude unto the Lord. Release yourselves from all distracting thoughts,
deliver the Message with an eloquent tongue, adorn your assemblages with
praise of the Beloved, till bounty shall descend in overwhelming floods
and dress the world in fresh greenery and blossoms. This streaming bounty
is even the counsels, admonitions, instructions, and injunctions of
Almighty God.

O ye my loved ones! The world is wrapped in the thick darkness of open
revolt and swept by a whirlwind of hate. It is the fires of malevolence
that have cast up their flames to the clouds of heaven, it is a
blood-drenched flood that rolleth across the plains and down the hills,
and no one on the face of the earth can find any peace. Therefore must the
friends of God engender that tenderness which cometh from Heaven, and
bestow love in the spirit upon all humankind. With every soul must they
deal according to the Divine counsellings and admonitions; to all must
they show forth kindness and good faith; to all must they wish well. They
must sacrifice themselves for their friends, and wish good fortune to
their foes. They must comfort the ill-natured, and treat their oppressors
with loving-kindness. They must be as refreshing water to the thirsty, and
to the sick, a swift remedy, a healing balm to those in pain and a solace
to every burdened heart. They must be a guiding light to those who have
gone astray, a sure leader for the lost. They must be seeing eyes to the
blind, hearing ears to the deaf, and to the dead eternal life, and to the
despondent joy forever.

Let them willingly subject themselves to every just king, and to every
generous ruler be good citizens. Let them obey the government and not
meddle in political affairs, but devote themselves to the betterment of
character and behaviour, and fix their gaze upon the Light of the world.





237: WHOSO RECITETH THIS PRAYER WITH LOWLINESS AND ...


Whoso reciteth this prayer with lowliness and fervour will bring gladness
and joy to the heart of this Servant; it will be even as meeting Him face
to face.

He is the All-Glorious!

O God, my God! Lowly and tearful, I raise my suppliant hands to Thee and
cover my face in the dust of that Threshold of Thine, exalted above the
knowledge of the learned, and the praise of all that glorify Thee.
Graciously look upon Thy servant, humble and lowly at Thy door, with the
glances of the eye of Thy mercy, and immerse him in the Ocean of Thine
eternal grace.

Lord! He is a poor and lowly servant of Thine, enthralled and imploring
Thee, captive in Thy hand, praying fervently to Thee, trusting in Thee, in
tears before Thy face, calling to Thee and beseeching Thee, saying:

O Lord, my God! Give me Thy grace to serve Thy loved ones, strengthen me
in my servitude to Thee, illumine my brow with the light of adoration in
Thy court of holiness, and of prayer to Thy Kingdom of grandeur. Help me
to be selfless at the heavenly entrance of Thy gate, and aid me to be
detached from all things within Thy holy precincts. Lord! Give me to drink
from the chalice of selflessness; with its robe clothe me, and in its
ocean immerse me. Make me as dust in the pathway of Thy loved ones, and
grant that I may offer up my soul for the earth ennobled by the footsteps
of Thy chosen ones in Thy path, O Lord of Glory in the Highest.

With this prayer doth Thy servant call Thee, at dawntide and in the
night-season. Fulfil his heart's desire, O Lord! Illumine his heart,
gladden his bosom, kindle his light, that he may serve Thy Cause and Thy
servants.

Thou art the Bestower, the Pitiful, the Most Bountiful, the Gracious, the
Merciful, the Compassionate.






FOOTNOTES


    1 Qur'an 60:13.

    2 Matthew 22:14.

    3 Qur'an 57:21.

    4 Qur'an 17:81.

    5 Qur'an 15:72.

    6 Qur'an 39:68; Epistle to the Son of the Wolf, p. 133.

    7 Qur'an 74:8.

    8 Qur'an 39:68.

    9 Qur'an 79:6.

   10 Qur'an 22:2.

   11 Qur'an 34:39.

   12 Qur'an 29:19.

   13 Qur'an 79:34.

   14 Qur'an 6:91; 52:12.

   15 Napoleon III

   16 Believed to be the angel appointed to sound the trumpet on the Day
      of Resurrection to raise the dead at the bidding of the Lord.

   17 Huququ'llah

   18 Qur'an 6:103.

   19 Qur'an 17:110.

   20 John 14:11.

   21 John 14:10.

   22 Qur'an 6:91.

   23 Written especially for Dr. Esslemont's immortal work Baha'u'llah and
      the New Era.

   24 John 6:51, 58.

   25 cf. John 15:26; 16:12-13.

   26 Regarding this Tablet Shoghi Effendi's secretary wrote on his
      behalf, on 9 May 1938, '...this obviously refers to the Bab, as the
      text shows clearly, and is in no way a reference to Swedenborg.'

   27 Jesus

   28 Cities in China celebrated for their musk-producing animals.

   29 The earthquake of 1906

   30 Of a Spiritual Assembly

   31 The Baha'is of Najaf-Abad

   32 Muhammad

_   33 Sh_ahnaz, the name given to the recipient of this Tablet, is also
      the name of a musical mode.

   34 An article from Andrew Carnegie's book The Gospel of Wealth was
      published in England in the Pall Mall Budget and called The Gospel
      of Wealth, cf. Andrew Carnegie's Autobiography 255n.

   35 Qur'an 36:36, and cf. 51:49.

   36 Qur'an 25:55, 35:13, 55:19-25. See also Marriage Prayer revealed by
      'Abdu'l-Baha beginning 'He is God! O peerless Lord! In Thine
      almighty wisdom Thou hast enjoined marriage upon the peoples...'

   37 See Some Answered Questions, pp. 328-9 for 'Abdu'l-Baha's comments
      on the arc of descent and ascent.

   38 cf. Qur'an 37:60 (The Tree of Zaqqum)

   39 cf. Qur'an 24:35.

   40 Genesis 1:26.

   41 A Baha'i children's class in Kenosha, Wisconsin.

   42 Qur'an 25:50.

   43 cf. John 3:5.

   44 cf. Qur'an 39:57.

   45 Possibly 'Abdu'l-Baha was referring to the Sikhs; the description
      appears to apply to them.

   46 Matthew 17:1-19; Mark 9:2-9; Luke 9:28-36.

   47 John 6:38.

   48 John 3:13.

   49 The Bab, cf. Some Answered Questions, chap. XIII.

   50 Germany

   51 cf. Qur'an 3:35; 2:254.

   52 cf. Qur'an 36:25.

   53 The Pacific

   54 Matthew 19:24; Mark 10:25.

   55 30 September 1912

   56 at Bahji

   57 Qur'an 24:39.

   58 John the Baptist

   59 Qur'an 36:29.

   60 Qur'an 20:12. Also referred to as the 'Sacred Vale'

   61 cf. Qur'an 4:80.

   62 This letter was signed by four hundred and twenty-two believers in
      America, and sent on 4 July 1905.

   63 John 18:11.

   64 Qur'an 67:3.

   65 Qur'an 24:35.

   66 cf. Qur'an 28:29.

   67 Qur'an 76:5.

   68 Qur'an 26:31; 26:44; the reference is to Moses' rod, and the
      enchanters.

   69 Qur'an 61:4.

   70 The Bab

   71 Qur'an 67:3.

   72 Qur'an 2:69.

   73 Gleanings from the Writings of Baha'u'llah, LXXII.

   74 Qur'an 76:5.

   75 This is the first part of 'Abdu'l-Baha's reply to a letter addressed
      to Him by the Executive Committee of the Central Organization for a
      Durable Peace. The Tablet, described by Shoghi Effendi in God Passes
      By as of 'far reaching importance', and dated December 17, 1919, was
      despatched to the Committee at The Hague by the hands of a special
      delegation.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SELECTIONS FROM THE WRITINGS OF 'ABDU'L-BAHA***



CREDITS


June 2006

            Converted from Microsoft Word document format to TEI master
            format.
            Joshua Hutchinson



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 19287-0.txt or 19287-0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/9/2/8/19287/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder. Information on the
copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use imposed by
the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the beginning of this
work.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation."

    - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.

    - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

    - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES -- Except for the "Right of
Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND -- If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY -- You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}'s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

