The Project Gutenberg eBook of Mind and Motion and Monism
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Mind and Motion and Monism

Author: George John Romanes


        
Release date: August 9, 2007 [eBook #22283]

Language: English

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/22283

Credits: Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Janet Blenkinship
        and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
        http://www.pgdp.net






Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, Janet Blenkinship
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









  MIND AND MOTION AND MONISM

  BY THE LATE

  GEORGE JOHN ROMANES, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S.

  HONORARY FELLOW OF GONVILLE AND CAIUS COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE


  LONDON LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO. AND NEW YORK 1895
  Oxford
  HORACE HART, PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY



    WORKS BY _GEORGE JOHN ROMANES, M.A., LL.D., F.R.S._

    =DARWIN, AND AFTER DARWIN=: an Exposition of the Darwinian Theory,
    and a Discussion on Post-Darwinian Questions.

    PART I. THE DARWINIAN THEORY. With Portrait of Darwin and 125
    Illustrations. _Crown 8vo_, 10s. 6d.

    PART II. POST-DARWINIAN QUESTIONS: HEREDITY AND UTILITY. _Crown
    8vo_.

    =AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM.= _Crown 8vo_, 6s.

    =MIND AND MOTION AND MONISM.= _Crown 8vo_.

    =THOUGHTS ON RELIGION=. Edited, with a Preface, by CHARLES GORE,
    M.A., Canon of Westminster. _Crown 8vo_, 4s. 6d.

    London
    LONGMANS, GREEN & CO.




PREFACE


Of the contents of this little volume the section on _Mind and Motion_
which forms, in accordance with a suggestion of the author's, a general
introduction, was delivered at Cambridge as the Rede Lecture in 1885,
and was printed in the _Contemporary Review_ for June in that year. The
chapter on The _World as an Eject_ was published, almost as it now
stands, in the _Contemporary Review_ for July, 1886. A paper on _The
Fallacy of Materialism_, of which Mr. Romanes incorporated the more
important parts in the Essay on Monism, was contributed to the
_Nineteenth Century_ for December, 1882. The rest was left in MS. and
was probably written in 1889 or 1890.

The subjects here discussed frequently occupied Mr. Romanes' keen and
versatile mind. Had not the hand of death fallen upon him while so much
of the ripening grain of his thought still remained to be finally
garnered, some modifications and extensions of the views set forth in
the Essay on Monism would probably have been introduced. Attention may
be drawn, for example, to the sentence on p. 139, italicized by the
author himself, in which it is contended that the will as agent _must be
identified with the principle of Causality_. I have reason to believe
that the chapter on _The World as an Eject_ would, in a final revision
of the Essay as a whole, have been modified so as to lay stress on this
identification of the human will with the principle of Causality in the
world at large--a doctrine the relation of which to the teachings of
Schopenhauer will be evident to students of philosophy.

But the hand of death closed on the thinker ere his thought had received
its full and ultimate expression. When in July, 1893, I received from
Mr. Romanes instructions with regard to the publication of that which
now goes forth to the world in his name, his end seemed very near; and
he said with faltering voice, in tones the pathos of which lingers with
me still, that this and much besides must, he feared, be left
unfinished. He suggested that perhaps I might revise the parts in the
light of the whole. But I have thought it best to leave what he had
written as he wrote it, save for quite unimportant emendations, lest in
revising I should cast over it the shadow of my own opinions.

It only remains to add that the conclusions reached in this Essay should
be studied in connection with the later _Thoughts on Religion_ which
Canon Gore has recently edited.
                                                C. LL. M.
  BRISTOL,
  _May, 1895._




  CONTENTS
                                                                      PAGE

  MIND AND MOTION                                                        1

  MONISM                                                                39

  INTRODUCTION                                                          41

  CHAPTER     I. SPIRITUALISM                                           47

     "       II. MATERIALISM                                            55

     "      III. MONISM                                                 79

     "       IV. THE WORLD AS AN EJECT                                  88

     "        V. THE WILL IN RELATION TO MATERIALISM AND SPIRITUALISM  119

     "       VI. THE WILL IN RELATION TO MONISM                        129




MIND AND MOTION

[REDE LECTURE, 1885.]


The earliest writer who deserves to be called a psychologist is Hobbes;
and if we consider the time when he wrote, we cannot fail to be
surprised at what I may term his prevision of the most important results
which have now been established by science. He was the first clearly to
sound the note which has ever since constituted the bass, or fundamental
tone, of scientific thought. Let us listen to it through the clear
instrumentality of his own language:--

     'All the qualities called sensible are, in the object which causeth
     them, but so many motions of the matter by which it presseth on our
     organs diversely. Neither in us that are pressed are they anything
     else but divers motions; for motion produceth nothing but
     motion.... The cause of sense is the external body or object, which
     presseth the organ proper to each sense, either immediately, as in
     taste and touch, or mediately, as in hearing, seeing, and smelling;
     which pressure, by the mediation of the nerves, and other strings
     and membranes of the body, continued inwards to the brain and
     heart, causeth there a resistance, or counter-pressure, or
     endeavour.... And because _going_, _speaking_, and the like
     voluntary motions, depend always upon a precedent thought of
     _whither_, _which way_, and _what_; it is evident that the
     imagination [or idea] is the first internal beginning of all
     voluntary motion. And although unstudied men do not conceive any
     motion at all to be there, where the thing moved is invisible; or
     the space it is moved in is, for the shortness of it, insensible;
     yet that doth not hinder, but that such motions are. These small
     beginnings of motion, within the body of man, before they appear in
     walking, speaking, striking, and other visible actions, are
     commonly called ENDEAVOUR[1].'

These quotations are sufficient to show that the system of Hobbes was
prophetic of a revelation afterwards declared by two centuries of
scientific research. For they show how plainly he taught that all our
knowledge of the external world is a knowledge of motion; and, again,
that all our acquisitions of knowledge and other acts of mind themselves
imply, as he elsewhere says, some kind of 'motion, agitation, or
alteration, which worketh in the brain.' That he conceived such motion,
agitation, or alteration to be, from its extreme minuteness, 'invisible'
and 'insensible,' or, as we should now say, molecular, is likewise
evident. I can therefore imagine the delight with which he would hear me
speak when I say, that it is no longer a matter of keen-sighted
speculation, but a matter of carefully demonstrated fact, that all our
knowledge of the external world is nothing more than a knowledge of
motion. For all the forms of energy have now been proved to be but modes
of motion; and even matter, if not in its ultimate constitution vortical
motion, at all events is known to us only as changes of motion: all that
we perceive in what we call matter is change in modes of motion. We do
not even know what it is that moves; we only know that when some modes
of motion pass into other modes, we perceive what we understand by
matter. It would take me too long to justify this general statement so
that it should be intelligible to every one; but I am confident that all
persons who understand such subjects will, when they think about it,
accept this general statement as one which is universally true. And, if
so, they will agree with Hobbes that all our knowledge of the external
world is a knowledge of motion.

Now, if it would have been thus a joy to Hobbes to have heard to-day how
thoroughly he has been justified in his views touching the external
world, with no less joy would he have heard that he has been equally
justified in his views touching the internal world. For it has now been
proved, beyond the possibility of dispute, that it is only in virtue of
those invisible movements which he inferred that the nervous system is
enabled to perform its varied functions.

To many among the different kinds of movement going on in the external
world, the animal body is adapted to respond by its own movements as
best suits its own welfare; and the mechanism whereby this is effected
is the neuro-muscular system. Those kinds of movement going on in the
external world which are competent to evoke responsive movements in the
animal body are called by physiologists stimuli. When a stimulus falls
upon the appropriate sensory surface, a wave of molecular movement is
sent up the attached sensory nerve to a nerve-centre, which thereupon
issues another wave of molecular movement down a motor nerve to the
group of muscles over whose action it presides; and when the muscles
receive this wave of nervous influence they contract. This kind of
response to stimuli is purely mechanical, or non-mental, and is
ordinarily termed reflex action. The whole of the spinal cord and lower
part of the brain are made up of nerve-centres of reflex action; and, in
the result, we have a wonderfully perfect machine in the animal body
considered as a whole. For while the various sensory surfaces are
severally adapted to respond to different kinds of external
movement--the eye to light, the ear to sound, and so on--any of these
surfaces may be brought into suitable relation with any of the muscles
of the body by means of the cerebro-spinal nerve-centres and their
intercommunications.

So much, then, for the machinery of the body. We must now turn to
consider the corporeal seat of the mind, or the only part of the nervous
system wherein the agitation of nervous matter is accompanied with
consciousness. This is composed of a double nerve-centre, which occurs
in all vertebrated animals, and the two parts of which are called the
cerebral hemispheres. In man this double nerve-centre is so large that
it completely fills the arch of the skull, as far down as the level of
the eyebrows. The two hemispheres of which it consists meet face to face
in the middle line of the skull, from the top of the nose backwards.
Each hemisphere is composed of two conspicuously distinct parts, called
respectively the grey matter and the white matter. The grey matter is
external, enveloping the white matter like a skull-cap, and is composed
of an inconceivable number of nerve-cells connected together by
nerve-fibres. It is computed that in a human brain there cannot be less
than a thousand millions of cells, and five thousand millions of fibres.
The white matter is composed only of nerve-fibres, which pass downwards
in great strands of conducting tissue to the lower centres of the brain
and spinal cord. So that the whole constitutes one system, with the grey
matter of the cerebral hemispheres at the apex or crown.

That the grey matter of the cerebral hemispheres is the exclusive seat
of mind is proved in two ways. In the first place, if we look to the
animal kingdom as a whole, we find that, speaking generally, the
intelligence of species varies with the mass of this grey matter. Or, in
other words, we find that the process of mental evolution, on its
physical side, has consisted in the progressive development of this
grey matter superimposed upon the pre-existing nervous machinery, until
it has attained its latest and maximum growth in man.

In the second place, we find that when the grey matter is experimentally
removed from the brain of animals, the animals continue to live; but are
completely deprived of intelligence. All the lower nerve-centres
continue to perform their mechanical adjustments in response to suitable
stimulation; but they are no longer under the government of the mind.
Thus, for instance, when a bird is mutilated in this way, it will
continue to perform all its reflex adjustments--such as sitting on a
perch, using its wings when thrown into the air, and so forth; but it no
longer remembers its nest or its young, and will starve to death in the
midst of its food, unless it be fed artificially.

Again, if the grey matter of only one hemisphere be removed, the mind is
taken away from the corresponding (i. e. the opposite) side of the body,
while it remains intact on the other side. For example, if a dog be
deprived of one hemisphere, the eye which was supplied from it with
nerve-fibres continues able to see, or to transmit impressions to the
lower nerve-centre called the optic ganglion; for this eye will then
mechanically follow the hand waved in front of it. But if the hand
should hold a piece of meat, the dog will show no mental recognition of
the meat, which of course it will immediately seize if exposed to the
view of its other eye. The same thing is found to happen in the case of
birds: on the injured side _sensation_, or the power of responding to a
stimulus, remains intact; while _perception_, or the power of mental
recognition, is destroyed.

This description applies to the grey matter of the cerebral hemispheres
as a whole. But of course the question next arises whether it only acts
as a whole, or whether there is any localization of different
intellectual faculties in different parts of it. Now, in answer to this
question, it has long been known that the faculty of speech is
definitely localized in a part of the grey matter lying just behind the
forehead; for, when this part is injured, a man loses all power of
expressing even the most simple ideas in words, while the ideas
themselves remain as clear as ever. It is remarkable that in each
individual only this part of one hemisphere appears to be used; and
there is some evidence to show that left-handed persons use the opposite
side from right-handed. Moreover, when the side which is habitually in
use is destroyed, the corresponding part of the other hemisphere begins
to learn its work, so that the patient may in time recover his use of
language.

Within the last few years the important discovery has been made, that by
stimulating with electricity the surface of the grey matter of the
hemispheres, muscular movements are evoked; and that certain patches of
the grey matter, when thus stimulated, always throw into action the same
groups of muscles. In other words, there are definite local areas of
grey matter, which, when stimulated, throw into action definite groups
of muscles. The surface of the cerebral hemispheres has now been in
large measure explored and mapped out with reference to these so-called
motor-centres; and thus our knowledge of the neuro-muscular machinery of
the higher animals (including man) has been very greatly furthered. Here
I may observe parenthetically that, as the brain is insentient to
injuries inflicted upon its own substance, none of the experiments to
which I have alluded entail any suffering to the animals experimented
upon; and it is evident that the important information which has thus
been gained could not have been gained by any other method. I may also
observe that as these motor-centres occur in the grey matter of the
hemispheres, a strong probability arises that they are not only the
motor-centres, but also the volitional centres which originate the
intellectual commands for the contraction of this and that group of
muscles. Unfortunately we cannot interrogate an animal whether, when we
stimulate a motor-centre, we arouse in the animal's mind an act of will
to throw the corresponding group of muscles into action; but that these
motor-centres are really centres of volition is pointed to by the fact,
that electrical stimuli have no longer any effect upon them when the
mental faculties of the animal are suspended by anaesthetics, nor in the
case of young animals where the mental faculties have not yet been
sufficiently developed to admit of voluntary co-ordination among the
muscles which are concerned. On the whole, then, it is not improbable
that on stimulating artificially these motor-centres of the brain, a
physiologist is actually playing from without, and at his own pleasure,
upon the volitions of the animal.

Turning, now, from this brief description of the structure and leading
functions of the principal parts of the nervous system, I propose to
consider what we know about the molecular movements which go on in
different parts of this system, and which are concerned in all the
processes of reflex adjustment, sensation, perception, emotion,
instinct, thought, and volition.

First of all, the rate at which these molecular movements travel through
a nerve has been measured, and found to be about 100 feet per second, or
somewhat more than a mile a minute, in the nerves of a frog. In the
nerves of a mammal it is just about twice as fast; so that if London
were connected with New York by means of a mammalian nerve instead of an
electric cable, it would require nearly a whole day for a message to
pass.

Next, the time has also been measured which is required by a
nerve-centre to perform its part in a reflex action, where no thought or
consciousness is involved. This time, in the case of the winking reflex,
and apart from the time required for the passage of the molecular waves
up and down the sensory and motor nerves, is about 1/20 of a second.
Such is the rate at which a nerve-centre conducts its operations when no
consciousness or volition is involved. But when consciousness and
volition are involved, or when the cerebral hemispheres are called into
play, the time required is considerably greater. For the operations on
the part of the hemispheres which are comprised in perceiving a simple
sensation (such as an electrical shock) and the volitional act of
signalling the perception, cannot be performed in less than 1/12 of a
second, which is nearly twice as long as the time required by the lower
nerve-centres for the performance of a reflex action. Other experiments
prove that the more complex an act of perception, the more time is
required for its performance. Thus, when the experiment is made to
consist, not merely in signalling a perception, but in signalling one of
two or more perceptions (such as an electrical shock on one or other of
the two hands, which of five letters is suddenly exposed to view, &c.),
a longer time is required for the more complex process of distinguishing
which of the two or more expected stimuli is perceived, and in
determining which of the appropriate signals to make in response. The
time consumed by the cerebral hemispheres in meeting a 'dilemma' of this
kind is from 1/5 to 1/20 of a second longer than that which they consume
in the case of a simpler perception. Therefore, whenever mental
operations are concerned, a relatively much greater time is required for
a nerve-centre to perform its adjustments than when a merely mechanical
or non-mental response is needed; and the more complex the mental
operation the more time is necessary. Such may be termed the physiology
of deliberation.

So much, then, for the rate at which molecular movements travel through
nerves, and the times which nerve-centres consume in performing their
molecular adjustments. We may next consider the researches which have
been made within the last few months upon the rates of these movements
themselves, or the number of vibrations per second with which the
particles of nervous matter oscillate.

If, by means of a suitable apparatus, a muscle is made to record its own
contraction, we find that during all the time it is in contraction, it
is under-going a vibratory movement at the rate of about nine pulsations
per second. What is the meaning of this movement? The meaning is that
the act of will in the brain, which serves as a stimulus to the
contraction of the muscle, is accompanied by a vibratory movement in the
grey matter of the brain; that this movement is going on at the rate of
nine pulsations per second; and that the muscle is giving a separate or
distinct contraction in response to every one of these nervous
pulsations. That such is the true explanation of the rhythm in the
muscle is proved by the fact that if, instead of contracting a muscle by
an act of the will, it be contracted by means of a rapid series of
electrical shocks playing upon its attached nerve, the record then
furnished shows a similar trembling going on in the muscle as in the
previous case; but the tremors of contraction are now no longer at the
rate of nine per second: they correspond beat for beat with the
interruptions of the electrical current. That is to say, the muscle is
responding separately to every separate stimulus which it receives
through the nerve; and further experiment shows that it is able thus to
keep time with the separate shocks, even though these be made to follow
one another so rapidly as 1,000 per second. Therefore we can have no
doubt that the slow rhythm of nine per second under the influence of
volitional stimulation, represents the rate at which the muscle is
receiving so many separate impulses from the brain: the muscle is
keeping time with the molecular vibrations going on in the cerebral
hemispheres at the rate of nine beats per second. Careful tracings show
that this rate cannot be increased by increasing the strength of the
volitional stimulus; but some individuals--and those usually who are of
quickest intelligence--display a somewhat quicker rate of rhythm, which
may be as high as eleven per second. Moreover, it is found that by
stimulating with strychnine any of the centres of reflex action, pretty
nearly the same rate of rhythm is exhibited by the muscles thus thrown
into contraction; so that all the nerve-cells in the body are thus shown
to have in their vibrations pretty nearly the same period, and not to be
able to vibrate with any other. For no matter how rapidly the electrical
shocks are allowed to play upon the grey matter of the cerebral
hemispheres, as distinguished from the nerve-trunks proceeding from them
to the muscles, the muscles always show the same rhythm of about nine
beats per second: the nerve-cells, unlike the nerve-fibres, refuse to
keep time with the electric shocks, and will only respond to them by
vibrating at their own intrinsic rate of nine beats per second.

Thus much, then, for the rate of molecular vibration which goes on in
nerve-centres. But the rate of such vibration which goes on in sensory
and motor nerves may be very much more rapid. For while a nerve-centre
is only able to _originate_ a vibration at the rate of about nine beats
per second, a motor-nerve, as we have already seen, is able to
_transmit_ a vibration of at least 1,000 beats per second; and a sensory
nerve which at the surface of its expansion is able to respond
differently to differences of musical pitch, of temperature, and even of
colour, is probably able to vibrate very much more rapidly even than
this. We are not, indeed, entitled to conclude that the nerves of
special sense vibrate in actual unison, or synchronize, with these
external sources of stimulation; but we are, I think, bound to conclude
that they must vibrate in some numerical proportion to them (else we
should not perceive objective differences in sound, temperature, or
colour); and even this implies that they are probably able to vibrate at
some enormous rate.

With further reference to these molecular movements in sensory nerves,
the following important observation has been made--viz. that there is a
constant ratio between the amount of agitation produced in a sensory
nerve, and the intensity of the corresponding sensation. This ratio is
not a direct one. As Fechner states it, 'Sensation varies, not as the
stimulus, but as the logarithm of the stimulus.' Thus, for instance, if
1,000 candles are all throwing their light upon the same screen, we
should require ten more candles to be added before our eyes could
perceive any difference in the amount of illumination. But if we begin
with only 100 candles shining upon the screen, we should perceive an
increase in the illumination by adding a single candle. And what is true
of sight is equally true of all the other senses: if any stimulus is
increased, the smallest increase of sensation first occurs when the
stimulus rises one per cent, above its original intensity. Such being
the law on the side of sensation, suppose that we place upon the optic
nerve of an animal the wires proceeding from a delicate galvanometer, we
find that every time we stimulate the eye with light, the needle of the
galvanometer moves, showing electrical changes going on in the nerve,
caused by the molecular agitations. Now these electrical changes are
found to vary in intensity with the intensity of the light used as a
stimulus, and they do so very nearly in accordance with the law of
sensation just mentioned. So we say that in sensation the cerebral
hemispheres are, as it were, acting the part of galvanometers in
appreciating the amount of molecular change which is going on in sensory
nerves; and that they record their readings in the mind as faithfully as
a galvanometer records its readings on the dial.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hitherto we have been considering certain features in the physiology of
nervous action, so far as this can be appreciated by means of
physiological instruments. But we have just seen that the cerebral
hemispheres may themselves be regarded as such instruments, which record
in our minds their readings of changes going on in our nerves. Hence,
when other physiological instruments fail us, we may gain much
additional insight touching the movements of nervous matter by attending
to the thoughts and feelings of our own minds; for these are so many
indices of what is going on in the cerebral hemispheres. I therefore
propose next to contemplate the mind, considered thus as a physiological
instrument.

The same scientific instinct which led Hobbes so truly to anticipate the
progress of physiology, led him not less truly to anticipate the
progress of psychology. For just as he was the first to enunciate the
fundamental principle of nerve-action in the vibration of molecules, so
was he likewise the first to enunciate the fundamental principle of
psychology in the association of ideas. And the great advance of
knowledge which has been made since his day with respect to both these
principles, entitles us to be much more confident than even he was that
they are in some way intimately united. Moreover, the manner in which
they are so united we have begun clearly to understand. For we know from
our study of nerve-action in general, that when once a wave of invisible
or molecular movement passes through any line of nerve-structure, it
leaves behind it a change in the structure such that it is afterwards
more easy for a similar wave, when started from the same point, to
pursue the same course. Or, to adopt a simile from Hobbes, just as water
upon a table flows most readily in the lines which have been wetted by a
previous flow, so the invisible waves of nerve-action pass most readily
in the lines of a previous passage. This is the reason why in any
exercise requiring muscular co-ordination, or dexterity, 'practice makes
perfect:' the nerve-centres concerned learn to perform their work by
frequently repeating it, because in this way the needful lines of
wave-movement in the structure of the nerve-centre are rendered more and
more permeable by use. Now we have seen that in the nerve-centres called
the cerebral hemispheres, wave-movement of this kind is accompanied with
feeling. Changes of consciousness follow step by step these waves of
movement in the brain, and therefore when on two successive occasions
the waves of movement pursue the same pathway in the brain, they are
attended with a succession of the same ideas in the mind. Thus we see
that the tendency of ideas to _re_cur in the same order as that in
which they have previously _oc_curred, is merely an obverse expression
of the fact that lines of wave-movement in the brain become more and
more permeable by use. So it comes that a child can learn its lessons by
frequently repeating them; so it is that all our knowledge is
accumulated; and so it is that all our thinking is conducted.

A wholly new field of inquiry is thus opened up. By using our own
consciousness as a physiological instrument of the greatest delicacy, we
are able to learn a great deal about the dynamics of brain-action
concerning which we should otherwise remain in total ignorance. But the
field of inquiry thus opened up is too large for me to enter upon
to-day. I will therefore merely observe, in general terms, that although
we are still very far from understanding the operations of the brain in
thought, there can be no longer any question that in these operations of
the brain we have what I may term the objective machinery of thought.
'Not every thought to every thought succeeds indifferently,' said
Hobbes. Starting from this fact, modern physiology has clearly shown why
it is a fact; and looking to the astonishing rate at which the science
of physiology is now advancing, I think we may fairly expect that within
a time less remote than the two centuries which now separate us from
Hobbes, the course of ideas in a given train of thought will admit of
having its footsteps tracked in the corresponding pathways of the brain.
Be this, however, as it may, even now we know enough to say that,
whether or not these footsteps will ever admit of being thus tracked in
detail, they are all certainly present in the cerebral structures of
each one of us. What we know on the side of mind as logical sequence, is
on the side of the nervous system nothing more than a passage of nervous
energy through one series of cells and fibres rather than through
another: what we recognize as truth is merely the fact of the brain
vibrating in tune with Nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such being the intimate relation between nerve-action and mind-action,
it has become the scientifically orthodox teaching that the two stand to
one another in the relation of cause to effect. One of the most
distinguished of my predecessors in this place, the President of the
Royal Society, has said in one of the most celebrated of his
lectures:--'We have as much reason for regarding the mode of motion of
the nervous system as the cause of the state of consciousness, as we
have for regarding any event as the cause of another.' And, by way of
perfectly logical deduction from this statement, Professor Huxley argues
that thought and feeling have nothing whatever to do with determining
action: they are merely the bye-products of cerebration, or, as he
expresses it, the indices of changes which are going on in the brain.
Under this view we are all what he terms conscious automata, or machines
which happen, as it were by chance, to be conscious of some of their own
movements. But the consciousness is altogether adventitious, and bears
the same ineffectual relation to the activity of the brain as a
steam-whistle bears to the activity of a locomotive, or the striking of
a clock to the time-keeping adjustments of the clock-work. Here, again,
we meet with an echo of Hobbes, who opens his work on the Commonwealth
with these words:--

     'Nature, the art whereby God hath made and governs the world, is by
     the _art_ of man, as in many other things, in this also imitated,
     that it can make an artificial animal. For seeing life is but a
     motion of limbs, the beginning whereof is in the principal part
     within; why may we not say, that all _automata_ (engines that move
     themselves by springs and wheels as doth a watch), have an
     artificial life? For what is the _heart_, but a _spring_; and the
     _nerves_, but so many _strings_; and the _joints_, but so many
     _wheels_, giving motion to the whole body, such as was intended by
     the artificer[2]?'

Now, this theory of conscious automatism is not merely a legitimate
outcome of the theory that nervous changes are the causes of mental
changes, but it is logically the only possible outcome. Nor do I see any
way in which this theory can be fought on grounds of physiology. If we
persist in regarding the association between brain and thought
exclusively from a physiological point of view, we must of necessity be
materialists. Further, so far as we are physiologists our materialism
can do us no harm. On the contrary, it is to us of the utmost service,
as at once the simplest physiological explanation of facts already
known, and the best working hypothesis to guide us in our further
researches. But it does not follow from this that the theory of
materialism is true. The bells of St. Mary's over the way always ring
for a quarter of an hour before the University sermon; yet the ringing
of the bells is not the cause of the sermon, although, as long as the
association remains constant, there would be no harm in assuming, for
any practical purposes, that it is so. But just as we should be wrong in
concluding, if we did not happen to know so much about the matter as we
do, that the University sermon is produced by the vibration of bells in
the tower of St. Mary's Church, so we may be similarly wrong if we were
definitely to conclude that the sermon is produced by the vibration of a
number of little nerve-cells in the brain of the preacher.

Now, if time permitted, and if I supposed that you would all care to go
with me into matters of some abstruseness, I could certainly prove that
whatever the connexion between body and mind may be, we have the best
possible reasons for concluding that it is not a causal connexion. These
reasons are, of course, extra-physiological; but they are not on this
account less conclusive. Within the limits of a lecture, however, I can
only undertake to give an outline sketch of what I take to be the
overwhelming argument against materialism.

We have first the general fact that all our knowledge of motion, and so
of matter, is merely a knowledge of the modifications of mind. That is
to say, all our knowledge of the external world--including the knowledge
of our own brains--is merely a knowledge of our own mental states. Let
it be observed that we do not even require to go so far as the
irrefutable position of Berkeley, that the existence of an external
world without the medium of mind, or of being without knowing, is
inconceivable. It is enough to take our stand on a lower level of
abstraction, and to say that whether or not an external world can exist
apart from mind in any absolute or inconceivable sense, at any rate it
cannot do so _for us_. We cannot think any of the facts of external
nature without presupposing the existence of a mind which thinks them;
and therefore, so far at least as we are concerned, mind is necessarily
prior to everything else. It is for us the only mode of existence which
is real in its own right; and to it, as to a standard, all other modes
of existence which may be _in_ferred must be _re_ferred. Therefore, if
we say that mind is a function of motion, we are only saying, in
somewhat confused terminology, that mind is a function of itself.

Such, then, I take to be a general refutation of materialism. To use but
a mild epithet, we must conclude that the theory is unphilosophical,
seeing that it assumes one thing to be produced by another thing, in
spite of an obvious demonstration that the alleged effect is necessarily
prior to its cause. Such, I say, is a general refutation of
materialism. But this is far from being all. 'Motion,' says Hobbes,
'produceth nothing but motion;' and yet he immediately proceeds to
assume that in the case of the brain it produces, not only motion, but
mind. He was perfectly right in saying that with respect to its
movements the animal body resembles an engine or a watch; and if he had
been acquainted with the products of higher evolution in watch-making,
he might with full propriety have argued, for instance, that in the
compensating balance, whereby a watch adjusts its own movements in
adaptation to external changes of temperature, a watch is exhibiting the
mechanical aspect of volition. And, similarly, it is perhaps possible to
conceive that the principles of mechanism might be more and more
extended in their effects, until, in so marvellously perfected a
structure as the human brain, all the voluntary movements of the body
might be originated in the same mechanical manner as are the
compensating movements of a watch; for this, indeed, as we have seen, is
no more than happens in the case of all the nerve-centres other than the
cerebral hemispheres. If this were so, motion would be producing nothing
but motion, and upon the subject of brain-action there would be nothing
further to say. Without consciousness I should be delivering this
lecture; without consciousness you would be hearing it; and all the busy
brains in this University would be conducting their researches, or
preparing for their examinations, mindlessly. Strange as such a state
of things might be, still motion would be producing nothing but motion;
and, therefore, if there were any mind to contemplate the facts, it
would encounter no philosophical paradox: it would merely have to
conclude that such were the astonishing possibilities of mechanism. But,
as the facts actually stand, we find that this is not the case. We find,
indeed, that up to a certain level of complexity mechanism alone is able
to perform all the compensations or adjustments which are performed by
the animal body; but we also find that beyond this level such
compensations or adjustments are never performed without the
intervention of consciousness. Therefore, the theory of automatism has
to meet the unanswerable question--How is it that in the machinery of
the brain motion produces this something which is not motion? Science
has now definitely proved the correlation of all the forces; and this
means that if any kind of motion could produce anything else that is not
motion, it would be producing that which science would be bound to
regard as in the strictest sense of the word a miracle. Therefore, if we
are to take our stand upon science--and this is what materialism
professes to do--we are logically bound to conclude, not merely that the
evidence of causation from body to mind is not so cogent as that of
causation in any other case, but that in this particular case causation
may be proved, again in the strictest sense of the term, a physical
impossibility.

To adduce only one other consideration. Apart from all that I have said,
is it not in itself a strikingly suggestive fact that consciousness
only, yet always, appears upon the scene when the adjustive actions of
any animal body rise above the certain level of intricacy to which I
have alluded? Surely this large and general fact points with
irresistible force to the conclusion, that in the performance of these
more complex adjustments, consciousness--or the power of feeling and the
power of willing--is of some _use_. Assuredly on the principles of
evolution, which materialists at all events cannot afford to disregard,
it would be a wholly anomalous fact that so wide and important a class
of faculties as those of mind should have become developed in constantly
ascending degrees throughout the animal kingdom, if they were entirely
without use to animals. And, be it observed, this consideration holds
good whatever views we may happen to entertain upon the special theory
of natural selection. For the consideration stands upon the general fact
that all the organs and functions of animals are of use to animals: we
never meet, on any large or general scale, with organs and functions
which are wholly adventitious. Is it to be supposed that this general
principle fails just where its presence is most required, and that the
highest functions of the highest organs of the highest animals stand out
of analogy with all other functions in being themselves functionless? To
this question I, for one, can only answer, and answer unequivocally,
No. As a rational being who waits to take a wider view of the facts than
that which is open to the one line of research pursued by the
physiologist, I am forced to conclude that not without a reason does
mind exist in the frame of things; and that apart from the activity of
mind, whereby motion is related to that which is not motion, this planet
could never have held the wonderful being, who in multiplying has
replenished the earth and subdued it--holding dominion over the fish of
the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that
moveth.

What, then, shall we say touching this mysterious union of mind and
motion? Having found it physically impossible that there should be a
causal connexion proceeding from motion to mind, shall we try to reverse
the terms, and suppose a causal connexion proceeding from mind to
motion? This is the oldest and still the most popular theory--the theory
of spiritualism. And, no doubt, in one important respect it is less
unphilosophical than the opposite theory of materialism. For
spiritualism supposes the causation to proceed from that which is the
source of our idea of causality--the mind: not from that into which this
idea has been read--the brain. Therefore, if causation were to be
accepted as a possibility either way, it would be less unreasonable to
suppose mental changes the causes of material changes than _vice versa_;
for we should then at least be starting from the basis of immediate
knowledge, instead of from the reflection of that knowledge in what we
call the external world. Seeing that the external world is known to us
only as motion, it is logically impossible for the mind to infer its own
causation from the external world; for this would be to infer that it is
an effect of motion, which would be the same as saying that it is an
effect of its own knowledge; and this would be absurd. But, on the other
hand, it is not thus logically impossible for the mind to infer that it
may be the cause of some of its own knowledge, or, in other words, that
it may have in some measure the power of producing what it knows as
motion. And when the mind does infer this, no logic on earth is able to
touch the inference; the position of pure idealism is beyond the reach
of argument. Nevertheless, it is opposed to the whole momentum of
science. For if mind is supposed, on no matter how small a scale, to be
a cause of motion, the fundamental axiom of science is impugned. This
fundamental axiom is that energy can neither be created nor
destroyed--that just as motion can produce nothing but motion, so,
conversely, motion can be produced by nothing but motion. Regarded,
therefore, from the stand-point of physical science, the theory of
spiritualism is in precisely the same case as the theory of materialism:
that is to say, if the supposed causation takes place, it can only be
supposed to do so by way of miracle.

And this is a conclusion which the more clear-sighted of the idealists
have expressly recognized. That subtle and most entertaining thinker,
for example, the late Professor Green of Oxford, has said that the
self-conscious volition of man 'does not consist in a series of natural
events, ... is not natural in the ordinary sense of that term; not
natural at any rate in any sense in which naturalness would imply its
determination by antecedent events, or by conditions of which it is not
itself the source.'

Thus the theory of spiritualism, although not directly refutable by any
process of logic, is certainly enfeebled by its collision with the
instincts of physical science. In necessarily holding the facts of
consciousness and volition super-natural, extra-natural, or non-natural,
the theory is opposed to the principle of continuity.

Spiritualism being thus unsatisfactory, and materialism impossible, is
there yet any third hypothesis in which we may hope to find intellectual
rest? In my opinion there is. If we unite in a higher synthesis the
elements both of spiritualism and of materialism, we obtain a product
which satisfies every fact of feeling on the one hand, and of
observation on the other. The manner in which this synthesis may be
effected is perfectly simple. We have only to suppose that the
antithesis between mind and motion--subject and object--is itself
phenomenal or apparent: not absolute or real. We have only to suppose
that the seeming duality is relative to our modes of apprehension; and,
therefore, that any change taking place in the mind, and any
corresponding change taking place in the brain, are really not two
changes, but one change. When a violin is played upon we hear a musical
sound, and at the same time we see a vibration of the strings.
Relatively to our consciousness, therefore, we have here two sets of
changes, which appear to be very different in kind; yet we know that in
an absolute sense they are one and the same: we know that the diversity
in consciousness is created only by the difference in our modes of
perceiving the same event--whether we see or whether we hear the
vibration of the strings. Similarly, we may suppose that a vibration of
nerve-strings and a process of thought are really one and the same
event, which is dual or diverse only in relation to our modes of
perceiving it.

The great advantage of this theory is that it supposes only one stream
of causation, in which both mind and motion are simultaneously
concerned. The theory, therefore, escapes all the difficulties and
contradictions with which both spiritualism and materialism are beset.
Thus, motion is supposed to be producing nothing but motion;
mind-changes nothing but mind-changes: both producing both
simultaneously, neither could be what it is without the other, because
without the other neither could be the cause which in fact it is.
Impossible, therefore, is the supposition of the materialist that
consciousness is adventitious, or that in the absence of mind changes
of brain could be what they are; for it belongs to the very causation of
these changes that they should have a mental side. The use of mind to
animals is thus rendered apparent; for intelligent volition is thus
shown to be a true cause of adjustive movement, in that the cerebration
which it involves could not otherwise be possible: the causation would
not otherwise be complete.

A simple illustration may serve at once to render this doctrine more
easily intelligible, and to show that, if accepted, the doctrine, as it
appears to me, terminates the otherwise interminable controversy on the
freedom of the will.

In an Edison lamp the light which is emitted from the burner may be said
indifferently to be caused by the number of vibrations per second going
on in the carbon, or by the temperature of the carbon; for this rate of
vibration could not take place in the carbon without constituting that
degree of temperature which affects our eyes as luminous. Similarly, a
train of thought may be said indifferently to be caused by brain-action
or by mind-action; for, _ex hypothesi_, the one could not take place
without the other. Now, when we contemplate the phenomena of volition by
themselves, it is as though we were contemplating the phenomena of light
by themselves: volition is produced by mind in brain, just as light is
produced by temperature in carbon. And just as we may correctly speak of
light as the cause, say, of a photograph, so we may correctly speak of
volition as the cause of bodily movement. That particular kind of
physical activity which takes place in the carbon could not take place
without the light which causes a photograph; and, similarly, that
particular kind of physical activity which takes place in the brain
could not take place without the volition which causes a bodily
movement. So that volition is as truly a cause of bodily movement as is
the physical activity of the brain; seeing that, in an absolute sense,
the cause is one and the same. But if we once clearly perceive that what
in a relative sense we know as volition is, in a similar sense, the
cause of bodily movement, we terminate the question touching the freedom
of the will. For this question in its last resort--and apart from the
ambiguity which has been thrown around it by some of our
metaphysicians--is merely the question whether the will is to be
regarded as a cause of Nature. And the theory which we have now before
us sanctions the doctrine that it may be so regarded, if only we
remember that its causal activity depends upon its identity with the
obverse aspect known as cerebration, without which identity in apparent
duality neither volition nor cerebration could be the cause which in
fact they are. It thus becomes a mere matter of phraseology whether we
speak of the will determining, or being determined by, changes going on
in the external world; just as it is but a matter of phraseology whether
we speak of temperature determining, or being determined by, molecular
vibration. All the requirements alike of the free-will and of the
bond-will hypotheses are thus satisfied by a synthesis which comprises
them both. On the one hand, it would be as impossible for an
_un_conscious automaton to do the work or to perform the adjustments of
a conscious agent, as it would be for an Edison lamp to give out light
and cause a photograph when not heated by an electric current. On the
other hand, it would be as impossible for the will to originate bodily
movement without the occurrence of a strictly physical process of
cerebration, as it would be for light to shine in an Edison lamp which
had been deprived of its carbon-burner.

It may be said of this theory that it is highly speculative, not
verifiable by any possible experiment, and therefore at best is but a
mere guess. All which is, no doubt, perfectly true; but, on the other
hand, we must remember that this theory comes to us as the only one
which is logically possible, and at the same time competent to satisfy
the facts alike of the outer and of the inner world. It is a speculation
in the sense of not being verifiable by experiment; but it has much more
value than ordinarily attaches to an unverifiable speculation, in that
there is really no alternative hypothesis to be considered: if we choose
to call it a guess, we must at the same time remember it is a guess
where it does not appear that any other is open. Once more to quote
Hobbes, who, as we have seen, was himself a remarkable instance of what
he here says: 'The best prophet naturally is the best guesser; and the
best guesser, he that is most versed and studied in the matters he
guesses at.' In this case, therefore, the best prophet is not the
physiologist, whose guess ends in materialism; nor the purely mental
philosopher, whose guess ends in spiritualism; but rather the man who,
being 'versed and studied' in all the facts appertaining to both sides
of the matter, ends in the only alternative guess which remains open.
And if that most troublesome individual, the 'plain man' of Locke,
should say it seems at least opposed to common sense to suppose that
there is anything in a burning candle or a rolling billiard-ball
substantially the same as mind, the answer is that if he could look into
my brain at this moment he would see nothing there but motion of
molecules, or motion of masses; and apart from the accident of my being
able to tell him so, his 'common sense' could never have divined that
these motions in my brain are concerned in the genesis of my spoken
thoughts.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is obvious that from this hypothesis as to the substantial identity
of mind and motion, two important questions arise; and I feel that some
reference to these questions is in present circumstances forced upon me,
because they have both been considered in precisely the same connexion
by one of the most powerful intellects that was ever sent out into the
world by this University. I mean the late Professor Clifford. As my
intimate and valued friend, I desire to mention his name in this place
with all the affection, as well as with all the admiration, to which I
well know it is so fully entitled; and if I appear to mention him only
in order to disagree with him, this is only because I know equally well
that in his large and magnanimous thought differences of philosophical
opinion were never felt to weaken the bonds of friendship.

In his well-known lecture on Body and Mind, Professor Clifford adopted
the hypothesis of identity which we are now considering, and from it was
led to the conclusion that if in the case of cerebral processes motion
is one with mind, the same must be true of motion wherever it occurs;
or, as he expressed it subsequently, the whole universe must be made of
mind-stuff. But in his view, although matter in motion presents what may
be termed the raw material of mind, it is only in the highly elaborated
constitution of the human brain that this raw material is sufficiently
wrought up to yield a self-conscious personality. Hence the dissolution
of a human brain implies the dissolution of a human mind; and hence also
the universe, although entirely composed of mind-stuff, is itself
mindless. Now, all I have to say about these two deductions is
this--they do not necessarily follow from the theory which is before us.
In holding that the mind of man perishes with his body, and that above
the mind of man there is no other, Clifford may have been right, or may
have been wrong. I am not here to discuss at length any questions of
such supreme importance. But I feel that I am here to insist upon the
one point which is immediately connected with my subject; and this is,
that whether or not Clifford was right in his conclusions, these
conclusions certainly did not follow by way of any logical sequence from
his premises. Because within the limits of human experience mind is only
known as associated with brain, it clearly does not follow that mind
cannot exist in any other mode. It does not even follow that any
probability upon this matter can be thus established. The basis of
analogy on which Clifford sought to rear an inference of cosmical
extent, was restricted to the one instance of mind as known upon one
planet; and, therefore, it is hard to imagine a more precarious use of
that precarious method which is called by logicians simple enumeration.
Indeed, even for what it is worth, the inference may be pointed with
quite as much effect in precisely the opposite direction. For we have
seen how little it is that we understand of the one mode in which we
certainly know that mind does exist; and if from this little we feel
impelled to conclude that there is a mode of mind which is not
restricted to brain, but co-extensive with motion, is consubstantial and
co-eternal with all that was, and is, and is to come; have we not at
least a suggestion, that high as the heavens are above the earth, so
high above our thoughts may be the thoughts of such a mind as this? I
offer no opinion upon the question whether the general order of Nature
does not require some one explanatory cause; nor upon the question
whether the mind of man itself does not point to something kindred in
the self-existing origin of things. I am not concerned to argue any
point upon which I feel that opinions may legitimately differ. I am only
concerned to show that, in so far as any deductions can be drawn from
the theory which is before us, they make at least as much against as in
favour of the cosmical conclusions arrived at by Clifford.

On February 17, in the year 1600, when the streets of Rome were thronged
with pilgrims from all the quarters of Christendom, while no less than
fifty cardinals were congregated for the Jubilee; into the densely
crowded Campo di Fiori a man was led to the stake, where, 'silent and
self-sustained,' before the eyes of all nations, he perished in the
flames. That death was the death of a martyr: it was met voluntarily in
attestation of truth. But most noble of all the noble army to which he
belonged, the name of that man is written large in history, as the name
of one who had fortitude to die, not in the cause of religious belief,
but in that of scientific conviction. For why did Bruno suffer? He
suffered, as we all know, because he refused to recant his persuasion of
the truth of the Copernican theory. Why, then, do I adduce the name of
Bruno at the close of this lecture? I do so because, as far as I have
been able to ascertain, he was the first clearly to enunciate the
monistic theory of things to which the consideration of my subject has
conducted us. This theory--or that as to the substantial identity of
mind and motion--was afterwards espoused, in different guises, by sundry
other writers; but to Bruno belongs the merit of its original
publication, and it was partly for his adherence to this publication
that he died. To this day Bruno is ordinarily termed a pantheist, and
his theory, which in the light of much fuller knowledge I am advocating,
Pantheism. I do not care to consider a difference of terms, where the
only distinction resides in so unintelligible an idea as that of the
creation of substance. It is more to the purpose to observe that in the
mind of its first originator--and this a mind which was sufficiently
clear in its thought to die for its perception of astronomical
truth--the theory of Pantheism was but a sublime extension of the then
contracted views of Theism. And I think that we of to-day, when we look
to the teaching of this martyr of science, will find that in his theory
alone do we meet with what I may term a philosophically adequate
conception of Deity. If the advance of natural science is now steadily
leading us to the conclusion that there is no motion without mind, must
we not see how the independent conclusion of mental science is thus
independently confirmed--the conclusion, I mean, that there is no being
without knowing? To me, at least, it does appear that the time has come
when we may begin, as it were in a dawning light, to see that the study
of Nature and the study of Mind are meeting upon this greatest of
possible truths. And if this is the case--if there is no motion without
mind, no being without knowing--shall we infer, with Clifford, that
universal being is mindless, or answer with a dogmatic negative that
most stupendous of questions--Is there knowledge with the Most High? If
there is no motion without mind, no being without knowing, may we not
rather infer, with Bruno, that it is in the medium of mind, and in the
medium of knowledge, we live, and move, and have our being?

This, I think, is the direction in which the inference points, if we are
careful to set the logical conditions with complete impartiality. But
the ulterior question remains, whether, so far as science is concerned,
it is here possible to point any inference at all: the whole orbit of
human knowledge may be too narrow to afford a parallax for measurements
so vast. Yet even here, if it be true that the voice of science must
thus of necessity speak the language of agnosticism, at least let us see
to it that the language is pure; let us not tolerate any barbarisms
introduced from the side of aggressive dogma. So shall we find that this
new grammar of thought does not admit of any constructions radically
opposed to more venerable ways of thinking; even if we do not find that
the often-quoted words of its earliest formulator apply with special
force to its latest dialects--that if a little knowledge of physiology
and a little knowledge of psychology dispose men to atheism, a deeper
knowledge of both, and, still more, a deeper thought upon their
relations to one another, will lead men back to some form of religion,
which, if it be more vague, may also be more worthy than that of earlier
days.

    'It is a beauteous evening, calm and free;
    The holy time is quiet as a nun,
    Breathless with adoration; the broad sun
    Is sinking down in its tranquillity;
    The gentleness of heaven is on the sea:
    Listen! the mighty being is awake,
    And doth with his eternal motion make
    A sound like thunder, everlastingly.'

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: _Leviathan_, pt. i. chaps, i. and vi.]

[Footnote 2: _Leviathan_, Introduction.]




MONISM


     'Das Ich ist nicht aus Leib und Seele zusammengesetzt, sondern es
     ist eine bestimmte Entwicklungsstufe des Wesens, das von
     verschiedenem Standpunkt betrachtet in koerperliches und geistiges
     Dasein auseinanderfaellt.'--Wundt, _Vorlesungen ueber die
     Menschen-und Thierseele_, i. 293.




INTRODUCTION.


In no respect has the progress of physical science exercised a more
profound influence upon philosophical thought than it has by proving an
apparently quantitative relation between material changes and mental
changes. It has always been known that there is qualitative relation.
Even long before mankind suspected that the brain was in any way
connected with thought, it was well understood that alcohol and other
poisons exercised their sundry influences on the mind in virtue of
influences which they exercised upon the body; and even the lowest
savages must always have been aware that a blow on the head is followed
by insensibility. But it was not until the rise of Physiology that this
qualitative relation between corporeal changes and mental changes was
gradually found to be a quantitative one--or that every particular
change of mind had an exact and invariable counterpart in some
particular change of body. It is needless for me to detail the
successive steps in the long course of physiological discovery whereby
this great fact has been established; it is enough to say that the fact
_is_ established to the satisfaction of every physiologist.

Now, when once the relation between material changes and mental changes
has been thus recognized as quantitative--or, which is the same thing,
when once the association has been recognized as both invariable and
exact--there arises the question as to how this relation is to be
explained. Formally considered--or considered as a matter of logical
statement irrespective of the relative probabilities which they may
present, either to the minds of different individuals or to the general
intelligence of the race--it appears to me that the possible hypotheses
are here seven in number.

     I. The mental changes may cause the material changes.

     II. The material changes may cause the mental changes.

     III. There may be no causation either way, because the association
     may be only a phenomenal association--the two apparently diverse
     classes of phenomena being really one and the same.

     IV. There may be no causation either way, because the association
     may be due to a harmony pre-established by a superior mind.

     V. There may be no causation either way, because the association
     may always be due to chance.

     VI. There may be no causation either way, because the material
     order may not have any real existence at all, being merely an ideal
     creation of the mental order.

     VII. Whether or not there be any causation either way, the
     association may be one which it is necessarily beyond the power of
     the human mind to explain.

So far as I can see, this list of possible answers to the question
before us is exhaustive. I will next show why, in my opinion, the last
four of them may be excluded _in limine_.

The suggestion of pre-established harmony (IV) merely postpones the
question: it _assumes_ a higher _mind_ as adjusting correspondencies
between known minds and animal bodies with respect to the activities of
each; and, therefore, it either leaves untouched the ultimate question
concerning the relation of mind (as such) to matter, or else it answers
this question in terms of spiritualism (I).

The suggestion of chance (V) is effectually excluded by the doctrine of
chances: even in any one individual mind, the association between mental
changes and material changes is much too intimate, constant, and
detailed to admit of any one reasonably supposing that it can be due
only to chance.

The suggestion of pure idealism (VI) ultimately implies that the
thinking Ego is itself the sole existence--a position which cannot,
indeed, be turned by any assault of logic; but one which is
nevertheless too obviously opposed to common sense to admit of any
serious defence; its immunity from direct attack arises only from the
gratuitous nature of its challenge to prove a negative (namely, that the
thinking Ego is _not_ the sole existence), and this a negative which is
necessarily beyond the region of proof.

Lastly, the suggestion that the problem is necessarily insoluble (VII)
does not deserve to be regarded as an hypothesis at all; for to suppose
that the problem is necessarily insoluble is merely to exclude the
supposition of there being any hypothesis available.

In view of these several considerations, it appears to me that, although
in a formal sense we may say there are altogether seven possible answers
to the question before us, in reality, or for the purposes of practical
discussion, there are nowadays but three--namely those which head the
above list, and which I will now proceed to consider.

I have named these three hypotheses in the order of their appearance
during the history of philosophical thought. The earliest is the
spiritualistic. As far back as we can trace the conceptions of primitive
man, we meet with an unquestioning belief that it is his spirit which
_animates_ his body; and, starting from this belief as explanatory of
the movements of his own body, he readily attributes movements elsewhere
to analogous agencies--the theory of _animism_ in Nature thus becoming
the universal theory in all early stages of culture. It also appears to
be the theory most natural to our own children during the early years of
their dawning intelligence, and would doubtless continue through life in
the case of every individual human being, were he not subsequently
instructed in the reasons which have led to its rejection by many other
members of his race. These reasons, as already observed, have been
furnished in their entirety only within comparatively recent times; not
until Physiology was able to prove how intimate is the association
between cerebral processes and mental processes did it become possible
for materialism to turn the tables upon spiritualism, by simply
inverting the hypothesis. Lastly, although the theory of Monism (III)
may be traced back at least as far as the pantheistic thought of
Buddhism, it there had reference to theology as distinguished from
psychology. And even as presented in the writings of Bruno, Spinoza, and
other so-called monists prior to the present century, the hypothesis
necessarily lacked completeness on account of the absence of knowledge
afterwards supplied by physiology. For Monism, in the sense of this term
as I shall use it, may be metaphorically regarded as the child of the
two pre-existing theories, Spiritualism and Materialism. The birth of
this child was necessarily impossible before both its parents had
reached mature age. On the one hand it was necessary that the theory of
Spiritualism should have outgrown its infancy as Animism, its childhood
as Polytheism, before it entered upon its youth as Monotheism--or before
it was able to supply material for the conception of Monism as a theory
of cosmical extent. On the other hand, Materialism required to grow into
the fullness of manhood, under the nursing influence of Science, before
it was possible to engender this new-born offspring; for this offspring
is new-born. The theory of Monism, as we are about to consider it, is a
creature of our own generation; and it is only as such that I desire to
call attention to the child. In order, however, to do this, I must
follow the example of biographers in general, and begin by giving a
brief sketch of both the parents.




CHAPTER I.

SPIRITUALISM.


In proceeding to consider the opposite theories of Spiritualism and
Materialism, it is before all else desirable to be perfectly clear upon
the point of theory whereby they are essentially distinguished. This
point is that which is raised by the question whether mind is the cause
or the effect of motion. Both theories are dualistic, and therefore
agree in holding that there is causation as between mind and motion:
they differ only in their teaching as to the direction in which the
causation proceeds. Of course, out of this fundamental difference there
arise many secondary differences. The most important of these secondary
differences has reference to the nature of the eternal or self-existing
substance. Both theories agree that there is such a substance; but on
the question whether this substance be mental or material, the two
theories give contradictory answers, and logically so. For, if mind as
we directly know it (namely, in ourselves) is taken to be a cause of
motion, within our experience mind is accredited with priority; and
hence the inference that elsewhere, or universally, mind is prior to
motion. Furthermore, as motion cannot take place without something which
moves, this something is likewise supposed to have been the result of
mind: hence the doctrine of the creation by mind both of matter and of
energy. On the other hand, the theory of materialism, by refusing to
assign priority to mind as known directly in ourselves, naturally
concludes that mind is elsewhere, or universally, the result of matter
in motion--in other words, that matter in motion is the eternal or
self-existing substance, and, as such, the cause of mind wherever mind
occurs.

I may observe, in passing, that although this cosmical deduction from
the theory of materialism is, as I have said, natural, it is not (as is
the case with the corresponding deduction from the theory of
spiritualism) inevitable. For it is logically possible that even though
all known minds be the results of matter in motion, matter in motion may
nevertheless itself be the result of an unknown mind. This, indeed, is
the position virtually adopted by Locke in his celebrated controversy
with the Bishop of Worcester. Having been taken to task by this divine
for the materialistic tendency of his writings, Locke defends himself by
denying the necessary character of the deduction which we are now
considering. For example, he insists, 'I see no contradiction in it that
the first eternal thinking being should, if he pleased, give to certain
systems of created senseless matter, put together as he thinks fit, some
degrees of sense, perception, and thought: though, as I think, I have
proved (lib. IV, ch. 10 and 14 &c.), it is no less than a contradiction
to suppose matter (which is evidently in its own nature void of sense
and thought) should be that eternal first thinking being.' Under this
view, it will be observed, mind is supposed to have the ultimate
priority, and thus to have been the original or creating cause of matter
in motion, which, in turn, becomes the cause (or, at least, the
conditional condition) of mind of a lower order. This view, however,
need not detain us, inasmuch as it can only be held by those who, on
grounds independent of philosophical thinking, already believe in mind
as the First Cause or Eternal Being: this belief granted, there is, of
course, an end of any question as between Spiritualism and Materialism.
I have, therefore, only mentioned this possible phase of spiritualistic
theory, in order to show that the theory of Materialism as applied to a
human being does not _necessarily_ involve an extension of that theory
to the cosmos. But I hold this distinction as of no practical value: it
merely indicates a logical possibility which no one would be likely to
entertain except on grounds independent of those upon which the
philosophical dispute between Spiritualism and Materialism must be
confined.

Of more practical importance is the remark already made, namely, that
the fundamental or diagnostic distinction between these two species of
theory consists _only_ in the views which they severally take on the
question of causality. This remark is of practical importance, because
in the debate between spiritualists and materialists it is often lost
sight of: nay, in some cases, it is even expressly ignored. Obviously,
when it is either intentionally or unintentionally disregarded, the
debate ceases to be directed to the question under discussion, and may
then wander aimlessly over the whole field of collateral speculation.
Throughout the present essay, therefore, the discussion will be
restricted to the only topic which we have to discuss--namely, whether
mind is the cause of motion, motion the cause of mind, or neither the
cause of the other.

The view to be first considered--namely, that mind is the cause of
motion--obviously has one great advantage over the opposite view: it
supposes the causality to proceed from that which is the source of our
idea of causality (the mind); not from that into which this idea has
been read by the mind. Hence, it is so far less difficult to imagine
that mental changes are the cause of bodily changes than _vice versa_;
for upon this hypothesis we are starting at least from the substance of
immediate knowledge, and not from the reflection of that knowledge in
what we call the external world.

On the other hand, the theory of Spiritualism labours under certain
speculative difficulties which appear to me overwhelming. The most
formidable of these difficulties arises from the inevitable collision of
the theory with the scientific doctrine of the conservation of energy.
Whether or not we adopt the view that all causation of a physical kind
is ultimately an expression of the fact that matter and energy are
indestructible[3], it is equally certain that this indestructibility is
a necessary condition to the occurrence of causation as natural.
Therefore, if the mind of man is capable of breaking in as an
independent cause upon the otherwise uniform system of natural
causation, the only way in which it could do so would be by either
destroying or creating certain _quanta_ of either matter or energy or
both. But to suppose the mind capable of doing any of these things would
be to suppose that the mind is a cause in some other sense than a
physical or a natural cause; it would be to suppose that the mind is a
super-natural cause, or, more plainly, that all mental activity, so far
as it is an efficient cause of bodily movement, is of the nature of a
miracle.

This conclusion, which appears to me unavoidably implicated in the
spiritualistic hypothesis, is not merely improbable _per se_, but admits
of being shown virtually impossible if we proceed to consider the
consequences to which it necessarily leads. A sportsman, for example,
pulls the trigger of a gun, thereby initiating a long train of physical
causes, which we may take up at the point where the powder is
discharged, the shot propelled, and the bird dropped. Here the man's
volition is supposed to have broken in upon the otherwise continuous
stream of physical causes--first by modifying the molecular movements of
his brain, so as to produce the particular co-ordination of
neuro-muscular movement required to take accurate aim and to fire at the
right moment; next by converting a quantity of gunpowder into gas,
propelling a quantity of lead through the air; and finally, by killing a
bird. Now, without tracing the matter further than this, let us consider
how enormous a change the will of the man has introduced, even by so
trivial an exercise of its activity. No doubt the first change in the
material world was exceedingly slight: the molecular movement in the
cortex of his brain was probably not more than might be dynamically
represented by some small fraction of a foot-pound. But so intricate is
the _nexus_ of physical causality throughout the whole domain of Nature,
that the intervention of even so minute a disturbance _ab extra_ is
obviously bound to continue to assert an influence of ever-widening
extent as well as of everlasting duration. The heat generated by the
explosion of the powder, the changed disposition of the shot, the death
of the bird--leading to innumerable physical changes as to stoppage of
many mechanical processes previously going on in the bird's body, loss
of animal heat, &c., and also to innumerable vital changes, leading to
a stoppage of all the mechanical changes which the bird would have
helped to condition had it lived to die some other death, to propagate
its kind, and thus indirectly condition an incalculable number of future
changes that would have been brought about by the ever increasing number
of its descendants--these and an indefinite number of other physical
changes must all be held to have followed as a direct consequence of the
man's volition thus suddenly breaking in as an independent cause upon
the otherwise uniform course of Nature. Now, I say that, apart from some
system of pre-established harmony, it appears simply inconceivable that
the order of Nature could be maintained at all, if it were thus liable
to be interfered with at any moment in any number of points. And if the
spiritualist takes refuge in the further hypothesis of a pre-established
harmony between acts of human (not to add brute) volition and causes of
a natural kind, we have only to observe that he thus lands himself in a
speculative position which is practically identical with that occupied
by the materialist. For the only difference between the two positions
then is that the necessity which the materialist takes to be imposed on
human volition by the system of natural causation, is now taken by the
spiritualist to be equally imposed by a super-natural volition. The
necessity which binds the human volition must be equally rigid in
either case; and therefore it can make no practical difference whether
the source of it be regarded as natural or super-natural, material or
mental: so that a man be fated to will only in certain ways--and this
with all the rigour which belongs to causation as physical--it is
scarcely worth while to dispute whether the predestination is of God or
of Nature. There can be no question, however, that in this matter the
possibility which I have supposed to be suggested by the spiritualist is
more far-fetched than that which obviously lies to the hand of the
materialist; and, moreover, that it too plainly wears the appearance of
a desperate device to save a hollow theory.

It remains to add that this great difficulty against the spiritualistic
theory has been revealed in all its force only during the present
generation. Since the days of fetishism, indeed, the difficulty has
always been an increasing one--growing with the growth of the perception
of uniformity on the one hand, and of mechanical as distinguished from
volitional agency on the other. But it was not until the correlation of
all the physical forces had been proved by actual experiment, and the
scientific doctrine of the conservation of energy became as a
consequence firmly established, that the difficulty in question assumed
the importance of a logical barrier to the theory of mental changes
acting as efficient causes of material changes.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 3: In the opinion of some modern writers the indestructibility
of matter and the conservation of energy are alone sufficient to explain
all the facts of natural causation. 'For,' it is urged, 'if in any case
similar antecedents did not determine similar consequents, on one or
other of these occasions some _quantum_ of force, or of matter, or of
both, must have disappeared--or, which is the same thing, the law of
causation cannot have been constant.' In a future chapter I shall have
to recur to this view. Meanwhile I have only to observe that whether or
not the law of causation is nothing more than a re-statement of the fact
that matter and energy are indestructible, it is equally true that this
fact is at least a necessary _condition_ to the operation of that law.]




