CHAPTER XXV

THE HEART OF HELOÏSE


The romantic growth and imaginative shaping of chivalric love having been
followed in the fortunes of its great exemplars, Tristan, Iseult,
Lancelot, Guinevere, Parzival, a different illustration of mediaeval
passion may be had by turning from these creations of literature to an
actual woman, whose love for a living man was thought out as keenly and as
tragically felt as any heart-break of imagined lovers, and was impressed
with as entire a self-surrender as ever ravished the soul of nun panting
with love of the God-man.

There has never been a passion between a man and woman more famous than
that which brought happiness and sorrow to the lives of Abaelard and
Heloïse. Here fame is just. It was a great love, and its course was a
perfect soul’s tragedy. Abaelard was a celebrity, the intellectual glory
of an active-minded epoch. His love-story has done as much for his
posthumous fame as all his intellectual activities. Heloïse became known
in her time through her relations with Abaelard; in his songs her name was
wafted far. She has come down to us as one of the world’s love-heroines.
Yet few of those who have been touched by her story have known that
Heloïse was a great woman, possessed of an admirable mind, a character
which proved its strength through years, and, above all, a capacity for
loving--for loving out to the full conclusions of love’s convictions, and
for feeling in their full range and power whatever moods and emotions
could arise from an unhappy situation and a passion as deeply felt as it
was deeply thought upon.

Abaelard was not a great character--aside from his intellect. He was vain
and inconsiderate, a man who delighted in confounding and supplanting his
teachers, and in being a thorn in the flesh of all opponents. But he
became chastened through his misfortunes and through Heloïse’s high and
self-sacrificing love. In the end, perhaps, his love was worthy of the
love of Heloïse. Yet her love from the beginning was nobler and deeper
than his love of her. Love was for him an incident in his experience, then
an element in his life. Love made the life of Heloïse; it remained her
all. Moreover, in the records of their passion, Heloïse’s love is unveiled
as Abaelard’s is not. For all these reasons, the heart of Heloïse rather
than the heart of Abaelard discloses the greatness of a love that wept
itself out in the twelfth century, and it is her love rather than his that
can teach us much regarding the mediaeval capacity for loving. Hers is a
story of mediaeval womanhood, and sin, and repentance perhaps, with peace
at last, or at least the lips shut close and further protest foregone.

Abaelard’s stormy intellectual career[1] and the story of the love between
him and the canon’s niece are well known. Let us follow him in those parts
of his narrative which disclose the depth and power of Heloïse’s love for
him. We draw from his _Historia calamitatum_, written “to a friend,”
apparently an open letter intended to circulate.

“There was,” writes he, referring to the time of his sojourn in Paris,
when he was about thirty-six years old, and at the height of his fame as a
lecturer in the schools--

    “There was in Paris a young girl named Heloïse, the niece of a canon,
    Fulbert. It was his affectionate wish that she should have the best
    education in letters that could be procured. Her face was not unfair,
    and her knowledge was unequalled. This attainment, so rare in women,
    had given her great reputation.

    “I had hitherto lived continently, but now was casting my eyes about,
    and I saw that she possessed every attraction that lovers seek; nor
    did I regard my success as doubtful, when I considered my fame and my
    goodly person, and also her love of letters. Inflamed with love, I
    thought how I could best become intimate with her. It occurred to me
    to obtain lodgings with her uncle, on the plea that household cares
    distracted me from study. Friends quickly brought this about, the old
    man being miserly and yet desirous of instruction for his niece. He
    eagerly entrusted her to my tutorship, and begged me to give her all
    the time I could take from my lectures, authorizing me to see her at
    any hour of the day or night, and punish her when necessary. I
    marvelled with what simplicity he confided a tender lamb to a hungry
    wolf. As he had given me authority to punish her, I saw that if
    caresses would not win my object, I could bend her by threats and
    blows. Doubtless he was misled by love of his niece and my own good
    reputation. Well, what need to say more: we were united first by the
    one roof above us, and then by our hearts. Our hours of study were
    given to love. The books lay open, but our words were of love rather
    than philosophy, there were more kisses than aphorisms; and love was
    oftener reflected in our eyes than the lettered page. To avert
    suspicion, I struck her occasionally--very gentle blows of love. The
    joy of love, new to us both, brought no satiety. The more I was taken
    up with this pleasure, the less time I gave to philosophy and the
    schools--how tiresome had all that become! I became unproductive,
    merely repeating my old lectures, and if I composed any verses, love
    was their subject, and not the secrets of philosophy; you know how
    popular and widely sung these have become. But the students! what
    groans and laments arose from them at my distraction! A passion so
    plain was not to be concealed; every one knew of it except Fulbert. A
    man is often the last to know of his own shame. Yet what everybody
    knows cannot be hid forever, and so after some months he learned all.
    Oh how bitter was that uncle’s grief! and what was the grief of the
    separated lovers! How ashamed I was, and afflicted at the affliction
    of the girl! And what a storm of sorrow came over her at my disgrace.
    Neither complained for himself, but each grieved at what the other
    must endure.”

Although Abaelard was moved at the plight of Heloïse, he bitterly felt his
own discomfiture in the eyes of the once admiring world. But the sentence
touching Heloïse is a first true note of her devoted love: what a storm of
sorrow (_moeroris aestus_) came over her at my disgrace. Through this
trouble and woe, Heloïse never thought of her own pain save as it pained
her to be the source of grief to Abaelard.

Abaelard continues:

    “The separation of our bodies joined our souls more closely and
    inflamed our love. Shame spent itself and made us unashamed, so small
    a thing it seemed compared with satisfying love. Not long afterwards
    the girl knew that she was to be a mother, and in the greatest
    exultation wrote and asked me to advise what she should do. One night,
    as we agreed on, when Fulbert was away I bore her off secretly and
    sent her to my own country, Brittany, where she stayed with my sister
    till she gave birth to a son, whom she named Astralabius.

    “The uncle, on his return to his empty house, was frantic. He did not
    know what to do to me. If he should kill or do me some bodily injury,
    he feared lest his niece, whom he loved, would suffer for it among my
    people in Brittany. He could not seize me, as I was prepared against
    all attempts. At length, pitying his anguish, and feeling remorse at
    having caused it, I went to him as a suppliant and promised whatever
    satisfaction he should demand. I assured him that nothing in my
    conduct would seem remarkable to any one who had felt the strength of
    love or would take the pains to recall how many of the greatest men
    had been thrown down by women, ever since the world began. Whereupon I
    offered him a satisfaction greater than he could have hoped, to wit,
    that I would marry her whom I had corrupted, if only the marriage
    might be kept secret so that it should not injure me in the minds of
    men. He agreed and pledged his faith, and the faith of his friends,
    and sealed with kisses the reconciliation which I had sought--so that
    he might more easily betray me!”

It will be remembered that Abaelard was a clerk, a _clericus_, in virtue
of his profession of letters and theology. Never having taken orders, he
could marry; but while a clerk’s slip could be forgotten, marriage might
lead people to think he had slighted his vocation, and would certainly bar
the ecclesiastical preferment which such a famous _clericus_ might
naturally look forward to. Nevertheless, he at once set out to fetch
Heloïse from Brittany, to make her his wife.

The stand which she now took shows both her mind and heart:

    “She strongly disapproved, and urged two reasons against the marriage,
    to wit, the danger and the disgrace in which it would involve me. She
    swore--and so it proved--that no satisfaction would ever appease her
    uncle. She asked how she was to have any glory through me when she
    should have made me inglorious, and should have humiliated both
    herself and me. What penalties would the world exact from her if she
    deprived it of such a luminary; what curses, what damage to the
    Church, what lamentations of philosophers, would follow on this
    marriage. How indecent, how lamentable would it be for a man whom
    nature had made for all, to declare that he belonged to one woman, and
    subject himself to such shame. From her soul, she detested this
    marriage which would be so utterly ignominious for me, and a burden to
    me. She expatiated on the disgrace and inconvenience of matrimony for
    me and quoted the Apostle Paul exhorting men to shun it. If I would
    not take the apostle’s advice or listen to what the saints had said
    regarding the matrimonial yoke, I should at least pay attention to the
    philosophers--to Theophrastus’s words upon the intolerable evils of
    marriage, and to the refusal of Cicero to take a wife after he had
    divorced Terentia, when he said that he could not devote himself to a
    wife and philosophy at the same time. ‘Or,’ she continued, laying
    aside the disaccord between study and a wife, ‘consider what a married
    man’s establishment would be to you. What sweet accord there would be
    between the schools and domestics, between copyists and cradles,
    between books and distaffs, between pen and spindle! Who, engaged in
    religious or philosophical meditations, could endure a baby’s crying
    and the nurse’s ditties stilling it, and all the noise of servants?
    Could you put up with the dirty ways of children? The rich can, you
    say, with their palaces and apartments of all kinds; their wealth does
    not feel the expense or the daily care and annoyance. But I say, the
    state of the rich is not that of philosophers; nor have men entangled
    in riches and affairs any time for the study of Scripture or
    philosophy. The renowned philosophers of old, despising the world,
    fleeing rather than relinquishing it, forbade themselves all
    pleasures, and reposed in the embraces of philosophy.’”

Speaking thus, Heloïse fortified her argument with quotations from Seneca,
and the examples of Jewish and Gentile worthies and Christian saints, and
continued:

    “It is not for me to point out--for I would not be thought to instruct
    Minerva--how soberly and continently all these men lived who,
    according to Augustine and others, were called philosophers as much
    for their way of life as or their knowledge. If laymen and Gentiles,
    bound by no profession of religion, lived thus, surely you, a clerk
    and canon, should not prefer low pleasures to sacred duties, nor let
    yourself be sucked down by this Charybdis and smothered in filth
    inextricably. If you do not value the privilege of a clerk, at least
    defend the dignity of a philosopher. If reverence for God be despised,
    still let love of decency temper immodesty. Remember, Socrates was
    tied to a wife, and through a nasty accident wiped out this blot upon
    philosophy, that others afterwards might be more cautious; which
    Jerome relates in his book against Jovinianus, how once when enduring
    a storm of Xanthippe’s clamours from the floor above, he was ducked
    with slops, and simply said, ‘I knew such thunder would bring rain.’

    “Finally she said that it would be dangerous for me to take her back
    to Paris; it was more becoming to me, and sweeter to her, to be called
    my mistress, so that affection alone might keep me hers and not the
    binding power of any matrimonial chain; and if we should be separated
    for a time, our joys at meeting would be the dearer for their rarity.
    When at last with all her persuasions and dissuasions she could not
    turn me from my folly, and could not bear to offend me, with a burst
    of tears she ended in these words: ‘One thing is left: in the ruin of
    us both the grief which follows shall not be less than the love which
    went before.’ Nor did she here lack the spirit of prophecy.”

Heloïse’s reasonings show love great and true and her absolute devotion to
Abaelard’s interests. None the less striking is her clear intelligence.
She reasoned correctly; she was right, the marriage would do great harm to
Abaelard and little good to her. We see this too, if we lay aside our
sense of the ennobling purity of marriage--a sentiment not commonly felt
in the twelfth century. Marriage was holy in the mind of Christ. But it
did not preserve its holiness through the centuries which saw the rise of
monasticism and priestly celibacy. A way of life is not pure and holy when
another way is holier and purer; this is peculiarly true in Christianity,
which demands the ideal best with such intensity as to cast reflection on
whatever falls below the highest standard. From the time of the barbarian
inroads, on through the Carolingian periods, and into the later Middle
Ages, there was enough barbarism and brutality to prevent the
preservation, or impede the development, of a high standard of marriage.
Not monasticism, but his own half-barbarian, lustful heart led Charlemagne
to marry and remarry at will, and have many mistresses besides. It was the
same with the countless barons and mediaeval kings, rude and half
civilized. This was barbarous lust, not due to the influence of
monasticism. But, on the other hand, it was always the virgin or celibate
state that the Church held before the eyes of all this semi-barbarous
laity as the ideal for a Christian man or woman. The Church sanctioned
marriage, but hardly lauded it or held it up as a condition in which lives
of holiness and purity could be led. Such were the sentiments in which
Heloïse was born and bred. They were subconscious factors in her thoughts
regarding herself and her lover. Devoted and unselfish was her love;
undoubtedly Heloïse would have sacrificed herself for Abaelard under any
social conditions. Nevertheless, with her, marriage added little to love;
it was a mere formal and binding authorization; love was no purer for it.
To her mind, for a man in Abaelard’s situation to be entangled in a
temporary _amour_ was better than to be chained to his passion, with his
career irrevocably ruined, in marriage. In so far as her thoughts or
Abaelard’s were influenced by the environment of priestly thinking,
marriage would seem a rendering permanent of a passionate and sinful
state, which it were _best_ to cast off altogether. For herself, as she
said truly, the marriage would bring obloquy rather than reinstatement.
She had been mistress to a clerk; marriage would make her the partner of
his abandonment of his vocation, the accomplice of broken purposes if not
of broken vows. And finally, as there was then no line of disgrace as now
between bastard and lawful issue, Heloïse had no thought that the
interests of her son demanded that his mother should become his father’s
wife.

    “Leaving our son in my sister’s care, we stole back to Paris, and
    shortly after, having in the night celebrated our vigils in a certain
    church, we were married at dawn in the presence of her uncle and some
    of his and our friends. We left at once separately and with secrecy,
    and afterwards saw each other only in privacy, so as to conceal what
    we had done. But her uncle and his household began at once to announce
    the marriage and violate his word; while she, on the contrary,
    protested vehemently and swore that it was false. At that he became
    enraged and treated her vilely. When I discovered this I sent her to
    the convent of Argenteuil, near Paris, where she had been educated.
    There I had her take the garb of a nun, except the veil. Hearing this,
    the uncle and his relations thought that I had duped them, ridding
    myself of Heloïse by making her a nun. So having bribed my servant,
    they came upon me by night, when I was sleeping, and took on me a
    vengeance as cruel and irretrievable as it was vile and shameful. Two
    of the perpetrators were pursued and vengeance taken.

    “In the morning the whole town was assembled, crying and lamenting my
    plight, especially the clerks and students; at which I was afflicted
    with more shame than I suffered physical pain. I thought of my ruined
    hopes and glory, and then saw that by God’s just judgment I was
    punished where I had most sinned, and that Fulbert had justly
    avenged treachery with treachery. But what a figure I should cut in
    public! how the world would point its finger at me! I was also
    confounded at the thought of the Levitical law, according to which I
    had become an abomination to the Church.[2] In this misery the
    confusion of shame--I confess it--rather than the ardour of conversion
    drove me to the cover of the cloister, after she had willingly obeyed
    my command to take the veil. I became a monk in the abbey of St.
    Denis, and she a nun in the convent of Argenteuil. Many begged her not
    to set that yoke upon her youth; at which, amid her tears, she broke
    out in Cornelia’s lament: ‘O great husband! undeserving of my couch!
    Has fortune rights over a head so high? Why did I, impious, marry thee
    to make thee wretched? Accept these penalties, which I gladly pay.’[3]
    With these words, she went straight to the altar, received the veil
    blessed by the bishop, and took the vows before them all.”

Abaelard’s _Historia calamitatum_ now turns to troubles having no
connection with Heloïse: his difficulties with the monks of St. Denis,
with other monks, with every one, in fact, except his scholars; his
arraignment before the Council of Soissons, the public burning of his
book, _De Unitate et Trinitate divina_, and various other troubles, till,
seeking a retreat, he constructed an oratory on the bank of the Ardisson.
He named it the Paraclete, and there he taught and lectured. He was
afterwards elected abbot of a monastery in Brittany, where he discovered
that those under him were savage beasts rather than monks. Here the
_Historia calamitatum_ was written.

The monks of St. Denis had never ceased to hate Abaelard for his assertion
that their great Saint was not really Dionysius the Areopagite who heard
Paul preach. Their abbot now brought forward and proved an ancient title
to the land where stood the convent of Argenteuil, “in which,” to resume
Abaelard’s account,

    “she, once my wife, now my sister in Christ, had taken the veil, and
    was at this time prioress. The nuns were rudely driven out. News of
    this came to me as a suggestion from the Lord to bethink me of the
    deserted Paraclete. Going thither, I invited Heloïse and her nuns to
    come and take possession. They accepted, and I gave it to them.
    Afterward Pope Innocent II. confirmed this grant to them and their
    successors in perpetuity. There for a time they lived in want; but
    soon the Divine Pity showed itself the true Paraclete, and moved the
    people of the neighbourhood to take compassion on them, and they soon
    knew no lack. Indeed as women are the weaker sex, their need moves men
    more readily to pity, and their virtues are the more grateful to both
    God and man. And on our sister the Lord bestowed such favour in the
    eyes of all, that the bishops loved her as a daughter, the abbots as a
    sister, the laity as a mother; and all wondered at her piety, her
    wisdom, and her gentle patience in everything. She rarely let herself
    be seen, that she might devote herself more wholly to prayers and
    meditations in her cell; but all the more persistently people sought
    her spiritual counsel.”

What were those meditations and those prayers uttered or unuttered in that
cell? They did not always refer to the kingdom of heaven, judging from the
abbess’s first letter to her former lover. After the installation of
Heloïse and her nuns, Abaelard rarely visited the Paraclete, although his
advice and instruction was desired there. His visits gave rise to too much
scandal. In the course of time, however, the _Historia calamitatum_ came
into the hands of Heloïse, and occasioned this letter, which seems to
issue forth out of a long silence; ten years had passed since she became a
nun. The superscription is as follows:

    “To her master, rather to a father, to her husband, rather to a
    brother, his maid or rather daughter, his wife or rather sister, to
    Abaelard, Heloïse.

    “Your letter, beloved, written to comfort a friend, chanced recently
    to reach me. Seeing by its first lines from whom it was, I burned to
    read it for the love I bear the writer, hoping also from its words to
    recreate an image of him whose life I have ruined. Those words dropped
    gall and absinthe as they brought back the unhappy story of our
    intercourse and thy ceaseless crosses, O my only one. Truly the letter
    must have convinced the friend that his troubles were light compared
    with yours, as you showed the treachery and persecutions which had
    followed you, the calumnies of enemies and the burning of your
    glorious book, the machinations of false brothers, and the vile acts
    of those worthless monks whom you call your sons. No one could read it
    with dry eyes. Your perils have renewed my griefs; here we all despair
    of your life and each day with trembling hearts expect news of your
    death. In the name of Christ, who so far has somehow preserved thee
    for himself, deign with frequent letters to let these weak servants of
    Him and thee know of the storms overwhelming the swimmer, so that we
    who alone remain to thee may be participators of thy pain or joy. One
    who grieves may gain consolation from those grieving with him; a
    burden borne by many is more lightly borne. And if this tempest
    abates, how happy shall we be to know it. Whatever the letters may
    contain they will show at least that we are not forgotten. Has not
    Seneca said in his letter to Lucilius, that the letters of an absent
    friend are sweet? When no malice can stop your giving us this much of
    you, do not let neglect prove a bar.

    “You have written that long letter to console a friend with the story
    of your own misfortunes, and have thereby roused our grief and added
    to our desolation. Heal these new wounds. You owe to us a deeper debt
    of friendship than to him, for we are not only friends, but friends
    the dearest, and your daughters. After God, you alone are the founder
    of this place, the builder of this oratory and of this congregation.
    This new plantation for a holy purpose is your own; the delicate
    plants need frequent watering. He who gives so much to his enemies,
    should consider his daughters. Or, leaving out the others here, think
    how this is owing me from thee: what thou owest to all women under
    vows, thou shalt pay more devotedly to thine only one. How many books
    have the holy fathers written for holy women, for their exhortation
    and instruction! I marvel at thy forgetfulness of these frail
    beginnings of our conversion. Neither respect of God nor love of us
    nor the example of the blessed fathers, has led thee by speech or
    letter to console me, cast about, and consumed with grief. This
    obligation was the stronger, because the sacrament of marriage joined
    thee to me, and I--every one sees it--cling to thee with unmeasured
    love.

    “Dearest, thou knowest--who knows not?--how much I lost in thee, and
    that an infamous act of treachery robbed me of thee and of myself at
    once. The greater my grief, the greater need of consolation, not from
    another but from thee, that thou who art alone my cause of grief may
    be alone my consolation. It is thou alone that canst sadden me or
    gladden me or comfort me. And thou alone owest this to me, especially
    since I have done thy will so utterly that, unable to offend thee, I
    endured to wreck myself at thy command. Nay, more than this, love
    turned to madness and cut itself off from hope of that which alone it
    sought, when I obediently changed my garb and my heart too in order
    that I might prove thee sole owner of my body as well as of my spirit.
    God knows, I have ever sought in thee only thyself, desiring simply
    thee and not what was thine. I asked no matrimonial contract, I looked
    for no dowry; not my pleasure, not my will, but thine have I striven
    to fulfil. And if the name of wife seemed holier or more potent, the
    word mistress (_amica_) was always sweeter to me, or even--be not
    angry!--concubine or harlot; for the more I lowered myself before
    thee, the more I hoped to gain thy favour, and the less I should hurt
    the glory of thy renown. This thou didst graciously remember, when
    condescending to point out in that letter to a friend some of the
    reasons (but not all!) why I preferred love to wedlock and liberty to
    a chain. I call God to witness that if Augustus, the master of the
    world, would honour me with marriage and invest me with equal rule, it
    would still seem to me dearer and more honourable to be called thy
    strumpet than his empress. He who is rich and powerful is not the
    better man: that is a matter of fortune, this of merit. And she is
    venal who marries a rich man sooner than a poor man, and yearns for a
    husband’s riches rather than himself. Such a woman deserves pay and
    not affection. She is not seeking the man but his goods, and would
    wish, if possible, to prostitute herself to one still richer. Aspasia
    put this clearly when she was trying to effect a reconciliation
    between Xenophon and his wife: ‘Until you come to think that there is
    nowhere else a better man or a woman more desirable, you will be
    continually looking for what you think to be the best, and will wish
    to be married to the man or woman who is the very best.’ This is
    indeed a holy, rather than a philosophical sentiment, and wisdom, not
    philosophy, speaks. This is the holy error and blessed deception
    between man and wife, when affection perfect and unimpaired keeps
    marriage inviolate not so much by continency of body as by chastity of
    mind. But what with other women is an error, is, in my case, the
    manifest truth: since what they suppose in their husbands, I--and the
    whole world agrees--know to be in thee. My love for thee is truth,
    being free from all error. Who among kings or philosophers can vie
    with your fame? What country, what city does not thirst to see you?
    Who, I ask, did not hurry to see you appearing in public and crane his
    neck to catch a last glimpse as you departed? What wife, what maid did
    not yearn for you absent, and burn when you were present? What queen
    did not envy me my joys and couch? There were in you two qualities by
    which you could draw the soul of any woman, the gift of poetry and the
    gift of singing, gifts which other philosophers have lacked. As a
    distraction from labour, you composed love-songs both in metre and in
    rhyme, which for their sweet sentiment and music have been sung and
    resung and have kept your name in every mouth. Your sweet melodies do
    not permit even the illiterate to forget you. Because of these gifts
    women sighed for your love. And, as these songs sung of our loves,
    they quickly spread my name in many lands, and made me the envy of my
    sex. What excellence of mind or body did not adorn your youth? No
    woman, then envious, but now would pity me bereft of such delights.
    What enemy even would not now be softened by the compassion due me?

    “I have brought thee evil, thou knowest how innocently. Not the result
    of the act but the disposition of the doer makes the crime; justice
    does not consider what happens, but through what intent it happens. My
    intent towards thee thou only hast proved and alone canst judge. I
    commit everything to thy weighing and submit to thy decree.

    “Tell me one thing: why, after our conversion, commanded by thee, did
    I drop into oblivion, to be no more refreshed by speech of thine or
    letter? Tell me, I say, if you can, or I will say what I feel and what
    every one suspects: desire rather than friendship drew you to me, lust
    rather than love. So when desire ceased, whatever you were manifesting
    for its sake likewise vanished. This, beloved, is not so much my
    opinion as the opinion of all. Would it were only mine and that thy
    love might find defenders to argue away my pain. Would that I could
    invent some reason to excuse you and also cover my cheapness. Listen,
    I beg, to what I ask, and it will seem small and very easy to you.
    Since I am cheated of your presence, at least put vows in words, of
    which you have a store, and so keep before me the sweetness of thine
    image. I shall vainly expect you to be bountiful in acts if I find you
    a miser in words. Truly I thought that I merited much from you, when I
    had done all for your sake and still continue in obedience. When
    little more than a girl I took the hard vows of a nun, not from piety
    but at your command. If I merit nothing from thee, how vain I deem my
    labour! I can expect no reward from God, as I have done nothing from
    love of Him. Thee hurrying to God I followed, or rather went before.
    For, as you remembered how Lot’s wife turned back, you first delivered
    me to God bound with the vow, and then yourself. That single act of
    distrust, I confess, grieved me and made me blush. God knows, at your
    command I would have followed or preceded you to fiery places. For my
    heart is not with me, but with thee; and now more than ever, if not
    with thee it is nowhere, for it cannot exist without thee. That my
    heart may be well with thee, see to it, I beg; and it will be well if
    it finds thee kind, rendering grace for grace--a little for much.
    Beloved, would that thy love were less sure of me so that it might be
    more solicitous; I have made you so secure that you are negligent.
    Remember all I have done and think what you owe. While I enjoyed
    carnal joy with you, many people were uncertain whether I acted from
    love or lust. Now the end makes clear the beginning; I have cut myself
    off from pleasure to obey thy will. I have kept nothing, save to be
    more than ever thine. Think how wicked it were in thee where all the
    more is due to render less, nothing almost; especially when little is
    asked, and that so easy for you. In the name of God to whom you have
    vowed yourself, give me that of thee which is possible, the
    consolation of a letter. I promise, thus refreshed, to serve God more
    readily. When of old you would call me to pleasures, you sought me
    with frequent letters, and never failed with thy songs to keep thy
    Heloïse on every tongue; the streets, the houses re-echoed me. How
    much fitter that you should now incite me to God than then to lust?
    Bethink thee what thou owest; heed what I ask; and a long letter I
    will conclude with a brief ending: farewell only one!”

Remarks upon this letter would seem to profane a shrine--had the man
profaned that shrine? He had not always worshipped there. Heloïse knew
this, for all her love. She said it too, writing in phraseology which had
been brutalized through the denouncing spirit of Latin monasticism. How
truly she puts the situation and how clearly she thinks withal, discerning
as it were the beautiful and true in love and marriage. The whole letter
is well arranged, and written in a style showing the writer’s training in
Latin mediaeval rhetoric. It was not the less deeply felt because composed
with care and skill. Evidently the writer is of the Middle Ages; her
occasional prolixity was not of her sex but of her time; and she quotes
the ancients so naturally; what they say should be convincing. How the
letter bares the motives of her own conduct: not for God’s sake, or the
kingdom of heaven’s sake, but for Abaelard’s sake she became a nun. She
had no inclination thereto; her letters do not indicate that she ever
became really and spontaneously devoted to her calling. Abaelard was her
God, and as her God she held him to the end; though she applied herself to
the consideration of religious topics, as we shall see. Moreover, her
position as nun and abbess could not fail to force such topics on her
consideration.

Is there another such love-letter, setting forth a situation so
triple-barred and hopeless? And the love which fills the letter, which
throbs and burns in it, which speaks and argues in it, how absolute is
this love. It is love carried out to its full conclusions; it includes the
whole woman and the whole of her life; whatever lies beyond its ken and
care is scorned and rejected. This love is extreme in its humility, and
yet realizes its own purity and worth; it is grieved at the thought of
rousing a feeling baser than itself. Heloïse had been and still was
Heloïse, devoted and self-sacrificing in her love. But the situation has
become torture; her heart is filled with all manner of pain, old and new,
till it is driven to assert its right at least to consolation. Thus
Heloïse’s love becomes insistent and requiring. Was it possibly burdensome
to the man who now might wish to think no more of passion? who might wish
no longer to be loved in that way? In his reply Abaelard does not unveil
himself; he seems to take an attitude which may have been the most
faithful expression that he could devise of his changed self.

    “To Heloïse his beloved sister in Christ, Abaelard her brother in the
    Same.”

This superscription was a gentle reminder of their present
relationship--in Christ. The writer begins: his not having written since
their conversion was to be ascribed not to his negligence, but to his
confidence in her wisdom; he did not think that she who, so full of grace,
had consoled her sister nuns when prioress, could as abbess need teaching
or exhortation for the guidance of her daughters; but if, in her humility,
she felt the need of his instruction in matters pertaining to God, she
might write, and he would answer, as the Lord should grant. Thanks be to
God who had filled their hearts--hers and her nuns--with solicitude for
his perils, and had made them participators in his afflictions; through
their prayers the divine pity had protected him. He had hastened to send
the Psalter, requested by his sister, formerly dear to him in the world
and now most dear in Christ, to assist their prayers. The potency of
prayer, with God and the saints, and especially the prayer of women for
those dear to them, is frequently declared in Scripture; he cites a number
of passages to prove it. May these move her to pray for him. He refers
with affectionate gratitude to the prayers which the nuns had been
offering for him, and encloses a short prayer for his safety, which he
begs and implores may be used in their daily canonical hours. If the Lord,
however, delivers him into the hands of his enemies to kill him, or if he
meet his death in any way, he begs that his body may be brought to the
Paraclete for burial, so that the sight of his sepulchre may move his
daughters and sisters in Christ to pray for him; no place could be so safe
and salutary for the soul of one bitterly repenting of his sins, as that
consecrated to the true Paraclete--the Comforter; nor could fitter
Christian burial be found than among women devoted by their vows to
Christ. He begs that the great solicitude which they now have for his
bodily safety, they will then have for the salvation of his soul, and by
the suffrage of their prayer for the dead man show how they had loved him
when alive. The letter closes, not with a personal word to Heloïse, but
with this distich:

  “Vive, vale, vivantque tuae valeantque sorores,
   Vivite, sed Christo, quaeso, mei memores.”

Thus as against Heloïse’s beseeching love, Abaelard lifted his hands,
palms out, repelling it. His letter ignored all that filled the soul and
the letter of Heloïse. His reply did not lack words of spiritual
affection, and its tone was not as formal then as it now seems. When
Abaelard asked for the prayers of Heloïse and her nuns, he meant it; he
desired the efficacy of their prayers. Then he wished to be buried among
them. We are touched by this; but, again, Abaelard meant it, as he said,
for his soul’s welfare; it was no love sentiment. The letter stirred the
heart of Heloïse to a rebellious outcry against the cruelty of God, if not
of Abaelard, a soul’s cry against life and the calm attitude of one who no
longer was--or at least meant to be no longer--what he had been to her.

    “To her only one, next to Christ, his only one in Christ.

    “I wonder, my only one, that contrary to epistolary custom and the
    natural order of things, in the salutation of your letter you have
    placed me before you, a woman before a man, a wife before a husband, a
    servant before her lord, a nun before a monk and priest, a deaconess
    before an abbot. The proper order is for one writing to a superior to
    put his own name last, but when writing to an inferior, the writer’s
    name should precede. We also marvelled, that where you should have
    afforded us consolation, you added to our desolation, and excited the
    tears you should have quieted. How could we restrain our tears when
    reading what you wrote towards the end: ‘If the Lord shall deliver me
    into the hand of my enemies to slay me’! Dearest, how couldst thou
    think or say that? May God never forget His handmaids, to leave them
    living when you are no more! May He never allot to us that life, which
    would be harder than any death! It is for you to perform our obsequies
    and commend our souls to God, and send before to God those whom you
    have gathered for Him--that you may have no further anxiety, and
    follow us the more gladly because assured of our safety. Refrain, my
    lord, I beg, from making the miserable most miserable with such words;
    destroy not our life before we die. ‘Sufficient unto the day is the
    evil thereof’--and that day will come to all with bitterness enough.
    ‘What need,’ says Seneca, ‘to add to evil, and destroy life before
    death?’

    “Thou askest, only one, that, in the event of thy death when absent
    from us, we should have thy body brought to our cemetery, in order
    that, being always in our memory, thou shouldst obtain greater benefit
    from our prayers. Did you think that your memory could slip from us?
    How could we pray, with distracted minds? What use of tongue or reason
    would be left to us? When the mind is crazed against God it will not
    placate Him with prayer so much as irritate Him with complaints. We
    could only weep, pressing to follow rather than bury you. How could we
    live after we had lost our life in you? The thought of your death is
    death to us; what would be the actuality? God grant we shall not have
    to pay those rites to one from whom we look for them; may we go before
    and not follow! A heart crushed with grief is not calm, nor is a mind
    tossed by troubles open to God. Do not, I beg, hinder the divine
    service to which we are dedicated.

    “What remains of hope for me when thou art gone? Or what reason to
    continue in this pilgrimage, where I have no solace save thee? and of
    thee I have but the bare knowledge that thou dost live, since thy
    restoring presence is not granted me. Oh!--if it is right to say
    it--how cruel has God been to me! Inclement Clemency! Fortune has
    emptied her quiver against me, so that others have nothing to fear! If
    indeed a single dart were left, no place could be found in me for a
    new wound. Fortune fears only lest I escape her tortures by death.
    Wretched and unhappy! in thee I was lifted above all women; in thee am
    I the more fatally thrown down. What glory did I have in thee! what
    ruin have I now! Fortune made me the happiest of women that she might
    make me the most miserable. The injury was the more outrageous in that
    all ways of right were broken. While we were abandoned to love’s
    delights, the divine severity spared us. When we made the forbidden
    lawful and by marriage wiped out fornication’s stains, the Lord’s
    wrath broke on us, impatient of an unsullied bed when it long had
    borne with one defiled. A man taken in adultery would have been amply
    punished by what came to you. What others deserved for adultery, that
    you got from the marriage which you thought had made amends for
    everything. Adulteresses bring their paramours what your own wife
    brought you. Not when we lived for pleasure, but when, separated, we
    lived in chastity, you presiding at the Paris schools, I at thy
    command dwelling with the nuns at Argenteuil; you devoted to study, I
    to prayer and holy reading; it was then that you alone paid the
    penalty for what we had done together. Alone you bore the punishment,
    which you deserved less than I. When you had humiliated yourself and
    elevated me and all my kin, you little merited that punishment either
    from God or from those traitors. Miserable me, begotten to cause such
    a crime! O womankind ever the ruin of the noblest men![4]

    “Well the Tempter knows how easy is man’s overthrow through a wife. He
    cast his malice over us, and the man whom he could not throw down
    through fornication, he tried with marriage, using a good to bring
    about an evil where evil means had failed. I thank God at least for
    this, that the Tempter did not draw me to assent to that which became
    the cause of the evil deed. Yet, although in this my mind absolves me,
    too many sins had gone before to leave me guiltless of that crime. For
    long a servant of forbidden joys, I earned the punishment which I now
    suffer of past sins. Let the evil end be attributed to ill beginnings!
    May my penitence be meet for what I have done, and may long remorse in
    some way compensate for the penalty you suffered! What once you
    suffered in the body, may I through contrition bear to the end of
    life, that so I may make satisfaction to thee if not to God. To
    confess the infirmities of my most wretched soul, I can find no
    penitence to offer God, whom I never cease to accuse of utter cruelty
    towards you. Rebellious to His rule, I offend Him with indignation
    more than I placate Him with penitence. For that cannot be called the
    sinner’s penitence where, whatever be the body’s suffering, the mind
    retains the will to sin and still burns with the same desires. It is
    easy in confession to accuse oneself of sins, and also to do penance
    with the body; but hard indeed to turn the heart from the desire of
    its greatest joys![5] Love’s pleasures, which we knew together, cannot
    be made displeasing to me nor driven from my memory. Wherever I turn,
    they press upon me, nor do they spare my dreams. Even in the solemn
    moments of the Mass, when prayer should be the purest, their phantoms
    catch my soul. When I should groan for what I have done, I sigh for
    what I have lost. Not only our acts, but times and places stick fast
    in my mind, and my body quivers. O truly wretched me, fit only to
    utter this cry of the soul: ‘Wretched that I am, who shall deliver me
    from the body of this death?’ Would I could add with truth what
    follows:--‘I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.’ Such
    thanksgiving, dearest, may be thine, by one bodily ill cured of many
    tortures of the soul, and God may have been merciful where He seemed
    against you; like a good physician who does not spare the pain needed
    to save life. But I am tortured with passion and the fires of memory.
    They call me chaste, who do not know me for a hypocrite. They look
    upon purity of the flesh as virtue--which is of the soul, not of the
    body. Having some praise from men, I merit none from God, who knows
    the heart. I am called religious at a time when most religion is
    hypocrisy, and when whoever keeps from offence against human law is
    praised. Perhaps it seems praiseworthy and acceptable to God, through
    decent conduct,--whatever the intent--to avoid scandalizing the Church
    or causing the Lord’s name to be blasphemed or the religious Order
    discredited. Perhaps it may be of grace just to abstain from evil. But
    the Scripture says, ‘Refrain from evil and do good’; and vainly he
    attempts either who does not act from love of God. God knows that I
    have always feared to offend thee more than I feared to offend Him;
    and have desired to please thee rather than Him. Thy command, not the
    divine love, put on me this garb of religion. What a wretched life I
    lead if I vainly endure all this here and am to have no reward
    hereafter. My hypocrisy has long deceived you, as it has others, and
    therefore you desire my prayers. Have no such confidence; I need your
    prayers; do not withdraw their aid. Do not take away the medicine,
    thinking me whole. Do not cease to think me needy; do not think me
    strong; do not delay your help. Cease from praising me, I beg. No one
    versed in medicine will judge of inner disease from outward view. Thy
    praise is the more perilous because I love it, and desire to please
    thee always. Be fearful rather than confident regarding me, so that I
    may have the help of your care. Do not seek to spur me on, by quoting,
    ‘For strength is made perfect in weakness,’ or ‘He is not crowned
    unless he have contended lawfully.’ I am not looking for the crown of
    victory; enough for me to escape peril;--safer to shun peril than to
    wage war! In whatever little corner of heaven God puts me, that will
    satisfy me. Hear what Saint Jerome says: ‘I confess my weakness; I do
    not wish to fight for the hope of victory, lest I lose.’ Why give up
    certainties to follow the uncertain?”

This letter gives a view of Heloïse’s mind, its strong grasp and its
capacity for reasoning, though its reasoning is here distraught with
passion. Scathingly, half-blinded by her pain, she declares the
perversities of Providence, as they glared upon her. Such a disclosure of
the woman’s mind suggests how broadly based in thought and largely reared
was that great love into which her whole soul had been poured, the mind as
well as heart. Her love was great, unique, not only from its force of
feeling, but from the power and scope of thought by which passion and
feeling were carried out so far and fully to the last conclusions of
devotion. The letter also shows a woman driven by stress of misery to
utter cries and clutch at remedies that her calmer self would have put
by. It is not hypocrisy to conceal the desires or imaginings which one
would never act upon. To tell these is not true disclosure of oneself, but
slander. Torn by pain, Heloïse makes herself more vile and needy than in
other moments she knew herself to be. Yet the letter also uncovers her,
and in nakedness there is some truth. Doubtless her nun’s garb did clothe
a hypocrite. Whatever she felt--and here we see the worst she felt--before
the world she had to act the nun. We shall soon see how she forced herself
to act, or be, the nun toward Abaelard.

Abaelard replied in a letter filled with religious argument and
consolation. It was self-controlled, firm, authoritative, and strong in
those arguments regarding God’s mercy which have stood the test of time.
If they sometimes fail to satisfy the embittered soul, at least they are
the best that man has known. And withal, the letter is calmly and nobly
affectionate--what place was there for love’s protestations? They would
have increased the evil, adding fuel to Heloïse’s passionate misery.

The master-note is struck in the address: “To the spouse of Christ, His
servant.” The letter seeks to turn Heloïse’s thoughts to her nun’s calling
and her soul’s salvation. It divides her expressions of complaint under
four heads. First, he had put her name first, because she had become his
superior from the moment of her bridal with his master Christ. Jerome
writing to Eustochium called her Lady, when she had become the spouse of
Jerome’s Lord. Abaelard shows, with citations from the Song of Songs, the
glory of the spouse, and how her prayers should be sought by one who was
the servant of her Husband. Second, as to the terrors roused in her by his
mention of his peril and possible death, he points out that in her first
letter she had bidden him write of those perils; if they brought him
death, she should deem that a kind release. She should not wish to see his
miseries drawn out, even for her sake. Third, he shows that his praise of
her was justified even by her disclaimer of merit--as it is written, Who
humbles himself shall be exalted. He warns her against false modesty which
may be vanity.

He turns at last to the old and ceaseless plaint which she makes against
God for cruelty, when she should rather glorify Him; he had thought that
that bitterness had departed, so dangerous for her, so painful to him. If
she wished to please him, let her lay it aside; retaining it, she could
not please him or advance with him to blessedness; let her have this much
religion, not to separate herself from him hastening to God; let her take
comfort in their journeying to the same goal. He then shows her that his
punishment was just as well as merciful; he had deserved it from God and
also from Fulbert. If she will consider, she will see in it God’s justice
and His mercy; God had saved them from shipwreck; had raised a barrier
against shame and lust. For himself the punishment was purification, not
privation; will not she, as his inseparable comrade, participate in the
workings of this grace, even as she shared the guilt and its pardon? Once
he had thought of binding her to him in wedlock; but God found a means to
turn them both to Him; and the Lord was continuing His mercy towards her,
causing her to bring forth spiritual daughters, when otherwise she would
only have borne children in the flesh; in her the curse of Eve is turned
to the blessing of Mary. God had purified them both; whom God loveth He
correcteth. Oh! let her thoughts dwell with the Son of God, seized,
dragged, beaten, spit upon, crowned with thorns, hung on a vile cross. Let
her think of Him as her spouse, and for Him let her make lament; He bought
her with himself, He loved her. In comparison with His love, his own
(Abaelard’s) was lust, seeking the pleasure it could get from her. If he,
Abaelard, had suffered for her, it was not willingly nor for her sake, as
Christ had suffered, and for her salvation. Let her weep for Him who made
her whole, not for her corrupter; for her Redeemer, not for her defiler;
for the Lord who died for her, not for the living servant, himself just
freed from the death. Let his sister accept with patience what came to her
in mercy from Him who wounded the body to save the soul.

    “We are one in Christ, as through marriage we were one flesh. Whatever
    is thine is not alien to me. Christ is thine, because thou art His
    spouse. And now thou hast me for a servant, who formerly was thy
    master--a servant united to thee by spiritual love. I trust in thy
    pleading with Him for such defence as my own prayers may not obtain.
    That nothing may hinder this petition I have composed this prayer,
    which I send thee: ‘O God, who formed woman from the side of man and
    didst sanction the sacrament of marriage; who didst bestow upon my
    frailty a cure for its incontinence; do not despise the prayers of thy
    handmaid, and the prayers which I pour out for my sins and those of my
    dear one. Pardon our great crimes, and may the enormity of our faults
    find the greatness of thy ineffable mercy. Punish the culprits in the
    present; spare, in the future. Thou hast joined us, Lord, and hast
    divided us, as it pleased thee. Now complete most mercifully what thou
    hast begun in mercy; and those whom thou hast divided in this world,
    join eternally in heaven, thou who art our hope, our portion, our
    expectation, our consolation, Lord blessed forever. Amen.’

    “Farewell in Christ, spouse of Christ; in Christ farewell and in
    Christ live. Amen.”

In her next letter Heloïse obeys, and turns her pen if not her thoughts to
the topics suggested by Abaelard’s admonitions. The short scholastically
phrased address cannot be rendered in any modern fashion: “Domino
specialiter sua singulariter.”

    “That you may have no further reason to call me disobedient, your
    command shall bridle the words of unrestrained grief; in writing I
    will moderate my language, which I might be unable to do in speech.
    Nothing is less in our power than our heart; which compels us to obey
    more often than it obeys us. When our affections goad us, we cannot
    keep the sudden impulse from breaking out in words; as it is written,
    ‘From the fulness of the heart the mouth speaketh.’ So I will withhold
    my hand from writing whenever I am unable to control my words. Would
    that the sorrowing heart were as ready to obey as the hand that
    writes! You can afford some remedy to grief, even when unable to
    dispel it quite. As one nail driven in drives out another, a new
    thought pushes away its predecessor, and the mind is freed for a time.
    A thought, moreover, takes the mind up and leads it from others more
    effectually, if the subject of the thought is excellent and of great
    importance.”

The rest of this long letter shows Heloïse putting her principles in
practice. She is forcing her mind to consider and her pen to discourse
upon topics which might properly occupy an abbess’s thoughts--topics,
moreover, which would satisfy Abaelard and call forth long letters in
reply. Whether she cared really for these matters or ever came to care
for them; or whether she turned to them to distract her mind and keep up
some poor makeshift of intercourse with one who would and could no longer
be her lover; or whether all these motives mingled, and in what
proportion, perhaps may best be left to Him who tries the heart.

The abbess writes:

    “All of us here, servants of Christ and thy daughters, make two
    requests of thy fathership which we deem most needful. The one is,
    that you would instruct us concerning the origins of the order of nuns
    and the authority for our calling. The other is, that you would draw
    up a written _regula_, suitable for women, which shall prescribe and
    set the order and usages of our convent. We do not find any adequate
    _regula_ for women among the works of the holy Fathers. It is a
    manifest defect in monastic institutions that the same rules should be
    imposed upon both monks and nuns, and that the weaker sex should bear
    the same monastic yoke as the stronger.”

Heloïse, having set this task for Abaelard, proceeds to show how the
various monastic _regulae_, from Benedict’s downward, failed to make
suitable provision for the habits and requirements and weaknesses of
women, the _regulae_ hitherto having been concerned with the weaknesses of
men. She enters upon matters of clothing and diet, and everything
concerning the lives of nuns. She writes as one learned in Scripture and
the writings of the Fathers, and sets the whole matter forth, in its
details, with admirable understanding of its intricacies. She concludes,
reminding Abaelard that it is for him in his lifetime to set a _regula_
for them to follow forever; after God, he is their founder. They might
thereafter have some teacher who would build in alien fashion; such a one
might have less care and understanding, and might not be as readily obeyed
as himself; it is for him to speak, and they will listen. _Vale._

The first of Heloïse’s letters is a great expression of a great love; in
the second, anguish drives the writer’s hand; in the third, she has gained
self-control; she suppresses her heart, and writes a letter which is
discursive and impersonal from the beginning to the little _Vale_ at the
end.

Abaelard returned a long epistle upon the Scriptural origin of the order
of nuns, and soon followed it with another, still longer, containing
instruction, advice, and rules for the nuns of the Paraclete. He also
wrote them a letter upon the study of Scripture. From this time forth he
proved his devotion to Heloïse and her nuns by the large body of writings
which he composed for their edification. Heloïse sent him a long list of
questions upon obscure phrases and knotty points of Scripture, which he
answered diligently in detail.[6] He then sent her a collection of hymns
written or “rearranged” by himself for the use of the nuns, accompanied by
a prefatory letter: “At thy prayers, my sister Heloïse, once dear to me in
the world, now most dear in Christ, I have composed what in Greek are
called hymns, and in Hebrew _tillim_.” He then explains why, yielding to
the requests of the nuns, he had written hymns, of which the Church had
such a store.

Next he composed for them a large volume of sermons, which he also sent
with a letter to Heloïse: “Having completed the book of hymns and
sequences, revered in Christ and loved sister Heloïse, I have hastened to
compose some sermons for your congregation; I have paid more attention to
the meaning than the language. But perhaps an unstudied style is well
suited to simple auditors. In composing and arranging these sermons I have
followed the order of Church festivals. Farewell in the Lord, servant of
His, once dear to me in the world, now most dear in Christ: in the flesh
then my wife, now my sister in the spirit and partner in our sacred
calling.”

At a subsequent period, when his opinions were condemned by the Council of
Sens, he sent to Heloïse a confession of faith. Shortly afterward his
stormy life found a last refuge in the monastery of Cluny. His closing
years (of peace?) are described in a letter to Heloïse from the good and
revered abbot, Peter the Venerable. He writes that he had received with
joy the letter which her affection had dictated,[7] and now took the first
opportunity to express his recognition of her affection and his reverence
for herself. He refers to her keenly prosecuted studies (so rare for
women) before taking the veil, and then to the glorious example of her
sage and holy life in the nun’s sacred calling--her victory over the proud
Prince of this World. His admiration for her was deep; his expression of
it was extreme. A learned, wise, and holy woman could not be praised more
ardently than Heloïse is praised by this good man. He had spoken of the
advantages his monastery would have derived from her presence, and then
continued:

    “But although God’s providence denied us this, it was granted us to
    enjoy the presence of him--who was yours--Master Peter Abaelard, a man
    always to be spoken of with honour as a true servant of Christ and a
    philosopher. The divine dispensation placed him in Cluny for his last
    years, and through him enriched our monastery with treasure richer
    than gold. No brief writing could do justice to his holy, humble, and
    devoted life among us. I have not seen his equal in humility of garb
    and manner. When in the crowd of our brethren I forced him to take a
    first place, in meanness of clothing he appeared as the last of all.
    Often I marvelled, as the monks walked past me, to see a man so great
    and famous thus despise and abase himself. He was abstemious in food
    and drink, refusing and condemning everything beyond the bare
    necessities. He was assiduous in study, frequent in prayer, always
    silent unless compelled to answer the question of some brother or
    expound sacred themes before us. He partook of the sacrament as often
    as possible. Truly his mind, his tongue, his act, taught and
    exemplified religion, philosophy, and learning. So he dwelt with us, a
    man simple and righteous, fearing God, turning from evil, consecrating
    to God the latter days of his life. At last, because of his bodily
    infirmities, I sent him to a quiet and salubrious retreat on the banks
    of the Saone. There he bent over his books, as long as his strength
    lasted, always praying, reading, writing, or dictating. In these
    sacred exercises, not sleeping but watching, he was found by the
    heavenly Visitor; who summoned him to the eternal wedding-feast not as
    a foolish but as a wise virgin, bearing his lamp filled with oil--the
    consciousness of a holy life. When he came to pay humanity’s last
    debt, his illness was brief. With holy devotion he made confession of
    the Catholic Faith, then of his sins. The brothers who were with him
    can testify how devoutly he received the viaticum of that last
    journey, and with what fervent faith he commended his body and soul to
    his Redeemer. Thus this master, Peter, completed his days. He who was
    known throughout the world by the fame of his teaching, entered the
    school of Him who said, ‘Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of
    heart’; and continuing meek and lowly he passed to Him, as we may
    believe.

    “Venerable and dearest sister in the Lord, the man who was once joined
    to thee in the flesh, and then by the stronger chain of divine love,
    him in thy stead, or as another thee, the Lord holds in His bosom; and
    at the day of His coming, His grace will restore him to thee.”

The abbot afterwards visited the Paraclete, and on returning to Cluny
received this letter from the abbess:

    “God’s mercy visiting us, we have been visited by the favour of your
    graciousness. We are glad, kindest father, and we glory that your
    greatness condescended to our insignificance. A visit from you is an
    honour even to the great. The others may know the great benefit they
    received from the presence of your highness. I cannot tell in words,
    or even comprehend in thought, how beneficial and how sweet your
    coming was to me. You, our abbot and our lord, celebrated mass with us
    the sixteenth of the Calends of last December; you commended us to the
    Holy Spirit; you nourished us with the Divine Word;--you gave us the
    body of the master, and confirmed that gift from Cluny. To me also,
    unworthy to be your servant, though by word and letter you have called
    me sister, you gave as a pledge of sincere love the privilege of a
    Tricenarium, to be performed by the brethren of Cluny, after my death,
    for the benefit of my soul. You have promised to confirm this under
    your seal. May you fulfil this, my lord. Might it please you also to
    send to me that other sealed roll, containing the absolution of the
    master, that I may hang it on his tomb. Remember also, for the love of
    God, our--and your--Astralabius, to obtain for him a prebend from the
    bishop of Paris or another. Farewell. May God preserve you, and grant
    to us sometime your presence.”

The good abbot replied with a kind and affectionate letter, confirming his
gift of the Tricenarium, promising to do all he could for Astralabius, and
sending with his letter the record of Abaelard’s absolution, as follows:

    “I, Peter, Abbot of Cluny, who received Peter Abaelard to be a monk in
    Cluny, and granted his body, secretly transported, to the Abbess
    Heloïse and the nuns of the Paraclete, absolve him, in the performance
    of my office (_pro officio_) by the authority of the omnipotent God
    and all the saints, from all his sins.”

Abaelard died in the year 1142, aged sixty-three. Twenty-one years
afterward Heloïse died at the same age, and was buried in the same tomb
with him at the Paraclete:

  “Hoc tumulo abbatissa jacet prudens Heloïssa.”




