CHAPTER XXXVI

TWELFTH-CENTURY SCHOLASTICISM

      I. THE PROBLEM OF UNIVERSALS: ABAELARD.

     II. THE MYSTIC STRAIN: HUGO AND BERNARD.

    III. THE LATER DECADES: BERNARD SILVESTRIS; GILBERT DE LA PORRÉE;
         WILLIAM OF CONCHES; JOHN OF SALISBURY, AND ALANUS OF LILLE.


I

From the somewhat elaborate general considerations which have occupied the
last two chapters, we turn to the representative manifestations of
mediaeval thought in the twelfth century. These belong in part to the
second or “logical,” and in part to the third or “meta-logical,” stage of
the mediaeval mind. The first or “grammatical” stage was represented by
the Carolingian period; and in reviewing the mental aspects of the
eleventh century, we entered upon the second stage, that of logic, or
dialectic, to use the more specific mediaeval term. Toward the close of
the tenth century Gerbert was found strenuously occupying himself with
logic, and using it as a means of ordering the branches of knowledge. At
the end of the eleventh, Anselm has not only considered certain logical
problems, but has vaulted over into constructive metaphysical theology.
Looking back over Anselm’s work, from the vantage-ground of the twelfth
century’s further reflections, one may be conscious of a certain genial
youthfulness in his reliance upon single arguments, noble and beautiful
soarings of the spirit, which however pay little regard to the firmness of
the premises from which they spring, and still less to a number of
cognate and pertinent considerations, which the twelfth century was to
analyze.

Anselm’s thoughts perhaps overleaped logic. At all events he appears only
occasionally absorbed with its formal problems. Yet he lived in a time of
dawning logical controversy. Roscellin was even then blowing up the
problem of universals, a problem occasioned by the entering of mediaeval
thought upon the “logical” stage of its appropriation of the patristic and
antique.

The problem of universals, or general ideas, from the standpoint of logic,
lies at the basis of consistent thinking. It reverts to the time when
Aristotle’s assertion of the pre-eminently real existence of individuals
broke away from the Platonic doctrine of Ideas. For the early mediaeval
philosophers, it took its rise in a famous passage in Porphyry’s
Introduction to the _Categories_, the concluding sentence of which, as
translated into Latin by Boëthius, puts the question thus: “Mox de
generibus et speciebus illud quidem sive subsistant sive in nudis
intellectibus posita sint, sive subsistentia corporalia sint an
incorporalia, et utrum separata a sensibilibus an in sensibilibus posita
et circa haec consistentia, dicere recusabo.” “Next as to _genera_ and
_species_, do they actually exist or are they merely in thought; are they
corporeal or incorporeal existences; are they separate from sensible
things or only in and of them?--I refuse to answer,” says Porphyry; “it is
a very lofty business, unsuited to an elementary work.”

Thus, in three pairs of crude alternatives, the question came over to the
early Middle Ages. The men of the Carolingian period took one position or
another, without sensing its difficulties, or observing how it lay athwart
the path of knowledge. Students were not as yet attempting such a dynamic
appropriation of the ancient material as would evoke this veritable
problem of cognition. Even Gerbert at the close of the tenth century was
still so busy with the outer forms and figments of logic that he had no
time to enter on those ulterior problems where logic links itself to
metaphysics. One Roscellin, living and teaching apparently at Besançon in
the latter part of the eleventh century, seems to have been the first to
attack the currently accepted “realism” with some sense of the matter’s
thorny intricacies. With his own “nominalistic” position we are acquainted
only through his adversaries, who imputed to him views which a thoughtful
person could hardly have entertained--that universals were merely words
and breath (_flatus vocis_). Roscellin seems at all events to have been a
man strongly held by the reality of individuals, and one who found it
difficult to ascribe a sufficient intellectual actuality to the general
idea as distinguished from the perception of things and the demands of the
concepts of their individual existences. His logical difficulties impelled
him to theological heresy. The unity in the Trinity became an
impossibility; he could only conceive of three beings, just as he might
think of three angels; and he would have spoken of three Gods had usage
not forbidden it, says St. Anselm.[458] As it was, he said enough to draw
on him the condemnation of a Council held at Soissons in 1092, before
which he quailed and recanted. For the remainder of his life he so
constrained the expression of his thoughts as to ensure his safety.

One may say that Plato’s theory of ideas was a metaphysical presentation
of the universe, sounding in conceptions of reality. But for the Middle
Ages, the problem whether genera and species exist when abstracted from
their particulars, sprang from logical controversy. It was a problem of
cognition, cognizance, understanding: how should one understand and
analyze the contents of a statement, _e.g._ Socrates is a man. Moreover,
it was a fundamental and universal problem of cognition; for it was not
merely occupied, like all mental processes, with bringing data to
consistent formulation, but pertained to those processes themselves by
which any and all data are stated or formulated. It touched every
formulation of truth, asking, in fine, how are we to think our statements?
The philosophers of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, however, did not
view this problem as one pertaining to the mind’s processes, and as having
to do solely with the understanding of the contents of a statement.
Rather, even as Plato had done, they approached it as if it were a problem
of modes of existence; and for this very reason it had pushed Roscellin
into theological error.

The discussion was to pass through various stages; and each stage may seem
to us to represent the point reached by the thinker in his analysis of his
conscious meaning in stating a proposition. Moreover, each solution may be
valid for him who gives it, because of its correspondence to the meaning
of his utterances so far as he has analyzed them. But mediaeval men could
not take it in this way. Their intellectual task lay in appropriating, and
in their own way re-expressing, all that had come to them from an
authoritative past. The problem of universals had been stated by a great
authority, who put it as pertaining to the objective reality of genera and
species. How then might mediaeval men take it otherwise, especially when
at all events it pertained in all verity to their endeavour to grasp and
re-express the contents of transmitted truth? It became for a while the
crucial problem, the answer to which might indicate the thinker’s general
intellectual attitude. Far from keeping to logic, to the _organon_ or
instrumental part of the mediaeval endeavour to know, it wound itself
through metaphysics and theology. Obviously the thinker’s answer to the
problem would bear relation to his thoughts upon the transcendent reality
of spiritual essences.

The men who first became impressed with the importance of this problem,
gave extreme answers to it, sometimes crassly denying the real existence
of universals, but more often hailing them as antecedent and
all-permeating realities. If Roscellinus took the former position, a pupil
of his, William of Champeaux, held the extreme opposite view, when both he
and the twelfth century were still young. One may, however, bear in mind
that as the views of the older nominalist are reported only by his
enemies, so our knowledge of William’s lucubrations comes mainly from the
exacerbated pen of Peter Abaelard.

William held apparently “that the same thing, in its totality and at the
same time, existed in its single individuals, among which there was no
essential difference, but merely a variety of accidents.”[459] Abaelard
appears to have performed a _reductio ad absurdum_ upon this view that the
total genus exists in each individual. He pointed out that in such case
the total genus _homo_ would at the same time exist in Socrates and also
in Plato, when one of them might be in Rome and the other in Athens. “At
this William changed his opinion,” continues Abaelard, “and taught that
the genus existed in each individual not _essentialiter_ but
_indifferenter_ or [as some texts read] _individualiter_.” Which seems to
mean that William no longer held that the total genus existed in each
individual actually, but “indistinguishably,” or “individually.”

And the students flocked away with Abaelard, _he_ also says; and William
fled the lecture chair. William and Peter; shall we say of them _arcades
ambo_? This would be but a harmless depreciation of Abaelard, in the face
of the universal and correct tradition as to his epoch-making intellectual
progressiveness. Indeed it might be well to let the phrase sound in our
ears, just for the reminder’s sake, that Abaelard was, like William, a man
of logic, although far more expert both in manipulating the dialectic
processes and in applying them to theology.

Before endeavouring briefly to reconstruct the intellectual qualities of
Abaelard from his writings, let us see how the famous open letter to a
friend, in giving an apologetic story of the writer’s life, discloses the
fatalities of his character. This _Historia calamitatum suarum_ makes it
plain enough why the crises of his life were all of them
catastrophes--even leaving out of view his liaison with Heloïse and its
penalty. A fatal impulse to annoy seems to drive him from fate to fate;
the old word of Heraclitus ἦθος ἀνθρώπῳ δαίμων (character is a man’s
genius) was so patently true of him. Much that he said was to receive
orthodox approval after his time. Quite true. It has often been remarked,
that the heresy of one age is the accepted doctrine of the next, even
within the Church. But would the heretic have been _persona grata_ to the
later time? Perhaps not. Peter Abaelard at all events would have led
others and himself a life of thorns in the thirteenth century, or the
fourteenth had he been born again, when some of his methods and opinions
had become accepted commonplace. Did he have an eye for logical and human
truth more piercing than his twelfth-century fellows? Apparently. Was his
need to speak out his truth so much the more imperative than theirs?
Possibly. At all events, he was certainly possessed with an inordinate
impulsion to undo his rivals. He sits down before their fortress walls by
night, and when they see him there, they know not whether they look on
friend or foe--in this auditor. They will find out soon enough. He studied
dialectic under William of Champeaux at Paris, as all men were to know. He
got what William had to teach, and moved on, to lecture in Melun and
elsewhere. Then he returned and sat at William’s feet awhile to learn
rhetoric, as he announced. But quickly he rose up, and assailed his
master’s doctrine of universals, and overthrew him, as we have seen. The
victim’s friends made Abaelard’s eristically won lecturer’s seat a prickly
one. He left Paris for a while, and then returned and taught on Mount St.
Geneviève, outside the city.

Up to this time he had not been known to study theology. But in 1113, at
the age of thirty-four, he went to Laon to listen to a famous theologian
named Anselm, who himself had studied at Bec under a greater Anselm. Says
Abaelard in his _Historia calamitatum_: “So I came to this old man, whose
repute was a tradition, rather than merited by talent or learning. Any one
who brought his uncertainties to him, went away more uncertain still! He
was a marvel in the eyes of his hearers, but a nobody before a questioner.
He had a wonderful wordflow, but the sense was contemptible and the
reasoning abject.” Well, I didn’t listen to him long, Abaelard intimates;
but began to absent myself from his lectures, and was brought to task by
his auditors, to whom jokingly I said, I, too, could lecture on Scripture;
and I was taken up. Nothing loath, the next day I lectured to them on the
passage they had chosen from Ezekiel’s obscure prophecies. So, all
unprepared, and trusting in my genius, I began to lecture, at first to
sparse audiences, but they quickly grew. Such is the substance of
Abaelard’s own account, and he goes on to tell how “the old man aforesaid
was violently moved with envy,” and shortly Abaelard had to take his
lecturings elsewhere. He returned to Paris, and we have the episode of
Heloïse, for whom, as his life went on, he evinced a devoted
affection.[460]

Now he is monk in the abbey of St. Denis; and there again he lectures, and
takes up certain themes against Roscellinus, whom he seems to resurrect
from the quiet of old age to make a target of. This old man, too, hits
back, and other vicious people blow up a cloud of envy, until the gifted
lecturer finds himself an accused before the Council of Soissons, and his
book condemned. Untaught by the burning of his book, Abaelard returns to
his convent, and proceeds to unearth statements of the Venerable Bede
showing that Dionysius the Areopagite who heard Paul preach, was not the
St. Denis who became patron saint of France, and founder of the great
abbey which even now was sheltering a certain Abaelard, and drawing power
and revenue from the fame of its reputed almost apostolic founder. Its
abbot and monks did not care to have the abbey walls undermined by truth,
and Abaelard was hunted forth from among them.

It was after this that he made for himself a lonely refuge, which he named
the Paraclete, not far from Troyes, and thither again his pupils followed
him in swarms, and built their huts around him in the wilderness. But
still mightier foes--or their phantoms--rise against this hunted head. The
_Historia_ seems to allude to St. Norbert and to St. Bernard. Whatever the
storm was, it was escaped by flight to a remote Breton convent
which--still for his sins!--had chosen Abaelard its abbot. There in due
course they tried to murder him, and again he fled, this time back to his
congenial sphere, the schools of Paris, where he lectured, now at the
summit of fame, to enthusiastic multitudes of students. Some years pass,
and then the pious jackal, William of St. Thierry, rouses his lion Bernard
to contend with Abaelard and crush him, not with dialectic, at the
Council of Sens in 1141. In a year he died, a broken man, in Cluny’s
shelter. The conflict had not been of his seeking. Perhaps, had he been
less vain, he might have avoided it. When it was upon him, the unhappy
athlete of the schools found himself a pigmy matched against the giant of
Clairvaux--the Thor and Loki of the Church! Whether or not the unequal
battle raises Abaelard in our esteem, its outcome commends him to our
pity; and all our sympathy stays with him to the last days of a life that
was, as if physically, crushed. This accumulation of sad fortune bears
witness enough to the character of the man on whose neck it did not fall
by accident. Now let us try to reconstruct him intellectually.

We have heretofore observed the genius and noted the somewhat swaddling
dialectic categories of a certain eager intellect bearing the name of
Gerbert.[461] Abaelard’s mental processes have advanced beyond such
logical stammerings. He and his time are in the fulness of youth, and feel
the strength and joyful assurance of an intellectual progress, to be
brought about by a new-found proficiency in dialectic. In the first half
of the twelfth century, the intellectual genius of the time--and Abaelard
was its quintessence--knew itself advancing by this means in truth. A like
intellectual consciousness had rejoiced the disputants in Plato’s academy,
under the inspiration of that beautiful reasoner’s exquisite dialectic.
The one time, like the other, was justified in its confidence. For in such
epochs, language, reasoning, and knowledge advance with equal step;
thought clears up with linguistic and logical analysis; it becomes clear
and illuminated because more distinctly conscious of the character of its
processes, and the nature of statement. There is thus a veritable
progress, at least in the methodology of truth.

In Abaelard’s time men had already studied grammar, the grammar of the
Latin tongue, and the quasi-grammar of rearrangement and first painful
learning of the knowledge which it held. They had studied logic too, its
simpler elements, those which consist mainly in a further clearing up of
the meanings of language. Some men--Anselm of Canterbury--had already
made sudden flights beyond grammar, and out of logic’s pale. And the
labour of logical and organic appropriation, with some reconstruction of
the ancient material, was to go on in this first half of the twelfth
century, when Hugo of St. Victor lived as well as Abaelard. Progress by
means of dialectic controversy, and first attempts at systematic
construction, mark this period intellectually. Abaelard lived and moved
and had his being in dialectic. The further interest of Theology was lent
him by the spirit of his time. Through the medium of the one he reasoned
analytically; and in the province of the other he applied his reasoning
constructively, using patristic materials and the fragments of Greek
philosophy scattered through them. Thus Abaelard, a true man of the
twelfth century, passes on through logic to theology or metaphysics.

For the completeness of his logical knowledge he lived and worked twenty
or thirty years too soon. He was unacquainted with the more elaborate
logical treatises of Aristotle, to wit, the _Prior_ and _Posterior
Analytics_, the _Topics_, and _Sophistical Elenchi_. The sources of his
own treatises upon Dialectic are Porphyry’s Introduction, Aristotle’s
_Categories_ and _De interpretatione_, and certain treatises of
Boëthius.[462] A first result of the elementary and quasi-grammatical
character of the sources of logic upon which he drew, is that the
connection between logic and grammar is very plain with him. Note, for
example, this paragraph of his, the substance of which is drawn from
Aristotle’s _Categories_:

    “But neither can substances be compared,[463] since comparison relates
    to attribute, and not to substance; so it is shown that comparison
    lies not as to nouns, but as to their attributes. Thus we say _whiter_
    but not _whitenesser_. Much more are substances which have no
    attribute (_adjacentiam_) immune from comparison. More or less cannot
    be predicated of nouns (_nomina substantiva_). For one cannot say
    _more man_ or _less man_, as _more_ or _less white_.”[464]

Evidently this elementary sort of logic, whether with Aristotle or
Abaelard, represents a clearing up of the mind on current modes of
expression. And sometimes from such studies men make discoveries like that
of Molière’s Bourgeois Gentilhomme, who discovered that he had always been
talking prose. Some of the points on which the minds of Abaelard’s
contemporaries required clarification, would be foolish word-play to
ourselves, as, for instance, whether the significance of the sentence
_homo est animal_ is contained in the subject, copula, or predicate, or
only in all three; and whether when a word is spoken, the very same word
and the whole of it comes to the ears of all the hearers at the same time:
“utrum ipsa vox ad aures diversorum simul et tota aequaliter veniat.”[465]
Such questions, as was observed regarding the problems of logical
arrangement in Gerbert’s mind, may be pertinent and reasonable enough, if
viewed in connection with the intellectual conditions of a period; just as
many questions now make demand on us for solution, being links in the
chain of our knowledge, or manner of reasoning. But future men may pass
them by as not lying in their path to progressive knowledge of the
universe and man.

So the problem of universals was still cardinal with Abaelard and his
fellow-logicians, who through logic were advancing, as they believed,
along the path of objective truth. Its solution would determine the nature
of the categories into which logic was fitting whatever might be
enunciated or expressed. The inquiry represented an ultimate analysis of
statement, of the general nature of propositions; and also related to
their assumed correspondence with realities. What William of Champeaux had
unqualifiedly alleged, Abaelard tried to determine more analytically, to
wit, the value of the proposition “si aliquid sit ea res quae est species,
id est vel homo vel equus et caetera, sit quaelibet res quae eorum genus
est, veluti animal aut corpus aut substantia,”--if species be something,
as man, horse, and so forth, then that which is the genus of these may be
something, as animal, body, or substance.[466]

Abaelard’s discussion of this matter is a discussion of the true content
of propositions. His conclusion is not so clear as to have occasioned no
dispute. One must not think of him as an Aristotelian--for he knew little
of the substantial philosophy of Aristotle. Our dialectician had absorbed
more of Plato, through turbid patristic channels and the current
translation of the _Timaeus_. So his solution of the question of genus and
species may prove an analytic bit of eclecticism, an imagined
reconcilement of the two great masters. The universal or general is, says
he, “quod natum est de pluribus praedicari,” that which is by its nature
adapted to be predicated of a number of things. The universal consists
neither in things as such nor in words as such; it consists rather in
general predicability; it is _sermo, sermo praedicabilis_, that which may
be stated, as a predicate, of many. As such it is not a mere word: _sermo_
is not merely _vox_; that is not the true general predicable. On the other
hand, one thing cannot be the predicate of another; _res de re non
praedicatur_: therefore _sermo_ is not _res_. Yet Abaelard does not limit
the existence of the universal to the concept of him who thinks it. It
surely exists in the individuals, since _substantia specierum_ is not
different from the _essentia individuorum_. But does not the general
concept exist as an objective unity? Apparently Abaelard would answer:
Yes, it does thus exist as a common sameness (_consimilitudo_).

All this is anything but clear. And the various twelfth-century opinions
on universals no longer possess human interest. It is hard for us to
distinguish between them, or understand them clearly, or state them
intelligibly. They are bound up in a phraseology untranslatable into
modern language, because the discussion no longer corresponds to modern
ways of thought. But one is interested in the human need which drove
Abaelard and his fellows upon the horns of this problem, and in the nature
of their endeavours to formulate their thought so as to escape those
opposing horns--of an extreme realism which might issue in pantheism, and
an extreme nominalism which seemed to deprive predication of substance and
validity.[467]

So much for Abaelard as sheer logician, formal adjuster of the
instrumental processes of thinking. Dialectic was for him a first stage in
the actualization of the impulse to know, and bring knowledge to
consistent expression. It was also his way of approach to the further
systematic presentation of his thoughts upon God and man, human society
and justice, divine and human.

    “A new calumny against me, have my rivals lately devised, because I
    write upon the dialectic art; affirming that it is not lawful for a
    Christian to treat of things which do not pertain to the Faith. Not
    only they say that this science does not prepare us for the Faith, but
    that it destroys faith by the implications of its arguments. But it is
    wonderful if I must not discuss what is permitted them to read. If
    they allow that the art militates against faith, surely they deem it
    not to be science (_scientia_). For the science of truth is the
    comprehension of things, whose _species_ is the wisdom in which faith
    consists. Truth is not opposed to truth. For not as falsehood may be
    opposed to falsity, or evil to evil, can the true be opposed to the
    true, or the good to the good; but rather all good things are in
    accord. All knowledge is good, even that which relates to evil,
    because a righteous man must have it. Since he should guard against
    evil, it is necessary that he should know it beforehand: otherwise he
    could not shun it. Though an act be evil, knowledge regarding it is
    good; though it be evil to sin, it is good to know the sin, which
    otherwise we could not shun. Nor is the science _mathematica_ to be
    deemed evil, whose practice (astrology) is evil. Nor is it a crime to
    know with what services and immolations the demons may be compelled to
    do our will, but to use such knowledge. For if it were evil to know
    this, how could God be absolved, who knows the desires and cogitations
    of all His creatures, and how the concurrence of demons may be
    obtained? If therefore it is not wrong to know, but to do, the evil is
    to be referred to the act and not to the knowledge. Hence we are
    convinced that all knowledge, which indeed comes from God alone and
    from His bounty, is good. Wherefore the study of every science should
    be conceded to be good, because that which is good comes from it; and
    especially one must insist upon the study of that _doctrina_ by which
    the greater truth is known. This is dialectic, whose function is to
    distinguish between every truth and falsity: as leader in all
    knowledge it holds the primacy and rule of all philosophy. The same
    also is shown to be needful to the Catholic Faith, which cannot
    without its aid resist the sophistries of schismatics.”[468]

In this passage the man himself is speaking, and disclosing his innermost
convictions. For Abaelard’s nature was set upon understanding all things
through reason, even the mysteries of the Faith. He does not say, or quite
think, that he will disbelieve whatever he cannot understand; but his
reasoning and temper point to the conclusion. This was obviously true of
Abaelard’s ethical opinions; his enemies said it was true of his theology.
Such a man would naturally plead for freedom of discussion, even for
freedom of conclusion; but within certain bounds; for who in the twelfth
century could maintain that heretics or infidels did rightly in rejecting
the Christian Faith? Yet Abaelard says heretics should be compelled
(_coercendi_) by reason rather than force.[469] And he could at least
conceive of the rejection of the Faith upon, say, imperfect rational
grounds. In his dialogue between Philosopher, Jew, and Christian, the
Christian says to the Philosopher: One cannot argue against you from the
authority of Scripture, which you do not recognize; for no one can be
refuted save with arguments drawn from what he admits: _Nemo quippe argui
nisi ex concessis potest_.[470] However this sounded in Abaelard’s time,
the same was enunciated by Thomas Aquinas after him, in a passage already
given.[471] But it is doubtful whether Thomas would have cared to follow
Abaelard in some of the arguments of his _Ethics_ or _Book called, Know
Thyself_, in which he maintains that no act is a sin unless the actor was
conscious of its sinfulness; and therefore that killing the martyrs could
not be imputed as sin to those persecutors who deemed themselves thereby
to be doing a service acceptable to God.[472]

The titles given by Abaelard to his various treatises are indicative of
the critical insistency of his nature. He called his _Ethica_, _Scito te
ipsum_, _Know Thyself_: understand thy good and ill intentions, and what
may be vice or virtue in thee. Through the book, the discussion of right
and wrong directs itself as pertinaciously to considerations of human
nature as was possible in an age when theological dogma held the final
criteria of human conduct. And Abaelard is capable of a lofty insight
touching the relationship between God and man.

    “Penitence,” says he, “is truly fruitful when grief and contrition
    proceed from love of God, regarded as benignant, rather than from fear
    of penalties. Sin cannot endure with this groaning and contrition of
    heart: for sin is contempt of God, or consent to evil, and the love of
    God in inspiring our groaning, suffers no ill.”[473]

Possibly when reading the _Scito te ipsum_ one is conscious of a
dialectician drawing distinctions, rather than of a moralist searching the
heart of the matter. Everything is set forth so reasonably. Yet Abaelard’s
impartial delight in a rational view of belief and conduct shows nowhere
quite as obviously as in his _Dialogue_ between Philosopher and Jew and
Christian. Each in turn is made to set forth the best arguments his
position admits of. The author does his best for each, and perhaps seems
temperamentally drawn to the position of the Philosopher, whom he permits
to call the Jews _stultos_ and the Christians _insanos_. This philosopher
naturally is no Greek of Plato’s or Aristotle’s time, but a good Roman,
who regards _moralis philosophia_ as the _finis omnium disciplinarum_, and
hangs all intellectual considerations upon a discussion of the _summum
bonum_. His well-worn arguments are put with earnestness. He deprecates
the blind acceptance of beliefs by children from their fathers, and the
narrowness of mind which keeps men from perceiving the possible truth in
others’ opinions:

    “so that whomsoever they see differing from themselves in belief, they
    deem alien from the mercy of God. Thus condemning all others, they
    vaunt themselves alone as blessed. Long reflecting on this blindness
    and pride of the human race, I have unceasingly besought the Divine
    Pity that He would deign to draw me forth from this miserable
    Charibdian whirlpool of error, and guide me to a port of safety. So
    you [addressing both Jew and Christian] behold me solicitous and
    attentive as a disciple, to the documents of your arguments.”[474]

The qualities cultivated by dialectic, and the impartial rational temper,
here displayed, reappear in the works of Abaelard devoted to sacred
doctrine. Enough has been said of the method and somewhat captious
qualities of the _Sic et non_.[475] Unquestionably its manner of
presenting the contradictory opinions of the Fathers, without any attempt
to reconcile them, tended to bring into view the difficulties inhering in
the formulation of Christian belief. And indeed the book made prominent
all the diabolic insoluble problems of the Faith, or rather of life itself
and any view of God and man: Predestination, for example; whether God
causes evil; whether He is omnipotent; whether He is free. The Lombard’s
_Sentences_ and Thomas’s _Summa_ considered all these questions; but they
strove to solve them; and Thomas did solve every one, leaving no loose
ends to his theology. More potently than Abaelard did the Angelic Doctor
employ dialectic in his finished scheme. With him, this propaedeutic
discipline, this tool of truth, perfectly performs its task of
construction. So also Abaelard intended to work with it; but his somewhat
unconsidered use of the tool did not meet the approval of his
contemporaries. Accordingly, in his more constructive theological
treatises his impulse to know and state appears finally actualized in the
systematic formulation of convictions upon topics of ultimate interest, to
wit, theology, the contents of the Christian Faith, the full relationship
of God and man. Did he sever theology from philosophy? Nay, rather, with
him theology was ultimate philosophy.

Several times Abaelard rewrote what was substantially the same general
work upon Theology. In one of its earliest forms it was burnt by the
Council of Soissons in 1121.[476] In another form it exists under the
title _Theologia Christiana_;[477] and the first part of its apparently
final revision is now improperly entitled, _Introductio ad
theologiam_.[478]

The first Book of the _Theologia Christiana_ is an exposition of the
Trinity, not clinched in syllogisms, but consisting mainly of an orderly
presentation of the patristic authorities supporting the author’s view of
the matter. The testimonies of profane writers are also given. Liber II.
opens by saying that in the former part of the work “we have collected the
_testimonia_ of prophets and philosophers, in support of the faith of the
Holy Trinity.” Hereupon, by the same method of adducing authorities,
Abaelard proceeds to refute those who had blamed him for citing the pagan
philosophers. He marshals his supporting excerpts from the Fathers, and
remarks: “That nothing is more needful for the defence of our faith than
that as against the importunities of all the infidels we should have
witness from themselves wherewith to refute them.” Then he points to the
moral worth of some of the philosophers, to their true teaching of the
soul’s immortality, and quotes Horace’s

  “Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore.”

He continues at some length setting forth their well-nigh evangelical
virtue, and speaks of the Gospel as _reformatio legis naturalis_.

At the beginning of Liber III. comes the statement: “We set the faith of
the blessed Trinity as the foundation of all good.” Whereupon Abaelard
breaks out in a denunciation of those who misuse dialectic; but again he
passes to a defence of the art as an art and branch of knowledge, and
shows its need as a weapon against those wranglers who will be quieted
neither by the authority of the saints nor the philosophers: against whom,
he, Abaelard, trusting in the divine aid, will turn this weapon as David
did the sword of Goliath. He now states the true object of his work:
“First then is to be set forth the theme of our whole labour, and the sum
of faith; the unity of the divine substance and the Trinity of persons,
which are in God, and are one God. Next we state the objections to our
theses, and then the solutions of those objections.” And he gives the
substance of the Athanasian Creed. From this point, his work becomes more
dialectical and constructive, although of course continuing to quote
authorities. He is emboldened to discuss the deepest mysteries, the very
penetralia of the Trinity, and in a way which might well alarm men like
Bernard, who desired acceptance of the Faith, with rhetoric, but without
discussion. To be sure Abaelard pauses to justify himself by reverting to
his apologetic purpose: “Heretics must be coerced with reason rather than
by force.” However this may be, the work henceforth shows the passing on
of logic to the exercise of its architectonic functions in constructing a
systematic theological metaphysics.

The miscalled _Introductio ad theologiam_, as might be expected of a last
revision of the author’s _Theology_, is a more organic work. In the
Prologue, Abaelard speaks of it as a _Summa sacrae eruditionis_ or an
_Introductio_ to Divine Scripture. And again he states the justifying
purpose of his labour, or rather puts it into the mouths of his disciples
who have asked for such a work from him: “Since our faith, the Christian
Faith, seems entangled in such difficult questions, and to stand apart
from human reason (_et ab humana ratione longius absistere_), it should be
fortified by so much the stronger arguments, especially against the
attacks of those who call themselves philosophers.” Continuing, Abaelard
protests that if in any way, for his sins, he should deviate from the
Catholic understanding and statement, he will on seeing his error revise
the same, like the blessed Augustine.

The work itself opens with a statement of its intended divisions: “In
three matters, as I judge, rests the sum of human salvation: _Fides_,
_caritas_, and _sacramentum_”; and he gives his definition of faith, which
was so obnoxious to Bernard and others, as the _existimatio rerum non
apparentium_. The three extant Books do not conclude the treatment even of
the first of these three topics. But one readily sees that were the work
complete, its arrangement might correspond with that of Thomas’s
_Summa_.[479] One may reiterate that it was more constructively
argumentative than the _Theologia Christiana_, even in the manner of
using the cited authorities. For instance, Abaelard’s mind is fixed on the
analogy between the Neo-Platonic Trinity of _Deus_, _nous_, and _anima
mundi_, and that of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The _nous_ fitly
represents Christ, who is the _Sapientia Dei_--which Abaelard sets forth;
but then with even greater insistency he identifies the Holy Spirit with
the world-soul. Nothing gave a stronger warrant to the accusations of
heresy brought against him than this last doctrine, with which he was
obsessed. Yet what roused St. Bernard and his jackals was not so much any
particular opinion of Abaelard, as his dialectic and critical spirit,
which insisted upon understanding and explaining, before believing. “The
faith of the righteous believes; it does not dispute. But that man,
suspicious of God (_Deum habens suspectum_), has no mind to believe what
his reason has not previously argued.”[480]

Still, when Bernard says that faith does not discuss, but believes, he
states a conviction of his mind, a conviction corresponding with an inner
need of his own to formulate and express his thought. Only, with Abaelard
the need to consider and analyse was more consciously imperative. He could
not avoid the constant query: How shall I think this thing--this thing,
for example, which is declared by revelation? Just as other questioning
spirits in other times might be driven upon the query: How shall we think
these things which are disclosed by the variegated walls of our physical
environment? Those yield data, or refuse them, and force the mind to put
many queries, and come to some adjustment. So experience presents data for
adjustment, just as dogma, Scripture, revelation present that which reason
must bring within the action of its processes, and endeavour to find
rational expression for.


II

The greatest dialectician of the early twelfth century felt no problems
put him by the physical world. That did not attract his inquiry; it did
not touch the reasonings evolved by his self-consciousness, any more than
it impressed the fervid mind of his great adversary, St. Bernard. The
natural world, however, stirred the mind of Abaelard’s contemporary, Hugo
of St. Victor.[481] Its colours waved before his reveries, and its visible
sublimities drew his mind aloft to the contemplation of God: for him its
_things_ were all the things of God--_opus conditionis_ or _opus
restaurationis_;[482] the work of foundation, whereby God created the
physical world for the support and edification of its crowning creature
man; and the work of restoration, to wit, the incarnation of the Word, and
all its sacraments.

Hugo was a Platonic and very Christian theologian. He would reason and
expound, and yet was well aware that reason could not fathom the nature of
God, or bring man to salvation. “Logic, mathematics, physics teach some
truth, yet do not reach that truth wherein is the soul’s safety, without
which whatever is is vain.”[483] So Hugo was not primarily a logician,
like Abaelard; nor did he care chiefly for the kind of truth which might
be had through logic. Nevertheless the productions of his short life prove
the excellence of his mind and his large enthusiasm for knowledge.

As Hugo was the head of the school of St. Victor for some years before his
death, certain of his works cover topics of ordinary mediaeval education,
secular and religious; while others advance to a more profound expression
of the intellectual, or spiritual, interests of their author. For
elementary religious instruction, he composed a veritable book of
_Sentences_,[484] which preceded the Lombard’s in time, but was later than
Abaelard’s _Sic et non_. Without striking features, it lucidly and amiably
carried out its general purpose of setting forth the authoritative
explanations of the elements of the Christian Faith. The writer did not
hesitate to quote opposing views, which were not heralded, however, by
such danger-signals of contradiction as flare from the chapter headings of
the _Sic et non_.

The corresponding treatise upon profane learning--the _Eruditio
didascalica_--is of greater interest.[485] It commences in elementary
fashion, as a manual of study: “There are two things by which we gain
knowledge, to wit, reading and meditation; reading comes first.” The book
is to be a guide to the student in the study both of secular and divine
writings; it teaches how to study the _artes_, and then how to study the
Scriptures.[486] Even in this manual, Hugo shows himself a meditative
soul, and one who seeks to base his most elementary expositions upon the
nature and needs of man. The mind, says he, is distracted by things of
sense, and does not know itself. It is renewed through study, so that it
learns again not to look without for what itself affords. Learning is
life’s solace, which he who finds is happy, and he who makes his own is
blessed.[487]

For Hugo, philosophy is that which investigates the _rationes_ of things
human and divine, seeking ever the final wisdom, which is knowledge of the
_primaeva ratio_: this distinguishes philosophy from the practical
sciences, like agriculture: it follows the _ratio_, and they administer
the matter. Again and again, Hugo returns to the thought that the object
of all human _actiones_ and _studia_ is to restore the integrity of our
nature or mitigate its weaknesses, restore the image of the divine
similitude in us, or minister to the needs of life. This likeness is
renewed by _speculatio veritatis_, or _exercitium virtutis_.[488]

Such is a pretty broad basis of theory for a high school manual. Hugo
proceeds to set forth the scheme, rather than the substance, of the arts
and sciences, pausing occasionally to admonish the reader to hold no
science vile, since knowledge always is good; and he points out that all
knowledge hangs together in a common coherency. He sketches[489] the true
student’s life: Whoever seeks learning, must not neglect discipline! He
must be humble, and not ashamed to learn from any one; he must observe
decent manners, and not play the fool and make faces at lecturers on
divinity, for thereby he insults God. Yea, and let him mind the example of
the ancient sages, who for learning’s sake spurned honours, rejected
riches, rejoiced in insults, deserted the companionship of men, and gave
themselves up to philosophy in desert solitudes, that they might be more
free for meditation. Diligent search for wisdom in quietude becomes a
scholar; and likewise poverty, and likewise exile: he is very delicate who
clings to his fatherland; “He is brave to whom every land is home
(_patria_); and he is perfect to whom the whole world is an exile!”[490]

Hugo has much to say of the _pulchritudo_ and the _decor_ of the
creature-world. But with him the world and its beauty point to God. One
should observe it because of its suggestiveness, the visible suggesting
the invisible. Hugo has already been followed in his argument that the
world, in its veriest reality, is a symbol.[491] Here we follow him along
his path of knowledge, which leads on and upward from _cogitatio_, through
_meditatio_, to _contemplatio_. The steps in Hugo’s scheme are rational,
though the summit lies beyond. This path to truth, leading on from the
visible symbol to the unseen power, is for him the reason and
justification of study; drawing to God it makes for man’s salvation.

Hugo has put perhaps his most lucid exposition of the three grades of
knowledge into the first of his _Nineteen Sermons on Ecclesiastes_.[492]
He is fond of certain numbers, and here his thought revolves in categories
of the number three. Solomon composed three works, the Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes, and Canticles. In the first, he addresses his son
paternally, admonishing him to pursue virtue and shun vice; in the second,
he shows the grown man that nothing in the world is stable; finally, in
Canticles, he brings the consummate one, who has spurned the world, to the
Bridegroom’s arms.

    “Three are the modes of cognition (_visiones_) belonging to the
    rational soul: cogitation, meditation, contemplation. It is cogitation
    when the mind is touched with the ideas of things, and the thing
    itself is by its image presented suddenly, either entering the mind
    through sense or rising from memory. Meditation is the assiduous and
    sagacious revision of cogitation, and strives to explain the involved,
    and penetrate the hidden. Contemplation is the mind’s perspicacious
    and free attention, diffused everywhere throughout the range of
    whatever may be explored. There is this difference between meditation
    and contemplation: meditation relates always to things hidden from our
    intelligence; contemplation relates to things made manifest, either
    according to their nature or our capacity. Meditation always is
    occupied with some one matter to be investigated; contemplation
    spreads abroad for the comprehending of many things, even the
    universe. Thus meditation is a certain inquisitive power of the mind,
    sagaciously striving to look into the obscure and unravel the
    perplexed. Contemplation is that acumen of intelligence which, keeping
    all things open to view, comprehends all with clear vision. Thus
    contemplation has what meditation seeks.

    “There are two kinds of contemplation: the first is for beginners, and
    considers creatures; the kind which comes later, belongs to the
    perfect, and contemplates the Creator. In the Proverbs, Solomon
    proceeds as through meditation. In Ecclesiastes he ascends to the
    first grade of contemplation. In the Song of Songs he transports
    himself to the final grade. In meditation there is a wrestling of
    ignorance with knowledge; and the light of truth gleams as in a fog of
    error. So fire is kindled with difficulty in a heap of green wood; but
    then fanned with stronger breath, the flame burns higher, and we see
    volumes of smoke rolling up, with flame flashing through. Little by
    little the damp is exhausted, and the leaping fire dispels the smoke.
    Then _victrix flamma_ darting through the heap of crackling wood,
    springs from branch to branch, and with lambent grasp catches upon
    every twig; nor does it rest until it penetrates everywhere and draws
    into itself all that it finds which is not flame. At length the whole
    combustible material is purged of its own nature and passes into the
    similitude and property of fire; then the din is hushed, and the
    voracious fire having subdued all, and brought all into its own
    likeness, composes itself to a high peace and silence, finding nothing
    more that is alien or opposed to itself. First there was fire with
    flame and smoke; then fire with flame, without smoke; and at last pure
    fire with neither flame nor smoke.”

So the _victrix flamma_ achieves the three stages of spiritual insight,
fighting its way through the smoke of cogitation, through the smoke and
flame of meditation, and at last through the flame of creature
contemplation, to the high peace of God, where all is love’s ardent
vision, without flame or smoke. It is thus through the grades of knowledge
that the soul reaches at last that fulness of intelligence which may be
made perfect and inflamed with love, in the contemplation of God. All
knowledge is good according to its grade; only let it always lead on to
God, and with humility. Hugo makes his principles clear at the opening of
his commentary on the _Celestial Hierarchy_ of Dionysius.[493]

    “_The Jews seek a sign, and the Greeks wisdom._ There was a certain
    wisdom which seemed such to them who knew not the true wisdom. The
    world found it, and began to be puffed up, thinking itself great in
    this. Confiding in its wisdom, it presumed, and boasted that it would
    attain the highest wisdom.... And it made itself a ladder of the face
    of the creation, shining toward the invisible things of the
    Creator.... Then those things which were seen were known, and there
    were other things which were not known; and through those which were
    manifest they expected to reach those which were hidden; and they
    stumbled and fell into the falsehoods of their own imaginings.... So
    God made foolish the wisdom of this world; and He pointed out another
    wisdom, which seemed foolishness, and was not. For it preached Christ
    crucified, in order that truth might be sought in humility. But the
    world despised it, wishing to contemplate the works of God, which He
    had made to be marvelled at, and it did not wish to venerate what He
    had set for imitation. Neither did it look to its own disease, and
    seek a medicine with piety; but presuming on a false health, it gave
    itself over with vain curiosity to the study of alien matters.”

This study made the wisdom of the world, whereby it devised the arts and
sciences which we still learn. But the world in its pride did not read
aright the great book of nature. It had not the knowledge of the true
Exemplar, for the sanitation of its inner vision, to wit, the flesh of the
eternal Word in the humanity of Jesus.

    “There were two images (_simulacra_) set for man, in which he might
    perceive the unseen: one consisting of nature, the other of grace. The
    former image was the face of this world; the latter was the humanity
    of the Word. And God is shown in both, but He is not understood in
    both; since the appearance of nature discloses the artificer, but
    cannot illuminate the eyes of him who contemplates it.”

Hugo then classifies the sciences in the usual Aristotelian way, and shows
that Christian theology is the end of all philosophy. The first part of
_philosophia theorica_ is mathematics, which speculates as to the visible
forms of visible things. The second is physics, which scrutinizes the
invisible causes of visible things. The third, theology, alone
contemplates invisible substances and their invisible natures. Herein is a
certain progression; and the mind mounts to knowledge of the true. Through
the visible forms of visible things, it comes to invisible causes of
visible things; and through the invisible causes of visible things, it
ascends to invisible substances, and to knowing their natures. This is the
summit of philosophy and the perfection of truth. In this, as already
said, the wise of this world were made foolish; because proceeding by the
natural document alone, making account only of the elements and appearance
of the world, they missed the instructive instances of Grace: which in
spite of humble guise afford the clearer insight into truth.

This is Hugo’s scheme of knowledge; it begins with _cogitatio_, then
proceeds through _meditatio_ to _contemplatio_ of the creature world, and
finally of the Creator. The arts and sciences, as well as the face of
nature, afford a _simulacrum_ of the unseen Power; but all this knowledge
by itself will not bring man to the perfect knowledge of God. For this he
needs the _exemplaria_ of Grace, shown through the incarnation of the
Word. Only by virtue of this added means, may man attain to perfect
contemplation of the truth of God. That end and final summit is beyond
reason’s reach; but the attainment of rational knowledge makes part of the
path thither. Keen as was Hugo’s intellectual nature, his interest in
reason was coupled with a deeper interest in that which reason might
neither include nor understand. The intellect does not include the
emotional and immediately desiderative elements of human nature; neither
can it comprehend the infinite which is God; and Hugo drew toward God not
only through his intellect, but likewise through his desiderative nature,
with its yearnings of religious love. That love with him was rational,
since its object satisfied his mind as far as his mind could comprehend
it.

So Hugo’s intellectual interests were connected with the emotional side of
human nature, and also led up to what transcended reason. Thus they led to
what was a mystery because too great for human reason, and they included
that which also was somewhat of a mystery to reason because lying partly
outside its sphere. Hugo is an instance of the intellectual nature which
will not rest in reason’s province, but feels equally impelled to find
expression for matters that either exceed the mind, or do not altogether
belong to it. Such an intellect is impelled to formulate its convictions
in regard to these; its negative conviction that it cannot comprehend
them, and why it cannot; and its more positive conviction of their
value--of the absolute worth of God, and of man’s need of Him, and of the
love and fear by which men may come close to Him, or avoid His wrath.

What Hugo has had to say as to cogitation, meditation, and contemplation,
represents his analysis of the stages by which a sufficing sense may be
reached of the Creator and His world of creature-kind. In this final
wisdom and ardour of contemplation, both human reason and human love have
part. The intellect advances along its lines, considering the world, and
drawing inferences as to the unseen Being who created and sustains it.
Mind’s unaided power will not reach. But by the grace of God, supremely
manifested in the Incarnation, the man is humbled, and his heart is
touched and drawn to love the power of the divine pity and humility. The
lesson of the Incarnation and its guiding grace, emboldens the heart and
enlightens the mind; and the man’s faculties are strengthened and uplifted
to the contemplation of God, wherein the mind is satisfied and the heart
at rest.

We have here the elements of piety, intellectual and devotional. Hugo is
an example of their union; they also preserve their equal weight in
Aquinas. But because Hugo emphasizes the limitations of the intellect, and
so ardently recognizes the heart’s yearning and immediacy of
apperception, he is what is styled a mystic; a term which we are now in a
position to consider, and to some extent exchange for other phrases of
more definite significance.[494]

Quite to avoid the term is not possible, inasmuch as the conception
certainly includes what is mysterious because unknowable through reason.
For it includes a sense of the supreme, a sense of God, who is too great
for human reason to comprehend, and therefore a mystery. And it includes a
yearning toward God, the desire of Him, and the feeling of love. The last
is also mysterious, in that it has not exclusive part with reason, but
springs as well from feeling. Yet the essence or nature of this spirit of
piety which we would analyse, consists in consciousness of the reality of
the object of its yearning or devotion. Not altogether through induction
or deduction, but with an irrational immediacy of conviction, it feels and
knows its object. In place of the knowledge which is mediated through
rational processes, is substituted a conviction upheld by yearning, love’s
conviction indeed, of the reality and presence of that which is all the
greater and more worthy because it baffles reason. And the final goal
attainable by this mystic love is, even as the goal of other love, union
with the Beloved.

The mystic spirit is an essential part of all piety or religion, which
relates always and forever to the rationally unknown, and therefore
mysterious. Without a consciousness of mystery, there can be neither piety
nor religion. Nor can there be piety without some devotion to God, nor the
deepest and most ardent forms of piety, without fervent love of God. This
devotion and this love supply strength of conviction, creating a realness
of communion with the divine, and an assurance of the soul’s rest and
peace therein. But that the intellect has part, Hugo abundantly
demonstrates. One must have perceptions, and thought’s severest
wrestlings--_cogitatio_ and _meditatio_--before reaching that first stage
of wide and sure intelligence, which relates to the creature world, and
affords a broad basis of assurance, whence at last the soul shall spring
to God. Intellectual perceptions and rational knowledge, and all the
mind’s puttings together of its data in inductions and deductions and
constructions, form a basis for contemplation, and yield material upon
which the emotional side of human nature may exercise itself in yearning
and devotion. Herein the constructive imagination works; which is
intellectual faculty illuminated and impelled by the emotions.

This spirit actualizes itself in the power and scope of its resultant
conviction, by which it makes real to itself the qualities, attributes,
and actions of its object, God, and the nature of man’s relationship or
union with the divine. In its final energy, when only partly conscious of
its intellectual inductions, it discards syllogisms, quite dissatisfied
with their devious and hesitating approach. Instead, by the power of love,
it springs directly to its God. Nevertheless the soul which feels the
inadequacy of reason even to voice the soul’s desires, will seek means of
expression wherein reason still will play a submerged part. The soul is
seeking to express what is not altogether expressible in direct and
rational statement. It seeks adumbrations, partial unveilings of its
sentiments, which shall perhaps make up in warmth of colour what they lack
in definiteness of line. In fine, it seeks symbols. Such symbolism must be
large and elastic, in order to shadow forth the soul’s relations with the
Infinite; it must also be capable of carrying passion, that it may satisfy
the soul’s craving to give voice to its great love.

In Greek thought as well as in the Hellenizing Judaism of a Philo,
symbolism, or more specifically speaking, allegorical interpretation, was
obviously apologetic, seeking to cloud in naturalistic interpretations the
doings of the rather over-human gods of Greece.[495] But it sprang also
from the unresting need of man to find expression for that sense of things
which will not fit definite statement. This was the need which became
creative, and of necessity fancifully creative, with Plato. Though he
would have nothing to do with falsifying apologetics, all the more he felt
the need of allegories, to suggest what his dialectic could not
formulate. In the early times of the Church militant of Christ,
allegorical interpretation was exploited to defend the Faith; in the later
patristic period, the Faith had so far triumphed, that allegory as a sword
of defence and attack might be sheathed, or just allowed to glitter now
and then half-drawn. But piety’s other need, with increasing energy,
compelled the use of symbols and articulate allegory to express the
directly inexpressible. Thereafter through the Middle Ages, while the use
of allegory as a defence against the Gentiles slumbered, so much more the
other need of it, and the sense of the universal symbolism of material
things, filled the minds of men; and in age-long answer to this need,
allegory, symbolism, became part of the very spirit of the mediaeval time.

Thus it became the universal vehicle of pious expression: it may be said
almost to have co-extended with all mediaeval piety. It was ardently
loving, as with St. Bernard; it might be filled with scarlet passion, as
with Mechthild of Magdeburg; or it might be used in the self-conscious,
and yet inspired vision-pictures of Hildegard of Bingen. And indeed with
almost any mediaeval man or woman, it might keep talking, as a way of
speech, obtrusively, conventionally, _ad nauseam_. For indeed in treatise
after treatise even of the better men, allegory seems on the one hand to
become very foolish and perverse, banal, intolerably talking on and on
beyond the point; or again we sense its mechanism, hear the creaking of
its jaws, while no living voice emerges,--and we suspect that the mystery
of life, if it may not be compassed by direct statement, also lies deeper
than allegorical conventions.

Hugo’s great _De sacramentis_ showed the equipoise of intellectual and
pietistic interests in him, and the Platonic quality of his mind’s sure
sense of the reality of the supersensual.[496] Other treatises of his show
his yearning piety, and the Augustinian quality of his soul, “made toward
thee, and unquiet till it rests in thee.” The _De arca Noe morali_,[497]
that is to say, the Ark of Noah viewed in its moral significance, is
charming in its spiritual refinement, and interesting in its catholic
intellectual reflections. The Prologue presents a situation:

    “As I was sitting once among the brethren, and they were asking
    questions, and I replying, and many matters had been cited and
    adduced, it came about that all of us at once began to marvel
    vehemently at the unstableness and disquiet of the human heart; and we
    began to sigh. Then they pleaded with me that I would show them the
    cause of such whirlings of thought in the human heart; and they
    besought me to set forth by what art or exercise of discipline this
    evil might be removed. I indeed wished to satisfy my brethren, so far
    as God might aid me, and untie the knot of their questions, both by
    authority and by argument. I knew it would please them most if I
    should compose my matter to read to them at table.

    “It was my plan to show first whence arise such violent changes in
    man’s heart, and then how the mind may be led to keep itself in stable
    peace. And although I had no doubt that this is the proper work of
    grace, rather than of human labour, nevertheless I know that God
    wishes us to co-operate. Besides it is well to know the magnitude of
    our weakness and the mode of its repairing, since so much the deeper
    will be our gratitude.

    “The first man was so created, that if he had not sinned, he would
    always have beheld in present contemplation his Creator’s face, and by
    always seeing Him, would have loved Him always, and, by loving, would
    always have clung close to Him, and by clinging to Him who was
    eternal, would have possessed life without end. Evidently the one true
    good of man was perfect knowledge of his Creator. But he was driven
    from the face of the Lord, since for his sin he was struck with the
    blindness of ignorance, and passed from that intimate light of
    contemplation; and he inclined his mind to earthly desires, as he
    began to forget the sweetness of the divine. Thus he was made a
    wanderer and fugitive over the earth. A wanderer indeed, because of
    disordered concupiscence; and a fugitive, through guilty conscience,
    which feels every man’s hand against it. For every temptation will
    overcome the man who has lost God’s aid.

    “So man’s heart which had been kept secure by divine love, and one by
    loving one, afterwards began to flow here and there through earthly
    desires. For the mind which knows not to love its true good, is never
    stable and never rests. Hence restlessness, and ceaseless labour, and
    disquiet, until the man turns and adheres to Him. The sick heart
    wavers and quivers; the cause of its disease is love of the world; the
    remedy, the love of God.”

Hugo’s object is to give rest to the restless heart, by directing its love
to God. One still bears in mind his three plains of knowledge, forming
perhaps the three stages of ascent, at the top of which is found the
knowledge that turns to divine contemplation and love. There may be a
direct and simple love of God for simple souls; but for the man of mind,
knowledge precedes love.

    “In two ways God dwells in the human heart, to wit, through knowledge
    and through love; yet the dwelling is one, since every one who knows
    Him, loves, and no one can love without knowing. Knowledge through
    cognition of the Faith erects the structure; love through virtue,
    paints the edifice with colour.”[498]

Then make a habitation for God in thy heart. This is the great matter, and
indeed all: for this, Scripture exists, and the world was made, and God
became flesh, through His humility making man sublime. The Ark of Noah is
the type of this spiritual edifice, as it is also the type of the Church.

The piety and allegory of this work rise as from a basis of knowledge. The
allegory indeed is drawn out and out, until it seems to become sheer
circumlocution. This was the mediaeval way, and Hugo’s too, alas! We will
not follow further in this treatise, nor take up his _De arca Noe
mystica_,[499] which carries out into still further detail the symbolism
of the Ark, and applies it to the Church and the people of God. Hugo has
also left a colloquy between man and his soul on the true love, which lies
in spiritual meditation.[500] But it is clear that the reaches of Hugo’s
yearning are still grounded in intellectual considerations, though these
may be no longer present in the mind of him whose consciousness is
transformed to love.

One may discern the same progression, from painful thought to surer
contemplation, and thence to the heart’s devoted communion, in him whom we
have called the Thor and Loki of the Church. No twelfth-century soul loved
God more zealously than St. Bernard. He was not strong in abstract
reasoning. His mind needed the compulsion of the passions to move it to
sublime conclusions. Commonly he is dubbed a mystic. But his piety and
love of God poise themselves on a basis of consideration before springing
to soar on other wings. In his _De consideratione_,[501] Bernard explains
that word in the sense given by Hugo to _meditatio_, while he uses
_contemplatio_ very much as Hugo does. It applies to things that have
become certain to the mind, while “_consideratio_ is busy investigating.
In this sense _contemplatio_ may be defined as the true and certain
intuition of the mind (_intuitus animi_) regarding anything, or the sure
apprehension of the true: while _consideratio_ is thought intently
searching, or the mind’s endeavour to track out the true.”[502]

_Contemplatio_, even though it forget itself in ecstasy, must be based on
prior consideration; then it may take wings of its own, or rather (with
orthodox Hugo and Bernard) wings of grace, and fly to the bosom of its
God. This flight is the immediacy of conviction and the ecstasy which
follows. One may even perceive the thinking going on during the soul’s
outpour of love. For the mind still supports the soul’s ardour with
reasonings, original or borrowed, as appears in the second sermon of that
long series preached by Bernard on Canticles to his own spiritual _élite_
of Clairvaux.[503] The saintly orator is yearning, yearning for Christ
Himself; he will have naught of Moses or Isaiah; nor does he desire
dreams, or care for angels’ visits: _ipse, ipse me osculetur_, cries his
soul in the words of Canticles--let _Him_ kiss me. The phrasing seems
symbolical; but the yearning is direct, and at least rhetorically
overmastering. The emotion is justified by its reasons. They lie in the
personality of Christ and Bernard’s love of Him, rising from all his
knowledge of Him, even from his experience of Jesus’ whisperings to the
soul. He knows how vastly Jesus surpasses the human prophets who
prefigured or foretold Him: _ipsos longe superat Jesus meus_--the word
_meus_ is love’s very articulation. The orator cries: “Listen! Let the
kissing mouth be the Word assuming flesh; and the mouth kissed be the
flesh which is assumed; then the kiss which is consummated between them is
the _persona_ compacted of the two, to wit, the mediator of God and men,
the man Christ Jesus.”

This identical allegory goes back to Origen’s _Commentary on Canticles_.
Bernard has kindled it with an intimate love of Jesus, which is not
Origen’s. But the thought explains and justifies Bernard’s desire to be
kissed by the kiss of His mouth, and so to be infolded in the divine love
which “gave His only-begotten Son,” and also became flesh. _Os osculans_
signifies the Incarnation: one realizes the emotional power which that
saving thought would take through such a metaphor. At the end of his
sermon, Bernard sums up the conclusion, so that his hearers may carry it
away:

    “It is plain that this holy kiss was a grace needed by the world, to
    give faith to the weak, and satisfy the desire of the perfect. The
    kiss itself is none other than the mediator of God and men, the man
    Christ Jesus, who with the Father and the Holy Spirit lives and reigns
    God, _per omnia saecula saeculorum_, Amen.”


III

There is small propriety in speaking of these men of the first half of the
twelfth century as Platonists or Aristotelians; nor is there great
interest in trying to find in Plato or Aristotle or Plotinus the specific
origin of any of their thoughts. They were apt to draw on the source
nearest and most convenient; and one must remember that their immediate
philosophic antecedents were not the distinct systems of Plato and
Aristotle and Plotinus, but rather the late pagan eras of eclecticism,
followed by that strongly motived syntheticism of the Church Fathers which
selected whatever might accord with their Christian scheme. So Abaelard
must not be called an Aristotelian. Neither he nor his contemporaries knew
what an Aristotelian was, and when they called Abaelard _Peripateticus_,
they meant one skilled in the logic which was derived from the simpler
treatises of Aristotle’s _Organon_. Nor will we call Hugo a Platonist, in
spite of his fine affinities with Plato; for many of Hugo’s thoughts, his
classification of the sciences for example, pointed back to Aristotle.

Abaelard, Hugo, St. Bernard suggest the triangulation of the epoch’s
intellectual interests. Peter Lombard, somewhat their junior, presents its
compend of accepted and partly digested theology. He took his method from
Abaelard, and drew whole chapters of his work from Hugo; but his great
source, which was also theirs, was Augustine. The Lombard was, and was to
be, a representative man; for his _Sentences_ brought together the
ultimate problems which exercised the minds of the men of his time and
after.

The early and central decades of the twelfth century offer other persons
who may serve to round out our general notion of the character of the
intellectual interests which occupied the period before the rediscovery of
Aristotle, that is, of the substantial Aristotelian encyclopaedia of
knowledge. Among such Adelard of Bath (England) was somewhat older than
Abaelard. His keen pursuit of knowledge made him one of its early pilgrims
to Spain and Greece. He compiled a book of _Quaestiones naturales_, and
another called _De eodem et diverso_,[504] in which he struggled with the
problem of universals, and with palpable problems of psychology. His
cosmology shows a genial culling from the _Timaeus_ fragment of Plato, and
such other bits of Greek philosophy as he had access to.

Adelard was influenced by the views of men who taught or studied at
Chartres. Bernard of Chartres, the first of the great Chartrian teachers
of the early twelfth century,[505] wrote on Porphyry, and after his death
was called by John of Salisbury _perfectissimus inter Platonicos saeculi
nostri_. He was one of those extreme realists whose teachings might bear
pantheistic fruit in his disciples; he had also a Platonistic imagination,
leading him to see in Nature a living organism. Bernard’s younger brother,
Thierry, also called of Chartres, extended his range of studies, and
compiled numerous works on natural knowledge, indicating his wide reading
and receptive nature. His realism brought him very close to pantheism,
which indeed flowered poetically in his admirer or pupil, Bernard
Silvestris of Tours.

If we should analyze the contents of the latter’s _De mundi universitate_,
it might be necessary to affirm that the author was a dualistic thinker,
in that he recognized two first principles, God and matter; and also that
he was a pantheist, because of the way in which he sees in God the source
of Nature: “This mind (_nous_) of the supreme God is soul (_intellectus_),
and from its divinity Nature is born.”[506] One should not, however, drive
the heterogeneous thoughts of these twelfth-century people to their
opposite conclusions. A moderate degree of historical insight should
prevent our interpreting their gleanings from the past by formulas of our
own greater knowledge. Doubtless their books--Hugo’s as well as Thierry’s
and Bernard Silvester’s--have enough of contradiction if we will probe for
it with a spirit not their own. But if we will see with their eyes and
perceive with their feelings, we shall find ourselves resting with each of
them in some unity of personal temperament; and _that_, rather than any
half-borrowed thought, is Hugo or Thierry or Bernard Silvestris.
Silvester’s book, _De mundi universitate, sive Megacosmus et microcosmus_,
is a half poem, like Boëthius’s _De consolatione_ and a number of
mediaeval productions to which there has been occasion to allude. It is
fruitless to dissect such a composite of prose and verse. In it Natura
speaks to Nous, and then Nous to Natura; the four elements come into play,
and nine hierarchies of angels; the stars in their firmaments, and the
genesis of things on earth; Physics and her daughters, Theorica and
Practica, and all the figures of Greek mythology. An analysis of such a
book will turn it to nonsense, and destroy the breath of that
twelfth-century temperament which loved to gather driftwood from the
wreckage of the ancient world of thought. Thus perhaps they expected to
draw to themselves, even from the pagan flotsam, some congenial
explanation of the universe and man.

A far more acute thinker was Gilbert de la Porrée,[507] who taught at
Chartres for a number of years, before advancing upon Paris in 1141. He
next became Bishop of Poictiers, and died in 1154. Like Abaelard, he was
primarily a logician, and occupied himself with the problem of universals,
taking a position not so different from Abaelard’s. Like Abaelard also,
Gilbert was brought to task before a council, in which St Bernard sought
to be the guiding, _scilicet_, condemning spirit. But the condemnation was
confined to certain sentences, which when cut from their context and
presented in distorting isolation, the author willingly sacrificed to the
flames. He refused, some time afterwards, to discuss his views privately
with the Abbot of Clairvaux, saying that the latter was too inexpert a
theologian to understand them. Gilbert’s most famous work, _De sex
principiis_, attempted to complete the last six of Aristotle’s ten
_Categories_, which the philosopher had treated cursorily; it was almost
to rival the work of the Stagirite in authority, for instance, with
Albertus Magnus, who wrote a Commentary upon it in the same spirit with
which he commented on the logical treatises of the _Organon_.

In the same year with Gilbert (1154) died a man of different mental
tendencies, William of Conches,[508] who likewise had been a pupil of
Bernard of Chartres. He was for a time the tutor of Henry Plantagenet.
William was interested in natural knowledge, and something of a humanist.
He made a Commentary on the _Timaeus_, and wrote various works on the
philosophy of Nature, in which he wavered around an atomistic explanation
of the world, yet held fast to the Biblical Creation, to save his
orthodoxy. He also pursued the study of medicine, which was a specialty at
Chartres; through the treatises of Constantinus Africanus[509] he had some
knowledge of the pathological theories of Galen and Hippocrates. For his
interest in physical knowledge, he may be regarded as a precursor of
Roger Bacon. On the other hand, he was a humanist in his strife against
those “Cornificiani” who would know no more Latin than was needful;[510]
and he compiled from the pagan moralists a sort of _Summa_. It is called,
in fact, a _Summa moralium philosophorum_ (an interesting title,
connecting it with the Christian _Summae sententiarum_).[511] It treats
the virtues under the head of _de honesto_; and under that of _de utile_,
reviews the other good things of mind, body, and estate. It also discusses
whether there may be a conflict between the _honestum_ and the _utile_.

These men of the first half of the twelfth century lived before the new
revealing of the Aristotelian philosophy and natural knowledge coming at
the century’s close. Their muster is finally completed by two younger men,
the one an Englishman and the other a Lowlander. The youthful years of
both synchronize with the old age of the men of whom we have been
speaking. For John of Salisbury was born not far from the year 1115, and
died in 1180; and Alanus de Insulis (Lille) was probably born in 1128, and
lived to the beginning of the next century. They are spiritually connected
with the older men because they were taught by them, and because they had
small share in the coming encyclopaedic knowledge. But they close the
group: John of Salisbury closing it by virtue of his critical estimate of
its achievement; Alanus by virtue of his final rehandling of the body of
intellectual data at its disposal, to which he may have made some slight
addition. Abaelard knew and used the simpler treatises of the Aristotelian
_Organon_ of logic. He had not studied the _Analytics_ and the _Topics_,
and of course was unacquainted with the body of Aristotle’s philosophy
outside of logic. John of Salisbury and Alanus know the entire _Organon_;
but neither one nor the other knows the rest of Aristotle, which Alexander
of Hales was the first to make large use of.

John of Salisbury, Little John, Johannes Parvus, as he was called, was the
best classical scholar of his time.[512] His was an acute and active
intellect, which never tired of hearing and weighing the views of other
men. He was, moreover, a man of large experience, travelling much, and
listening to all the teachers prominent in his youth. Also he was active
in affairs, being at one time secretary to Thibaut, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and then the intimate of Becket, of Henry II., and Pope Adrian
IV.! A finished scholar, who knew not one thing, but whatever might be
known, and was enlightened by the training of the world, Little John
critically estimates the learning and philosophy of the men he learns
from. Having always an independent point of view he makes acute remarks
upon it all, and admirable contributions to the sum of current thought.
But chiefly he seems to us as one who looks with even eye upon whatsoever
comes within his vision. He knows the weaknesses of men and the
limitations of branches of discipline; knows, for instance, that dialectic
is sterile by itself, but efficient as an aid to other disciplines. So, as
to logic, John keeps his own point of view, and is always reasonable and
practical.[513] Likewise, with open mind, he considers what there may be
in the alleged science of the Mathematicians, _i.e._ diviners and
astrologers. He uses such phrases as “_probabilia quidem sunt haec ... sed
tamen_ the venom lies under the honey!” For this science sets a fatal
necessity on things, and would even intrude into the knowledge of the
future reserved for God’s majesty. And as John considers the order of
events to come, and the diviner’s art, _cornua succrescunt_--the horns of
more than one dilemma grow.[514]

John knew more than any man of the ancient philosophies.[515] For himself,
of course he loved knowledge; yet he would not dissever it from its value
in the art of living. “Wisdom indeed is a fountain, from which pour forth
the streams which water the whole earth; they fill not alone the garden of
delights of the divine page, but flow on to the Gentiles, and do not
altogether fail even the Ethiopians.... It is certain that the faithful
and wise reader, who from love keeps learning’s watch, escapes vice and
draws near to life.”[516] Philosophy is the _moderatrix omnium_ (a
favourite phrase with John); the true philosopher, as Plato says, is a
lover of God: and so _philosophia_ is _amor divinitatis_. Its precept is
to love God with all our strength, and our neighbour as ourselves: “He who
by philosophizing has reached _charitas_, has attained philosophy’s true
end.”[517] John goes on to show how deeply they err who think philosophy
is but a thing of words and arguments: many of those who multiply words,
by so doing burden the mind. Virtue inseparably accompanies wisdom; this
is John’s sum of the matter. Clearly he is not always, or commonly,
wrestling with ultimate metaphysical problems; he busies himself, acutely
but not metaphysically, with the wisdom of life. He too can use the
language of piety and contemplation. In the sixth chapter of his _De
septem septenis_ (The seven Sevens) he gives the seven grades of
contemplation--_meditatio_, _soliloquium_, _circumspectio_, _ascensio_,
_revelatio_, _emissio_, _inspiratio_.[518] He presents the matter
succinctly, thus perhaps giving clarity to current pietistic phraseology.

Alanus de Insulis was a man of renown in his life-time, and after his
death won the title of Doctor Universalis. Although the fame of scholar,
philosopher, theologian, poet, may have uplifted him during his years of
strength, he died a monk at Citeaux, in the year 1202. Fame came justly to
him, for he was learned in the antique literature, and a gifted Latin
poet, while as thinker and theologian he made skilful and catholic use of
his thorough knowledge of whatever the first half of the twelfth century
had achieved in thought and system. Elsewhere he has been considered as a
poet;[519] here we merely observe his position and accomplishment in
matters of salvation and philosophy.[520]

Alanus possessed imagination, language, and a faculty of acute exposition.
His sentences, especially his definitions, are pithy, suggestive, and
vivid. He projected much thought as well as fantasy into his poem,
_Anticlaudianus_, and his _cantafable_, _De planctu naturae_. He showed
himself a man of might, and insight too, in his _Contra haereticos_. His
suggestive pithiness of diction lends interest to his encyclopaedia of
definitions, _Distinctiones dictionum theologicalium_; and his keen power
of reasoning succinctly from axiomatic premises is evinced in his _De arte
fidei catholicae_.

The intellectual activities of Alanus fell in the latter decades of the
twelfth century, when mediaeval thought seemed for the moment to be
mending its nets, and preparing for a further cast in the new waters of
Aristotelianism. Alanus is busy with what has already been won; he is
unconscious of the new greater knowledge, which was preparing its
revelations. He is not even a man of the transition from the lesser to the
greater intellectual estate; but is rather a final compendium of the
lesser. Himself no epoch-making reasoner, he uses the achievements of
Abaelard and Hugo, of Gilbert de la Porrée and William of Conches, and
others. Neither do his works unify and systematize the results of his
studies. He is rather a re-phraser. Yet his refashioning is not a mere
thing of words; it proceeds with the vitalizing power of the man’s plastic
and creative temperament. One may speak of him as keen and acquisitive
intellectually, and creative through his temperament.

Alanus shows a catholic receptivity for all the mingled strains of
thought, Platonic, Aristotelian, Neo-Platonic and Pythagorean, which fed
the labours of his predecessors. He has studied the older sources, the
_Timaeus_ fragment, also Apuleius and Boëthius of course. His chief
blunder is his misconception of Aristotle as a logician and confuser of
words (_verborum turbator_)--a phrase, perhaps, consciously used with
poetic license. For he has made use of much that came originally from the
Stagirite. Within his range of opportunity, Alanus was a universal reader,
and his writings discover traces of the men of importance from
Pseudo-Dionysius and Eriugena down to John of Salisbury and Gundissalinus.

These remarks may take the place of any specific presentation of Alanus’s
work in logic, of his view of universals, of his notions of physics, of
nature, of matter and form, of man’s mind and body, and of the Triune
Godhead.[521] In his cosmology, however, we may note his imaginatively
original employment of the conception or personification of Nature. God is
the Creator, and Nature is His creature, and His vice-regent or vicarious
maker, working the generation and decay of things material and
changeable.[522] This thought, imaginatively treated, makes a good part of
the poetry of the _De planctu_ and the _Anticlaudianus_. The conception
with him is full of charming fantasy, and we look back through Bernardus
Silvestris and other writers to Plato’s divine fooling in the _Timaeus_,
not as the specific, but generic, origin of such imaginative views of the
contents and generation of the world. Such imaginings were as fantasy to
science, when compared with the solid and comprehensive consideration of
the material world which was to come a few years after Alanus’s death
through the encyclopaedic Aristotelian knowledge presented in the works of
Alexander of Hales and Albertus Magnus.




