BOOK V

SYMBOLISM




CHAPTER XXVII

SCRIPTURAL ALLEGORIES IN THE EARLY MIDDLE AGES; HONORIUS OF AUTUN


Words, pictures, and other vehicles of expression are symbols of whatever
they are intended to designate. A certain unavoidable symbolism also
inheres in human mental processes; for the mind in knowing “turns itself
to images,” as Aquinas says following Aristotle; and every statement or
formulation is a casting together of data in some presentable and
representative form. An example is the Apostles’ Creed, called also by
this very name of Symbol, being a casting together, an elementary formula,
of the essentials of the Christian Faith. In the same sense the “law of
gravitation” or a moral precept is a deduction, induction, or gathering
together into a representative symbol, of otherwise unassembled and
uncorrelated experience. In the present and following chapters, however,
the term symbol will be used in its common acceptation to indicate a
thing, an act, or a word invested with an adventitious representative
significance. All statements or expressions (through language or by means
of pictures) which are intended to carry, besides their palpable meaning,
another which is veiled and more spiritual, are symbolical or figurative,
and more specifically are called allegories.[32]

These devices of the mind have a history as old as humanity. From
inscrutable beginnings, in time they become recognized as makeshifts; yet
they remain prone to enter new stages of confusion. The mind seeking to
express the transcendental, avails itself of symbols. All religions have
teemed with them, in their primitive phases scarcely distinguishing
between symbol and fact; then a difference becomes evident to
clearer-minded men, while perhaps at the same time others are elaborately
maintaining that the symbol magically is, or brings to pass, that which it
represents. Such obscuring mysticism existed not merely in confused Egypt
and Brahminical India, but everywhere--in antique Greece and Rome, and
then afterwards through the times of the Christian Church Fathers and the
entire Middle Ages. Fact and symbol are seen constantly closing together
and becoming each other like the serpent-souls in the twenty-fifth canto
of Dante’s _Inferno_.

Allegory properly speaking, which involves a conscious and sustained
effort to invest concrete or material statements with more general or
spiritual meaning, played an interesting rôle in epochs antecedent to the
patristic and mediaeval periods. Even before Plato’s time the personal
myths of the gods shocked the Greek ethical intellect, which thereupon
proceeded to convert them into allegories. Greek allegorical
interpretation of ancient myth was apologetic to both the critical mind
and the moral sense.

With Philo, the Hellenizing Jew of Alexandria, whose philosophy revolted
from the literal text of Genesis, the motive for allegorical
interpretation was similar. But the document before him was most unlike
the _Iliad_ and _Odyssey_. Genesis contained no palpably immoral stories
of Jehovah to be explained away. Its account of divine creation and human
beginnings merely needed to be invested with further ethical meaning. So
Philo made cardinal virtues of the four rivers of Eden, and through like
allegorical conceits transformed the Book of Genesis into a system of
Hellenistic ethics. Not cosmogonic myths, but moral meanings, he had
discovered in his document.

Advancing along the path which Philo found, Christian allegorical
interpretation undertook to substantiate the validity of the Gospel. To
this end it fixed special symbolical meanings upon the Old Testament
narratives, so as to make them into prefigurative testimonies to the truth
of Christian teachings.[33] Allegory was also called on to justify, as
against educated pagans, certain acts of that heroic but peccant “type” of
Christ, David, the son of Jesse. Such special apologetic needs hardly
affected the allegorical interpretation of the Gospel itself, which began
at an early day, and from the first was spiritual and anagogic, constantly
straining on to educe further salutary meaning from the text.

The Greek and Latin Church Fathers created the mass of doctrine, including
Scriptural interpretation,[34] upon which mediaeval theologians were to
expend their systematizing and reconstructive labours. Through the Middle
Ages, the course of allegory and symbolism strikingly illustrates the
mediaeval way of using the patristic heritage--first painfully learning
it, then making it their own, and at last creating by means of that which
they had organically appropriated. Allegory and symbolism were to impress
the Middle Ages as perhaps no other element of their inheritance. The
mediaeval man thought and felt in symbols, and the sequence of his thought
moved as frequently from symbol to symbol as from fact to fact.

The allegorical faculty with the Fathers was dogmatic and theological;
ingenious in devising useful interpretations, but oblivious to all
reasonable propriety in the meaning which it twisted into the text:
controversial necessities readily overrode the rational and moral
requirements of the “historical” or “literal” meaning. For the deeply
realized allegorical significance was a law unto itself. These
characteristics of patristic allegory passed over to the Middle Ages,
which in the course of time were to impress human qualities upon the
patristic material.

The Bathsheba and Uriah episode in the life of David was of course taken
allegorically, and affords a curious example of a patristic interpretation
originating in the exigencies of controversy, and then becoming
authoritative for later periods when the echoes of the old controversy had
long been silent. Augustine was called upon to answer the book of the
clever Manichaean, Faustus, the stress of whose attacks was directed
against the Old Testament. Faustus declared that he did not blaspheme “the
law and the prophets,” but rejected merely the special Hebrew customs and
the vile calumnies of the Old Testament writers, imputing shameful acts to
prophets and patriarchs. In his list of shocking narratives to be
rejected, was the story “that David after having had such a number of
wives, defiled the little woman of Uriah his soldier, and caused him to be
slain in battle.”[35]

Augustine responds with a general exclamation at the Manichaean’s failure
to understand the sacramental symbols (_sacramenta_) of the Law and the
deeds of the prophets. He then speaks of certain Old Testament statements
regarding God and His demands, and proceeds to consider the nature of sin
and the questionable deeds of the prophets. Some of the reprehended deeds
he justifies, as, for instance, Abraham’s intercourse with Hagar and his
deceit in telling Abimelech that Sara was his sister when she was his
wife. He also declares that Sara typifies the Church, which is the secret
spouse of Christ. Proceeding further, he does not justify, but palliates,
the conduct of Lot and his daughters, and then introduces its typological
significance. At length he comes to David. First he gives a noble estimate
of David’s character, his righteousness, his liability to sin, and his
quick penitence.[36] Afterwards he considers, briefly as he says, what
David’s sin with Bathsheba signifies prophetically.[37] The passage may be
given to show what a mixture of banality and disregard of moral propriety
in drawing analogies might emanate from the best mind among the Latin
Fathers, and be repeated by later transitional and mediaeval commentators.

    “The names themselves when interpreted indicate what this deed
    prefigured. David is interpreted ‘Strong of hand’ or ‘Desirable.’ And
    what is stronger than that Lion of the tribe of Judah that overcame
    the world? and what is more desirable than him of whom the prophet
    says: ‘The desired of all nations shall come’ (Hag. ii. 7)? Bathsheba
    means ‘well of satiety,’ or ‘seventh well.’ Whichever of these
    interpretations we adopt will suit. For in Canticles the Bride who is
    the Church is called a well of living water (Cant. iv. 15); and to
    this well the name of the seventh number is joined in the sense of
    Holy Spirit; and this because of Pentecost (the fiftieth), the day on
    which the Holy Spirit came. For that same festival is of the weeks
    (_de septimanis constare_) as the Book of Tobit testifies. Then to
    forty-nine, which is seven times seven, one is added, whereby unity is
    commended. By this spiritual, that is ‘Seven-natured’ (_septenario_)
    gift the Church is made a well of satiety; because there is made in
    her a well of living water springing up unto everlasting life, which
    whoso has shall never thirst (John iv. 14). Uriah, indeed, who had
    been her husband, what but devil does his name signify? In whose
    vilest wedlock all those were bound whom the grace of God sets free,
    that the Church without spot or wrinkle may be married to her own
    Saviour. For Uriah is interpreted, ‘My light of God’; and Hittite
    means ‘cut off,’ or he who does not stand in truth, but by the guilt
    of pride is cut off from the supernal light which he had from God; or
    it means, he who in falling away from his true strength which was
    lost, nevertheless fashioneth himself into an angel of light (2 Cor.
    xi. 14), daring to say: ‘My light is of God.’ Therefore this David
    gravely and wickedly sinned; and God rebuked his crime through the
    prophet with a threat; and he himself washed it away by repenting. Yet
    likewise He, the desired of all nations, was enamoured of the Church
    bathing upon the roof, that is cleansing herself from the filth of the
    world, and in spiritual contemplation surmounting and trampling on her
    house of clay; and knowledge of her having been had at their first
    meeting, He afterwards killed the devil, apart from her, and joined
    her to himself in perpetual marriage. Therefore we hate the sin but
    will not quench the prophecy. Let us love that (_illum_) David, who is
    so greatly to be loved, who through mercy freed us from the devil; and
    let us also love that (_istum_) David who by the humility of penitence
    healed in himself so deep a wound of sin.”[38]

Augustine’s interpretation of the story of David and Bathsheba was
embodied verbatim in a work upon the Old Testament by Isidore of
Seville.[39] The voluminous commentator Rabanus Maurus took the same, also
verbatim, either from Isidore or Augustine.[40] His pupil, Walafrid
Strabo, in his famous _Glossa ordinaria_, cited, probably from Rabanus,
the first part of the passage as far as the reference to the well of
living water from John’s Gospel. He abridged the matter somewhat, thus
showing the smoothing compiler’s art which was to bring his _Glossa
ordinaria_ into such general use. Walafrid omitted the lines declaring
that Uriah signified the devil. He did cite, however, again probably from
Rabanus, part of a long passage, taken by Rabanus from Gregory the Great,
where Bathsheba is declared to be the letter of the Law, united to a
carnal people, which David (Christ) joins to himself in a spiritual sense.
Uriah is that carnal people, to wit, the Jews.[41]

Thus far as to the comments on the narrative from the eleventh chapter of
the Second Book of Samuel, otherwise called the Second Book of Kings. When
Rabanus came to explain the sixth verse of the first chapter of
Matthew--“And David begat Solomon from her who was the wife of Uriah”--he
said: “Uriah indeed, that is interpreted ‘My light of God,’ signifies the
devil, who fashions himself into an angel of light, daring to say to God:
‘My light of God,’ and ‘I will be like unto the Most High’ (Isaiah
xiv.).”[42] Here pupil Walafrid follows his master, but adds: “Whose
bewedded Church Christ became enamoured of from the terrace of His
paternal majesty and joined her, made beautiful, to himself in
matrimony.”[43]

With Rabanus and Walafrid, as with Isidore and the Venerable Bede who were
the links between these Carolingians and the Fathers, the interest in
Scripture relates to its allegorical significance. Unmindful of the
obvious and literal meaning of the text, they were unabashed by the
incongruity of their allegorical interpretations.[44] Rabanus, for
instance, had unbounded enthusiasm for Exodus, because of its rich
symbolism:

    “Among the Scriptures embraced in the Pentateuch of the Law, the Book
    of Exodus excels in merit; in it almost all the sacraments by which
    the present Church is founded, nourished, and ruled, are figuratively
    set forth. For there, through the corporeal exit of the children of
    Israel from the terrestrial Egypt, our exit from the spiritual Egypt
    is made clear. There again, through the crossing of the Red Sea and
    the submersion of Pharaoh and the Egyptians, the mystery of Baptism
    and the destruction of spiritual enemies are figured. There the
    immolation of the typifying lamb and the celebration of the Passover
    suggest the passion of the true Lamb and our redemption. There manna
    from heaven and drink from a rock are given in order to teach us to
    desire the heavenly bread and the drink of life. There precepts and
    judgments are delivered to the people of God upon a mountain in order
    that we may learn to be subject to supernal discipline. There the
    construction of the tabernacle and its vessels is ordered to take
    place with worship and sacrifices, that therein the adornment of the
    marvellous Church and the rites of spiritual sacrifices may be
    indicated. There the perfumes of incense and anointment are prepared,
    in order that the sanctification of the Holy Spirit and the mystery of
    sacred prayers may be commended to us.”[45]

The same commentator compiled a dictionary of allegories entitled
_Allegoriae in universam sacram scripturam_,[46] saying in his lumbering
Preface:

    “Whoever desires to arrive at an understanding of Holy Scripture
    should consider when he should take the narrative historically, when
    allegorically, when anagogically, and when tropologically. For these
    four ways of understanding, to wit, history, allegory, tropology,
    anagogy, we call the four daughters of wisdom, who cannot fully be
    searched out without a prior knowledge of these. Through them Mother
    Wisdom feeds her adopted children, giving to tender beginners drink in
    the milk of history; to those advancing in faith, the food of
    allegory; to the strenuous and sweating doers of good works, satiety
    in the savoury refection of tropology; and finally, to those raised
    from the depths through contempt of the earthly and through heavenly
    desire progressing towards the summit, the sober intoxication of
    theoretical contemplation in the wine of anagogy.... History, through
    the ensample which it gives of perfect men, incites the reader to the
    imitation of holiness; allegory, in the revelation of faith, leads to
    a knowledge of truth; tropology, in the instruction of morals, to a
    love of virtue; anagogy, in the display of everlasting joys, to a
    desire of eternal felicity. In the house of our soul, history lays the
    foundation, allegory erects the walls, anagogy puts on the roof, while
    tropology provides ornament, within through the disposition, without
    through the effect of the good work.”[47]

This work, alphabetically arranged, gave the allegorical significations of
words used in the Vulgate, with examples; for instance:

    “_Ager_ (field) is the world, as in the Gospel: ‘To the man who sowed
    good seed in his field,’ that is to Christ, who sows preaching through
    the world.

    “_Amicus_ (friend) is Christ, as in Canticles: ‘He is my friend,
    daughters of Jerusalem,’ for He loved His Church so much that He would
    die for her....

    “_Ancilla_ (handmaid) is the Church, as in the Psalms: ‘Make safe the
    son of thine handmaid,’ that is me, who am a member of the Church.
    _Ancilla_, corruptible flesh, as in Genesis: ‘Cast out the handmaid
    and her son,’ that is, despise the flesh and its carnal fruit.
    _Ancilla_, preachers of the Church, as in Job: ‘He will bind her with
    his handmaids,’[48] because the Lord through His preachers conquered
    the devil. _Ancilla_, the effeminate minds of the Jews, as in Job:
    ‘Thy handmaids hold me as a stranger,’ because the effeminate minds of
    the Jews knew me through faith.[49] _Ancilla_, the lowly, as in
    Genesis, ‘and meal for his handmaids,’ because Holy Church affords
    spiritual refection to the lowly.

    “_Aqua_ is the Holy Spirit, Christ, subtle wisdom, loquacity, temporal
    greed, baptism, the hidden speech of the prophets, the holy preaching
    of Christ, compunction, temporal prosperity, adversity, human
    knowledge, this world’s wealth, the literal meaning carnal pleasure,
    eternal reflection, holy angels, souls of the blessed, saints,
    humility’s lament, the devotions of the saints, sins of the elect
    which God condones, knowledge of the heretics, persecutions, unstable
    thoughts, the blandishments of temptations, the pleasures of the
    wicked, the punishments of hell.

    “_Mons_, mountain (in the singular) the Virgin Mary, _montes_ (in the
    plural) angels, apostles, sublime precepts, the two Testaments, inner
    meditations, proud men, the Gentiles, evil spirits.”[50]

Thus Rabanus dragged into his compilation every meaning that had ever been
ascribed to the words defined. In him and his contemporaries, the
allegorical material, apart from its utility for salvation, seems void of
human interest or poetic quality, as yet unstirred by a breath of life.
That was to enter, as allegory and all manner of symbolism began to form
the temper of mediaeval thought, and became a chosen vessel of the
mediaeval spirit in poetry and art. The vital change had taken place
before the twelfth century had turned its first quarter.[51]

There flourished at this time a worthy monk named Honorius of Autun, also
called “the Solitary.” It has been argued, and vehemently contradicted,
that he was of German birth. At all events, monk he was and teacher at
Autun. Those about him sought his instruction, and also requested him to
put his discourses into writing for their use; their request reads as if
at that time Honorius had retired from among them.[52] This is all that is
known of the man who composed the most popular handbook of sermons in the
Middle Ages. It was called the _Speculum ecclesiae_. Honorius may never
have preached these sermons; but still his book exists with sermons for
Sundays, saints’ days, and other Church festivals; a sermon also to be
preached at Church dedications, and one “sermo generalis,” very useful,
since it touched up all orders of society in succession, and a preacher
might take or omit according to his audience. Before beginning, the
preacher is directed to make the sign of the cross and invoke the Holy
Spirit: he is admonished first to pronounce his text of Scripture in the
Latin tongue, and then expound it in the vernacular;[53] he is instructed
as to what portions of certain sermons should be used under special
circumstances, and what parts he may omit in winter when the church is
cold, or when in summer it is too hot; or this is left quite to his
discretion: “Here make an end if you wish; but if time permits, continue
thus.”

Most of these sermons are short, and contain much excellent moral advice
put simply and directly. They also make constant use of allegory, and
evidently Honorius’s chief care in their composition was to expound his
text allegorically and point the allegory’s application to the needs of
his supposed audience. Neither he nor any man of his time devised many
novel allegorical interpretations; but the old ones had at length become
part of the mediaeval spirit and the regular means of apprehending the
force and meaning of Scripture. Consequently Honorius handles his
allegories more easily, and makes a more natural human application of
them, than Rabanus or Walafrid had done. Sometimes the allegory seems to
ignore the moral lesson of the literal facts; but while a smile may escape
us in reading Honorius, the allegories in his sermons are rarely strained
and shocking, likewise rarely dull. A general point from which he regards
the narratives and institutions of the Old Testament is summed up in his
statement, that for us Christ turned all provisions of the law into
spiritual sacraments.[54] The whole Old Testament has pre-figurative
significance and spiritual meaning; and likewise every narrative in the
Gospels is spiritual.

Two or three examples will illustrate Honorius’s edifying way of using
allegory. His sermon for the eleventh Sunday after Pentecost is typical of
his manner. The text is from the thirty-first[55] Psalm: “Blessed is the
man to whom the Lord will not impute sin.” Opening with an exhortation to
penitence and tears and almsgiving, the preacher turns to the
self-righteous “whose obstinacy the Lord curbs in the Gospel for the day,
telling how two went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, to
wit, one of the Jewish clergy, the other a Publican.” After proceeding for
a while with sound and obvious comment on the situation, Honorius says:

    “By the two men who went up into the temple to pray, two peoples, the
    Jewish and the Gentile, are meant. The Pharisee who went close to the
    altar is the Jewish people, who possessed the Sanctuary and the Ark.
    He tells aloud his merits in the temple, because in the world he
    boasts of his observance of the law.

    “The Publican who stands afar off is the Gentile people, who were far
    off from the worship of God. He did not lift up his eyes to heaven,
    because the Gentile was agape at the things of earth. He beat his
    breast when he bewailed his error through penitence; and because he
    humbled himself in confession, God exalted him through pardon. Let us
    also, beloved, thus stand afar off, deeming ourselves unworthy of the
    holy sacraments and the companionship of the saints. Let us not lift
    up our eyes to heaven, but deem ourselves unworthy of it. Let us beat
    our breasts and punish our misdeeds with tears. Let us fall prostrate
    before God; and let us weep in the presence of the Lord who made us,
    so that He may turn our lament to joy, rend asunder our garb of
    mourning, and clothe us with happiness.”

Honorius lingers a moment with some further exhortations suggested by his
parable, and then turns to the edification to be found in fables wisely
composed by profane writers. Let not the congregation be scandalized; for
the children of Israel despoiled the Egyptians of gold and gems and
precious vesture, which they afterwards devoted to completing the
tabernacle. Pious Christians spoil the Egyptians when they turn profane
studies to spiritual account. The philosophers tell of a woman bound to a
revolving wheel, her head now up now down. The wheel is this world’s
glory, and the woman is that fortune which depends on it. Again, they tell
of one who tries to roll a stone to the top of a mountain; but, near the
top, it hurls the wretch prostrate with its weight and crashes back to the
bottom; and again, of one whose liver is eaten by a vulture, and, when
consumed, grows again. The man who pushes up the stone is he who
toilsomely amasses dignities, to be plunged by them to hell; and he of the
liver is the man upon whose heart lust feeds. From that pest, they say,
Medusa sprang, with noble form exciting many to lust, but with her look
turning them to stone. She is wantonness, who turns to stone the hearts of
the lewd through their lustful pleasure. Perseus slew her, covering
himself with his crystalline shield; for the strong man, gazing into
virtue’s mirror, averts his heart’s countenance (_i.e._ from wantonness).
The sword with which he kills her is the fear of everlasting fire.

Then, continues Honorius, we read of a boy brought up by one of the
Fathers in a hermitage; but as he grew to youth he was tickled with lust.
The Father commanded him to go alone into the desert and pass forty days
in fasting and prayer. When some twenty days had passed, there appeared a
naked woman foul and stinking, who thrust herself upon him, and he, unable
to endure her stench, began to repel her. At which she asked: “Why do you
shudder at the sight of me for whom you burned? I am the image of lust,
which appears sweet to men’s hearts. If you had not obeyed the Father, you
would have been overthrown by me as others have been.” So he thanked God
for snatching him from the spirit of fornication. Many other examples lead
us to the path of life.

Honorius closes with the story of the “Three Fools,” observed by a certain
Father: the first an Ethiopian who was unable to move a faggot of wood,
which he would continually unbind and make still heavier by adding further
sticks; the second, a man pouring water into a vase which had no bottom;
and, thirdly, the two men who came bearing before them crosswise a beam of
wood; as they neared the city gate neither would let the other precede him
even a little, and so both remained without. The Ethiopian who adds to his
insupportable faggot is he who continually increases his weight of sin,
adding new sins to old ones unrepented of; he who pours water into the
vase with no bottom is he who by his uncleanness loses the merit of his
good acts; and the two who bear the beam crosswise are those bound by the
yoke of Pride.[56]

Such are good examples of the queer stories to which preachers resorted.
One notices that whatever be the source from which Honorius draws, his
interest is always in the allegory found in the narratives. Another very
apt example of his manner is his treatment of the story of the Good
Samaritan, so often depicted on Gothic church windows. For us this parable
carries an exhaustless wealth of direct application in human life; it was
regarded very differently by Honorius and the glass painters, whose
windows are a pictorial transcription of the first half of his
sermon.[57]

“Blessed is the man who walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly”--this
is the text; and Honorius proceeds:

    “Adam was the unhappy man who through the counsel of the wicked
    departed from his native land of Paradise and dragged all his
    descendants into this exile. He thus stood in the way of sinners,
    because he remained stable in sin. He sat ‘in the seat of the
    scornful,’ because by evil example he taught others to sin. But Christ
    arose, the blessed man who walketh in the counsel of the Father from
    the hall of heaven into prison after the lost servant. He did not walk
    in the counsel of the ungodly when the devil showed Him all the
    kingdoms of the world; He did not stand in the way of sinners, because
    He committed no sin; He did not sit in the seat of the scornful, since
    neither by word nor deed did He teach evil. Thus as that unhappy man
    drew all his carnal children into death, this blessed man brought all
    His sons to life. As He himself sets forth in the Gospel: ‘A certain
    man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and robbers attacked and
    wounded him, stripped him and went away. And by chance there came that
    way a certain priest, who seeing him half-dead, crossed to the other
    side. Likewise a Levite passed by when he had seen him. But a
    Samaritan coming that same way, had compassion on the poor wretch,
    bound up his wounds and poured in oil and wine, and setting him on his
    own beast, brought him to an inn. The next day he gave the innkeeper
    two pence and asked that he care for him, and if more was needed He
    promised to repay the innkeeper on His return.’

    “Surely man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho when our first parent
    from the joys of Paradise entered death’s eclipse. For Jericho, which
    means moon, designates the eclipse of our mortality. Whereby man fell
    among thieves, since a swarm of demons at once surrounded the exile.
    Wherefore also they despoiled him, since they stripped him of the
    riches of Paradise and the garment of immortality. They gave him
    wounds, for sins flowed in upon him. They left him half-dead, because
    dead in soul. The priest passed down the same way, as the Order of
    Patriarchs proceeded along the path of mortality. The priest left him
    wounded, having no power to aid the human race while himself sore
    wounded with sins. The Levite went that way, inasmuch as the Order of
    Prophets also had to tread the path of death. He too passed by the
    wounded man, because he could bear no human aid to the lost while
    himself groaning under the wounds of sin. The wretch half-dead was
    healed by the Samaritan, for the man set apart through Christ is made
    whole.

    “Samaria was the chief city of the Israelitish kingdom whose chiefs
    were led away to idolatry in Nineveh, and Gentiles were placed in her.
    The Jews abhorred their fellowship, making them a byword of
    malediction. So when reviling the Lord, they called Him a Samaritan.
    The Lord was the true Samaritan, being called guardian (_custos_)
    since the human race is guarded by Him. He went down this way when
    from heaven He came into this world. He saw the wounded traveller,
    inasmuch as He saw man held in misery and sin. He was moved with
    compassion for him, since for man He undergoes all pains. Approaching,
    He bound his wounds when, proclaiming eternal life, He taught man to
    cease from sin. He bound his wounds together with the two parts of the
    bandage when He quelled sins through two fears--the servile fear which
    forbids through penalties, and the filial fear which exhorts the holy
    to good works. He drew tight the lower part of the bandage when He
    struck men’s hearts with fear of hell. Their worm, He said, does not
    die, and their fire is not quenched. He drew tight the upper part when
    He taught the fear which belongs to the study of good. ‘The children
    of the kingdom,’ said He, ‘shall be cast into outer darkness, where
    there is weeping and gnashing of teeth.’ He poured in wine and oil
    when He taught repentance and pardon. He poured in wine when He said,
    ‘Repent ye’; He added oil when He said, ‘for the kingdom of heaven is
    at hand.’ He set him upon His beast when He bore our sins in His body
    on the Cross. He led him to the inn when He joined him to the supernal
    Church. The inn, in which living beings are assembled at night, is the
    present Church, where the just are harboured amid the darkness of this
    life until the Day of Eternity blows and the shadows of mortality give
    way.

    “The next day He tendered the two pence. The first day was of death,
    the next of life. The day of death began with Adam, when all die. The
    day of life took its beginning from Christ, in whom all shall be made
    alive. Before Christ’s resurrection all men were travelling to death;
    since His resurrection all the faithful have been rising to life. He
    tendered the two pence the next day--when after His resurrection He
    taught that the two Testaments were fulfilled by the two precepts of
    love. He gave the pence to the innkeeper when He committed the
    doctrine of the law of life to the Order of Doctors. He directed him
    to tend the sick man when He commanded that the human race should be
    saved from sin. The stench drove the sick man from the inn, because
    this world’s tribulation drives the righteous to seek the things
    celestial. Two pence are given to the innkeeper when the Doctors are
    raised on high by Scriptural knowledge and temporal honour. If they
    should require more, He repays them on His return; for if they
    exemplify good preaching with good works, when the true Samaritan
    returns to judgment and leads him, aforetime wounded but now healed,
    from the inn to the celestial mansion, He will repay the zealous
    stewards with eternal rewards.”[58]

Here Honorius proceeds to expound the allegory contained in the healing of
the dumb man and the ten lepers, and closes his sermon with two
narratives, one of a poor idiot who sang the _Gloria_ without ceasing, and
was seen in glory after death; the other of a lay nun (_conversa_) around
whose last hours were shed sweet odours and a miraculous light, while
those present heard the chant of heavenly voices.

The parables of Christ present types which we may apply in life according
to circumstances. In the concrete instance of the parable we find the
universal, and we deem Christ meant it so. Thus we also view the parables
as symbols, which they were. Honorius, with the vast company of mediaeval
and patristic expounders, ordinarily directs the symbolism of the parables
in a special mode, whereby--like the stories of the Old Testament--they
become figurative of Christ and the needy soul of man, or figurative of
the Christian dispensation with its historical antecedents and its Day of
Judgment at the end.

The like may be said of Honorius’s allegorical interpretation of Greek
legends. These ancient stories have the perennial youth of human charm and
meaning ever new. They had been good old stories to the Greeks, and then
acquired further intendment as later men discerned a broader symbolism in
them. Even in classic times, Homer’s stories had been turned to
allegories, philosophers and critics sometimes finding in them a spiritual
significance not unlike that which the same tales may bear for us. But
with this difference: the later Greeks usually were trying to explain away
the somewhat untrammelled ways of the Homeric pantheon, and therefore
maintained that Homer’s stories were composed as allegories, the wise and
mystic poet choosing thus to veil his meaning. To-day we find the clarity
of daybreak in Homer’s tales, and if we make symbols of them we know the
symbolism is not his but ours. Honorius chooses to think that allegory had
always lain in the old story; he will not deem it the invention of himself
or other Christian writers. Here his attitude is not unlike that of the
apologetic Greek critics. But his interpretations are apt to differ from
theirs as well as from our own. For his symbolism tends to abandon the
broadly human, and to become, like the mediaeval Biblical interpretations,
figurative of the tenets of the Christian Faith.

There is an interesting example of this in the sermon for Septuagesima
Sunday, which was written on a somewhat blind text from the twenty-eighth
chapter of Job. Honorius proceeds expounding it through a number of
strained allegories, which he doubtless drew from Gregory’s _Moralia_; for
that great pope was the recognized expositor of Job, and the Book of Job
was simply Gregory through all the Middle Ages. Perhaps Honorius felt that
this sermon was rather soporific. At all events he stops in the middle to
give a piece of advice to the supposed preacher: “Often put something of
this kind in your sermon; for so you will relieve the tedium.” And he
continues thus:

    “Brethren, on this holy day there is much to say which I must pass
    over in silence, lest disgusted you should wish to leave the church
    before the end. For some of you have come far and must go a long way
    to reach your houses. Or perhaps, some have guests at home, or crying
    babies; or others are not swift and have to go elsewhere, while to
    some a bodily infirmity brings uneasiness lest they expose themselves.
    So I omit much for everybody’s sake, but still would say a few words.

    “Because to-day, beloved, we have laid aside the song of gladness and
    taken up the song of sadness, I would briefly tell you something from
    the books of the pagans, to show how you should reject the melody of
    this world’s pleasures in order that hereafter with the angels you may
    make sweet harmonies in heaven. For one should pick up a gem found in
    dung and set it as a kingly ornament; thus if we find anything useful
    in pagan books we should turn it to the building up of the Church,
    which is Christ’s spouse. The wise of this world write that there were
    three Syrens in an island of the sea, who used to chant the sweetest
    song in divers tones. One sang, another piped, the third played upon a
    lyre. They had the faces of women, the talons and wings of birds. They
    stopped all passing ships with the sweetness of their song; they rent
    the sailors heavy with sleep; they sank the ships in the brine. When a
    certain duke, Ulysses, had to sail by their island, he ordered his
    comrades to bind him to the mast and stuff their ears with wax. Thus
    he escaped the peril unharmed, and plunged the Syrens in the waves.
    These, beloved, are mysteries, although written by the enemies of
    Christ. By the sea is to be understood this age which rolls beneath
    the unceasing blasts of tribulations. The island is earth’s joy, which
    is intercepted by crowding pains, as the shore is beat upon by
    crowding waves. The three Syrens who with sweet caressing song
    overturn the navigators in sleep, are three delights which soften
    men’s hearts for vice and lead them into the sleep of death. She who
    sings with human voice is Avarice, and to her hearers thus she tunes
    her song: ‘Thou shouldst get together much, so as to be able to spread
    wide thy fame, and also visit the Lord’s sepulchre and other places,
    restore churches, aid the poor and thy relatives as well.’ With such
    baneful song she charms the miser’s heart, until the sleep of death
    oppresses him. Then she tears his flesh, the wave devours the ship,
    and the wretch by fierce pains is waked from his riches and plunged in
    eternal flame. She who plays upon the pipe is Vainglory (_Jactantia_),
    and thus she pipes her lay for hers: ‘Thou art in thy youth, and
    noble; make thyself appear glorious. Spare no enemies, but kill them
    all when able. Then people will call thee a good knight.’ Again will
    she chant: ‘Thou shouldst win Jerusalem, and give great alms. Then
    thou wilt be famous, and wilt be called good by all.’ To the lay
    brethren (_conversis_) she sings: ‘Thou must fast and pray always,
    singing with loud voice. Then wilt thou hear thyself lauded as a saint
    by all.’ Such song with vain heart she makes resound till the
    whirlpool of death devours the wretch emptied of worth.

    “She who sings to a lyre is Wantonness (_Luxuria_), and she chants
    melodies like these to her parasites: ‘Thou art in thy youth; now is
    the time to sport with the girls--old age will do to reform in. Here
    is one with a fine figure; this one is rich; from this one you would
    gain much. There is plenty of time to save your soul.’ In such way she
    melts the hearts of the wanton till Cocytus’s waves engulf them
    suddenly tripped by death.

    “They have the faces of women, because nothing so estranges man from
    God as the love of women. They have wings of birds, because the desire
    of worldlings is always unstable, their appetites now craving one
    thing, and again their lust flying to another object. They have also
    the talons of birds, because they tear their victims as they snatch
    them away to the torments of hell. Ulysses is called Wise. Unharmed he
    steers his course by the island, because the truly wise Christian
    swims over the sea of this world, in the ship of the Church. By the
    fear of God he binds himself to the mast of the ship, that is, to the
    cross of Christ; with wax, that is with the incarnation of Christ, he
    seals the ears of his comrades, that they may turn their hearts from
    lusts and vices and yearn only for heavenly things. The Syrens are
    submerged, because he is protected from their lusts by the strength
    of the Spirit. Unharmed the voyagers avoid the peril, inasmuch as
    through victory they reach the joys of the saints.”[59]




