CHAPTER XXXI

EVOLUTION OF MEDIAEVAL LATIN PROSE


Classical antiquity lay far back of the mediaeval period, while in the
nearer background pressed the centuries of transition, the time of the
Church Fathers. The patristic material and a crude knowledge of the
antique passed over to the early Middle Ages. Mediaeval progress was to
consist, very largely, in the mastery and appropriation of the one and the
other.

The varied illustration of these propositions has filled a large portion
of this work. In this and the next chapter we are concerned with
literature, properly speaking; and with the effect of the Classics, the
pure literary antique, upon mediaeval literary productions. The latter are
to be viewed as literature; not considering their substance, but their
form, their composition, style, and temperamental shading, qualities which
show the faculties and temper of their authors. We are to discover, if we
can, wherein the qualities of mediaeval literature reflect the Latin
Classics, or in any way betray their influence.

It is an affair of dull diligence to learn what Classics were read by the
various mediaeval writers; and likewise is it a dull affair to note in
mediaeval writings the direct borrowing from the Classics of fact,
opinion, sentiment, or phrase. Such borrowing was incessant, resorted to
as of course wherever opportunity offered and the knowledge was at hand.
It would not commonly occur to a mediaeval writer to state in his own way
what he could take from an ancient author, save in so far as change of
medium--from prose to verse, or from Latin to the vernacular--compelled
him. So the church builders in Rome never thought of hewing new blocks of
stone, or making new columns, when some ancient palace or temple afforded
a quarry. The details of such spoliations offer little interest in
comparison with the effect of antique architecture upon later styles. So
we should like to discover the effect of the ancient compositions upon the
mediaeval, and observe how far the faculties and mental processes of
classic authors, incorporate in their writings, were transmitted to
mediaeval men, to become incorporate in theirs.

Unless you are Virgil or Cicero, you cannot write like Virgil or Cicero.
Writing, real writing, that is to say, creative self-expressive
composition, is the personal product and closely mirrored reflex of the
writer’s temperament and mentality. It gives forth indirectly the
influences which have blended in him, education and environment, his past
and present. His personality makes his style, his untransmittable style.
Yet a group of men affected by the same past, and living at the same time
and place, or under like spiritual influences, may show a like faculty and
taste. Having more in common with one another than with men of other time,
their mental processes, and therefore their ways of writing, will present
more common qualities. Around and above them, as well as through their
natal and acquired faculties, sweeps the genius of the language, itself
the age-long product of a like-minded race. In harmony with it, not in
opposition and repugnancy, each writer must, if he will write that
language, shape his more personal diction.

Obviously the personal elements in classic writings were no more capable
of transmission than the personal qualities of the writers. Likewise, the
genius of the Latin language, though one might think it fixed in approved
compositions, changed with the spiritual fortune of the Roman people, and
constantly transmitted an altered self and novel tenets of construction to
control the linguistic usages of succeeding men. None but himself could
have written Cicero’s letters. No man of Juvenal’s time could have written
the _Aeneid_, nor any man of the time of Diocletian the histories of
Tacitus. There were, however, common elements in these compositions, all
of them possessing certain qualities which are associated with classical
writing. These may be difficult to formulate, but they become clear enough
in contrast with the qualities of mediaeval Latin literature. The
mediaeval man did not feel and reason like a contemporary of Virgil or
Cicero; he had not the same training in _Greek_ literature; he did not
have the same definitude of conception, did not care so much that a
composition should have limit and the unity springing from adherence to a
single topic; he did not, in fine, stand on the same level of attainment
and faculty and taste with men of the Augustan time. He had his own
heights and depths, his own temperament and predilections, his own
capacities. Reading the Classics had not transformed him into Cicero or
Seneca, or set his feet in the Roman Forum. His feet wandered in the ways
of the Middle Ages, and whatever he wrote in prose or verse, in Latin or
in his own vernacular, was himself and of himself, and but indirectly due
to the antecedent influences which had been transmuted even in entering
his nature and becoming part of his temper and faculty.

Any consideration of the knowledge and appreciation of the Classics in the
Middle Ages would be followed naturally by a consideration of their effect
upon mediaeval composition; which in turn forms part of any discussion of
the literary qualities of mediaeval Latin literature. But inasmuch as
mediaeval form and diction tend to remove further and further from
classical standards, the whole discussion may seem a _lucus a non lucendo_
for all the light it throws upon the effect of the Classics on mediaeval
literature. Our best plan will be to note the beginnings of mediaeval
Latinity in that post-Augustan and largely patristic diction which had
been enriched and reinvigorated with many phrases from daily speech; and
then to follow the living if sluggish river as it moves on, receiving
increment along its course, its currents mottled with the silt of
mediaeval Italy, France, Germany. We shall suppose this flood to divide in
rivers of Latin prose and verse; and we may follow them, and see where
they overflow their channels, carrying antique flotsam into the ample
marshes of vernacular poetry.

There has always been a difference in diction between speech and
literature. At Rome, Cicero and Caesar, and of course the poets, did not,
in writing, use quite the language of the people. All the words of daily
speech were not taken into the literary or classical vocabulary, which had
often quite other words of its own. Moreover the writers, in forming their
prose and verse and constructing their compositions, were affected deeply
by their study of Greek literature.[227] If Caesar, Cicero, Virgil, and
their friends spoke differently from the Roman shopkeepers, there was a
still greater difference between their writings and the parlance of the
town.

No one need be told that it was the spoken, and not the classical Latin,
which in Italy, Spain, Provence, and Northern France developed into
Italian, Spanish, Provençal, and French. On the other hand, the descent of
written mediaeval Latin from the classical diction or the popular speech,
or both, is not so clear, or at least not so simple. It cannot be said
that mediaeval Latin came straight from the classical; and manifestly it
cannot have sprung from the popular spoken Latin, like the Romance
tongues, without other influence or admixture; because then, instead of
remaining Latin, it would have become Romance; which it did not. Evidently
mediaeval Latin, the literary and to some extent the spoken medium of
educated men in the Middle Ages, must have carried classic strains, or
have kept itself Latin by the study of Latin grammar and a conscious
adherence to a veritable, if not classical, Latin diction. The mediaeval
reading of the Classics, and the earnest and constant study of Latin
grammar spoken of in the previous chapter, were the chief means by which
mediaeval Latin maintained its Latinity. Nevertheless, while it kept the
word forms and inflections of classical Latin, with most of the classical
vocabulary, it also took up an indefinite supplement of words from the
spoken Latin of the late imperial or patristic period.

In order to understand the genesis and qualities of mediaeval Latin, one
must bear in mind (as with most things mediaeval) that its immediate
antecedents lie in the transitional fourth, fifth, and sixth centuries,
and not in the classical period.[228] Those centuries went far toward
declassicizing Latin prose, by departing from the balanced structure of
the classic sentences and introducing words from the spoken tongue. The
style became less correct, freer, and better suited to the expression of
the novel thoughts and interests coming with Christianity. The change is
seen in the works of the men to whom it was largely due, Tertullian,
Jerome, and other great patristic writers.[229] Such men knew the Classics
well, and regarded them as literary models, and yet wrote differently. For
a new spirit was upon them and new necessities of expression, and they
lived when, even outside of Christian circles, the classic forms of style
were loosening with the falling away of the strenuous intellectual temper,
the poise, the self-reliance and the self-control distinguishing the
classical epoch.

The stylistic genius of Augustine and Jerome was not the genius of the
formative beginnings of the Romance tongues, with, for instance, its
inability to rely on the close logic of the case ending, and its need to
help the meaning by the more explicit preposition. Yet the spirit of these
two great men was turning that way. They were not classic writers, but
students of the Classics, who assisted their own genius by the study of
what no longer was themselves. So in the following centuries the most
careful Latin writers are students of the Classics, and do not study
Jerome and Augustine for style. Yet their writings carry out the
tendencies beginning (or rather not beginning) with these two.

It was not in diction alone that the Fathers were the forerunners of
mediaeval writers. _Classic_ Latin authors, both from themselves and
through their study of Greek literature, had the sense and faculty of
form. Their works maintain a clear sequence of thought, along with strict
pertinency to the main topic, or adherence to the central current of the
narrative, avoiding digression and refraining from excessive
amplification. The classic writer did not lose himself in his subject, or
wander with it wherever it might lead him. But in patristic writings the
subject is apt to dominate the man, draw him after its own necessities, or
by its casual suggestions cause him to digress. The Fathers in their
polemic or expository works became prolix and circumstantial, intent, like
a lawyer with a brief, on proving every point and leaving no loophole to
the adversary. In their works literary unity and strict sequence of
argument may be cast to the winds. Above all, as it seems to us, and as it
would have seemed to Caesar or Cicero or Tacitus, allegorical
interpretation carries them at its own errant and fantastic will into
footless mazes.

Yet whoever will understand and appreciate the writings of the Fathers and
of the mediaeval generations after them, should beware of inelastic
notions. The question of unity hangs on what the writer deems the
veritable topic of his work, and that may be the universal course of the
providence of God, which was the subject of Augustine’s _Civitas Dei_.
Indeed, the infinite relationship of any Christian topic was like enough
to break through academic limits of literary unity. Likewise, the proper
sequence of thought depends on what constitutes the true connection
between one matter and another; it must follow what with the writer are
the veritable relationships of his topics. If the visible facts of a man’s
environment and the narratives of history are to him primarily neither
actual facts nor literal narratives, but symbols and allegories of
spiritual things, then the true sequence of thought for him is from symbol
to symbol and from allegory to allegory. He is justified in ignoring the
apparent connection of visible facts and the logic of the literal story,
and in surrendering himself to that sequence of thought which follows what
is for him the veritable significance of the matter.

Yet here we must apply another standard besides that of the writer’s
conception of his subject’s significance. He should be wise, and not
foolish. Other men and later ages will judge him according to their own
best wisdom. And with respect to the writings of the Fathers viewed as
literature, the modern critic cannot fail to see them entering upon that
course of prolixity which in mediaeval writings will develop into the
endless; looking forward, he will see their errant habits resolving into
the mediaeval lack of determined topic, and their symbolically driven
sequences of thought turning into the most ridiculous topical transitions,
as the less cogent faculties of later men permit themselves to be
_suggested_ anywhither.

The Fathers developed their distinguishing qualities of style and language
under the demands of the topics absorbing them, and the influence of modes
of feeling coming with Christianity. They were compelling an established
language to express novel matter. In the centuries after them, further
changes were to come through the linguistic tendencies moulding the
evolution of the Romance tongues, through the counter influence of the
study of grammar and rhetoric, and also through the ignorance and
intellectual limitations of the writers. But as with the Latin of the
Fathers, so with the Latin of the Middle Ages, the change of style and
language was intimately and spiritually dependent upon the minds and
temperaments of the writers and the qualities of the subjects for which
they were seeking an expression. A profound influence in the evolution of
mediaeval Latin was the continual endeavour of the mediaeval genius to
express the thoughts and feelings through which it was becoming itself.
With impressive adequacy and power the Christian writers of the Middle
Ages moulded their inherited and acquired Latin tongue to utter the varied
matters which moved their minds and lifted up their hearts. We marvel to
see a language which once had told the stately tale of Rome here lowered
to fantastic incident and dull stupidity, then with almost gospel
simplicity telling the moving story of some saintly life; again sonorously
uttering thoughts to lift men from the earth and denunciations crushing
them to hell; quivering with hope and fear and love, and chanting the last
verities of the human soul.

As to the evolution of various styles of written Latin from the close of
the patristic period on through the following centuries, one may premise
the remark that there would commonly be two opposite influences upon the
writer; that of the genius of his native tongue, and that of his education
in Latinity. If he lived in a land where Teutonic speech had never given
way to the spoken Latin of the Empire, his native tongue would be so
different from the Latin which he learned at school, that while it might
impede, it could hardly draw to its own genius the learned language. But
in Romance countries there was no such absolute difference between the
vernacular and the Latin, and the analytic genius of the growing Romance
dialects did not fail to affect the latter. Accordingly in France, for
example, the spoken Latin dialect, or one may say the genius that was
forming the old French dialects to what they were to be, tends to break up
the ancient periods, to introduce the auxiliary verb in the place of
elaborate inflections, and rely on prepositions instead of case endings,
which were disappearing and whose force was ceasing to be felt. One result
was to simplify the order of words in a sentence; for it was not possible
to move a noun with its accompanying preposition wherever it had been
feasible to place a noun whose relation to the rest of the sentence was
felt from its case ending. Gregory of Tours is the famous example of these
tendencies, with his _Historia francorum_, an ideal forerunner of
Froissart. He became Bishop of Tours in the year 573. In his writings he
followed the instincts of the inchoate Romance tongues. He acknowledges
and perhaps overstates his ignorance of Latin grammar and the rules of
composition. Such ignorance was destined to become still blanker; and
ignorance in itself was a disintegrating influence upon written Latin, and
also gave freer play to the gathering tendencies of Romance speech.

Evidently, had all these influences worked unchecked, they would have
obliterated Latinity from mediaeval Latin. Grammatical and rhetorical
education countered them effectively, and the mighty genius of the ancient
language endured in the extant masterpieces. Nevertheless the spirit of
classical Latinity was never again to be a spontaneous creative power.
The most that men thenceforth could do was to study, and endeavour to
imitate, the forms in which it had embodied its living self.

In brief, some of the chief influences upon the writing of Latin in the
Middle Ages were: the classical genius dead, leaving only its works for
imitation; the school education in Latin grammar and rhetoric; endeavour
to follow classic models and write correctly; inability to do so from lack
of capacity and knowledge; conscious disregard of classicism; the spirit
of the Teutonic tongues clogging Latinity, and that of the Romance tongues
deflecting it from classical constructions; and finally, the plastic
faculties of advancing Christian mediaeval civilization educing power from
confusion, and creating modes of language suited to express the thoughts
and feelings of mediaeval men.

The life, that is to say the living development, of mediaeval Latin prose,
was to lie in the capacity of successive generations of educated men to
maintain a sufficient grammatical correctness, while at the same time
writing Latin, not classically, but in accordance with the necessities and
spirit of their times. There resulted an enormous literature which was not
dead, nor altogether living, and lacked throughout the spontaneity of
writings in a mother tongue; for Latin was not the speech of hearth and
home, nor everywhere the tongue of the market-place and camp. But it was
the language of mediaeval education and acquired culture; it was the
language also of the universal church, and, above all other tongues,
expressed the thoughts by which men were saved or damned. More profoundly
than any vernacular mediaeval literature, the Latin literature of the
Middle Ages expresses the mediaeval mind. It thundered with the authority
that held the keys of heaven; it was resonant with feeling, and through
long centuries gave voice to emotions, shattering, terror-stricken,
convulsively loving. When, say with the close of the eleventh century, the
mediaeval peoples had absorbed with power the teachings of patristic
Christianity, and had undergone some centuries of Latin schooling, and
when under these two chief influences certain distinctive and homogeneous
ways of thinking, feeling, and looking upon life, had been reached; when,
in fine, the Middle Ages had become themselves and had evolved a genius
that could create,--then and from that time appears the adaptability and
power of mediaeval Latin to serve the ends of intellectual effort and the
expression of emotion.

To estimate the literary qualities of classical Latin is a simpler task
than to judge the Latinity and style of the Latin literature of the Middle
Ages. Classic Latin prose has a common likeness. In general one feels that
what Cicero and Caesar would have rejected, Tacitus and Quintilian would
not have admitted. The syntax of these writers shows still greater
uniformity. No such common likeness, or avoidance of stylistic aberration
and grammatical solecism, obtains in mediaeval prose or verse. The one and
the other include many kinds of Latin, and vary from century to century,
diversified in idiom and deflected from linguistic uniformity by
influences of race and native speech, of ignorance and knowledge. He who
would appreciate mediaeval Latin will be diffident of academic standards,
and mistrust his classical predilections lest he see aberration and
barbarism where he might discover the evolution of new constructions and
novel styles; lest he bestow encomium upon clever imitations of classical
models, and withhold it from more living creations of the mediaeval
spirit. He will realize that to appreciate mediaeval Latin literature, he
must shelve his Virgil and his Cicero.[230]

The following pages do not offer themselves even as a slight sketch of
mediaeval Latin literature. Their purpose is to indicate the stages of
development of the prose and the phases of evolution of the verse; and to
illustrate the way in which antique themes and antique knowledge passed
into vernacular poetry. Classical standards will supply us less with a
point of view than with a point of departure. Nothing more need be said
of the Latin of the Church Fathers and Gregory of Tours. But one must
refer to the Carolingian period, in order to appreciate the Latin styles
of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.

The revival of education and classical scholarship under the strong rule
and fostering care of the greatest of mediaeval monarchs has not always
been rightly judged. The vision of that prodigious personality ruling,
christianizing, striving to civilize masses of barbarians and barbarized
descendants of Romans and provincials; at the same time with eager
interest endeavouring to revive the culture of the past, and press it into
the service of the Christian faith; the striking success of his
endeavours, men of learning coming from Ireland, England, Spain, and
Italy, creating a peripatetic centre of knowledge at the imperial court,
and establishing schools in many a monastery and episcopal residence--all
this has never failed to arouse enthusiasm for the great achievement, and
has veiled the creative deadness of it all, a deadness which in some
provinces of intellectual endeavour was quite veritably moribund, while in
others it betokened the necessary preparation for creative epochs to
come.[231]

Carolingian scholarship was directed to the mastery of Latin. Grammar was
taught, and the rules of composition. Then the scholars were bidden, or
bade themselves, do likewise. So they wrote verse or prose according to
their school lessons. They might write correctly; but they had no style of
their own. This was hopelessly true as to their metrical verses;[232] it
was only somewhat less tangibly true of their prose. The “classic” of the
period, in the eyes of modern classical scholars and also in the opinion
of the mediaeval centuries, is Einhard’s _Life of Charlemagne_. Numberless
encomiums have been passed on it, and justly too. It was an excellent
imitation of Suetonius’s _Life of Augustus_; and the writer had made a
careful study of Caesar and Livy.[233] There is no need to quote from a
writing so accessible and well known. Yet one remark may be added to what
others have said: if Einhard’s composition was an excellent copy of
classical Latin it was nothing else; it has no stylistic
individuality.[234]

Turning from this famous biography, we will illustrate our point by
quoting from the letters of him who stands as the type of the Carolingian
revival, the Anglo-Saxon Alcuin. All praise to this noble educational
coadjutor of Charlemagne; his learning was conscientious; his work was
important, his character was lovable. His affectionate nature speaks in a
letter to his former brethren at York, where his home had been before he
entered Charlemagne’s service. Here is a sentence:

    “O omnium dilectissimi patres et fratres, memores mei estote; ego
    vester ero, sive in vita, sive in morte. Et forte miserebitur mei
    Deus, ut cujus infantiam aluistis, ejus senectutem sepeliatis.”[235]

It were invidious to find fault with this Latin, in which the homesick man
expresses his hope of sepulture in his old home. Note also the balance of
the following, written to a sick friend:

    “Gratias agamus Deo Jesu, vulneranti et medenti, flagellanti et
    consolanti. Dolor corporis salus est animae, et infirmitas temporalis,
    sanitas perpetua. Libenter accipiamus, patienter feramus voluntatem
    Salvatoris nostri.”[236]

This too is excellent, in language as in sentiment. So is another, and
last, sentence from our author, in a letter congratulating Charlemagne on
his final subjugation of the Huns, through which the survivors were
brought to a knowledge of the truth:

    “Qualis erit tibi gloria, O beatissime rex, in die aeternae
    retributionis, quando hi omnes qui per tuam sollicitudinem ab
    adolatriae cultura ad cognoscendum verum Deum conversi sunt, te ante
    tribunal Domini nostri Jesu Christi in beata sorte stantem
    sequentur!”[237]

Again, the only trouble is stylelessness. In fine, an absence of quality
characterizes Carolingian prose, of which a last example may be taken from
the Spaniard Theodulphus, Bishop of Orleans, “an accomplished Latin poet,”
and an educator yielding in importance to Alcuin alone. The sentence is
from an official admonition to the clergy, warning them to attach more
value to salvation than to lucre:

    “Admonendi sunt qui negotiis ac mercationibus rerum invigilant, ut non
    plus terrenam quam viam cupiant sempiternam. Nam qui plus de rebus
    terrenis quam de animae suae salute cogitat, valde a via veritatis
    aberrat.”[238]

Evidently there was a good knowledge of Latin among these Carolingians,
who laboured for the revival of education and the preservation of the
Classics. The nadir of classical learning falls in the succeeding period
of break-up, confusion, and dawning re-adjustment. In the century or two
following the year 850, the writers were too unskilled in Latin and often
too cumbered by it, to manifest in their writings that unhampered and
distinctive reflex of a personality which we term style. A rare exception
would appear in such a potent scholar as Gerbert, who mastered whatever he
learned, and made it part of his own faculties and temperament. His
letters, consequently, have an individual style, however good or bad we
may be disposed to deem it.[239]

Accordingly, until after the millennial year Latin prose shows little
beyond a clumsy heaviness resulting from the writer’s insufficient mastery
of his medium; and there are many instances of barbarism and corruption of
the tongue without any compensating positive qualities. A dreadful example
is afforded by the _Chronicon_ of Benedictus, a monk of St. Andrews in
Monte Soracte, who lived in the latter part of the tenth century. He
relates, as history, the fable of Charlemagne’s journey to the Holy Land;
and his own eyes may have witnessed the atrocious times of John XII., of
whom he speaks as follows:

    “Inter haec non multum tempus Agapitus papa decessit (an. 956).
    Octabianus in sede sanctissima susceptus est, et vocatus est Johannes
    duodecimi pape. Factus est tam lubricus sui corporis, et tam audaces,
    quantum nunc in gentilis populo solebat fieri. Habebat consuetudinem
    sepius venandi non quasi apostolicus sed quasi homo ferus. Erat enim
    cogitio ejus vanum; diligebat collectio feminarum, odibiles
    aecclesiarum, amabilis juvenis ferocitantes. Tanta denique libidine
    sui corporis exarsit, quanta nunc (non?) possumus enarrare.”[240]

No need to draw further from this writing, which is characterized
throughout by crass ignorance of grammar and all else pertaining to Latin.
It has no individual qualities; it has no style. Leaving this example of
illiteracy, let us turn to a man of more knowledge, Odo, one of the
greatest of the abbots of Cluny, who died in the year 943. He left lengthy
writings, one of them a bulky epitome of the famous _Moralia_ of Gregory
the Great.[241] More original were his three dull books of _Collationes_,
or moral comments upon the Scriptures. They open with a heavy note which
their author might have drawn from the dark temperament of that great pope
whom he so deeply admired; but the language has a leaden quality which is
not Gregory’s, but Odo’s.

    “Auctor igitur et judex hominum Deus, licet ab illa felicitate
    paradisi genus nostrum juste repulerit, suae tamen bonitatis memor, ne
    totus reus homo quod meretur incurrat, hujus peregrinationis molestias
    multis beneficiis demulcet.”

And, again, a little further on:

    “Omnis vero ejusdem Scripturae intentio est, ut nos ab hujus vitae
    pravitatibus compescat. Nam idcirco terribilibus suis sententiis cor
    nostrum, quasi quibusdam stimulis pungit, ut homo terrore pulsatus
    expavescat, et divina judicia quae aut voluptate carnis aut terrena
    sollicitudine discissus oblivisci facile solet, ad memoriam
    reducat.”[242]

One feels the dull heaviness of this. Odo, like many of his
contemporaries, knew enough of Latin grammar, and had read some of the
Classics. But he had not mastered what he knew, and his knowledge was not
converted into power. The tenth century was still painfully learning the
lessons of its Christian and classical heritage. A similar lack of
personal facility may be observed in Ruotger’s biography of Bruno, the
worthy brother of the great emperor Otto I., and Archbishop of Cologne.
Bruno died in 965, and Ruotger, who had been his companion, wrote his Life
without delay. It has not the didactic ponderousness of Odo’s writing, but
its language is clumsy. The following passage is of interest as showing
Bruno’s education and the kind of learned man it made him.

    “Deinde ubi prima grammaticae artis rudimenta percepit, sicut ab ipso
    in Dei omnipotentis gloriam hoc saepius ruminante didicimus,
    Prudentium poetam tradente magistro legere coepit. Qui sicut est et
    fide intentioneque catholicus, et eloquentia veritateque praecipuus,
    et metrorum librorumque varietate elegantissimus, tanta mox dulcedine
    palato cordis ejus complacuit, ut jam non tantum exteriorum verborum
    scientiam, verum intimi medullam sensus, et nectar ut ita dicam
    liquidissimum, majori quam dici possit aviditate hauriret. Postea
    nullum penitus erat studiorum liberalium genus in omni Graeca vel
    Latina eloquentia, quod ingenii sui vivacitatem aufugeret. Nec vero,
    ut solet, aut divitiarum affluentia, aut turbarum circumstrepentium
    assiduitas, aut ullum aliunde subrepens fastidium ab hoc nobili otio
    animum ejus unquam avertit.... Saepe inter Graecorum et Latinorum
    doctissimos de philosophiae sublimitate aut de cujuslibet in illa
    florentis disciplinae subtilitate disputantes doctus interpres medius
    ipse consedit, et disputantibus ad plausum omnium, quo nihil minus
    amaverat, satisfecit.”[243]

The gradual improvement in the writing of Latin in the Middle Ages, and
the evolution of distinctive mediaeval styles, did not result from a
larger acquaintance with the Classics, or a better knowledge of grammar
and school rhetoric. The range of classical reading might extend, or from
time to time contract, and Donatus and Priscian were used in the ninth
century as well as in the twelfth. It is true that the study of grammar
became more intelligent in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and its
teachers deferred less absolutely to the old rules and illustrations. They
recognized Christian standards of diction: first of all the Vulgate; next,
early Christian poets like Prudentius; and then gradually the mediaeval
versifiers who wrote and won approval in the twelfth century. Thus grammar
sought to follow current usage.[244] This endeavour culminated at the
close of the twelfth century in the _Doctrinale_ of Alexander of Villa
Dei.[245] Before this, much of the best mediaeval Latin prose and verse
had been written, and the period most devoted to the Classics had come and
was already waning. That period was this same twelfth century. During its
earlier half, Latinity gained doubtless from such improvement in the
courses of the Trivium as took place at Chartres, for example, an
improvement connected with the intellectual growth of the time. But the
increase in the knowledge of Latin was mainly such as a mature man may
realize within himself, if he has kept up his Latin reading, however
little he seem to have added to his knowledge since leaving his Alma
Mater.

So the development of mediaeval Latin prose (and also verse) advanced with
the maturing of mediaeval civilization. That which was at the same time a
living factor in this growth and a result of it, was the more organic
appropriation of the classical and Christian heritages of culture and
religion. As intellectual faculties strengthened, and men drew power from
the past, they gained facility in moulding their Latin to their purposes.
Writings begin to reflect the personalities of the writers; the diction
ceases to be that of clumsy or clever school compositions, and presents an
evolution of tangible mediaeval styles. Henceforth, although a man be an
eager student of the Classics, like John of Salisbury for example, and try
to imitate their excellences, he will still write mediaeval Latin, and
with a personal style if he be a strong personality. The classical models
no longer trammel, but assist him to be more effectively himself on a
higher plane.

If mediaeval civilization is to be regarded as that which the peoples of
western Europe attained under the two universal influences of Christianity
and antique culture, then nothing more mediaeval will be seen than
mediaeval Latin. To make it, the antique Latin had been modified and
reinspired and loosed by the Christian energies of the Fathers; and had
then passed on to peoples who never had been, or no longer were, antique.
They barbarized the language down to the rudeness of their faculties. As
they themselves advanced, they brought up Latin with them, as it were,
from the depths of the ninth and tenth centuries, but a Latin which in the
crude natures of these men had been stripped of classical quality; a Latin
barbarous and naked, and ready to be clothed upon with novel qualities
which should make it a new creature. Throughout all this process, while
Latin was sinking and re-emerging, it was worked upon and inspired by the
spirit of the uses to which it was predominantly applied, which were those
of the Roman Catholic Church and of the intimacies of the Christian soul,
pressing to expression in the learned tongue which they were transforming.

In considering the Latin writings of the Middle Ages one should bear in
mind the differences between Italy and the North with respect to the
ancient language. These were important through the earlier Middle Ages,
when modes of diction sufficiently characteristic to be called styles,
were forming. The men of Latin-sodden Italy might have a fluent Latin when
those of the North still had theirs to learn. Thus there were Italians in
the eleventh century who wrote quite a distinctive Latin prose.[246]
Among them were St. Peter Damiani, and St. Anselm of Aosta, Bec, and
Canterbury.

The former died full of virtue in the year 1072. We have elsewhere
observed his character and followed his career.[247] He was, to his great
anxiety, a classical scholar, who had earned large sums as a teacher of
rhetoric before natural inclination and fears for his soul drove him to an
ascetic life. He was a master of the Latin which he used. His style is
intense, eloquent, personal to himself as well as suited to his matter,
and reflects his ardent character and keen perceptions. The following is a
rhetorical yet beautiful description of a “last leaf,” taken from one of
his compositions in praise of the hermit way of salvation.

    “Videamus in arbore folium sub ipsis pruinis hiemalibus lapsabundum,
    et consumpto autumnalis clementiae virore, jamjam pene casurum, ita ut
    vix ramusculo, cui dependet, inhaereat, sed apertissima levis ruinae
    signa praetendat: inhorrescunt flabra, venti furentes hic inde
    concutiunt, brumalis horror crassi aeris rigore densatur: atque, ut
    magis stupeas, defluentibus reliquis undique foliis terra sternitur,
    et depositis comis arbor suo decore nudatur; cum illud solum nullo
    manente permaneat, et velut cohaeredum superstes in fraternae
    possessionis jura succedat. Quid autem intelligendum in hujus rei
    consideratione relinquitur, nisi quia nec arboris folium potest
    cadere, nisi divinum praesumat imperium?”[248]

Anselm’s diction, in spite of its frequent cloister rhetoric, has a simple
and modern word-order. An account has already been given of his life and
of his thoughts, so beautifully sky-blue, unpurpled with the crimson of
human passion, which made the words of Augustine more veritably
incandescent.[249] The great African was the strongest individual
influence upon Anselm’s thought and language. But the latter’s style has
departed further from the classical sentence, and of itself indicates that
the writer belongs neither to the patristic period nor to the Carolingian
time, busied with its rearrangement of patristic thought. The following is
from his _Proslogion_ upon the existence of God. Through this discourse,
Deity and the Soul are addressed in the second person after the manner of
Augustine’s _Confessions_.

    “Excita nunc, anima mea, et erige totum intellectum tuum, et cogita
    quantum potes quale et quantum sit illud bonum (_i.e._ Deus). Si enim
    singula bona delectabilia sunt, cogita intente quam delectabile sit
    illud bonum quod continet jucunditatem omnium bonorum; et non qualem
    in rebus creatis sumus experti, sed tanto differentem quanto differt
    Creator a creatura. Si enim bona est vita creata, quam bona est vita
    creatrix! Si jucunda est salus facta, quam jucunda est salus quae
    fecit omnem salutem! Si amabilis est sapientia in cognitione rerum
    conditarum, quam amabilis est sapientia quae omnia condidit ex nihilo!
    Denique, si multae et magnae delectationes sunt in rebus
    delectabilibus, qualis et quanta delectatio est in illo qui fecit ipsa
    delectabilia!”[250]

In a more emotional passage Anselm arouses in his soul the terror of the
Judgment. It is from a “Meditatio”:

    “Taedet animam meam vitae meae; vivere erubesco, mori pertimesco. Quid
    ergo restat tibi, o peccator, nisi ut in tota vita tua plores totam
    vitam tuam, ut ipsa tota se ploret totam? Sed est in hoc quoque anima
    mea miserabiliter mirabilis et mirabiliter miserabilis, quia non
    tantum dolet quantum se noscit; sed sic secura torpet, velut quid
    patiatur ignoret. O anima sterilis, quid agis? quid torpes, anima
    peccatrix? Dies judicii venit, juxta est dies Domini magnus, juxta et
    velox nimis, _dies irae dies illa_, dies tribulationis et angustiae,
    dies calamitatis et miseriae, dies tenebrarum et caliginis, dies
    nebulae et turbinis, dies tubae et clangoris. O vox diei Domini amara!
    Quid dormitas, anima tepida et digna evomi?”[251]

Damiani wrote in the middle of the eleventh century, Anselm in the latter
part. The northern lands could as yet show no such characteristic
styles,[252] although the classically educated German, Lambert of
Hersfeld, wrote as correctly and perspicuously as either. His _Annals_
have won admiration for their clear and correct Latinity, modelled upon
the styles of Sallust and Livy. He died in 1077, the year of Canossa, his
_Annals_ covering the conflict between Henry IV. and Hildebrand up to that
event. The narrative moves with spirit, as one may see by reading his
description of King Henry and his consort struggling through Alpine ice
and snow to reach that castle never to be forgotten, and gain absolution
from the Pope before the ban should have completed Henry’s ruin.[253]

For the North, the best period of mediaeval Latin, prose as well as
verse, opens with the twelfth century. It was indeed the great literary
period of the Middle Ages. For the vernacular literatures flourished as
well as the Latin. Provençal literature began as the eleventh century
closed, and was stifled in the thirteenth by the Albigensian Crusade. So
the twelfth was its great period. Likewise with the Old French literature:
except the _Roland_ which is earlier, the chief _chansons de geste_ belong
to the twelfth century; also the romances of antiquity, to be spoken of
hereafter; also the romances of the Round Table, and a great mass of
_chansons_ and _fabliaux_. The Old German--or rather, _Mittel
Hochdeutsch_--literature touches its height as the century closes and the
next begins, in the works of Heinrich von Veldeke, Gottfried von
Strassburg, Wolfram von Eschenbach, and Walther von der Vogelweide.

The best Latin writers of the century lived, or sojourned, or were
educated, for the most part in the France north of the Loire. Not that all
of them were natives of that territory; for some were German born, some
saw the light in England, and the birthplace of many is unknown. Yet they
seem to belong to France. Nearly all were ecclesiastics, secular or
regular. Many of them were notables in theology, like Hugo of St. Victor,
Abaelard, Alanus de Insulis (Lille); many were poets as well, like Alanus
and Hildebert and John of Salisbury too; one was a thunderer on the earth,
and a most deft politician, Bernard of Clairvaux. Some again are known
only as poets, sacred or profane, like Adam of St. Victor, and Walter of
Chatillon--but of these hereafter. The best Latin prose writing of this,
or any other, mediaeval period, had its definite purpose, metaphysical,
theological, or pietistic; and the writers have been or will be spoken of
in connection with their specific fields of intellectual achievement or
religious fervour. Here, without discussing the men or their works, some
favourable examples of their writing will be given.

In the last passage quoted from Anselm, the reader must have felt the
working of cloister rhetoric, and have noticed the antitheses and rhymes,
to which mediaeval Latin lent itself so readily. Yet it is a slight affair
compared with the confounding sonorousness, the flaring pictures, and
terrifying climaxes of St. Bernard when preaching upon the same topic--the
Judgment Day. In one of his famous sermons on Canticles, the saint has
been suggesting to his audience, the monks of Clara Vallis, that although
the _Father_ might ignore faults, not so the _Dominus_ and _Creator_: “et
qui parcit filio, non parcet figmento, non parcet servo nequam.” Listen to
the carrying out and pointing of this thought:

    “Pensa cujus sit formidinis et horroris tuum atque omnium contempsisse
    factorem, offendisse Dominum majestatis. Majestatis est timeri, Domini
    est timeri, et maxime hujus majestatis, hujusque Domini. Nam si reum
    regiae majestatis, quamvis humanae, humanis legibus plecti capite
    sancitum sit, quis finis contemnentium divinam omnipotentiam erit?
    Tangit montes, et fumigant; et tam tremendam majestatem audet irritare
    vilis pulvisculus, uno levi flatu mox dispergendus, et minime
    recolligendus? Ille, ille timendus est, qui postquam acciderit corpus,
    potestatem habet mittere et in gehennam. Paveo gehennam, paveo judicis
    vultum, ipsis quoque tremendum angelicis potestatibus. Contremisco ab
    ira potentis, a facie furoris ejus, a fragore ruentis mundi, a
    conflagratione elementorum, a tempestate valida, a voce archangeli, et
    a verbo aspero. [Feel the climax of this sentence, which tells the end
    of the sinner.] Contremisco a dentibus bestiae infernalis, a ventre
    inferi, a rugientibus praeparatis ad escam. Horreo vermem rodentem, et
    ignem torrentem, fumum, et vaporem, et sulphur, et spiritum
    procellarum; horreo tenebras exteriores. Quis dabit capiti meo aquam,
    et oculis meis fontem lacrymarum ut praeveniam fletibus fletum, et
    stridorem dentium, et manuum pedumque dura vincula, et pondus
    catenarum prementium, stringentium, urentium, nec consumentium? Heu
    me, mater mea! utquid me genuisti filium doloris, filium amaritudinis,
    indignationis et plorationis aeternae? Cur exceptus genibus, cur
    lactatus uberibus, natus in combustionem, et cibus ignis?”[254]

As one recovers from the sound and power of this high-wrought passage, he
notices how readily it might be turned into the form of a Latin hymn; and
also how very modern is its sequence of words. Bernard’s Latin could
whisper intimate love, as well as thunder terror. He says, preaching on
the _medicina_, the healing power, of Jesu’s name:

    “Hoc tibi electuarium habes, o anima mea, reconditum in vasculo
    vocabuli hujus quod est Jesus, salutiferum, certe, quodque nulli
    unquam pesti tuae inveniatur inefficax.”[255]

With the music of this prose one may compare the sweet personal plaint of
the following:

    “Felices quos abscondit in tabernaculo suo in umbra alarum suarum
    sperantes, donec transeat iniquitas. Caeterum ego infelix, pauper et
    nudus, homo natus ad laborem, implumis avicula pene omni tempore
    nidulo exsulans, vento exposita et turbini, turbatus sum et motus sum
    sicut ebrius, et omnis conscientia mea devorata est.”[256]

Extracts can give no idea of Bernard’s literary powers, any more than a
small volume could tell the story of that life which, so to speak, was
_magna pars_ of all contemporary history. But since he was one of the best
of Latin letter-writers, one should not omit an example of his varied
epistolary style, which can be known in its compass only from a large
reading of his letters. The following is a short letter, written to win
back to the cloister a delicately nurtured youth whose parents had lured
him out into the world.

    “Doleo super te, fili mi Gaufride, doleo super te. Et merito. Quis
    enim non doleat florem juventutis tuae, quem laetantibus angelis Deo
    illibatum obtuleras in odorem suavitatis, nunc a daemonibus
    conculcari, vitiorum spurcitiis, et saeculi sordibus inquinari?
    Quomodo qui vocatus eras a Deo, revocantem diabolum sequeris, et quem
    Christus trahere coeperat post se, repente pedem ab ipso introitu
    gloriae retraxisti? In te experior nunc veritatem sermonis Domini,
    quem dixit: Inimici hominis, domestici ejus (Matt. x. 36). Amici tui
    et proximi tui adversum te appropinquaverunt, et steterunt.
    Revocaverunt te in fauces leonis, et in portis mortis iterum
    collocaverunt te. Collocaverunt te in obscuris, sicut mortuos saeculi:
    et jam parum est ut descendas in ventrem inferi; jam te deglutire
    festinat, ac rugientibus praeparatis ad escam tradere devorandum.

    “Revertere, quaeso, revertere, priusquam te absorbeat profundum, et
    urgeat super te puteus os suum; priusquam demergaris, unde ulterius
    non emergas; priusquam ligatis manibus et pedibus projiciaris in
    tenebras exteriores, ubi est fletus et stridor dentium; priusquam
    detrudaris in locum tenebrosum, et opertum mortis caligine. Erubescis
    forte redire, quia ad horam cessisti. Erubesce fugam, et non post
    fugam reverti in proelium, et rursum pugnare. Necdum finis pugnae,
    necdum ab invicem dimicantes acies discesserunt: adhuc victoria prae
    manibus est. Si vis, nolumus vincere sine te, nec tuam tibi invidemus
    gloriae portionem. Laeti occuremus tibi, laetis te recipiemus
    amplexibus, dicemusque: Epulari et gaudere oportet, quia hic filius
    noster mortuus fuerat, et revixit; perierat, et inventus est” (Luc.
    xv. 32).[257]

The argument of this letter is, from the standpoint of Bernard’s time, as
resistless as the style. Did it win back the little monk? Many wonderful
examples of loving expression could be drawn from Bernard’s letters;[258]
but instead an instance may be given of his none too subtle way of
uttering his hate: “Arnaldus de Brixia, cujus conversatio mel et doctrina
venenum, cui caput columbae, cauda scorpionis est, quem Brixia evomuit,
Roma exhorruit, Francia repulit, Germania abominatur, Italia non vult
recipere, fertur esse vobiscum.”[259] And then he proceeds to warn his
correspondent of the danger of intercourse with this arch-enemy of the
Church.

Considering that Latin was a tongue which youths learned at school rather
than at their mothers’ knees, such writing as Bernard’s is a triumphant
recasting of an ancient language. One notices in him, as generally with
mediaeval religious writers, the influence of the Vulgate, which was
mainly in the language of St. Jerome--of Jerome when not writing as a
literary virtuoso, but as a scholar occupied with rendering the meaning,
and willing to accept such linguistic innovations as served his
purpose.[260] But beyond this influence, one sees how masterful is
Bernard’s diction, quite freed from observance of classical principles,
quite of the writer and his time, adapting itself with ease and power to
the topic and character of the composition, and always expressive of the
personality of the mighty saint.

Hildebert of Le Mans was a few years older than St. Bernard. As an example
of his prose a letter may be cited, of which the translation has been
given. It was written in 1128, when he was Archbishop of Tours, in protest
against the encroachments of the royal power of the French king, Louis the
Fat, upon the rights of the Archiepiscopacy of Tours in the matter of
ecclesiastical appointments within that diocese:

    “In adversis nonnullum solatium est, tempora sperare laetiora. Diutius
    spes haec mihi blandita est, et velut agricolam messis in herba, sic
    animum meum prosperitatis expectatio confortavit. Caeterum jam nihil
    est quo serenitatem nimbosi temporis exspectem, nihil est quo navis,
    in cujus puppi sedeo, crebris agitata turbinibus, portum quietis
    attingat.

    “Silent amici, silent sacerdotes Jesu Christi. Denique silent et illi
    quorum suffragio credidi regem mecum in gratiam rediturum. Credidi
    quidem, sed super dolorem vulnerum meorum rex, illis silentibus,
    adjecit. Eorum tamen erat gravamini ecclesiae canonicis obviare
    institutis. Eorum erat, si res postulasset, opponere murum pro domo
    Israel. Verum apud serenissimum regem opus est exhortatione potius
    quam increpatione, consilio quam praecepto, doctrina quam virga. His
    ille conveniendus fuit, his reverenter instruendus, ne sagittas suas
    in sene compleret sacerdote, ne sanctiones canonicas evacuaret, ne
    persequeretur cineres Ecclesiae jam sepultae, cineres in quibus ego
    panem doloris manduco, in quibus bibo calicem luctus, de quibus eripi
    et evadere, de morte ad vitam transire est.

    “Inter has tamen angustias, nunquam de me sic ira triumphavit, ut
    aliquem super Christo Domini clamorem deponere vellem, seu pacem
    ipsius in manu forti et brachio Ecclesiae adipisci. Suspecta est pax
    ad quam, non amore sed vi, sublimes veniunt potestates. Ea facile
    rescindetur, et fiunt aliquando novissima pejora prioribus. Alia est
    via qua compendiosius ad eam Christo perducente pertingam. Jactabo
    cogitatum meum in Domino, et ipse dabit mihi petitionem cordis mei.
    Recordatus est Dominus Joseph, cujus pincerna Pharaonis oblitus, dum
    prospera succederent, interveniendi pro eo curam abjecit.... Fortassis
    recordabitur et mei, atque in desiderato littore navem sistet
    fluctuantem. Ipse enim est qui respicit in orationem humilium, et non
    spernit preces eorum. Ipse est in cujus manu corda regum cerea sunt.
    Si invenero gratiam in oculis ejus, gratiam regis vel facile
    consequar, vel utiliter amittam. Siquidem offendere hominem proper
    Deum lucrari est gratiam Dei.”[261]

John of Salisbury (1110-1180), much younger than Hildebert and a little
younger than Bernard, seems to have been the best scholar of his time.
With the Classics he is as one in the company of friends; he cites them as
readily as Scripture; their _sententiae_ have become part of his views of
life. John was an eager humanist, who followed his studies to whatever
town and to the feet of whatsoever teacher they might lead him. So he
listened to Abaelard and many others. His writing is always lively and
often forcible, especially when vituperating the set who despised classic
reading. His most vivacious work, the _Metalogicus_, was directed against
their unnamed prophet, whom he dubs “Cornificus.”[262] Its opening passage
is of interest as John’s exordium, and because a somewhat consciously
intending stylist like our John is likely to exhibit his utmost virtuosity
in the opening sentences of an important work:

    “Adversus insigne donum naturae parentis et gratiae, calumniam veterem
    et majorum nostrorum judicio condemnatam excitat improbus litigator,
    et conquirens undique imperitiae suae solatia, sibi proficere sperat
    ad gloriam, si multos similes sui, id est si eos viderit imperitos;
    habet enim hoc proprium arrogantiae tumor, ut se commetiatur aliis,
    bona sua, si qua sunt, efferens, deprimens aliena; defectumque
    proximi, suum putet esse profectum. Omnibus autem recte sapientibus
    indubium est quod natura, clementissima parens omnium, et
    dispositissima moderatrix, inter caetera quae genuit animantia,
    hominem privilegio rationis extulit, et usu eloquii insignivit: id
    agens sedulitate officiosa, et lege dispositissima, ut homo qui
    gravedine faeculentioris naturae et molis corporeae tarditate
    premebatur et trahebatur ad ima, his quasi subvectus alis, ad alta
    ascendat, et ad obtinendum verae beatitudinis bravium, omnia alia
    felici compendio antecebat. Dum itaque naturam fecundat gratia, ratio
    rebus perspiciendis et examinandis invigilat; naturae sinus excutit,
    metitur fructus et efficaciam singulorum: et innatus omnibus amor
    boni, naturali urgente se appetitu, hoc, aut solum, aut prae caeteris
    sequitur, quod percipiendae beatitudini maxime videtur esse
    accommodum.”[263]

One perceives the effect of classical studies; yet the passage is good
twelfth-century Latin, quite different from the compositions of the
Carolingian epoch, those, for example, from the pen of Alcuin, who had
studied the Classics like John, but unlike him had no personal style. One
gains similar impressions from the diction of the _Polycraticus_, a
lengthy, discursive work in which John surprises us with his classical
equipment. Although containing many quoted passages, it is not made of
extracts strung together; but reflects the sentiments or tells the
opinions of ancient philosophers in the writer’s own way. The following
shows John’s knowledge of early Greek philosophers, and is a fair example
of his ordinary style:

    “Alterum vero philosophorum genus est, quod Ionicum dicitur et a
    Graecis ulterioribus traxit originem. Horum princeps fuit Thales
    Milesius, unus illorum septem, qui dicti sunt sapientes. Iste cum
    rerum naturam scrutatus, inter caeteros emicuisset, maxime admirabilis
    exstitit, quod astrologiae numeris comprehensis, solis et lunae
    defectus praedicebat. Huic successit Anaximander ejus auditor, qui
    Anaximenem discipulum reliquit et successorem. Diogenes quoque ejusdem
    auditor exstitit, et Anaxagoras, qui omnium rerum quas videmus,
    effectorem divinum animum docuit. Ei successit auditor ejus Archelaüs,
    cujus discipulus Socrates fuisse perhibetur, magister Platonis, qui,
    teste Apuleio, prius Aristoteles dictus est, sed deinde a latitudine
    pectoris Plato, et in tantam eminentiam philosophiae, et vigore
    ingenii, et studii exercitio, et omnium morum venustate, eloquii
    quoque suavitate et copia subvectus est, ut quasi in throno sapientiae
    residens, praecepta quadam auctoritate visus est, tam antecessoribus
    quam successoribus philosophis, imperare. Et primus quidem Socrates
    universam philosophiam ad corrigendos componendosque mores flexisse
    memoratur, cum ante illum omnes physicis, id est rebus naturalibus
    perscrutandis, maximam operam dederint.”[264]

These extracts from the writings of saints and scholars may be
supplemented by two extracts from compositions of another class. The
mediaeval chronicle has not a good reputation. Its credulity and
uncritical spirit varied with the time and man. Little can be said in
favour of its general form, which usually is stupidly chronological, or
annalistic. The example of classical historical composition was lost on
mediaeval annalists. Yet their work is not always dull; and, by the
twelfth century, their diction had become as mediaeval as that of the
theologian rhetoricians, although it rarely crystallizes to personal style
by reason of the insignificance of the writers. A well-known work of this
kind is the _Gesta Dei per Francos_, by Guibert of Nogent, who wrote his
account of the First Crusade a few years after its turmoil had passed by.
The following passage tells of proceedings upon the conclusion of Urban’s
great crusading oration at the Council of Clermont in 1099:

    “Peroraverat vir excellentissimus, et omnes qui se ituros voverant,
    beati Petri potestate absolvit, eadem, ipsa apostolica auctoritate
    firmavit, et signum satis conveniens hujus tam honestae professionis
    instituit, et veluti cingulum militiae, vel potius militaturis Deo
    passionis Dominicae stigma tradens, crucis figuram, ex cujuslibet
    materiae panni, tunicis, byrris et palliis iturorum, assui mandavit.
    Quod si quis, post hujus signi acceptionem, aut post evidentis voti
    pollicitationem ab ista benevolentia, prava poenitudine, aut aliquorum
    suorum affectione resileret, ut exlex perpetuo haberetur omnino
    praecepit, nisi resipisceret; idemque quod omiserat foede repeteret.
    Praeterea omnes illos atroci damnavit anathemate, qui eorum uxoribus,
    filiis, aut possessionibus, qui hoc Dei iter aggrederentur, per
    integrum triennii tempus, molestiam auderent inferre. Ad extremum,
    cuidam viro omnimodis laudibus efferendo, Podiensis urbis episcopo,
    cujus nomen doleo quia neque usquam reperi, nec audivi, curam super
    eadem expeditione regenda contulit, et vices suas ipsi, super
    Christiani populi quocunque venirent institutione, commisit. Unde et
    manus ei, more apostolorum, data pariter benedictione, imposuit. Quod
    ille quam sagaciter sit exsecutus, docet mirabilis operis tanti
    exitus.”[265]

This Frenchman Guibert is almost vivacious. A certain younger contemporary
of his, of English birth, could construct his narrative quite as well.
Ordericus Vitalis (d. 1142) is said to have been born at Wroxeter, though
he spent most of his life as monk of St. Evroult in Normandy. There he
wrote his _Historia Ecclesiastica_ of Normandy and England. His account of
the loss of the _White Ship_ in 1120 tells the story:

    “Thomas, filius Stephani, regem adiit, eique marcum auri offerens,
    ait: ‘Stephanus, Airardi filius, genitor meus fuit, et ipse in omni
    vita sua patri tuo in mari servivit. Nam illum, in sua puppe vectum,
    in Angliam conduxit, quando contra Haraldum pugnaturus, in Angliam
    perrexit. Hujusmodi autem officio usque ad mortem famulando ei
    placuit, et ab eo multis honoratus exeniis, inter contribules suos
    magnifice floruit. Hoc feudum, domine rex, a te requiro, et vas quod
    Candida-Navis appellatur, merito ad regalem famulatum optime
    instructum habeo.’ Cui rex ait: ‘Gratum habeo quod petis. Mihi quidem
    aptam navim elegi, quam non mutabo; sed filios meos, Guillelmum et
    Richardum, quos sicut me diligo, cum multa regni mei nobilitate, nunc
    tibi commendo.’

    “His auditis, nautae gavisi sunt, filioque regis adulantes, vinum ab
    eo ad bibendum postulaverunt. At ille tres vini modios ipsis dari
    praecepit. Quibus acceptis, biberunt, sociisque abundanter
    propinaverunt, nimiumque potantes inebriati sunt. Jussu regis multi
    barones cum filiis suis puppim ascenderunt, et fere trecenti, ut
    opinor, in infausta nave fuerunt. Duo siquidem monachi Tironis, et
    Stephanus comes cum duobus militibus, Guillelmus quoque de Rolmara, et
    Rabellus Camerarius, Eduardus de Salesburia, et alii plures inde
    exierunt, quia nimiam multitudinem lascivae et pompaticae juventutis
    inesse conspicati sunt. Periti enim remiges quinquaginta ibi erant, et
    feroces epibatae, qui jam in navi sedes nacti turgebant, et suimet
    prae ebrietate immemores, vix aliquem reverenter agnoscebant. Heu!
    quamplures illorum mentes pia devotione erga Deum habebant vacuas

      ‘Qui maris immodicas moderatur et aeris iras.’

    Unde sacerdotes, qui ad benedicendos illos illuc accesserant, aliosque
    ministros qui aquam benedictam deferebant, cum dedecore et cachinnis
    subsannantes abigerunt; sed paulo post derisionis suae ultionem
    receperunt.

    “Soli homines, cum thesauro regis et vasis merum ferentibus, Thomae
    carinam implebant, ipsumque ut regiam classem, quae jam aequora
    sulcabat, summopere prosequeretur, commonebant. Ipse vero, quia
    ebrietate desipiebat, in virtute sua, satellitumque suorum confidebat,
    et audacter, quia omnes qui jam praecesserant praeiret, spondebat.
    Tandem navigandi signum dedit. Porro schippae remos haud segniter
    arripuerunt, et alia laeti, quia quid eis ante oculos penderet
    nesciebant, armamenta coaptaverunt, navemque cum impetu magno per
    pontum currere fecerunt. Cumque remiges ebrii totis navigarent
    conatibus, et infelix gubernio male intenderet cursui dirigendo per
    pelagus, ingenti saxo quod quotidie fluctu recedente detegitur et
    rursus accessu maris cooperitur, sinistrum latus Candidae-Navis
    vehementer illisum est, confractisque duabus tabulis, ex insperato,
    navis, proh dolor! subversa est. Omnes igitur in tanto discrimine
    simul exclamaverunt; sed aqua mox implente ora, pariter perierunt.
    Duo soli virgae qua velum pendebat manus injecerunt, et magna noctis
    parte pendentes, auxilium quodlibet praestolati sunt. Unus erat
    Rothomagensis carnifex, nomine Beroldus, et alter generosus puer,
    nomine Goisfredus, Gisleberti de Aquila filius.

    “Tunc luna in signo Tauri nona decima fuit, et fere ix horis radiis
    suis mundum illustravit, et navigantibus mare lucidum reddidit. Thomas
    nauclerus post primam submersionem vires resumpsit, suique memor,
    super undas caput extulit, et videns capita eorum qui ligno utcunque
    inhaerebant, interrogavit: ‘Filius regis quid devenit?’ Cumque
    naufragi respondissent illum cum omnibus collegis suis deperisse:
    ‘Miserum,’ inquit, ‘est amodo meum vivere.’ Hoc dicto, male desperans,
    maluit illic occumbere, quam furore irati regis pro pernicie prolis
    oppetere, seu longas in vinculis poenas luere.”[266]

Our examples thus far belong to the twelfth century. As touching its
successor, it will be interesting to observe the qualities of two opposite
kinds of writing, the one springing from the intellectual activities, and
the other from the religious awakening, of the time. In the thirteenth
century, scientific and scholastic writing was of representative
importance, and deeply affected the development of Latin prose. Very
different in style were the Latin stories and _vitae_ of the blessed
Francis of Assisi and other saints, composed in Italy.

Roger Bacon, of whom there will be much to say, composed most of his
extant works about the year 1267.[267] His language is often rough and
involved, from his impetuosity and eagerness to utter what was in him. But
it is always vigorous. He took pains to say just what he meant, and what
was worth saying; and frequently rewrote his sentences. His writings show
little rhetoric; yet they are stamped with a Baconian style, which has a
cumulative force. The word-order is modern with scarcely a trace of the
antique. Perhaps we may say that he wrote Latin like an Englishman of
vehement temper and great intellect. He is powerful in continuous
exposition; yet instances of his general, and very striking statements,
will illustrate his diction at its best. In the following sentence he
recognizes the progressiveness of knowledge, a rare idea in the Middle
Ages:

    “Nam semper posteriores addiderunt ad opera priorum, et multa
    correxerunt, et plura mutaverunt, sicut maxime per Aristotelem patet,
    qui omnes sententias praecedentium discussit.”[268]

Again, he animadverts upon the duty of thirteenth-century Christians to
supply the defects of the old philosophers:

    “Quapropter antiquorum defectus deberemus nos posteriores supplere,
    quia introivimus in labores eorum, per quos, nisi simus asini,
    possumus ad meliora excitari; quia miserrimum est semper uti inventis
    et nunquam inveniendis.”[269]

Speaking of language, he says:

    “Impossibile est quod proprietas unius linguae servetur in alia.”[270]
    (“The idioms of one language cannot be preserved in a translation.”)
    And again: “Omnes philosophi fuerunt post patriarchas et prophetas ...
    et legerunt libros prophetarum et patriarcharum qui sunt in sacro
    textu.”[271] (“The philosophers of Greece came after the prophets of
    the Old Testament and read their works contained in the sacred text.”)

In the first of these sentences Bacon shows his linguistic insight; in the
second he reflects an uncritical view entertained since the time of the
Church Fathers; in both, he writes with an order of words requiring no
change in an English translation.

In his time, Bacon had but a sorry fame, and his works no influence. The
writings of his younger contemporary Thomas Aquinas exerted greater
influence than those of any man after Augustine. They represent the
culmination of scholasticism. He was Italian born, and his language,
however difficult the matter, is lucidity itself. It is never rhetorical;
but measured, temperate, and balanced; properly proceeding from the mind
which weighed every proposition in the scales of universal consideration.
Sometimes it gains a certain fervour from the clarity and import of the
statement which it so lucidly conveys. In article eighth, of the first
Questio, of Pars Prima of the _Summa theologiae_, Thomas thus decides that
Theology is a rational (_argumentativa_) science:

    “Respondeo dicendum quod, sicut aliae scientiae non argumentantur ad
    sua principia probanda, sed ex principiis argumentantur ad ostendendum
    alia in ipsis scientiis; ita haec doctrina non argumentatur ad sua
    principia probanda, quae sunt articuli fidei; sed ex eis procedit ad
    aliquid aliud ostendendum; sicut Apostolus I ad Cor. xv., ex
    resurrectione Christi argumentatur ad resurrectionem communem
    probandam.

    “Sed tamen considerandum est in scientiis philosophicis, quod
    inferiores scientiae nec probant sua principia, nec contra negantem
    principia disputant, sed hoc relinquunt superiori scientiae: suprema
    vero inter eas, scilicet metaphysica, disputat contra negantem sua
    principia, si adversarius aliquid concedit: si autem nihil concedit,
    non potest cum eo disputare, potest tamen solvere rationes ipsius.
    Unde sacra scriptura (_i.e._ Theology), cum non habeat superiorem,
    disputat cum negante sua principia: argumentando quidem, si
    adversarius aliquid concedat eorum quae per divinam revelationem
    habentur; sicut per auctoritates sacrae doctrinae disputamus contra
    hereticos, et per unum articulum contra negantes alium. Si vero
    adversarius nihil credat eorum quae divinitus revelantur, non remanet
    amplius via ad probandum articulos fidei per rationes, sed ad
    solvendum rationes, si quas inducit, contra fidem. Cum enim fides
    infallibili veritati innitatur, impossibile autem sit de vero
    demonstrari contrarium, manifestum est probationes quae contra fidem
    inducuntur, non esse demonstrationes, sed solubilia argumenta.”[272]

Of a different intellectual temperament was John of Fidanza, known as St.
Bonaventura.[273] He also was born and passed his youth in Italy. This
sainted General of the Franciscan Order was a few years older than the
great Dominican, who was his friend. Both doctors died in the year 1274.
Bonaventura’s powers of constructive reasoning were excellent. His diction
is clear and beautiful, and eloquent with a spiritual fervour whenever the
matter is such as to evoke it. His account of how he came to write his
famous little _Itinerarium mentis in Deum_ is full of temperament.

    “Cum igitur exemplo beatissimi patris Francisci hanc pacem anhelo
    spiritu quaererem, ego peccator, qui loco ipsius patris beatissimi
    post eius transitum septimus in generali fratrum ministerio per omnia
    indignus succedo; contigit, ut nutu divino circa Beati ipsius
    transitum, anno trigesimo tertio ad montem Alvernae tanquam ad locum
    quietum amore quaerendi pacem spiritus declinarem, ibique existens,
    dum mente tractarem aliquas mentales ascensiones in Deum, inter alia
    occurrit illud miraculum, quod in praedicto loco contigit ipsi beato
    Francisco, de visione scilicet Seraph alati ad instar Crucifixi. In
    cuius consideratione statim visum est mihi, quod visio illa
    praetenderet ipsius patris suspensionem in contemplando et viam, per
    quam pervenitur ad eam.”[274]

And Bonaventura at the end of his _Itinerarium_ speaks of the perfect
passing of Francis into God through the very mystic climax of
contemplation, concluding thus:

    “Si autem quaeras, quomodo haec fiant, interroga gratiam, non
    doctrinam; desiderium, non intellectum; gemitum orationis, non studium
    lectionis; sponsum, non magistrum; Deum, non hominem; caliginem, non
    claritatem; non lucem, sed ignem totaliter inflammantem et in Deum
    excessivis unctionibus et ardentissimis affectionibus
    transferentem.”[275]

Bonaventura’s fervent diction will serve to carry us over from the more
unmitigated intellectuality of Bacon and Thomas to the simpler matter of
those personal and pious narratives from which may be drawn concluding
illustrations of mediaeval Latin prose. Some of the authors will show the
skill which comes from training; others are quite innocent of grammar, and
their Latin has made a happy surrender to the genius of their vernacular
speech, which was the _lingua vulgaris_ of northern Italy.

One of the earliest biographers of St. Francis of Assisi was Thomas of
Celano, a skilled Latinist, who was enraptured with the loveliness of
Francis’s life. His diction is limpid and rhythmical. A well-known passage
in his _Vita prima_ (for he wrote two Lives) tells of Francis’s joyous
assurance of the great work which God would accomplish through the simple
band who formed the beginnings of the Order. This assurance crystallized
in a vision of multitudes hurrying to join. Francis speaks to the
brethren:

    “Confortamini, charissimi, et gaudete in Domino, nec, quia pauci
    videmini, efficiamini tristes. Ne vos deterreat mea, vel vestra
    simplicitas, quoniam sicut mihi a Domino in veritate ostensum est, in
    maximam multitudinem faciet vos crescere Deus, et usque ad fines orbis
    multipliciter dilatabit. Vidi multitudinem magnam hominum ad nos
    venientium, et in habitu sanctae conversationis beataeque religionis
    regula nobiscum volentium conversari; et ecce adhuc sonitus eorum est
    in auribus meis, euntium, et redeuntium secundum obedientiae sanctae
    mandatum: vidique vias ipsorum multitudine plenas ex omni fere natione
    in his partibus convenire. Veniunt Francigenae, festinant Hispani,
    Teuthonici, et Anglici currunt, et aliarum diversarum linguarum
    accelerat maxima multitudo.

    “Quod cum audissent fratres, repleti sunt gaudio Salvatoris sive
    propter gratiam, quam dominus Deus contulerat sancto suo, sive quia
    proximorum lucrum sitiebant ardenter, quos desiderabant ut salvi
    essent, in idipsum quotidie augmentari.”[276]

We feel the flow and rhythm, and note the agreeable balancing of clauses.
Francis died in 1226. The _Vita prima_ by Celano was approved by Gregory
IX. in 1229. Already other matter touching the saint was gathering in
anecdote and narrative. Much of it was brought together in the so-called
_Speculum perfectionis_, which has been confidently but very questionably
ascribed to Francis’s personal disciple, Brother Leo. Brother Leo, or
whoever may have been the narrator or compiler, was no scholar; his Latin
is naively incorrect, and has also the simplicity of Gospel narrative.
Indeed this Latin is as effectively “vulgarized” as the Greek of Matthew’s
Gospel. An interesting passage tells with what loving wisdom Francis
interpreted a text of Scripture:

    “Manente ipso apud Senas venit ad eum quidam doctor sacrae theologiae
    de ordine Praedicatorum, vir utique humilis et spiritualis valde. Quum
    ipse cum beato Francisco de verbis Domini simul aliquamdiu
    contulissent interrogavit eum magister de illo verbo Ezechielis: _Si
    non annuntiaveris impio impietatem suam animam ejus de manu tua
    requiram_. Dixit enim: ‘Multos, bone pater, ego cognosco in peccato
    mortali quibus non annuntio impietatem eorum, numquid de manu mea
    ipsorum animae requirentur?’

    “Cui beatus Franciscus humiliter dixit se esse idiotam et ideo magis
    expedire sibi doceri ab eo quam super scripturae sententiam
    respondere. Tunc ille humilis magister adjecit: ‘Frater, licet ab
    aliquibus sapientibus hujus verbi expositionem audiverim, tamen
    libenter super hoc vestrum perciperem intellectum.’ Dixit ergo beatus
    Franciscus: ‘Si verbum debeat generaliter intelligi, ego taliter
    accipio ipsum quod servus Dei sic debet vita et sanctitate in seipso
    ardere vel fulgere ut luce exempli et lingua sanctae conversationis
    omnes impios reprehendat. Sic, inquam, splendor ejus et odor famae
    ipsius annuntiabit omnibus iniquitates eorum.’

    “Plurimum itaque doctor ille aedificatus recedens dixit sociis beati
    Francisci: ‘Fratres mei, theologia hujus viri puritate et
    contemplatione subnixa est aquila volans, nostra vero scientia ventre
    graditur super terram.’”[277]

Another passage has Francis breaking out in song from the joy of his love
of Christ:

    “Ebrius amore et compassione Christi beatus Franciscus quandoque talia
    faciebat, nam dulcissima melodia spiritus intra se ipsum ebulliens
    frequenter exterius gallice dabat sonum et vena divini susurrii quam
    auris ejus suscipiebat furtive gallicum erumpebat in jubilum.

    “Lignum quandoque colligebat de terra ipsumque sinistro brachio
    superponens aliud lignum per modum arcus in manu dextera trahebat
    super illud, quasi super viellam vel aliud instrumentum atque gestus
    ad hoc idoneos faciens gallice cantabat de Domino Jesu Christo.
    Terminabatur denique tota haec tripudiatio in lacrymas et in
    compassionem passionis Christi hic jubilus solvebatur.

    “In his trahebat continue suspiria et ingeminatis gemitibus eorum quae
    tenebat in manibus oblitus suspendebatur ad caelum.”[278]

This Latin is as childlike as the Old Italian of the _Fioretti_ of St.
Francis; it has a like word-order, and one might almost add, a like
vocabulary. The simple, ignorant writer seems as if held by a direct and
personal inspiration from the familiar life of the sweet saint. His
language reflects that inspiration, and mirrors his own childlike
character. Hence he has a style, direct, effective, moving to tears and
joy, like his impression of the blessed Francis.

A not dissimilar kind of childlike Latin could attain to a remarkable
symmetry and balance. The _Legenda aurea_ is before us, written by the
Dominican Jacobus à Voragine, by race a Genoese, and living toward the
close of the thirteenth century. This book was the most popular compend of
saints’ lives in use in the later Middle Ages. Its stories are told with
fascinating _naïveté_. We cite the opening sentences from its chapter on
the Annunciation, just to show the harmony and balance of its periods. The
passage is exceptional and almost formal in these qualities:

    “Annunciatio dominica dicitur, quia in tali die ab angelo adventus
    filii Dei in carnem fuit annuntiatus, congruum enim fuit, ut
    incarnationem praecederet angelica annuntiatio, triplici ratione.
    Primo ratione ordinis connotandi, ut scilicet ordo reparationis
    responderet ordini praevaricationis. Unde sicut dyabolus tentavit
    mulierem, ut eam pertraheret ad dubitationem et per dubitationem ad
    consensum et per consensum ad lapsum, sic angelus nuntiavit virgini,
    ut nuntiando excitaret ad fidem et per fidem ad consensum et per
    consensum ad concipiendum Dei filium. Secundo ratione ministerii
    angelici, quia enim angelus est Dei minister et servus et beata virgo
    electa erat, ut esset Dei mater, et congruum est ministrum dominae
    famulari, conveniens fuit, ut beatae virgini annuntiatio per angelum
    fieret. Tertio ratione lapsus angelici reparandi. Quia enim incarnatio
    non tantum faciebat ad reparationem humani lapsus, sed etiam ad
    reparationem ruinae angelicae, ideo angeli non debuerunt excludi. Unde
    sicut sexus mulieris non excluditur a cognitione mysterii
    incarnationis et resurrectionis, sic etiam nec angelicus nuntius. Imo
    Deus utrumque angelo mediante nuntiat mulieri, scilicet incarnationem
    virgini Mariae et resurrectionem Magdelenae.”[279]

These extracts bring us far into the thirteenth century. Two hundred years
later, mediaeval Latin prose, if one may say so, sang its swan song in
that little book which is a last, sweet, and composite echo of all
mellifluous mediaeval piety. Yet perhaps this _De imitatione Christi_ of
Thomas à Kempis can scarcely be classed as prose, so full is it of
assonances and rhythms fit for chanting.




