CHAPTER XL

THOMAS AQUINAS

      I. THOMAS’S CONCEPTION OF HUMAN BEATITUDE.

     II. MAN’S CAPACITY TO KNOW GOD.

    III. HOW GOD KNOWS.

     IV. HOW THE ANGELS KNOW.

      V. HOW MEN KNOW.

     VI. KNOWLEDGE THROUGH FAITH PERFECTED IN LOVE.


I

With Albert it seemed most illuminating to outline the masses of his work
of Aristotelian purveyorship and inchoate reconstruction of the Christian
encyclopaedia in conformity with the new philosophy. Such a treatment will
not avail for Thomas. His achievement, even measured by its bulk, was as
great as Albert’s. But its size and encyclopaedic inclusiveness do not
represent its integral excellences. The intellectual qualities of Thomas,
evinced in his work, are of a higher order than those included in
intelligent diligence, however exceptional. They must be disengaged from
out of the vast product of their energies, in order that they may be
brought together, and made to appear in the organic correlation which they
held in the mind of the most potent genius of scholasticism.

We are pleased to find some clue to a man’s genius in the race and place
from which he draws his origin. So for whatever may be its explanatory
value as to Thomas, one may note that he came of Teutonic stocks, which
for some generations had been domiciled in the form-giving Italian land.
The mingled blood of princely Suabian and Norman lines flowed in him; the
nobility of his father’s house, the Counts of Aquinum, was equalled by
his mother’s lineage. Probably in 1225 he was born, in Southern Italy, not
far from Monte Cassino. Thither, as a child, he was sent to school to the
monks, and stayed with them through childhood’s formative period. His
education did not create the mind which it may have had part in directing
to sacred study. Near his tenth year, the extraordinary boy was returned
to Naples, there to study the humanities and philosophy under selected
masters. When eighteen, he launched himself upon the intellectual currents
of the age by joining the Dominican Order. Stories have come down of the
violent, but fruitless opposition of his family. In two years, with true
instinct, Thomas had made his way from Naples to the feet of Albert in
Cologne. Thenceforth the two were to be together, as their tasks
permitted, and the loyal relationship between master and scholar was
undisturbed by the latter’s transcendent genius. Plato had the greatest
pupil, and Aristotle the greatest master, known to fame. That pupil’s work
was a redirecting of philosophy. The work of pupil Thomas perfected
finally the matter upon which his master laboured; and the master’s aged
eyes beheld the finished structure that was partly his, when the pupil’s
eyes had closed. Thomas, dying, left Albert to defend the system that was
to be called “Thomist,” after him who constructed and finished it to its
very turret points, rather than “Albertist,” after him who prepared the
materials.

To return to the time when both still laboured. Thomas in 1245 accompanied
his master to Paris, and three years later went back with him to Cologne.
Thereafter their duties often separated them. We know that in 1252 Thomas
was lecturing at Paris, and that he there received with Bonaventura the
title of _magister_ in 1257. After this he is found south of the Alps; it
was in the year 1263 that Urban IV. at Rome encouraged him to undertake a
critical commentary upon Aristotle, based on a closer rendering into Latin
of the Greek. In 1268, at the height of his academic fame, he is once more
at Paris; which he leaves for the last time in 1272, having been directed
to establish a _studium generale_ at Naples. Two years later he died, on
his way to advise the labours of the Council assembled at Lyons.[577]

Thomas wrote commentaries upon the Aristotelian _De interpretatione_ and
_Posterior Analytics_; the _Physics_, the _De coelo et mundo_, the
_Meteorum_, the _Metaphysics_, _Ethics_, _Politics_, and certain other
Aristotelian treatises. His work shows such a close understanding of
Aristotle as the world had not known since the days of the ancient
Peripatetics. Of course, he lectured on the _Sentences_, and the result
remains in his Commentaries on them. He lectured, and the resulting
Commentaries exist in many tomes, on the greater part of both the Old and
New Testaments. It would little help our purpose to catalogue in detail
his more constructive and original works, wherein he perfected a system of
philosophy and sacred knowledge. Chief among them were the _Summa contra
Gentiles_ and the _Summa theologiae_, the latter the most influential work
of all western mediaeval scholasticism. Many of his more important shorter
treatises are included in the _Quaestiones disputatae_, and the
_Quodlibetalia_. They treat of many matters finally put together in the
_Summa theologiae_. _De malo in communi, de peccatis, etc._; _De anima_;
_De virtutibus in communi, etc._; _De veritate_; _De ideis_; _De
cognitione angelorum_; _De bono_; _De voluntate_; _De libero arbitrio_;
_De passionibus animae_; _De gratia_;--such are titles drawn from the
_Quaestiones_. The _Quodlibetalia_ were academic disputations held in the
theological faculty, upon any imaginable thesis having theological
bearing. Some of them still appear philosophical, while many seem bizarre
to us; for example: Whether an angel can move from one extreme to the
other without passing through the middle. One may remember that such
questions had been put, and put again, from the time of the Church
Fathers. This question answered by Thomas whether an angel may pass from
one extreme to the other without traversing the middle is pertinent to the
conception of angels as completely immaterial beings,--a conception upon
the elaboration of which theologians expended much ingenious thought.

In the earlier Middle Ages, when men were busy putting together the
ancient matter, the personalities of the writers may not clearly appear.
It is different in the twelfth century, and very different in the
thirteenth, when the figures of at least its greater men are thrown out
plainly by their written works. Bonaventura is seen lucidly reasoning, but
with his ardently envisioning piety ever reaching out beyond; the
personality of Albert most Teutonically wrestles itself into salience
through the many-tomed results of his very visible efforts; when we come
to Roger Bacon, we shall find wormwood, and many higher qualities of mind,
flowing in his sentences. And the consummate fashioning faculty, the
devout and intellectual temperament of Thomas, are writ large in his
treatises. His work has unity; it is a system; it corresponds to the
scholastically creative personality, from the efficient concord of whose
faculties it proceeded. The unity of Thomas’s personality lay in his
conception of man’s _summum bonum_, which sprang from his Christian faith,
but was constructed by reason from foundation to pinnacle; and it is
evinced in the compulsion of an intellectual temperament that never let
the pious reasoner’s energies or appetitions stray loitering or aberrant
from that goal. Likewise the unity of his system consists in its purpose,
which is to present that same _summum bonum_, credited by faith,
empowered, if not empassioned, by piety, and constructed by reason. To
fulfil this purpose in its utmost compass, reason works with the material
of all pertinent knowledge; fashioning the same to complete logical
consistency of expression.

Therefore, it is from his conception of this _summum bonum_ as from a
centre of illumination, that we may trace the characteristic qualities
alike of Thomas and his work. His faith, his piety, and his intellectual
nature are revealed in his thought of supreme felicity. Man’s chief good
being the ground of the system, the thought and study which Thomas puts
upon the created universe and upon God, regarded both as Creator and in
the relationships of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, conduce to make large
and sure and ample this same chief good of man. To it likewise conduce the
Incarnation, and the Sacraments springing therefrom; in accord with it,
Thomas accepts or constructs his metaphysics, his psychology, his entire
thought of human capacity and destiny, and sets forth how nearly man’s
reason may bring him to this goal, and where there is need of divine
grace. In this goal, moreover, shall be found the sanction of human
knowledge, and the justification of the right enjoyment of human
faculties; it determines what elements of mortal life may be gathered up
and carried on, to form part of the soul’s eternal beatitude.

Thomas’s intellectual powers work together in order to set his thought of
man’s _summum bonum_ on its surest foundations, and make clear its scope:
his faculty of arrangement, and serious and lucid presentation; his
careful reasoning, which never trips, never overlooks, and never either
hurries or is taken unprepared; his marvellous unforgetfulness of
everything which might remotely bear on the subject; his intellectual
poise, and his just weighing of every matter that should be taken into the
scales of his determination. Observing these, we may realize how he seemed
to his time a new intellectual manifestation of God’s illuminating grace.
There was in him something unknown before; his argument, his exposition,
was new in power, in interest, in lucidity. On the quality of newness the
wretched old biographer rings his reiteration:

    “For in his lectures he put out _new_ topics (_articulos_), inventing
    a _new_ and clear way of drawing conclusions and bringing _new_
    reasons into them, so that no one, who had heard him teach _new_
    doubts and allay them by _new_ arguments, would have doubted that God
    had illumined with rays of _new_ light one who became straightway of
    such sure judgment, that he did not hesitate to teach and write _new_
    opinions, which God had deigned _newly_ to inspire.”[578]

His biographer’s view is justified. Thomas was the greatest of the
schoolmen. His way of teaching, his translucent exposition, came to his
hearers as a new inspiration. Only Bonaventura (likewise Italian-born) may
be compared with him for clearness of exposition--of solution indeed; and
Thomas is more judicial, more supremely intellectual; his way of treatment
was a stronger incitement and satisfaction to at least the minds of his
auditors. Albert, with his mass of but half-conquered material, could not
fail to show, whether he would or not, the doubt-breeding difficulties of
the new philosophy, which was yet to be worked into Christian theology.
Thomas exposed every difficulty and revealed its depths; but then he
solved and adjusted everything with an argumentation from whose careful
inclusiveness no questions strayed unshepherded. Placed with Thomas,
Albert shows as the Titan whose strength assembles the materials, while
Thomas is the god who erects the edifice. The material that Thomas works
with, and many of his thoughts and arguments, are to be found in Albert;
and the pupil knew his indebtedness to the great master, who survived him
to defend his doctrines. But what is not in Albert, is Thomas, Thomas
himself, with his disentangled reasoning, his clarity, his organic
exposition, his final construction of the mediaeval Christian scheme.[579]

In the third book of his _Summa philosophica contra Gentiles_, and in the
beginning of _Pars prima secundae_ of his _Summa theologiae_, Thomas
expounds man’s final end, _ultimus finis_, which is his supreme good or
perfect beatitude. The exposition in the former work, dating from the
earlier years of the author’s academic activities, seems the simpler at
first reading; but the other includes more surely Thomas’s last reasoning,
placed in the setting of argument and relationship which he gave it in his
greatest work. We shall follow the latter, borrowing, however, from the
former when its phrases seem to present the matter more aptly to our
non-scholastic minds. The general position of the topic is the same in
both _Summae_; and Thomas gives the reason in the Prologus to _Pars prima
secundae_ of the _Summa theologiae_. His way of doing this is significant:

    “Man is declared to be made in the image of God in this sense (as
    Damascenus[580] says) that by ‘image’ is meant _intellectual_, _free
    to choose_, and _self-potent to act_. Therefore, after what has been
    said of the Exemplar God, and of those things which proceed from the
    divine power according to its will, there remains for us to consider
    His image, to wit, man, in so far as he is himself the source
    (_principium_) of his acts, possessing free will and power over them.”

Thereupon Thomas continues, opening his first Quaestio:[581]

    “First one must consider the final end (_ultimus finis_) of human
    life, and then those things through which man may attain this end, or
    deviate from it. For one must accept from an end the rationale of
    those things which are ordained to that end.”

Assuming the final end of human life to be beatitude, Thomas considers
wherein man as a rational creature may properly have one final end, on
account of which he wills all that he wills. Quaestio ii. shows that man’s
beatitude cannot consist in riches, honours, fame, power, pleasures of the
body, or in any created good, not even in the soul. Man gains his
beatitude _through_ the soul; but in itself the soul is not man’s final
end. The next Quaestio is devoted to the gist of the matter: what
beatitude is, and what is needed for it. Thomas first shows in what sense
beatitude is something increate (_increatum_). He has already pointed out
that _end_ (_finis_) has a twofold meaning: the thing itself which we
desire to obtain, and the fruition of it.

    “In the first sense, the final end of man is an increate good, to wit
    God, who alone with His infinite goodness can perfectly fulfil the
    wish (_voluntas_) of man. In the second sense the final end of man is
    something created existing in himself; which is nought else than
    attainment or fruition (_adeptio vel fruitio_) of the final end. The
    final end is called beatitude. If then man’s beatitude is viewed as
    cause or object, it is something increate; but if it is considered in
    its beatific essence (_quantum ad ipsam essentiam beatitudinis_) it is
    something created.”

Thomas next shows:

    “... that inasmuch as man’s beatitude is something created existing in
    himself, it is necessary to regard it as action (_operatio_). For
    beatitude is man’s ultimate perfection. But everything is perfect in
    so far as it is actually (_actu_, _i.e._ in realized actuality): for
    potentiality without actuality is imperfect. Therefore beatitude
    should consist in man’s ultimate actuality. But manifestly action
    (_operatio_) is the final actuality of the actor (_operantis_); as the
    Philosopher shows, demonstrating that everything exists for its action
    (_propter suam operationem_). Hence it follows of necessity that man’s
    beatitude is action.”

The next point to consider is whether beatitude is the action of man’s
senses or his intellect. Drawing distinctions, Thomas points out that

    “the action of sense cannot pertain to beatitude essentially; because
    man’s beatitude essentially consists in uniting himself to the
    increate good; to which he cannot be joined through the action of the
    senses. Yet sense-action may pertain to beatitude as an antecedent or
    consequence: as an antecedent, for the imperfect beatitude attainable
    in this life, where the action of the senses is a prerequisite to the
    action of the mind; as a consequence, in that perfect beatitude which
    is looked for in heaven; because, after the resurrection, as Augustine
    says, from the very beatitude of the soul, there may be a certain
    flowing back into the body and its senses, perfecting them in their
    actions. But not even then will the action by which the human mind is
    joined to God depend on sense.”

Beatitude then is the action of man’s intellectual part; and Thomas next
inquires, whether it is an action of the intelligence or will
(_intellectus aut voluntatis_). With this inquiry we touch the pivot of
Thomas’s attitude, wherein he departs from Augustine, in apparent reliance
on the word of John: “This is eternal life that they should know thee, the
one true God.” Life eternal is man’s final end; and therefore man’s
beatitude consists in knowledge of God, which is an act of mind. Thomas
argues this at some length. He refers to the distinction between what is
essential to the existence of beatitude, and what is joined to it _per
accidens_, like enjoyment (_delectatio_).

    “I say then, that beatitude in its essence cannot consist in an act of
    will. For it has appeared that beatitude is the obtaining
    (_consecutio_) of the final end. But obtaining does not consist in any
    act of will; for will attaches to the absent when one desires it, as
    well as to the present in which one rests delighted. It is evident
    that the desire for an end is not an obtaining of it, but a movement
    toward it. Enjoyment attaches to will from the presence of the end;
    but not conversely does anything become present because the will shall
    delight in it. Therefore there must be something besides an act of
    will, through which the end may become present to the will. This is
    plain respecting the ends of sense (_fines sensibiles_). For if to
    obtain money were an act of will, the miser would have obtained it
    from the beginning. And so it comes to pass with respect to an end
    conceived by the mind; we obtain it when it becomes present to us
    through an act of the intellect; and then the delighted will rests in
    the end obtained. Thus, therefore, the essence of beatitude consists
    in an act of mind. But the delight which follows beatitude pertains to
    will, even in the sense in which Augustine says: ‘beatitudo est
    gaudium de veritate,’ because indeed joy is the consummation of
    beatitude.”

The supremely intellectual attitude of the Angelic Doctor, shows at once,
and as it were universally, in his conviction of the primacy of the true
over the good, and of knowledge over will. Sometimes he argues these
points directly; and again, his temperamental attitude appears in the
course of argument upon other points. For example, Quaestio xvi. of _Pars
prima_ has for its subject _Veritas_. And in the first article, which
discusses whether truth is in the thing (_in re_) or only in the mind, he
argues thus:

    “As _good_ signifies that upon which desire (_appetitus_) is bent, so
    _true_ signifies that at which understanding aims. There is this
    difference between desire and understanding or any kind of cognition:
    cognition exists in so far as what is known (_cognitum_) is in the
    knower; but desire is as the desirous inclines toward the desired.
    Thus the end (_terminus_ == _finis_) of desire, which is the _good_,
    is in the desirable thing; but the end of knowing, which is the true,
    is in mind itself.”

In _Articulus 4_, Thomas comes to his point: that the true _secundum
rationem_ (_i.e._ according to its formal nature) is prior to the good.

    “Although both the good and the true have been taken as convertible
    with being, yet they differ in their conception (_ratione_); and that
    the true is prior to the good appears from two considerations: First,
    the true is more closely related to being, which is prior to the good;
    for the true regards being itself, simply and directly; while the
    ratio of the good follows being as in some way perfect, and therefore
    desirable. Secondly, cognition naturally precedes desire. Therefore,
    since the true regards cognition, and the good regards desire, the
    true is prior to the good _secundum rationem_.”

This argument, whatever validity it may have, is significant of its
author’s predominantly intellectual temperament, and consistent with his
conception of man’s supreme beatitude as the intellectual vision of God.
Obviously, moreover, the setting of the true above the good is another way
of stating the primacy of knowledge over will, which is also maintained:
“Will and understanding (_intellectus_) mutually include each other: for
the understanding knows the will; and the will wills that the
understanding should know.”[582] Evidently all rational beings have will
as well as understanding; God wills, the Angels will, man wills. Indeed,
how could knowledge progress but for the will to know? Yet of the two,
considered in themselves, understanding is higher than will--

    “for its object is the _ratio_, the very essential nature, of the
    desired good, while the object of will is the desired good whose
    _ratio_ is in the understanding.... Yet will may be the higher, if it
    is set upon something higher than the understanding.... When the thing
    in which is the good is nobler than the soul itself, in which is the
    rational cognizance (_ratio intellecta_), the will, through relation
    to that thing, is higher than the understanding. But when the thing in
    which is the good, is lower than the soul, then in relation to that
    thing, the understanding is higher than the will. Wherefore the love
    of God is better than the cognizance (_cognitio_); but the cognizance
    of corporeal things is better than the love. Yet taken absolutely, the
    understanding is higher than the will.”[583]

These positions of the Angelic Doctor were sharply opposed in his lifetime
and afterwards. Without entering the lists, let us rather follow him on
his evidently Aristotelian path, which quickly brings him to his next
conclusion: “That beatitude consists in the action of the speculative
rather than the practical intellect, as is evident from three arguments:

    “First, if man’s beatitude is action, it ought to be the man’s best
    (optima) action. But man’s best action is that of his best faculty in
    respect to the best object. The best faculty is intelligence, whose
    best object is the divine good, which is not an object of the
    practical, but of the speculative intelligence. Wherefore, in such
    action, to wit, in contemplation of things divine, beatitude chiefly
    consists. And because _every one seems to be that which is best in
    him_, as is said in the _Ethics_, so such action is most proper to man
    and most enjoyable.

    “Secondly, the same conclusion appears from this, that contemplation
    above all is sought on account of itself. The perfection (_actus_,
    full realization) of the practical intelligence is not sought on
    account of itself, but for the sake of action: the actions themselves
    are directed toward some end. Hence it is evident that the final end
    cannot consist in the _vita activa_, which belongs to the practical
    intelligence.

    “Thirdly, it is plain from this, that in the _vita contemplativa_ man
    has part with those above him, to wit, God and the Angels, unto whom
    he is made like through beatitude; but in those matters which belong
    to the _vita activa_, other animals, however imperfectly, have somehow
    part with him.

    “And so the final and perfect beatitude which is looked for in the
    life to come, in principle consists altogether in contemplation. But
    the imperfect beatitude which may be had here, consists first and in
    principle in contemplation, and secondly in the true operation of the
    practical intellect directing human actions and passions, as is said
    in the tenth book of the _Ethics_.”

It being thus shown that perfect beatitude lies in the action of the
speculative intelligence, Thomas next shows that it cannot consist in
consideration of the speculative sciences--

    “for the consideration of a science does not reach beyond the potency
    (_virtus_) of the principles of that science, seeing that the whole
    science is contained potentially (_virtualiter_) in its principles.
    But the principles of speculative sciences are received through the
    senses, as the Philosopher makes clear. Therefore the entire
    consideration of the speculative sciences cannot be extended beyond
    that to which a cognition of sense-objects (_sensibilium_) is able to
    lead. Man’s final beatitude, which is his perfection, cannot consist
    in the cognition of sense-objects. For no thing is perfected by
    something inferior, except as there may be in the inferior some
    participation in a superior. Evidently the nature (_forma_) of a
    stone, or any other sensible thing, is inferior to man, save in so far
    as something higher than the human intelligence has part in it, like
    the light of reason.... But since there is in sensible forms some
    participation in the similitude of spiritual substances, the
    consideration of the speculative sciences is, in a certain way,
    participation in true and perfect beatitude.”

Neither can perfect beatitude consist in knowledge of the higher, entirely
immaterial, or, as Thomas calls them, separate (_separatae_) substances,
to wit, the Angels. Because it cannot consist in that which is the
perfection of intelligence only from participation. The object of the
intelligence is the true. Whatever has truth only through participation in
something else cannot make the contemplating intelligence perfect with a
final perfection. But the angels have their being (_esse_) as they have
their truth, from the participation of the divine in them. Whence it
remains that only the contemplation of God, Who alone is truth through His
essential being, can make perfectly blessed. “But,” adds Thomas, “nothing
precludes the expectation of some imperfect beatitude from contemplating
the angels, and even a higher beatitude than lies in the consideration of
the speculative sciences.”

So the conclusion is that “the final and perfect beatitude can be only in
the vision of the divine essence. The proof of this lies in the
consideration of two matters: first, that man is not perfectly blessed
(_beatus_) so long as there remains anything for him to desire or seek;
secondly, that the perfection of every capacity (_potentiae_), is adjudged
according to the nature (_ratio_) of its object.” And a patent line of
argument leads to the unavoidable conclusion: “For perfect beatitude it is
necessary that the intellect should attain to the very essence of the
first cause. And thus it will have its perfection through union with God
as its object.”

There are few novel thoughts in Thomas’s conception of man’s supreme
beatitude. But he has taken cognizance of all pertinent considerations,
and put the whole matter together with stable coherency. He continues,
discussing in the succeeding Quaestiones a number of important matters
incidental to his central determination of the nature of man’s supreme
good. Thus he shows how joy (_delectatio_) is a necessary accompaniment of
beatitude, which, however, in principle consists in the action of the
mind, which is _visio_, rather than in the resulting _delectatio_. The
latter consists in a quieting or satisfying of the will, through the
goodness of that in which it is satisfied. When the will is satisfied in
any action, that results from the goodness of the action; and the good
lies in the action itself rather than in the quieting of the will.[584]
Here Thomas’s reasoning points to an active ideal, an ideal of energizing,
rather than repose. But he concludes that for beatitude “there must be a
concurrence of _visio_, which is the perfect cognizance of the
intelligible end; the getting it, which implies its presence; and the joy
or fruition, which implies the quieting of that which loves in that which
is loved.”[585] Thomas also shows how rectitude of will is needed, and
discusses whether a body is essential; his conclusion being that a body is
not required for the perfect beatitude of the life to come; yet he gives
the counter considerations, showing the conduciveness of the perfected
body to the soul’s beatitude even then. Next he follows Aristotle in
pointing out how material goods may be necessary for the attainment of the
imperfect beatitude possible on earth, while they are quite impertinent to
the perfect beatitude of seeing God; and likewise he shows how the society
of friends is needed here, but not essential hereafter, and yet a
concomitant to our supreme felicity.

The course of argument of the Liber iii. of the _Contra Gentiles_ is not
dissimilar. A number of preliminary chapters show how all things tend to
an end; that the end of all is God; and that to know God is the end of
every intellectual being. Next, that human _felicitas_ does not consist in
all those matters, in which the _Summa theologiae_ also shows that
_beatitude_ does not lie; but that it consists in contemplation of God. He
puts his argument simply:

    “It remains that the ultimate felicity of man lies in contemplation of
    truth. For this is the sole action (_operatio_) of man which is proper
    to man alone. This alone is directed to nothing else, as an end; since
    the contemplation of truth is sought for its own sake. Through this
    action, likewise, man is joined to higher substances (_beings_)
    through likeness of action, and through knowing them in some way. For
    this action, moreover, man is most sufficient by himself, needing but
    little external aid. To this also all other human acts seem to be
    directed as to an end. For to the perfection of contemplation,
    soundness of body is needed, to which all the arts of living are
    directed. Also quiet from the disturbance of passions is required, to
    which one comes through the moral virtues, and prudence; and quiet
    also from tumults, to which end all rules of civil life are ordained;
    and so, if rightly conceived, all human business seems to serve the
    contemplation of truth. Nor is it possible for the final felicity of
    man to consist in the contemplation which is confined to an
    intelligence of beginnings (_principiorum_), which is most imperfect
    and general (_universalis_), containing a knowledge of things
    potentially: it is the beginning, not the end of human study. Nor can
    that felicity lie in the contemplation of the sciences, which pertain
    to the lowest things, since felicity ought to lie in the action of the
    intelligence in relationship to the noblest intelligible verities. It
    remains that man’s final felicity consists in the contemplation of
    wisdom pursuant to a consideration of things divine. From which it
    also is evident by the way of induction, what was before proved by
    arguments, that the final felicity of man consists only in
    contemplation of God.”[586]

Having reached this central conclusion of the _Contra Gentiles_, as well
as of the _Summa theologiae_, Thomas proceeds to trim it further, so as
clearly to differentiate that knowledge of God in which lies the ultimate
felicity of intelligent beings from other ways of knowing God, which do
not fully represent this supreme and final bliss. He first excludes the
sort of common and confused knowledge of God, which almost all men draw
from observing the natural order of things; then he shuts out the
knowledge of God derived from logical demonstration, through which,
indeed, one rather approaches a proper knowledge of Him;[587] next, he
will not admit that supreme felicity lies in the cognition of God through
faith; since that is still imperfect. This felicity consists in
seeing[588] the divine essence, an impossibility in this life, when we see
as in a glass. The supreme felicity is attainable only after death.
Hereupon Thomas continues with the very crucial discussion of the capacity
of the rational creature to know God. But instead of following him further
in the _Contra Gentiles_, we will rather turn to his final presentation of
this question in his _Summa theologiae_.


II

The great _Summa_, having opened with an introductory consideration of the
character of _sacra doctrina_,[589] at once fixes its attention upon the
existence and attributes of God. These having been reviewed, Thomas begins
Quaestio xii. by saying, that “as we have now considered what God is in
His own nature (_secundum se ipsum_) it remains to consider what He is in
our cognition, that is, how He is known by creatures.” The first question
is whether any created intelligence whatsoever may be able to see God _per
essentiam_. Having stated the counter arguments, and relying on John’s “we
shall see Him as He is,” Thomas proceeds with his solution thus:

    “Since everything may be knowable so far as it exists in
    actuality,[590] God, who is pure actuality, without any mingling of
    potentiality, is in Himself, most knowable. But what is most knowable
    in itself, is not knowable to every intelligence because of the
    exceeding greatness of that which is to be known (_propter excessum
    intelligibilis supra intellectum_); as the sun, which is most visible,
    may not be seen by a bat, because of the excess of light. Mindful of
    this, some have asserted that no created intelligence could behold the
    essential nature (_essentiam_) of God.

    “But this is a solecism. For since man’s final beatitude consists in
    his highest action, which is the action of the intelligence, if the
    created intelligence is never to be able to see the essential nature
    of God, either it will never obtain beatitude, or its beatitude will
    consist in something besides God: which is repugnant to the faith. For
    the ultimate perfection of a rational creature lies in that which is
    the source or principle (_principium_) of its being. Likewise the
    argument is against reason. For there is in man a natural desire to
    know the cause, when he observes the effect; and from this, wonder
    rises in men. If then the intelligence of the rational creature is
    incapable of attaining to the first cause of things, an inane desire
    must be ascribed to nature.

    “Wherefore it is simply to be conceded that the blessed may see the
    essential nature of God.”

So this general conclusion, or assumption, is based on faith, and also
leaps, as from the head of Jove, the creature of unconquerable human
need, which never will admit the inaneness of its yearnings. And now,
assuming the possibility of seeing God in his true nature, Thomas proves
that He cannot be seen thus through the similitude of any created thing:
in order to behold God’s essence some divine likeness must be imparted
from the seeing power (_ex parte visivae potentiae_), to wit, the light of
divine glory (which is consummated grace) strengthening the intelligence
that it may see God. And he next shows that it is impossible to see God by
the sense of sight, or any other sense or power of man’s sensible nature.
For God is incorporeal. Therefore He cannot be seen through the
imagination, but only through the intelligence. Nor can any created
intelligence through its natural faculties see the divine essence.
“Cognition takes place in so far as the known is in the knower. But the
known is in the knower according to the mode and capacity (_modus_) of the
knower. Whence any knower’s knowledge is according to the measure of his
nature. If then the being of the thing to be known exceeds the measure of
the knowing nature, knowledge of it will be beyond the nature of that
knower.” In order to see God in His essential nature, the created
intellect needs light created by God: _In lumine tuo videbimus lumen_. And
it may be given to one created intellect to see more perfectly than
another.

Do those who see God _per essentiam_, comprehend Him? No.

    “To comprehend God is impossible for any created intelligence. To have
    any true thought of God is a great beatitude.... Since the created
    light of glory received by any created intelligence, cannot be
    infinite, it is impossible that any created intelligence should know
    God infinitely, and comprehend Him.”

Again he reasons; They who shall see God in His essence will see what they
see through the divine essence united to their intelligence; they will see
whatever they see at once, and not successively; for the contents of this
intellectual, God-granted vision are not apprehended by means of the
respective species or general images, but in and through the one divine
essence. But in this life, man may not see God in His essential nature:

    “The mode of cognition conforms to the nature of the knower. But our
    soul, so long as we live in this life, has its existence (_esse_) in
    corporeal matter. Wherefore, by nature, it knows only things that have
    material form, or may through such be known. Evidently the divine
    essence cannot be known through the natures of material things. Any
    cognition of God through any created likeness whatsoever, is not a
    vision of His essence.... Our natural cognition draws its origin from
    sense; it may extend itself so far as it can be conducted (_manuduci_)
    by things of sense (_sensibilia_). But from them our intelligence may
    not attain to seeing the divine essence.... Yet since sensible
    creatures are effects, dependant on a cause, we know from them that
    God exists, and that as first cause He exceeds all that He has caused.
    From which we may learn the difference between Himself and His
    creatures, to wit, that He is not any of those things which He has
    caused....

    “Through grace a more perfect knowledge of God is had than through
    natural reason. For cognition through natural reason needs both images
    (_phantasmata_) received from things of sense, and the natural light
    of intelligence, through whose virtue we abstract intelligible
    conceptions from them. In both respects human cognition is aided
    through the revelation of grace. For the natural light of the
    intellect is strengthened through the infusion of light graciously
    given (_luminis gratuiti_); while the images in the man’s imagination
    are divinely formed so that they are expressive of things divine,
    rather than of what naturally is received through the senses, as
    appears from the visions of the prophets.”[591]

Natural reason stops with the unity of God, and can give no knowledge of
the Trinity of divine Persons. Says Thomas:[592]

    “It has been shown that through natural reason man can know God only
    _from His creatures_. Creatures lead to knowledge of God as effects
    lead to some knowledge of a cause. Only that may be known of God by
    natural reason which necessarily belongs to Him as the source of all
    existences. The creative virtue of God is common to the whole Trinity;
    it pertains to the unity of essence, not to the distinction of
    persons. Through natural reason, therefore, those things concerning
    God may be known which pertain to the unity of essence, but not those
    which pertain to the distinction of persons.... Who strives to prove
    the Trinity of Persons by natural reason, doubly disparages faith:
    first as regards the dignity of faith itself, which concerns invisible
    things surpassing human reason; secondly as derogating from its
    efficiency in drawing men to it. For when any one in order to prove
    the faith adduces reasons which are not cogent, he falls under the
    derision of the faithless; for they think that we use such arguments,
    and that we believe because of them. One shall not attempt to prove
    things of faith save by authorities, and in discussion with those who
    receive the authorities. With others it is enough to argue that what
    the faith announces is not impossible.”

Here Thomas seems rationally to recognize the limits upon reason in
discovering the divine nature. In the regions of faith, reason’s feet lack
the material footing upon which to mount. So Thomas would assert. But will
he stand to his assertion? The shadowy line between reason and faith
wavers with him. At least so it seems to us, for whom ontological
reasoning has lost reality, and who find proofs of God not so much easier
than proofs of the Trinity. But Thomas and the other scholastics dwelt in
the region of the metaphysically ideal. To them it was not only real, but
the most real; and it was so natural to step across the line of faith,
trailing clouds of reason. The feet of such as Thomas are as firmly
planted on the one side of the line as on the other. And now, as it might
also seem, Thomas, having thus formally reserved the realm of faith,
quickly steps across the line, to undertake a tremendous metaphysical
exposition of the Trinity, of the distinctions between its Persons, of
their properties, respective functions, and relationships; and all this is
carried on largely in the categories of Aristotelian philosophy. Yet is he
not still consistent with himself? For he surely did not conceive the
elements of his discussion to lie in the lucubrations or discoveries of
the natural reason; but in the data of revelation, and their explanation
by saintly doctors. And was not he also a vessel of their inspiration, a
son of faith, who might humbly hope for the light of grace, to transfigure
and glorify his natural powers in the service of revealed truth?

Thomas’s ideal is intellectual, and yet ends in faith. His intellectual
interests, by faith emboldened, strengthened, and pointed heavenward, make
on toward the realisation of that intellectual beatitude which is to be
consummate hereafter, when the saved soul’s grace-illumined eye shall
re-awaken where it may see face to face.


III

Knowledge, then, supplemented in this life by faith, is the primary
element of blessedness. We now turn our attention to the forms of
knowledge and modes of knowing appropriate to the three rational
substances: God, angel, man. The first is the absolute incorporeal being,
the primal mover, in whom there is no potentiality, but actuality simple
and perfect. The second is the created immaterial or “separated”
substance, which is all that it is through participation in the uncreate
being of its Creator. The third is the composite creature man, made of
both soul and body, his capacities conditioned upon the necessities of his
dual nature, his sense-perception and imagination being as necessary to
his knowledge, as his rational understanding; for whom alone it is true
that sense-apprehension may lead to the intelligible verities of God:
“etiam sensibilia intellecta manuducunt ad intelligibilia divinorum.”[593]

The earlier Quaestiones of _Pars prima_, on the nature of God, lead on to
a consideration of God’s knowledge and ways of knowing. Those Quaestiones
expounded the qualities of God quite as far as comported with Thomas’s
realization of the limitation of the human capacity to know God in this
life. Quaestio iii. upon the _Simplicitas_ of God, shows that God is not
body (_corpus_); that in Him there is no compositeness of form and
material; that throughout His nature, He is one and the same, and
therefore that He _is_ His _Deitas_, His _vita_, and whatever else may be
predicated of Him. Next it is shown (Qu. iv.) that God is perfect; that in
Him are the _perfectiones_ of all things, since whatever there may be of
perfection in an effect, should be found in the effective cause; and as
God is self-existent being, He must contain the whole perfection of being
in Himself (_totam perfectionem essendi in se_). Next, that God is the
good (_bonum_) and the _summum bonum_; He is infinite; He is in all things
(Qu. viii. Art. 1) not as a part of their essence, but as _accidens_, and
as the doer is in his deeds; and not only in their beginning, but so long
as they exist; He acts upon everything immediately, and nothing is
distant from Him; God is everywhere: as the soul is altogether in every
part of the body, so God entire is in all things and in each. God is in
all things created by Him as the working cause; but He is in the rational
creature, through grace; as the object of action is in the actor, as the
known is in the knower, and the desired in the wishful. God is immutable
(Qu. ix.); for as final actuality (_actus purus_), with no admixture of
potentiality, He cannot change; nor can He be _moved_; since His
infinitude comprehends the plenitude of all perfection, there is nothing
that He can acquire, and no whither for Him to extend. God is eternal (Qu.
x.); for him there is no beginning, nor any succession of time; but an
interminable now, an all at once (_tota simul_), which is the essence of
eternity, as distinguished from the successiveness of even infinite time.
And God is One (Qu. xi.). “One does not add anything to being, save
negation of division. For One signifies nothing else than undivided being
(_ens indivisum_). And from this it follows that One is convertible with
being.” That God is One, is proved by His _simplicitas_; by the
infiniteness of His perfection; and by the oneness of the world.

    “After a consideration,” now says Thomas, “of those matters which
    pertain to the divine substance, we may consider those which pertain
    to its action (_operatio_). And because certain kinds of action remain
    in the doer, while others pass out into external effect, we first
    treat of knowledge and will (for knowing is in the knower and willing
    in him who wills); and then of God’s power, which is regarded as the
    source of the divine action passing out into external effect. Then,
    since knowing is a kind of living, after considering the divine
    knowledge, the divine life will be considered. And because knowledge
    is of the true, there will be need to consider truth and falsity.
    Again since every cognition is in the knower, the _rationes_ (types,
    essential natures) of things as they are in God the Knower (_Deo
    cognoscente_) are called ideas (_ideae_); and a consideration of these
    will be joined to the consideration of knowledge.”[594]

Thus clearly laying out his topic, Thomas begins his discussion of God’s
knowledge (_scientia Dei_); of the modes in which God knows and the
knowledge which He has. In God is the most perfect knowledge. God knows
Himself through Himself; in Him knowledge and Knower (_intellectum_ and
_intellectus_) are the same.[595] He perfectly comprehends Himself; for He
knows Himself so far as He is knowable; and He is absolutely knowable
being utter reality (_actus purus_). Likewise He knows things other than
Himself. For He knows Himself perfectly, which implies a knowledge of
those things to which His power (_virtus_) extends. Moreover, He knows all
things in their special natures and distinctions from each other: for the
perfection, or perfected actuality, of everything is contained in Him; and
therefore God in Himself is able to know all things perfectly, and the
special nature of everything exists through some manner of participation
in the divine perfection. God knows all things in one, to wit, Himself;
and not successively, or by means of discursive reasoning. “God’s
knowledge is the cause of things. It stands to all created beings as the
knowledge of the artificer to the things he makes. God causes things
through His knowledge, since His being is His knowing (_cum suum esse sit
suum intelligere_).” His knowledge causes things when it has the will
joined with it, and, in so far as it is the cause of things, is called
_scientia approbationis_. God knows things which are not actually
(_actu_). Whatever has been or will be, He knows by the knowledge of sight
(_scientia visionis_, which by implication is equivalent to _scientia
approbationis_). For God’s knowing, which is His being, is measured by
eternity; and eternity includes all time, as present, and without
succession; so the present vision (_intuitus_) of God embraces all time
and all things existing at any time, as if present. As for whatever is in
the power of God or creature, but which never has been or will be, God
knows it not as in vision, but simply knows it.

God also knows evil.

    “Whoever knows anything perfectly should know whatever might happen to
    it. There are some good things to which it may happen to be corrupted
    through evils: wherefore God would not know the good perfectly,
    unless He also knew the evil. Everything is knowable so far as it
    _is_; but the being (_esse_) of evil is the privation of good: hence
    inasmuch as God knows good, He knows evil, as darkness is known
    through light.”

Thomas now takes up a point curious perhaps to us, but of importance to
him and Aristotle: does God know individuals (_singularia_), the
particular as opposed to the universal? This point might seem disposed of
in the argument by which Thomas maintained that God knew things in their
special and distinct natures. But he now proves that God knows
_singularia_ by an argument which bears on his contention that man does
not know _singularia_ through the intelligence, but perceives them through
sense; and as we shall see, that the angels have no direct knowledge of
individuals, being immaterial substances.

    “God knows individuals (_cognoscit singularia_). For all perfections
    found in creatures pre-exist in higher mode in God. To know
    (_cognoscere_) individuals pertains to our perfection. Whence it
    follows that God must know them. The Philosopher (Aristotle) holds it
    to be illogical that anything should be known to us, and not to
    God.... But the perfections which are divided in inferior beings,
    exist simply and as one in God. Hence, although through one faculty we
    know universals and what is immaterial, and through another,
    individuals and what is material; yet God simply, through His
    intelligence, knows both.... One must hold that since God is the cause
    of things through His knowledge, the knowledge of God extends itself
    as far as His causality extends. Wherefore, since God’s active virtue
    extends itself not only to forms, from which is received the _ratio_
    of the universal, but also to matter, it is necessary that God’s
    knowledge should extend itself to individuals, which are such through
    matter.”

And replying to a counter-argument Thomas continues:

    “Our intelligence abstracts the intelligible species from the
    individuating principles. Therefore the intelligible species of our
    intelligence cannot be the likeness of the individual principles; and,
    for this reason, our intelligence does not know individuals. But the
    intelligible species of the divine intelligence, which is the essence
    of God, is not immaterial through abstraction, but through itself; and
    exists as the principle of all principles entering the composition of
    the thing, whether principles of species or of the individual.
    Therefore through His essence God knows both universals and
    individuals.”[596]

With these arguments still echoing, Thomas shows that God can know
infinite things; also future contingencies; also whatever may be stated
(_enuntiabilia_). His knowledge, which is His substance, does not change.
It is speculative knowledge, in so far as relating to His own unchangeable
nature, and to whatever He can do, but does not; it is practical knowledge
so far as it relates to anything which He does.

Thomas concludes his direct discussion of God’s knowledge, by an
application of the Platonic theory of _ideas_, in which he mainly follows
Augustine.

    “It is necessary to place _ideas_ in the divine mind. _Idea_ is the
    Greek for the Latin _forma_. Thus through _ideas_ are understood the
    forms of things existing beyond the things themselves. By which we
    mean the prototype (_exemplar_) of that of which it is called the
    form; or the principle of its cognition, in so far as the forms of
    things knowable are said to be in the knower.”

There must be many ideas or (as Augustine phrases it) stable _rationes_ of
things. There is a _ratio_ in the divine mind corresponding to whatever
God does or knows.

    “Ideas were set by Plato as the principles both of the cognition and
    the generation of things, and in both senses they are to be placed in
    the divine mind. So far as _idea_ is the principle of the making of a
    thing, it may be called the prototype (_exemplar_), and pertains to
    practical knowledge (_practicam cognitionem_); but as the principle of
    cognition (_principium cognoscitivum_), it is properly called _ratio_,
    and may also pertain to speculative knowledge. In the signification of
    _exemplar_, it relates to everything created at any time by God: but
    when it means _principium cognoscitivum_, it relates to all things
    which are known by God, although never coming into existence.”[597]

Such are the divine modes of knowledge. Thomas proceeds to discuss other
aspects of the divine nature, the life and power, will and love, which may
be ascribed to God. He then passes on to a discussion of the Persons of
the Trinity. This completed, he turns to the world of created substances;
into which we will follow him so far as to observe the forms of knowledge
and ways of knowing proper to angels and mankind. We shall hereafter have
to speak of the divine and angelic love, and of man’s love of God; but
here, as our field is intellectual, we will simply recall to mind that
Thomas applies a like intellectual conception of beatitude to both God and
His rational creatures:

    “Beatitude, as has been said, signifies the perfect good of the
    intellectual nature; as everything desires its perfection, the
    intellectual [substance] desires to be _beata_. That which is most
    perfect in every intellectual nature, is the intellectual operation
    wherein, in a measure, it grasps all things. Wherefore the beatitude
    of any created intellectual nature consists in knowing (_in
    intelligendo_).”[598]


IV

Thomas regards the creation as a _processio_, a going out of all creatures
from God. Every being (_ens_) that in any manner (_quocumque modo_) is, is
from God.

    “God is the _prima causa exemplaris_ of all things.... For the
    production of anything, there is needed a prototype (_exemplar_), in
    order that the effect may follow a determined form.... The
    determination of forms must be sought in the divine wisdom. Hence one
    ought to say that in the divine wisdom are the _rationes_ of all
    things: these we have called _ideas_, to wit, prototypal forms
    existing in the divine mind. Although such may be multiplied in
    respect to things, yet really they are not other than the divine
    essence, according as its similitude can be participated in by divers
    things in divers ways. Thus God Himself is the first _exemplar_ of
    all. There may also be said to be in created things certain
    _exemplaria_ of other things, when they are made in the likeness of
    such others, or according to the same species or after the analogy of
    some resemblance.”[599]

God not only is the efficient and exemplary cause, but also the final
cause of all things (_Divina bonitas est finis omnium rerum_). “The
emanation (_emanatio_) of all being from the universal cause, which is
God, we call creation.”[600] God alone may be said to create. The function
pertains not to any Person, but to the whole Trinity in common. And there
is found some image of the Trinity in rational creatures in whom is
intelligence and will; and in all creatures may be found some vestiges of
the creator.

Thomas, after a while, takes up the distinction between spiritual and
corporeal creatures, and considers first the purely spiritual, called
Angels. We enter with him upon the contemplation of these conceptions,
which scholasticism did not indeed create, but elaborated with marvellous
logic, and refined to a consistent intellectual beauty. None had larger
share in perfecting the logical conception of the angelic nature, as
immaterial and essentially intellectual, than our Angelic Doctor. A volume
might well be devoted to tracing the growth of these beings of the mind,
from their not unmilitant career in the Old Testament and the Jewish
Apocrypha, their brief but classically beautiful mention in the Gospels,
and their storm-red action in the Apocalypse; then through their treatment
by the Fathers, to their hierarchic ordering by the great
Pseudo-Areopagite; and so on and on, through the earlier Scholastics, the
Lombard’s _Sentences_, and Hugo of St. Victor’s appreciative presentation;
up to the gathering of all the angelic matter by Albertus Magnus, its
further encyclopaedizing by Vincent of Beauvais, and finally its perfect
intellectual disembodiment by Thomas;--while all the time the people’s
mythopoeic love went on endowing these guardian spirits with heart and
soul, and fashioning responsive stories of their doings. For men loved and
feared them, and looked to them as God’s peculiar messengers. Thus they
flash past us in the _Divina Commedia_; and their forms become lovely in
Christian art.

As we enter upon the contemplation of the angelic nature, let us not as of
course regard angels simply as imaginative conceptions of Scripture and of
the patristic and mediaeval mind. Thomas will show his reasons for their
necessary existence, which may not convince us. Yet we may believe in
angels, inasmuch as any real conception of the world’s governance by God
requires the fulfilling of His thoughts through media that bring them down
to move and live and realize themselves with each of us. Who, in striving
to express, can do more than symbolize, the ways of God? What symbols
truer than angels have been devised?

    “It is necessary,” opens Thomas,[601] “to affirm (_ponere_) that there
    are incorporeal creatures. For in created things God chiefly intends
    the good, which consists in assimilation to Him. Perfect assimilation
    of the effect to the cause is seen when the effect resembles the cause
    in that through which the cause produces the effect. God produces the
    creature through intelligence and will. Consequently the perfection of
    the universe requires that there should be intellectual creatures. To
    know cannot be the act (_actus_) of the body or of any corporeal
    faculty (_virtus_); because all body is limited to here and now.
    Therefore it is necessary, in order that the universe may be perfect,
    that there should be incorporeal creatures.”[602]

Thomas then argues that the intellectual substance is entirely immaterial.
“Angelic substances are above our understanding. So our understanding
cannot attain to apprehending them as they are in themselves; but only in
its own fashion as it apprehends composite things.” These immaterial
substances exist in exceeding great number, and each is a species, because
there cannot be several immaterial beings of one species, any more than
there could be separate whitenesses or many humanities. Angels in their
nature are imperishable. For nothing is corrupted save as its form is
separated from its matter. But these immaterial substances are not
composed of matter and form, being themselves subsisting forms and
indestructible. Brass may have and lose a circular shape; but the circular
shape cannot be separated from the circle, which it is.

Thomas next shows (_Pars prima_, Qu. li.) that angels have no bodies by
nature joined to them. Body is not of the _ratio_ of intellectual
substances. These (when perfect and not like the human soul) have no need
to acquire knowledge through sensation. But though angels are intellectual
substances, separate (_separatae_) from bodies, they sometimes assume
bodies. In these they can perform those actions of life which have
something in common with other kinds of acts; as speech, a living act, has
something in common with inanimate sounds. Thus far only can physical acts
be performed by angels, and not when such acts essentially belong to
living bodies. Angels may appear as living men, but are not; neither are
they sentient through the organs of their assumed bodies; they do not eat
and digest food; they move only _per accidens_, incidentally to the
inanimate motion of their assumed bodies; they do not beget, nor do they
really speak; “but it is something like speech, when these bodies make
sounds in the air like human voices.”

Dropping the sole remark, that scholasticism has no sense of humour, we
pass on to Thomas’s careful consideration of the angelic relations to
space or locality (Qu. lii. and liii.). “Equivocally only may it be said
that an angel is in a place (_in loco_): through application of the
angelic virtue to some corporeal spot, the angel may be said in some sense
to be there.” But, as angels are finite, when one is said, in this sense,
to be in a place, he is not elsewhere too (like God). Yet the place where
the angel is need not be an indivisible point, but may be larger or
smaller, as the angel wills to apply his virtue to a larger or smaller
body. Two angels may not be in the same place at the same time, “because
it is impossible that there should be two complete immediate causes of one
and the same thing.” Angels are said, likewise equivocally, to move, in a
sense analogous to that in which they are said to be in a place. Such
equivocal motion may be continuous or not. If not continuous, evidently
the angel may pass from one place to another without traversing the
intervening spaces. The angelic movement must take place in time; there
must be a before and after to it, and yet not necessarily with any period
intervening.

Now as to angelic knowledge: _De cognitione Angelorum_. Knowing is no easy
thing for man; and we shall see that it is not a simple matter to know,
without the senses to provide the data and help build up knowledge in the
mind. The function of sense, or its absence, conditions much besides the
mere acquisition of the elements from which men form their thoughts.
Thomas’s exposition of angelic knowledge and modes of knowing is a logical
and consistent presentation of a supersensual psychology and theory of
knowledge.

Entering upon his subject, Thomas shows (Qu. liv.) that knowing
(_intelligere_) is not the _substantia_ or the _esse_ of an angel. Knowing
is _actio_, which is the actuality of faculty, as being (_esse_) is the
actuality of substance. God alone is _actus purus_ (absolute realized
actuality), free from potentiality. His _substantia_ is His being and His
action (_suum esse_ and _suum agere_). “But neither in an angel, nor in
any creature, is _virtus_ or the _potentia operativa_ the same as the
creature’s _essentia_,” or its _esse_ or _substantia_. The difficult
scholastic-Aristotelian categories of _intellectus agens_ and _possibilis_
do not apply to angelic cognition (for which the reader and the angels may
be thankful). The angels, being immaterial intelligences, have no share in
those faculties of the human soul, like sight or hearing, which are
exercised through bodily organs. They possess only intelligence and will.
“It accords with the order of the universe that the supreme intellectual
creature should be intelligent altogether, and not intelligent in part,
like our souls.”

Quaestio lv., concerning the _medium cognitionis angelicae_, is a
scholastic discussion scarcely to be rendered in modern language. The
angelic intelligence is capable of knowing all things; and therefore an
angel does not know through the medium of his _essentia_ or _substantia_,
which are limited. God alone knows all things through His _essentia_. The
angelic intellect is made perfect for knowing by means of certain forms or
ideas (_species_). These are not received from things, but are part of the
angelic nature (_connaturales_). The angelic intelligence (_potentia
intellectiva_) is completed through general concepts, of the same nature
with itself (_species intelligibiles connaturales_). These come to angels
from God at the same time with their being. Such concepts or ideas cover
everything that they can know by nature (_naturaliter_). And Thomas proves
that the higher angels know through fewer and more universal concepts than
the lower.

    “In God an entire plenitude of intellectual cognition is held _in
    one_, to wit, in the divine essence through which God knows all
    things. Intelligent creatures possess such cognition in inferior mode
    and less simply. What God knows through one, inferior intelligences
    know through many; and this many becomes more as the inferiority
    increases. Hence the higher angel may know the sum total of the
    intelligible (_universitatem intelligibilium_) through fewer ideas or
    concepts (_species_); which, however, are more universal since each
    concept extends to more [things]. We find illustration of this among
    our fellows. Some are incapable of grasping intelligible truth, unless
    it be set forth through particular examples. This comes from the
    weakness of their intelligence. But others, of stronger mind, can
    seize many things from a few statements” (Qu. lv. Art. 3).

Through this argument, and throughout the rest of his exposition of the
knowledge of God, angel, and man, we perceive that, with Thomas, knowledge
is superior and more delightful, as it is abstract in character, and
universal in applicability. By knowing the abstract and the universal we
become like to God and the angels; knowledge of and through the particular
is but a necessity of our half-material nature.

Thomas turns now to consider the knowledge had by angels of immaterial
beings, _i.e._ themselves and God (Qu. lvi.): “An angel, being immaterial,
is a subsisting form, and therefore intelligible actually (_actu_, _i.e._
not potentially). Wherefore, through its form, which is its substance, it
knows itself.” Then as to knowledge of each other: God from the beginning
impressed upon the angelic mind the likenesses of things which He created.
For in Him, from the beginning, were the _rationes_ of all things, both
spiritual and corporeal. Through the impression of these _rationes_ upon
the angelic mind, an angel knows other angels as well as corporeal
creatures. Their natures also yield them some knowledge of God. The
angelic nature is a mirror holding the divine similitude. Yet without the
illumination of grace the angelic nature knows not God in His essence,
because no created likeness may represent that.

As for material things (Qu. lvii.), angels have knowledge of them through
the intelligible species or concepts impressed by God on the angelic mind.
But do they know particulars--_singularia_? To deny it, says Thomas,
would detract from the faith which accords to angels the ministration of
affairs. This matter may be thought thus:

    “Things flow forth from God both as they subsist in their own natures
    and as they are in the angelic cognition. Evidently what flowed from
    God in things pertained not only to their universal nature, but to
    their principles of individuation.... And as He causes, so He also
    knows.... Likewise the angel, through the concepts (_species_) planted
    in him by God, knows things not only according to their universal
    nature, but also according to their singularity, in so far as they are
    manifold representations of the one and simple essence.”

One observes that the whole scholastic discussion of universals lies back
of arguments like these.

The main principles of angelic knowledge have now been set forth; and
Thomas pauses to point out to what extent the angels know the future, the
secret thoughts of our hearts, and the mysteries of grace. He has still to
consider the mode and measure of the angelic knowledge from other points
of view. Whatever the angels may know through their implanted natures,
they know perfectly (_actu_); but it may be otherwise as to what is
divinely revealed to them. What they know, they know without the need of
argument. And the discussion closes with remarks on Augustine’s phrase and
conception of the _matutina_ and _vespertina_ knowledge of angels: the
former being the knowledge of things as they are in the Word; the latter
being the knowledge of things as they are in their own natures.[603]


V

That the abstract and the universal is the noble and delectable, we learn
from this exposition of angelic knowledge. We may learn the same from
Thomas’s presentation of the modes and contents of human understanding.
The _Summa theologiae_ follows the Scriptural order of presentation;[604]
which is doubtless the reason why Thomas, instead of passing from
immaterial creatures to the partly immaterial creature man, considers
first the creation of physical things--the Scriptural work of the six
days. After this he takes up the last act of the Creation--man. In the
_Summa_ he considers man so far as his composite nature comes within the
scope of theology. Accordingly the principal topic is the human soul
(_anima_); and the body is regarded only in relation to the soul, its
qualities and its fate. Thomas will follow Dionysius (Pseudo-Areopagite)
in considering first the nature (_essentia_) of the soul, then its
faculties (_virtus sive potentiae_), and thirdly, its mode of action
(_operatio_).

Under the first head he argues (_Pars prima_, Qu. lxxv.) that the soul,
which is the _primum principium_ of life, is not body, but the body’s
consummation (_actus_) and _forma_. Further, inasmuch as the soul is the
_principium_ of mental action, it must be an incorporeal principle
existing by itself. It cannot properly be said to be the man; for man is
not soul alone, but a composite of soul and body. But the soul, being
immaterial and intellectual, is not a composite of form and matter. It is
not subject to corruption. Concerning its union with the body (Qu.
lxxvi.), “it is necessary to say that the mind (_intellectus_), which is
the principle of intellectual action, is the _form_ (_forma_) of the human
body.” One and the same intellectual principle does not pertain to all
human bodies: there is no common human soul, but as many souls as there
are men.[605] Yet no man has a plurality of souls. “If indeed the _anima
intellectiva_ were not united to the body as form, but only as _motor_ (as
the Platonists affirm), it would be necessary to find in man another
substantial form, through which the body should be set in its being. But
if, as we have shown, the soul is united to the body as substantial form,
there cannot be another substantial form beside it” (Qu. lxxvi. Art. 4).
The human soul is fitly joined to its body; for it holds the lowest grade
among intellectual substances, having no knowledge of truth implanted in
it, as the angels have; it has to gather knowledge _per viam sensus_. “But
nature never omits what is necessary. Hence the _anima intellectiva_ must
have not only the faculty of knowing, but the faculty of feeling
(_sentiendi_). Sense-action can take place only through a corporeal
instrument. Therefore the _anima intellectiva_ ought to be united to such
a body, which should be to it a convenient organ of sense” (Art. 5).
Moreover, “since the soul is united to the body as form, it is altogether
in any and every part of the body” (Art. 8).

It is a cardinal point (Qu. lxxvii.) with Thomas that the soul’s
_essentia_ is not its _potentia_: the soul is not its faculties. That is
true only of God. In Him there is no diversity. There is some diversity of
faculty in an angel; and more in man, a creature on the confines of the
corporeal and spiritual creation, in whom concur the powers of both. There
is order and priority among the powers of the soul: the _potentiae
intellectivae_ are higher than the _potentiae sensitivae_, and control
them; while the latter are above the _potentiae nutritivae_. Yet the order
of their generation is the reverse. The highest of the sensitive faculties
is sight. The _anima_ is the subject in which are the powers of knowing
and willing (_potentiae intellectivae_); but the subject in which are the
powers of sensation is the combination of the soul and body. All the
powers of the soul, whether the subject be soul alone or soul and body,
flow from the essence of the soul, as from a source (_principium_).

Thomas follows (Qu. lxxviii.) Aristotle in dividing the powers of the soul
into vegetative, sensitive, appetitive, motor, and intellectual. In taking
up the last, he points out (Qu. lxxix.) that intelligence (_intellectus_)
is a power of the soul, and not the soul itself. He then follows the
Philosopher in showing how intelligence (_intelligere_) is to be regarded
as a passive power, and he presents the difficult Aristotelian device of
the _intellectus agens_, and argues that memory and reason are not to be
regarded as powers distinct from the intelligence (_intellectus_).

How does the soul, while united to the body (the _anima conjuncta_), (1)
know corporeal things which are beneath it? (2) how does it know itself
and what is in itself? and (3) how does it know immaterial substances
which are above it? The exposition of these problems is introduced by (Qu.
lxxxiv.) a historical discussion of the _primi philosophi_ who thought
there was nothing but body in the world. Then came Plato, seeking “to save
some certain cognition of truth” by means of his theory of Ideas. But
Plato seems to have erred in thinking that the form of the known must be
in the knower as it is in the known. This is not necessary. In
sense-perception the form of the thing is not in sense as it is in the
thing. “And likewise the intelligence receives the _species_ (Ideas) of
material and mobile bodies immaterially and immutably, after its own mode;
for the received is in the recipient after the mode of the recipient.
Hence it is to be held that the soul through the intelligence knows bodies
by immaterial, universal, and necessary cognition.”

Thomas sets this matter forth in a manner very illuminating as to his
general position regarding knowledge:

    “It follows that material things which are known must exist in the
    knower, not materially, but immaterially. And the reason of this is
    that the act of cognition extends itself to those things which are
    outside of the knower. For we know things outside of us. But through
    matter, the form of the thing is limited to what is single (_aliquid
    unum_). Hence it is plain that the _ratio_ (proper nature) of
    cognition is the opposite of the _ratio_ of materiality. And therefore
    things, like plants, which receive forms only materially, are in no
    way _cognoscitivae_, as is said in the second book of _De anima_. The
    more immaterially anything possesses the form of the thing known, the
    more perfectly it knows. Wherefore the intelligence, which abstracts
    the species (Idea) not only from matter, but also from individualizing
    material conditions, knows more perfectly than sense, which receives
    the form of the thing known without matter indeed, but with material
    conditions. Among the senses themselves, sight is the most
    _cognoscitivus_, because least material. And among intelligences, that
    is the more perfect which is the more immaterial” (Qu. lxxxiv. Art.
    2).

Then Thomas again differs from Plato, and holds with Aristotle, that the
intelligence through which the soul knows has not its ideas written upon
it by nature, but from the first is capable of receiving them all (sed est
in principio in potentia ad hujusmodi species omnes). Hereupon, and with
further arguments, Thomas shows “that the _species intelligibiles_, by
which our soul knows, do not arise from separate forms” or ideas.

To the converse question, whether intelligent cognition comes from things
of sense, Thomas answers, following Aristotle: “One cannot say that sense
perception is the whole cause of intellectual cognition, but rather in a
certain way is the matter of the cause (_materia causae_).” On the other
hand,

    “it is impossible that the mind, in the state of the present life,
    wherein it is joined to the passive body (_passibili corpori_), should
    know anything actually (_actu_) except by turning itself to images
    (_phantasmata_). And this appears from two arguments. In the first
    place, since the mind itself is a power (_vis_) using no bodily organ,
    its action would not be interrupted by an injury to any bodily organ,
    if for its action there was not needed the action of some faculty
    using a bodily organ. Sense and imagination use a bodily organ. Hence
    as to what the mind knows actually (_actu_), there is needed the
    action of the imagination and other faculties, both in receiving new
    knowledge and in using knowledge already acquired. For we see that
    when the action of the imaginative faculty is interrupted by injury to
    an organ, as with the delirious, the man is prevented from actually
    knowing those things of which he has knowledge. Secondly (as any one
    may observe in himself), whenever he attempts to know (_intelligere_)
    anything, he forms images by way of example, in which he may
    contemplate what he is trying to know. And whenever we wish to make
    any one else understand, we suggest examples, from which he may make
    for himself images to know by.

    “The reason of this is that the knowing faculty is suited to the
    knowable (_potentia cognoscitiva proportionatur cognoscibili_). The
    appropriate object of the intelligence of an angel, who is separate
    from all body, is intelligible immaterial substance (_substantia
    intelligibilis a corpore separata_); through this kind of intelligible
    he cognizes also material things. But the appropriate object of the
    human mind, which is joined to a body, is the essence or nature
    (_quidditas sive natura_) existing in material body; and through the
    natures of visible things of this sort it ascends to some cognition of
    invisible things. It belongs to the idea (_ratio_) of this nature that
    it should exist in some individual having corporeal matter, as it is
    of the concept (_ratio_) of the nature of stone or horse that it
    should be in _this_ stone or _this_ horse. Hence the nature of a stone
    or any material thing cannot be known completely and truly, unless it
    is known as existing in some particular [instance]. We apprehend the
    particular through sense and imagination; and so it is necessary, in
    order that the mind should know its appropriate object, that it should
    turn itself to images, in order to behold the universal nature
    existing in the particular. If, indeed, the appropriate object of our
    intelligence were the separate form, or if the form of sensible
    things did not subsist in the particular [instances], as the
    Platonists say, our mind in knowing would have no need always to turn
    itself to images” (Qu. lxxxiv. Art. 7).

It is next queried whether the judgment of the mind is impeded through
binding (_per ligamentum_) the senses. In view of the preceding argument
the answer is, that since “all that we know in our present state, becomes
known to us through comparison with sensible things, it is impossible that
there should be in us perfect mental judgment when the senses are tied,
through which we take cognizance of sensible things” (Qu. lxxxiv. Art. 8).

This entire argument shows in what firm Aristotelian manner,
scholasticism, in the person of Thomas, set itself upon a basis of sense
perception; through which it still pressed to a knowledge of the
supersensible and abstract. In this argument we also see, as always with
Thomas, that knowledge is perfect and blessed, the more immaterial and
abstract are its modes. All of which will continue to impress us as we
follow Thomas, briefly, through his exposition of the _modus_ and _ordo_
of knowing (_intelligendi_) (Qu. lxxxv.).

The first question is whether our mind knows corporeal things by
abstracting the species from the images--the type from the particular.
There are three grades of the cognizing faculty (_virtutis
cognoscitivae_). The lowest is sensation, which is the act of a bodily
organ. Its appropriate object is form as existing in matter. And since
matter is the principle of individuation (_i.e._ the particularizing
principle from which results the particular or individual), sense
perception is confined to the particular. The highest grade of the
cognitient faculty is that which is independent of bodily organs and
separate from matter, as the angelic intelligence; and its object is form
subsisting without matter. For though angels know material things, they
view them only in the immaterial, to wit, themselves or God. Between the
two is the human mind, which

    “is the _forma_ of the body. So it naturally knows form existing
    individually in corporeal matter, and yet not as form is in such
    matter. But to know form, which is in concrete matter, and yet know it
    not as it is in such matter, is to abstract it from this particular
    matter which the images represent. It follows that our intelligence
    knows material things by abstracting them from images; and through
    reflecting on these material abstractions we reach some cognition of
    the immaterial, just as conversely the angels know the material
    through the immaterial” (Qu. lxxxv. Art. 1).

It is next proved that the soul, through the intelligible species or forms
abstracted from particulars, knows things which are outside the soul. In a
way, intellection arises from sense perception; therefore the sense
perception of the particular precedes the intellectual knowledge of
universals. But, on the other hand, the intelligence, in coming to perfect
cognition, proceeds from the undistinguished to the distinguished, from
the more to the less general, and so knows _animal_ before it knows
_homo_, and _homo_ before it knows Socrates. The next conclusion reads
very neatly in scholastic Latin, but is difficult to paraphrase: it is
that the intelligence may know many things at once (_simul_) _per modum
unius_, but not _per modum multorum_; that is to say, the mind may grasp
at once whatever it may grasp under one species, but cannot know a number
of things at once which fall under different species.

Next as to what our mind knows in material things (Qu. lxxxvi.). It does
not know the particular or singular (_singularia_) in them directly; for
the principle of singularity in material things is the particular matter.
But our mind _knows_ by abstracting from such the species, that is, the
universal. This it knows directly. But it knows _singularia_ indirectly,
inasmuch as, when it has abstracted the intelligible species, it must
still, in order to know completely (_actu_), turn itself to the images in
which it knows the species.

How does the _anima intellectiva_ know itself, and those things which are
in it (Qu. lxxxvii.)? Everything is knowable in so far as it is actually
(_in actu_) and not merely potentially. So the human intelligence knows
itself not through its essence, which is still but potential, but in so
far as it has actually realized itself; knows itself, that is, through its
actuality. The permanent qualities (_habitus_) of the soul exist in a
condition between potentiality and actuality. The mind knows them when
they are actually present or operative.

Does the human intelligence know its own act--know that it knows? In God,
knowing and being are one. Although this is not true of the angelic
intelligence, nevertheless with an angel the prime object of knowledge is
his own essence. With one and the same act an angel knows that it knows,
and knows its essence. But the primal object of the human intelligence is
neither its knowledge (knowing, _intelligere_) nor its essence, but
something extrinsic, to wit, the nature of the material thing. Hence that
is the first object known by the human intelligence; and next is known its
own _actus_, by which that first object is known. Likewise the human
intelligence knows the acts of will. An act of will is nothing but a
certain inclination toward some form of the mind (_formam intellectam_) as
natural appetite is an inclination toward a natural form. The act of will
is in the knowing mind and so is known by it.

So far as to how the soul knows material things, which are below it, and
its own nature and qualities. It is another question whether the soul
knows those things which are above it, to wit, the immaterial substances.
Can the soul in the state of the present life know the angels in
themselves? With lengthy argument, differing from Plato and adhering to
Aristotle, Thomas proves the negative: that in the present life we cannot
know _substantias separatas immateriales secundum seipsas_. Nor can we
come to a knowledge of the angelic substances through knowing material
things.

    “For immaterial substances are altogether of another nature (_ratio_)
    from the whatnesses (_quidditates_) of material things; and however
    much our intelligence abstracts from matter the essence (_quidditas_)
    of the material thing, it will never arrive at anything like an
    immaterial substance. And so, through material substances, we cannot
    know immaterial substances perfectly” (Qu. lxxxviii. Art. 2).

Much less can we thus know God.

The discussion hitherto has been confined to the intellectual capacities
of souls united to their bodies. As to the knowledge which the “separated”
soul may have, other considerations arise akin to those touching the
knowledge possessed by the separated substances called angels. Is the
separated soul able to know? Thomas has shown that so long as the soul is
joined to the body it cannot know anything except by turning itself to
images. If this were a mere accident of the soul, incidental to its
existence in the body, then with that impediment removed, it would return
to its own nature and know simply. But if, as we suppose, this turning to
images is of the nature of the soul, the difficulty grows. Yet the soul
has one mode of existence when united to the body, and another when
separated, but with its nature remaining. Souls united to bodies may know
through resort to images of bodies, which are in the bodily organs; but
when separated, they may know by turning to that which is intelligible
simply, as other separate substances do. Yet still this raises doubt; for
why did not God appoint a nobler way for the soul to know than that which
is natural to it when joined to the body? The perfection of the universe
required that there should be diverse grades among intellectual
substances. The soul is the lowest of them. Its feeble intelligence was
not fit to receive perfect knowledge through universal conceptions, save
when assisted by concrete examples. Without these, souls would have had
but a confused knowledge. Hence, for their more perfect knowledge of
things, they are naturally united to bodies, and so receive a knowledge
from things of sense proper to their condition; just as rude men can be
led to know only through examples. So it was for a higher end that the
soul was united to the body, and knows through resort to images; yet, when
separated, it will be capable of another way of knowing.[606]

Separated from the body, the soul can know itself through itself. It can
know other separated souls perfectly, but the angels, who are higher
natures, only imperfectly, at least through the knowledge which the
separated soul has from its nature; but that may be increased through
grace and glory. The separated soul will know natural objects through the
species (ideas) received from the inflowing divine light; yet less
perfectly than the angels. Likewise, less universally than angels, will
separated souls, by like means of species received from the divine light,
know particular things, and only such as they previously knew, or may know
through some affection or aptitude or the divine decree. For the habit and
aptitude of knowledge, and the knowledge already acquired, will remain in
the separated soul, so far as relates to the knowledge which is in the
intellect, and no longer in the lower perceptive faculties. Neither will
distance from the object affect the soul’s knowledge, since it will know
through the influx of forms (_species_) from the divine light.

    “Yet through the cognition belonging to their nature, separated souls
    do not know what is doing here below. For such souls know the
    particular and concrete (_singularia_) only as from the traces
    (_vestigia_) of previous cognition or affection, or by divine
    appointment. And the souls of the dead by divine decree, and in
    accordance with their mode of existence, are separated from the
    intercourse of the living and joined to the society of spiritual
    substances. Therefore they are ignorant of those things which are done
    among us.”

Nevertheless, it would seem, according to the opinions of Augustine and
Gregory, “that the souls of the saints who see God know all that is done
here. Yet, perfectly joined to the divine righteousness, they are not
grieved, nor do they take part in the affairs of the living, save as the
divine disposition requires.”

    “Still the souls of the dead are able to care for the affairs of the
    living, although ignorant of their condition; just as we have care for
    the dead, though ignorant of their state, by invoking the suffrages of
    the Church. And the souls of the dead may be informed of the affairs
    of the living from souls lately departed hence, or through angels or
    demons, or by the revealing spirit of God. But if the dead appear to
    the living, it is by God’s special dispensation, and to be reckoned as
    a divine miracle” (Qu. lxxxix. Art. 8).


VI

We have thus traced Thomas’s view of the faculty of knowledge, the primary
constituent of beatitude in God, and in angels and men. There are other
elements which not only supplement the faculty of knowledge, but even flow
as of necessity from a full and true conception of that faculty and its
perfect energizing. These needful, yet supplementary, factors are the
faculties of will and love and natural appetite; though the last does not
exist in God or angel or in “separated soul.” The composite creature man
shares it with brutes: it is of enormous importance, since it may affect
his spiritual progress in this life, and so determine his state after
death. Let us observe these qualities in God, in the immaterial substances
called angels, and in man.

In God there is volition as well as intelligence; for _voluntas
intellectum consequitur_; and as God’s _being_ (_esse_) is His knowing
(_intelligere_), so likewise His being is His will (_velle_).[607]
Essentially alike in God and man and angel are the constituents of
spiritual beatitude and existence--knowing, willing, loving. From Creator
down to man, knowledge differs in mode and in degree, yet is essentially
the same. The like is true of will. As to love, because passion is of the
body, love and every mode of turning from or to an object is passionless
in God and the angels. Yet man through love, as well as through willing
and through knowing, may prove his kinship with angels and with God.

God is love, says John’s Epistle. “It is necessary to place love in God,”
says Thomas. “For the first movement of will and any appetitive faculty
(_appetitivae virtutis_) is love (_amor_).” It is objected that love is a
passion; and the passionless God cannot love. Answers Thomas, “Love and
joy and delight are passions in so far as they signify acts (or
actualities, _actus_) of the _appetitus sensitivi_; but they are not
passions when they signify the _actus_ of the _appetitus intellectivi_;
and thus are they placed in God” (_Pars prima_, Qu. xx. Art. 1).

God loves all existences. Now all existences, in so far as they are, are
good. For being itself (_esse_) is in a sense the _good_ of any thing, and
likewise its perfection. It has been shown that God’s will is the cause of
all things; and thus it is proper that a thing should have being, or good,
in so far as it is willed by God. God wills some good to every existent
thing. And since to love is nothing else than to will good to something,
it is evident that God loves all things that are, yet not in the way we
love. For since our will is not the cause of the goodness of things, but
is moved by it as by an object, our love by which we will good to anything
is not the cause of its goodness; but its goodness calls forth the love by
which we wish to preserve and add to the good it has; and for this we
work. But God’s love imparts and creates goodness in things.

The divine love embraces all things in one and the same act of will; but
inasmuch as His love creates goodness, there could be no greater goodness
in one thing than in another unless He willed greater good to one than to
the other: in this sense He may be said to love one creature more than
another; and in this way He loves the better things more. Besides love,
the order of the universe proves God’s _justitia_; an attribute which is
to be ascribed to Him, as Dionysius says, in that He grants to all things
what is appropriate, according to the dignity of the existence of each,
and preserves the nature of each in its own order and virtue. Likewise
_misericordia_ is to be ascribed to God, not as if He were affected by
pitying sadness, but in that He remedies the misery or defects of others.

Thus far as to will and love in God. Next, as to these qualities in
Angels. Have angels will? (_Pars prima_, Qu. lix.). Thomas argues: All
things proceed from the divine will, and all _per appetitum_ incline
toward good. In plants this is called natural appetite. Next above them
come those creatures who perceive the particular good as of the senses;
their inclination toward it is _appetitus sensitivus_. Still above them
are such as know the _ratio_ of the good universally, through their
intelligence. Such are the angels; and in them inclination toward the good
is will. Moreover, since they know the nature of the good, they are able
to form a judgment as to it; and so they have free will: _ubicumque est
intellectus, est liberum arbitrium_. And as their knowledge is above that
of men, so in them free will exists more excellently.

The angels have only the _appetitus intellectivus_ which is will; they are
not irascible or concupiscent, since these belong to the _appetitus
sensitivus_. Only metaphorically can _furor_ and evil concupiscence be
ascribed to demons, as anger is to God--_propter similitudinem effectus_.
Consequently _amor_ and _gaudium_ do not exist as passions in angels. But
in so far as these qualities signify solely an act of will, they are
intellectual. In this sense, to love is to will good to anything, and to
rejoice (_gaudere_) is to rest the will in a good obtained. Similarly,
_caritas_ and _spes_, in so far as they are virtues, lie not in appetite,
but in will; and thus exist in angels. With man the virtues of temperance
and fortitude may relate to things of sense; but not so with angels, who
have no passions to be bridled by these virtues. Temperance is ascribed to
them when they temper their will according to the will divine, and
fortitude, when they firmly execute it (Qu. lix. Art. 4).

In a subsequent portion of _Pars prima_ (Qu. cx.) Thomas has occasion to
point out that, as in human affairs, the more particular power is governed
by the more universal, so among the angels.

    “The higher angels who preside over the lower have more universal
    knowledge. It is likewise clear that the _virtus_ of a body is more
    particular than the _virtus_ of a spiritual substance; for every
    corporeal form is form particularized (_individuata_) through matter,
    and limited to the here and now. But immaterial forms are
    unconditioned and intelligible. And as the lower angels, who have
    forms less universal, are ruled by the higher angels, so all corporeal
    things are ruled by angels. And this is maintained not only by the
    holy Doctors, but by all philosophers who have recognized incorporeal
    substances.”

Next Thomas considers the action of angels upon men, and shows that men
may have their minds illumined by the lower orders of angels, who present
to men _intelligibilem veritatem sub similitudinibus sensibilium_. God
sends the angels to minister to corporeal creatures; in which mission
their acts proceed from God as a cause (_principio_). They are His
instruments. They are sent as custodians of men, to guide and move them to
good. “To every man an angel is appointed for his guard: of which the
reason is, that the guardianship (_custodia_) of the angels is an
execution of divine providence in regard to men.” Every man, while as
_viator_ he walks life’s _via non tuta_, has his guardian angel. And the
archangels have care of multitudes of men (Qu. cxiii.).

Thus Thomas’s, or rather, say the Christian doctrine as to angels, becomes
a corollary necessary to Christian theism, and true at least symbolically.
But--and this is the last point as to these ministering spirits--do the
angels who love without passion, grieve and suffer when those over whom
they minister are lost?

    “Angels grieve neither over the sins nor the punishment of men. For,
    as says Augustine, sadness and grief arise only from what contravenes
    the will. But nothing happens in the world that is contrary to the
    will of the angels and other blessed ones. For their will is entirely
    fixed (_totaliter inhaeret_) in the order of the divine righteousness
    (_Justitiae_); and nothing takes place in the world, save what takes
    place and is permitted by the same. And so, in brief, nothing takes
    place in the world contrary to the will of the blessed” (Qu. cxiii.
    Art. 7).

We come to man. He has will, and free will or choice, as the angels have.
Will is part of the intellectual nature: it is as the _intellectivus
appetitus_. But man differs from the angels in possessing appetites which
belong to his sense-nature and do not perceive the good in its common
aspects; because sense does not apprehend the universal, but only the
particular.[608] Sometimes Thomas speaks of _amor_ as including every form
of desire, intellectual or pertaining to the world of sense. “The first
movement of will and of any appetitive faculty (_virtus_) is amor.”[609]
So in this most general signification _amor_ “is something belonging to
appetite; for the object of both is the good.”

    “The first effect of the desirable (_appetibilis_) upon the
    _appetitus_, is called _amor_; thence follows _desiderium_, or the
    movement toward the desirable; and at last the _quies_ which is
    _gaudium_. Since then _amor_ consists in an effect upon the
    _appetitus_, it is evidently _passio_; most properly speaking when it
    relates to the yearning element (_concupiscibile_), but less properly
    when it relates to will” (_Pars prima_, Qu. xxvi. Art. 2).

Further distinguishing definitions are now in order:

    “Four names are applied to what pertains to the same: _amor_,
    _dilectio_, _caritas_, _et amicitia_. Of the three first, _amor_ has
    the broadest meaning. For all _dilectio_ or _caritas_ is _amor_; but
    not conversely. _Dilectio_ adds to _amor_ a precedent choice
    (_electionem praecedentem_) as its name indicates. Hence _dilectio_ is
    not in the concupiscent nature, but in the will, and therefore in the
    rational nature. _Caritas_ adds to _amor_ a certain _perfectionem
    amoris_, inasmuch as what is loved, is esteemed as very precious, as
    the name shows” (_Ibid._ Art. 3).

Moreover, _amor_ may be divided into _amor amicitiae_, whereby we wish
good to the _amicus_, and _amor concupiscentiae_, whereby properly we
desire a good to ourselves.

The Good is the object and, in that sense, the cause, of _amor_ (Qu.
xxvii.).

    “But love requires a cognition of the good which is loved. Therefore
    the Philosopher says, that bodily sight is the cause of _amoris
    sensitivi_. Likewise contemplation of spiritual beauty or goodness is
    the cause of _amoris spiritualis_. Thus, therefore, cognition is the
    cause of love, inasmuch as the good cannot be loved unless known.”

From this broad conception of _amor_ the argument rises to _amor_ in its
purest phases, which correspond to the highest modes of knowledge man is
capable of. They are considered in their nature, in their causes, and
effects. It is evident whither we are travelling in this matter.

    “Love (_amor_) may be perfect or imperfect. Perfect love is that by
    which some one is loved for himself, as a man loves a friend.
    Imperfect love is that by which some one loves a thing, not for
    itself, but in order that that good may come to him, as a man loves
    the thing he desires. The first love pertains to _caritas_ which
    cleaves to God (_inhaeret Deo_) for Himself (_secundum
    seipsum_).”[610]

_Caritas_ is one of the theological virtues, and as such Thomas treats it.
To it corresponds the “gift” of _sapientia_, likewise a virtue bestowed by
God, but more particularly regarded as the “gift” of the Holy Spirit.
_Caritas_ is set not in the _appetitus sensitivus_, but in the will. Yet
as it exceeds our natural faculties, “it is not in us by nature, nor
acquired through our natural powers; but through the infusion of the Holy
Spirit, who is the _amor Patris et Filii_.” He infuses _caritas_ according
to His will; and it will increase as we draw near to God; nor is there any
bound to its augmentation. May _caritas_ be perfect in this life? In one
sense it never can be perfect, because no creature ever can love God
according to His infinite lovableness.

    “But on the part of him who wills to love (_ex parte diligentis_),
    _caritas_ is perfect when he loves as much as he is able. Which may be
    taken in three ways. In one way, as the whole heart of man is always
    borne toward God; and this is the perfection of the love of home
    (_caritas patriae_), unattainable here, where because of this life’s
    infirmities it is impossible always actually to think upon God, and be
    drawn toward Him by voluntary love (_dilectione_). In another way, as
    a man may strive to keep himself free for God and things divine,
    laying other matters aside, save as life’s need requires: and that is
    the perfection of _caritas_, possible in this life, yet not for all
    who have _caritas_. And the third way, when any one habitually sets
    his heart on God, so that he thinks and wills nothing that is contrary
    to the divine love: this perfection is common to all who have
    _caritas_.”[611]

The _caritas_ with which we love God, extends to our neighbours, and even
to our enemies, for God’s sake; also to ourselves, including our bodies;
it embraces sinners, but not their sinfulness. It embraces the angels.
There is order and grade in _caritas_, according to its relationship to
God, the source of beatitude and voluntary love (_dilectionis_). God is to
be loved _ex caritate_ above all; for He is loved as the cause of
beatitude, while our neighbour is loved as a participant with us in the
beatitude from God. We should love God more than ourselves; because
beatitude is in God as in the common and fontal source of all things that
participate in beatitude.

    “But, after God, man should love himself, in so far as he is spirit
    (_secundum naturam spiritualem_), more than any one else. This is
    plain from the very reason of loving. God is loved as the principle of
    good, on which the _dilectio caritatis_ is based. Man loves himself
    _ex caritate_ for the reason that he is a participator in that good.
    He loves his neighbour because of his association (_societas_) in that
    good.... Participation in the divine good is a stronger reason for
    loving, than association in this participation. Therefore, man _ex
    caritate_ should love himself more than his neighbour; and the mark
    (_signum_) of this is, that man should not commit any sin barring his
    participation in this beatitude, in order to free his neighbour from
    sin.... But one should love his neighbour’s salvation more than his
    own _body_.”[612]

We may love some of our neighbours more than others; for those bound to us
by natural ties and proximity can be loved more and in more actual ways.
The order and grades of love will endure when our natures are perfected in
glory.

Love (_caritas_) is the supreme theological virtue. It comes to us in this
life through grace; it can be perfected only when grace is consummated in
glory. Likewise the highest knowledge possible in this life comes through
grace, to be perfected in glory. All is from God, and that which, of all
the rest, seems most freely given is the divine influence disposing the
intelligence and will toward good, and illuminating these best God-given
faculties. This, as _par excellence_, through the exceeding bounty of its
free bestowal, is called _gratia_ (grace). It is a certain habitual
disposition of the soul; it is not the same as _virtus_, but a divinely
implanted disposition, in which the virtues must be rooted; it is the
imparted similitude of the divine nature, and perfects the nature of the
soul, so far as that has part in likeness to the divine: it is the medial
state between nature and that further consummation of the grace-illumined
nature, which is glory; and so it is the beginning, the _inchoatio_, of
our glorified beatitude. Clearly, grace is no part of our inborn nature,
and does not belong to our natural faculties. It is a divinely bestowed
increment, directing our natural faculties toward God and uplifting them
to higher capacities of knowing and loving.

To follow Thomas’s exposition of grace a little more closely:[613] man,
through his natural powers, may know truth, but not the highest; and
without grace, our fallen nature cannot will all the good belonging to it
(_connaturale_), nor love God above all else, nor merit eternal life.
“Grace is something supernatural in man coming from God.” It

    “is not the same as virtue; and its subject (_i.e._ its possessor,
    that in which it is set) cannot be a faculty (_potentia_) of the soul;
    for the soul’s faculties, as perfected, are conceived to be virtues.
    Grace, which is prior to virtue, is set, not in the faculties, but in
    the essence of the soul. Thus, as through his faculty of knowing
    (_potentiam intellectivam_), man shares the divine knowledge by the
    virtue of faith, and through the faculty of will shares the divine
    love by the virtue of _caritas_, so by means of a certain similitude
    he shares in the divine nature through some regeneration or
    recreation” (_Pars_ I. ii., Qu. cx. Art. 4).

Grace may be conceived either as “divine aid, moving us to willing and
doing right, or as a formative and abiding (_habituale_) gift, divinely
placed in us” (Qu. cxi. Art. 2). “The gift of grace exceeds the power of
any created nature; and is nothing else than a sharing (_participatio_) of
the divine nature” (Qu. cxii. Art. 1).

So it is clear that without grace man cannot rise to the highest knowledge
and the purest love of which he is capable in this life; far less can he
reach that final and perfected blessedness which is expected hereafter.
For this he must possess the virtue of Faith, which comes not without
grace.

    “The perfection of the rational creature consists not only in that
    which may be his, in accordance with his nature; but also in that
    which may come to him from some supernatural sharing in the divine
    goodness. The final beatitude of man consists in some supernatural
    vision of God. Man can attain to that only through some mode of
    learning from God the Teacher, and he must believe God as a disciple
    believes his master” (_Pars_ II. ii., Qu. ii. Art. 3).

Within the province of the Christian Faith “it is necessary that man
should accept _per modum fidei_ not only what is above reason, but also
what may be known through reason.” (Art. 4). He must believe explicitly
the _prima credibilia_, that is to say, the Articles of Faith; it is
enough if he believes other _credibilia_ implicitly, by holding his mind
prepared to accept whatever Scripture teaches (Art. 5).

    “To believe is an act of the intellect (_actus intellectus_) as moved
    by will to assenting. It proceeds from the will and from the
    intellect.... Yet it is the immediate act of the intellect, and
    therefore faith is in the intellect as in a subject [_i.e._
    possessor]” (Qu. iv. Art. 2).

And Thomas, having shown the function of will in any act of faith, passes
on by the same path to connect _fides_ with _caritas_:

    “Voluntary acts take their _species_ from the end which is the object
    of volition. That from which anything receives its species, occupies
    the place held by _form_ in material things. Hence, as it were, the
    _form_ of any voluntary act is the end to which it is directed
    (_ordinatur_). Manifestly, an act of faith is directed to the object
    willed (which is the good) as to an end. But good which is the end of
    faith, to wit, the divine good, is the proper object of _caritas_. And
    so _caritas_ is called the _form_ of faith, in so far as through
    _caritas_ the act of faith is perfected and given form” (Qu. iv. Art.
    3).

Thomas makes his conclusion more precise:

    “As faith is the consummation of the intellect, that which pertains to
    the intellect, pertains, _per se_, to faith. What pertains to will,
    does not, _per se_, pertain to faith. The increment making the
    difference between the faith which has form and faith which lacks it
    (_fides formata_, _fides informis_), consists in that which pertains
    to will, to wit, to _caritas_, and not in what pertains to intellect”
    (Qu. iv. Art. 4).

Only the _fides_ which is formed and completed in _caritas_ is a virtue
(Art. 5). And Thomas says concisely (Qu. vi. Art. 1) what in many ways has
been made evident before: For Faith, it is necessary that the _credibilia_
should be propounded, and then that there should be assent to them; but
since man, in assenting to those things which are of the Faith, is lifted
above his nature, his assent must proceed from a supernatural principle
working within him, which is God moving him through grace.

It is not hard to see why two gifts (_dona_) of the Holy Spirit should
belong to the virtue Faith, to wit, understanding and knowledge,
_intellectus et scientia_. Thomas gives the reasons in an argument germane
to his Aristotelian theory of cognition:

    “The object of the knowing faculty is _that which is_.... Many kinds
    of things lie hidden within, to which the _intellectus_ of man should
    penetrate. Beneath the _accidens_ the substantial nature of the thing
    lies hidden; beneath words lie their meanings; beneath similes and
    figures, lies the figured truth--_veritas figurata_ (for things
    intelligible are, as it were, within things sensible); and in causes
    lie hidden the effects, and conversely. Now, since human cognition
    begins with sense, as from without, it is clear that the stronger the
    light of the intellect, the further it will penetrate to the inmost
    depths. But the light of our natural intellect is of finite virtue,
    and may reach only to what is limited. Therefore man needs the
    supernatural light, in order to penetrate to the knowledge which
    through the natural light he is not able to know; and that
    supernatural light given to man is called the _donum intellectus_”
    (Qu. viii. Art. 1).

This gift follows grace. Grace is more perfect than nature. It does not
abrogate, but perfects the natural faculties. Nor does it fail in those
matters in which man’s natural power is competent (Qu. ix. Art. 1). So,
besides the _donum intellectus_, to Faith belongs the _donum scientiae_
also, which brings and guides knowledge of human things (Art. 2).

And now we shall not be surprised to find _sapientia_, the very highest
gift of the Spirit, attached to the grace-given virtue caritas. For
_caritas_ is the informing principle of Faith, and the highest virtue of
the grace-illumined will. The will, be it remembered, belongs to man’s
intellectual nature; its object is the good which is known by the mind
(_bonum intellectum_). “_Sapientia_ (wisdom, right knowledge as to the
highest cause, which is God) signifies rectitude of judgment in accordance
with the _rationes divinae_,” the ideas and reasons which exist in God.
Rectitude of judgment regarding things divine may arise from rational
inquiry; in which case it pertains to the _sapientia_ which is an
intellectual virtue. But it may also spring from affinity to those things
themselves; and then it is a gift of the Holy Spirit (II. ii., Qu. xlv.
Art. 2).

Says Thomas:

    “By the name _beatitude_ is understood the final perfection of the
    rational or intellectual nature. This consists for this life in such
    contemplation as we may have here of the highest intelligible good,
    which is God; but above this felicity is that other felicity which we
    expect when we shall see God as He is” (_Pars_ I., Qu. lxii Art 1).

But mark: the perfection of the intellectual nature does not consist
merely in knowing, narrowly taken. The right action of will is also
essential, of the will directed toward the highest good, which is God: and
this is _caritas_, of which the corresponding gift from the Spirit is
wisdom. In accord with this full consummation of human nature, comprising
the perfection of cognition and will, Thomas outlines his conception of
the _vita contemplativa_, the life of most perfect beatitude attainable on
earth:

    “The _vita contemplativa_ is theirs whose resolve is set upon the
    contemplation of truth. Resolve is an act of will; because resolve is
    with respect to the end, which is the object of will. Thus the _vita
    contemplativa_, according to the essence of its action, is of the
    intelligence; but so far as it pertains to what moves us to engage in
    such action, it is of the will, which moves all the other faculties,
    including the intelligence, to act. Appetitive energy (_vis
    appetitiva_) moves toward contemplating something, either sensibly or
    intellectually: sometimes from love of the thing seen, and sometimes
    from love of the knowledge itself, which arises from contemplation.
    And because of this, Gregory sets the _vita contemplativa_ in the love
    of God--_in caritate Dei_--to wit, inasmuch as some one, from a
    willing love (_dilectio_) of God burns to behold His beauty. And
    because any one is rejoiced when he attains what he loves, the _vita
    contemplativa_ is directed toward _dilectio_[614] which lies in affect
    (_in affectu_); by which _amor_ also is intended” (II. ii., Qu. clxxx.
    Art. 1).

The moral virtues, continues Thomas, do not pertain _essentially_ to this
_vita_. But they may promote it, by regulating the passions and quieting
the tumult of outside affairs. In principle it is fixed upon the
contemplation of truth, which here we see but in a glass darkly; and so we
help ourselves along by contemplating the effects of the divine cause in
the world.

Thus final beatitude, and its mortal approach in the _vita contemplativa_
of this earth, is of the mind, both in its knowledge and its love.
Immateriality, spirituality, is with Thomas primarily intellectual. Yet
his beatitude is not limited to the knowing faculties. It embraces will
and love. The grace of God and the gifts of the Holy Spirit touch love as
well as knowledge, raising one and both to final unison of aim. Thus far
in this life, while in the life to come, these grace-uplifted qualities of
knowledge, and that choosing love (_dilectio_) which rises from knowledge
of the good, are perfected _in gloria_.

Further than this we shall not go with Thomas, nor follow him, for
example, through his exposition of the means of salvation--the Incarnation
and the sacraments. Nor need we further mark the prodigious range of his
theology, or his metaphysics, logic, or physics. To all this many books
have been devoted. We are but seeking to realise his intellectual
interests and qualities, in such way as to bring them within the compass
of our sympathy. A more encyclopaedic and systematic presentation of his
teaching is proper for those who would trace, or perhaps attach themselves
to, particular doctrines; or would find in scholasticism, even in Thomas,
some special authoritativeness. For us these doctrines have but the
validity of all human striving after truth. Moreover, perhaps a truer view
of Thomas, the theologian and philosopher, is gained from following a few
typical forms of his teaching presented in his own exposition, than by
analyzing his thought with later solvents which he did not apply, and
presenting his matter classified as he would not have ordered it, and in
modern phrases, which have as many meanings foreign to scholasticism as
scholasticism has thoughts not to be translated into modern ways of
thinking.




