BOOK VI

LATINITY AND LAW




CHAPTER XXX

THE SPELL OF THE CLASSICS

      I. CLASSICAL READING.

     II. GRAMMAR.

    III. THE EFFECT UPON THE MEDIAEVAL MAN; HILDEBERT OF LAVARDIN.


I

During all the mediaeval centuries, men approached the Classics expecting
to learn from them. The usual attitude toward the classical heritage was
that of docile pupils looking for instruction. One may recall the
antecedent reasons of this, which have already been stated at length. In
Italy, letters survived as the most impressive legacy from an
overshadowing past. In the north, save where they lingered on from the
antique time, they came in the train of Latin Christianity, and were
offered to men under the same imposing conditions of a higher civilization
authoritatively instructing ruder peoples. Moreover, between the ancient
times which produced the classic literature and the Carolingian period
there intervened centuries of degeneracy and transition, when the Classics
were used pedagogically to teach grammar and rhetoric. Then grammars were
composed or revised, and other handbooks of elementary instruction. The
Classics still were loved; but how shall men love beyond their own
natures? Gifted Jerome, great Augustine, loved them with an ardour
bringing its own misgivings. Other lovers, like Ausonius and Apollinaris
Sidonius, were pedantic imitators.

Both north and south of the Alps another and obviously enduring cause
fostered the habit of regarding the Classics as storehouses of knowledge:
the fact that they were such for all the mediaeval centuries. They
included not only poetry and eloquence, but also history, philosophy,
natural knowledge, law and polity. The knowledge contained in them
exceeded what the men of western Europe otherwise possessed. As century
after century passed, mediaeval men learned more for themselves, and also
drew more largely on the classic store. Yet it remained unexhausted. The
twelfth and thirteenth centuries constitute the great mediaeval epoch. Men
were then opening their eyes a little to observe the natural world, and
were thinking a little for themselves. Nevertheless the chief increase in
knowledge issued from the gradual discovery and mastering of the works of
Aristotle. These centuries, like their predecessors, make clear that men
who inherit from a greater past a universal literature containing the best
they can conceive and more knowledge than they can otherwise attain, will
be likely to regard every part of this literature as in some way a source
of knowledge, physical or metaphysical, historical or ethical. And the
Classics merited such regard; for where they did not instruct in science,
they imparted knowledge of life, and norms and instances of conduct, from
which men still may draw guidance. We have outlearned the physics, and
perhaps the metaphysics of the Greeks; their knowledge of nature, in
comparison with ours, was but as a genial beginning; their polities and
their formal ethics we have tried and tested; but we have not risen above
the power and inspiration of the story of Greece and Rome, and the
exemplifications of life in the Greek and Latin Classics. It has not
ceased to be true that he who best loves the Classics, and most deeply
feels and glories in their unique excellence as literature, is he who
still draws life from them, and discipline and knowledge. Their true
lovers, like the true lovers of all noble literature, are always in a
state of pupilage to the poems and the histories they love.

Obviously then no final word lies in the statement that through the Middle
Ages men turned to the Classics for instruction. They did indeed turn to
them for all kinds of knowledge, and for discipline. Often they looked for
instruction from Ovid or Virgil in a way to make us smile. Often they
were like schoolboys, dully conning words which they did not feel and so
did not understand. But in the tenth century, and in the twelfth, some men
admired and loved the Latin Classics, and drew from them, as we may,
lessons which are learned only by those who love aright.

It would be hard to say what the men of the Middle Ages did not thus gain.
The pagan classical literature was one of humanity in its full range of
interests. This was true of the Greek; and from the Greek, the universal
human passed to the Latin, which the Middle Ages were to know. In both
literatures, man was a denizen of earth. The laws of mortality and fate
were held before his eyes; and the action of the higher powers bore upon
mortal happiness, rather than upon any life to come. When reflecting upon
the use and influence of the Classics through the Middle Ages, it is
always to be kept in mind that the antique literature was the literature
of this life and of this world; that it was universal in its humanity, and
still in the Middle Ages might touch every human love and human interest
not directly connected with the hopes and terrors of the Judgment Day.

So whenever educated mediaeval men were drawn by the ambitions or moved by
the finer joys of human life, it lay in their path to seek instruction or
satisfaction from some antique source. If a man wished the common
education of a clerk, he drew it from antique text-books and their
commentaries. Grammar and rhetoric meant Latin grammar and Latin rhetoric;
dialectic also was Latin and antique. Likewise the quadrivium of
arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music, could be studied only in
Latin. These ordinary branches of education having been mastered, if then
the man’s tastes or ambitions turned to the interests of earth (and who
except the saintly recluse was not so drawn?) he would still look to the
antique. A civilian or an ecclesiastic would need some knowledge of law,
which for the most part was Roman, even when disguised as Canon law.[152]
Did a man incline toward philosophy, and the scrutiny of life’s deeper
problems, again the source was the antique; and when he lifted his mind to
theology, he would still find himself reasoning in categories of antique
dialectic. Finally, and this was a broad field of humane inclination, if a
clerkly educated man loved poetry, eloquence, and history, for their own
sakes, he also would turn to the antique.

There is scarcely need to revert again to the use of the Classics in the
earlier Middle Ages. We have seen that in Italy they never ceased to form
the conscious background to all intellectual life; and that in the north,
letters came a handmaid in the train of Latin Christianity--a handmaid
that was apt to assert her own value, and also charm the minds of men.
From the first, it was the orthodox view that Latin letters should provide
the education enabling men to understand the Christian religion
adequately. This is the object set forth in Charlemagne’s Capitularies
upon education.[153] Three hundred years later Honorius of Autun says in
his sermonizing way:

    “Not only, beloved, do the sacred writings lead us to eternal life,
    but profane letters also teach us; for edifying matter may be drawn
    from them. In view of sacred examples no one should be scandalized at
    this. For the children of Israel spoiled the Egyptians; they took gold
    and silver, gems and precious vestments, which they afterwards turned
    into God’s treasury to build the tabernacle.”[154]

Honorius used Augustine’s reference to the Egyptians, and followed this
Augustinian view, always recognized as orthodox in the Middle Ages. It was
narrower than the practice among those who followed letters. Gerbert at
the close of the tenth century loved to teach and read the pagan writers,
and drew from them training and discipline.[155] In the next century, the
German monk Froumund of Tegernsee, with Bernward and Godehard, bishops of
Hildesheim, are instances of German love of antique letters.[156] Yet
lofty souls might choose to limit their reading of the Classics, at least
in theory, to the needs of their Latinity. Such a one was Hugo of
St.-Victor, scholar, theologian, man of genius;[157] he professed to care
more for the Christian ardours of the soul than for learning even as a
means of righteousness, and chose to take the side of those who would
read the classic authors only so far as the needs of education demanded:

    “There are two kinds of writings, first those which are termed the
    _artes_ proper, secondly, those which are the supplements
    (_appendentia_) of the _artes_. _Artes_ comprise the works grouped
    under (_supponuntur_) philosophy, those which contain some fixed and
    determined matter of philosophy, as grammar, dialectic and the like.
    _Appendentia artium_ are those [writings] which touch philosophy less
    nearly and are occupied with some subject apart from it; and yet
    sometimes offer flotsam and jetsam from the _artes_, or simply as
    narratives smooth the road to philosophy. All the songs of poets are
    such--tragedies, comedies, satires, heroics, and lyrics too, and
    iambics, besides certain didactic works (_didascalica_); tales
    likewise, and histories; also the writings of those nowadays called
    philosophers, who extend a brief matter with lengthy circumlocution,
    and thus darken a simple meaning.

    “Note then well the distinction I have drawn for thee: distinct and
    different (_duo_) are the _artes_ and their _appenditia_, ... and
    often from the latter the student will gain much labour and little
    fruit. The _artes_, without their _appenditia_, may make the reader
    perfect; but the latter, without the _artes_, can bring no whit of
    perfection. Wherefore one should first of all devote himself to the
    _artes_, which are so fundamental, and to the aforesaid seven above
    all, which are the means and instruments (_instrumenta_) of all
    philosophy. Then let the rest be read, if one has leisure, since
    sometimes the playful mingled with the serious especially delights us,
    and we are apt to remember a moral found in a tale.”[158]

Temperament affected Hugo’s view. He was of the spiritual aristocracy, who
may be somewhat disdainful of the common means by which men get their
education and round out their natures. The mechanical monotony of pedagogy
grated on him and evoked the ironical sketch of a school-room, which he
put in his dialogue on the Vanity of the World. The little Discipulus,
directed by his Magister, is surveying human things.

    “Turn again, and look,” says the latter, “and what do you see?”

    “I see the schools of learners. There is a great crowd, and of all
    ages, boys and youths, men young and old. They study various things.
    Some practise their rude tongue at the alphabet and at words new to
    them. Others listen to the inflection of words, their composition and
    derivation; then by reciting and repeating them they try to commit
    them to memory. Others furrow the waxen tablets with a stylus. Others,
    guiding the calamus with learned hand, draw figures of different
    shapes and colours on parchments. Still others with sharper zeal seem
    to dispute on graver matters and try to trip each other with twistings
    and impossibilities (_gryphis_?). I see some also making calculations,
    and some producing various sounds upon a cord stretched on a frame.
    Others, again, explain and demonstrate geometric figures; and yet
    others with various instruments show the positions and courses of the
    stars and the movement of the heavens. Others, finally, consider the
    nature of plants, the constitution of men, and the properties and
    powers of things.”

The Disciple is captivated with this many-coloured show of learning; but
the Master declares it to be mostly foolishness, distracting the student
from understanding his own nature, his Creator, and his future lot.[159]

These are examples, which might be multiplied indefinitely, of the pious
mediaeval view that the _artes_, with a very little reading of the
_auctores_, were proper for the educated Christian, whose need was to
understand Scripture. Sometimes, stung, at least rhetorically, by fear of
the lust and idolatry of the antique, mediaeval souls cry out against its
lures, even as Jerome’s Christianly protesting nature dreamed that famous
dream of exclusion from heaven as a “Ciceronian.” Alcuin, who led the
educational movement under Charlemagne, gently chides one whose fondness
for Virgil made him forget his friend--“would that the Gospels rather than
the _Aeneid_ filled thy breast.”[160] Three hundred years later, St. Peter
Damiani, himself a virtuoso in letters and a sometime teacher of rhetoric,
arraigns the monks for teaching grammar rather than things spiritual.[161]
Damiani speaks with the harshness of one who fears what he loves. In
France, about the same time, our worthy sermon-writer, Honorius of Autun,
liked the profanities well enough, and drew from them apt moral tales,
which preachers might introduce to rouse drowsy congregations. Yet he
directs his pulpit-thunder at the _cives Babyloniae_, the _superbi_, who
after their several tastes finger profane literature to their peril:
“Those delighting in quibbling learn Aristotle: the lovers of war have
Maro, and the lustful idlers their Naso. Lucan and Statius incite
discords, while Horace and Terence equip the pert and wanton
(_petulantes_)--but since the names of these are blotted from the book of
life, I shall not commemorate them with my lips.”[162]

This with the excellent Honorius was pious rhetoric. Yet the love and fear
of antique letters caused anxiety in many a mediaeval soul, deflected by
them from its narrow path to the heavenly Jerusalem. Indeed the love of
letters and of knowledge was to play its part, and might take one side or
the other, according to the motive of their pursuit, in the great
mediaeval _psychomachia_ between the cravings of mortal life and the
militant insistencies of the soul’s salvation. This conflict, not confined
to mediaeval monks, has its universal aspects. It echoes in the sigh of
Michelangelo over the

                  “affectuosa fantasia,
  Che l’ arte si fece idolo e monarca,”

--which had so long drawn his heart from Eternity.[163]

Commonly, however, this conflict did not greatly disturb scholars who felt
in some degree the classic spell so manifold of delight in themes
delightful, of pleasure somehow drawn from clear statement and convincing
sequence of thought, of even deeper happiness springing from the stirring
of those faculties through which man rejoices in knowledge. To be sure,
readers of the Classics, who drew joy from them or satisfaction, or humane
instruction, were comparatively few in the mediaeval centuries, as they
are to-day. And undoubtedly in the Middle Ages the Classics usually were
read in unenlightened schoolboy fashion. Yet making these reservations, we
may be sure that letters yielded up their joys to the chosen few in every
mediaeval century. “Amor litterarum ab ipso fere initio pueritiae mihi est
innatus,” wrote Lupus in the ninth.[164] Gerbert might have said the
same, and many of the men who taught at Chartres in the generations
following. So likewise might have said John of Salisbury. In studying the
Classics he certainly looked to them for instruction. But he also loved
them, and found companionship and solace in them, as he says, and as
Cicero before him had said of letters.

We may ask ourselves what sort of pleasure do _we_ get from reading the
Classics? not necessarily a light distracting of the mind, but rather a
deeper gratification: thought is aroused and satisfied, and our nature is
appeased by the admirable presentation of things admirable. At the same
time we may be conscious of discipline and benefit. There is good reason
to suppose that a like pleasure, or satisfaction, with discipline and
instruction, came to this exceedingly clever John from reading Terence,
Virgil and Ovid, Horace, Juvenal, Lucan, Persius and Statius, Cicero,
Seneca and Quintilian--for he read them all.[165] John is affected,
impressed, and trained by his classic reading; he has absorbed his
authors; he quotes from them as spontaneously and aptly as he quotes from
Scripture. A quotation from the one or the other may give final point to
an argument, and have its own eloquent suggestions. Sometimes the tone of
one of his own letters--which usually are excellent in form and
language--may agree with that of the pithy antique quotation garnishing
it. A mediaeval writer was not likely to say just what we should when
expressing ourselves on the same matter. Yet John makes quite clear to us
how he cared for antique letters, in the Prologue to his _Polycraticus_,
his chief work on philosophy and life; and we may take his word as to the
satisfaction which he drew from them, since his own writings prove his
assiduity in their cult. This prologue is somewhat _cherché_, and imbued
with a preciosity of sentiment putting one in mind of Cicero’s oration
_Pro Archia poeta_.

    “Most delightful in many ways, but in this especially, is the fruit of
    letters, that banishing the reserve of intervening place and time,
    they bring friends into each other’s presence, and do not suffer
    noteworthy things to be obliterated by dust. For the arts would have
    perished, laws would have vanished, the offices of faith and religion
    would have fallen away, and even the correct use of language would
    have failed, had not the divine pity, as a remedy for human infirmity,
    provided letters for the use of mortals. Ancient examples, which
    incite to virtue, would have corrected and served no one, had not the
    pious solicitude of writers transmitted them to posterity.... Who
    would know the Alexanders and the Caesars, or admire Stoics and
    Peripatetics, had not the monuments of writers signalized them?
    Triumphal arches promote the glory of illustrious men from the carved
    inscription of their deeds. Thereby the observer recognizes the
    Liberator of his Country, the Establisher of Peace. The light of fame
    endures for no one save through his own or another’s writing. How many
    and how great kings thinkest thou there have been, of whom there is
    neither speech nor cogitation? Vainly have men stormed the heights of
    glory, if their fame does not shine in the light of letters. Other
    favour or distinction is as fabled Echo, or the plaudits of the Play,
    ceasing the moment it has begun.

    “Besides all this, solace in grief, recreation in labour, cheerfulness
    in poverty, modesty amid riches and delights, faithfully are bestowed
    by letters. For the soul is redeemed from its vices, and even in
    adversity refreshed with sweet and wondrous cheer, when the mind is
    intended upon reading or writing what is profitable. Thou shalt find
    in human life no more pleasing or more useful employment; unless
    perchance when, with heart dilated through prayer and divine love, the
    mind perceives and arranges within itself, as with the hand of
    meditation, the great things of God. Believe one who has tried it,
    that all the sweets of the world, compared with these exercises, are
    wormwood.”[166]

Hereupon, still addressing himself to his friend and patron, Thomas à
Becket, John suggests that these recreations are peculiarly beneficial to
men in their circumstances, burdened with affairs; and he puts his
principles in practice, by launching forth upon his lengthy work of
learned and philosophic disquisition.

To supplement this outline of John’s appreciation of the Classics, it will
be interesting to look into the literary interpretation of a classical
poem, from the pen of one of his contemporaries. So little is known of the
author, Bernard Silvestris, that he usually has been confused with his
more famous fellow, Bernard of Chartres. We may refer to both of them
again.[167] Here our business is solely with the _Commentum Bernardi
Silvestris super sex libros Aeneidos Virgilii_.[168] The writer draws from
the _Saturnalia_ of the fifth-century grammarian, Macrobius; but his
allegorical interpretation of the _Aeneid_ seems to be his own. He finds
in the _Aeneid_ a twofold consideration, in that its author meant to teach
philosophic truth, and at the same time was not inattentive to the poetic
plot.

    “Since then Virgil in this poem is both philosopher and poet, we shall
    first expound the purpose and method of the poet.... His aim is to
    unfold the calamities of Aeneas and other Trojans, and the labours of
    the exiles. Herein disregarding the truth of history as told by Dares
    the Phrygian,[169] and seeking to win the favour of Augustus, he
    adorns the facts with figments. For Virgil, greatest of Latin poets,
    wrote in imitation of Homer, greatest of Greek poets. As Homer in the
    _Iliad_ narrates the fall of Troy and in the _Odyssey_ the exile of
    Ulysses; so Virgil in the second Book briefly relates the overthrow of
    Troy, and in the rest the labours of Aeneas. Consider the twin order
    of narration, the natural and the artistic (_artificialem_). The
    natural is when the narrative proceeds according to the sequence of
    events, telling first what happened first. Lucan and Statius keep to
    this order. The artistic is when we begin in the middle of the story,
    and thence revert to the commencement. Terence writes thus, and Virgil
    in this work. It would have been the natural order to have described
    first the destruction of Troy, and then brought the Trojans to Crete,
    from Crete to Sicily, and from Sicily to Libya. But he first brings
    them to Dido, and introduces Aeneas relating the overthrow of Troy and
    the other things that he has suffered.[170]

    “Up to this point we show how he proceeds: next let us observe why he
    does it so. With poets there is the reason of usefulness, as with a
    satirist; the reason of pleasure, as with a writer of comedies; and
    again these two combined, as with the historical poet. As Horace says:

      ‘Aut prodesse volunt aut delectare poetae,
       Aut simul et iucunda et idonea dicere vitae.’

    “This kind of a historical poem is shown by its figurative and
    polished diction and in the various mischances and deeds narrated. If
    any one will study to imitate it he will gain skill in writing. The
    narrative also contains instances and arguments for following the
    right and avoiding what is evil. Hence a twofold profit to the reader:
    skill in writing, gained through imitation, and prudence in conduct,
    drawn from example and precept. For instance, in the labours of Aeneas
    we have an example of endurance; and one of piety, in his affection
    for Anchises and Ascanius. From the reverence which he shows the gods,
    from the oracles which he supplicates, from the sacrifices which he
    offers, from the vows and prayers which he pours forth, we feel drawn
    to religion: while through Dido’s unbridled love, we are recalled from
    desire for the forbidden.”

The above is excellent, but not particularly original. It shows, however,
that Bernard could appreciate the _Aeneid_ in this way. His allegorical
interpretation is of a piece with current mediaeval methods. Yet to take a
poem allegorically was not distinctively mediaeval; for Homer and other
poets had been thus expounded from the days of Plato, who did not himself
approve. With Bernard, each Book of the _Aeneid_ represents one of the
ages of man, the first Book betokening infancy, the second boyhood, and so
forth. Allegorical etymologies are applied to the names of the personages;
and in general the whole natural course and setting of the poem is taken
allegorically. “The sea is the human body moved and tossed by drunkenness
and lusts, which are represented by waves.” Aeneas, to wit, the human soul
joined to its body, comes to Carthage, the mundane city where Dido reigns,
which is lust; this allegory is unfolded in detail. So the interpretation
ambles on, not more and not less jejune than such ingenuities usually are.

       *       *       *       *       *

Classical studies reached their zenith in the twelfth century. For in
every way that century surpassed its predecessors; and in classical
studies it excelled the thirteenth, which devoted to them a smaller
portion of its intellectual energies. The twelfth century, to be sure, was
prodigiously interested in dialectic and theology. Yet these had not quite
engulfed the humanities; nor had any newly awakened interest in physical
or experimental science distracted the eyes of men from the charms of the
ancient written page. The change took place in the thirteenth century.
Its best intellectual efforts, north of the Alps at least, were directed
to the study and theological appropriation of the Aristotelian
encyclopaedia of metaphysics and universal knowledge.[171] The effect of
Aristotle was totally unliterary. And the minds of men, absorbed in
mastering this giant mass of knowledge and argument, ceased to regard
literary form and the humane aspects of Latin literature.

Until the thirteenth century, dialectic and theology were not completely
severed from _belles lettres_. The Platonic-Augustinian theology of the
twelfth century had been idealizing and imaginative, not to say poetical.
Such an interesting exponent of it as Hugo of St. Victor appears as a
literary personage, despite his stinted advocacy of classical study. One
notes that for his time the chief single source of physical knowledge was
the Latin version of the _Timaeus_, certainly not a prosaic composition.
Thus, for the twelfth century, an effective cause of the continuance of
the study of letters lay herein: whatever branch of natural knowledge
might allure the student, he could not draw it bodily from a serious but
unliterary repository, like the _Physics_ or _De animalibus_ of Aristotle,
which were not yet available; he must follow his bent through the writings
of various Latin poets as well as prose-writers. In fine, the sources of
profane knowledge open to the twelfth century were literary in their
nature, and might form part of the literature which would be read by a
student of grammar or rhetoric.

One sees this in John of Salisbury. There may have been a few men who knew
more than he did of some particular topic. But his range and readiness of
knowledge were unique. And it is evident from his writings that his
knowledge (except in logic) had no special or scientific source, but was
derived from a promiscuous reading of Latin literature. As a result, he is
himself a literary man. One may say much the same of his younger
contemporary, Alanus de Insulis.[172] He too has gathered knowledge from
literary sources, and he himself is one of the best Latin poets of the
Middle Ages. Another extremely poetic philosopher was Bernard Silvestris,
the interpreter of Virgil. His _De mundi unitate_ is a Pantheistic
exposition of the Universe; it is also a poem; and incidentally it affords
another illustration of the general fact, that before the works of
Aristotle were made known and expounded in the thirteenth century, all
kinds of natural and quasi-philosophic knowledge were drawn from a variety
of writings, some of them poor enough from any point of view, but none of
them distinctly scientific and unliterary, like the works of Aristotle.
Formal logic or dialectic, as cultivated by Abaelard for example, appears
as an exception. It had been specialized and more scientifically treated
than any branch of substantial knowledge; for indeed it was based on the
logical treatises of Aristotle, most of which were in use before
Abaelard’s death, and all of which were known to Thierry of Chartres and
John of Salisbury.[173]

The contrast between the cathedral school of Chartres and the University
of Paris illustrates the change from the twelfth to the thirteenth
century. The former has been spoken of in a previous chapter, where its
story was brought down to the times of its great teachers, Bernard and
Thierry, of whom we shall have to speak in connection with the teaching of
grammar and the reading of classical authors. The school flourished
exceedingly until the middle of the twelfth century.[174] By that time the
schools of Paris had received an enormous impetus from the popularity of
Abaelard, and scholars had begun to push thither from all quarters. But it
was not till the latter part of the century that the University, with its
organization of Masters and Faculties, began visibly to emerge out of the
antecedent cathedral school.[175] Chartres was a home of letters; and
there Latin literature was read enthusiastically. But in Paris Abaelard
was pre-eminently a dialectician; and after he died, through those decades
when the University was coming into existence, the tide of study set
irresistibly toward theology and metaphysics. Students and masters of the
Faculty of Arts outnumbered all the other Faculties; nevertheless,
counting not by tumultuous numbers, but by intellectual strength, the
great matter was Theology, and the majority of the Masters in the Arts
were students in the divine science. The Arts were regarded as a
preparatory discipline. So through its great period, which roughly
coincides with the thirteenth century, the University of Paris was for all
Europe the supreme seat of Dialectic, Metaphysics, and Theology, and yet
no kindly nurse of _belles lettres_.

The tendencies of Oxford were not quite the same as those of Paris, yet
Latin literature as such does not seem to have been cultivated there for
its own fair sake. This apparently was unaffected by the fact that a
movement for “close” or exact scholarship existed at the English
university. Grosseteste, its first great chancellor, teacher and inspirer,
unquestionably introduced, or encouraged, the study of Greek; and his
famous pupil, Roger Bacon, was a serious Greek scholar, and wrote a
grammar of that tongue. But neither Grosseteste nor Bacon appears to have
been moved by any literary interest in Greek literature; both one and the
other urged the importance of Greek, and of Hebrew too and Arabic, in
order to reach a surer knowledge of Scripture and Aristotle. They sought
to open the veritable founts of theology and natural knowledge, an
intelligent aim indeed, but quite unliterary. In spirit both these men
belong to the thirteenth century, not to the twelfth.[176]

In Italy, one does not find that the passage from the twelfth to the
thirteenth century displays the decline in classical studies which is
apparent north of the Alps. The reasons seem obvious. The passion for
metaphysical theology did not invade this land of practical
ecclesiasticism and urban living, where pagan antiquity, dumb, broken, and
defaced, yet everywhere surviving, was the medium of life and thought and
temperamental inclination in the thirteenth as well as in the twelfth
century. Nor was Italy as yet becoming scientific, or greatly interested
in physical hypothesis; although medicine was cultivated in various
centres, Salerno, for example, and Bologna. But for the twelfth, and for
the thirteenth century as well, Italy’s great intellectual achievement was
in the two closely neighbouring sciences of canon and civil law. These
made the University of Bologna as pre-eminent in law as Paris was in
theology. There had been schools of grammar and rhetoric at Bologna and
Ravenna, before the lecturing of Irnerius on the _Pandects_ drew to the
first-named town the concourse of mature and seemly students who were
gradually to organize themselves into a university.[177] Thus at Bologna
law flourished and grew great, springing upward from an antecedent base of
grammatical if not literary studies. The study of the law never cut itself
away from this foundation. For the exigencies of legal business demanded
training in the scrivener’s and notarial arts of inditing epistles and
drawing documents, for which the _ars dictaminis_, to wit, the art of
composition was of primary utility. This _ars_, teaching as it did both
the general rules of composition and the more specific forms of legal or
other formal documents, pertained to law as well as grammar. Of the latter
study it was perhaps in Italy the main element, or, rather, end. But even
without this hybrid link of the _dictamen_, grammar was needed for the
interpretation of the _Pandects_; and indeed some of the glosses of
Irnerius and other early glossators are grammatical rather than legal
explanations of the text. We should bear in mind that this august body of
jurisprudential law existed not in the inflated statutory Latin of
Justinian’s time, but in the sonorous and correct language of the earlier
empire, when the great Jurists lived, as well as Quintilian. Accordingly a
close study of the _Pandects_ required, as well as yielded, a knowledge of
classical Latinity. Thus law tended to foster, rather than repress,
grammar and rhetoric; and had no unfavourable effect on classical studies.
And even as such studies “flourished” in Italy in the eleventh and twelfth
centuries, they did not cease to “flourish,” there in the thirteenth, in
the same general though rather dull and uncreative way. For it will
hereafter appear that the productions of the Latin poets and rhetoricians
of Italy were below the literary level of those composed north of the
Loire in France, or in England.


II

From the days of the Roman Empire, the study of grammar was, and never
ceased to be, the basis of the conscious and rational knowledge of the
Latin tongue. The Roman boys studied it at Rome; the Latin-speaking
provincials studied it, and all people of education who remained in the
lands of western Europe which once had formed part of the Empire; its
study was renewed under Charlemagne; he and Alcuin and all the scholars of
the ninth century were deeply interested in what to them represented
tangible Latinity, and in fact was to be a chief means by which their
mediaeval civilization should maintain its continuity with its source. For
grammar was most instrumental in preserving mediaeval Latin from violent
deflections, which would have left the ancient literature as the
literature of a forgotten tongue. Had mediaeval Latin failed to keep
itself veritable Latin; had it instead suffered transmutation into local
Romance dialects, the Latin classics, and all that hung from them, might
have become as unknown to the Middle Ages as the Greek, and even have been
lost forever. It was the study of Latin grammar, with classic texts to
illustrate its rules, that kept Latin Latin, and preserved standards of
universal usage throughout western Europe, by which one language was read
and spoken everywhere by educated people. From century to century this
language suffered modification, and varied according to the knowledge and
training of those who used it; yet its changes were never such as to
destroy its identity as a language, or prevent the Latin writer of one age
or country from understanding whatever in any land or century had been
written in that perennial tongue.

Therefore fortunately, as the Carolingian scholars studied Latin grammar,
so likewise did those of all succeeding mediaeval generations, thereby
holding themselves to at least a homogeneity, though not an unvarying
uniformity, of usage. Evidently, however, the method of grammatical
instruction had to vary with the needs of the learners and the teachers’
skill. The Romans prattled Latin on their mothers’ knees; and so, with
gradually widening deflections, did the Latinized provincials. Neither
Roman nor Provincial prattled Ciceronian periods, or used quite the
vocabulary of Virgil; yet it was Latin that they talked. Thenceforward
there was to be a difference between the people who lived in countries
where Romance dialects had emerged from the spoken Latin and prevailed,
and those people who spoke a Teuton speech. Although always drawing away,
the natal speech of Romance peoples was so like Latin, that in learning it
they seemed rather to correct their vulgar tongue than to acquire a new
language. So it was in the Christian parts of Spain, in Gaul, and, above
all, in Italy, where the vulgar dialects were tardiest in taking
distinctive form. Nevertheless, as the Romance dialects, for instance in
the country north of the Loire, developed into the various forms of what
is called Old French, young people at school would have to learn Latin as
a quasi-foreign tongue. Across the Rhine in Germany boys ordinarily had to
learn it at school, as a strange language, just as they must to-day; and
every effort was devoted to this end.[178] It was not likely that the
grammars composed for Roman boys, or at least for boys who spoke Latin
from their infancy, would altogether meet the needs of German, or even
French, youth. Yet only gradually and slowly in the Middle Ages were
grammars put together to make good the insufficiencies of Donatus and
Priscian.

The former was the teacher of St. Jerome. He composed a short work, in the
form of questions and answers, explaining the eight parts of speech, but
giving no rules of gender, or forms of declension and conjugation, needed
for the instruction of those who, unlike the Roman youth, could not speak
the language. This little book went by the name of the _Ars minor_. The
same grammarian composed a more extensive work, the third book of which
was called the _Barbarismus_, after its opening chapter. It defined the
figures of speech (_figurae_, _locutiones_), and was much used through the
mediaeval period.

The _Ars minor_ explained in simple fashion the elements of speech. But
the _Institutiones grammaticae_ of Priscian, a contemporary of
Cassiodorus, offered a mine of knowledge. Of its eighteen books the first
sixteen were devoted to the parts of speech and their forms, considered
under the variations of gender, declension, and conjugation. The remaining
two treated of _constructio_ or syntax. As early as the tenth century
Priscian was separated into these two parts, which came to be known as
_Priscianus major_ and _minor_. The Priscian manuscripts, whose name is
legion, usually present the former. Diffuse in language, confused in
arrangement, and overladen perhaps with its thousands of examples, it was
berated for its labyrinthine qualities even in the Middle Ages; yet its
sixteen books remained the chief source of etymological knowledge.
_Priscianus minor_ was less widely used.

The grammarians of the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries followed
Donatus and Priscian, making extracts from their works, or abridgements,
and now and then introducing examples of deviation from the ancient usage.
The last came usually from the Vulgate text of Scripture, which sometimes
departed from the idioms or even word-forms approved by the old
authorities.[179] The _Ars minor_ of Donatus became enveloped in
commentaries; but Priscian was so formidable that in these early centuries
he was merely _glossed_, that is, annotated in brief marginal fashion.

It would be tedious to dwell upon mediaeval grammatical studies. But the
tendencies characterizing them in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries may
be indicated briefly. The substance of the _Priscianus major_ was followed
by mediaeval grammarians. That is to say, while admitting certain
novelties,[180] they adhered to its rules and examples relating to the
forms of words, their declension and conjugation. But the _Priscianus
minor_, although used, was departed from. In the first place its treatment
of its subject (syntax) was confused and inadequate. There was, however, a
broader reason for seeking rules elsewhere. Mediaeval Latin, in its
progress as a living or quasi-living language, departed from the classical
norms far more in syntax and composition than in word-forms. The latter
continued much the same as in antiquity. But the popular and so to speak
Romance tendencies of mediaeval Latin brought radical changes of
word-order and style, which worked back necessarily upon the rules of
syntax. These had been but hazily stated by the old writers, and the task
of constructing an adequate Latin syntax remained undone. It was a task of
vital importance for the preservation of the Latin tongue. Word-forms
alone will not preserve the continuity of a language; it is essential that
their use in speech and writing should be kept congruous through
appropriate principles of syntax. Such were intelligently formulated by
mediaeval grammarians. The result was not exactly what it would have been
had the task been carried out in the fourth century: yet it has endured in
spite of the attacks, pseudo-attacks indeed, of the _cinquecento_; and the
mediaeval treatment of Latin syntax is the basis of the modern treatment.
One may add that syntax or _constructio_ was taken broadly as embracing
not only the agreements of number and gender, and the governing[181] of
cases, but also the order of words in a sentence, which had changed so
utterly between the time of Cicero and Thomas Aquinas.

These general statements find illustration in the famous _Doctrinale_ of
Alexander de Villa-Dei, whose author was born in Normandy in the latter
half of the twelfth century. He studied at Paris, and in course of time
was summoned by the Bishop of Dol to instruct his _nepotes_ in grammar.
While acting as their tutor, he appears to have helped their memory by
setting his rules in rhyme; and the bishop asked him to write a _Summa_ of
grammar in some such fashion. Complying, he composed the _Doctrinale_ in
the year 1199, putting his work into leonine or rhyming hexameter, to make
it easier to memorize. Rarely has a school-book met with such success. It
soon came into use in Paris and elsewhere, and for some three hundred
years was the common manual of grammatical teaching throughout western
Europe. It was then attacked and apparently driven from the field by the
so-called Humanists, who, however, failed to offer anything better in its
place, and plagiarized from the work which they professed to
execrate.[182]

The etymological portions of the _Doctrinale_ follow the teachings of the
_Priscianus major_; the part devoted to syntax, or _constructio_, shows
traces of the influence of the _Priscianus minor_. But Alexander’s
treatment of syntax is more systematic and elaborate than Priscian’s; and
he did not hesitate to defer to the Vulgate and other Christian Latin
writings. Thus he made his work conform to contemporary usage, which its
purpose was to set forth. He did the same in the section on Prosody, in
which he says that the ancient metricians distinguished a number of feet
no longer used, and he will confine himself to six--the dactyl, spondee,
trochee, anapaest, iambus, and tribrach.[183] In contradiction to
classical usage he condemns elision;[184] and in his chapter on accent he
throws over the ancient rules:

  “Accentus normas legitur posuisse vetustas;
   Non tamen has credo servandas tempore nostro.”[185]

Alexander was not really an innovator. He followed previous grammarians
in condemning elision, and in what he says of quantity and accent. In his
syntax he endeavoured to set forth rules conforming to the best Latin
usage of his time, like other mediaeval grammarians before him. He was
indeed vehement in his advocacy of recent and Christian authors as
standards of writing, and he inveighed against the scholars of Orleans,
who read the Classics, and would have us sacrifice to the gods and observe
the indecent festivals of Faunus and Jove.[186] But others defended the
Orleans school, and perhaps still regarded the Classics as the best
arbiters of grammar and eloquence. There exist thirteenth-century grammars
which follow Priscian more closely than Alexander does.[187] Yet his work
represents the dominant tendencies of his time.

Twelfth and thirteenth century grammarians recommended to their pupils a
variety of reading, in which mediaeval and early Christian compositions
held as large a place as Virgil and Ovid. The _Doctrinale_ advocates no
work more emphatically than Petrus Riga’s _Aurora_, a versified paraphrase
of Scripture. Its author was a chorister in Rheims, and died in 1209.[188]
The works of scholastic philosophers were not cited as frequently as the
compositions of verse-writers; yet mediaeval grammarians were influenced
by the language of philosophy, and drew from its training principles which
they applied to their own science. Grammar could not help becoming
dialectical when the intellectual world was turning to logic and
metaphysics. Commencing in the twelfth century, overmasteringly in the
thirteenth, logic penetrated grammar and compelled an application of its
principles. Often grammarians might better have looked to linguistic usage
than to dialectic; yet if grammar was to become a rational science, it had
to systematize itself through principles of logic, and make use of
dialectic in its endeavour to state a reason for its rules. Those who
applied logic to grammar at least endeavoured to distinguish between the
two, not always fruitfully. But a real difference could not fail to
assert itself inasmuch as logic was in truth of universal application,
while mediaeval grammar never ceased to be the grammar of the Latin
language. Nevertheless its terminology was largely drawn from logic.[189]

So dialectic brought both good and ill, proving itself helpful in the
regulation of syntax, but banefully affecting grammarians with the
conviction that language was the creature of reason, and must conform to
principles of logic. One likewise notes with curious interest, that, from
their dialectic training apparently, grammarians first found as many
_species_ of grammar as languages,[190] and then forsook this idea for the
view that, in order to be a science, grammar must be universal, or, as
they phrased it, one, and must possess principles not applicable specially
to Greek or Latin, but to _congruous construction in the abstract_; “de
constructione congrua secundum quod abstrahit ab omni lingua speciali,”
are the words of the English thirteenth-century philosopher and
grammarian, Robert Kilwardby.[191] A like idea affected Roger Bacon, who
composed a Greek grammar,[192] which appears to have been intended as the
first part of a work upon the grammars of the learned languages other than
Latin. It was adapted to afford a grounding in the elements of Greek: yet
it touches matters in a way showing that the writer had thought deeply on
the affinities of languages and the common principles of grammar. Of this
the following passage is evidence:

    “Therefore, because I wish to treat of the properties of Greek
    grammar, it should be known that there are differences in the Greek
    language, to be hereafter noted in giving the names of these dialects
    (_idiomata_). And I call them _idiomata_ and not _linguas_, because
    they are not different languages, but different properties which are
    peculiarities (_idiomata_) of the same language.[193] Wishing to set
    forth Greek grammar, for the use of the Latins, it is necessary to
    compare it with Latin grammar, because I commonly speak Latin myself,
    seeing that the crowd does not know Greek; also because grammar is of
    one and the same substance in all languages, although varying in its
    non-essentials (_accidentaliter_), also because Latin grammar in a
    certain special way is derived from Greek, as Priscian says, and other
    grammarians.”[194]

The dialecticizing of grammar took place in the north, under influences
radiating from Paris, the chief dialectic centre. These did not deeply
affect grammatical studies in Italy, or in the Midi of France, which in
some respects exhibited like intellectual tendencies. Grammar was
zealously studied in Italy, but it did not there become either speculative
or dialectical. To be sure northern manuals were used, especially the
_Doctrinale_; but the study remained practical, an art rather than a
science, and its chief element, or end, was the _ars dictaminis_ or
_dictandi_. The grammatical treatises of Italians were treatises upon this
art of epistolary composition and the proper ways of drawing documents.
These works were studied also in the North, where the _ars dictaminis_ was
by no means neglected.[195]

Latin grammar, although over-dialecticized in the North, and in Italy made
very practical, remained of necessity the foundation of classical studies,
and of mediaeval literary effort, in prose and verse. As the basis of
liberal studies, it had no truer home than the cathedral school of
Chartres.[196] Contemporary writers picture the manner in which this study
was there made to perform its most liberal office, under favourable
mediaeval conditions, in the first half of the twelfth century. The time
antedates the _Doctrinale_, and one notes at once that the Chartrian
masters used the ancient grammatical authorities. This is shown by the
_Eptateuchon_ of Thierry, who was headmaster (_scholasticus_) and then
Chancellor there for a number of years between 1120 and 1150. As its name
implies, the work was a manual, or rather an encyclopaedia, of the Seven
Arts. Thierry compiled it from the writings of the “chief doctors on the
arts.” He transcribed the _Ars minor_ of Donatus and then portions of his
larger work. Having commended this author for his conciseness and
subtilty, Thierry next copied out the whole of Priscian. As text-books for
the second branch of the Trivium, he gives Cicero’s _De inventione
rhetorica libri 2_, _Rhetoricorum ad Herennium libri 4_, _De partitione
oratoria dialogus_, and concludes with the rhetorical writings of
Martianus Capella and J. Severianus.[197]

So much for the books. Now for the method of teaching as described by John
of Salisbury. He gives the practice of Bernard of Chartres, Thierry’s
elder brother, who was scholasticus and Chancellor before him, in the
first quarter of the twelfth century. John has been advocating the study
of grammar as the _fundamentum atque radix_ of those exercises by which
virtue and philosophy are reached; and he is advising a generous reading
of the Classics by the student, and their constant use by the professor,
to illustrate his teaching.

    “This method was followed by Bernard of Chartres, _exundissimus
    modernis temporibus fons litterarum in Gallia_. By citations from the
    authors he showed what was simple and regular; he brought into relief
    the grammatical figures, the rhetorical colours, the artifices of
    sophistry, and pointed out how the text in hand bore upon other
    studies; not that he sought to teach everything in a single session,
    for he kept in mind the capacity of his audience. He inculcated
    correctness and propriety of diction, and a fitting use of congruous
    figures. Realizing that practise strengthens memory and sharpens
    faculty, he urged his pupils to imitate what they had heard, inciting
    some by admonitions, others by whipping and penalties. Each pupil
    recited the next day something from what he had heard on the
    preceding. The evening exercise, called the _declinatio_, was filled
    with such an abundance of grammar that any one, of fair intelligence,
    by attending it for a year, would have at his fingers’ ends the art of
    writing and speaking, and would know the meaning of all words in
    common use. But since no day and no school ought to be vacant of
    religion, Bernard would select for study a subject edifying to faith
    and morals. The closing part of this _declinatio_, or rather
    philosophical recitation, was stamped with piety: the souls of the
    dead were commended, a penitential Psalm was recited, and the Lord’s
    Prayer.

    “For those boys who had to write exercises in prose or verse, he
    selected the poets and orators, and showed how they should be imitated
    in the linking of words and the elegant ending of passages. If any one
    sewed another’s cloth into his garment, he was reproved for the theft,
    but usually was not punished. Yet Bernard gently pointed out to
    awkward borrowers that whoever imitated the ancients (_majores_)
    should himself become worthy of imitation by posterity. He impressed
    upon his pupils the virtue of economy, and the values of things and
    words: he explained where a meagreness and tenuity of diction was
    fitting, and where copiousness or even excess should be allowed, and
    the advantage of due measure everywhere. He admonished them to go
    through the histories and poems with diligence, and daily to fix
    passages in their memory. He advised them, in reading, to avoid the
    superfluous, and confine themselves to the works of distinguished
    authors. For, he said (quoting from Quintilian) that to follow out
    what every contemptible person has said, is irksome and vainglorious,
    and destructive of the capacity which should remain free for better
    things. To the same effect he cited Augustine, and remarked that the
    ancients thought it a virtue in a grammarian to be ignorant of
    something. But since in school exercises nothing is more useful than
    to practise what should be accomplished by the art, his scholars wrote
    daily in prose and verse, and proved themselves in discussions.”[198]

This passage indicates with what generous use of the _auctores_ Bernard
expounded grammar and explained the orators and poets; how he assigned
portions of their works for memorizing, and with what care he corrected
his pupils’ prose and metrical compositions, criticizing their knowledge
and their taste. He was a man mindful of his Christian piety toward the
dead and living, but caring greatly for the Classics, and loving study.
“The old man of Chartres (_senex Carnotensis_),” says John of Salisbury,
meaning Bernard, “named wisdom’s keys in a few lines, and though I am not
taken with the sweetness of the metre, I approve the sense:

  ‘Mens humilis, studium quaerendi, vita quieta,
   Scrutinium tacitum, paupertas, terra aliena....’”[199]

Bernard, Thierry, and other masters and scholars of their school, as the
advocates of classical education, detested the men called by John of
Salisbury _Cornificiani_, who were for shortening the academic course, as
one would say to-day, so that the student might finish it up in two or
three years, and proceed to the business of life. A good many in the
twelfth century adopted this notion, and turned from the pagan classics,
not as impious, but as a waste of time. Some of the good scholars of
Chartres lost heart, among them William of Conches and a certain Richard,
both teachers of John of Salisbury. They had followed Bernard’s methods;
“but when the time came that so many men, to the great prejudice of truth,
preferred to seem, rather than be, philosophers and professors of the
arts, engaging to impart the whole of philosophy in less than three years,
or even two, then my masters vanquished by the clamour of the ignorant
crowd, stopped. Since then, less time has been given to grammar. So it has
come about that those who profess to teach all the arts, both liberal and
mechanical, are ignorant of the first of them, without which vainly will
one try to get the rest.”[200]

Upon these people who seemed charlatans, and yet may have represented
tendencies of the coming time, Thierry, Gilbert de la Porrèe,[201] and
John of Salisbury poured their sarcasms. The controversy may have
clarified Bernard’s consciousness of the value of classical studies and
deepened his sense of obligation to the ancients, until it drew from him
perhaps the finest of mediaeval utterances touching the matter: “Bernard
of Chartres used to say that we were like dwarfs seated on the shoulders
of giants. If we see more and further than they, it is not due to our own
clear eyes or tall bodies, but because we are raised on high and upborne
by their gigantic bigness.”[202]

Echoes of this same controversy--have they ever quite died away?--are
heard in letters of the scholarly Peter of Blois, who was educated at
Paris in the middle of the twelfth century, became a secretary of Henry
Plantagenet and spent the greater part of his life in England, dying about
the year 1200. He writes to a friend:

    “You greatly commend your nephew, saying that never have you found a
    man of subtler vein: because, forsooth, skimming over grammar, and
    skipping the reading of the classical authors, he has flown to the
    trickeries of the logicians, where not in the books themselves but
    from abstracts and note-books, he has learned dialectic. Knowledge of
    letters cannot rest on such, and the subtilty you praise may be
    pernicious. For Seneca says, nothing is more odious than subtilty when
    it is only subtilty. Some people, without the elements of education,
    would discuss point and line and superficies, fate, chance and
    free-will, physics and matter and the void, the causes of things and
    the secrets of nature and the sources of the Nile! Our tender years
    used to be spent in rules of grammar, analogies, barbarisms,
    solecisms, tropes, with Donatus, Priscian, and Bede, who would not
    have devoted pains to these matters had they supposed that a solid
    basis of knowledge could be got without them. Quintilian, Caesar,
    Cicero, urge youths to study grammar. Why condemn the writings of the
    ancients? it is written that _in antiquis est scientia_. You rise from
    the darkness of ignorance to the light of science only by their
    diligent study. Jerome glories in having read Origen; Horace boasts of
    reading Homer over and over. It was much to my profit, when as a
    little chap I was studying how to make verses, that, as my master bade
    me, I took my matter not from fables but from truthful histories. And
    I profited from the letters of Hildebert of Le Mans, with their
    elegance of style and sweet urbanity; for as a boy I was made to learn
    some of them by heart. Besides other books, well known in the schools,
    I gained from keeping company with Trogus Pompeius, Josephus,
    Suetonius, Hegesippus, Quintus Curtius, Tacitus and Livy, all of whom
    throw into their histories much that makes for moral edification and
    the advance of liberal science. And I read other books, which had
    nothing to do with history--very many of them. From all of them we
    may pluck sweet flowers, and cultivate ourselves from their urbane
    suavity of speech.”[203]

In another letter Peter writes to his bishop of Bath, as touching the
accusation of some “hidden detractor,” that he, Peter, is but a useless
compiler, who fills letters and sermons with the plunder of the ancients
and Holy Writ:

    “Let him cease, or he will hear what he does not like; for I am full
    of cracks, and can hold in nothing, as Terence says. Let him try his
    hand at compiling, as he calls it.--But what of it! Though dogs may
    bark and pigs may grunt, I shall always pattern on the writings of the
    ancients; with them shall be my occupation; nor ever, while I am able,
    shall the sun find me idle.”[204]

It is evident how broadly Peter of Blois, or John of Salisbury, or the
Chartrians, were read in the Latin Classics. Peter mentions even Tacitus,
a writer not thought to have been much read in the Middle Ages. We have
been looking at the matter rather in regard to poetry and
eloquence--_belles lettres_. But one may also note the same broad reading
(among the few who read at all) on the part of those who sought for the
ethical wisdom of the ancients. This is apparent (perhaps more apparent
than real) with Abaelard, who is ready with a store of antique ethical
citations.[205] It is also borne witness to by the treatise _Moralis
philosophia de honesto et utili_, placed among the works of Hildebert of
Le Mans,[206] but probably from the pen of William of Conches, grammaticus
post Bernardum Carnotensem opulentissimus, as John of Salisbury calls
him.[207] In some manuscripts it is entitled _Summa moralium
philosophorum_, quite appropriately. One might hardly compare it for
organic inclusiveness with the Christian _Summa_ of Thomas Aquinas; but it
may very well be likened to the more compact Sentences of the Lombard[208]
which were so solidly put together about the same time. The Lombard drew
his Sentences from the writings of the Church Fathers; William’s work
consists of moral extracts, mainly from Cicero, Seneca, Sallust, Terence,
Horace, Lucan, and Boëthius. The first part, _De honesto_, reviews
Prudentia, Justitia, Fortitudo, and under these a number of particular
virtues in correspondence with which the extracts are arranged. The _De
utili_ considers the adventitious goods of circumstance and fortune.

The extracts forming the substance of this work were intelligently
selected and smoothly joined; and the treatise was much used by those who
studied the antique philosophy of life. It was drawn upon, for instance,
by that truculent and well-born Welshman, Giraldus Cambrensis, in his _De
instructione principum_, which the author wrote partly to show how evilly
Henry Plantagenet performed the functions of a king. This irrepressible
claimant of St. David’s See had been long a prickly thorn for Henry’s
side.[209] But he was a scholar, and quotes from the whole range of the
Latin Classics.


III

When a man is not a mere transcriber, but puts something of himself into
the product of his pen, his work will reflect his personality, and may
disclose the various factors of his spiritual constitution. To discover
from the writings of mediaeval scholars the effect of their classical
studies upon their characters is of greater interest than to trace from
their citations the authors read by them. Such a compilation as the _Summa
moralium_ which has just been noticed, while plainly disclosing the latter
information, tells nothing of the personality of him who strung the
extracts together. Yet he had read writings which could hardly have failed
to influence him. Cicero and Seneca do not leave their reader unchanged,
especially if he be seeking ethical instruction. And there was a work
known to this particular compiler which moved men in the Middle Ages. Deep
must have been the effect of that book so widely read and pondered on and
loved, the _De consolatione_ of Boëthius with its intimate consolings, its
ways of reasoning and looking upon life, its setting of the intellectual
above the physical, its insistence that mind rather than body makes the
man. Imagine it brought home to a vigorous struggling personality--imagine
Alfred reading and translating it, and adding to it from the teachings of
his own experience.[210] The study of such a book might form the turning
of a mediaeval life; at least could not fail to temper the convulsions of
a soul storm-driven amid unreconcilable spiritual conflicts.

One may look back even to the time of Alfred or Charlemagne and note
suggestions coming from classical reading. For instance, the antique
civilization being essentially urban, words denoting qualities of
disciplined and polished men had sprung from city life, as contrasted with
rustic rudeness. Thus the word _urbanitas_ passed over into mediaeval use
when the quality itself hardly existed outside of the transmitted Latin
literature. For an Anglo-Saxon or a Frank to use and even partly
comprehend its significance meant his introduction to a new idea. Alcuin
writes to Charlemagne that he knows how it rejoices the latter to meet
with zeal for learning and church discipline, and how pleasing to him is
anything which is seasoned with a touch of wit--_urbanitatis sale
conditum_.[211] And again, in more curious phrase, he compliments a
certain worthy upon his metrical exposition of the creed, “wherein I have
found gold-spouting whirlpools (_aurivomos gurgites_) of spiritual
meanings abounding with gems of scholastic wit (_scholasticae
urbanitatis_).”[212] Though doubtless this “scholastic wit” was flat
enough, it was something for these men to get the notion of what was witty
and entertaining through a word so vocalized with city life as
_urbanitas_, a word that we have seen used quite knowingly by the more
sophisticated scholar, Peter of Blois.

Again, it is matter of common observation that a feeling for nature’s
loveliness depends somewhat on the growth of towns. But mediaeval men
constantly had the idea suggested to them by the classic poetry of
city-dwelling poets. Here are some lines by Alcuin or one of his friends,
expressing sentiments which never came to them from the woods with which
they were disagreeably familiar:

  “O mea cella, mihi habitatio, dulcis, amata,
     Semper in aeternum, o mea cella, vale.
   Undique te cingit ramis resonantibus arbos,
     Silvula florigeris semper onusta comis.”[213]

These are little hints of the effect of the antique literature upon men
who still were somewhat rough-hewn. Advancing a century and a half, the
influence of classic study is seen, as it were, “in the round” in
Gerbert.[214] It is likewise clear and full in John of Salisbury, of whom
we have spoken, and shall speak again.[215] For an admirable example,
however, of the subtle working of the antique literature upon character
and temperament, we may look to that scholar-prelate whose letters the
youthful Peter of Blois studied with profit, Hildebert of Lavardin, Bishop
of Le Mans, and Archbishop of Tours. He shows the effect of the antique
not so strikingly in the knowledge which he possessed or the particular
opinions which he entertained, as in the balance and temperance of his
views, and incidentally in his fine facility of scholarship.

Hildebert was born at Lavardin, a village near the mouth of the Loire,
about the year 1055. He belonged to an unimportant but gentle family.
Dubious tradition has it that one of his teachers was Berengar of Tours,
and that he passed some time in the monastery of Cluny, of whose great
abbot, Hugh, he wrote a life. It is more probable that he studied at Le
Mans. But whatever appears to have been the character of his early
environment, Hildebert belongs essentially to the secular clergy, and
never was a monk. While comparatively young, he was made head of the
cathedral school of Le Mans, and then archdeacon. In the year 1096, the
old bishop of Le Mans died, and Hildebert, then about forty years of age,
was somewhat quickly chosen his successor, by the clergy and people of the
town, in spite of the protests of certain of the canons of the cathedral.
The none too happy scholar-bishop found himself at once a powerless but
not negligible element of a violently complicated feudal situation. There
was the noble Helias, Count of Maine, who was holding his domain against
Robert de Bellesme, the latter slackly supported by William Rufus of
England, who claimed the overlordship of the land. Helias reluctantly
acquiesced in Hildebert’s election. Not so Rufus, who never ceased to hate
and persecute the man that had obtained the see which had been in the gift
of his father, William the Conqueror. It happened soon after that Count
Helias was taken prisoner by his opponent, and was delivered over to Rufus
at Rouen. But Fulk of Anjou now thrust himself into this feudal _mêlée_,
appeared at Le Mans, entered, and was acknowledged as its lord. He left a
garrison, and departed before the Red King reached the town. The latter
began its siege, but soon made terms with Fulk, by which Le Mans was to be
given to Rufus, Helias was to be set free, and many other matters were
left quite unsettled.

Now Rufus entered the town (1098), where Hildebert nervously received him;
Helias, set free by the King, offered to become his feudal retainer; Rufus
would have none of him; so Helias defied the King, and was permitted to go
his way by that strange man, who held his knightly honour sacred, but
otherwise might commit any atrocity prompted by rage or greed. It was well
for Helias that trouble with the French King now drew Rufus to the north.
The next year, 1099, Rufus in England heard that the Count had renewed the
war, and captured Le Mans, except the citadel. He hurried across the
channel, rushed through the land, entered Le Mans, and passed on through
it, chasing Helias. But the war languished, and Rufus returned to Le Mans,
or to what was left of it. Hildebert had cause to tremble. He had met the
King on the latter’s hurried arrival from England for the war. Rufus had
spoken him fair. But now, at Le Mans, he was accused before the monarch of
complicity in the revolt. Quickly flared the King’s anger against the man
whom he never had ceased to detest. He ordered him to pull down the towers
of his cathedral, which rose threatening and massive over the city’s ruins
and the citadel of the King. What could the defenceless bishop do to avert
disgrace and the desolation of his beloved church? Words were left him,
but they did not prove effectual. Rufus commanded him to choose between
immediate compliance and going to England, there to submit himself to the
judgment of the English bishops. He accepted the latter alternative, and
followed the King, leaving his diocese ruined and his people dispersed. In
England, Rufus dangled him along between fear and hope, till at last the
disheartened prelate returned to the Continent, having ambiguously
consented to pull down those towers. But instead, he set to work to repair
the devastation of his diocese. The reiterated mandate of the King was not
long in following him, and this time coupled with an accusation of
treason. Hildebert’s state was desperate. His clergy were forbidden to
obey him, his palace was sacked, his own property destroyed. Such were
William’s methods of persuasion. Then the King proposed that the bishop
should purge himself by the ordeal of hot iron. Hildebert, the bishop, the
theologian, the scholar, was almost on the verge of taking up the
challenge, when a letter from Yves, the saintly Bishop of Chartres,
dissuaded him. At this moment, with ruin for his portion, and no escape,
an arrow ended the Red King’s life in the New Forest. It was the year of
grace 1100.

Now, what a change! Henry Beauclerc was from the first his friend, as
William Rufus to the last had been his enemy. Hitherto Hildebert has
appeared weakly endeavouring to elude destruction, and perhaps with no
unshaken loyalty in his bosom toward any cause except his dire
necessities. Henceforth, sailing a calmer sea, he repays Henry’s favour
with adherence and admiration. He has no support to offer Anselm of
Canterbury, still struggling with the English monarchy over investitures;
nor has he one word of censure for the clever cold-eyed scholar King who
kept his brother, Robert of Normandy, a prisoner for twenty-eight years
till he died.

Hildebert had still thirty years of life before him; nor were they all to
be untroubled. Shortly after the Red King’s death, he made a voyage to
Rome, to obtain the papal benediction. To judge from his poems, he was
deeply impressed with the ruins of the ancient city. Returning he devoted
himself to the affairs of his diocese and to rebuilding the cathedral and
other churches of Le Mans. In 1125, in spite of his unwillingness, for he
was seventy years old, he was enthroned Archbishop of Tours, where he was
to be worried by disputes with Louis le Gros of France over investitures.
But he acquitted himself with vigour, especially through his letters. A
famous one relates to this struggle of his closing years:

    “In adversity it is a comfort to hope for happier times. Long has this
    hope flattered me; and as the harvest in the fields cheers the
    countryman, the expectation of a fair season has comforted my soul.
    But now I no longer hope for the clearing of the cloudy weather, nor
    see where the storm-driven ship, on whose deck I sit, may gain the
    harbour of rest.

    “Friends are silent; silent are the priests of Jesus Christ. And those
    also are silent through whose prayers I thought the king would be
    reconciled with me. I thought indeed, but in their silence the king
    has added to the pain of my wounds. Yet it was theirs to resist the
    injury to the canonical institutes of the Church. Theirs was it, if
    the matter had demanded it, to raise a wall before the house of
    Israel. Yet with the most serene king there is call for exhortation
    rather than threat, for advice rather than command, for instruction
    rather than the rod. By these he should have been drawn to agree, by
    these reverently taught not to sheath his arrows in an aged priest,
    nor make void the canonical laws, nor persecute the ashes of a church
    already buried, ashes in which I eat the bread of grief, in which I
    drink the cup of mourning, from which to be snatched away and escape
    is to pass from death to life.

    “Yet amid these dire straits, anger has never triumphed over me, that
    I should raise a hue and cry against the anointed of the Lord, or
    wrest peace from him with the strong hand and by the arm of the
    Church. Suspect is the peace to which high potentates are brought not
    by love, but by force. Easily is it broken, and sometimes the final
    state is worse than the first. There is another way by which, Christ
    leading, I can better reach it. I will cast my thought upon the Lord,
    and He will give me the desire of my heart. The Lord remembered
    Joseph, forgotten by Pharaoh’s chief butler when prosperity had
    returned to him; He remembered David abandoned by his own son. Perhaps
    He will remember even me, and bring the tossing ship to rest on the
    desired shore. He it is who looks upon the petition of the meek, and
    does not spurn their prayers. He it is in whose hand the hearts of
    kings are wax. If I shall have found grace in His eyes, I shall easily
    obtain the grace of the king or advantageously lose it. For to offend
    man for the sake of God is to win God’s grace.”[216]

Hildebert was a classical scholar, and in his time unmatched as a writer
of Latin prose and verse. Many of his elegiac poems survive, some of them
so antique in sentiment and so correct in metre as to have been taken for
products of the pagan period. One of the best is an elegy on Rome
obviously inspired by his visit to that city of ruins:

  “Par tibi, Roma, nihil, cum sis prope tota ruina.”

Its closing lines are interesting:

  “Hic superûm formas superi mirantur et ipsi,
     Et cupiunt fictis vultibus esse pares.
   Non potuit natura deos hoc ore creare
     Quo miranda deûm signa creavit homo.
   Vultus adest his numinibus, potiusque coluntur
     Artificum studio quam deitate sua.
   Urbs felix, si vel dominis urbs illa careret,
     Vel dominis esset turpe carere fide!”

Such phrases, such frank admiration for the idols of pagan Rome, are
startling from the pen of a contemporary of St. Bernard. The spell of the
antique lay on Hildebert, as on others of his time. “The gods themselves
marvel at their own images, and desire to equal their sculptured forms.
Nature was unable to make gods with such visages as man has created in
these wondrous images of the gods. There is a look (_vultus_) about these
deities, and they are worshipped for the skill of the sculptor rather than
for their divinity.”[217] Hildebert was not only a bishop, he was a
Christian; but the sense and feeling of ancient Rome had entered into him.
Besides the poem just quoted, he wrote another, either in Rome or after
his return, Christian in thought but most antique in sympathy and turn of
phrase.

  “Dum simulacra mihi, dum numina vana placerent,
     Militia, populo, moenibus alta fui;

         *       *       *       *       *

                           ruit alta senatus
   Gloria, procumbunt templa, theatra jacent.”

The antique feeling of these lines is hardly balanced by the expressed
sentiment: “plus Caesare Petrus!”[218] And again we hear the echo of the
antique in

  “Nil artes, nil pura fides, nil gloria linguae,
     Nil fons ingenii, nil probitas sine re.”[219]

Hildebert has also a poem “On his Exile,” perhaps written while in England
with the Red King. Quite in antique style it sings the loss of friends and
fields, gardens and granaries, which the writer possessed while _prospera
fata_ smiled. Then

  “Jurares superos intra mea vota teneri!”

--a very antique sentiment. But the Christian faith of the despoiled and
exiled bishop reasserts itself as the poem closes.[220] Did Hildebert also
write the still more palpably “antique” elegiacs on Hermaphrodite, and
other questionable subjects?[221] That is hard to say. He may or may not
have been the author of a somewhat scurrilous squib against a woman who
seems to have sent him verses:

  “Femina perfida, femina sordida, digna catenis.

  “O miserabilis, insatiabilis, insatiata,
   Desine scribere, desine mittere, carmina blandia,
   Carmina turpia, carmina mollia, vix memoranda,
   Nec tibi mittere, nec tibi scribere, disposui me.

  “Mens tua vitrea, plumbea, saxea, ferrea, nequam,
   Fingere, fallere, prodere, perdere, rem putat aequam.”[222]

With all his classical leanings, the major part of Hildebert was
Christian. His theological writings which survive, his zeal against
certain riotous heretics, and in general his letters, leave no doubt of
this. It is from the Christian point of view that he gives his sincerest
counsels; it is from that that he balances the advantages of an active or
contemplative life, the claims of the Christian _vita activa_ and _vita
contemplativa_. Yet his classic tastes gave temperance to his Christian
views, and often drew him to sheer scholarly pleasures and to an antique
consideration of the incidents of life.

How sweetly the elements were mixed in him appears in a famous letter
written to William of Champeaux, that Goliath of realism whom Abaelard
discomfited in the Paris schools. The unhappy William retreated a little
way across the Seine, and laid the foundations of the abbey of St. Victor
in the years between 1108 and 1113. He sought to abandon his studies and
his lectures, and surrender himself to the austere salvation of his soul,
and yet scarcely with such irrevocable purpose as would rebuff the
temperate advice of Hildebert’s letter proffered with tactful
understanding.

    “Over thy change of life my soul is glad and exults, that at length it
    has come to thee to determine to philosophize. For thou hadst not the
    true odour of a philosopher so long as thou didst not cull beauty of
    conduct from thy philosophic knowledge. Now, as honey from the
    honeycomb, thou hast drawn from that a worthy rule of living. This is
    to gather all of thee within virtue’s boundaries, no longer
    huckstering with nature for thy life, but attending less to what the
    flesh is able for, than to what the spirit wills. This is truly to
    philosophize; to live thus is already to enter the fellowship of those
    above. Easily shalt thou come to them if thou dost advance
    disburdened. The mind is a burden to itself until it ceases to hope
    and fear. Because Diogenes looked for no favour, he feared the power
    of no one. What the cynic infidel abhorred, the Christian doctor far
    more amply must abhor, since his profession is so much more fruitful
    through faith. For such are stumbling-blocks of conduct, impeding
    those who move toward virtue.

    “But the report comes that you have been persuaded to abstain from
    lecturing. Hear me as to this. It is virtue to furnish the material of
    virtue. Thy new way of life calls for no partial sacrifice, but a
    holocaust. Offer thyself altogether to the Lord, since so He
    sacrificed Himself for thee. Gold shines more when scattered than when
    locked up. Knowledge also when distributed takes increase, and unless
    given forth, scorning the miserly possessor, it slips away. Therefore
    do not close the streams of thy learning.”[223]

Eventually William followed this, or other like advice. One sees
Hildebert’s sympathetic point of view; he entirely approves of William’s
renunciation of the world--a good bishop of the twelfth century might also
have wished to renounce its troublous honours! Yes, William has at last
turned to the true and most disburdened way of living. But this
abandonment of worldly ends entails no abandonment of Christian knowledge
or surrender of the cause of Christian learning. Nay, let William resume,
and herein give himself to God’s will without reserve.

So the letter presents a temperate and noble view of the matter, a view as
sound in the twentieth century as in the twelfth. And a like broad
consideration Hildebert brings to a more particular discussion of the two
modes of Christian living, the _vita activa_ and the _vita contemplativa_,
Leah and Rachel, Martha and Mary. He amply distinguishes these two ways of
serving God from any mode of life with selfish aims. It happened that a
devout monk and friend of Hildebert was made abbot of the monastery of St.
Vincent, in the neighbourhood of Le Mans. The administrative duties of an
abbot might be as pressing as a bishop’s, and this good man deplored his
withdrawal from a life of more complete contemplation. So Hildebert wrote
him a long discursive letter, of which our extracts will give the thread
of argument:

    “You bewail the peace of contemplation which is snatched away, and the
    imposed burden of active responsibilities. You were sitting with Mary
    at the feet of the Lord Jesus, when lo, you were ordered to serve with
    Martha. You confess that those dishes which Mary receives, sitting and
    listening, are more savoury than those which zealous Martha prepares.
    In these, indeed, is the bread of men, in those the bread of angels.”

And Hildebert descants upon the raptures of the _vita contemplativa_, of
which his friend is now bereft.

    “The contemplative and the active life, my dearest brother, you
    sometimes find in the same person, and sometimes apart. As the
    examples of Scripture show us. Jacob was joined to both Leah and
    Rachel; Christ teaches in the fields, anon He prays on the mountains;
    Moses is in the tents of the people, and again speaks with God upon
    the heights. So Peter, so Paul. Again, action alone is found, as in
    Leah and Martha, while contemplation gleams in Mary and Rachel.
    Martha, as I think, represents the clergy of our time, with whom the
    press of business closes the shrine of contemplation, and dries up the
    sacrifice of tears.

    “No one can speak with the Lord while he has to prattle with the whole
    world. Such a prattler am I, and such a priest, who when I spend the
    livelong day caring for the herds, have not a moment for the care of
    souls. Affairs, the enemies of my spirit, come upon me; they claim me
    for their own, they thieve the private hour of prayer, they defraud
    the services of the sanctuary, they irritate me with their stings by
    day and infest my sleep; and what I can scarcely speak of without
    tears, the creeping furtive memory of disputes follows me miserable to
    the altar’s sacraments,--all such are even as the vultures which
    Abraham drove away from the carcases (Gen. xv. 11).

    “Nay more, what untold loss of virtue is entailed by these occupations
    of the captive mind! While under their power we do not even serve with
    Martha. She ministered, but to Christ; she bustled about, but for
    Christ. We truly, who like Martha bustle about, and, like Martha,
    minister, neither bustle about for Christ nor minister to Him. For if
    in such bustling ministry thou seekest to win thine own desire, art
    taken with the gossip of the mob, or with pandering to carnal
    pleasures, thou art neither the Martha whom thou dost counterfeit nor
    the Mary for whom thou dost sigh.

    “In that case, dearest brother, you would have just cause for grief
    and tears. But if you do the part of Martha simply, you do well; if,
    like Jacob, you hasten to and fro between Leah and Rachel, you do
    better; if with Mary you sit and listen, you do best. For action is
    good, whose pressing instancy, though it kill contemplation, draws
    back the brother wandering from Christ. Yet it is better, sometimes
    seated, to lay aside administrative cares, and amid the irksome nights
    of Leah, draw fresh life from Rachel’s loved embrace. From this
    intermixture the course to the celestials becomes more inclusive, for
    thereby the same soul now strives for the blessedness of men and anon
    participates in that of the angels. But of the zeal single for Mary,
    why should I speak? Is not the Saviour’s word enough, ‘Mary hath
    chosen the best part, which shall not be taken from her.’”

And in closing, Hildebert shows his friend the abbot that for him the true
course is to follow Jacob interchanging Leah and Rachel; and then in the
watches of his pastoral duties the celestial vision shall be also
his.[224]

Could any one adjust more fairly this contest, so insistent throughout the
annals of mediaeval piety, between active duties and heavenly
contemplation? The only solution for abbot and bishop was to join Leah
with Rachel. And how clearly Hildebert sees the pervasive peril of the
active life, that the prelate be drawn to serve his pleasures and not
Christ. Many souls of prelates had that cast into hell!

In theory Hildebert is clear as day, and altogether Christian, so far as
we have followed the counsels of these letters. But in fact the quiet life
had for him a temptation, to which he yielded himself more generously than
to any of the grosser lures of his high prelacy. This temptation, so
alluring and insidious, so fairly masked under the proffer of learning
leading to fuller Christian knowledge, was of course the all too beloved
pagan literature, and the all too humanly convincing plausibilities of
pagan philosophy. Hildebert’s writings evince that kind of classical
scholarship which springs only from great study and great love. His soul
does not appear to have been riven by a consciousness of sin in this
behoof. Sometimes he passes so gently from Christian to pagan ethics, as
to lead one to suspect that he did not deeply feel the inconsistency
between them. Or again, he seems satisfied with the moral reasonings of
paganism, and sets them forth without a qualm. For there was the antique
pagan side of our good bishop; and how pagan thoughts and views of life
had become a part of Hildebert’s nature, appears in a most interesting
letter written to King Henry, consoling him upon the loss of his son and
the noble company so gaily sailing from Normandy in that ill-starred
_White Ship_ in the year 1120.

Hildebert begins reminding the King how much more it is for a monarch to
rule himself than others. Hitherto he has triumphed over fortune, if
fortune be anything; now she has wounded him with her sharpest dart. Yet
that cannot penetrate the well-guarded mind. It is wisdom not to vaunt
oneself in prosperity, nor be overwhelmed with grief in adversity.
Hildebert then reasons on the excellence of man’s nature and will; he
speaks of the effect of Adam’s sin in loss of grace and entailment of
misery on the human race. He quotes from the Old Testament and from
Virgil. Then he proceeds more specifically with his fortifying arguments.
Their sum is, let the breast of man abound in weapons of defence and
contemn the thrusts of fortune; there is nothing over which the triumphant
soul may not triumph.

    “Unhappy he who lacks this armament; and most unhappy he who besides
    does not know it. Here Democritus found matter for laughter,
    Demosthenes (_sic_) matter for tears. Far be it from thee that the
    chance cast of things should affect thee so, and the loss of wisdom
    follow the loss of offspring. Thou hast suffered on dry land more
    grievous shipwreck than thy son in the brine, if fortune’s storm has
    wrested wisdom from the wise.”

After a while Hildebert passes on to consider what is man, and wherein
consists his welfare:

    “To any one carefully considering what man is, nothing will seem more
    probable than that he is a divine animal, distinguished by a certain
    share of divinity (_numinis_). By bone and flesh he smacks of the
    earth. By reason his affinity to God is shown. Moses, inspired,
    certifies that by this prerogative man was created in the image of
    God. Whence it also follows for man, that he should through reason
    recognize and love his true good. Now reason teaches that what
    pertains to virtue is the true good, and that it is within us. The
    things we temporally possess are good only by opinion (_opinione_,
    _i.e._ not _ratione_), and these are about us. What is about us is not
    within our _jus_ but another’s (_alterius juris sunt_). Chance directs
    them; they neither come nor stand under our arbitrament. For us they
    are at the lender’s will (_precaria_), like a slave belonging to
    another.[225] Through such, true felicity is neither had nor lost.
    Indeed no one is happy, no one is wretched by reason of what is
    another’s. It is his own that makes a man’s good or ill, and whatever
    is not within him is not his own.”

Then Hildebert speaks of dignities, of wife and child, of the fruits of
the earth and riches--_bona vaga_, _bona sunt pennata haec omnia_. Men
quarrel and struggle about all these things--_ecce vides quanta mundus
laboret insania_.[226]

No one need point out how much more natural this reasoning would have been
from the lips of Seneca than from those of an archiepiscopal contemporary
of St. Bernard. One may, however, comment on the patent fact that this
reflection of the antique in Hildebert’s ethical consolation reflects a
manner of reasoning rather than an emotional mood, and in this it is an
instance of the general fact that mediaeval methods of reasoning
consciously or unconsciously followed the antique; while the emotion, the
love and yearning, of mediaeval religion was more largely the gift of
Christianity.




