CHAPTER XXXIII

MEDIAEVAL APPROPRIATION OF THE ROMAN LAW

      I. THE FONTES JURIS CIVILIS.

     II. ROMAN AND BARBARIAN CODIFICATION.

    III. THE MEDIAEVAL APPROPRIATION.

     IV. CHURCH LAW.

      V. POLITICAL THEORIZING.


Classical studies, and the gradual development of mediaeval prose and
verse, discussed in the preceding chapters, illustrate modes of mediaeval
progress. But of all examples of mediaeval intellectual growth through the
appropriation of the antique, none is more completely illuminating than
the mediaeval use of Roman law. As with patristic theology and antique
philosophy, the Roman law was crudely taken and then painfully learned,
till in the end, vitally and broadly mastered, it became even a means and
mode of mediaeval thinking. Its mediaeval appropriation illustrates the
legal capacity of the Middle Ages and their concern with law both as a
practical business and an intellectual interest.


I

Primitive law is practical; it develops through the adjustment of social
exigencies. Gradually, however, in an intelligent community which is
progressing under favouring influences, some definite consciousness of
legal propriety, utility, or justice, makes itself articulate in
statements of general principles of legal right and in a steady endeavour
to adjust legal relationships and adjudicate actual controversies in
accordance. This endeavour to formulate just and useful principles, and
decide novel questions in accordance with them, and enunciate new rules in
harmony with the body of the existing law, is jurisprudence, which thus
works always for concord, co-ordination, and system.

There was a jurisprudential element in the early law of Rome. The Twelve
Tables are trenchant announcements of rules of procedure and substantial
law. They have the form of the general imperative: “Thus let it be; If one
summons [another] to court, let him go; As a man shall have appointed by
his Will, so let it be; When one makes a bond or purchase,[341] as the
tongue shall have pronounced it, so let it be.” These statements of legal
rules are far from primitive; they are elastic, inclusive, and suited to
form the foundation of a large and free legal development. And the
consistency with which the law of debt was carried out to its furthest
cruel conclusion, the permitted division of the body of the defaulting
debtor among several creditors,[342] gave earnest of the logic which was
to shape the Roman law in its humaner periods. Moreover, there is
jurisprudence in the arrangement of the Laws of the Twelve Tables.
Nevertheless the jurisprudential element is still but inchoate.

The Romans were endowed with a genius for law. Under the later Republic
and the Empire, the minds of their jurists were trained and broadened by
Greek philosophy and the study of the laws of Mediterranean peoples; Rome
was becoming the commercial as well as social and political centre of the
world. From this happy combination of causes resulted the most
comprehensive body of law and the noblest jurisprudence ever evolved by a
people. The great jurisconsults of the Empire, working upon the prior
labours of long lines of older praetors and jurists, perfected a body of
law of well-nigh universal applicability, and throughout logically
consistent with general principles of law and equity, recognized as
fundamental. These were in part suggested by Greek philosophy, especially
by Stoicism as adapted to the Roman temperament. They represented the best
ethics, the best justice of the time. As principles of law, however, they
would have hung in the air, had not the practical as well as theorizing
genius of the jurisconsults been equal to the task of embodying them in
legal propositions, and applying the latter to the decision of cases. Thus
was evolved a body of practical rules of law, controlled, co-ordinated,
and, as one may say, universalized through the constant logical employment
of sound principles of legal justice.[343]

The Roman law, broadly taken, was heterogeneous in origin, and complex in
its modes of growth. The great jurisconsults of the Empire recognized its
diversity of source, and distinguished its various characteristics
accordingly. They assumed (and this was a pure assumption) that every
civilized people lived under two kinds of law, the one its own, springing
from some recognized law-making source within the community; the other the
_jus gentium_, or the law inculcated among all peoples by natural reason
or common needs.

The supposed origin of the _jus gentium_ was not simple. Back in the time
of the Republic it had become necessary to recognize a law for the many
strangers in Rome, who were not entitled to the protection of Rome’s _jus
civile_. The edict of the praetor Peregrinus covered their substantial
rights, and sanctioned simple modes of sale and lease which did not
observe the forms prescribed by the _jus civile_. So this edict became the
chief source of the _jus gentium_ so-called, to wit, of those liberal
rules of law which ignored the peculiar formalities of the stricter law of
Rome. Probably foreign laws, that is to say, the commercial customs of the
Mediterranean world, were in fact recognized; and their study led to a
perception of elements common to the laws of many peoples. At all events,
in course of time the _jus gentium_ came to be regarded as consisting of
universal rules of law which all peoples might naturally follow.

The recognition of these simple modes of contracting obligations, and
perhaps the knowledge that certain rules of law obtained among many
peoples, fostered the conception of common or natural justice, which human
reason was supposed to inculcate everywhere. Such a conception could not
fail to spring up in the minds of Roman jurists who were educated in
Stoical philosophy, the ethics of which had much to say of a common human
nature. Indeed the idea _naturalis ratio_ was in the air, and the thought
of common elements of law and justice which _naturalis ratio inter omnes
homines constituit_, lay so close at hand that it were perhaps a mistake
to try to trace it to any single source. Practically the _jus gentium_
became identical with _jus naturale_, which Ulpian imagined as taught by
nature to all animals; the _jus gentium_, however, belonged to men
alone.[344]

Thus rules which were conceived as those of the _jus gentium_ came to
represent the principles of rational law, and impressed themselves upon
the development of the _jus civile_. They informed the whole growth and
application of Roman law with a breadth of legal reason. And conceptions
of a _jus naturale_ and a _jus gentium_ became cognate legal fictions, by
the aid of which praetor and jurisconsult might justify the validity of
informal modes of contract. In their application, judge and jurist learned
how and when to disregard the formal requirements of the older and
stricter Roman law, and found a way to the recognition of what was just
and convenient. These fictions agreed with the supposed nature and demands
of _aequitas_, which is the principle of progressive and discriminating
legal justice. Law itself (_jus_) was identical with _aequitas_ conceived
(after Celsus’s famous phrase) as the _ars boni et aequi_.

The Roman law proper, the _jus civile_, had multifarious sources. First
the _leges_, enacted by the people; then the _plebiscita_, sanctioned by
the Plebs; the _senatus consulta_, passed by the Senate; the
_constitutiones_ and _rescripta[345] principum_, ordained by the Emperor.
Excepting the _rescripta_, these (to cover them with a modern expression)
were statutory. They were laws announced at a specific time to meet some
definite exigency. Under the Empire, the _constitutiones principum_ became
the most important, and then practically the only kind of legal enactment.

Two or three other sources of Roman law remain for mention: first, the
_edicta_ of those judicial magistrates, especially the praetors, who had
the authority to issue them. In his edict the praetor announced what he
held to be the law and how he would apply it. The edict of each successive
praetor was a renewal and expansion or modification of that of his
predecessor. Papinian calls this source of law the “_jus praetorium_,
which the praetors have introduced to aid, supplement, or correct the _jus
civile_ for the sake of public utility.”

Next, the _responsa_ or _auctoritas jurisprudentium_, by which were
intended the judicial decisions and the authority of the legal writings of
the famous jurisconsults. Imperial rescripts recognized these _responsa_
as authoritative for the Roman courts; and some of the emperors embodied
portions of them in formally promulgated collections, thereby giving them
the force of law. Justinian’s _Digest_ is the great example of this method
of codification.[346] One need scarcely add that the authoritative
writings and _responsa_ of the jurisconsults extended and applied the _jus
gentium_, that is to say, the rules and principles of the best-considered
jurisprudence, freed so far as might be from the formal peculiarities of
the _jus civile_ strictly speaking. And the same was true of the
praetorian edict. The Roman law also gave legal effect to _inveterata
consuetudo_, the law which is sanctioned by custom: “for since the laws
bind us because established by the decision of the people, those unwritten
customs which the people have approved are binding.”[347]

Simply naming the sources of Roman law indicates the ways in which it
grew, and the part taken by the jurisconsults in its development as a
universal and elastic system. It was due to their labours that legal
principles were logically carried out through the mass of enactments and
decisions; that is, it was due to their large consideration of the body of
existing law, that each novel decision--each case of first
impression--should be a true legal deduction, and not a solecism; and that
even the new enactments should not create discordant law. And it was due
to their labours that as rules of law were called forth, they were stated
clearly and in terms of well-nigh universal applicability.

The Laws of the Twelve Tables showed the action of legal intelligence and
the result of much experience. They sanctioned a large contractual
freedom, if within strict forms; they stated broadly the right of
testamentary disposition. Many of their provisions, which commonly were
but authoritative recognitions, were expressions of basic legal
principles, the application of which might be extended to meet the needs
of advancing civic life. And through the enlargement of this fundamental
collection of law, or deviating from it in accordance with principles
which it implicitly embodied, the jurists of the Republic and the first
centuries of the Empire formed and developed a body of private and public
law from which the jurisprudence of Europe and America has never even
sought to free itself.

Roman jurisprudence was finally incorporated in Justinian’s _Digest_,
which opens with a statement of the most general principles, even those
which would have hung in the air but for the Roman genius of logical and
practical application to the concrete instance. “Jus est ars boni et
aequi”--it is better to leave these words untranslated, such is the wealth
of significance and connotation which they have acquired. “Justitia est
constans et perpetua voluntas jus suum cuique tribuendi. Juris praecepta
sunt haec: honeste vivere, alterum non laedere, suum cuique tribuere.
Jurisprudentia est divinarum atque humanarum rerum notitia, justi atque
injusti scientia.”

The first pregnant phrase is from the older jurist Celsus; the longer
passage is by the later Ulpian, and may be taken as an expansion of the
first. Both the one and the other expressed the most advanced and
philosophic ethics of the ancient world. They are both in the first
chapter of the _Digest_, wherein they become enactments. An extract from
Paulus follows: “_Jus_ has different meanings; that which is always
_aequum ac bonum_ is called _jus_, to wit, the _jus naturale_: _jus_ also
means the _jus civile_, that which is expedient (_utile_) for all or most
in any state. And in our state we have also the praetorian _jus_.” This
passage indicates the course of the development of the Roman law: the
fundamental and ceaselessly growing core of specifically Roman law, the
_jus civile_; its continual equitable application and enlargement, which
was the praetor’s contribution; and the constant application of the
_aequum ac bonum_, observed perhaps in legal rules common to many peoples,
but more surely existing in the high reasoning of jurists instructed in
the best ethics and philosophy of the ancient world, and learned and
practised in the law.

Now notice some of the still general, but distinctly legal, rather than
ethical, rules collected in the _Digest_: The laws cannot provide
specifically for every case that may arise; but when their intent is
plain, he who is adjudicating a cause should proceed _ad similia_, and
thus declare the law in the case.[348] Here is stated the general and
important formative principle, that new cases should be decided
consistently and _eleganter_, which means logically and in accordance with
established rules. Yet legal solecisms will exist, perhaps in a statute or
in some rule of law evoked by a special exigency. Their application is
not to be extended. For them the rule is: “What has been accepted _contra
rationem juris_, is not to be drawn out (_producendum_) to its
consequences,”[349] or again: “What was introduced not by principle, but
at first through error, does not obtain in like cases.”[350]

These are true principles making for the consistent development of a body
of law. Observe the scope and penetration of some other general rules:
“Nuptias non concubitus, sed consensus facit.”[351] This goes to the legal
root of the whole conception of matrimony, and is still the recognized
starting-point of all law upon that subject. Again: “An agreement to
perform what is impossible will not sustain a suit.”[352] This is still
everywhere a fundamental principle of the law of contracts. Again: “No one
can transfer to another a greater right than he would have himself,”[353]
another principle of fundamental validity, but, of course, like all rules
of law subject in its application to the qualifying operation of other
legal rules.

Roman jurisprudence recognized the danger of definition: “Omnis definitio
in jure civili periculosa est.”[354] Yet it could formulate admirable
ones; for example: “Inheritance is succession to the sum total (_universum
jus_) of the rights of the deceased.”[355] This definition excels in the
completeness of its legal view of the matter, and is not injured by the
obvious omission to exclude those personal privileges and rights of the
deceased which terminate upon his death.

Thus we note the sources and constructive principles of the Roman law. We
observe that while certain of the former might be called “statutory,” the
chief means and method of development was the declarative edict of the
praetor and the trained labour of the jurisconsults. In these appears the
consummate genius of Roman jurisprudence, a jurisprudence matchless in its
rational conception of principles of justice which were rooted in a
philosophic consideration of human life; matchless also in its carrying
through of such principles into the body of the law and the decision of
every case.


II

The Roman law was the creation of the genius of Rome and also the product
of the complex civilization of which Rome was the kinetic centre. As the
Roman power crumbled, Teutonic invaders established kingdoms within
territories formerly subject to Rome and to her law--a law, however, which
commonly had been modified to suit the peoples of the provinces. Those
territories retained their population of provincials. The invaders,
Burgundians, Visigoths, and Franks, planting themselves in the different
parts of Gaul, brought their own law, under which they continued to live,
but which they did not force upon the provincial population. On the
contrary, Burgundian and Visigothic kings promulgated codes of Roman law
for the latter. And these represent the forms in which the Roman law first
passed over into modes of acceptance and application no longer fully
Roman, but partly Teutonic and incipiently mediaeval. They exemplify,
moreover, the fact, so many aspects of which have been already noticed, of
transitional and partly barbarized communities drawing from a greater past
according to their simpler needs.

One may say that these codes carried on processes of decline from the full
creative genius of Roman jurisprudence, which had irrevocably set in under
the Empire in the fourth and fifth centuries. The decline lay in a
weakening of the intellectual power devoted to the law and its
development. The living growth of the praetorian edict had long since come
to an end; and now a waning jurisprudential intelligence first ceased to
advance the development of law, and then failed to save from desuetude the
achieved jurisprudence of the past. So the jurisprudential and juridical
elements (_jus_) fell away from the law, and the imperial constitutions
(_leges_) remained the sole legal vehicle and means of amendment. The need
of codification was felt, and that preserving and eliminating process was
entered upon.

Roman codification never became a reformulation. The Roman _Codex_ was a
collection of existing constitutions. A certain jurist (“Gregorianus”)
made an orderly and comprehensive collection of such as early as the close
of Diocletian’s reign; it was supplemented by the work of another jurist
(“Hermogenianus”) in the time of Constantine. Each compilation was the
work of a private person, who, without authority to restate, could but
compile the imperial constitutions. The same method was adopted by the
later codifications, which were made and promulgated under imperial
decree. There were two which were to be of supreme importance for the
legal future of western Europe, the Theodosian Code and the legislation of
Justinian. The former was promulgated in 438 by Theodosius II. and
Valentinianus. The emperors formally announce that “in imitation (_ad
similitudinem_) of the Code of Gregorianus and Hermogenianus we have
decreed that all the Constitutions should be collected” which have been
promulgated by Constantine and his successors, including ourselves.[356]
So the Theodosian Code contains many laws of the emperors who decreed
it.[357] It was thus a compilation of imperial constitutions already in
existence, or decreed from year to year while the codification was in
process (429-438). Every constitution is given in the words of its
original announcement, and with the name of the emperor. Evidently this
code was not a revision of the law.

The codification of Justinian began with the promulgation of the _Codex_
in 529. That was intended to be a compilation of the constitutions
contained in the previous codes and still in force, as well as those which
had been decreed since the time of Theodosius. The compilers received
authority to omit, abbreviate, and supplement. The _Codex_ was revised and
promulgated anew in 534. The constitutions which were decreed during the
remainder of Justinian’s long reign were collected after his death and
published as _Novellae_. So far there was nothing radically novel. But,
under Justinian, life and art seemed to have revived in the East; and
Tribonian, with the others who assisted in these labours, had larger views
of legal reform and jurisprudential conservation than the men who worked
for Theodosius. Justinian and his coadjutors had also serious plans for
improving the teaching of the law, in the furtherance of which the famous
little book of _Institutes_ was composed after the model, and to some
extent in the words, of the _Institutes_ of Gaius. It was published in
533.

The great labour, however, which Justinian and his lawyers were as by
Providence inspired to achieve was the encyclopaedic codification of the
jurisprudential law. Part of the emperor’s high-sounding command runs
thus:

    “We therefore command you to read and sift out from the books
    pertaining to the _jus Romanum_ composed by the ancient learned
    jurists (_antiqui prudentes_) to whom the most sacred emperors granted
    authority to indite and interpret the laws, so that the material may
    all be taken from these writers, and incongruity avoided--for others
    have written books which have been neither used nor recognized. When
    by the favour of the Deity this material shall have been collected, it
    should be reared with toil most beautiful, and consecrated as the own
    and most holy temple of justice, and the whole law (_totum jus_)
    should be arranged in fifty books under specific titles.”[358]

The language of the ancient jurists was to be preserved even critically,
that is to say, the compilers were directed to emend apparent errors and
restore what seemed “verum et optimum et quasi ab initio scriptum.” It was
not the least of the providential mercies connected with the compilation
of this great body of jurisprudential law, that Justinian and his
commission did not abandon the phrasing of the old jurisconsults, and
restate their opinions in such language as we have a sample of in the
constitution from which the above extract is taken. This jurisprudential
part of Justinian’s Codification was named the _Digest_ or
_Pandects_.[359]

Inasmuch as Justinian’s brief reconquest of western portions of the Roman
Empire did not extend north of the Alps, his codification was not
promulgated in Gaul or Germany. Even in Italy his legislation did not
maintain itself in general dominance, especially in the north where the
Lombard law narrowed its application. Moreover, throughout the peninsula,
the _Pandects_ quickly became as if they were not, and fell into
desuetude, if that can be said of a work which had not come into use. This
body of jurisprudential law was beyond the legal sense of those
monarchically-minded and barbarizing centuries, which knew law only as the
command of a royal lawgiver. The _Codex_ and the _Novellae_ were of this
nature. They, and not the _Digest_, represent the influence upon Italy of
Justinian’s legislation until the renewed interest in jurisprudence
brought the _Pandects_ to the front at the close of the eleventh century.
But _Codex_ and _Novellae_ were too bulky for a period that needed to have
its intellectual labours made easy. From the first, the _Novellae_ were
chiefly known and used in the condensed form given them in the excellent
_Epitome of Julianus_, apparently a Byzantine of the last part of
Justinian’s reign.[360] The cutting down and epitomizing of the _Codex_ is
more obscure; probably it began at once; the incomplete or condensed forms
were those in common use.[361]

It is, however, with the Theodosian Code and certain survivals of the
works of the great jurists that we have immediately to do. For these were
the sources of the codes enacted by Gothic and Burgundian kings for their
Roman or Gallo-Roman subjects. Apparently the earliest of them was
prepared soon after the year 502, at the command of Gondebaud, King of the
Burgundians. This, which later was dubbed the _Papianus_,[362] was the
work of a skilled Roman lawyer, and seems quite as much a text-book as a
code. It set forth the law of the topics important for the Roman
provincials living in the Burgundian kingdom, not merely making extracts
from its sources, but stating their contents and referring to them as
authorities. These sources were substantially the same as those used by
the Visigothic _Breviarium_, which was soon to supersede the _Papianus_
even in Burgundy.

_Breviarium_ was the popular name of the code enacted by the Visigothic
king Alaric II. about the year 506 for his _provinciales_ in the south of
Gaul.[363] It preserved the integrity of its sources, giving the texts in
the same order, and with the same rubrics, as in the original. The
principal source was the Theodosian Code; next in importance the
collections of _Novellae_ of Theodosius and succeeding emperors: a few
texts were taken from the Codes of “Gregorianus” and “Hermogenianus.”
These parts of the _Breviarium_ consisted of _leges_, that is, of
constitutions of the emperors. Two sources of quite a different character
were also drawn upon. One was the _Institutes_ of Gaius, or rather an old
epitome which had been made from it. The other was the _Sententiae_ of
Paulus, the famous “Five Books of Sentences _ad filium_.” This work of
elementary jurisprudence deserved its great repute; yet its use in the
_Breviarium_ may have been due to the special sanction which had been
given it in one of the constitutions of the Theodosian Code, also taken
over into the _Breviarium_: “Pauli quoque sententias semper valere
praecipimus.”[364] The same constitution confirmed the _Institutes_ of
Gaius, among other great jurisconsults. Presumably these two works were
the most commonly known as well as the clearest and best of elementary
jurisprudential compositions.

An interesting feature of the _Breviarium_, and destined to be of great
importance, was the _Interpretatio_ accompanying all its texts, except
those drawn from the epitome of Gaius. This was not the work of Alaric’s
compilers, but probably represents the approved exposition of the _leges_,
with the exposition of the already archaic _Sentences_ of Paulus, current
in the law schools of southern Gaul in the fifth century. The
_Interpretatio_ thus taken into the _Breviarium_ had, like the texts, the
force of royal law, and soon was to surpass them in practice by reason of
its perspicuity and modernity. Many manuscripts contain only the
_Interpretatio_ and omit the texts.

The _Breviarium_ became the source of Roman law, indeed the Roman law _par
excellence_, for the Merovingian and then the Carolingian realm, outside
of Italy. It was soon subjected to the epitomizing process, and its
epitomes exist, dating from the eighth to the tenth century: they reduced
it in bulk, and did away with the practical inconvenience of _lex_ and
_interpretatio_. Further, the _Breviarium_, and even the epitomes, were
glossed with numerous marginal or interlinear notes made by transcribers
or students. These range from definitions of words, sometimes taken from
Isidore’s _Etymologiae_, to brief explanations of difficulties in the
text.[365] In like manner in Italy, the _Codex_ and _Novellae_ of
Justinian were, as has been said, reduced to epitomes, and also equipped
with glosses.

These barbaric codes of Roman law mark the passage of Roman law into
incipiently mediaeval stages. On the other hand, certain Latin codes of
barbarian law present the laws of the Teutons touched with Roman
conceptions, and likewise becoming inchoately mediaeval.

Freedom, the efficient freedom of the individual, belongs to civilization
rather than to barbarism. The actual as well as imaginary perils
surrounding the lives of men who do not dwell in a safe society, entail a
state of close mutual dependence rather than of liberty. Law in a
civilized community has the twofold purpose of preserving the freedom of
the individual and of maintaining peace. With each advance in human
progress, the latter purpose, at least in the field of private civil law,
recedes a little farther, while the importance of private law, as
compared with penal law, constantly increases.

The law of uncivilized peoples lacks the first of these purposes. Its sole
conscious object is to maintain, or at least provide a method of
maintaining peace; it is scarcely aware that in maintaining peace it is
enhancing the freedom of every individual.

The distinct and conscious purpose of early Teutonic law was to promote
peace within the tribe, or among the members of a warband. Thus was law
regarded by the people--as a means of peace. Its communication or
ordainment might be ascribed to a God or a divine King. But in reality its
chief source lay in slowly growing regulative custom.[366] The force of
law, or more technically speaking the legal sanction, lay in the power of
the tribe to uphold its realized purpose as a tribe; for the power to
maintain its solidarity and organization was the final test of its
law-upholding strength.

Primarily the old Teutonic law looked to the tribe and its sub-units, and
scarcely regarded the special claims of an individual, or noticed
mitigating or aggravating elements in his culpability--answerability
rather. It prescribed for his peace and protection as a member of a
family, or as one included within the bands of _Sippe_ (blood
relationship); or as one of a warband or a chief’s close follower, one of
his _comitatus_. On the other hand, the law was stiff, narrow, and
ungeneralized in its recognized rules. The first Latin codifications of
Teutonic law are not to be compared for breadth and elasticity of
statement to the Law of the Twelve Tables. And their substance was more
primitive.[367]

The earliest of these first codifications was the Lex Salica, codified
under Clovis near the year 500. Unquestionably, contact with Roman
institutions suggested the idea, even as the Latin language was the
vehicle, of this code. Otherwise the Lex Salica is un-Christian and
un-Roman, although probably it was put together after Clovis’s baptism. It
was not a comprehensive codification, and omitted much that was common
knowledge at the time; which now makes it somewhat enigmatical. One finds
in it lists of thefts of every sort of object that might be stolen, and of
the various injuries to the person that might be done, and the sum of
money to be paid in each case as atonement or compensation. Such schedules
did not set light store on life and property. On the contrary, they were
earnestly intended as the most available protection of elemental human
rights, and as the best method of peaceful redress. The sums awarded as
Wergeld were large, and were reckoned according to the slain man’s rank.
By committing a homicide, a man might ruin himself and even his blood
relatives (_Sippe_) and of course on failure to atone might incur
servitude or death or outlawry.

The Salic law is scarcely touched by the law of Rome. From this piece of
intact Teutonism the codes of other Teuton peoples shade off into bodies
of law partially Romanized, that is, affected by the provincialized Roman
law current in the locality where the Teutonic tribe found a home. The
codes of the Burgundians and the Visigoths in southern France are examples
of this Teutonic-Romanesque commingling. On the other hand, the Lombard
codes, though later in time, held themselves even harshly Teutonic, as
opposed to any influence from the law of the conquered Italian population,
for whom the Lombards had less regard than Burgundians and Visigoths had
for their subject provincials. Moreover, as the Frankish realm extended
its power over other Gallo-Teuton states, the various Teuton laws modified
each other and tended toward uniformity. Naturally the law of the Franks,
first the Salic and then the partly derivative Ribuarian code, exerted a
dominating influence.[368]

These Teuton peoples regarded law as pertaining to the tribe. There was
little conscious intention on their part of forcing their laws on the
conquered. When the Visigoths established their kingdom in southern France
they had no idea of changing the law of the Gallo-Roman provincials living
within the Visigothic rule; and shortly afterwards, when the Franks
extended their power over the still Roman parts of Gaul, and then over
Alemanni, Burgundians, and Visigoths, they likewise had no thought of
forcing their laws either upon Gallo-Romans or upon the Teuton people
previously dominant within a given territory. This remained true even of
the later Frankish period, when the Carolingians conquered the Lombard
kingdom in upper Italy.

Indeed, to all these Teutons and to the Roman provincials as well, it
seemed as a matter of course that tribal or local laws should be permitted
to endure among the peoples they belonged to. These assumptions and the
conditions of the growing Frankish Empire evoked, as it were, a more acute
mobilization of the principle that to each people belonged its law. For
provincials and Teuton peoples were mingling throughout the Frankish
realm, and the first obvious solution of the legal problems arising was to
hold that provincials and Teutons everywhere should remain amenable and
entitled to their own law, which was assumed to attend them as a personal
appurtenance. Of course this solution became intolerable as tribal blood
and delimitations were obscured, and men moved about through the
territories of one great realm. Archbishop Agobard of Lyons remarks that
one might see five men sitting together, each amenable to a different
law.[369] The escape from this legal confusion was to revert to the idea
of law and custom as applying to every one within a given territory. The
personal principle gradually gave way to this conception in the course of
the ninth, tenth, and eleventh centuries.[370] In the meanwhile during the
Merovingian, and more potently in the Carolingian period, king’s law, as
distinguished from people’s law, had been an influence making for legal
uniformity throughout that wide conglomerate empire which acknowledged the
authority of the Frankish king or emperor. The king’s law might emanate
from the delegated authority, and arise from the practices, of royal
functionaries; it was most formally promulgated in Capitularies, which
with Charlemagne reach such volume and importance. Some of these royal
ordinances related to a town or district only. Others were for the realm,
and the latter not only were instances of law applying universally, but
also tended to promote, or suggest, the harmonizing of laws which they did
not modify directly.


III

The Roman law always existed in the Middle Ages. Provincialized and
changed, it was interwoven in the law and custom of the land of the
_langue d’oc_ and even in the customary law of the lands where the _langue
d’oil_ was spoken. Through the same territory it existed also in the
_Breviarium_ and its epitomes. There was very little of it in England, and
scarcely a trace in the Germany east of the Rhine. In Italy it was applied
when not superseded by the Lombard codes, and was drawn from works based
on the _Codex_ and _Novels_ of Justinian. But the jurisprudential law
contained in Justinian’s _Digest_ was as well forgotten in Italy as in any
land north of the Alps, where the Codification of Justinian had never been
promulgated. The extent to which the classic forms of Roman law were known
or unknown, unforgotten or forgotten, was no accident as of codices or
other writings lost accidentally. It hung upon larger conditions--whether
society had reached that stage of civilized exigency demanding the
application of an advanced commercial law, and whether there were men
capable of understanding and applying it. This need and the capacity to
understand would be closely joined.[371]

The history of the knowledge and understanding of Roman law in the Middle
Ages might be resolved into a consideration of the sources drawn upon, and
the extent and manner of their use, from century to century. In the fifth
century, when the Theodosian Code was promulgated, law was thought of
chiefly as the mandate of a ruler. The Theodosian Code was composed of
_constitutiones principum_. Likewise the _Breviarium_, based upon it, and
other barbarian codes of Roman law, were ordained by kings; and so were
the codes of Teutonic law. For law, men looked directly to the visible
ruler. The _jus_, reasoned out by the wisdom of trained jurists, had lost
authority and interest. To be sure, a hundred years later Justinian’s
Commission put together in the _Digest_ the body of jurisprudential law;
but even in Italy where his codification was promulgated, the _Digest_
fell still-born. Never was an official compilation of less effect upon its
own time, or of such mighty import for times to come.

The _Breviarium_ became _par excellence_ the code of Roman law for the
countries included in the present France. With its accompanying
_Interpretatio_ it was a work indicating intelligence on the part of its
compilers, whose chief care was as to arrangement and explanation. But the
time was not progressive, and a gathering mental decadence was shown by
the manner in which the _Breviarium_ was treated and used, to wit,
epitomized in many epitomes, and practically superseded by them. Here was
double evidence of decay; for the supersession of such a work by such
epitomes indicates a diminishing legal knowledge in the epitomizers, and
also a narrowing of social and commercial needs in the community, for
which the original work contained much that was no longer useful.

There were, of course, epitomes and epitomes. Such a work as the _Epitome
Juliani_, in which a good Byzantine lawyer of Justinian’s time presented
the substance of the _Novellae_, was an excellent compendium, and deserved
the fame it won. Of a lower order were the later manipulations of
Justinian’s _Codex_, by which apparently the _Codex_ was superseded in
Italy. One of these was the _Summa Perusina_ of the ninth or tenth
century, a wretched work, and one of the blindest.[372]

Justinian’s _Codex_ and Julian’s _Epitome_ were equipped with glosses,
some of which are as early as Justinian’s time; but the greater part are
later. The glosses to Justinian’s legislation resemble those of the
_Breviarium_ before referred to. That is to say, as the centuries pass
downward toward the tenth, the glosses answer to cruder needs: they become
largely translations of words, often taken from Isidore’s
_Etymologiae_.[373] Indeed many of them appear to have had merely a
grammatical interest, as if the text was used as an aid in the study of
the Latin language.

The last remark indicates a way in which a very superficial acquaintance
with the Roman law was kept up through the centuries prior to the twelfth:
it was commonly taught in the schools devoted to elementary instruction,
that is to say, to the Seven Liberal Arts. In many instances the
instructors had only such knowledge as they derived from Isidore, that
friend of every man. That is, they had no special knowledge of law, but
imparted various definitions to their pupils, just as they might teach
them the names of diseases and remedies, a list of which (and nothing
more) they would also find in Isidore. It was all just as one might have
expected. Elementary mediaeval education was encyclopaedic in its childish
way; and, in accordance with the methods and traditions of the transition
centuries, all branches of instruction were apt to be turned to grammar
and rhetoric, and made linguistic, so to speak--mere subjects for curious
definition. Thus it happened to law as well as medicine. Yet some of the
teachers may have had a practical acquaintance with legal matters, with an
understanding for legal documents and skill to draw them up.

The assertion also is warranted that at certain centres of learning
substantial legal instruction was given; one may even speak of schools of
law. Scattered information touching all the early mediaeval periods shows
that there was no time when instruction in Roman law could not be obtained
somewhere in western Europe. To refer to France, the Roman law was very
early taught at Narbonne; at Orleans it was taught from the time of Bishop
Theodulphus, Charlemagne’s contemporary, and probably the teaching of it
long continued. One may speak in the same way of Lyons; and in the
eleventh century Angers was famed for the study of law.

Our information is less broken as to an Italy where through the early
Middle Ages more general opportunities offered for elementary education,
and where the Roman law, with Justinian’s Codification as a base, made in
general the law of the land. There is no reason to suppose that it was not
taught. Contemporary allusions bear witness to the existence of a school
of law in Rome in the time of Cassiodorus and afterwards, which is
confirmed by a statement of the jurist Odofredus in the thirteenth
century. At Pavia there was a school of law in the time of Rothari, the
legislating Lombard king; this reached the zenith of its repute in the
eleventh century. Legal studies also flourished at Ravenna, and succumbed
before the rising star of the Bologna school at the beginning of the
twelfth century.[374] In these and doubtless many other cities[375]
students were instructed in legal practices and formulae, and some
substance of the Roman law was taught. Extant legal documents of various
kinds afford, especially for Italy, ample evidence of the continuous
application of the Roman law.[376]

As for the merits and deficiencies of legal instruction in Italy and in
France, an idea may be gained from the various manuals that were prepared
either for use in the schools of law or for the practitioner. Because of
the uncertainty, however, of their age and provenance, it is difficult to
connect them with a definite _foyer_ of instruction.

Until the opening of the twelfth century, or at all events until the last
quarter of the eleventh, the legal literature evinces scarcely any
originality or critical capacity. There are glosses, epitomes, and
collections of extracts, more or less condensed or confused from whatever
text the compiler had before him. Little jurisprudential intelligence
appears in any writings which are known to precede the close of the
eleventh century; none, for instance, in the epitomes of the _Breviarium_
and the glosses relating to that code; none in those works of Italian
origin the material for which was drawn directly or indirectly from the
_Codex_ or _Novels_ of Justinian, for instance the _Summa Perusina_ and
the _Lex Romana canonice compta_, both of which probably belong to the
ninth century. Such compilations were put together for practical use, or
perhaps as aids to teaching.

Thus, so far as inference may be drawn from the extant writings, the legal
teaching in any school during this long period hardly rose above an
uncritical and unenlightened explanation of Roman law somewhat
mediaevalized and deflected from its classic form and substance. There was
also practical instruction in current legal forms and customs. Interest in
the law had not risen above practical needs, nor was capacity shown for
anything above a mechanical handling of the matter. Legal study was on a
level with the other intellectual phenomena of the period.

In an opusculum[377] written shortly after the middle of the eleventh
century, Peter Damiani bears unequivocal, if somewhat hostile, witness to
the study of law at Ravenna; and it is clear that in his time legal
studies were progressing in both France and Italy. It is unsafe to speak
more definitely, because of the difficulty in fixing the time and place of
certain rather famous pieces of legal literature, which show a marked
advance upon the productions to be ascribed with certainty to an earlier
time. The reference is to the _Petri exceptiones_ and the _Brachylogus_.
The critical questions relating to the former are too complex even to
outline here. Both its time and place are in dispute. The ascribed dates
range from the third quarter of the eleventh century to the first quarter
of the twelfth, a matter of importance, since the opening of the twelfth
century is marked by the rise of the Bologna school. As for the place,
some scholars still adhere to the south of France, while others look to
Pavia or Ravenna. On the whole, the weight of argument seems to favour
Italy and a date not far from 1075.[378]

The _Petrus_, as it is familiarly called, is drawn from immediately prior
and still extant compilations. The compiler wished to give a compendious
if not systematic presentation of law as accepted and approved in his
time, that is to say, of Roman law somewhat mediaevalized in tone, and
with certain extraneous elements from the Lombard codes. The ultimate
Roman sources were the Codification of Justinian, and indeed all of it,
_Digest_, _Codex_, and _Novels_, the last in the form to which they had
been brought in Julian’s _Epitome_. The purpose of the compilation is
given in the Prologue,[379] which in substance is as follows:

    “Since for many divers reasons, on account of the great and manifold
    difficulties in the laws, even the Doctors of the laws cannot without
    pains reach a certain opinion, we, taking account of both laws, to
    wit, the _jus civile_ and the _jus naturale_, unfold the solution of
    controversies under plain and patent heads. Whatever is found in the
    laws that is useless, void, or contrary to equity, we trample under
    our feet. Whatever has been added and surely held to, we set forth in
    its integral meaning so that nothing may appear unjust or provocative
    of appeal from thy judgments, Odilo;[380] but all may make for the
    vigour of justice and the praise of God.”

The arrangement of topics in the _Petrus_ hardly evinces any clear design.
The substance, however, is well presented. If there be a question to be
solved, it is plainly stated, and the solution arrived at may be
interesting. For example, a case seems to have arisen where the son of one
who died intestate had seized the whole property to the exclusion of the
children of two deceased daughters. The sons of one daughter acquiesced.
The sons of the other _per placitum et guerram_ forced their uncle to give
up their share. Thereupon the supine cousins demanded to share in what had
so been won. The former contestants resisted on the plea that the latter
had borne no aid in the contest and that they had obtained only their own
portion. The decision was that the supine cousins might claim their
heritage from whoever held it, and should receive their share in what the
successful contestants had won; but that the latter could by
counter-actions compel them to pay their share of the necessary expenses
of the prior contest.[381]

Sometimes the _Petrus_ seems to draw a general rule of law from the
apparent instances of its application in Justinian’s Codification. Therein
certain formalities were prescribed in making a testament, in adopting a
son, or emancipating a slave. The _Petrus_ draws from them the general
principle that where the law prescribes formalities, the transaction is
not valid if they are omitted.[382] In fine, unsystematized as is the
arrangement of topics, the work presents an advance in legal intelligence
over mediaeval law-writings earlier than the middle of the eleventh
century.

If the _Petrus_ was adapted for use in practice, the _Brachylogus_, on the
other hand, was plainly a book of elementary instruction, formed on the
model of Justinian’s _Institutes_. But it made use of his entire
codification, the _Novels_, however, only as condensed in Julian’s
_Epitome_. The influence of the _Breviarium_ is also noticeable; which
might lead one to think that the treatise was written in Orleans or the
neighbourhood, since the _Breviarium_ was not in use in Italy, while the
Codification of Justinian was known in France by the end of the eleventh
century. The beginning of the twelfth is the date usually given to the
_Brachylogus_. It does not belong to the Bologna school of glossators, but
rather immediately precedes them, wherever it was composed.[383]

The _Brachylogus_, as a book of Institutes, compares favourably with its
model, from the language of which it departed at will. Both works are
divided into four _libri_; but the _libri_ of the _Brachylogus_ correspond
better to the logical divisions of the law. Again, frequently the author
of the _Brachylogus_ breaks up the chapters of Justinian’s _Institutes_
and gives the subject-matter under more pertinent headings. Sometimes the
statements of the older work are improved by rearrangement. The
definitions of the _Brachylogus_ are pithy and concise, even to a fault.
Often the exposition is well adapted to the purposes of an elementary
text-book,[384] which was meant to be supplemented by oral instruction. On
the whole, the work shows that the author is no longer encumbered by the
mass or by the advanced character of his sources. He restates their
substance intelligently, and thinks for himself. He is no compiler, and
his work has reached the rank of a treatise.

The merits of the _Brachylogus_ as an elementary text-book are surpassed
by those of the so-called _Summa Codicis Irnerii_, a book which may mark
the beginning of the Bologna school of law, and may even be the
composition of its founder. Many arguments are adduced for this
authorship.[385] The book has otherwise been deemed a production of the
last days of the school of law at Rome just before the school was broken
up by some catastrophe as to which there is little information. In that
case the work would belong to the closing years of the eleventh century,
whereas the authorship of Irnerius would bring it to the beginning of the
twelfth. At all events, its lucid jurisprudential reasoning precludes the
likelihood of an earlier origin.

This _Summa_ is an exposition of Roman law, following the arrangement and
titles of Justinian’s _Codex_, but making extensive use of the _Digest_.
It thus contains Roman jurisprudential law, and may be regarded as a
compendious text-book for law students, forming apparently the basis of a
course of lectures which treated the topics more at length.[386] The
author’s command of his material is admirable, and his presentation
masterly. Whether he was Irnerius or some one else, he was a great
teacher. His work may be also called academic, in that his standpoint is
always that of the Justinianean law, although he limits his exposition to
those topics which had living interest for the twelfth century. Private
substantial law forms the chief matter, but procedure is set forth and
penal law touched upon. The author appreciates the historical development
of the Roman law and the character of its various sources--praetorian law,
_constitutiones principum_, and _responsa prudentium_. He also shows
independence, and a regard for legal reasoning and the demands of justice.
While he sets forth the _jus civile_, his exposition and approval follow
the dictates of the _jus naturale_.

    “The established laws are to be understood benignly, so as to preserve
    their spirit, and prevent their departure from equity; for the Judge
    recognizes ordainments as legitimate when they conform to the
    principles of justice (_ratio equitatis_).... Interpretation is
    sometimes general and imperative, as when the lawgiver declares it:
    then it must be applied not only to the matter for which it is
    announced, but in all like cases. Sometimes an interpretation is
    imperative, but only for the special case, like the interpretation
    which is declared by those adjudicating a cause. It is then to be
    accepted in that cause, but not in like instances; for not by
    precedents, but by the laws are matters to be adjusted. There is
    another kind of interpretation which binds no one, that made by
    teachers explaining an ambiguous law, for although it may be
    admissible because sound, still it compels no one. For every
    interpretation should so be made as not to depart from justice, and
    that all absurdity may be avoided and no door opened to fraud.”[387]

One must suppose that such concise statements were explained and qualified
in the author’s lectures. But even as they stand, they afford an
exposition of Roman principles of interpretation. Not only under the Roman
Empire, but subsequently in mediaeval times, the Roman lawyer or the
canonist did not pay the deference to adjudicated precedent which is felt
by the English or American judge. The passage in the _Codex_ which
“Irnerius” was expounding commands that the judge, in deciding a case,
shall follow the laws and the reasoning of the great jurists, rather than
the decision of a like controversy.

Since the author of this _Summa_ weighs the justice, the reason, and the
convenience of the laws, and compares them with each other, his book is a
work of jurisprudence. Its qualities may be observed in its discussion of
_possession_ and the rights arising therefrom. The writer has just been
expounding the _usucapio_, an institution of the _jus civile_ strictly
speaking, whereby the law of Rome in certain instances protected and,
after three years, perfected, the title to property which one had in good
faith acquired from a vendor who was not the owner:

    “Now we must discuss the _ratio possessionis_. _Usucapio_ in the _jus
    civile_ hinges on possession, and ownership by the _jus naturale_ may
    take its origin in possession. There are many differences in the ways
    of acquiring possession, which must be considered. And since in the
    _constitutiones_ and _responsa prudentium_ divers reasons are adduced
    regarding possession, my associates have begged that I would expound
    this important and obscure subject in which is mingled the _ratio_
    both of the civil and the natural law. So I will do my best. First one
    must consider what possession is, how it is acquired, maintained, or
    lost. Possession (here the author follows Paulus and Labeo in the
    _Digest_) is as when one’s feet are set upon a thing, when body
    naturally rests on body. To acquire possession is to begin to possess.
    Herein one considers both the fact and the right. The fact arises
    through ourselves or our representative. It is understood differently
    as to movables and as to land; for the movable we take in our hand,
    but we take possession of a farm by going upon it with this intent and
    laying hold of a sod. The intent to possess is crucial. Thus a ring
    put in the hand of a sleeper is not possessed for lack of intent on
    his part. You possess naturally when with mind and body (yours or
    another’s who represents you) you hold or sit upon with intent to
    possess. Corporeal things you properly possess, and acquire possession
    of, by your own or your agent’s hand. In the same manner you retain.
    Incorporeal things cannot be possessed properly speaking, but the
    civil law accords a quasi possession of them.”

Then follows a discussion of the persons through whom another may have
possession, and of the various modes of possessing _longa manu_ without
actual touch:

    “It is one thing when the possession begins with you, and another when
    it is transferred to you by a prior possessor: for possession begins
    in three ways, by occupation, accession, and transfer. You occupy the
    thing that belongs to no one. By accession you acquire possession in
    two ways. Thus the increment may be possessed, as the fruit of thy
    handmaid; or the accession consists in the union with a larger thing
    which is yours, as when alluvium is deposited on your land. Again
    possession is transferred to you,”

voluntarily or otherwise. He now discusses the various modes in which
possession is acquired by transfer, then the nature of the _justa_ or
_injusta causa_ with which possession may begin, and the effect on the
rights of the possessor, and then some matters more peculiar to the time
of Justinian. After which he passes to the loss of possession, and
concludes with saying that he has endeavoured to go over the whole
subject, and whatever is omitted or insufficiently treated, he begs that
it be laid to the fault of _humanae imbecillitatis_. The discussion reads
like a carefully drawn outline which his lecture should expand.[388]

The knowledge and understanding of the Roman law in the mediaeval
centuries should be viewed in conjunction with the general progress of
intellectual aptitude during the same periods. The growth of legal
knowledge will then show itself as a part of mediaeval development, as one
phase of the flowering of the mediaeval intellect. For the treatment of
Roman law presents stages essentially analogous to those by which the
Middle Ages reached their understanding and appropriation of other
portions of their great inheritance from classical antiquity and the
Christianity of the Fathers. Let us recapitulate: the Roman law, adapted,
or corrupted if one will, epitomized and known chiefly in its later
enacted forms, was never unapplied nor the study of it quite abandoned. It
constituted a great part of the law of Italy and southern France; in these
two regions likewise was its study least neglected. We have observed the
superficial and mainly linguistic nature of the glosses which this early
mediaeval period interlined or wrote on the margins of the source-books
drawn upon, also the rude and barbarous nature of the earlier summaries
and compilations. They were helps to a crude practical knowledge of the
law. Gradually the treatment seems to become more intelligent, a little
nearer the level of the matter excerpted or made use of. Through the
eleventh century it is evident that social conditions were demanding and
also facilitating an increase in legal knowledge; and at that century’s
close a by no means stupid compilation appears, the _Petri exceptiones_,
and perhaps such a fairly intelligent manual for elementary instruction
as the _Brachylogus_. These works indicate that the instruction in the law
was improving. We have also the sparse references to schools of law, at
Rome, at Ravenna, at Orleans. Then we come upon the _Summa Codicis_ called
of Irnerius, of uncertain _provenance_, like the _Petrus_ and
_Brachylogus_. But there is no need to be informed specifically of its
place and date in order to recognize its advance in legal intelligence, in
veritable jurisprudence. The writer was a master of the law, an adept in
its exposition, and his oral teaching must have been of a high order. With
this book we have unquestionably touched the level of the strong
beginnings of the greatest of mediaeval schools of Roman law.

Its seat was Bologna, one of the chief centres of the civic and commercial
life of Lombardy. The Lombards themselves had shown a persistent legal
genius: their own Teutonic codes, enacted in Italy, had maintained
themselves in that land of Roman law and custom. Lombard codification had
almost reached a jurisprudence of its own, at Pavia, the juridical centre
of Lombardy. The provisions of various codes had been compared and put
together in a sort of _Concordia_, as early as the ninth century.[389]
Possibly the rivalry of Lombard law might stimulate those learned in the
law of Rome to sharper efforts to expound it and prove its superiority.
Moreover, all sides of civic life and culture were flourishing in that
region where novel commercial relations were calling for a corresponding
progress in the law, and especially for a better knowledge of the Roman
law which alone afforded provision for their regulation.

As some long course of human development approaches its climax, the
advance apparently becomes so rapid as to give the impression of something
suddenly happening, a sudden leap upward of the human spirit. The velocity
of the movement seems to quicken as the summit is neared. One easily finds
examples, for instance the fifth century before Christ in Greek art, or
the fourth century in Greek philosophy, or again the excellence so quickly
reached apparently by the Middle High German poetry just about the year
1200. But may not the seeming suddenness of the phenomenon be due to lack
of information as to antecedents? and the flare of the final achievement
even darken what went before? Yet, in fact, as a movement nears its
climax, it may become more rapid. For, as the promoting energies and
favouring conditions meet in conjunction, their joint action becomes more
effective. Forces free themselves from cumbrances and draw aid from one
another. Thus when the gradual growth of intellectual faculty effects a
conjunction with circumstances which offer a fair field, and the prizes of
life as a reward, a rapid increase of power may evince itself in novel and
timely productivity.

This may suggest the manner of the apparently sudden rise of the Bologna
school of Roman law, which, be it noted, took place but a little before
the time of Gratian’s achievement in the Canon law, itself contemporaneous
with the appearance of Peter Lombard’s novel _Books of Sentences_.[390]
The preparation, although obscure, existed; and the school after its
commencement passed onward through stages of development, to its best
accomplishment, and then into a condition of stasis, if not decline.
Irnerius apparently was its first master; and of his life little is known.
He was a native of Bologna. His name as _causidicus_ is attached to a
State paper of the year 1113. Thereafter he appears in the service of the
German emperor Henry V. We have no sure trace of him after 1118, though
there is no reason to suppose that he did not live and labour for some
further years. He had taught the Arts at Ravenna and Bologna before
teaching, or perhaps seriously studying, the law. But his career as a
teacher of the law doubtless began before the year 1113, when he is first
met with as a man of affairs. Accounts agree in ascribing to him the
foundation of the school.

Unless the _Summa Codicis_ already mentioned, and a book of _Quaestiones_,
be really his, his glosses upon Justinian’s _Digest_, _Codex_, and
_Novels_, are all we have of him;[391] of the rest we know by report. The
glosses themselves indicate that this jurist had been a grammarian, and
used the learning of his former profession in his exposition of the law.
His interlinear glosses are explanations of words, and would seem to
represent his earlier, more tentative, work when he was himself learning
the meaning of the law. But the marginal glosses are short expositions of
the passages to which they are attached, and perhaps belong to the time of
his fuller command over the legal material. They indicate, besides, a
critical consideration of the text, and even of the original connection
which the passage in the _Digest_ held in the work of the jurisconsult
from which it had been taken. Some of them show an understanding of the
chronological sequence of the sources of the Roman law, _e.g._ that the
law-making power had existed in the people and then passed to the
emperors. These glosses of Irnerius represent a clear advance in
jurisprudence over any previous legal comment subsequent to the
_Interpretatio_ attached to the _Breviarium_. It was also part of his plan
to equip his manuscripts of the _Codex_ with extracts taken from the text
of the _Novels_, and not from the _Epitome of Julian_. He appears also as
a lawyer versed in the practice of the law. For he wrote a book of forms
for notaries and a treatise on procedure, neither of which is extant.[392]

The accomplishment of the Bologna school may be judged more fully from the
works, still extant, of some of its chief representatives in the
generations following Irnerius. A worthy one was Placentinus, a native of
Piacenza. The year of his birth is unknown, but he died in 1192, after a
presumably full span of life, passed chiefly as a student and teacher of
the law. He taught in Mantua and Montpellier, as well as in Bologna. He
was an accomplished jurist and a lover of the classic literature. His work
entitled _De varietate actionum_ was apparently the first attempt to set
forth the Roman law in an arrangement and form that did not follow the
sources.[393] He opens his treatise with an allegory of a noble dame,
hight Jurisprudentia, within the circle of whose sweet and honied
utterances many eager youths were thronging. Placentinus drew near, and
received from her the book which he now gives to others.[394] This little
allegory savours of the _De consolatione_ of Boëthius, or, if one will, of
Capella’s _De nuptiis Philologiae_.

The most admirable surviving work of Placentinus is his Summa of the
_Codex_ of Justinian. His autobiographical _proemium_ shows him not
lacking in self-esteem, and tells why he undertook the work. He had
thought at first to complete the Summa of Rogerius, an older glossator,
but then decided to put that book to sleep, and compose a full Summa of
the _Codex_ himself, from the beginning to the end. This by the favour of
God he has done; it is the work of his own hands, from head to heel, and
all the matter is his own--not borrowed. Next he wrote for beginners a
Summa of the _Institutes_. After which he returned to his own town, and
shortly proceeded thence to Bologna, whither he had been called. “There in
the citadel (_in castello_) for two years I expounded the laws to
students; I brought the other teachers to the threshold of envy; I emptied
their benches of students. The hidden places of the law I laid open, I
reconciled the conflicts of enactments, I unlocked the secrets most
potently.” His success was great, and he was besought to continue his
course of lectures. He complied, and remained two years more, and then
returned to Montpellier, in order to compose a Summa of the _Digest_.[395]
If indeed Placentinus speaks bombastically of his work, its excellence
excuses him. His well-earned reputation as a jurist and scholar long
endured.

_Quaestiones_, _Distinctiones_, _Libri disputationum_, _Summae_ of the
_Codex_ or the _Institutions_, and other legal writings, are extant in
goodly bulk and number from the Bologna school. The names of the men are
almost legion, and many were of great repute in their day both as jurists
and as men of affairs. We may mention Azo and Accursius, of a little
later time. Azo’s name appears in public documents from the year 1190 to
1220--and he may have survived the latter date by some years. His works
were of such compass and excellence as to supersede those of his
predecessors. His glosses still survive, and his _Lectura_ on the _Codex_,
his _Summae_ of the _Codex_ and the _Institutes_, and his _Quaestiones_,
and _Brocarda_, the last a sort of work stating general legal propositions
and those contradicting them. Azo’s glosses were so complete as to
constitute a continuous exposition of the entire legislation of Justinian.
His _Summae_ of the _Codex_ and _Institutes_ drove those of Placentinus
out of use, which we note with a smile.[396]

None of the glossators is better known than Accursius. He comes before us
as a Florentine, and apparently a peasant’s son. He died an old man rich
and famous, about the year 1260. Azo was his teacher. In 1252 he was
Podesta of Bologna, which indicates the respect in which men held him.
Villani, the Florentine historian, describes him as of martial form,
grave, thoughtful, even melancholy in aspect, as if always meditating; a
man of brilliant talents and extraordinary memory, sober and chaste in
life, but delighting in noble vesture. His hearers drank in the laws of
living from his mien and manners no less than from the dissertations of
his mouth.[397] Late in life he retired to his villa, and there in quiet
worked on his great _Glossa_ till he died.

This famous, perhaps all too famous, _Glossa ordinaria_ was a digest and,
as it proved, a final one, of the glosses of his predecessors and
contemporaries. He drew not only from their glosses, but also on their
_Summae_ and other writings. He added a good deal of his own. Great as was
the feat, the somewhat deadened talent of a compiler shows in the result,
which flattened out the individual labours of so many jurists. It came at
once into general use in the courts and outside of them; for it was a
complete commentary on the Justinianean law, so compendious and convenient
that there was no further need of the glosses of earlier men. This book
marked the turning-point of the Bologna school, after which its
productivity lessened. Its work was done: _Codex_, _Novels_, and above
all the _Pandects_ were rescued from oblivion, and fully expounded, so far
as the matter in them was still of interest. When the labours of the
school had been conveniently heaped together in one huge _Glossa_, there
was no vital inducement to do this work again. The school of the
glossators was _functus officio_. Naturally with the lessening of the
call, productivity diminished. Little was left to do save to gloss the
glosses, an epigonic labour which would not attract men of talent.
Moreover, treating the older glosses, instead of the original text, as the
matter to be interpreted was unfavourable to progress in the understanding
of the latter.

Yet, for a little, the breath of life was still to stir in the school of
the glossators. There was a man of fame, a humanist indeed, named Cino,
whose beautiful tomb still draws the lover of things lovely to Pistoia.
Cino was also a jurist, and it came to him to be the teacher of one whose
name is second to none among the legists of the Middle Ages. This was
Bartolus, born probably in the year 1314 at Sassoferrato in the duchy of
Urbino. He was a scholar, learned in geometry and Hebrew, also a man of
affairs. He taught the law at Pisa and Perugia, and in the last-named town
he died in 1357, not yet forty-four years old. Bartolus wrote and compiled
full commentaries on the entire _Corpus juris civilis_; and yet he
produced no work differing in kind from works of his predecessors.
Moreover, between him and the body of the law rose the great mass of gloss
and comment already in existence, through which he did not always
penetrate to the veritable _Corpus_. Yet his labours were inspired with
the energy of a vigorous nature, and he put fresh thoughts into his
commentaries.[398]

The school of glossators presented the full Roman law to Europe. The
careful and critical interpretation of the text of Justinian’s
Codification, of the _Digest_ above all, was their great service. In
performing it, these jurists also had educated themselves and developed
their own intelligence. They had also put together in Summae the results
of their own education in the law. These works facilitated legal study and
sharpened the faculties of students and professors. Books of Quaestiones,
legal disputations, works upon legal process and formulae, served the same
ends.[399] These men were deficient in historical knowledge. Yet they
compared _Digest_, _Codex_, and _Novels_; they tried to re-establish the
purity of the text; they weighed and they expounded. Theirs was an
intellectual effort to master the jurisprudence of Rome: their labours
constituted a renaissance of jurisprudence; and the fact that they were
often men of affairs as well as professors, kept them from ignoring the
practical bearings of the matters which they taught.

The work of the glossators may be compared with that of the theologian
philosophers of the thirteenth century--Alexander of Hales, Albertus
Magnus, Thomas Aquinas--who were winning for the world a new and
comprehensive knowledge of Aristotle. Both jurists and philosophers, in
their different spheres, carried through a more profound study, and
reached a more comprehensive knowledge, of a great store of antique
thought, than previous mediaeval centuries conceived of. Moreover, the
interpretation of the _Corpus juris_ was quite as successful as the
interpretation of Aristotle. It was in fact surer, because freer from the
deflections of religious motive. No consideration of agreement or
disagreement with Scripture troubled the glossators’ interpretation of the
_Digest_, though indeed they may have been interested in finding support
for whatever political views they held upon the claims of emperor and
pope. But this did not disturb them as much as Aristotle’s opinion that
the universe was eternal, worried Albertus and Aquinas.


IV

The Church, from the time of its first recognition by the Roman Empire,
lived under the Roman law;[400] and the constitutions safeguarding its
authority were large and ample before the Empire fell. Constantine, to be
sure, never dreamed of the famous “Donation of Constantine” forged by a
later time, yet his enactments fairly launched the great mediaeval
Catholic Church upon the career which was to bring it more domination than
was granted in this pseudo-charter of its power. A number of Constantine’s
enactments were preserved by the Theodosian Code, in which the powers and
privileges of Church and clergy were portentously set forth.

The Theodosian Code freed the property of the Church from most fiscal
burdens, and the clergy from taxes, from public and military service, and
from many other obligations which sometimes the Code groups under the head
of _sordida munera_. The Church might receive all manner of bequests, and
it inherited the property of such of its clergy as did not leave near
relatives surviving them. Its property generally was inalienable; and the
clergy were accorded many special safeguards. Slaves might be manumitted
in a church. The church edifices were declared asylums of refuge from
pursuers, a privilege which had passed to the churches from the heathen
fanes and the statues of the emperors. Constitution after constitution was
hurled against the Church’s enemies. The Theodosian Code has one chapter
containing sixty-six constitutions directed against heretics, the combined
result of which was to deprive them, if not of life and property, at least
of protected legal existence.

Of enormous import was the sweeping recognition on the Empire’s part of
the validity of episcopal jurisdiction. No bishop might be summoned before
a secular court as a defendant, or compelled to give testimony. Falsely to
accuse one of the clergy rendered the accuser infamous. All matters
pertaining to religion and church discipline might be brought only before
the bishop’s court, which likewise had plenary jurisdiction over
controversies among the clergy. It was also open to the laity for the
settlement of civil disputes. The command not to go to law before the
heathen came down from Paul (1 Cor. vi.), and together with the severed
and persecuted condition of the early Christian communities, may be
regarded as the far source of the episcopal jurisdiction, which thus
divinely sanctioned tended to extend its arbitrament to all manner of
legal controversies.[401] To be sure, under the Christian Roman Empire
the authority of the Church as well as its privileges rested upon imperial
law. Yet the emperors recognized, rather than actually created, the
ecclesiastical authority. And when the Empire was shattered, there stood
the Church erect amid the downfall of the imperial government, and capable
of supporting itself in the new Teutonic kingdoms.

The constitutions of Christian emperors did not from their own force and
validity become Ecclesiastical or Canon law--the law relating to
Christians as such, and especially to the Church and its functions. The
source of that law was God; the Church was its declarative organ.
Acceptance on the Church’s part was requisite before any secular law could
become a law of the Church.

Canon law may be taken to include theology, or may be limited to the law
of the organization and functions of the Church taken in a large sense as
inclusive of the laity in their relations to the religion of Christ.[402]
Obviously part comes from Christ directly, through the Old Testament as
well as New. The other part, and in bulk far greater, emanates from His
foundation, the Church, under the guidance of His Spirit, and may be added
to and modified by the Church from age to age. It is expressed in custom,
universal and established, and it is found in written form in the works of
the Fathers, in the decrees of Councils, in the decretals of the popes,
and in the concordats and conventions with secular sovereignties. From the
beginning, canon law tacitly or expressly adopted the constitutions of the
Christian emperors relating to the Church, as well as the Roman law
generally, under which the Church lived in its civil relations.

The Church arose within the Roman Empire, and who shall say that its
wonderfully efficient and complete organization at the close of the
patristic period was not the final creation of the legal and constructive
genius of Rome, newly inspired by the spirit of Christianity? But the
centre of interest had been transferred from earth to heaven, and human
aims had been recast by the Gospel and the understanding of it reached by
Christian doctors. Evidently since the ideals of the Church were to be
other than those of the Roman Empire, the law which it accepted or evolved
would have ideals different from those of the Roman law. If the great
Roman jurists created a legal formulation and rendering of justice
adequate for the highly developed social and commercial needs of Roman
citizens, the law of the Church, while it might borrow phrases, rules, and
even general principles, from that system, could not fail to put new
meaning in them. For example, the constant will to render each his due,
which was _justitia_ in the Roman law, might involve different
considerations where the soul’s salvation, and not the just allotment of
the goods of this world, was the law’s chief aim. Again, what new meaning
might attach to the _honeste vivere_ and the _alterum non laedere_ of
pagan legal ethics. _Honeste vivere_ might mean to do no sin imperilling
the soul; _alterum non laedere_ would acquire the meaning of doing nothing
to another which might impede his progress toward salvation. Injuries to a
man in his temporalities were less important.

Further, Christianity although conceived as a religion for all mankind,
was founded on a definite code and revelation. The primary statement was
contained in the canonical books of the Old and New Testaments. These were
for all men, universal in application and of irrefragable validity and
truth. Here was some correspondence to the conception of the _jus gentium_
as representative of universal principles of justice and expediency, and
therefore as equivalent to the _jus naturale_. There was something of
logical necessity in the transference of this conception to the law of
Christ. Says Gratian at the beginning of his _Decretum_: “It is _jus
naturae_ which is contained in the Law and the Gospel, by which every one
is commanded to do to another as he would be done by, and forbidden to
inflict on him what he does not wish to happen to himself.” Since the Law
and the Gospel represent the final law of life for all men, they are _par
excellence_ the _jus naturae_, as well as _lex divina_. Gratian quotes
from Augustine: “Divinum jus in scripturis divinis habemus, humanum in
legibus regum.”[403] And then adds: “By its authority the _jus naturale_
prevails over custom and constitution. Whatever in customs or writings is
contrary to the _jus naturale_ is to be held vain and invalid.” Again he
says more explicitly: “Since therefore nothing is commanded by natural law
other than what God wills to be, and nothing is forbidden except what God
prohibits, and since nothing may be found in the canonical Scripture
except what is in the divine laws, the laws will rest divinely in nature
(_divine leges natura consistent_). It is evident, that whatever is proved
to be contrary to the divine will or canonical Scripture, is likewise
opposed to natural law. Wherefore whatever should give way before divine
will or Scripture or the divine laws, over that ought the _jus naturale_
to prevail. Therefore whatever ecclesiastical or secular constitutions are
contrary to natural law are to be shut out.”[404]

The canon law is a vast sea. Its growth, its age-long agglomerate
accretion, the systematization of its huge contents, have long been
subjects for controversialists and scholars. Its sources were as
multifarious as those of the Roman law. First the Scriptures and the early
quasi-apostolic and pseudo-apostolic writings; then the traditions of
primitive Christianity and also the writings of the Fathers; likewise
ecclesiastical customs, long accepted and legitimate, and finally the two
great written sources, the decretals or decisions of the popes and the
decrees of councils. From patristic times collections were made of the
last. These collections from a chronological gradually acquired a topical
and more systemic arrangement, which the compilers followed more
completely after the opening of the tenth century. The decisions of the
popes also had been collected, and then were joined to conciliar
compilations and arranged after the same topical plan.

In all of them there was unauthentic matter, accepted as if its
pseudo-authorship or pseudo-source were genuine. But in the stormy times
of the ninth century following the death of Charlemagne, the method of
argument through forged authority was exceptionally creative. It produced
two masterpieces which won universal acceptance. The first was a
collection of false Capitularies ascribed to Charlemagne and Louis the
Pious, and ostensibly the work of a certain Benedictus Levita, deacon of
the Church of Mainz, who worked in the middle of the century. Far more
famous and important was the book of _False Decretals_, put together and
largely written, that is forged, about the same time, probably in the
diocese of Rheims, and appearing as the work of Saint Isidore of Seville.
This contained many forged letters of the early popes and other forged
matter, including the Epistle or “Donation” of Constantine; also genuine
papal letters and conciliar decrees. These false collections were accepted
by councils and popes, and formed part of subsequent compilations.

From the tenth century onward many such compilations were made, all of
them uncritical as to the genuineness of the matter taken, and frequently
ill-arranged and discordant. They were destined to be superseded by the
great work in which appears the better methods and more highly trained
intelligence developing at the Bologna School in the first part of the
twelfth century. Its author was Gratianus, a monk of the monastery of St.
Felix at Bologna. He was a younger contemporary of Irnerius and of Peter
Lombard. Legend made him the latter’s brother, with some propriety; for
the compiler of those epoch-making _Sentences_ represents the same stage
in the appropriation of the patristic theological heritage of the Middle
Ages, that Gratian represents in the handling of the canon law. The
Lombard’s _Sentences_ made a systematic and even harmonizing presentation
of the theology of the Fathers in their own language; and the equally
immortal _Decretum_ of Gratian accomplished a like work for the canon law.
This is the name by which his work is known, but not the name he gave it.
That appears to have been _Concordia discordantium canonum_, which
indicates his methodical presentation of his matter and his endeavour to
reconcile conflicting propositions.

The first part of the _Decretum_ was entitled “De jure naturae et
constitutionis.” It presents the sources of the law, the Church’s
organization and administration, the ordination and ranking of the clergy,
the election and consecration of bishops, the authority of legates and
primates. The second part treats of the procedure of ecclesiastical
courts, also the law regulating the property of the Church, the law of
monks and the contract of marriage. The third part is devoted to the
Sacraments and the Liturgy.

Gratian’s usual method is as follows: He will open with an authoritative
proposition. If he finds it universally accepted, it stands as valid. But
if there are opposing statements, he tries to reconcile them, either
pointing out the difference in date (for the law of the Church may be
progressive), or showing that one of the discordant rules had but local or
otherwise limited application, or that the first proposition is the rule,
while the others make the exceptions. If he still fails to establish
concord, he searches to find which rule had been followed in the Roman
Church, and accepts that as authoritative. A rule being thus made certain,
he proceeds with subdivisions and distinctions, treating them as
deductions from the main rule and adjusting the supporting texts. Or he
will suppose a controversy (_causa_) and discuss its main and secondary
issues. Throughout he accompanies his authoritative matter with his own
commentary--commonly cited as the _Dicta Gratiani_.[405] The _Decretum_
was characterized by sagacity of interpretation and reconcilement, by vast
learning, and clear ordering of the matter. Only it was uncritical as to
the genuineness of its materials; and a number of Gratian’s own statements
were subsequently disapproved in papal decretals. The _Dicta Gratiani_
never received such formal sanction by pope or council as the writings of
Roman jurists received by being taken into Justinian’s _Digest_.

The papal decretals had become the great source of canonical law.
Gratian’s work was soon supplemented by various compilations known as
_Appendices ad Decretum_ or _Decretales extravagantes_, to wit, those
which the _Decretum_ did not contain. These, however, were superseded by
the collection, or rather codification, made at the command of the great
canonist Gregory IX. and completed in the year 1234. This authoritative
work preserved Gratian’s _Decretum_ intact, but suppressed, or abridged
and reordered, the decretals contained in subsequent collections. Arranged
in five books, it forms the second part of the _Corpus juris canonici_. In
1298 Boniface VIII. promulgated a supplementary book known as the _Sextus_
of Boniface. This with a new collection promulgated under the authority of
Clement V. in 1313, called the _Clementinae_, and the _Extravagantes_ of
his successor John XXII. and certain other popes, constitute the last
portions of the _Corpus juris canonici_.[406]

According to the law of the Empire the emperor’s authority extended over
the Church, its doctrine, its discipline, and its property. Such authority
was exercised by the emperors from Constantine to Justinian. But the
Church had always stood upon the principle that it was better to obey God
rather than man. This had been maintained against the power of the pagan
Empire, and was not to be sunned out of existence by imperial favour. It
was still better to obey God rather than the emperor. The Church still
should say who were its members and entitled to participate in the
salvation which it mediated. Ecclesiastical authorities could
excommunicate; that was their engine of coercion. These principles were
incarnate in Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, withstanding and prohibiting
Theodosius from Christian fellowship until he had done penance for the
massacre at Thessalonica. Of necessity they inhered in the Church; they
were of the essence of its strength to fulfil its purpose; they stood for
the duly constituted power of Christian resolution to uphold and advance
the peremptory truth of Christ.

So such principles persisted through the time of the hostile and then the
favouring Roman Empire. And when the Empire in fact crumbled and fell,
what _de facto_ and _de jure_ authority was best fitted to take the place
of the imperial supremacy? The Empire represented a universal secular
dominion; the Church was also universal, and with a universality now
reaching out beyond the Empire’s shrinking boundaries. In the midst of
political fragments otherwise disjoined, the Church endured as the
universal unity. The power of each Teutonic king was great in fact and law
within his realm. Yet he was but a local potency, while the Church existed
through his and other realms. And when the power of one Teutonic line (the
Carolingian) reached something like universal sway, the Church was also
there within and without. It held the learning of the time, and the
culture which large-minded seculars respected; and quite as much as the
empire of Charlemagne, it held the prestige of Rome. Witness the attitude
of Charles Martel and Pippin toward Boniface the great apostle, and the
attitude of Boniface toward the Gregories whose legate he proclaimed
himself, and upon whose central authority he based his claims to be
obeyed. Through the reforms of the Frankish Church, carried out by him
with the support of Charles Martel and Pippin, the ecclesiastical
supremacy of Rome was established. Charlemagne, indeed, from the nature
and necessities of his own transcendent power, possessed in fact the
ecclesiastical authority of the Roman emperors, whom men deemed his
predecessors. But after him the secular power fell again into fragments
scarcely locally efficient, while the Church’s universality of authority
endured.

In the unstable fragmentation of secular rule in the ninth century, the
Isidorean _Decretals_ presented the truth of the situation as it was to
be, although not as it had been in the times of the Church dignitaries
whose names were forged for that collection. And thereafter, as the Church
recovered from its tenth-century disintegration, it advanced to the
pragmatic demonstration of the validity of those false _Decretals_, on
through the tempests of the age of Hildebrand to the final triumph of
Innocent III. at the opening of the thirteenth century. Evidently the
canon law, whatever might be its immediate or remote source, drew its
authority from the sanction of the Roman Catholic Church, which enunciated
it and made it into a body corresponding to the Church’s functions. It was
what the Church promulgated as the law of the ecclesiastical hierarchy and
the kingdom of God on earth. It should be the temporal and legal
counterpart of the Church’s spiritual purposes. Its general tendency and
purpose was the promotion of the Church’s saving aim, which regarded all
things in the light of their relationship to life eternal. Therefore the
Church’s law could not but define and consider all worldly interests, all
personal and property rights and secular authority, with constant regard
to men’s need of salvation. The advancement of that must be the final
appellate standard of legal right.

Such was the event. The entire canon law might be lodged within those
propositions which Hildebrand enunciated and Innocent III. realized. For
the salvation of souls, all authority on earth had been entrusted by
Christ to Peter and his successors. Theirs was the spiritual sword;
secular power, the sword material, was to be exercised under the pope’s
mandate and permission. No king or emperor, no layman whatsoever, was
exempt from the supreme authority of the pope, who also was the absolute
head of the Church, which had become a monarchy. “The Lord entrusted to
Peter not only the universal Church, but the government of the whole
world,” writes Innocent III., whose pontificate almost made this principle
a fact. In private matters no member of the clergy could be brought before
a secular court; and the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts over
the laity threatened to reduce the secular jurisdiction to narrow
functions.[407] The property of the Church might not be taxed or levied on
by any temporal ruler or government; nor could the Church’s functions and
authority be controlled or limited by any secular decree. Universally
throughout every kingdom the Church was a sovereignty, not only in matters
spiritual, but with respect to all the personal and material
relationships that might be connected in any way with the welfare of
souls.[408]


V

The exposition of the _Corpus juris civilis_ in the school of the
glossators was of great moment in the evolution of _mediaeval political
theory_, which in its turn yields one more example of the mediaeval
application of thoughts derived from antique and patristic sources.
Political thinking in the Middle Ages sought its surest foundation in
theology; then it built itself up with concepts drawn from the philosophy
and social theory of the antique world; and lastly it laid hold on
jurisprudence, using the substance and reasoning of the Roman and the
Canon law.

Mediaeval ideas upon government and the relations between the individual
and his earthly sovereign, started from theological premises, of patristic
origin: _e.g._ that the universe and man were made by God, a miraculous
creation, springing from no other cause, and subject to no other
fundamental law, than God’s unsearchable will, which never ceases to
direct the whole creation to the Creator’s ends. A further premise was the
Scriptural revelation of God’s purpose as to man, with all the contents of
that revelation touching the overweening importance of man’s deathless
soul.

Unity--the unity of the creation--springs from these premises, or is one
of them. The principle of this unity is God’s will. Within the universal
whole, mankind also constitutes a unit, a community, specially ordained
and ordered. The Middle Ages, following the example of the patristic time,
were delivered over to allegory, and to an unbridled recognition of the
deductions of allegorical reasoning. Mankind was a community. Mankind was
also an organism, the mystical body whereof the head was Christ. Here was
an allegory potent for foolishness or wisdom. It was used to symbolize
the mystery of the oneness of all mankind in God, and the organic
co-ordination of all sorts and conditions of men with one another in the
divine commonwealth on earth; it was also drawn out into every detail of
banal anthropomorphic comparison. From John of Salisbury to Nicholas
Cusanus, Occam and Dante, no point of fancied analogy between the parts
and members of the body and the various functions of Church and State was
left unexploited.[409]

Mankind then is one community; also an organism. But within the human
organism abides the duality of soul and body; and the Community of Mankind
on earth is constituted of two orders, the spiritual and temporal, Church
and State.[410] There must be either co-ordination between State and
Church, body and soul, or subordination of the temporal and material to
the eternal and spiritual. To evoke an adjustment of what was felt to be
an actually universal opposition, was the chief problem of mediaeval
polity, and forms the warp and woof of conflicting theories. The Church
asserted a full spiritual supremacy even in things temporal, and, to
support the claim, brought sound arguments as well as foolish
allegory--allegory pretending to be horror-stricken at the vision of an
animal with two heads, a bicephalic monstrosity. But does not the Church
comprise all mankind? Did not God found it? Is not Christ its head, and
under Him his vicegerent Peter and all the popes? Then shall not the pope
who commands the greater, which is the spiritual, much more command the
less, the temporal? And all the argumentation of the two swords, delivered
to Peter, comes into play. That there are two swords is but a propriety of
administration. Secular rulers wield the secular sword at the pope’s
command. They are instruments of the Church. Fundamentally the State is
an ecclesiastical institution, and the bounds of secular law are set by
the law spiritual: the canon law overrides the laws of every State. True,
in this division, the State also is ordained of God, but only as
subordinate. And divinely ordained though it be, the origin of the State
lies in sin; for sin alone made government and law needful for man.[411]

On the other hand, the partisans of the State upheld co-ordination as the
true principle.[412] The two swords represent distinct powers, Sacerdotium
and Imperium. The latter as well as the former is from God; and the two
are co-ordinates, although of course the Church which wields the spiritual
sword is the higher. This theory creates no bicephalic monster. God is the
universal head. And even as man is body as well as soul, the human
community is State as well as Church; and the State needs the emperor for
its head, as the Church has the pope. The Roman Dominion, _imperium
mundi_, was legitimate, and by divine appointment has passed over to the
Roman-German emperor. Other views sustaining the scheme of co-ordination
upheld a plurality of states, rather than one universal Imperium. Of
course these opposing views of subordination or co-ordination of State and
Church took on every shade of diversity.

As to both Church and State, mediaeval political theory was predominantly
monarchical. Ideally this flowed from the thought of God as the true
monarch of the universe. Practically it comported with mediaeval social
conditions. Under Innocent III., if not under Gregory VII., the Church had
become a monarchy well-nigh absolute.[413] The pope’s power continued
plenary until the great schism and the age of councils evoked by it. For
the secular state, the common voice likewise favoured monarchy. The unity
of the social organism is best effected by the singleness of its head.
Thomas Aquinas authoritatively reasons thus, and Dante maintains that as
the unifying principle is Will, the will of one man is the best means to
realize it.[414] But monarchy is no absolute right existing for the
ruler’s benefit, rather it is an office to be righteously exercised for
the good of the community. The monarch’s power is limited, and if his
command outrages law or right, it is a nullity; his subjects need not
obey, and the principle applies, that it is better to obey God than man.
Even when, as in the days of the Hohenstaufen, the civil jurists claimed
for the emperor the _plenitudo potestatis_ of a Roman Caesar, the opposite
doctrine held strong, which gave him only a limited power, in its nature
conditioned on its rightful exercise.

Moreover, rights of the community were not unrecognized, and indeed were
supported by elaborate theories as the Middle Ages advanced to their
climacteric. The thought of a contract between ruler and people frequently
appears, and reference to the contract made at Hebron between David and
the people of Israel (2 Sam. v. 3). The civil jurist also looked back to
the principle of the _jus gentium_ giving to every free people the right
to choose a ruler; also to that famous text of the _Digest_, where,
through the _lex regia_, the people were said to have conferred their
powers upon the princeps.[415] With such thoughts of the people’s rights
came theories of representation and of the monarch as the people’s
representative; and Roman corporation law supplied the rules for mediaeval
representative assemblies, lay and clerical.[416]

The old Germanic state was a conglomerate of positive law and specific
custom, having no existence beyond the laws, which were its formative
constituents. Such a conception did not satisfy mediaeval publicists,
imbued with antique views of the State’s further aims and potency. Nor
were all men satisfied with the State’s divinely ordered origin in human
sinfulness. An ultimate ground for its existence was sought, commensurate
with its broadest aims. Such was found, not in positive, but in natural
law--again an antique conception. That a veritable natural law existed,
all men agreed; also that its source lay back of human conventions,
somehow in the nature of God. All admitted its absolute supremacy, binding
alike upon popes and secular monarchs, and rendering void all acts and
positive laws contravening it. It must be the State’s ultimate constituent
ground.

God was the source of natural law. Some argued that it proceeded from His
will, as a command, others that its source was eternal Reason announcing
her necessary and unalterable dictates; again its source was held to lie
more definitely in the Reason that was identical with God the _summa ratio
in Deo existens_, as Aquinas puts it. From that springs the _Lex
naturalis_, ordained to rest on the participation of man, as a rational
creature, in the moral order which he perceives by the light of natural
reason. This _lex naturalis_ (or _jus naturale_) is a true promulgated
law, since God implants it for recognition in the minds of men.[417]
Absolute unconditional supremacy was ascribed to it, and also to the _jus
divinum_, which God revealed supernaturally for a supramundane end. A
cognate supremacy was ascribed to the _jus commune gentium_, which was
composed of rules of the _jus naturale_ adapted to the conditions of
fallen human nature.

Such law was above the State, to which, on the other hand, positive law
was subject. Whenever the ruler was conceived as sovereign or absolute, he
likewise was deemed above positive law, but bound by these higher laws.
They were the source and sanction of the innate and indestructible rights
of the individual, to property and liberty and life as they were
formulated at a later period. It is evident how the recognition of such
rights fell in with the Christian revelation of the absolute value of
every individual in and for himself and his immortal life. On the other
hand, certain rights of the State, or the community, were also
indestructible and inalienable by virtue of the nature of their source in
natural law.[418]

This abstract of political theory has been stated in terms generalized to
vagueness, and with no attempt to follow the details or trace the
historical development. The purpose has been to give the general flavour
of mediaeval thought concerning Church and State, and the Individual as a
member of them both. One observes how the patristic and mediaeval
Christian thought mingles with the antique; and one may assume the
intellectual acumen applied by legist, canonist, and scholastic theologian
to the discussion and formulation of these high arguments. The mediaeval
genius for abstractions is evident, and the mediaeval faculty of linking
them to the affairs of life; clear also is the baneful effect of mediaeval
allegory. Even as men now-a-days are disposed to rest in the apparent
reality of the tangible phenomenon, so the mediaeval man just as commonly
sought for his reality in what the phenomenon might be conceived to
symbolize. Therefore in the higher political controversies, even as in
other interests of the human spirit, argument through allegory was
accepted as legitimate, if not convincing; and a proper sequence of
thought was deemed to lie from one symbolical meaning to another, with
even a deeper validity than from one palpable fact to that which followed
from it.




