CHAPTER XXIX

CATHEDRAL AND MASS; HYMN AND IMAGINATIVE POEM

     I. GUILELMUS DURANDUS AND VINCENT OF BEAUVAIS.

    II. THE HYMNS OF ADAM OF ST. VICTOR AND THE _Anticlaudianus_ of ALANUS
        OF LILLE.


Under sanction of Scriptural interpretation and the sacraments, allegory
and symbolism became accepted principles of spiritual verity, sources of
political argument, and modes of transcendental truth. They penetrated the
Liturgy, charging every sentence and ceremonial act with saving
significance and power; and as plastic influences they imparted form and
matter to religious art and poetry, where they had indeed been potent from
the beginning.


I

In the early Church the office of the Mass, the ordination of priests, and
the dedication of churches were not charged with the elaborate symbolism
carried by these ceremonies in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries,[83]
when the Liturgy, or speaking more specifically, the Mass, had become
symbolical from the _introit_ to the last benediction; and Gothic
sculpture and glass painting, which were its visible illustration, had
been impressed with corresponding allegory. Mediaeval liturgic lore is
summed up by Guilelmus Durandus in his _Rationale divinorum officiorum_,
which was composed in the latter part of the thirteenth century, and
contains much that is mirrored in the art of the French cathedrals. It is
impossible to review the elaborate symbolical significance of the Mass as
set forth in the authoritative work of one who was a bishop, theologian,
jurist, and papal regent.[84] But a little of it may be given.

The office of the Mass, says Durandus, is devised with great forethought,
so as to contain the major part of what was accomplished by and in Christ
from the time when He descended from heaven to the time when He ascended
into heaven. In the sacrifice of the Mass all the sacrifices of the
Ancient Law are represented and superseded. It may be celebrated at the
third hour, because then, according to Mark, Christ ascended the cross,
and at that hour also the Holy Spirit descended upon the Apostles in
tongues of fire; or at the sixth hour, when, according to Matthew, Christ
was crucified; or at the ninth hour, when on the cross He gave up His
spirit.

The first part of the Mass begins with the _introit_. Its antiphonal
chanting signifies the aspirations and deeds, the prayers and praises of
the patriarchs and prophets who were looking for the coming of the Son of
God. The chorus of chanting clergy represents this yearning multitude of
saints of the Ancient Law. The bishop, clad in his sacred vestments,[85]
at the end of the procession, emerging from the sacristy and advancing to
the altar, represents Christ, the expected of the nations, emerging from
the Virgin’s womb and entering the world, even as the Spouse from His
secret chamber. The seven lights borne before him on the chief festivals
are the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit descending upon the head of Christ.
The two acolytes preceding him signify the Law and the Prophets, shown in
Moses and Elias who appeared with Christ on Mount Tabor. The four who bear
the canopy are the four evangelists, declaring the Gospel. The bishop
takes his seat and lays aside his mitre. He is silent, as was Christ
during His early years. The Book of the Gospels lies closed before him.
Around him in the company of clergy are represented the Magi and others.

The services proceed, every word and act filled with symbolic import. The
reading of the Epistle is reached--that is the preaching of John the
Baptist, who preaches only to the Jews; so the reader turns to the north,
the region of the Ancient Law. The reading ended, he bows before the
bishop, as the Baptist humbled himself before Christ.

After the Epistle comes the Gradual or _responsorium_, which relates to
penitence and the works of the active life. The Baptist is still the main
figure, until the solemn moment when the Gospel is read, which signifies
the beginning of Christ’s preaching. The Creed follows the Gospel, as
faith follows the preaching of the truth. Its twelve parts refer to the
calling of the twelve apostles. Then the bishop begins his sermon; that is
to say, after the calling of the Twelve, the Word of God is preached to
the people, and it henceforth behoves the Church to hold fast to the Creed
which has just been recited.[86]

The authoritative allegorizing of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries
extended the symbolism of the Mass to the edifice in which it was
celebrated; as the _Rationale_ sets forth in its opening chapter entitled
“De ecclesia et eius partibus.” There it is shown that the corporeal
church is the edifice, while the Church, spiritually taken, signifies the
faithful people drawn together from all sorts of men as the edifice is
constructed of all sorts of stones. The various names ecclesia, synagogue,
basilica, and tabernacle are explained; and then why the Church is called
the Body of Christ, and also Virgin, also Spouse, Mother, Daughter, Widow,
and indeed Meretrix, as it shuts its bosom against no one seeking it. The
form of the church conforms to that of Solomon’s temple, in the anterior
part of which the people heard and prayed, while the clergy prayed and
preached, gave thanks and ministered, in the sanctuary or sacred place.
Solomon’s temple in turn was modelled on the Tabernacle of the Exodus,
which, because it was constructed on a journey, is the type of the world
which passes away and the lust thereof. It was made with the four colours
of the arch of heaven, as the world consists of the four elements. Since
God is in the world, He is in the tabernacle (which also means the Church
militant) and in the midst of the faithful congregation. The anterior part
of the tabernacle, where the people sacrificed, is also the _Vita activa_,
in which the laity labour in neighbourly love; and the portion where the
Levites ministered is the _Vita contemplativa_.

The church should be erected in the following manner: the place of its
foundation should be made ready--well-founded is the house of the Lord
upon a rock--and the bishop or licensed priest should sprinkle it with
holy water to dispel the demons, and should lay the first stone, on which
should be carved a cross. The head of the church, that is the chancel,
should be set toward the rising sun at the time of the equinox. Now if the
Jews were commanded to build walls for Jerusalem, how much more ought we
to build the walls of our churches? The material church signifies the Holy
Church built of living stones in heaven, with Christ the corner-stone,
upon which are set the foundations of Apostles and Prophets. The walls
above are the Jews and Gentiles, who believing come to Christ from the
four quarters of the world. The faithful people predestined to life are
the stones thereof.

The mortar in which the stones are set is made of lime, sand, and water.
Lime is fervent love, which takes to itself the sand, that is, earthly
toil; then water, which is the Spirit, unites the lime and sand. As the
stones of the wall would have no stability without the mortar, so men
cannot be set in the walls of the heavenly Jerusalem without love, which
the Holy Spirit brings. The stones of the wall are hewn and squared, which
means sanctified and made clean. Some stones are borne, but do not
themselves bear any burden, and these are the feeble in the Church. Other
stones are borne, yet also bear; while still others bear, but are not
borne, save by Christ alone, the one foundation; and the last are the
perfect.

The Jews were subject to hostile attack while building the walls of
Jerusalem,[87] so that with one hand they set stones, while they fought
with the other. Likewise are we surrounded by hostile vices as we build
the walls of the Church; but we oppose them with the shield of faith and
the breastplate of righteousness, and the sword of the Word of God in our
hands.

The church edifice is disposed like the human body. The chancel, where the
altar is, represents the head, and the cross (transept) the arms and
hands. The western portion (nave and aisles) is the rest of the body. But
indeed Richard of St. Victor deems that the three parts of the edifice
represent in order of sanctity, first the virgins, then the continent, and
lastly married people.

Again, the Church is built with four walls; that is, by the teaching of
the four evangelists it rises broad and high into the altitude of the
virtues. Its length is the long-suffering with which it endures adversity;
its breadth is love, with which it embraces its friends in God, and loves
its enemies for His sake; its height is the hope of future reward. Again,
in God’s temple the foundation is faith, which is as to what is not seen;
the roof is charity, which covers a multitude of sins. The door is
obedience--keep the commandments if thou wilt enter into life.[88] The
pavement is humility. The four walls are the four virtues, righteousness,
(_justitia_), fortitude, prudence, and temperance. The windows are glad
hospitality and free-handed pity.

Some churches are cruciform, to teach us that we are crucified to the
world, or should follow the Crucified. Some are circular, which signifies
that the Church is spread through the circle of the world.

The apse signifies the faithful laity; the crypts, the hermits. The nave
signifies Christ, through whom lies the way to the heavenly Jerusalem; the
towers are the preachers and prelates, and the pinnacles represent the
prelates’ minds which soar on high. Also a weather-cock on top of the
church signifies the preachers, who rouse the sleeping from the night of
sin, and turning ever to the wind, resist the rebellious. The iron rod
upholding the cock is the preacher’s sermon; and because this rod is
placed above the cross on the church, it indicates the word of God
finished and confirmed, as Christ said in His passion, “It is finished.”
The lofty dome on which the cross is set, signifies how perfect and
inviolate should be the preaching and observance of the Catholic Faith.

The glass windows of the church are the divine Scriptures, which repel the
wind and rain, but admit the light of the true sun, to wit God, into the
church, that is, into the hearts of the faithful. The windows also signify
the five senses of the body.[89]

The door of the church (again) is Christ--“I am the Door”; the doors are
also the Apostles. The pillars are the bishops and doctors; their bases
are the apostolic bishops; their capitals are the minds of the doctors and
bishops. The pavement is the foundation of faith, and also signifies the
“poor in spirit,” also the common crowd by whose labours the church is
upheld. The rafters are the princes and preachers in the world, who defend
the church by deed and word. The seats in a church are the contemplative
in whom God rests without offence. The panels in the ceiling are also
preachers who adorn and strengthen.

The chancel, the head of the church, by being lower than the rest,
indicates how great should be the humility of the clergy. The screens by
which the altar is separated from the choir signify the separation of
heavenly beings from things of earth. The choir stalls indicate the body’s
need of recreation. The pulpit is the life of the perfect. The horologe
signifies the diligence with which the priests should say the canonical
hours. The tiles of the roof are the knights who protect the church from
pagans. The spiral stairways concealed within the walls are the secret
knowledge had only by those who ascend to the heavenly places. The
sacristy, where the holy utensils are kept and the priest puts on his
vestments, signifies the womb of the most holy Virgin, in which Christ put
on His sacred garb of flesh. From thence the priest emerges before the
public, as Christ went forth from the Virgin’s womb into the world. The
lamp signifies Christ, who is the light of the world; or the lamps
signify the Apostles and other doctors, whose doctrine lights the church.
Moses also made seven lights, which are the seven gifts of the Holy
Spirit.

Durandus next devotes a whole chapter to the symbolism of the altar, and
another to the significance and function of ornaments, pictures, and
sculpture. The latter opens with the words: “The pictures and ornaments in
a church are the texts and scriptures (_lectiones et scripturae_) of the
laity.” This chapter is long; it explains how Christ and the angels, also
saints, Apostles and others, should be represented, and describes the
proper kinds of church ornament and utensils. Much of the detail is
symbolical.

Thus Durandus devised or brought together meanings to fit each bit of the
church edifice, its materials and furnishings. In the work of a
contemporary are stored the allegorical meanings of the subjects of Gothic
sculpture and painted glass. The thirteenth century had a weakness for the
word “Speculum,” and the idea it carried of a mirror or compendium of all
human knowledge. The chief of mediaeval encyclopaedists was Vincent of
Beauvais, a _protégé_ of the saintly King Louis IX. An analysis of his
huge _Speculum majus_ is given elsewhere.[90] It was made up of the Mirror
of Nature, the Mirror of human Knowledge and Ethics, and the Mirror of
History. The compiler and his assistants laboured during the best period
of Gothic art, and from their work, industry may draw an exhaustive
commentary upon the series of topics presented by the sculpture and glass
of a cathedral.[91]

The Mirror of Nature appears carved in the sculpture of Chartres or
Bourges. In rendering the work of the Six Days, the Creator is shown
(under the form of Christ)[92] contemplating His work, or resting from
His toil; here and there a lion, sheep, or goat, suggests the animal
creation, and a few trees the vegetable world. This is the necessary
symbolism of the sculptor’s art. But Gothic animals and plants sometimes
have other definite symbolic meanings, as in the instance of the
well-known signs of the four Evangelists, the man, the lion, the ox, the
eagle. The allegorical interpretations of Scripture were an exhaustless
source of symbolism for Gothic sculptors; another was the _Physiologus_
and its progeny of Bestiaries, with their symbolic explanations of the
legendary attributes of animals. Intentional symbolism, however, did not
inhere in all this carving, much of which is sheer fancy and decoration.
Such was the character of the splendid Gothic flora, of the birds and
beasts that move in it, and of the grotesque monsters. They were not out
of place, since the Gothic cathedral was itself a Speculum or Summa, and
should include the whole of God’s creation, not omitting even the devils
who beset men’s souls.

Vincent may have drawn from Hugo of St Victor the current doctrine that
the arts have part in the work of man’s restoration; a doctrine abundantly
justifying the presence of the sciences and crafts (composing the Mirror
of Knowledge) in the sculpture and painting of the cathedral. There the
Seven Liberal Arts are rendered, through allegorical figures; and the
months of the year are symbolized in the Zodiac and the labours of the
field which make up man’s annual toil. Philosophy is shown and Fortune’s
wheel; the Virtues and Vices are represented in personifications, and even
their conflict, the Psychomachia, may be shown.

At last the Mirror of History is reached. This will teach in concrete
examples what has been learned from the figures of the abstract Virtues
and Vices. Its chief source is the Bible. Those Old Testament incidents
were selected which for centuries had been interpreted as prefigurements
of the life of Christ; and each was presented as a pendant to the Gospel
scene which it typified. These make the chief subjects of the coloured
glass of Chartres and Bourges and other cathedrals where the windows are
preserved. Here may be seen the Passion of Christ, surrounded by scenes
from the Old Testament typifying it; likewise His Resurrection and its
ancient types; and other significant incidents in the life of the Saviour
and His virgin mother.[93] The latter is typified by the burning bush, by
the fleece of Gideon, by the rod of Aaron, even as in the hymns of Adam of
Saint-Victor.[94] Besides these incidents, leading personages of the Old
Testament are presented as prefigurative of Christ, as in the great series
of statues of Melchizedek, Abraham, Moses, Samuel, David, on the north
portal of Chartres; while the four greater and twelve minor prophets are
shown as types of the four Evangelists and the twelve Apostles. Christ
himself is depicted on a window at St. Denis, between the allegorical
figures of the Ancient Law and the Gospel,--figures which are allied to
those of the uncrowned and blinded Synagogue and the triumphant Church, so
frequently seen together upon cathedrals. Everywhere the tendency to
symbolize is strong. Parts of the Crucifixion scene are rendered
symbolically, and many of the parables. That of the Good Samaritan
constantly appears upon the windows, and is always designed so as to
convey the allegorical teaching drawn from it in Honorius’s sermon.[95]

Obviously this Mirror of History was chiefly sacred history. Pagan
antiquity was scantily suggested by the Sibyls, who stand for the dumb
pagan prophecy of Christ. Scenes from the history of Christian nations
were more frequent; but they always told of some victory for Christ, like
the baptism of Clovis, or the crusading deeds of Charlemagne, Roland or
Godfrey of Bouillon. God’s drama closed with the Last Judgment, the
damnation of the damned and the beatitude of the elect. The Last
Judgments, usually over-arching the tympanums above cathedral doors, are
known to all--as at Rheims, at Chartres, at Bourges. They are full of
symbolism, and full of “historic” reality as well. The treatment becomes
entirely allegorical when the sculptor enters Paradise with the redeemed,
and portrays in lovely personifications the beatitudes of the blessed, as
on the north portal of Chartres.

Those bands of nameless men who carved the statues and designed the
coloured glass which were to make Gothic cathedrals speak, faithfully
presented the teachings of the Church. They rendered the sacred drama of
mankind’s creation, fall, redemption, and final judgment unto hell or
heaven: they rendered it in all its dogmatic symbolism, and with a plastic
adequacy showing how completely they thought and felt in the allegorical
medium in which they worked. They also created matchless ideals of
symbolism in art. The statuary of the portals and façades of Rheims and
Chartres are in their way comparable to the sculptures of the pediment of
the Parthenon. But unlike those masterpieces of antique idealism, these
Christian masterpieces do not seek to set forth mortal man in his natural
strength and beauty and completeness. Rather they seek to show the working
of the human spirit held within the power and grace of God. Theirs is not
the strength and beauty of the flesh, or the excellence of the
unconquerable mind of man; but in them man’s mind and spirit are palpably
the devout creatures of God’s omnipotence, obedient to His will, sustained
and redeemed by His power and grace. Attitude, form, feature, alike
designed to express the sacred beauty of the soul, are not invested with
physical excellence for its own sake; but every physical quality of these
statues is a symbol of some holy and beautiful quality of spirit. These
statues attain a symbolic, and not a natural, ideal in art. Yet many of
them possess the physical beauty of form and feature, inasmuch as such may
be the proper envelope for the chaste and eager soul.[96]

On the other hand, in the filling out of the illustrative detail of life
on earth, of handicraft and art, the sculptor showed how he could carve
these actualities, and present earth’s beauty in the cathedral’s wealth of
vine and flower and leaf. The level commonplace of humanity is deftly
rendered, the daily doings of the forge and field and market-place, the
tugging labourer, the merchant with his stuffs, the scholar with his
scrolls. He knew life well, this artist, and had an eye for every catching
scene, also for Nature’s subtle beauties. Sometimes a certain passing show
was represented because a window was given by some drapers’ guild,
desirous of seeing its craft shown in a place of honour; and the artist
loved his scenes from busy life, as he loved his ornament from Nature.
Such scenes (which rarely held specific allegory) were not unconnected
with the rest of the drama of creation and redemption mirrored in the
cathedral, nor was the exquisitely cut leaf and rose without its
suggestion of the grace incarnate in the Virgin and her Son. Daily life
and natural ornament had at least an illustrative pertinency to the whole,
of which they were unobtrusive and lovely elements; and since that whole
was primarily a visible symbol of the unseen and divine power, these
humble elements had part in its unutterable mystery, and were likewise
symbols.

Finally, have not these nameless artists--even as Dante and our English
Bunyan--presented by their art a synthesis of life’s realities? Their feet
were on the earth; with sympathy and knowledge their hands worked in the
media of things seen and handled, and fashioned the little human matters
which are bounded by the cradle and the grave. Such were the materials
from which Dante formed his _Commedia_, and Bunyan drew the Progress of
his Pilgrim soul to God. Yet as with Bunyan and Dante, so with these
artists in stone and coloured light, the mortal and the tangible were but
the elements through which the poem or story, or the carved or painted
picture, was made the realizing symbol of the unseen and eternal Spirit.


II

Beneath the Abbey Church of Saint-Victor there was a crypt consecrated to
the Mother of God. Here a certain monk was wont to retire and compose
hymns in her honour. One day his lips uttered the lines:

  “Salve, mater pietatis,
   Et totius Trinitatis
       Nobile triclinium;
   Verbi tamen incarnati
   Speciale majestati
       Praeparans hospitium!”

Whereupon a flood of light filled the crypt, and the Virgin, appearing to
him, inclined her head.

The monk’s name was Adam,[97] and he is deemed the best of Latin
hymn-writers. Breton born, he entered Saint-Victor in his youth, about the
year 1130. He was favoured with the instruction of Hugo till the master’s
death in 1141. Adam must have been of nearly the same age as Richard of
Saint-Victor, that other pupil of Hugo who makes the third member of the
great Victorine trio. Their works have been the monastery’s fairest fame.
Hugo was a Saxon; Adam a Breton; Richard was Scotch. So Saint-Victor drew
her brilliant sons from many lands. Richard, whose writings worthily
supplemented those of his master Hugo,[98] died in 1173; his friend Adam
outlived him, and died an old man as the twelfth century was closing. He
was buried in the cloister, and over him was placed an elegiac epitaph
upon human vanity and sin, in part his own composition.

Adam’s hymns were Sequences[99] intended for church use. Their author was
learned in Christian doctrine, skilled in the Liturgy, and saturated with
the spirit of devotional symbolism. His symbolism, which his gift of verse
made into imagery, was that of the mediaeval church and its understanding
of the Liturgy; he also shows the special influence of Hugo. Adam’s hymns,
with their powerful Latin rhymes, cannot be reproduced in English; but a
translation may give the contents of their symbolism. The hymn for Easter,
beginning “Zyma vetus expurgetur,”[100] is an epitome of the symbolic
prefiguration of Christ in the Old Testament. Each familiar allegorical
interpretation flashes in a phrase. Literally translated, or rather
maltreated, it is as follows:

    “Let the old leaven be purged away that a new resurrection may be
    celebrated purely. This is the day of our hope; wonderful is the power
    of this day by the testimony of the law.

    “This day despoiled Egypt, and liberated the Hebrews from the fiery
    furnace; for them in wretched straits the work of servitude was mud
    and brick and straw.[101]

    “Now as praise of divine virtue, of triumph, of salvation, let the
    voice break free! This is the day which the Lord made, the day ending
    our grief, the day bringing salvation.

    “The Law is the shadow of things to come, Christ the goal of promises,
    who completes all. Christ’s blood blunts the sword the guardians
    removed.[102]

    “The Boy, type of our laughter, in whose stead the ram was slain,
    seals life’s joy.[103] Joseph issues from the pit;[104] Christ returns
    above after death’s punishment.

    “This serpent devours the serpents of Pharaoh secure from the
    serpent’s spite.[105] Whom the fire wounded, them the brazen serpent’s
    presence freed.[106]

    “The hook and ring of Christ pierce the dragon’s jaw;[107] the sucking
    child puts his hand into the cockatrice’s den, and the old tenant of
    the world flees affrighted.[108]

    “The mockers of Elisha ascending the house of God, feel the
    bald-head’s wrath;[109] David, feigning madness, the goat cast forth,
    and the sparrow escape.[110]

    “With a jaw-bone Samson slays a thousand and spurns the marriage of
    his tribe. Samson bursts the bars of Gaza, and, carrying its gates,
    scales the mountain’s crest.[111]

    “So the strong Lion of Judah, shattering the gates of dreadful death,
    rises the third day; at His father’s roaring voice, He carries aloft
    His spoils to the bosom of the supernal mother.[112]

    “After three days the whale gives back from his belly’s narrow house
    Jonas the fugitive, type of the true Jonas. The grape of Cyprus[113]
    blooms again, opens and grows apace. The synagogue’s flower withers,
    while flourishes the Church.[114]

    “Death and life fought together: truly Christ arose, and with Him many
    witnesses of glory. A new morn, a glad morn shall wipe away the tears
    of evening: life overcame destruction; it is a time of joy.

    “Jesu victor, Jesu life, Jesu life’s beaten way, thou whose death
    quelled death, bid us to the paschal board in trust. O Bread of life,
    O living Wave, O true and fruitful Vine, do thou feed us, do thou
    cleanse us, that thy grace may save us from the second death. Amen.”

From the time of that old third-century hymn ascribed to Clement of
Alexandria,[115] hymns to Christ had been filled with symbolism, the
symbolism of loving personification of His attributes, as well as with the
more formal symbolism of His Old Testament prefigurements. Adam’s
symbolism is of both kinds. It has feeling even when dogmatic,[116] and
throbs with devotion as its theme approaches the Gospel Christ. Prevailing
modes of thought and feeling may prescribe topics for verse which a
succeeding age will find curiously unpoetic. Yet if the later time have a
sympathetic understanding for the past, it will recognize how fervid and
how songful was that bygone verse--the verse of Adam’s hymns, for
instance. In one for Christmas Day, beginning:

  “Potestate, non natura,
   Fit Creator creatura,”[117]

a stanza touches on the reason why the Creator thus became creature. It
would be impossible to render its feeling in English, and much
circumlocution would be needed to express even its literal meaning in any
language but mediaeval Latin. This stanza has twelve lines:

  “Causam quaeris, modum rei:
   Causa prius omnes rei,
   Modus justum velle Dei,
       Sed conditum gratia.”

    “Thou askest cause and _modus_ of the fact: the _causa rei_ was before
    all, the _modus_ was God’s righteous willing, but seasoned with
    grace.”

These lines are scholastic. In the next four, the feeling begins to rise,
yet the phrases repel rather than attract us:

  “O quam dulce condimentum
   Nobis mutans in pigmentum,
   Cum aceto fel cruentum
       Degustante Messya!”

    “Oh! how sweet the condiment changing for us into juice, as the
    Messiah tastes the bloody gall and vinegar.”

The feeling touches its climax with the four concluding lines, in which
the parable of the Good Samaritan is invested with the special allegorical
significance set forth in the sermon of Honorius:[118]

  “O salubre sacramentum,
   Quod nos ponit in jumentum
   Plagis nostris dans unguentum
       Ille de Samaria.”

    “O health-giving sacrament which sets us on a beast, giving ointment
    for our stripes,--he of Samaria.”[119]

Two stanzas from another of Adam’s Christmas hymns will show how
curiously intricate could be his symbolism. Having spoken of the ineffable
wonder of the Incarnation, he proceeds:

  “Frondem, florem, nucem sicca
   Virga profert, et pudica
       Virgo Dei Filium.
   Fert coelestem vellus rorem,
   Creatura creatorem,
       Creaturae pretium.

  “Frondis, floris, nucis, roris
   Pietati Salvatoris
       Congruunt mysteria.
   Frons est Christus protegendo,
   Flos dulcore, nux pascendo,
       Ros coelesti gratia.”[120]

    “A dry rod puts forth leafage, flower, nut,[121] and a chaste Virgin
    brings forth the Son of God. A fleece bears heavenly dew,[122] a
    creature the Creator, the creature’s price.

    “The mysteries of leafage, flower, nut, dew are suited to the
    Saviour’s tender love (_pietas_). The foliage by its protecting is
    Christ, the flower is Christ by its sweetness, the nut as it yields
    food, the dew by its celestial grace.”

One observes that here the symbolism first touches Christ’s birth, the dry
rod and the fleece representing the Virgin. Then the leafage, flower, nut
and dew typify His qualities. The remaining stanzas of this hymn carry out
in further detail the symbolism of the nut.

Besides the hymns devoted to the Saviour, the greater part of Adam’s hymns
are symbolical throughout. Those written for the dedication of churches
are among the most interesting. One beginning “Quam dilecta
tabernacula”[123] sketches the Old Testament facts which prefigure
Christ’s holy Church. The keynote is in the lines:

  “Quam decora fundamenta
   Per concinna sacramenta
       Umbra praecurrentia!”

    “How seemly the foundations through the appropriate sacraments, the
    forerunning shadow.”

The shadow is the Old Testament, and these three lines sum up the teaching
of Hugo as to the sacramental nature of the Old Testament narratives.
Throughout this hymn Adam follows Hugo closely.[124] In another dedicatory
hymn[125] Adam gives the prefigurative meaning of the parts of Solomon’s
temple. There is likewise much symbolism in the grand hymns addressed to
the Virgin. One for the festival of the Assumption[126] gives the figures
of the Virgin in the Old Testament--the throne of Solomon, the fleece of
Gideon, the burning bush. Then with more feeling the metaphorical epithets
pour forth, voicing the heart’s gratitude to the Virgin’s saving aid to
man. A still more splendid example of like symbolism and ardent metaphor
is the great hymn beginning:

  “Salve mater Salvatoris,
   Vas electum, vas honoris,”

which won the Virgin’s greeting for the poet.[127]

The lives of Honorius, of Hugo, of Adam, from whose works we have been
drawing illustrations of mediaeval symbolism, vie with each other in
obscurity; and properly enough since they were monks, for whom
self-effacement is becoming. This personal obscurity culminates with one
last example to be drawn from monastic sources. The man himself was an
impressive figure in his time; a sight of him was not to be forgotten: he
was called _magnus_ and _doctor universalis_. Nevertheless it has been
questioned whether he lived in the twelfth or the thirteenth century, and
whether one man or two bore the name of Alanus de Insulis.

There was in fact but one, and he belongs to the twelfth century, dying
almost a centenarian, in the year 1202. The cognomen _de Insulis_ has also
been an enigma. From it he has been dubbed a Sicilian, and then a Scot,
born on the island of Mona. But the name in reality refers to the chief
town of Flanders, which is called Lisle; and Alanus doubtless was a
Fleming.

He became a learned man, and lectured at Paris. That he was possessed with
no small opinion of his talents would appear from the legend told of him
as well as of St. Augustine. He had announced that on a certain day in a
single lecture he would set forth the complete doctrine of the mystery of
the most Holy Trinity. The afternoon before the day appointed, he walked
by the river, thinking how he should arrange his subject so as to include
it all. He chanced upon a child who was dipping up the river water with a
snail shell and dropping it into a little trench. Smiling, he asked what
should be the object of this; and the child told him that he was putting
the whole river into his trench. As the great scholar was explaining that
this could not be done, he suddenly felt himself chidden and taught--how
much less might he perform what he had set for the next morning. He stood
speechless at his presumption, and burst into tears. The next day
ascending the platform he said to the crowd of auditors, “Let it suffice
you to have seen Alanus”;[128] and with that he left them all astonished,
and himself hastily set out for Citeaux. On arrival he asked to be
admitted as a _conversus_, and was given charge of the monastery’s sheep.
Patient and unknown, he long plied this humble vocation. But at length it
chanced that the abbot took him to a council at Rome, in the capacity of
hostler. And there he beat down the arrogance of a heretic with such
arguments that the latter cried out that he was disputing either with the
devil or Alanus, and would say no more.

Such is one story. By another he is made to seek the monastery of
Clairvaux, and there become a monk under St. Bernard. It is also written
that he became an abbot, and then a bishop, but afterwards resigned his
bishopric. However all this may have been, he died and was buried, and was
subjected to many epitaphs. On what purports to be an old copy of his tomb
at Citeaux, he is shown with St. Bernard, and called Alanus Magnus. The
title _Doctor universalis_ has always clung to his memory, which will not
altogether fade. For if Adam of Saint-Victor was the greatest of Latin
mediaeval hymn-writers, Alanus has good claim to be called the greatest of
mediaeval Latin poets in the field of didactic and narrative poetry.[129]

The many works ascribed to Alanus include an allegorical Commentary on
Canticles, a treatise on the art of preaching, a book of _sententiae_,
another of _theologicae regulae_, sundry sermons, and a lengthy work
“contra haereticos”; also a large dictionary of Biblical allegorical
interpretations, entitled _Liber in distinctionibus dictionum
theologicalium_.[130] All these are prose. He composed besides his _Liber
de planctu naturae_,[131] and his _Anticlaudianus_, a learned and
profound, and likewise highly imaginative allegorical poem upon man.[132]
Its Preface in prose casts a curious light upon the author’s enigmatical
personality, which combined the wonted or conventional humility of a monk
with the towering self-consciousness of a man of genius.

    “The lightning scorns to spend its force on twigs, but breaks the
    proud tops of exalted trees. The wind’s imperious rage passes over the
    reed and drives the assaults of its wild blasts against the highest
    summits. Wherefore let not envy’s flame strike the pinched humility of
    my work, nor detraction’s breath overwhelm the driven poverty of my
    little book, where misery’s wreck demands a port of pity, far more
    than felicity provokes the sting of spite.”

More sentences of turgid deprecation follow, and the author begs the
reader not to approach his book with disgust and irritation, but with
pleasant anticipations of novelty (not all a monk speaks here!).

    “For although the book may not bloom with the purple vestment of
    flowering speech, nor shine with the constellated light of the
    flashing period, still in the tenuity of the fragile reed the honey’s
    sweetness may be found, and parched thirst can be tempered with the
    scant water of a rill. In this book let nothing be made vulgar
    (_plebescat_) with ribaldry, nor let anything be open to biting
    reproof, as if it smacked of the coarseness of the moderns [to whom
    does he refer?]; but let the flower of my talent be presented, and the
    dignity of diligence; for pigmy humility, thus raised upon a height,
    may overtop the giant. Let not those dare to tire of this work, who
    are squalling in the cradles of elementary instruction, sucking milk
    from nurses’ paps; nor let those seek to cry it down, who are pledged
    to the service of the higher learning; nor those presume to discredit
    it, who strike heaven from the top-notch of philosophy. For in this
    work, the sweetness of the literal meaning will tickle the puerile
    ear; moral teaching will instruct the more proficient understanding;
    and the finer subtilty of allegory will sharpen the finished
    intellect. Wherefore let all those be kept from ingress who, abandoned
    to the mirrors of the senses, are not charioteered by reason, and,
    pursuing the sense-image, have no appetite for reason’s truth,--lest
    indeed what is holy be defiled by dogs, and the pearl be trampled by
    the feet of swine. But such as will not suffer the things of reason to
    rest with the base images, and dare to lift their view to forms
    divine, may thread the narrow passes of my book, while they weigh with
    discretion’s scales what is suited to the common ear, and what should
    be buried in silence.”

This Preface of strained sentence and laboured metaphor, of forced
humility and overweening self-consciousness, hardly augurs well for the
poem of which it is the prelude. But prefaces are authors’ pitfalls, and,
moreover, many writers have floundered in one medium of speech while in
another they have moved with ease. From the ungainly prose of the
_Persones Tale_, no one would expect the ease and force of Chaucer’s
verse. And the reader of Alanus’s Preface need not be discouraged from
entering upon his poem. Its subject is man; its philosophic or religious
purpose is to expound the functions of God, of Nature, of Fortune, of
Virtue and Vice, in making man and shaping his career. The poem is an
allegory, original in its general scheme of composition, but in many of
its parts following earlier allegorical writings.

The opening lines tell of Nature’s solicitude to bestow her gifts so that
the finished work may present a fair harmony: as a patient workman she
forges, trims and files, and fashions with reason’s chisel. But when she
seeks to invest her work with qualities beyond her giving, she is obliged
to call on the Celestial Council of her Sisters. Responding, pilgrim-like
the Crown of Heaven’s soldiery comes from on high, brightens the earth
with its light, and clothes the ground with blessed footprints.

Leading this galaxy, Concord advances, foster-child of Peace; then Plenty
comes, and Favour, and Youth with favour anointed, and Laughter, banisher
of mental mists; then Shame and Modesty, and Reason the measure of good,
and Honesty, Reason’s happy comrade; then Dignity (_decus_) and Prudence
balancing her scales, and Piety and true Faith, and Virtue. Last of all
Nobility (_nobilitas_), in grace not quite the others’ equal.[133]

In the midst of a great wood blessed with fountains and multitudinous
bird-song, a cloud-kissing mountain rose with level top. Nature’s palace
was erected here, gemmed and golden; and within was a great hall hung upon
bronze columns. Here the painter’s art had rendered the ways of men, and
inscriptions made plain the pictured story. “O new wonders of painting,”
exclaims the poet; “what cannot be, comes into being; and painting, the
ape of truth, deluding with novel art, turns shadows to realities, and
transforms particular falsehood into (general) truth.”[134] There might be
seen the power of logic pressing its arguments and conquering sophistry.
There Aristotle was preparing his arms, and, more divinely, Plato mused on
heaven’s secrets. There Seneca moralized, and Ptolemy explained the stars
in their times and courses. There spoke the word of Tully, while Virgil’s
muse painted many lies, and put truth’s garb on falsehood. There was also
shown the might of Alcides and Ulysses’ wisdom, Turnus’s valour prodigal
of life, and Hippolytus’s shame, undone by Venus’s reins.[135] Such and
many other tropes of things and dreams of truth, this royal art set
forth.

Here, standing in the midst of her Council, Nature, with bowed head, spoke
her solemn words: “Painfully I remake what my hand’s solicitude has
wrought. But the hand’s penitence does not wipe out the flaws. The
shortcomings of our works must be repaired by some perfect model, some man
divine, not smelling of the earth and earthly, but whose mind shall hold
to heaven while his body walks the earth. Let him be the mirror in which
we may see what our faith, our potency, and virtue ought to be. As it is,
our shame is over all the earth.”

When the Council had approved these words, Prudence arose in all her
beauty.[136] She discoursed upon man’s dual nature, spirit and body.
Nature and her helpers may be the artificers of his mortal body, but the
soul demands its heavenly Artificer, and laughs at our rude arts. God’s
wisdom alone can create the soul, as Prudence shows by an exposition of
its qualities.

Now Reason raised his reverend form, holding his triple glass in which
appear the causes and effects and qualities of things. He humbly
disclaimed the power to instruct Minerva,[137] and applauded the plan by
which a new Lucifer should sojourn in the world. May he unite all the
gifts which they can bestow, and be their champion against the Vices. Now
let their suppliant vows be sped to Him who alone can create the divine
mind. A legate should be despatched above, bearing their request. For this
office none is so fit as Prudence, to whom the secrets of Heaven are
known, and whose energy and wisdom will surmount the difficulties of the
way.

Prudence at first refuses; but Concordia rises, the inspirer of chaste
loves, she who knit the souls of David and Jonathan, Pirithous and
Theseus, Nisus and Euryalus, Orestes and Pylades. Persuasively she speaks,
and points out all the ills the world had suffered by disobedience to her
behests. Prudence is won over to the task, and now wills only as her
sisters will. She thinks upon the means and way. Wisdom orders a chariot
to be made, in which the sea, the stars, the heavens may be traversed. Its
artificers are her seven daughters, wise and fair, who unite the skill and
knowledge of all those wise ancients who had excelled in any Art. First
Grammar (her functions and great writers being told) forms the pole which
goes before the axle-tree (_temo praeambulus axis_). Then Logic makes the
axle-tree; and Rhetoric adorns the pole with gems and the axle with
flowers. Arithmetic constructs one wheel of the chariot, and Music the
second, Geometry the third, and the fourth wheel is made by
Astronomy.[138]

Now Reason, at Nature’s nod, yokes to the chariot the five horses, to wit,
the Senses disciplined and controlled, Sight, Hearing, Smell, Taste, and
Touch. He himself mounts as charioteer, and bids Prudence follow. Amid the
farewells and plaudits of all, the chariot soars aloft. As it speeds
along, Prudence investigates atmospheric phenomena, and then the spirits
of evil who wander through the air. They passed on through the upper
ether, reached the citadel and fount of light, where the Sun holds sway;
next was reached the region where Venus and the star of Mercury sing
together and Lucifer exults, the herald of the day. Then to their rapid
flight appeared Mars’ flaming palace, seething with fire and wrath. Onward
they passed to the glad light and unhurtful flames of Jupiter, and then to
Saturn’s sphere. At length they ascended the stellar region where the Pole
stars contend in brightness, where are seen Hercules and Orion, Leda’s
twins, the fiery Crab, the Lion, and the rest of the Zodiac’s
constellations.[139]

Here at heaven’s entrance the chariot halted. Those five horses of the
Senses, charioteered by Reason, could ascend no farther. But a damsel was
seen, seated upon the summit of the Pole. She scrutinizes the hidden Cause
and End of all things, holding scales in her right hand and in her left a
sceptre. On her vestments a subtile point traces God’s secrets, and the
formless is figured in form. Reverently Phronesis, that is Prudence,
saluted this Queen of the Pole, and set forth the purpose of her journey,
telling of Nature’s desire and her limitations. In reply Theology, for it
is she,[140] offered herself as a companion, and bade Prudence leave her
chariot, but keep the second courser (Hearing) to bear her on. Prudence
now surmounted the starry citadels, and marvelled at heaven’s nodes, where
the four ways begin and the crystalline waters flow, shot with agreeing
fires; for here, in universal harmony transcending Nature’s laws and
Reason’s power, Concord unites those elements which war below. Onward
leads the way among those joys celestial which know no tears, where there
is peace without hate, and light above all brightness. Here dwell the
angel bands, the Thunderer’s princes, regulators of the world; here glow
the seraphim, and cherubim drain draughts from the mind of God; and here
are the Thrones whereon God balances His weighed decrees, and with His
band of Powers conquers the tyrants.[141] Here also rest the saints, freed
from earth’s dross and passion, clothed in virgin white or martyr’s
purple, or wearing the Doctor’s laurel. Joyful alike are they, yet diverse
in merit, shining with unequal splendour.[142] Here finally, in honour
surpassing all, is the Virgin Mother, clad in the garb of our
salvation--Star of the Sea, Way of Life, Port of Salvation, Limit of
Piety, Mother of Pity, Garden closed, Sealed Font, Fruitful Olive, Sweet
Paradise, Rose without Thorn, Guiltless Grace, Way of the Wanderer, Light
of the Blind, Rest of the Tired--untold, unnumbered, and unspeakable are
her praises.[143]

Phronesis cannot bear the sight. Queen Theology calls to her sister Faith
to aid the fainting one. Faith comes and holds her Mirror before the eyes
of Phronesis; and in this glass her eyes can endure the shaded glory of
the overpowering vision. She staggers on, her trembling steps supported
by Faith and Theology. In the glass she sees the eternal and divine, the
enduring, moveless, sure; species unborn, celestial ideas, the forms of
men and principles of things, causes of causes and the course of fate, the
Thunderer’s mind; why God condemns some, predestines others, prepares that
one for life and from this one withdraws His rewards; why poverty presses
upon some and want is filled only with tears; why riches pour on others,
why one is wise, another lacking, and why the worthies of the past have
been endowed each with his several gifts.[144]

Marvelling at all these sights, Prudence, supported by the sisters,
reached at last the palace of the King, and fell prostrate before God
himself. He bade her rise, and speak. Humbly she set forth Nature’s plight
and the evil upon earth, and presented her petition. God accedes
benignantly. He will not destroy the earth again, but will send a human
spirit endowed with heavenly gifts, a pilgrim to the earth, a medicine for
the world. Prudence worships. God summons Mind, and orders him to fashion
the type-form, the idea of the human mind. Mind searches among existing
beings for the traces of this new _idea_ or type.[145] His difficult
search succeeds at last, and in the Mirror which he constructs, every
grace takes its abode: Joseph’s form, the intelligence of Judith, the
patience of righteous Job, the modesty of Moses, Jacob’s simplicity,
Abraham’s faith, Tobias’s piety. He presents this pattern-type to God, who
sets an accordant soul therein, and then entrusts the new-made being to
Phronesis, while Mind anoints it with an unguent against the attacks of
the Vices. Phronesis, with her prize, turned to the way by which she had
ascended, regained her chariot and Reason her charioteer. Together they
sped back to the congratulations of Nature and her Council.

For this perfect soul Nature now forms a beautiful body. Concord unites
the two, and a new man is formed, perfect and free from flaw. Chastity and
guardian Modesty endow him with their gifts; Reason adds his, and Honesty.
These Logic follows, with her gift of skill in argument; Rhetoric brings
her stores, then Arithmetic, next Music, next Geometry, next
Astronomy;[146] while Theology and Piety are not behind with theirs; and
to these Faith joins her gifts of fidelity and truth. Last of all comes
Nobility, Fortune’s daughter. But because she has nothing of her own to
give, and must receive all from her mother, she betakes herself to
Fortune’s house of splendid mutability. What will Fortune give? The two
return to Nature’s palace, and Fortune’s magnificence is proffered by her
daughter; but Reason, standing by, will allow only a measured
acceptance.[147]

The report of this richly endowed creature reached Alecto. Raging she
summoned her pests, the chiefs of Tartarus, doers of ill, masters of every
sin--Injury, Fraud, Perjury, Theft, Rapine, Fury and Anger, Hate, Discord,
Strife, Disease and Melancholy, Lust, Wantonness and Need, Fear and Old
Age. She roused them with a harangue: their rule is threatened by this
upstart Creature, whom Parent Nature has prepared for war; but what can
his untried imbecility do against them in arms?

All clamour assent, and in a tumult of rage make ready for the strife. The
hostile ranks approach. The first attack is made by Folly (_Stultitia_)
and her comrades, Sloth, Gaming, Idle Jesting, Ease and Sleep. But
faithful Virtues protect the constant youth against these foes. Next
Discord leads its mutinous band, but only to defeat. Onslaughts follow
from Poverty, next from Ill-Repute, from Old Age and Disease. Then
Grieving advances, and is overthrown by Laughter. More deadly still are
the attacks of Venus and Lust; then Excess and Wantonness take up the
fray; and at the end Impiety and Fraud and Avarice. But still the man
conquers with the aid of his Virtues ever true.

The fight is over. The Virtues triumph and receive their Kingdoms; Vice
succumbs; Love reigns instead of Discord; the man is blessed; and the
earth, adorned with flowers in a new spring of youth, brings forth
abundance. The Poet sums up his poem’s teaching: From God must everything
begin and in Him end. But our genius may not stand inert; ours is the
strife as well, according to our strength and faculty. Let the mind attach
itself to the things which are and do not pass, even as Plato sings, from
things of sense reaching on ever to the grades Angelic and Olympus’s
steeps. Then it shall behold the universal praise of God and the true
ascription of all good to Him. He in himself is perfect, Part and likewise
Whole, and everywhere uncircumscribed. Nothing has power in itself, but
all would fall to nothing, did He close the flux of hidden power.

Alanus, a good Christian Doctor, is also an eclectic in his thought. A
consistent system is hardly to be drawn from his poem. It suggests Christ.
But its hero is not the God-man of the Incarnation. Its figures are
semi-pagan. The virtue Faith, for example, is the Fides, the Good Faith,
of the antique Roman, though it is the Christian virtue Faith as well. In
language the poem is antique; its verse has vigorous flow; its imagery
lacks neither beauty nor sublimity. It is in fact a poem, a creation,
having a scheme and unity of its own, although the author borrows
continually. Martianus Capella is there and Dionysius the Areopagite;
there also is the _Psychomachia_ of Prudentius and its progeny of symbolic
battles between the Virtues and the Vices.[148] Yet Alanus has achieved;
for he has woven his material into a real poem and has reared his own
lofty allegory. His work is another grand example of mediaeval symbolism.

Thus we see the ceaseless sweep of allegory through men’s minds. They felt
and thought and dreamed in allegories; and also spent their dry ingenuity
on allegorical constructions. It was reserved for one supreme poet to
create, out of this atmosphere, a supreme poem which is as complete an
allegory as the _Anticlaudianus_. But the _Divina Commedia_ has also the
power of its human realities of actually experienced pain and joy, and
hate and love. Compared with it, the _Anticlaudianus_ betrays the
vapourings of monk and doctor, imaginative indeed, but thin. The author’s
feet were not planted on the earth of human life.

But the Middle Ages did not demand that allegory should have its feet
planted on the earth, so long as its head nodded high among the clouds--or
its sentiments wandered sweetly in fancy’s gardens. In one of these dwelt
that lovely Rose, whose _Roman_ once had vogue. In structure the _Roman de
la rose_ is an allegory from the beginning of the first part by De Lorris
to the very end of that encyclopaedic sequel added by De Meun. The story
is well known.[149] One may recall the fact that in De Lorris’s poem and
De Meun’s sequel every quality and circumstance of Love’s sentiment and
fortunes are figured in allegorical personifications--all the lover’s
hopes and fears and the wavering chances of his quest.

In this respect the poem is the courtly and romantic counterpart of such a
philosophical or religious allegory as the _Anticlaudianus_.
Personifications of the arts and sciences, the vices and virtues, current
since the time of Prudentius’s _Psychomachia_ and Capella’s _Nuptials of
Philology_, were all in the _Anticlaudianus_, while in the _Roman de la
rose_ figure their secular and romantic kin: in De Lorris’s part, Love,
Fair-Welcome, Danger, Reason, Franchise, Pity, Courtesy, Shame, Fear,
Idleness, Jealousy, Wicked-Tongue; then, with De Meun, others besides:
Richesse, False-Seeming, Hypocrisy, Nature, and Genius.[150] The figures
of the _Roman de la rose_ have diverse antecedents scattered through the
entire store of knowledge and classic literature possessed by the Middle
Ages; perhaps their immediate source of inspiration was the scheme of
courtly love which the mediaeval imagination elaborated and revelled
in.[151] The poem of De Lorris was a veritable romantic allegory. De Meun,
in his sequel, rather plays with the allegorical form, which he continues;
it has become a frame for his stores of learning, his knowledge of the
world, his views of life, his wit and satire, and his great literary and
poetic gifts. Yet it ends in a regular _Psychomachia_, in which Love’s
barons are hard beset by all the foes of Love’s delight, though Love has
its will at last.




