CHAPTER XXVI

GERMAN CONSIDERATIONS: WALTHER VON DER VOGELWEIDE


A criticism of the world of feudalism, chivalry, and love may be had from
the impressions and temperamental reactions of a certain thinking atom
revolving in the same. The atom referred to was Walther von der
Vogelweide, a German, a knight, a Minnesinger, and a national poet whose
thoughts were moved by the instincts of his caste and race.

In language, temperament, and character, the Germans east of the Rhine
were Germans still in the thirteenth century. They had accepted, and even
vitally appropriated, Latin Christianity; those of them who were educated
had received a Latin education. Yet their natures, though somewhat
tempered, showed largely and distinctly German. Moreover, through the
centuries, they had acquired--or rather they had never lost--a national
antipathy toward those Roman papal well-springs of authority, which seemed
to suck back German gold and lands in return for spiritual assurance and
political betrayal.

A different and already mediaevalized element had also become part of
German culture, to wit, the matter of the French Arthurian romances and
the lyric fashions of Provence, which, working together, had captivated
modish German circles from the Rhine to the Danube. Nevertheless the
German character maintained itself in the _Minnelieder_ which followed
Provençal poetry, and in the _höfisch_ (courtly) epics which were palpable
translations from the French.[8] The distinguished group of German poets
whose lives fall around the year 1200, were as German as their language,
although they borrowed from abroad the form and matter of their
compositions.

There could be no better Germans than the two most thoughtful of this
group, Wolfram von Eschenbach and Walther von der Vogelweide. Most
Germanically the former wrestled with that ancient theme, “from suffering,
wisdom,” which he pressed into the tale of _Parzival_. His great poem,
achieved with toil and sweat, was mighty in its climaxes, and fit to
strengthen the hearts of those men who through sorrow and loneliness and
despair’s temptations were growing “slowly wise.”

The virtues which Wolfram praised and embodied in his hero were those
praised in the verses, and even, one may think, strugglingly exemplified
in the conduct, of Walther von der Vogelweide,[9] most famous of
Minnesingers, and a power in the German lands through his _Sprüche_, or
verses personal and political. Less is known of his life than of his whole
and manly views, his poetic fancies, his musings, his hopes, and great
depressions. Many places have claimed the honour of his birth, which took
place somewhat before 1170. He was poor, and through his youth and manhood
moved about from castle to castle, and from court to court, seeking to win
some recompense for his excellent verses and good company. Thus he learned
much of men, “climbing another’s stairs,” with his fellows, at the
Landgraf Hermann’s Wartburg, or at the Austrian ducal Court.

Walther’s _Sprüche_ render his moods most surely, and reflect his outlook
on the world. His charming _Minnelieder_ bear more conventional evidence.
The courtly German love-songs passing by this name were affected by the
conceits and conventions of the Provençal poetry upon which they were
modelled. A strong nature might use such with power, or break with their
influence. Walther made his own the high convention of trouvère and
troubadour, that love uplifts the lover’s being. Besides this, and besides
the lighter forms and phrases current in such poetry, his _Lieder_ carry
natural feeling, joy, and moral levity, according to the theme; they also
may express Walther’s convictions.

To take examples: Walther’s _Tagelied_[10] imitates the Provençal _alba_
(dawn), in which knight and truant lady bewail the coming of the light and
the parting which it brings. Far more joyous, and as immoral as one
pleases, is _Unter der Linde_, most famous of his songs. Marvellously it
gives the mood of love’s joy remembered--and anticipated too. The
immorality is complete (if we will be serious), and is rendered most
alluring by the utter gladness of the girl’s song--no repentance, no
regret; only joy and roguish laughter.

Walther was young, he was a knight and a Minnesinger; he had doubtless
loved, in this way! His love-songs have plenty to say of the red mouth,
good for kissing--I care not who knows it either. But he also realizes,
and greatly sings, the height and breadth and worth of love the true and
stable, the blessing and completion of two lives, which comes to a false
heart never.[11] He seems to feel it necessary to defend love for itself,
perhaps because _marriage_ was taken more seriously in this imitative
German literature than in the French and Provençal originals: “Who says
that love is sin, let him consider well. Many an honour dwells with her,
and troth and happiness. If one does ill to the other, love is grieved. I
do not mean false love; that were better named un-love. No friend of that,
am I.” But his thoughts turn quickly to love as a lasting union: “He happy
man, she happy woman, whose hearts are to each other true; both lives
increased in price and worth; blessed their years and all their days.”[12]

Giving play to his caustic temper, Walther puts scorn upon the light of
love: “Fool he who cannot understand what joy and good, love brings. But
the light man is ever pleased with light things, as is fit!”[13] This
Minnesinger applied most earnest standards to life; lofty his praise of
the qualities of womanhood, which are better than beauty or riches:
“woman” is a higher word than “lady”[14]--it took a German to say this.
“He who carries hidden sorrow in his heart, let him think upon a good
woman--he is freed.”[15] With a burst of patriotism, in one of his
greatest poems Walther praises German women as the best in all the
world.[16]

But even in the _Minnelieder_, Walther has his despondencies. One of the
most definite, and possibly conventional, was regret for love’s labour
lost, and the days of youth spent in service of an ungracious fair. The
poet wonders how it is that he who has helped other men is tongue-tied
before his lady. Again, his reflections broaden from thoughts of
unresponsive fair ones to a conviction of life’s thanklessness. “I have
well served the World (_Frau Welt_, Society), and gladly would serve her
more, but for her evil thanks and her way of preferring fools to me....
Come, World, give me better greeting--the loss is not all mine.” He knows
his good unbending temper which will not endure to hear ill spoken of the
upright. But he thinks, what is the use? why speak so sweetly, why sing,
when virtue and beauty are so lightly held, and every one does evil,
fearing nought? The verse which carries these reflections is tossing in
the squally haven of Society; soon the poet will encounter the wild sea
without. Still from the windy harbour comes one grand lament over art’s
decline: “The worst songs please, frogs’ voices! Oh, I laugh from anger!
Lady World, no score of mine is on your devil’s slate. Many a life of man
and woman have I made glad--might I so have gladdened mine! Here, I make
my Will, and bequeath my goods--to the envious my ill-luck, my sorrows to
the liars, my follies to false lovers, and to the ladies my heart’s
pain.”[17] He makes a solemn offering of his poems: “Good women, worthy
men, a loving greeting is my due. Forty years have I sung fittingly of
love; and now, take my songs which gladden, as my gift to you. Your favour
be my return. And with my staff I will fare on, still wooing worth with
undisheartened work, as from my childhood. So shall I be, in lowly lot,
one of the Noble--for me enough.”

To relish Walther’s love-songs, one need not know whether she was dark or
fair, kept forest-tryst or listened by some castle’s hearth, or in what
German land that castle stood. Likewise in his _Sprüche_, which have other
bearing, the roll of his protesting voice carries the universal human. To
comprehend them it were well to know that life was then as now niggardly
in rewarding virtue; beyond this, one needs to have the type-idea of the
Empire and the Papacy, those two powers which were set, somewhat
antagonistically, on the decree of God; both claiming the world’s
headship; the one, Roman in tradition, but in strength and temper German,
and of this world decidedly. The other, Roman in the genius of its
organization, and Christian in its subordination of the life below to the
life to come, if not in the methods of establishing this consummation;
Christian too, but more especially mediaeval, in its formal disdain for
whatever belonged to earth. In Germany these two partial opposites were
further antagonized, since the native resources recoiled from the foreign
drain upon them, and the struggling patriotism of a broken land resented
the pressure of a state within and above the state of duke and king and
emperor.

In Walther’s time Innocent III. swayed the nations from Peter’s throne.
Just before Innocent’s accession, Germany’s able emperor, Henry VI., died
suddenly in Sicily (September 1197), leaving an heir not two years old.
The queen-mother, dying the next year, bequeathed this child, Frederick,
to the paternal care of Innocent, his feudal as well as ghostly lord,
since the queen, for herself and child, had accepted the Pope as the
feudal suzerain of their kingdom of Sicily. In Germany (using that name
loosely and broadly) Philip Hohenstauffen, Henry’s brother and Duke of
Suabia, claimed the throne. His unequal opponent was Otto of Brunswick, of
the ever-rebellious house of Henry the Lion. The Pope opposed the
Hohenstauffen; but was obliged to acknowledge him when the course of the
ten years of wasting civil war in Germany decided in his
favour--whereupon, alack! Philip was murdered (1207). Quickly the Pope
turned back to Otto; but the latter, after he had been crowned king and
emperor, became intolerable to Innocent through the compulsion of his
position as the head of an empire inherently hostile to the papacy. To
thwart him Innocent set up his own ward, Frederick. Soon this precocious
youth began to make head against pope-forsaken Otto; and then the
excommunicated emperor was overthrown in 1214 by Philip Augustus of
France, who had intervened in Frederick’s favour. So Otto passed away,
and, some time after, Frederick was crowned German king at
Aix-la-Chapelle.[18] In the meanwhile Innocent died (1216), and amity
followed between Frederick and the gentle Honorius III., who crowned
Frederick emperor at Rome in 1220. This peace ended quickly when the
sterner Gregory IX. ascended the papal throne on the death of Honorius in
1227.

Walther’s life extended through these events. Though apparently changing
sides under the stress of his necessities, he was patriotically German to
the end. First he clave to the Hohenstauffen, Philip, as the true upholder
of German interests against Otto and the Pope. On Philip’s death, he
turned to Otto; but with all the world left him at last for Frederick. It
is known that Walther, an easily angered man, felt himself ill-used by
Otto and justified in turning to the open-handed Frederick, who finally
gave him a small fief. To the last, Walther upheld him as Germany’s
sovereign. Probably the poet died in the year 1228, just as Gregory was
succeeding Honorius, and the death-struggle of the Empire with the Papacy
was opening.

With no light heart, as well may be imagined, had Walther looked about him
on the death of the emperor Henry in 1197. “I sat upon a rock, crossed
knee on knee, and with elbow so supported, chin on hand I leaned.
Anxiously I pondered. I could see no way to win gain without loss. Honour
and riches do not go hand in hand, both of less value than God’s favour.
Would I have them all? Alas! riches and worldly honour and God’s favour
come not within the closure of one heart’s wishes. The ways are barred;
perfidy lurks in secret, and might walks the highroads. Peace and law are
wounded.”[19]

The personal dilemma of the poet with his fortune to make, but desirous of
doing right, mirrors the desperate situation of the State: “Woe is thee,
German tongue; ill stand thy order and thy honour!--I hear the lies of
Rome betraying two kings!” And in verses of wrath Walther inveighs against
the Pope. The sweeping nature of his denunciation raises the question
whether he merely attacked the supposed treachery of the reigning pope, or
was opposed to the papacy as an institution hostile to the German nation.

The answer is not clear. Mediaeval denunciations of the Church range from
indictments of particular abuses, on through more general invectives, to
the clear protests of heretics impugning the ecclesiastical system. It is
not always easy to ascertain the speaker’s meaning. Usually the abuse and
not the system is attacked. Hostility to the latter, however sweeping the
language of satirist or preacher, is not lightly to be inferred. The
invectives of St. Bernard and Damiani are very broad; but where had the
Church more devoted sons? Even the satirists composing in Old French
rarely intended an assault upon her spiritual authority. It would seem as
if, at least in the Romance countries, one must look for such hostility to
heretical circles, the Waldenses for example. And from the orthodox
mediaeval standpoint, this was their most accursed heresy.

It would have been hard for any German to use broader language than some
of the French satirists and Latin castigators. If there was a difference,
it must be sought in the specific matter of the German disapproval viewed
in connection with the political situation. Was a position ever taken
incompatible with the Church’s absolute spiritual authority? or one
intrinsically irreconcilable with the secular power of the papacy? At any
time, in any country, papal claims might become irreconcilable with the
royal prerogative--as William the Conqueror had held those of Gregory VII.
in England, and as, two centuries afterwards, Philip the Fair was to hold
those of Boniface VIII. in France. But in neither case was there such
sheer and fundamental antagonism as men felt to exist between the Empire
and the Papacy. Perhaps it was possible in the early thirteenth century
for a German whose whole heart was on the German side to dispute even the
sacerdotal principle of papal authority. It is hard to judge otherwise of
Freidank, the very German composer or collector of trenchant sayings in
the early thirteenth century. Many of these sneer at Rome and the Pope,
and some of them strike the gist of the matter: “Sunde nieman mac vergeben
wan Got alein” (“God alone can forgive sins”). This is the direct
statement; he gives its scornful converse: “Could the Pope absolve me from
my oaths and duties, I’d let other sureties go and fasten to him
alone.”[20] Such words mean denial of the Church’s authority to forgive,
and the Pope’s to grant absolution from oaths of allegiance. Freidank is
very near rejecting the principles of the ecclesiastical system.

Walther, Freidank’s contemporary, is more picturesque: “King Constantine,
he gave so much--as I will tell you--to the Chair of Rome: spear, cross,
and crown. At once the angels cried: ‘Alas! Alas! Alas! Christendom before
stood crowned with righteousness. Now is poison fallen on her, and her
honey turned to gall--sad for the world henceforth!’ To-day the princes
all live in honour; only their highest languishes--so works the priest’s
election. Be that denounced to thee, sweet God! The priests would upset
laymen’s rights: true is the angels’ prophecy.”[21]

On Constantine’s apocryphal gift, symbolized by the emblems of Christ’s
passion, rested the secular authority of the popes, which Walther laments
with the angels. “The Chair of Rome was first set up by Sorcerer Gerbert!
[Queer history this, but we see what he means.] He destroyed his own soul
only; but this one would bring down Christendom with him to perdition.
When will all tongues call Heaven to arms, and ask God how long He will
sleep? They bring to nought His work, distort His Word. His steward steals
His treasure; His judge robs here and murders there; His shepherd has
become a wolf among His sheep.”[22] The clergy point their fingers
heavenward while they travel fast to hell.[23] How laughs the Pope at us,
when at home with his Italians, at the way he empties our German pockets
into his “poor boxes.”[24] Walther’s hatred of the foreign Pope is roused
at every point. And at last, in a _Spruch_ full of implied meaning, he
declares that Christ’s word as to the tribute money meant that the emperor
should receive his royal due.[25]

These utterances, considered in the light of the political and racial
situation, seem to deny, at least implicitly, the secular power of the
papacy. Yet in matters of religion Walther apparently was entirely
orthodox, and a pious Christian. He has left a sweet prayer to Christ,
with ample recognition of the angels and the saints, and a beautiful verse
of penitent contrition, in which he confesses his sins to God very
directly--how that he does the wrong, and leaves the right, and fails in
love of neighbour. “Father, Son, may thy Spirit lighten mine; how may I
love him who does me ill? Ever dear to me is he who treats me well!”[26]
Walther’s questing spirit also pondered over God’s greatness and
incomprehensibility.[27] His open mind is shown by the famous line: “Him
(God) Christians, Jews, and heathen serve,”[28] a breadth of view shared
by his friend Wolfram von Eschenbach, who speaks of the chaste virtue of a
heathen lady as equal to baptism.[29]

The personal lot of this proud heart was not an easy one; homelessness
broke him down, and the bitterness of eating others’ bread. Too well had
he learned of the world and all its changing ways, and how poor becomes
the soul that follows them. Mortality is a trite sorrow; there are worse:
“We all complain that the old die and pass away; rather let us lament
taints of another hue, that troth and seemliness and honour are
dead.”[30] At the last Walther’s grey memory of life and his vainly
yearning hope took form in a great elegy. After long years he seemed, with
heavy steps, and leaning on his wanderer’s staff, to be returning to a
home which was changed forever: “Alas! whither are they vanished, my many
years! Did I dream my life, or is it real? what I once deemed it, was it
that? And now I wake, and all the things and people once familiar,
strange! My playmates, dull and old! And the fields changed; only that the
streams still flow as then they flowed, my heart would break with thinking
on the glad days, vanished in the sea. And the young people! slow and
mirthless! and the knights go clad as peasants! Ah! Rome! thy ban! Our
groans have stilled the song of birds. Fool I, to speak and so
despair,--and the earth looks fair! Up knights again: your swords, your
armour! would to God I might fare with your victor band, and gain my pay
too--not in lands of earth! Oh! might I win the eternal crown from that
sweet voyage beyond the sea, then would I sing O joy! and never more,
alas--never more, alas.”[31]




