CHAPTER XLIII

THE MEDIAEVAL SYNTHESIS: DANTE


It lies before us to draw the lines of mediaeval development together. We
have been considering the Middle Ages very largely, endeavouring to fix in
mind the more interesting of their intellectual and emotional phenomena.
We have found throughout a certain spiritual homogeneity; but have also
seen that the mediaeval period of western Europe is not to be forced to a
fictitious unity of intellectual and emotional quality--contradicted by a
disparity of traits and interests existing then as now. Yet just as
certain ways of discerning facts and estimating their importance
distinguish our own time, making it an “age” or epoch, so in spite of
diversity and conflict, the same was true of the mediaeval period. From
the ninth to the fourteenth century, inter-related processes of thought,
beliefs, and standards prevailed and imparted a spiritual colour to the
time. While not affecting all men equally, these spiritual habits tended
to dominate the minds and tempers of those men who were the arbiters of
opinion, for example, the church dignitaries, or the
theologian-philosophers. Men who thought effectively, or upon whom it fell
to decide for others, or to construct or imagine for them, such, whether
pleasure-loving, secularly ambitious, or immersed in contemplation of the
life beyond the grave, accepted certain beliefs, recognized certain
authoritatively prescribed ideals of conduct and well-being, and did not
reject the processes of proof supporting them.

The causes making the Middle Ages a characterizable period in human
history have been scanned. We observed the antecedent influences as they
finally took form and temper in the intellectual atmosphere of the
latter-day pagan world and the cognate mentalities of the Church Fathers.
We followed the pre-Christian Latinizing of Provence, Spain, Gaul, and the
diffusion of Christianity throughout the same countries, where, save for
sporadic dispossession, Christianity and Latin were to continue, and
become, in the course of centuries, mediaeval and Romance. As waves of
barbarism washed over the somewhat decadent society of Italy and her Latin
daughters, we saw a new ignorance setting a final seal upon the inability
of these epigoni to emulate bygone achievements. Plainly there was need of
effort to rescue the _disjecta membra_ of the antique and Christian
heritages. The wreckers were famous men, young Boëthius, old Cassiodorus,
the great pope Gregory, and princely Isidore. For their own people they
were gatherers and conservers; but they proved veritable transmitters for
Franks, Anglo-Saxons and Germans, who were made acquainted with
Christianity and Latinity between the sixth and the ninth centuries, the
period in the course of which the Merovingian kingdoms were superseded by
the Carolingian Empire.

With the Carolingian period the Middles Ages unquestionably are upon us.
The factors and material of mediaeval development, howsoever they have
come into conjunction, are found in interplay. It was for the mediaeval
peoples, now in presence of their spiritual fortunes, to grow and draw
from life. Their task, as has appeared from many points of view, was to
master the Christian and antique material, and change its substance into
personal faculty. Under different guises this task was for all, whether
living in Italy or dwelling where the antique had weaker root or had been
newly introduced.

This Carolingian time of so much sheer introduction to the teaching of the
past presented little intellectual discrimination. That would come very
gradually, when men had mastered their lesson and could set themselves to
further study of the parts suited to their taste. Nevertheless, there was
even in the Carolingian period another sort of discrimination, towards
which men’s consciences were drawn by the contrast between their antique
and Christian heritages, and because the latter held a criterion of
selection and rejection, touching all the elements of human life.

Whoever reflects upon his life and its compass of thought, of inclination,
of passion, action, and capacity for happiness or desolation, is likely to
consider how he may best harmonize its elements. He will have to choose
and reject; and within him may arise a conflict which he must bring to
reconcilement if he will have peace. He may need to sacrifice certain of
his impulses or even rational desires. As with a thoughtful individual, so
with thoughtful people of an epoch, among whom like standards of
discrimination may be found prevailing. The ninth century received, with
patristic Christianity, a standard of selection and rejection. In
conformity with it, men, century after century, were to make their choice,
and try to bring their lives to a discriminating unity and certain peace.
Yet in every mediaeval century the soul’s peace was broken in ways
demanding other modes of reconcilement.

What profiteth a man to gain the world and lose his eternal life? Here was
the Gospel basis of the matter. And, following their conception of
Christ’s teaching, the Fathers of the Church elaborated and defined the
conditions of attainment of eternal life with God, which was salvation.
This was man’s whole good, embracing every valid and righteous element of
life. Thus it had been with Christ; thus it was with Augustine; thus it
was with Benedict of Nursia and Gregory the Great; only in Benedict and
Gregory the salvation which represented the true and uncorrupt life of man
on earth, as well as the assured preparation for eternal life with God,
had shrunken from the universality of Christ, and even from the fulness of
desire with which Augustine sought to know God and the soul. In these
later men the conception of salvation had contracted through ascetic
exclusion and barbaric fear.

Yet with Benedict and Gregory, in whom there was much constructive sanity,
and indeed with all men who were not maniacally constrained, there was
recognition that salvation was of the mind as well as through faith and
love, or abhorrent fear. It is necessary to know the truth; and surely it
is absolutely good to desire to know the truth forever, without the
cumbrances of fleshly mortality. This desire is a true part of everlasting
life. Through it Origen, Hilary of Poictiers, Augustine largely, and after
them the great scholastics with Dante at their close, achieved salvation.

But why should one desire to know the truth utterly and forever, were not
the truth desirable, lovable? Naturally one loves that which through
desire and effort one has come to know. Love is required and also faith by
him who will have and know the salvation which is eternal life; the
emotions must take active part. Yet salvation comes not through the
unguided sense-desiderative nature. It is for reason to direct passionate
desire, and raise it to desire rationally approved, which is volition.

Thus salvation not only requires the action of the whole man, but is in
and of his entire nature. It presents a unity primarily because of its
agreement with the will of God, and then because of its unqualified and
universal insistence that it, salvation, life eternal, be set absolutely
first in man’s endeavour. What indeed could be more irrational, and more
loveless and faithless, than that any desire should prevail over the
entire good of man and the will of God as well? Oneness and peace consist
in singleness of purpose and endeavour for salvation. Herein lies the
standard of conduct and of discrimination as touching every element of
mortal life.

With mediaeval men, the application of the criterion of salvation depended
on how the will of God for man, and man’s accordant conduct, was
conceived. What kind of conduct, what elements of the intellectual and
emotional life were proper for the Kingdom of Heaven? What matters barred
the way, or were unfit for the eternal spiritual state? The history of
Christian thought lies within these queries. An authoritative consensus of
opinion was represented by the Church at large, holding from century to
century a _juste milieu_ of doctrine, by no means lax and yet not going to
ascetic extremes. Seemingly the Church maintained varying standards of
conduct for different orders of men. Yet in truth it was applying one
standard according to the responsibilities of individuals and their vows.

The Church (meaning, for our purpose, the authoritative consensus of
mediaeval ecclesiastical or religious approvals) always upheld as the
ideal of perfect living the religious life, led under the sanction and
guidance of some recognized monastic _regula_. So lived monks and nuns,
and in more extreme or sporadic instances, anchorites and _reclusae_. The
main peril of this strait and narrow path was its forsaking, the breaking
of its vows. Less austerely guarded and exposed to further dangers were
the secular clergy, living in the world, occupied with the care of lay
souls, and with other cares that hardly touched salvation. The world
avowedly, the flesh in reality, and the devil in all probability, beset
the souls of bishops and other clergy. In view of their exposed positions
“in the world,” a less austerely ascetic life was expected of the
seculars, whose lapses from absolute holiness God might--or perhaps might
not--condone.

Around, and for the most part below, regulars and seculars were the laity
of both sexes, of all ages, positions, and degrees of instruction or
ignorance. They had taken no vows of utter devotion to God’s service, and
were expected to marry, beget children, fight and barter, and fend for
themselves amid the temptations and exigencies of affairs. Well for them
indeed if they could live in communion with the Church, and die repentant
and absolved, eligible for purgatory.

For all these kinds of men and women like virtues were prescribed,
although their fulfilment was looked for with varying degrees of
expectation. For instance, the distinctly theological virtues, faith,
hope, and charity, especially the first, could not be completely attained
by the ignorance and imperfect consecration of laymen. The vices,
likewise, were the same for all, pride, anger, hypocrisy, and the rest;
only with married people a venial unchastity was sacramentally declared
not to constitute mortal sin. For this one case, human weakness, also
mankind’s necessity, was recognized; while, in practice, the Church,
through its boundless opportunities for penitence and absolution,
mercifully condoned all delinquency save obstinate pride, impenitence, and
disbelief.

These were the bare poles ethical of the orthodox mediaeval Christian
scheme. How as to its intellectual and emotional inclusiveness? The
many-phased interest of the mind, _i.e._ the desire to know, was in
principle accepted, but with the condition that the ultimate end of
knowledge should be the attainment of salvation. It was stated and
re-emphasized by well-nigh every type of mediaeval thinker, that Theology
was the queen of sciences, and her service alone justified her handmaids.
All knowledge should make for the knowledge of God, and enlarge the soul’s
relationship to its Creator and Judge. “He that is not with me is against
me.” Knowledge which does not aid man to know his God and save his soul,
all intellectual pursuits which are not loyal to this end, minister to the
obstinacy and vainglory of man, stiff-necked, disobedient, unsubmissive to
the will of God. Knowledge is justified or condemned according to its
ultimate purpose. Likewise every deed, business, occupation, which can
fill out the active life of man. As they make for Christ and salvation,
the functions of ruler, warrior, lawyer, artisan, priest, are justified
and blessed--or the reverse.

But how as to the appetites and the emotions? How as to love, between the
sexes, parent and child, among friends? The standard of discrimination is
still the same, though its application vary. Appetite for food, if
unrestrained, is gluttony; it must be held from hindering the great end.
One must guard against love’s obsession, against sense-passion, which is
so forgetful of the ultimate good: concupiscence is sinful. Through bodily
begetting, the taint of original sin is transmitted; and in all carnal
desire, though sanctioned by the marriage sacrament, is lust and spiritual
forgetfulness. When in fornication and adultery its acts contravene God’s
law, they are mortal sins which will, if unabsolved, cast the sinner into
hell.

Few men in the Middle Ages were insensible to their future lot, and
therefore the criterion of salvation unto eternal life would rarely be
rejected. But often there was conflict within the soul before it
acquiesced in what it felt compelled to recognize; and sometimes there was
clear revolt against current convictions, or practical insistence that a
larger volume of the elements of human nature were fit for life eternal.

Conflict before acquiescence had agitated the natures of sainted Fathers
of the Church, who marked out the path to salvation which the Middle Ages
were to tread. One thinks at once of Jerome’s never-forgotten dream of
exclusion from Paradise because of too great delight in classic reading.
Another phase was Augustine’s, set forth somewhat retrospectively in his
_Confessions_. Therein, as would seem, the drawings of the flesh were most
importunate. Yet not without sighs and waverings did the _mind_ of
Augustine settle to its purpose of knowing only God and the soul. At all
events the chafings of mortal curiosity, the promptings of cultivated
taste, and the cravings of the flesh, were the moving forces of the
Psychomachia which passed with Patristic Christianity to the Middle Ages.
Thousands upon thousands of ardent souls were to experience this conflict
before convincing themselves that classic studies should be followed only
as they led heavenward, and that carnal love was an evil thing which, even
when sacramentally sanctioned, might deflect the soul.

The revolt against the authoritatively accepted standard declared itself
along the same lines of conflict, but did not end in acquiescence and
renunciation. It contended rather for a peace and reconcilement which
should include much that was looked upon askance. It was not always
violent, and might be dumb to the verge of unconsciousness, merely a tacit
departure from standards more universally recognized than followed.

There were countless instances of this silent departure from the standard
of salvation. With cultivated men, it realized itself in classical
studies, as with Hildebert of Le Mans or John of Salisbury. It does not
appear that either of them experienced qualms of conscience or suffered
rebuke from their brethren. No more did Gerbert, an earlier instance of
catholic interest in profane knowledge, though legends of questionable
practices were to encircle his fame.

Other men pursued knowledge, rational or physical, in such a way as to
rouse hostile attention to its irrelevancy or repugnancy to saving faith,
and this even in spite of formal demonstration by the investigator--Roger
Bacon is in our mind--of the advantage of his researches to the Queen
Theology. Bacon might not have been so suspect to his brethren, and his
demonstration of the theological serviceableness of natural knowledge
would have passed, had he not put forth bristling manifestos denouncing
the blind acceptance of custom and authority. Moreover, the obvious
tendencies of methods of investigation advocated by him countered methods
of faith; for the mediaeval and patristic conception of salvation,
whatever collateral supports it might find in reason, was founded on the
authority of revelation.

Indeed it was the lifting up of the standard of rational investigation
which distinguished the veritable revolt from those preliminary inner
conflicts which often strengthened final acquiescence. And it was the
obstinate elevation of one’s individual wisdom (as it appeared to the
orthodox) that separated the accredited supporters of the Church among
theologians and philosophers, from those who were suspect. We mark the
line of the latter reaching back through Abaelard to Eriugena. Such men,
although possibly narrower in their intellectual interests than some who
more surely abode within the Church’s pale, may be held as broader in
principle. For inasmuch as they tended to set reason above authority, it
would seem that there was no bound to their pursuit of rational knowledge,
wherewith to expand and fortify their reason.

But if the intellectual side of man pressed upon the absolutism of the
standard of salvation, more belligerent was the insistency of love--not of
the Crucified. To the Church’s disparagement of the flesh, love made
answer openly, not slinking behind hedges or closed doors, nor even
sheltering itself within wedlock’s lawfulness. It, love, without regard to
priestly sanction, proclaimed itself a counter-principle of worth. The
love of man for woman was to be an inspiration to high deeds and noble
living as well as a source of ennobling power. It presented an ideal for
knights and poets. It could confer no immortality on lovers save that of
undying fame: but it promised the highest happiness and worth in mortal
life. If only knights and ladies might not have grown old, the supremacy
of love and its emprize would have been impregnable. But age must come,
and the ghastly mediaeval fear of death was like to drive lover and
mistress at the last within some convent refuge. Fear brought compunction
and perhaps its tears. Renunciation of the joy of life seemed a fit
penance to disarm the Judge’s wrath. So at the end of life the ideal of
love was prone to make surrender to salvation. Asceticism even enters its
literature, as with the monkish Galahad. There was, however, another way
of reconcilement between the carnal and the spiritual, the secular and the
eternal, by which the secular and carnal were transformed to symbols of
the spiritual and eternal--the way of the _Vita nuova_ and the _Divina
Commedia_, as we shall see.

So in spite of conflicts or silent treasons within the natures of many who
fought beneath the Christian banner, in spite of open mutinies of the mind
and declared revolts of the heart, salvation remained the triumphant
standard of discrimination by which the elements of mediaeval life were to
be esteemed or rejected. What then were these elements to which this
standard, or deflections from it, should apply? How specify their
mediaeval guise and character? It would be possible to pass in review
synoptically the contents of this work. We might return, and then once
more travel hitherward over the mediaeval path, the many paths and byways
of mediaeval life. We might follow and again see applied--or
unapplied--these standards of discrimination, salvation over all, and the
deviations of pretended acquiescence or subconscious departure. We might
perhaps make one final attempt to draw the currents of mediaeval life
together, or observe the angles of their divergence, and note once more
the disparity of taste and interest making so motley the mediaeval
picture. But this has been done so excellently, in colours of life, and
presented in the person of a man in whom mediaeval thought and feeling
were whole, organic, living--an achievement by the Artist moving the
antecedent scheme of things which made this man Dante what he was. We
shall find in him the conflict, the silent departures, and the
reconcilement at last of recalcitrant elements brought within salvation as
the standard of universal discrimination. Dante accomplishes this
reconcilement in personal yet full mediaeval manner by transmuting the
material to the spiritual, the mortal to the eternal, through the
instrumentality of symbolism. He is not merely mediaeval; he is the end of
the mediaeval development and the proper issue of the mediaeval genius.

Yes, there is unity throughout the diversity of mediaeval life; and Dante
is the proof. For the elements of mediaeval growth combine in him,
demonstrating their congruity by working together in the stature of the
full-grown mediaeval man. When the contents of patristic Christianity and
the surviving antique culture had been conceived anew, and had been felt
as well, and novel forms of sentiment evolved, at last comes Dante to
possess the whole, to think it, feel it, visualize its sum, and make of it
a poem. He had mastered the field of mediaeval knowledge, diligently
cultivating parts of it, like the Graeco-Arabian astronomy; he thought and
reasoned in the terms and assumptions of scholastic (chiefly
Thomist-Aristotelian) philosophy; his intellectual interests were
mediaeval; he felt the mediaeval reverence for the past, being impassioned
with the ancient greatness of Rome and the lineage of virtue and authority
moving from it to him and thirteenth-century Italy and the already
shattered Holy Roman Empire. He took earnest joy in the Latin Classics,
approaching them from mediaeval points of view, accepting their contents
uncritically. He was affected with the preciosity of courtly or chivalric
love, which Italy had made her own along with the songs of the Troubadours
and the poetry of northern France. His emotions flowed in channels of
current convention, save that they overfilled them; this was true as to
his early love, and true as to his final range of religious and poetic
feeling. His was the emotion and the cruelty of mediaeval religious
conviction; while in his mind (so worked the genius of symbolism) every
fact’s apparent meaning was clothed with the significance of other modes
of truth.

Dante was also an Italian of the period in which he lived; and he was a
marvellous poet. One may note in him what was mediaeval, what was
specifically Italian, and what, apparently, was personal. This scholar
could not but draw his education, his views of life and death, his
dominant inclinations and the large currents of his purpose, from the
antecedent mediaeval period and the still greater past which had worked
upon it so mightily. His Italian nature and environment gave point and
piquancy and very concrete life to these mediaeval elements; and his
personal genius produced from it all a supreme poetic creation.

The Italian part of Dante comes between the mediaeval and the personal, as
species comes between the genus and the individual. The tremendous feeling
which he discloses for the Roman past seems, in him, specifically Italian:
child of Italy, he holds himself a Latin and a direct heir of the
Republic. Yet often his attitude toward the antique will be that of
mediaeval men in general, as in his disposition to accept ancient myth for
fact; while his own genius appears in his beautifully apt appropriation of
the Virgilian incident or image; wherein he excels his “Mantuan” master,
whose borrowings from Homer were not always felicitous. Frequently the
specifically Italian in Dante, his yearning hate of Florence, for example,
may scarcely be distinguished from his personal temper; but its civic
bitterness is different from the feudal animosities or promiscuous rages
which were more generically mediaeval. As a lighter example, there are
three lines in the fourth canto of the _Purgatorio_ which do not reflect
the Middle Ages, nor yet pertain to Dante’s character, but are, we feel,
Italian. They are these: “Thither we drew; and there were persons who were
staying in the shadow behind the rock, as one through indolence sets
himself to stay.”

Again, Dante’s arguments in the _De monarchia_[672] seem to be those of an
Italian Ghibelline. Yet beyond his intense realization of Italy’s direct
succession to the Roman past, his reasoning is scholastic and mediaeval,
or springs occasionally from his own reflections. The Italian contribution
to the book tends to coalesce either with the general or the personal
elements. Dante argues that the rewards or fruits of virtue belonged to
the Roman people because of the pre-eminent virtue, high lineage, and
royal marriage-connections, of their ancestor Aeneas.[673] Here, of
course, the statements of Virgil are accepted literally, and one notes
that while the argument is mediaeval in its absurdity, it will be made
Italian in its application. Likewise his further arguments making for the
same conclusion, however Italianized in their pointing, are mediaeval, or
patristic, in their provenance: for example, that the Roman Empire was
divinely helped by miracles; that the divine arbitrament decided the
world-struggle or _duellum_ in its favour; and that Christ was born and
suffered legally to redeem mankind under the Empire’s authority and
jurisdiction.[674] Moreover, in refuting the very mediaeval papal
arguments from “the keys,” from “the two swords,” and from the analogy of
the sun and moon, Dante himself reasons scholastically.[675]

The _De vulgari eloquentia_ illustrates the difference between Dante
accepting and reproducing mediaeval views, and Dante thinking for himself.
In opening he speaks of mixing the stronger potions of others with the
water of his own talent, to make a beverage of sweetest hydromel--we have
heard such phrases before! Then the first chapters give the current ideas
touching the nature and origin of speech, and describe the confusion of
language at the building of Babel: each group of workmen engaged in the
same sort of work found themselves speaking a new tongue understood only
by themselves; while the sacred Hebrew speech endured with that seed of
Shem who had taken no part in the impious construction. After this
foolishness, the eighth chapter of Book I. becomes startlingly intelligent
as Dante discusses the contemporary Romance tongues of Europe and takes up
the _idioma_ which uses the particle _si_. Out of its many dialects he
detaches his thought of a _volgare_, a mother tongue, which shall be the
illustrious, noble, and courtly speech in Latium, and shall seem to be of
every Latian city and yet of none, and afford a standard by which the
speech of each city may be criticized. The mediaeval period offers no such
penetrating linguistic observation; and in the _De Vulgari Eloquentia_, as
in the _Convito_, Dante is deeply conscious of the worth of the Romance
vernacular.

Written in the _volgare_, the style of the latter nondescript work bears
curious likeness to scientific Latin writing. The Latin scholastic thought
shows plainly through this involved and scholastic _volgare_, while the
scholastic substance is rendered in a scarcely altered medium. The
_Convito_ is indeed a curious work which one need not lament that Dante
did not carry out to its mediaeval interminableness in fourteen books. The
four that he wrote suffice to show its futility and apparent confusion in
conception and form. Besides incidentally explaining the thought of the
idyllic _Vita nuova_, it professed to be a commentary upon fourteen of
Dante’s canzone, the meaning of which had been misunderstood. Indeed they
had been suspected of disclosing a passion bearing a morganatic
relationship to the love of Beatrice. Truly understood they referred to
that love which is the love of knowledge, philosophy to wit; and their
commentary should expound that, and might properly set forth the contents
of the Seven Liberal Arts and the higher divine reaches of knowledge. The
_Convito_ seems also to mark a stage in Dante’s life: the time perhaps
when he turned, or imagined himself as turning, to philosophy for
consolation in youthful grief, or the time perhaps when his nature looked
coldly upon its early faith and sought to stay itself with rational
knowledge. The book might thus seem a _De consolatione philosophiae_,
after the temper, if not the manner, of Boëthius’ work, which then was
much in Dante’s mind. Yet it was to be a setting forth of knowledge for
the ignorant, a sort of _Summa contra Gentiles_, as is hinted in the last
completed chapter. These three purposes fall in with the fact that the
work was apparently the expression of Dante’s intellectual nature, and of
his spiritual condition between the experience of the _Vita nuova_ and the
time or state of the _Commedia_.[676]

Certainly the _Convito_ gives evidence touching the writer’s mental
processes and the interests of his mind. Except for its lofty advocacy of
the _volgare_ and its personal apologetic references, it contains little
that is not blankly mediaeval. And had it kept on to its completion, so as
to have become no torso, but a full _Summa_ or _Tesoro_ of liberal
knowledge, its whimsical form as a commentary upon canzone would have made
it one of the most bizarre of mediaeval compositions. One should not take
this most repellent of Dante’s writings as an adequate expression of the
intellectual side of his nature; though a significant phrase may be drawn
from it: “Philosophy is a loving use of wisdom (_uno amoroso uso di
sapienza_) which chiefly is in God, since in Him is utmost wisdom, utmost
love, and utmost actuality.”[677] A loving use of wisdom--with Dante the
pursuit of knowledge was no mere intellectual search, but a pilgrimage of
the whole nature, loving heart as well as knowing mind, and the working
virtues too. This pilgrimage is set forth in the _Commedia_, perhaps the
supreme creation of the Middle Ages, and a work that by reason of the
beautiful affinity of its speech with Latin,[678] exquisitely expressed
the matters which in Latin had been coming to formulation through the
mediaeval centuries.

The _Commedia_ (_Inferno_, _Purgatorio_, _Paradiso_) is a _Summa_, a
_Summa salvationis_, a sum of saving knowledge. It is such just as surely
as the final work of Aquinas is a _Summa theologiae_. But Aquinas was the
supreme mediaeval theologian-philosopher, while Dante was the supreme
theologian-poet; and with both Aquinas and Dante, theology includes the
knowledge of all things, but chiefly of man in relation to God. Such was
the matter of the _divina scientia_ of Thomas, and such was the subject of
the _Commedia_, which was soon recognized as the _Divina Commedia_ in the
very sense in which Theology was the divine science. The _Summa_ of Thomas
was _scientia_ not only in substance, but in form; the _Commedia_ was
_scientia_, or _sapientia_, in substance, while in form it was a poem, the
epic of man the pilgrim of salvation. In every sense, Aristotelian and
otherwise, it was a work of art; and herein if we cannot compare it with a
_Summa_, we may certainly liken it to a Cathedral, which also was a work
of art and a _Summa salvationis_ wrought in stone. For a Cathedral--it is
the great French type we have in mind--was a _Summa_ of saving knowledge,
as well as a place for saving acts. And presenting the substance of
knowledge in the forms of art, very true art, the matter of which had long
been pondered on and loved or hated, the Cathedral in its feeling and
beauty, as well as in the order of its manifested thought, was a
_Commedia_; for it too was a poem with a happy ending, at least for those
who should be saved.

The Cathedral had grown from dumb barrel-vaulted Romanesque to Gothic,
speaking in all the terms of sculpture and painted glass. It grew out of
its antecedents. The _Commedia_ rested upon the entire evolution of the
Middle Ages. Therein had lain its spiritual preparation. To be sure it had
its casual forerunners (_precursori_): narratives, real or feigned, of men
faring to the regions of the dead.[679] But these signified little; for
everywhere thoughts of the other life pressed upon men’s minds: fear of it
blanched their hearts; its heavenly or hellish messengers had been seen,
and not a few men dreamed that they had walked within those gates and
witnessed clanging horrors or purgatorial pain. Heaven they had more
rarely visited.

Dante gave little attention to any so-called “forerunners,” save only two,
Paul and Virgil. The former was a warrant for the poet’s reticence as to
the manner of his ascent to Heaven;[680] the latter supplied much of his
scheme of Hell. Yet there were one or two others possessed of some
affinity of soul with the great Florentine, who perhaps knew nothing of
them. One of these was Hildegard of Bingen, with her vision of the spirits
in the cloud, and her pungent sights of the bitterness of the pains of
hell.[681] Another sort of affinity is disclosed in the allegorical
_Anticlaudianus_ of Alanus de Insulis, in which Reason can take
_Prudentia_ just so far upon her heavenly journey, and then gives place to
Theology, even as Virgil, symbol of rational wisdom, gives place to
Beatrice at the summit of the Mount of Purgatory.[682] Dante might have
drawn still more enlightenment from the _De sacramentis_ of Hugo of St.
Victor, in which the rational basis of the universal scheme of things is
shown to lie in the principle of allegorical intendment. Yet one finds few
traces of Hugo in Dante except through Hugo’s pupil, Richard, whose works
he had read. That such apt forerunners should scarcely have affected him
shows how he was taught and inspired, not by individuals, but by the
entire Middle Ages.

One observes mediaeval characteristics in the _Commedia_ raised to a
higher power. The mediaeval period was marked by contrasts of quality and
of conduct such as cannot be found in the antique or the modern age. And
what other poem can vie with the _Commedia_ in contrasts of the beautiful
and the loathsome, the heavenly and the hellish, exquisite refinement of
expression and lapses into the reverse,[683] love and hate, pity and
cruelty, reverence and disdain? These contrasts not only are presented by
the story; they evince themselves in the character of the author. Many
scenes of the _Inferno_ are loathsome:[684] Dante’s own words and conduct
there may be cruel and hateful[685] or show tender pity; and every reader
knows the poetic beauty which glorifies the _Paradiso_, renders lovely the
_Purgatorio_, and ever and anon breaks through the gloom of Hell.

Another mediaeval quality, sublimated in Dante’s poem, is that of
elaborate plan, intended symmetry of composition, the balance of one
incident or subject against another.[686] And finally one observes the
mediaeval inclusiveness which belongs to the scope and purpose of the
_Commedia_ as a _Summa_ of salvation. Dante brings in everything that can
illuminate and fill out his theme. Even as the _Summa_ of St. Thomas, so
the _Commedia_ must present a whole doctrinal scheme of salvation, and
leave no loopholes, loose ends, broken links of argument or explanation.

The substance of the _Commedia_, practically its whole content of thought,
opinion, sentiment, had source in the mediaeval store of antique culture
and the partly affiliated, if not partly derivative, Latin Christianity.
The mediaeval appreciation of the Classics, and of the contents of ancient
philosophy, is not to be so very sharply distinguished from the attitude
of the fifteenth or sixteenth, nay, if one will, the eighteenth, century,
when the _Federalist_ in the young inchoately United States, and many an
orator in the revolutionary assemblies of France, quoted Cicero and
Plutarch as arbiters of civic expediency. Nevertheless, if we choose to
recognize deference to ancient opinion, acceptance of antique myth and
poetry as fact,[687] unbounded admiration for a shadowy and much distorted
ancient world, as characterizing the mediaeval attitude toward whatever
once belonged to Rome and Greece, then we must say that such also is
Dante’s attitude, scholar as he was;[688] and that in his use of the
Classics he differed from other mediaeval men only in so far as above them
all he was a poet.

Lines of illustrative examples begin with the opening canto of the
_Inferno_, where Dante addresses Virgil as _famoso saggio_, an appellative
strictly corresponding with the current mediaeval view of the “Mantuan.”
Mediaeval also is the grouping of the great poets who rise to meet Virgil,
first Homer, then _Orazio satiro_, and Ovid and Lucan.[689] More narrowly
mediaeval, that is, pertaining particularly to the thirteenth century, is
Dante’s profound reverence for the authority of Aristotle, _il maestro di
color che sanno_.[690] It may be that the poet’s sense of the enormous,
_elect_, importance of Aeneas,[691] and his putting Rhipeus, most
righteous of the Trojans, as the fifth regal spirit in the Eagle’s
eye,[692] belonged more especially to Dante as the Ghibelline author of
the _De monarchia_. But generically mediaeval was his acceptance of
antique myth for fact, a most curious instance of which is his referring
to the consuming of Meleager with the consuming of the brand, to
illustrate a point of physiological psychology.[693] Antique heroes, even
monsters, seem as real to him as the people of Scripture and history. It
is not, however, his mediaevalism, but his own greatness that enables him
to lift his treatment of them to the level of their presentation in the
Classics. Noble as an antique demigod is the damned Jason, silent and
tearless, among the scourged;[694] and Ulysses is as great in the tale he
tells from out the lambent flame as he was in the palace of Alcinoos,
telling the tale which Dante never read.[695]

The poet, especially in the _Purgatorio_, constantly balances moral
examples alternately drawn from pagan and sacred story. This propensity
was quite mediaeval; for throughout the Middle Ages the antique authority
was used to fortify or parallel the Christian argument. Yet herein, as
always, Dante is Dante as well as a mediaeval man; and his moral examples,
for the aid of souls who are purging themselves for Heaven, are
interesting and curious enough. On the pavement of the first ledge of
Purgatory, Lucifer is figured falling from Heaven and Briareus transfixed
by the bolt of Jove; then Nimrod, Niobe, Saul, Arachne, Rehoboam, Eriphyle
and Sennacherib, the Assyrians routed after Holophernes’ death, and Troy
in ashes.[696] On the third ledge, as instances of gentle forgivingness,
he sees in vision the Virgin Mary, and then appear Peisistratus (tyrant of
Athens) refusing to avenge himself, and Stephen asking pardon for his
slayers.[697] But the most wonderful instance of this combining of the
Christian and the antique, each at its height of feeling, occurs in the
thirtieth canto of the _Purgatorio_, where angels herald the appearance of
Beatrice with the chant, _Benedictus qui venis_, and, as they scatter
flowers, sing _Manibus o date lilia plenis_. This unison of the hail to
Christ upon His sacrificial entry into Jerusalem and the Virgilian
heartbreak over the young Marcellus, shows how Dante rose in his
combinings, and how potent an element of his imagination was the
antique.[698]

Of course the plan of Hell reflects the sixth Book of the _Aeneid_, and
throughout the whole _Commedia_ the Virgilian phrase rises aptly to the
poet’s lips. “Thou wouldst that I renew the desperate grief which presses
my heart even before I put it into words,” says Ugolino, nearly as Aeneas
speaks to Dido.[699] And in the _Paradiso_ the power of the Dantesque
reminiscence rouses the reader, spiritually as it were, to emulate the
glorious ones who passed to Colchos.[700] A more desperate passage was the
lot of those who must drop from Acheron’s bank into Charon’s boat;--the
whole scene here is quite reminiscent of Virgil. The simile:

  “Quam multa in silvis auctumni frigore primo
   Lapsa cadunt folia,”

is even beautified and made more pregnant with significance in Dante’s

  “Come d’autunno si levan le foglie
   L’una appresso dell’altra....”[701]

On the other hand, the threefold attempt of Aeneas to embrace Anchises is
stripped of its beautiful dream-simile in Dante’s use.[702] A lovelier bit
of borrowing is that of the quick springing up again of the rush, the
symbol of humility, _l’umile pianta_, with which the poet is girt before
proceeding up the Mount of Purgatory.[703]

With Dante the pagan antique represented much that was philosophically
true, if not veritably divine. In his mind, apparently, the heathen good
stood for the Christian good, and the conflict of the heathen deities with
Titan monsters symbolized, if indeed it did not continue to make part of,
the Christian struggle against the power of sin.[704] We may be jarred by
the apostrophe:

              “... O sommo Giove,
  Che fosti in terra per noi crucifisso.”[705]

But this is a kind of Christian-antique phrase by no means unexampled in
mediaeval poetry. And we feel the poetic breadth and beauty of the
invocation in which Apollo symbolizes or represents, exactly what we will
not presume to say, but at all events some veritable spiritual power, as
Minerva does, apparently, in another passage.[706] In such instances the
antique image which beautifies the poem is transfigured to a Christian
symbol, if it does not present actual truth.

Yet however universally Dante’s mind was solicited by the antique matter
and his poet’s nature charmed, he was profoundly and mediaevally
Christian. The _Commedia_ is a mediaeval Christian poem. Its fabric,
springing from the life of earth, enfolds the threefold quasi-other world
of damned, of purging, and of finally purified, spirits. It is dramatic
and doctrinal. Its drama of action and suffering, like the narratives of
Scripture, offers literal fact, moral teaching, and allegorical or
spiritual significance. The doctrinal contents are held partly within the
poem’s dramatic action and partly in expositions which are not fused in
the drama. Thus whatever else it is, the poem is a _Summa_ of saving
doctrine, which is driven home by illustrations of the sovereign good and
abysmal ill coming to man under the providence of God. One may perhaps
discern a twofold purpose in it, since the poet works out his own
salvation and gives precepts and examples to aid others and help truth and
righteousness on earth. The subject is man as rewarded or punished
eternally by God--says Dante in the letter to Can Grande. This subject
could hardly be conceived as veritable, and still less could it be
executed, by a poet who had no care for the effect of his poem upon men.
Dante had such care. But whether he, who was first and always a poet,
wrote the _Commedia_ in order to lift others out of error to salvation, or
even in order to work out his own salvation,--let him say who knows the
mind of Dante. No divination, however, is required to trace the course of
the saving teaching, which, whether dramatically exemplified or expounded
in doctrinal statement, is embodied in the great poem; nor is it hard to
note how Dante drew its substance from the mediaeval past.

The _Inferno_, which is the most dramatic and realistic, “Dantesque,” part
of the _Commedia_, and replete with terrestrial interest, is doctrinally
the least rich. Its doctrine chiefly lies in its scheme of punishment, or
divine vengeance, for different sins. Herein Dante followed no set series
like the seven deadly sins expiated in Purgatory. Neither the Church nor
authoritative writers had laid out the plan of Hell. Dante had in mind
Thomas Aquinas and Aristotle, also Cicero’s _De officiis_,[707] and,
structurally, Virgil. His scheme also was affected by his own character,
situation, and aversions, and assuredly by the movement of its own
composition. At the mouth of Hell the worthless nameless ones and the
neutral angels receive their due. Then after the sad calm of the place of
the unbaptized and the great blameless heathen, the veritable Hell begins,
and the series of tortures unfold, the lightest being such as punish
incontinence, while the most awful are reserved for those fraudulent ones
who have betrayed a trust. Dante’s power of presenting the humanly
loathsome does not let the progress of hellish torment fail in climax even
to the end, where Brutus, Cassius, and Judas are crunched in the dripping
mouths of Lucifer at the bottom of the lowest pit of Hell.

The general idea of hell torments came to the poet from current beliefs
and authoritative utterances, ranging from the “outer darkness” of the
Gospel to the lurid oratory of St. Bernard. Dante’s thoughts were drawn
generically from the stores of mediaeval convictions, approvals, and
imaginings: they were given to him by his epoch. Of necessity--innocently,
one may say--he made them into concrete realities because he was Dante.
Terrifying phrases and crude ghastliness were raised through his dramatic
power to living experiences. The reader goes through Hell, sees with his
own eyes, hears with his own ears, and stifles in the choking air.
Doubtless the narrative brought fear and contrition to the men of Dante’s
time. But for us the disproportion of the vengeance to the crime, the
outrage of everlasting torments for momentary, even impulsive sin, is
shocking and preposterous.[708] The torments themselves present conditions
which become unthinkable when we try to conceive them as enduring
eternally. Human flesh, or implicated spirit could not last beneath them.
And as for our impulses, there is many a tortured soul with whom we would
keep company, for instance, with the excellent band of Sodomites--Priscian
(!) Brunetto Latini, and those three Florentines whose “honoured names”
the poet greets with reverence and affection.[709] One might even wish to
make a third in the flame which enwraps Diomede and Ulysses. In fact,
Dante’s dramatic genius has brought the mediaeval hell to a _reductio ad
absurdum_, to our minds.

The poet is of it too. He can pity those who touch his pity. And how great
he can be, how absolute. There is compacted in the story of Francesca all
that can be thought or felt over unhappy love. Yet Dante never doubts the
justice of the punishment he describes; sometimes he calmly or cruelly
approves. _Nel mio bel San Giovanni!_ How many thousands have quoted these
detached words to show the poet’s love of his beautiful baptistery. But,
in fact, he refers to the little cylindrical places where stood the
baptizing priests, in order to bring home to the reader the size of the
holes in the burning rock from which protruded the quivering feet of
Simoniacs![710] It appears that the souls of all the damned will suffer
more when they shall again be joined to their bodies after the
resurrection.[711]

The _Inferno_ fully exemplifies the doctrinal statement obscurely set over
the gate which shut out hope: moved by justice, the Trinity, “divine
power, supreme wisdom, primal love, created me (Hell) to endure
eternally.” Dante follows this current authoritative opinion, stated by
Aquinas. Here one may repeat that Dante is the child of the Middle Ages,
rather than a disciple of any single teacher. If he follows Aquinas more
than any other scholastic, he follows Bonaventura also with breadth and
balance. These two, however, were themselves final results of lines of
previous development. Both were rational and also mystically
contemplative, though the former quality predominates in Thomas and the
latter in Bonaventura. And in Dante’s poem, at the end of the _Paradiso_,
Theology, the rational apprehension of divine truth, gives place to
contemplation’s loftier insight. Dante is kin to both these men; but when
he thinks, more frequently he thinks like Thomas, and the intellectual
realization of life is dominant with him. This was evident in the
_Convito_; and that the intellectual vision constitutes the substance of
the _Commedia_, becomes luminously apparent in the _Paradiso_.[712] It is
even suggested at the gate of Hell, within which the wretched people will
be seen, who have lost the good of the Intellect,[713] by which is meant
knowledge of God.

The _Purgatorio_ presents more saving doctrine than the cantica of
damnation. Its Mount with the earthly paradise at the top, may have been
his own, but might have been taken from the Venerable Bede or Albertus
Magnus.[714] The ante-purgatory appears as a creation of the poet,
influenced by certain passages of the _Aeneid_ and by ancient disciplinary
practices which kept the penitents waiting outside the church.[715] The
teaching of the whole cantica relates to the purgation of pride, envy,
anger, _accidia_ (sloth), avarice, gluttony, lust. These are the seven
deadly sins whose _provenance_ is early monasticism.[716] Through their
purgation man is made pure and fit to mount to the stars.

We shall not follow Dante through the _Purgatorio_ and _Paradiso_, or
observe in detail the teachings set forth and the sources whence they were
derived.[717] But a brief reference to the successive incidents and topics
of instruction will show how the _Commedia_ touches every key of saving
doctrine. The soul entering Purgatory goes seeking liberty from sin,[718]
and as a first lesson learns to detach itself from memories of the
damned.[719] It receives some slight suggestion of the limits of human
reason;[720] and is told that according to the correct teaching there is
one soul in man with several faculties.[721] It learns the risk of
repentance in the hour of death;[722] and the efficacy of the prayers of
others to help souls through their purifying expiation; also, that, after
death, souls can advance only by the aid of grace.[723] The symbolism of
the gate of Purgatory teaches the need of contrition and confession. Upon
the first ledge, the proud do penance, disciplined with examples of
humility, and through the Lord’s Prayer are taught man’s entire dependence
upon God. It is fitting that Pride should be the first sin expiated, since
it lies at the base of all sins in the Christian scheme. Much doctrine is
inculcated by the treatment of the different sins and the appositeness of
the hymns sung by the penitents.[724]

Ascending the second ledge, Virgil, _i.e._ human reason, expounds the
first principles of the doctrine of that love which is of the Good.[725]
Next is set forth the theory of human free-will and the effect of the
spheres in directing human inclination--all in strict accord with the
teaching of Thomas;[726] and then, still in accord with Thomas, the fuller
nature of love (or desire) is expounded, and the allotment of purgatorial
pains in expiation of the various modes of evil desire or failure to love
aright.[727] These fitting pains are as a solace to the soul yearning to
accomplish its purgation.[728] Next, generation is explained, the creation
of the soul, and the manner of its existence after separation from the
body, according to dominant scholastic theories.[729] In the concluding
cantos of the _Purgatorio_, much Church doctrine is symbolically set forth
by the Mystic Procession and the rivers of the earthly paradise, Lethe and
Eunoe--the latter representing sacramental grace through which good works,
killed by later sins, are made to live again.[730] The earthly paradise
symbolizes the perfect happiness of life in the flesh, and the state
wherein man is fit to pass to the heavenly Paradise.

Besides doctrine directly bearing on Salvation, the _Commedia_ contains
explanations by the way, needed to understand Dante’s journey through the
earth and heavens, and give it verisimilitude. Apparently these
explanations were also intended to afford a sufficient knowledge of the
structure of the universe. The _Paradiso_ abounds in this kind of
information, largely physical and astronomical. Its first canto offers a
general statement, beautifully put, of the ordering of created things. In
this instance, the instruction is not exclusively astronomical or
physical,[731] but touches upon animated creatures, and follows Thomist
teaching. Another interesting instance is the explanation in the second
canto of the spots on the moon and then of the influence of the heavens.
Here the astronomical matter runs on into elucidations touching human
nature, even that human nature which is to be saved through saving
doctrine. In this way the Christian-Thomist-Dantesque scheme of knowledge
holds together. The _Commedia_ is the pilgrimage of the soul after all
wisdom, and includes, implicitly at least, the matter of the _Convito_.

The _Paradiso_ contains the chief store of saving knowledge. It sets forth
the ultimate problems of human life and divine salvation, with due
emphasis laid upon the limitations of human understanding. Dante,
conscious of the strenuousness of his high argument, warns off all but the
chosen few.

A first point learned in the heavenly voyage is that no soul in Paradise
desires aught save what it has; since such desire would contravene the
will of God. Paradise is everywhere in Heaven, though the divine grace
rains not upon all in one mode.[732] Beatified souls do not dwell in any
particular star, though Plato seems to say so. Scripture condescends to
figure the intelligible under the guise of sensible forms, as Plato may
have done.[733] Broken vows and their reparation are now considered. Then
the history of the Roman Eagle brings out the fact that Christ was
crucified under Tiberius and His death avenged by Titus, which leads on to
the explanation of the Fall and the Redemption, occupying the seventh
canto. The next offers comment upon the divine goodness and the diversity
of human lots; and shows how the bitter may rise from the sweet. With deep
consistency the poet exclaims against the insensate toilsome reasonings
through which mortals beat their wings downward, away from God.[734]

In canto thirteen the reader is enlightened regarding the wisdom of Adam,
of Solomon, and of Christ; and then as to the existence of the beatified
soul before and after it is clothed with the glorified body of the
Resurrection.[735] Incidentally the justice of eternal punishment is
adverted to.[736] The depth of the divine righteousness is next
presented,[737] and its application to the heathen, with illustrations of
God’s saving ways, in the instances of certain princes who loved
righteousness, including Trajan and the Trojan Rhipeus.[738] The
incomprehensibility of Predestination next receives attention.

Now intervenes the marvellous and illuminative beauty of canto
twenty-three, preceding Dante’s declaration of his creed, upon
interrogatories from the apostles, Peter, James, and John. In this way he
states the dogmatic fundamentals of the Christian Faith, and the
substantiating rôles of philosophic argument and authority.[739] After
this, the vision of the hierarchies of angels leads on to discourse upon
their creation and nature, the immediate fall of those who fell, the
exaltation of the steadfast with added grace, and the mode and measure of
their knowledge. Thomas is followed in this scholastic argument.

With the vision of the Rose, rational theology gives place to mystic
contemplation;[740] and further visions of the divine ordering precede the
prayer to the Virgin, with which the last canto opens--that prayer so
beautiful and so expressive of mediaeval thought and feeling as to the
most kind and blessed Lady of Heaven. This prayer or hymn is made of
phrases which the mediaeval mind and heart had been recasting and
perfecting for centuries. It is almost a great _cento_, like the _Dies
Irae_. After the Lady’s answering benediction, there comes to Dante, in
grace, the final mystic vision of the Trinity, enfolding all
existence--substance, accidents and their modes, bound with love in one
volume. Supreme dogmatic truth is set forth, and the furthest strainings
of reason are stilled in supersensual and super-rational vision, which
satisfies all intellectual desire. This vision, vouchsafed through the
Virgin’s grace, assures the pilgrim soul: the goal is reached alike of
knowledge and salvation.

One may say that the _Commedia_ begins and ends with the Virgin. It was
she who sent Beatrice into the gates of Hell to move Virgil--meaning human
reason--to go to Dante’s aid. The prayer which obtains her benediction,
and the vision following, close the _Paradiso_. So the teaching of the
poem ends in mediaeval strains. For the Virgin was the mediaeval goddess,
beloved and universally adored, helpful in every way, and the chief aid in
bringing man to Heaven. But no more with Dante than with other mediaeval
men is she the end of worship and devotion. Her eyes are turned on God.
So are those of Beatrice, of Rachel, and of all the saints in Paradise. As
for man on earth, he is _viator_, journeying on through discipline, in
righteousness and beneficence, but above all in faith and hope and love of
God, with his eyes of knowledge and desire set on God. God is the goal,
even of the _vita activa_, which is also training and enlightenment.
Loving his brother whom he hath seen, man may learn to love
God--practising himself in love. Even Christ’s parable, “Inasmuch as ye
did it unto one of the least of these,” rightly interpreted, implies that
the end of human charity is God: the human charity is preparation,
obedience, means of enlightenment. The brother for whom Christ died--that
is he whom thou shalt love, and that is why thou shalt love him. In
themselves human relationships are disciplinary, ancillary, as all the
sciences are ancillary to Theology. Mediaeval religion is turned utterly
toward God; the relationship of the soul to God is its whole matter. It is
not humanitarian: not human, but _divina scientia, fides, et amor_, make
mediaeval Christianity. Thus Dante’s doctrine is mediaeval. Toward God
moves the desire of the _viatores_ in Purgatory, though they still are
incidentally mindful of earth’s memories. In Paradise the eyes of all the
blessed are set on Him. Because of the divine love they may for a moment
turn the eyes of their knowledge and desire to aid a fellow-creature; the
occasion past, they fix them again on God: thus the Virgin, thus Bernard,
thus Beatrice.

As a son of the Middle Ages, Dante was possessed with the spirit of
symbolism. Allegory, with him, was not merely a way of expressing that
which might transcend direct statement: it embodied a principle of truth.
The universally accepted allegorical interpretation of Scripture justified
the view that a deeper verity lay in allegorical significance than in
literal meaning. This principle applied to other writings also. “Now since
the literal sense [of the first canzone] is sufficiently explained, it is
time to proceed to the allegorical and true interpretation.”[741]

In the _Vita Nuova_ and somewhat more lifelessly in the _Convito_, Dante
explains that it is his way to invest his poetry with a secondary or
allegorical sense. He proposes in the latter work to carry out the formal
notion of the four kinds of meaning contained in profound
writings--literal, allegorical, moral, anagogical.[742] He never holds
himself, however, to the lines of any such obsession, but is content in
practice with the literal and the broadly allegorical sense.[743] Even
then the great Florentine occasionally can be jejune enough. The
conception of the ten heavens figuring the Seven Liberal Arts along with
metaphysics, ethics, and theology, as a plan of composition for the
_Convito_,[744] was on a level with the structural symbolism of the _De
nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii_ of Capella. Yet the likening of Ethics to
the _primum mobile_ and Theology to the Empyrean has bearing on Dante’s,
and the mediaeval, scheme of the sciences, among which Theology is chief.

Allegory moulds the structure and permeates the substance of the
_Commedia_. For this Dante himself vouches in the famous dedicatory letter
to Can Grande, where his thoughts may be heard creaking scholastically, as
he describes the nature of his poem, and explains why he entitled it
_Commedia_:

    “Literally, the subject is the state of souls after death taken
    simply. If, however, the work be accepted allegorically, the subject
    is man, according as by merit or demerit through freedom of choice
    (_arbitrii libertatem_) he is subject to Justice, rewarding or
    punitive.”

This is the positive statement emanating, in all probability, from the
poet. Perhaps it is as well that he did not live to inaugurate the series
of Commentaries upon his poem, which began within a few years of his death
and show no signs of ceasing.[745] So it has been left to others to
determine the metes and bounds and special features of the _Commedia’s_
allegorical intent. The task has proved hazardous, because Dante was such
a great poet, so realistic in his visualizing and so masterful in forcing
the different phases of his many-sided thoughts to combine in concrete
creations. His drama is so living that one can hardly think it an
allegory.

Evidently certain matters, like the Mystic Procession and its apocalyptic
appurtenances in the last cantos of the _Purgatorio_, are sheer allegory.
Such, while suited to suggest theological tenets, are formal and lifeless,
a little like the hieratic allegorical mosaics of the fourth and fifth
centuries, which were composed before Christian art had become imbued with
Christian feeling.[746] Indeed, doffing for an instant one’s reverence for
the great poet, one may say that from the point of view of art and life,
Dante’s symbolism becomes jejune, or at least ceases to draw us, according
as it becomes palpable allegory.[747]

Beyond such incidents one recognizes that the general course of the poem,
its more pointed occurrences, together with its chief characters and the
scenes amid which they move, have commonly both literal and allegorical
meaning.[748] Usually it is wise not to press either side too rigorously.
The poet’s mind worked in the clearly imagined setting and dramatic action
of his poem, where fact and symbolism combined in that reality which is
both art and life. Surely the _Commedia_ was completed and rendered real
and beautiful through many a touch and incident which had no allegorical
intent. Even as in a French cathedral, the main sculptured and painted
subjects have doctrinal, that is to say, allegorical, significance,
besides their literal truth; but there is also much lovely carving of
scroll and flowered ornament and beast and bird, which beautifies the
building.

For Dante’s purpose, to set out the state of disembodied spirits after
death, allegory might prove prejudicial, because of the intensity of his
artist’s vision. Much of the poem’s symbolism, especially in the
_Paradiso_, belongs to that unavoidable imagery to which every one is
driven when attempting to describe spiritual facts. Such symbolism,
however, when constructed with the plastic power of a Dante, may become
itself so convincing or compelling as to reduce the intended spiritual
signification to the terms of its concrete embodiment in the symbol. In
view of the carnality of most sin, one is not surprised to find the place
of punishment a converging cavity within the earth. With Dante, as with
Hildegard, the sights and torments of Hell are realistically given quite
as of course. Perhaps Dante’s Mount of Purgatory begins to give us pause,
and its corniced _mise en scène_ tends to enflesh the idea of spirit and
materialize its purgation. But the limiting effect of symbolism is most
keenly felt in the _Paradiso_, notwithstanding the beauty of that cantica;
for its very concrete symbolism seems sometimes to ensphere the intended
truths of spirit in a sort of crystalline translucency. It is all a
marvellously imagined description of the state of blessed souls. Yet in
the final pure and glorious image of a white rose (_candida rosa_) the
company of the glorified spirits is so visualized as to become, surely not
theatrical, but as if assembled upon the rounding tiers of seats occupied
by an audience.[749] There are topics in which the sheer ratiocination of
Thomas is more completely spiritual than the poetic vision of Dante.

Dante’s most admirable symbolic creation was also his dearest
reality--Beatrice. And while this being in which he has immortalized his
fame and hers, is eminently the creation of his genius, the elements were
drawn from the many-chambered mediaeval past. Some issued out of the vast
matter of chivalric love, with its high heart of service and sense of its
own worth, its science, its foolish and most wise reasoning, its
preciosity of temper--Dante and his literary friends were virtuosos in
everything pertaining to its understanding.[750] This love was of the
fine-reasoning mind. The first canzone of the _Vita Nuova_ does not begin
“Donne, che sentite amore,” but: “Donne, ch’ avete intelletto d’ amore.”
Through that book love is what it never ceases to be with Dante,
_intelligenza_:

  “Intelligenza nuova, che l’ Amore
   Piangendo mette in lui....”

The _piangendo_, the tears, have likewise part; without them love is not
had or even understood. The enormous sense of love’s supreme worth--that
too is in Dante. It had all been with the Troubadours of Provence, with
Chrétien de Troies, and with the great Minnesingers, and had been reasoned
on, appreciated, felt and wept over, by ladies and knights who listened to
their poems. From France and Provence love and its reasonings had come to
Italy even before Dante’s eyes had opened to it and other matters.

This was one strain that entered the Beatrice of the _Vita Nuova_, of the
_Convito_, of the _Commedia_. But Beatrice is something else: she is, or
becomes, Theology, the God-given science of the divine and human. Long had
Theologia (_divina scientia_) been a queen; and even before her,
Philosophia, as with Boëthius, had been a queenly woman gowned with as
full symbolical particularity as ever the Beatrice of Dante. Indeed from
the time of the _Psychomachia_ of Prudentius to the _Roman de la Rose_ of
De Lorris and De Meun, every human quality, and many an aspect of human
circumstance, had been personified, for the most part under the forms of
gracious or seductive women. Above all of these rose, sweet, gracious, and
potent, the Virgin Queen of Heaven. It came as of course to Dante to
symbolize his conception of divine wisdom in a woman’s form. The
achievement of his genius was the transfusing combination of elements of
courtly love, didactic allegory, and _divina scientia_, in a creature
before whom the whole man Dante, heart and reason and religious faith,
could stand and gaze and love and worship.

Beatrice was his and of him always; but with the visions and experience
of that mature and grace-illuminated manhood, which expressed itself in
the _Commedia_, she comes to be much that she had not been when she lived
on earth or had just left it, and Dante was a maker of exquisite verses in
Florence; and much too that she had scarce become while the poet was
consoling himself with philosophy for his bereavement and the dulling of
his early faith. Beatrice lives and moves and has her ever more uplifted
being as the reality as well as symbol of Dante’s thoughts of life. With
all first love’s idealism, he loved a girl; then she, having passed from
earth, becomes the inspiration and object of address of the young maker of
sonnets and canzoni, who with such intellectual preciosity was intent on
building these verses of fine-spun sentiment. Thereafter, when he is in
darker mood, she does not altogether leave him, whatever variant attitudes
his thought and temper take. And at last the yearning self-fulfilments of
his renewed life draw together in the Beatrice of the _Commedia_.

It is very beautiful, and the growth, as well as work, of genius; but it
is not strange. For there is no bound to the idealizing of the love which
first transfuses a youth’s nature with a mortal golden flame, and awakens
it to new understanding. Out of whatever of experience of life and joy and
sorrow may come to the man, this first love may still vivify itself
anew--often in dreams--and become again living and beautiful, in tears,
and will awaken new perceptions and disclose further vistas of the
_intelligenza nuova_ which love never ceases to impart to him who has
loved.

Dante’s mind was always turning from the obvious sense-actuality of the
fact to its symbolism; which held the truer reality. With such a man it is
not strange that the beloved and adored woman, the love of whom was virtue
and enlightenment, should, when dead to earth, become that divine wisdom
which opens Heaven to the lover who would follow, for all eternity,
whither his beloved has so surely gone. No, it was not strange, but only
as wonderful as all the works of God, that she who while living had been
the spring of virtue of all kinds and meanings in the poet’s breast,
should after death become the emblem, even the reality, of that whereby
man is taught how to win his heavenly salvation. Passage after passage in
the _Purgatorio_ and _Paradiso_ show that Beatrice is this _divina
scientia_, and yet has never ceased to be one whom the poet loves.[751]

Thus it is clear that mediaeval development converges at last in Dante.
He, or his _Commedia_, might be the final _Summa_, were not he, or rather
it, the final poem. Man and work include the emotions and the intellectual
interests of the Middle Ages, embracing what had been known,--Physics,
Astronomy, Politics, History, Pagan Mythology, Christian Theology,--all
bent and moulded at last to the matter of the book. Not the contents of
the _Commedia_ is Dante’s own, but the poem itself--that is his creation.

Yet even the poem itself was a climax long led up to. The power of its
feeling had been preparing in the conceptions, even in the reasonings,
which through the centuries had been gaining ardour as they became part of
the entire natures of men and women. Thus had mediaeval thought become
emotionalized and plastic and living in poetry and art. Otherwise, even
Dante’s genius could not have fused the contents of mediaeval thought into
a poem. How many passages in the _Commedia_ illustrate this--like the
lovely picture of Lia moving in the flowering meadow, with her fair hands
making her a garland. The twenty-third canto of the _Paradiso_, telling of
the triumph of Christ and the Virgin, yields a larger illustration; and
within it, as a very concrete lyric instance, floats that flower of
angelic love, the song of Gabriel circling the Lady of Heaven with its
melody, and giving quintessential utterance to the love and adoration
which the Middle Ages had intoned to the Virgin. Yes, if it be Dante’s
genius, it is also the gathering emotion of the centuries, which lifts the
last cantos of the _Paradiso_ from glory to glory, and makes this closing
singing of the _Commedia_ such supreme poetry. Nor is it the emotional
element alone that reaches its final voice in Dante. Passage after passage
of the _Paradiso_ is the apotheosis of scholastic thought and ways of
stating it, the very apotheosis, for example, of those harnessed phrases
in which the line of great scholastics had endeavoured to put in words
the universalities of substance and accident and the absolute qualities
of God.

Yet one more feature of Dante’s typifying inclusiveness of the past. Its
elements exist in him at first without conscious opposition and yet not
subordinated one to another, the less worthy to those of eternal validity.
Then conflict arises; the mediaeval Psychomachia awakes in Dante.
Evidently he who wrote the _Convito_ after the _Vita Nuova_, had not
continued spiritually undisturbed. Had there come dullings of his early
faith? Did his mind seek too exclusive satisfaction in knowledge? Had he
possibly swerved a little from some high intention? The facts are veiled.
Dante wears neither his mind nor his heart upon his sleeve. Yet a
reconcilement was attained by him, though perhaps he had to fetch it out
of Hell. He achieved it in his great poem, which in its long making made
the poet into the likeness of itself. Fitness for salvation is the
ultimate criterion with Dante respecting the elements of mortal life, as
it had been through the Middle Ages. And the _Commedia_--truly the _Divina
Commedia_--while it presents the scheme of salvation for universal man, is
the achieved salvation of the poet.




INDEX

_NOTE.--Of several references to the same matter the more important are
shown by heavy type._


  Abaelard, Peter, career of, ii. 342-5;
    at Paris, ii. 343, 344, 383;
      popularity there, ii. 119;
    love for Heloïse, ii. 4-=5=, 344;
    love-songs, ii. =13=, 207;
    Heloïse’s love for, i. 585; ii. =3=, =5=, 8, 9, =15-16=;
    early relations with Heloïse, ii. 4-5;
    suggestion of marriage opposed by her, ii. 6-9;
    marriage, ii. 9;
    suffers vengeance of Fulbert, ii. 9;
    becomes a monk at St. Denis, ii. 10;
      at the Paraclete, ii. 10, 344;
      at Breton monastery, ii. 10;
    St. Bernard’s denunciations of, i. 229, 401; ii. =344-5=, =355=;
    letters to, from Heloïse quoted, ii. 11-15, 17-20, 23, 24;
    letters from, to Heloïse quoted, ii. 16-17, 21-3, 24-5;
    closing years at Cluny, ii. 25, =26=, 345;
    death of, ii. =27=, 345;
    estimate of, ii. 4, 342;
    rationalizing temper, i. 229; ii. =298-9=;
    skill in dialectic, ii. 303, =345-6=, 353;
    not an Aristotelian, ii. 369;
    works on theology, ii. 352-5;
      _De Unitate et Trinitate divina_, ii. 10, =298-9=, 352 _and_ _n. 3_;
      _Theologia_, ii. =303-4=, 395;
      _Scito te ipsum_, ii. 350-1;
      _Sic et non_, i. 17; ii. =304-6=, =352=, 357;
      _Dialectica_, ii. 346 _and_ _nn._, 349-50;
      _Dialogue_ between Philosopher, Jew, and Christian, ii. 350, =351=;
      _Historia calamitatum_, ii. =4-11=, 298-9, =343=;
      _Carmen ad Astralabium filium_, ii. 192;
      hymns, ii. 207-9;
      otherwise mentioned, ii. 134, 283 _and_ _n._

  Abbo, Abbot, i. =294 and n.=, 324

  Abbots:
    Armed forces, with, i. 473
    Cistercian, position of, i. 362-3 _and_ _n._
    Investiture of, lay, i. 244
    Social class of, i. 473

  Accursius, _Glossa ordinaria_ of, ii. 262, =263=

  Adalberon, Abp. of Rheims, i. 240, =282-3=, 287

  Adam of Marsh, ii. 389, 400, 487

  Adam of St. Victor, editions of hymns of, ii. 87 _n. 1_;
    examples of the hymns, ii. 87 _seqq._;
    Latin originals, ii. 206, 209-15

  Adamnan cited, i. 134 _n. 2_, 137

  Adelard of Bath, ii. 370

  Aedh, i. 132

  Agobard, Abp. of Lyons, i. 215, =232-3=;
    cited, ii. 247

  Aidan, St., i. 174

  Aimoin, _Vita Abbonis_ by, i. 294 _and_ _n._

  Aix, Synod of, i. 359

  Aix-la-Chapelle:
    Chapel at, i. 212 _n._
    School at, _see_ Carolingian period--Palace school

  Alans, i. 113, 116, 119

  Alanus de Insulis, career of, ii. 92-4;
    estimate of, ii. 375-6;
    works of, ii. 48 _n. 1_, =94=, 375 _n. 5_, 376;
      _Anticlaudianus_, ii. =94-103=, 192, 377, 539;
      _De planctu naturae_, ii. =192-3 and n. 1=, 376

  Alaric, i. 112

  Alaric II., i. =117=; ii. 243

  Alberic, Card., i. 252 _n. 2_

  Alberic, Markgrave of Camerino, i. 242

  Alberic, son of Marozia, i. 242-3

  Albertus Magnus, career of, ii. 421;
    estimate of, ii. 298, 301, =421=;
    estimate of work of, ii. 393, 395;
    attitude toward Gilbert de la Porrée, ii. 372;
    compared with Bacon, ii. 422;
      with Aquinas, ii. 433, =438=;
    relations with Aquinas, ii. 434;
    on logic, ii. 314-15;
      method of, ii. 315 _n._;
    edition of works, ii. 424 _n. 1_;
    _De praedicabilibus_, ii. 314 and _n._, 315, 424-5;
    work on the rest of Aristotle, ii. 420-1;
    analysis of this work, ii. 424 _seqq._;
    attitude toward the original, ii. 422;
    _Summa theologiae_, ii. 430, 431;
    _Summa de creaturis_, ii. 430-1;
    _De adhaerendo Deo_, ii. 432;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 17; ii. 82 _n. 2_, 283, 312, 402, 541 _n. 2_

  Albigenses, i. 49;
    persecution of, i. 366-7, 461, 481, 572; ii. 168

  Alboin the Lombard, i. 115

  Alchemy, ii. 496-7

  Alcuin of York, career of, i. 214;
    works of, i. 216-21 _and_ _n. 2_;
    extracts from letters of, ii. 159;
    stylelessness of, ii. =159=, 174;
    verses by, quoted, ii. 136-7;
    on _urbanitas_, ii. 136;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 212, 240, 343; ii. 112, 312, 332

  Aldhelm, i. 185

  Alemanni, i. 9, 121, 122, 145 _n. 2_, 174, 192

  Alemannia, Boniface’s work in, i. 199

  Alexander the Great, Pseudo-Callisthenes’ Life of, ii. 224, 225,
        =229-230=;
    Walter of Lille’s work on, ii. 230 _n. 1_

  Alexander II., Pope, i. 262 _n._, 263 _and_ _n. 1_

  Alexander de Villa-Dei, _Doctrinale_ of, ii. =125-7=, 163

  Alexander of Hales--at Paris, i. 476; ii. =399=;
    Bacon’s attack on, ii. 494, 497;
    estimate of work of, ii. 393, 395, 399;
    Augustinianism of, ii. 403-4

  Alfred, King of England, i. 144 _and_ _n. 2_, =187-90=

  Allegory (_See also_ Symbolism):
    Dictionaries of, ii. 47-8 _and_ _n. 1_, 49
    Greek examples of, ii. 42, 364
    Metaphor distinguished from, ii. 41 _n._
    Politics, in, ii. 60-1, 275-=6=, =280=
    _Roman de la rose_ as exemplifying, ii. 103
    Scripture, _see under_ Scriptures
    Two uses of, ii. 365

  Almsgiving, i. 268

  Alphanus, i. 253-4

  _Amadas_, i. 565

  Ambrose, St., Abp. of Milan, on miracles, i. 85-6;
    attitude toward secular studies, i. 300; ii. 288;
    _Hexaëmeron_ of, i. 72-4;
    _De officiis_, i. 96;
    hymns, i. 347-8;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 70, 75, 76, 104, 186, 354; ii. 45 _n._, 272

  Anacletus II., Pope, i. 394

  Anchorites, _see_ Hermits

  Andrew the Chaplain, _Flos amoris_ of, i. 575-6

  Angels:
    Aquinas’ discussion of, ii. 324-5, 435, =457 seqq.=, =469=, =473-5=
    Dante’s views on, ii. 551
    Emotionalizing of conception of, i. 348 _n. 4_
    Hugo of St. Victor on, ii. 68, 69
    Symbols, regarded as, ii. 457
    Vincent’s _Speculum_ as concerning, ii. 319
    Writings regarding, summary of, ii. 457

  Angilbert, i. 234-5

  Angles, i. 140

  Anglo-Saxons:
    Britain conquered by, i. 141
    Characteristics of, i. 142, =196=
    Christian missions by, i. 196, 197
    Christian missions to, i. 172, 174, =180 seqq.=
    Customs of, i. 141
    Poetry of, i. 142-4
    Roman influence slight on, i. 32

  Aniane monastery, i. 358-9

  Annals, i. 234 and _n. 1_

  Anselm (at Laon), ii. 343-4

  Anselm, St., Abp. of Canterbury, dream of, i. 269-70;
    early career, i. 270;
    at Bec, i. 271-2;
    relations with Rufus, i. 273, 275;
    journey to Italy, i. 275;
    estimate of, i. 274, =276-7=; ii. =303=, 330, =338=;
    style of, i. 276; ii. =166-7=;
    influence of, on Duns Scotus, ii. 511;
    works of, i. 275 _seqq._;
    _Cur Deus homo_, i. 275, 277 _n. 1_, =279=; ii. 395;
    _Monologion_, i. 275-7;
    _Proslogion_, i. 276-8; ii. =166=, 395;
    _Meditationes_, i. 276, =279=;
    _De grammatico_, i. 277 _n. 2_;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 16, 19, 301-2; ii. 139, 283, 297, 340

  Anselm of Besate, i. 259

  Anthony, St., i. 365-6;
    Life of, by Athanasius, i. 47, =52 and n.=

  Antique literature, _see_ Greek thought _and_ Latin classics

  Antique stories, themes of, in vernacular poetry, ii. 223 _seqq._

  Apollinaris Sidonius, ii. 107

  Apollonius of Tyana, i. 44

  _Apollonius of Tyre_, ii. 224 _and_ _n._

  Aquinas, Thomas, family of, ii. 433-4;
    career, ii. 434-5;
    relations with Albertus Magnus, ii. 434;
    translations of Aristotle obtained by, ii. 391;
    _Vita_ of, by Guilielmus de Thoco, ii. 435 _n._;
    works of, ii. 435;
    estimate of, and of his work, i. 17, 18; ii. 301, =436-8=, 484;
    completeness of his philosophy, ii. 393-5;
    pivot of his attitude, ii. 440;
    present position of, ii. 501;
    style, ii. 180;
    mastery of dialectic, ii. 352;
    compared with Eriugena, i. 231 _n. 1_;
    with Albertus Magnus, ii. 433, =438=;
    with Bonaventura, ii. 437;
    with Duns, ii. 517;
    Dante compared with and influenced by, ii. 541 _n. 2_, =547=, 549,
        551, 555;
    on monarchy, ii. 277;
    on faith, ii. 288;
    on difference between philosophy and theology, ii. 290;
    on logic, ii. 313;
    _Summa theologiae_, i. 17, 18; ii. =290 seqq.=;
    style of the work, ii. 180-1;
    Bacon’s charge against it, ii. 300;
    Peter Lombard’s work contrasted with it, ii. 307-10;
    its method, ii. 307;
    its classification scheme, ii. 324-9;
    analysis of the work, ii. 438 _seqq._, 447 _seqq._;
    _Summa philosophica contra Gentiles_, ii. 290, 438, =445-6=;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 69 _n. 2_; ii. 283, 298, 300, 312, 402

  Aquitaine, i. 29, 240, =573=

  Arabian philosophy, ii. =389-90=, 400-1

  Arabs, Spanish conquest by, i. 9, 118

  Archimedes, i. 40

  Architecture, Gothic:
    Evolution of, i. 305; ii. =539=
    Great period of, i. 346

  Argenteuil convent, ii. 9, 10

  Arianism:
    Teutonic acceptance of, i. =120=, 192, 194
    Visigothic abandonment of, i. 118 _nn._

  Aristotle, estimate of, i. 37-8;
    works of, i. 37-8;
    unliterary character of writings of, ii. 118, 119;
    philosophy as classified by, ii. 312;
    attitude of, to discussions of final cause, ii. 336;
    the _Organon_, i. =37=, 71;
    progressive character of its treatises, ii. 333-4;
    Boëthius’ translation of the work, i. 71, =91-2=;
    advanced treatises “lost” till 12th cent., ii. 248 _n._, 334;
    Porphyry’s _Introduction_ to the _Categories_, i. 45, 92, 102; ii.
        312, =314 n.=, 333, =339=;
    Arabian translations of works, ii. 389-90;
    introduction of complete works, i. 17;
    Latin translations made in 13th cent., ii. 391;
    three stages in scholastic appropriation of the Natural Philosophy and
        Metaphysics, ii. 393;
    Paris University study of, ii. 391-2 _and_ _n._;
    Albertus Magnus’ work on, ii. 420-1, 424 _seqq._;
    Aquinas’ mastery of, i. 17, 18;
    Dominican acceptance of system of, ii. 404;
    Dante’s reverence for, ii. 542

  Arithmetic:
    Abacus, the, i. 299
    Boëthius’ work on, i. 72, =90=
    Music in relation to, ii. 291
    Patristic treatment of, i. 72
    Scholastic classification of, ii. 313

  Arnold of Brescia, i. 401; ii. 171

  Arnulf, Abp. of Rheims, i. 283-4

  Art, Christian (_For particular arts, see their names_):
    Demons as depicted in, ii. 540 _n. 2_
    Early, i. 345 _n._
    Emotionalizing of, i. 345-7
    Evolution of, i. 19-20
    Germany, in (11th cent.), i. 312
    Symbolism the inspiration of, i. 21; ii. 82-6

  Arthur, King, story of youth of, i. 568-569;
    relations with Lancelot and Guinevere, i. 584;
    with Parzival, i. 592, 599-600, 612

  Arthurian romances:
    Comparison of, with _Chansons de geste_, i. 564-5
    German culture influenced by, ii. 28
    Origin and authorship of, question as to, i. 565-7
    Universal vogue of, i. =565=, 573, 577
    otherwise mentioned, i. 531, 538

  Arts, the (_See also_ Latin classics):
    Classifications of, ii. 312 _seqq._
    Course of, shortening of, ii. =132=, 384
    _Dictamen_, ii. =121=, =129=, 381
    Grammar, _see that heading_
    Masters in, at Paris and Oxford, ii. 384-5;
      course for, ii. 388
    Seven Liberal, _see that heading_

  Asceticism:
    Christian:
      Carthusian, i. 384
      Early growth of, i. 333-5
      Manichean, i. 49
      Women’s practice of, i. 444, 462-3
    Neo-Platonic, i. 43, 44, 46, 50, =331=, 334

  Astralabius, ii. 6, 9, 27;
    Abaelard’s poem to, ii. 191-2 _and_ _n. 1_

  Astrology, i. =44 and n.=; ii. 374:
    Bacon’s views on, ii. 499-500

  Astronomy:
    Chartres study of, i. 299
    Gerbert’s teaching of, i. 288-9
    Patristic attitude toward, i. 72

  Ataulf, i. 112, 116

  Athanasius, St., estimate of work of, i. =54=, 68;
    Life of St. Anthony by, i. 47, =52 and n.=, 84;
    _Orationes_, i. 68

  Atlantis, i. 36

  Attila the Hun, i. 112-13;
    in legend, i. 145-7

  Augustine, Abp. of Canterbury, i. 6, 171, =180-2=;
    Gregory’s letters to, cited, i. 102

  Augustine, St., Bp. of Hippo, Platonism of, i. 55;
    personal affinity of, with Plotinus, i. 55-7;
    barbarization of, by Gregory the Great, i. 98, 102;
    compared with Gregory the Great, i. 98-9;
    with Anselm, i. 279;
    with Guigo, i. 385, 390;
    overwhelming influence of, in Middle Ages, ii. 403;
    on numbers, i. 72 _and_ _n. 2_, 105;
    attitude toward physical science, i. 300;
    on love of God, i. 342, 344;
    allegorizing of Scripture by, ii. 44-5;
    modification by, of classical Latin, ii. 152;
    _Confessions_, i. =63=; ii. 531;
    _De Trinitate_, i. =64=, =68=, 74, 96;
    _Civitas Dei_, i. 64-65, 69 _n. 2_, =81-82=;
    _De moribus Ecclesiae_, i. 65, 67-8;
    _De doctrina Christiana_, i. 66-7;
    classification scheme based on the _Doctrina_, ii. 322;
    _De spiritu et littera_, i. 69;
    _De cura pro mortuis_, i. 86;
    _De genesi ad litteram_, ii. 324;
    Alcuin’s compends of works of, i. 220;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 5, 53, 71, 75, 82, 87, 89, 104, 186, 225, 340,
        354, 366, 370; ii. 107, 269, 297, 312

  Augustus, Emp., i. 26, 29

  Aurillac monastery, i. 281

  Ausonius, i. 126 _n. 2_; ii. 107

  Austrasia:
    Church organization in, i. 199
    Feudal disintegration of, i. 240
    Irish monasteries founded in, i. 174
    Rise of, under Pippin, i. 209

  Authority _v._ reason, _see_ Reason

  Auxerre, i. 506-7

  Averroes, ii. 390

  Averroism, ii. 400-1

  Averroists, ii. =284 n.=, 296 _n. 1_

  Avicenna, ii. 390

  Avitus, Bp. of Vienne, i. 126 _n. 2_

  Azo, ii. 262-3


  Bacon, Roger, career of, ii. 486-7
    tragedy of career, ii. 486;
    relations with Franciscan Order, ii. 299, 486, =488=, 490-1;
    encouragement to, from Clement IV., ii. 489-90 _and_ _n. 1_;
    estimate of, ii. 484-6;
    estimate of work of, ii. 402;
    style of, ii. 179-80;
    attitude toward the classics, ii. 120;
    predilection for physical science, ii. 289, 486-7;
    Albertus Magnus compared with, ii. 422;
    on four causes of ignorance, ii. 494-5;
    on seven errors in theological study, ii. 495-8;
    on experimental science, ii. 502-8;
    on logic, ii. 505;
    on faith, ii. 507;
    editions of works of, ii. 484 _n._;
    Greek Grammar by, ii. =128= _and_ _n. 5_, 484 _n._, 487, 498;
    _Multiplicatio specierum_, ii. 484 _n._, 500;
    _Opus tertium_, ii. =488=, 490 _and_ _nn._, 491, 492, 498, 499;
    _Opus majus_, ii. 490-1, 492, =494-5=, 498, =499-500=, =506-8=;
    _Optics_, ii. 500;
    _Opus minus_, ii. 490-1, =495-8=;
    _Vatican fragment_, ii. 490 _and_ _n. 2_, =505 n. 1=;
    _Compendium studii philosophiae_, ii. 491, 493-4, 507-8;
    _Compendium theologiae_, ii. 491;
    otherwise mentioned, ii. 284 _n._, 335 _n._, =389=, 531-2

  Bartolomaeus, _De proprietatibus rerum_ of, ii. 316 _n. 2_

  Bartolus, ii. 264

  Baudri, Abbot of Bourgueil, ii. 192 _n. 1_

  Bavaria:
    Irish monasteries founded in, i. 174
    Merovingian rule in, i. 121
    Otto’s relations with, i. 241
    Reorganization of Church in, 198-9

  Bavarians, i. 145 _n. 2_, 209, 210

  Beauty, love of, i. 340

  Bec monastery, i. 262 _n._, 270-2

  Bede, estimate of, i. 185-6;
    allegorizing of Scripture by, ii. 47 _n. 1_;
    _Church History of the English People_, i. 172, =186=, 234 _n. 2_;
    _De arte metrica_, i. 187, =298=;
    _Liber de temporibus_, 300;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 184, 212

  Beghards of Liége, i. 365

  Belgae, i. 126

  Belgica, i. 29, 32

  Benedict, Prior, i. 258

  Benedict, St., of Nursia, i. =85 and n. 2=, 94, 100 _n. 4_;
    _Regula_ of, _see under_ Monasticism

  Benedictus, _Chronicon_ of, ii. 160-1

  Benedictus Levita, Deacon, ii. 270

  Benoit de St. More, _Roman de Troie_ by, ii. 225, =227-9=

  Beowulf, i. 141, =143-4= _and_ _n. 1_

  Berengar, King, i. 256

  Berengar of Tours, i. 297, 299, =302-3=; ii. 137

  Bernard, Bro., of Quintavalle, i. 502

  Bernard, disciple of St. Francis, i. 425-6

  Bernard of Chartres, ii. 130-2, 370

  Bernard, St., Abbot of Clairvaux, at Citeaux, i. 360, 393;
    inspires Templars’ _regula_, i. 531;
    denounces and crushes Abaelard, i. 229, 401; ii. =344-5=, =355=;
    denounces Arnold of Brescia, i. 401; ii. 171;
    relations with Gilbert de la Porrée, ii. 372;
    Lives of, i. 392 _n._, 393 _n. 1_;
    appearance and characteristics of, i. 392-3;
    estimate of, i. 394; ii. 367-8;
    love and tenderness of, i. 344, 345, =394 seqq.=; ii. 365;
    severity of, i. 400-1;
    his love of Clairvaux, i. 401-2;
    of his brother, i. 402-4;
    Latin style of, ii. 169-71;
    on church corruption, i. 474;
    on faith, ii. 298;
    unconcerned with physics, ii. 356;
    St. Francis compared with, i. 415-16;
    extracts from letters of, i. 395 _seqq._; ii. 170-1;
    _Sermons on Canticles_--cited, 337 _n._;
    quoted, i. =409-13=; ii. =169=, 368-9;
    _De consideratione_, ii. 368;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 17, 20, 279, 302, 472, 501; ii. 34, 168

  Bernard Morlanensis, _De contemptu mundi_ by, ii. 199 _n. 3_

  Bernard Silvestris, _Commentum ..._ of, ii. 116-17 _and_ _n. 2_;
    _De mundi universitate_, ii. 119, =371 and n.=

  Bernardone, Peter, i. 419, 423-4

  Bernward, Bp. of Hildesheim, i. 312 _and_ _n. 1_

  Bible, _see_ Scriptures

  Biscop, Benedict, i. 184

  Bishops:
    Armed forces, with, i. 473
    Francis of Assisi’s attitude toward, i. 430
    Gallo-Roman and Frankish, position of, i. 191-2, 194 _and_ _nn._, 198,
        =201 n.=
    Investiture of, lay, i. 244-5 _and_ _n. 4_; ii. 140
    Jurisdiction and privileges of, ii. 266
    Papacy’s ascendancy over, i. 304
    Reluctance to be consecrated, i. 472
    Social class of, i. 473
    Vestments of, symbolism of, ii. 77 _n. 2_

  _Blancandrin_, i. 565

  Bobbio monastery, i. 178, =282-3=

  Boëthius, death of, i. =89=, 93;
    estimate of, i. 89, 92, =102=;
    Albertus Magnus compared with, ii. 420;
    works of, i. 90-3;
    Gerbert’s familiarity with works of, i. 289;
    works of, studied at Chartres, i. 298-9;
      their importance, i. 298;
    _De arithmetica_, i. 72, =90=;
    _De geometria_, i. 90;
    commentary on Porphyry’s _Isagoge_, i. =92=; ii. 312;
    translation of the _Organon_, i. 71, =91-2=;
    “loss” of advanced works, ii. 248 _n._, 334;
    _De consolatione philosophiae_, i. =89=, 188, =189-90=, 299;
      mediaeval study of the work, i. 89; ii. 135-6

  Bologna:
    Clubs and guilds in, ii. 382
    Fight of, against Parma, i. 497
    Law school at, ii. =121=, 251, =259-62=, 378
    Medical school at, ii. 121, 383 _n._
    University, Law, inception and character of, ii. 121, =381-3=;
      affiliated universities, ii. 383 _n._

  Bonaventura, St. (John of Fidanza), career of, ii. 403;
    at Paris, ii. 399, 403;
    estimate of, ii. 301;
    style of, ii. 181-2;
    contrasted with Albertus, ii. 405;
    compared with Aquinas, ii. 405, 437;
    with Dante, ii. 547;
    on faith, ii. 298;
    on Minorites and Preachers, ii. 396;
    attitude toward Plato and Aristotle, ii. 404-5;
    toward Scriptures, ii. 405 _seqq._;
    _De reductione artium ad theologiam_, ii. 406-8;
    _Breviloquium_, ii. 408-13;
    _Itinerarium mentis in Deum_, ii. 413-18;
    otherwise mentioned, ii. 283, 288

  Boniface, _see_ Winifried-Boniface

  Boniface VIII., Pope, _Sextus_ of, ii. 272;
    _Unam sanctam_ bull of, ii. 509

  _Books of Sentences_, method of, ii. 307
    (_See also under_ Lombard)

  Botany, ii. 427-8

  Bretons, i. 113

  _Breviarium_, i. 117, 239, =243-4=

  Britain:
    Anglo-Saxon conquest of, i. 141
    Antique culture in relation to, before Middle Ages, i. 10-11
    Celts in, i. 127 _n._
    Christianity of, i. 171-2
    Romanization of, i. 32

  Brude (Bridius), King of Picts, i. 173

  Brunhilde, i. 176, 178

  Bruno, Abp. of Cologne, i. 309-10, 383-4;
    Ruotger’s Life of, i. 310; ii. 162 _and_ _n. 1_

  Burgundians:
    Christianizing of, i. 193
    Church’s attitude toward, i. 120
    Roman law code promulgated by (_Papianus_), ii. 239, =242=
    Roman subjects of, i. 121
    otherwise mentioned, i. 9-10, 113, 145

  Burgundy, i. =175=, 243 _n. 1_

  Byzantine architecture, 212 _n._

  Byzantine Empire, _see_ Eastern Empire


  Cædmon, i. 183, 343

  Caesar, C. Julius, cited, i. =27-9=, 138, 296

  Caesar of Heisterbach, Life of Engelbert by, i. 482-6 _and_ _n._;
    _Dialogi miraculorum_, cited, i. 488 _n._, 491.

  Canon law:
    Authority of, ii. 274
    Basis of, ii. 267-9
    Bulk of, ii. 269
    Conciliar decrees, collections of, ii. =269=
    Decretals:
      Collections of, ii. 269, =271-2=, =275= =n.=
      False, ii. 270, 273
    Gratian’s _Decretum_, ii. 268-9, =270-1=, 306
    _Jus naturale_ in, ii. 268-9
    _Lex romana canonice compta_, ii. 252
    Scope of, ii. 267
    Sources of, ii. 269
    Supremacy of, ii. 277

  Canossa, i. 244

  Cantafables, i. 157 _n. 1_

  Canticles, i. 350;
    Origen’s interpretation of, 333;
    St. Bernard’s Sermons on, i. 337 _n._, =409-13=; ii. =169=, 368-9

  Capella, Martianus, _De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii_ of, i. =71 and
        n. 3=; ii. 553

  _Caritas_, ii. 476-8;
    in relation to faith, ii. 479-81;
    to wisdom, ii. 481

  Carloman, King of Austrasia, i. =199-200 and n.=, 209

  Carloman (son of Pippin), i. 209-10

  Carnuti, i. 296

  Carolingian period:
    _Breviarium_ epitomes current during, ii. 244, =249=
    Continuity of, with Merovingian, i. 210-12
    Criticism of records non-existent in, i. 234
    Definiteness of statement a characteristic of, i. 225, =227=
    Educational revival in, 218-19, 222, =236=; ii. 122, =158=;
      palace school, i. =214=, 218, 229, 235
    First stage of mediaeval learning represented by, ii. 330, 332
    History as compiled in, i. 234-5
    King’s law in, ii. 247
    Latin poetry of, ii. 188, 194, 197
    Latin prose of, ii. 158
    Originality in, circumstances evoking, i. 232-3
    Restatement of antique and patristic matter in, i. =237=, 342-3

  Carthaginians, i. 25

  Carthusian Order, origin of, i. 383-4

  Cassian’s _Institutes_ and _Conlocations_, i. 335

  Cassiodorus, life and works of, i. 93-7;
    _Chronicon_, i. 94;
    _Variae epistolae_, i. 94;
    _De anima_, 94-5;
    _Institutiones divinarum et saecularium litterarum_, i. =95-6=; ii.
        357 _n. 2_;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 6, 88-9, 115; ii. 312

  Cathari, i. 49; ii. 283 _n._

  Catullus, i. 25

  Cavallini, i. 347

  Celsus cited, ii. 235, 237

  Celtic language, date of disuse of, i. 31 _and_ _n._

  Celts:
    Gaul, in, i. =125 and n.=, =126-7=, 129 _n. 1_
    Goidelic and Brythonic, i. 127 _n._
    Ireland, in, _see_ Irish
    Italy invaded by (3rd cent. B.C.), i. 24
    Latinized, i. 124
    Teutons compared with, i. 125

  Champagne, i. 240, =573=

  Chandos, Sir John, i. 554-5

  _Chanson de Roland_, i. 12 _n._, 528 _and_ _n. 2_, =559-62=

  _Chansons de geste_, i. =558 seqq.=; ii. 222

  Charlemagne, age of, _see_ Carolingian period;
    estimate of, i. 213;
    relations of, with the Church, i. =201=, 239; ii. 273;
    relations with Angilbert, i. 234-5;
    educational revival by, i. =213-14=; ii. 110, 122, =158=, 332;
    book of Germanic poems compiled by order of, ii. 220;
    Capitularies of, ii. 110, =248=;
    open letters of, i. 213 _n._;
    Einhard’s Life of, ii. 158-9;
    poetic fame of, i. 210;
    false Capitularies ascribed to, ii. 270;
    empire of, non-enduring, i. 238;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 9, 115, 153, 562; ii. 8

  Charles Martel, i. 197, =198=, =209=; ii. 273

  Charles II. (the Bald), King of France, i. 228, 235

  Charles III. (the Simple), King of France, i. 239-40

  Charles IV., King of France, i. 551

  Chartres Cathedral, sculpture of, i. =20=, 297; ii. =82-5=

  Chartres Schools:
    Classics the study of, i. 298; ii. 119
    Fulbert’s work at, i. 296-7, 299
    Grammar as studied at, ii. 129-30
    Medicine studied at, ii. 372
    Orleans the rival of, ii. 119 _n. 2_
    Trivium and quadrivium at, i. =298-9=; ii. 163
    mentioned, i. 287, 293

  Chartreuse, La Grande, founding of, i. 384 (_See also_ Carthusian)

  Chaucer, ii. 95

  Childeric, King, i. 119, 122

  Chivalry:
    Literature of:
      Arthurian romances, _see that heading_
      Aube (alba) poetry, i. =571=; ii. 30
      _Chansons de geste_, i. 558 _seqq._
      Nature of, i. 20
      _Pastorelle_, i. 571
      Pietistic ideal recognized in, ii. 288, 533
      Poems of various nations cited, i. 570 =n.=
      Religious phraseology in love poems, i. 350 _n. 2_
      _Romans d’aventure_, i. =564-5=, 571 _n. 2_
      Three branches of, i. 558
    Nature of, i. 522, =570 n.=
    Order of, evolution of, i. 524 _seqq._
      (_See also_ Knighthood)

  Chrétien de Troies, romances by, i. 566-=7=;
    _Tristan_, i. 567;
    _Perceval_, i. 567, =588-9=;
    _Erec_ (Geraint), i. 567, 586; ii. 29 _n._;
    _Lancelot_ or _Le Conte de la charrette_, i. 567, 569-70, =582-5=;
    _Cligés_, i. 567, =586 n. 2=;
    _Ivain_, i. =571 n. 2=, 586 _n. 3_; ii. 29 _n._;
    translation of Ovid’s _Ars amatoria_, i. 574

  Christianity:
    Appropriation of, by mediaeval peoples, stages in, i. 17-18
    Aquinas’ _Summa_ as concerning, ii. 324
    Art, in, _see_ Art
    Atonement doctrine, Anselm’s views on, i. 279
    Basis of, ii. 268
    Britain, in, i. 171-2
    Buddhism contrasted with, i. 390
    Catholic Church, _see_ Church
    Completeness of scheme of, ii. 394-5
    Dualistic element in, i. 59
    Eleventh century, position in, i. 16
    Emotional elements in:
      Fear, i. 103, 339, 342, 383
      Hate, i. 332, 339
      Love, i. 331, =345=
      Synthetic treatment of, i. 333
    Emotionalizing of, angels as regarded in, i. 348 _n. 4_
    Eternal punishment doctrine of, i. =65=, =339=, 486
    Faith of, _see_ Faith
    Feudalism in relation to, i. 524, 527-=9 and n. 2=, =530=
    Fifth century, position in, i. 15
    Gallo-Roman, i. 191-2
    German language affected by, i. 202
    Greek Fathers’ contribution to, i. 5
    Greek philosophic admixture in, i. 33-4
    Hell-fear in, i. 103, =339=, 342, =383=
    Hymns, _see that heading_
    Ideal _v._ actual, i. 354-5
    Incarnation doctrine of, ii. 369
    Irish missionaries of, _see under_ Irish
    Latin as modified for expression of, ii. 152, =154=, 156, 164, 171
    Marriage as regarded by, ii. 8, 529
    Martyrs for, _see_ Martyrs
    Mediaeval development in relation to, i. 11, 170
    Mediation doctrine of, i. 54, 59-60
    Militant character of, in early centuries, i. =69-70=, 75
    Miracles, attitude toward, i. 50-1
    Monasticism, _see that heading_
    Neo-Platonism compared with, i. 51
    Pagan ethics inconsistent with, i. 66
    Pessimism of, toward mortal life, i. 64
    Saints, _see that heading_
    Salvation:
      Master motive, as, i. 59, =61=, 79, 89
      Scholasticism’s main interest, as, ii. =296-7=, 300, 311
      Standard of discrimination, as, ii. =530=, =533=, 559
    Scriptures, _see that heading_
    Teutonic acceptance of, _see under_ Teutons
    Trinity doctrine of:
      Abaelard’s works on, ii. 10, =298-9=, 352-3, 355
      Aquinas on, ii. 449-50, 456
      Bonaventura on, ii. 416-17
      Dante’s vision, ii. 551
      Peter Lombard’s Book on, ii. 323
      Roscellin on, ii. 340
    Vernacular presentation of, ii. 221
    Visions, _see that heading_

  Chronicles, mediaeval, ii. 175

  Chrysostom, i. 53

  Church, Roman Catholic:
    Authority of, Duns’ views on, ii. 516
    Bishops, _see that heading_
    British Church’s divergencies from, 171-2
    Canon Law, _see that heading_
    Charlemagne’s relations with, i. =201=, 239; ii. 273
    Classical study as regarded by, i. 260; ii. =110 seqq.=, 396-7
    Clergy, _see that heading_
    Confession doctrine of, i. 489
    Constantine’s relations with, ii. 266
    Creation of, i. 11, 68, =86-7=
    Decretals, etc., _see under_ Canon Law
    Denunciations of, i. 474-5; ii. 34-5
    Diocesan organization of, among Germans, i. 196
    Doctrinal literature of, i. 68-70
    Duns’ attitude towards, ii. 513
    East and West, solidarity of development of, i. 55
    Empire’s relations with, _see under_ Papacy
    Eternal punishment doctrine of, i. =65=, =339=, 486; ii. 550
    Eucharistic controversy, _see that heading_
    Fathers of the, _see_ Greek thought, patristic; Latin Fathers; _and
        chiefly_ Patristic thought
    Feudalism as affected by, i. 524, 527-=9 and n. 2=, =530=
    Feudalism as affecting, i. 244, 473
    Frankish, _see under_ Franks
    Gallo-Roman, i. 191-2, 194
    Hildegard’s visions regarding, i. 457
    Intolerance of, _see subheading_ Persecutions
    Investiture controversy, _see under_ Bishops
    Irish Church’s relations with, i. 172-4 _and_ =n. 1=
    Isidore’s treatise on liturgical practices of, i. 106
    Knights’ vow of obedience to, i. 530
    Mass, the:
      Alleluia chant and Sequence-hymn, ii. 196, =201 seqq.=
      Symbolism of, ii. 77-8
    Nicene Creed, i. 69
    Papacy, Popes, _see those headings_
    Paschal controversy, _see_ Eucharistic
    Penance doctrine of, i. =101=, 195
    Persecutions by, i. 339;
      of Albigenses, i. 366-7, 461, 481, 572; ii. 168;
      of Jews, i. 118, 332;
      of Montanists, i. 332
    Popes, _see that heading_
    Predestination, attitude toward, i. 228
    Property of, enactments regarding, ii. 266
    Rationalists in, i. 305
    Reforms in (11th cent.), i. 304
    Roman law for, ii. 265 _and_ _n. 2_
    Sacraments:
      Definition of the word, ii. 72 _and_ _n. 1_
      Hugo of St. Victor on, ii. 64, 66, 68-9, 71, =72-4=, 90 _n. 2_
      Origin of, Bonaventura on, ii. 411-13
      Pagan analogy with, i. 53, 59-60
    Secularization of dignities of, i. 472
    Simony in, i. =244=, 475
    Spain, in, _see under_ Spain
    Standards set by, ii. 528-9
    Suspects to, estimate of, ii. 532
    Synod of Aix (817), i. 359
    Theodosian Code as concerning, ii. 266-7 _and_ _n. 1_
    Transubstantiation doctrine of, i. 226-227
    “Truce of God” promulgated by, i. 529 _n. 2_

  Churches:
    Building of, symbolism in, ii. 78-82
    Dedication of, sequence designed for, ii. 210-11

  Cicero, i. 26 _n. 3_, 39, 78, =219=

  Cino, ii. 264

  Cistercian Order:
    _Charta charitatis_, i. 361-3
    Clairvaux founded, i. 393
    Cluniac controversies with, i. 360

  Citeaux monastery:
    Bernard at, i. 360, 393
    Foundation and rise of, i. 360-3

  Cities and towns:
    Growth of, in 12th cent., i. 305; ii. =379-80=
    Italian, _see under_ Italy

  Cities (_civitates_) of Roman provinces, i. 29-30

  Clairvaux (Clara Vallis):
    Founding of, i. 360, 393
    Position of, i. 362
    St. Bernard’s love of, i. 401-2

  Classics, _see_ Latin classics

  Claudius, Bp. of Turin, i. 215, 231-2 _and_ _n. 1_

  Claudius, Emp., i. 30

  Clement II., Pope, i. 243

  Clement IV., Pope, ii. 489-91

  Clement V., Pope, _Decretales Clementinae_ of, ii. 272

  Clement of Alexandria, ii. 64

  Clergy:
    Accusations against, false, penalty for, ii. 266
    Legal status of, ii. 382
    Regular, _see_ Monasticism
    Secular:
      Concubinage of, i. 244
      Francis of Assisi’s attitude toward, i. 430, 440
      Marriage of, i. 472 _n. 1_
      Reforms of, i. 359
      Standard of conduct for, i. 471; ii. 529
    Term, scope of, i. 356

  Clerval, Abbé, cited, i. 300 _n. 1_

  Clopinel, Jean, _see_ De Meun

  Clovis (Chlodoweg), i. 114, 117, =119-21=, 122, 138, =193-4=; ii. 245

  Cluny monastery:
    Abaelard at, ii. 25, =26=, 345
    Characteristics of, i. 359-60
    Monastic reforms accomplished by, i. =293=, 304

  Cologne, i. 29, 31

  Columba, St., of Iona, i. =133-7=, 173

  Columbanus, St., of Luxeuil and Bobbio, i. 6, 133, =174-9=, 196;
    Life and works of, 174 _n. 2_

  Combat, trial by, i. 232

  Commentaries, mediaeval:
    Boëthius’, i. 93
    Excerpts as characteristic of, i. 104
    General addiction to, ii. 390, 553 _n. 4_
    Originals supplanted by, ii. 390
    Raban’s, i. 222-3

  Compends:
    Fourteenth century use of, ii. 523
    Mediaeval preference for, i. 94
    Medical, in Italy, i. 251
    Saints’ lives, of (_Legenda aurea_), ii. 184

  Conrad, Duke of Franconia, i. 241

  Conrad II., Emp., i. 243

  Constantine, Emp., ii. 266;
    “Donation” of, ii. =35=, 265, 270

  Constantinus Africanus, i. =251= _and_ _n._; ii. 372

  Cordova, i. 25

  Cornelius Nepos, i. 25

  _Cornificiani_, ii. =132=, 373

  Cosmogony:
    Aquinas’ theory of, ii. 456
    Mediaeval allegorizing of, ii. 65 _seqq._
    Patristic attitude toward, i. 72-4

  Cosmology, Alan’s, in _Anticlaudianus_, ii. 377

  Cremona, i. 24

  Cross, Christian:
    Magic safeguard, as, i. 294-5
    Mediaeval feeling for, ii. 197

  Crusades:
    Constantinople, capture of, as affecting Western learning, ii. 391
    First:
      _Chansons_ concerning, i. 537-8
      Character of, i. 535-7
      Guibert’s account of, ii. 175
    Hymn concerning, quoted, i. 349 _and_ _n._
    Italians little concerned in, ii. 189
    Joinville’s account of, quoted, i. 546-9
    Language of, i. 531
    Results of, i. 305
    Second, i. 394
    Spirit of, i. 535-7

  Cuchulain, i. 129 _and_ _nn. 2, 3_

  Cynewulf’s _Christ_, i. 183

  Cyprian quoted, i. 337 _n._

  Cyril of Alexandria, i. 227

  Cyril of Jerusalem, i. 53


  Da Romano, Alberic, i. 515-16

  Da Romano, Eccelino, i. =505-6=, 516

  Dacia, Visigoths in, i. 112

  Damiani, St. Peter, Card. Bp. of Ostia, career of, i. 262-4;
    attitude of, to the classics, i. 260; ii. 112, 165;
    on the hermit life, i. 369-70;
    on tears, i. 371 _and_ _n._;
    extract illustrating Latin style of, ii. 165 _and_ _n. 3_;
    works of, i. 263 _n. 1_;
    writings quoted, i. 263-7;
    _Liber Gomorrhianus_, i. 265, 474;
    _Vita Romualdi_, i. 372 _seqq._;
    biography of Dominicus Loricatus, i. 381-2;
    _De parentelae gradibus_, ii. 252;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 17, 19, 20, 260, 343, 345, 391; ii. 34

  Damianus, i. 262, 265

  Danes, i. 142, =153=

  Dante, estimate of, ii. 534-5;
    scholarship of, ii. 541 _n. 2_;
    possessed by spirit of allegory, ii. 552-5;
    compared with Aquinas and influenced by him, ii. 541 _n. 2_, 547, 549,
        551, 555;
    compared with Bonaventura, ii. 547;
    attitude to Beatrice, ii. 555-8;
    on love, ii. 555-6;
    on monarchy, ii. 278;
    _De monarchia_, ii. 535;
    _De vulgari eloquentia_, ii. 219, =536=;
    _Vita nuova_, ii. =556=, 559;
    _Convito_, ii. =537-8=, 553;
    _Divina Commedia_, i. 12 _n._; ii. 86, 99 _n. 1_, =103=, 219;
      commentaries on this work, ii. 553-4;
      estimate of it, ii. 538, 540-1, 544, 553-4;
    _Inferno_ cited, ii. 42, 541-3, =545-7=;
    _Purgatorio_ cited, ii. 535, 542-3, =548-9=, 554, 558;
    _Paradiso_ cited, i. 395; ii. 542-3, =549-51=, 558

  Dares the Phrygian, ii. 116 _and_ _n. 3_, 224-=5 and nn.=, 226-7

  _De bello et excidio urbis Comensis_, ii. 189-90

  De Boron, Robert, i. 567

  _De casu Diaboli_, i. 279

  _De consolatione philosophiae_, _see under_ Boëthius

  De Lorris, Guillaume, _Roman de la rose_ by, i. =586-7=; ii. 103 _and_
        _n. 1_, 104

  De Meun, Jean (Clopinel), _Roman de la rose_ by, ii. 103 _and_ _n. 1_,
        104, =223=

  Denis, St., i. 230

  Dermot (Diarmaid, Diarmuid), High-King of Ireland, i. =132=-3, 135, =136=

  Desiderius, Bp. of Vienne, i. 99

  Desiderius, Pope, i. =253=, 263

  Devil, the:
    Mediaeval beliefs and stories as to, i. 487 _seqq._
    Romuald’s conflicts with, i. =374=, 379-80

  Dialectic (_See also_ Logic):
    Abaelard’s skill in, ii. 118, 119, =345-6=, 353;
      his subjection of dogma to, ii. 304;
      his _Dialectica_, ii. 346 _and_ _nn._, 349-50
    Chartres study of, i. 298
    Duns Scotus’ mastery of, ii. 510, 514
    Grammar penetrated by, ii. 127 _seqq._
    Hugo of St. Victor on, ii. 67
    Raban’s view of, i. 222
    Thirteenth century study of, ii. 118-20

  Diarmaid (Diarmuid), _see_ Dermot

  _Dictamen_, ii. =121=, =129=, 381

  Dictys the Cretan, ii. 224, 225 _and_ _n. 1_

  _Dies irae_, i. 348

  Dionysius the Areopagite, ii. 10, 102, =344=

  _Divina Commedia_, _see under_ Dante

  Divination, ii. 374

  Dominic, St., i. =366-7=, 497; ii. 396

  Dominican Order:
    Aristotelianism of, ii. 404
    Founding of, i. =366=; ii. 396
    Growth of, i. 498; ii. =398=
    Object of, ii. 396
    Oxford University, at, ii. 387
    Papacy, relations with, ii. =398=, 509
    Paris University, position in, ii. =386=, 399

  Dominicus Loricatus, i. 263, =381-3=

  Donatus, i. 71, 297;
    _Ars minor_ and _Barbarismus_ of, ii. 123-=4=

  Donizo of Canossa, ii. 189 _and_ _n. 2_

  Druids:
    Gallic, i. =28=, 296
    Irish, i. 133

  Du Guesclin, Bertrand, Constable of France, i. 554-6, 557 _n._

  Duns Scotus, education of, ii. 511;
    career of, ii. 513;
    estimate of, ii. 513;
    intricacy of style of, ii. 510, 514, =516 n. 2=;
    on logic, ii. 504 _n. 2_;
    Occam’s attitude toward, ii. 518 _seqq._;
    editions of works of, ii. 511 _n. 1_;
    estimate of his work, ii. 509-10, 514

  Dunstan, St., Abp. of Canterbury, i. 323-4

  Durandus, Guilelmus, _Rationale divinorum officiorum_ of, ii. 76 _seqq._


  Eadmer, i. 269, 273, 277

  Eastern Empire:
    Frankish relations with, i. 123
    Huns’ relations with, i. 112-13
    Norse mercenaries of, i. 153
    Ostrogoths’ relations with, i. 114
    Roman restoration by, i. 115

  Ebroin, i. 209

  Eckbert, Abbot of Schönau, i. 444

  Ecstasy:
    Bernard’s views on, ii. 368
    Examples of, i. 444, 446

  Eddas, ii. 220

  Education:
    Carolingian period, in, i. =213-14=, 218-19, 222, =236=; ii. 110, 122,
        =158=, 332
    Chartres method of, ii. 130-1
    Grammar a chief study in, ii. 122 _seqq._, 331-2
    Italy, in, _see under_ Italy
    Latin culture the means and method of, i. 12; ii. =109=
    Schools, clerical and monastic, i. =250 n. 2=, 293
    Schools, lay, i. 249-51
    Seven Liberal Arts, _see that heading_
    Shortening of academic course, advocates of, ii. =132=, 373

  Edward II., King of England, i. 551

  Edward III., King of England, i. 550-1

  Edward the Black Prince, i. 554-6

  Einhard the Frank, i. 234 _n. 1_;
    _Life of Charlemagne_ by, i. 215; ii. 158-9

  Ekkehart family, i. 309

  Ekkehart of St. Gall, _Waltarius_ (_Waltharilied_) by, ii. 188

  El-Farabi, ii. 390

  Eleventh century:
    Characteristics of, i. 301;
      in France, i. 301, 304, 328;
      in Germany, i. 307-9;
      in England, i. 324;
      in Italy, i. 327
    Christianity in, position of, i. 16

  Elias, Minister-General of the Minorites, i. 499

  Elizabeth, St., of Hungary, i. 391, =465 n. 1=

  Elizabeth, St., of Schönau, visions of, i. 444-6

  Emotional development, secular, i. 349-50 _and_ _n. 2_

  Empire, the, _see_ Holy Roman Empire

  Encyclopaedias, mediaeval, ii. 316 _n. 2_;
    Vincent’s _Speculum majus_, ii. 315-22

  _Eneas_, ii. 225, =226=

  Engelbert, Abp. of Cologne, i. 481-6;
    estimate of, i. 482

  England (_See also_ Britain):
    Danish Viking invasion of, i. 153
    Eleventh century conditions in, i. 324
    Law in, principles of, i. 141-2;
      Roman law almost non-existent in Middle Ages, ii. 248
    Norman conquest of, linguistic result of, i. 324

  English language, character of, i. 324

  Epicureanism, i. =41=, 70; ii. 296, 312

  Eriugena, John Scotus, estimate of, i. 215, =228-9=, =231=; ii. 330;
    on reason _v._ authority, ii. 298, 302;
    works of, studied at Chartres, i. 299;
    _De divisione naturae_, i. =230-1=; ii. 302;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 16; ii. 282 _n._, 312

  Essenes, i. 334

  Ethelbert, King of Kent, i. 180-1

  _Etymologies_ of Isidore, i. 33, 105 _and_ _n. 1_, =107-9=; ii. 318;
    law codes glossed from, ii. 250

  Eucharistic (Paschal) controversy:
    Berengar’s contribution to, i. 302-3
    Paschasius’ contribution to, i. 225-7

  Eucherius, Bp. of Lyons, ii. 48 _n. 1_

  Euclid, i. 40

  Eudemus of Rhodes, i. 38

  Eunapius, i. 47, 52

  Euric, King of the Visigoths, i. 117 _and_ _n. 1_

  Eusebius, i. 81 _n. 2_

  Evil or sin:
    Abaelard’s views concerning, ii. 350
    Eriugena’s views concerning, i. 228
    Original sin, realism in relation to, ii. 340 _n._
    Peter Lombard and Aquinas contrasted as to, ii. 308-10

  Experimental science, Bacon on, ii. 502-8


  _Fabliaux_, i. =521 n. 2=; ii. 222

  Facts, unlimited actuality of, i. 79-80

  Faith:
    Abaelard’s definition of, ii. 354
    Bacon’s views on, ii. 507
    Bernard of Clairvaux’s attitude toward, ii. 355
    _Caritas_ in relation to, ii. 479-81
    Cognition through, Aquinas’ views on, ii. 446
    Occam’s views on, ii. 519
    Proof of matters of, Aquinas on, ii. 450
    Will as functioning in, ii. 479

  _False Decretals_, i. 104 _n._, =118 n. 1=

  Fathers of the Church (_See also_ Patristic thought):
    Greek, _see_ Greek thought, patristic
    Latin, _see_ Latin Fathers

  Faustus, ii. 44

  Felix, St., i. 86

  Feudalism (_See also_ Knighthood):
    Anarchy of, modification of, i. 304
    Austrasian disintegration by, i. 240
    _Chansons_ regarding, i. 559 _seqq._, 569
    Christianity in relation to, i. 524, 527-=9 and n. 2=, =530=
    Church affected by, i. 244, 473
    Italy not greatly under, i. 241
    Marriage as affected by, i. 571, 586
    Obligations of, i. 533-4
    Origin of, 522-3
    Principle and practice of, at variance, i. 522

  Fibonacci, Leonardo, ii. 501

  Finnian, i. 136

  _Flamenca_, i. 565

  _Flore et Blanchefleur_, i. 565

  Florus, Deacon, of Lyons, i. 229 _and_ _n._

  Fonte Avellana hermitage, i. =262-3=, 381

  Forms, new, creation of, _see_ Mediaeval thought--Restatement

  Fortunatus, Hymns by, ii. 196-7

  Fourteenth century:
    Academic decadence in, ii. 523
    Papal position in, ii. 509-10

  France (_For particular districts, towns, etc., see their names_):
    Antique, the, in relation to, before Middle Ages, i. 9-10
    Arthurian romances developed in, i. 566
    Cathedrals of, ii. 539, 554-5
    Church in, secularization of, i. 472-3
    Eleventh century conditions in, i. 301, 304, 328
    History of, in 11th century, i. 300
    Hundred Years’ War, i. 550 _seqq._
    Jacquerie in (1358), i. 556
    Language modifications in, ii. 155
    Literary celebrities in (12th cent.), ii. 168
    Monarchy of, advance of, i. 305
    North and South, characteristics of, i. 328
    Rise of, in 14th century, ii. 509
    Town-dwellers of, i. =495=, 508

  Francis, St., of Assisi, birth of, i. 415;
    parentage, i. 419;
    youth, i. 420-3;
    breach with his father, i. 423-4;
    monastic career, i. 427 _seqq._;
    French songs sung by, i. =419 and n. 2=, 427, 432;
    _Lives_ of, i. 415 _n._;
    style of Thomas of Celano’s _Life_, ii. 182-3;
    _Speculum perfectionis_, i. 415 _n._, 416 _n._, =438 n. 3=; ii. =183=;
    literal acceptance of Scripture by, i. 365, 406-=7=;
    on Scripture interpretation, i. 427 _n. 1_; ii. 183;
    universality of outlook, i. 417;
    mediaevalism, i. 417;
    Christ-influence, i. 417, =418=, =432=-3;
    inspiration, i. =419 n. 1=, 441;
    gaiety of spirit, i. 421, 427-8, 431-2;
    poetic temperament, i. 422, 435;
    love of God, man, and nature, i. 366, 428, =432-3=, =435=-7;
    simplicity, i. 429;
    obedience and humility, i. 365 _n._, =429-30=;
    humanism, i. 495;
    St. Bernard compared with, i. 415-16;
    St. Dominic contrasted with, ii. 396;
    _Fioretti_, ii. 184;
    Canticle of Brother Sun, i. 433-4, =439-40=;
    last testament of, i. 440-1;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 20, 21, 279, 344, 345, 355-6; ii. 302

  Franciscan Order:
    Attractiveness of, i. 498
    Augustinianism of, ii. 404
    Bacon’s relations with, ii. 486, =488=, 490-=1=
    Characteristics of, i. 366
    Founding of, i. =427=; ii. 396
    Grosseteste’s relations, ii. =487=, 511
    Object of, ii. 396
    Oxford University, at, ii. 387, 400
    Papacy, relations with, ii. =398=, 509
    Paris University, in, ii. 386, 399
    Rise of, ii. 398

  Franconia, i. 241

  Franks (_See also_ Germans):
    Christianity as accepted by, i. 193
    Church among:
      Bishops, position of, i. =194 and nn.=, 198, 201 _n._
      Charlemagne’s relations with, i. =201=, 239; ii. 273
      Clovis, under, i. 194
      Lands held by, i. 194, 199-200;
        immunities of, i. 201 _and_ _n._
      Organization of, i. 199
      Reform of, by Boniface, i. =196=; ii. 273
      Roman character of, i. 201
    Division of the kingdom a custom of, i. 238-9
    Gallo-Roman relations with, i. 123
    Language of, i. 145 _n. 2_
    Law of, ii. 245-6
    _Missi dominici_, i. 211
    Ripuarian, i. 119, 121; ii. 246
    Romanizing of, partial, i. 9-10
    Salian, i. 113, =119=; Code, ii. 245-6
    Saracens defeated by, i. 209-10 _n. 1_
    Trojan origin of, belief as to, ii. 225 _and_ _n. 1_

  Frederic, Count of Isenburg, i. 483-6

  Frederick I. (Barbarossa), Emp., i. 448

  Frederick II., Emp., under Innocent’s guardianship, ii. 32-3;
    crowned, ii. 33;
    estimate of, i. 497;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 250 _n. 4_, 417, 481, 505, 510, 517

  Free, meaning of term, i. 526 _n. 3_

  Free Companies, i. 556

  Free will:
    Angelic, ii. 473
    Duns Scotus on, ii. 515
    Human, ii. 475
    Richard of Middleton on, ii. 512

  Freidank, i. 475; ii. =35=

  Frescoes, i. 346-7

  Friendship, chivalric, i. 561-2, 569-70, 583

  Frisians, i. 169, 174;
    missionary work among, i. =197=, 200, 209

  Froissart, Sir John, _Chronicles_ of, i. 549 _seqq._;
    estimate of the work, i. 557

  Froumund of Tegernsee, i. =312-13=; ii. 110

  Fulbert, Bp. of Chartres, i. 287, =296-7=, 299

  Fulbert, Canon, ii. 4-6, 9

  Fulco, Bp. of Toulouse, i. 461

  Fulda monastery, i. =198=, 221 _n. 2_

  Fulk of Anjou, ii. 138


  Gaius, _Institutes_ of, ii. 241, 243

  Galahad, i. 569-70, 583, 584 _and_ _n. 2_

  Galen of Pergamos, i. =40=, 251

  Gall, St., i. 6, 178, =196=

  Gallo-Romans:
    Feudal system among, i. 523
    Frankish rule over, i. 120, 123
    Literature of, i. 126 _n. 2_

  Gandersheim cloister, i. 311

  Gaul (_For particular districts, towns, etc., see their names_):
    Celtic inhabitants of, i. =125 and n.=, =126=-7, 129 _n. 1_
    Druidism in, i. =28=, 296
    Ethnology of, i. 126
    Heathenism in, late survival of, i. 191 _n. 1_
    Latinization of, i. 9-10, =29-32=
    Visigothic kingdom in south of, i. 112, 116, 117, 121

  Gauls, characteristics and customs of, i. 27-8

  Geoffrey of Beaulieu, Life of St. Louis by, i. 539-42

  Gepidae, i. 113, 115

  Geraldus, St., i. 281

  Gerard, brother of St. Bernard, i. 402-4

  Gerbert of Aurillac, _see_ Sylvester II.

  German language:
    Christianity as affecting, i. 202
    High and Low, separation of, i. 145 _n. 2_
    Middle High German literature, ii. 168, 221
    Old High German poetry, ii. =194=, 220

  Germans (Saxons) (_See also_ Franks):
    Characteristics of, i. 138-40, 147, 151-2
    Language of, _see_ German language
    Latin as studied by, i. =307-9=; ii. =123=, 155
    Literature of, ii. 220-1 (_See also subheading_ Poetry)
    Marriage as regarded by, ii. 30
    Nationalism of, in 13th cent., ii. 28
    Poetry of:
      _Hildebrandslied_, i. 145-7
      _Kudrun_ (_Gudrun_), i. 148, =149=-52; ii. 220
      _Nibelungenlied_, i. 145-6, =148-9=, 152, 193, 203 _n. 2_; ii. 220
      _Waltarius_, i. 147 _and_ _n._, 148
      otherwise mentioned, i. 113, 115, 119, 174, 209, 210

  Germany:
    Antique, the, in relation to, before Middle Ages, i. 10-11
    Art in (11th cent.), i. 312
    Church in, secularization of, i. 472
    Italy contrasted with, as to culture, i. 249-50
    Merovingian supremacy in, i. 121
    Papacy as regarded by, ii. 28, 33, =34-5=
    Sequence-composition in, ii. 215

  Gertrude of Hackeborn, Abbess, i. 466

  Gilbert de la Porrée, Bp. of Poictiers, ii. 132, =372=

  Gilduin, Abbot of St. Victor, ii. =62= _and_ _n. 2_

  Giraldus Cambrensis, ii. 135 _and_ _n._

  Girard, Bro., of Modena, i. 498

  Glaber, Radulphus, _Histories_ of, i. 488 _n._

  Glass-painting, ii. 82-6

  Gnosticism, i. 51 _n. 1_

  Gnostics, Eriugena compared with, i. 231 _and_ _n. 1_

  Godehard, Bp. of Hildesheim, i. 312

  Godfrey of Bouillon, i. 535-8

  Godfrey of Viterbo, ii. 190 _and_ _n. 4_

  Gondebaud, King of the Burgundians, ii. 242

  Good and the true compared, ii. 441, 512

  Goths (_See also_ Visigoths):
    Christianity of, i. 192, 194
    Roman Empire invaded by, i. 111 _seqq._

  Gottfried von Strassburg, i. 567; ii. 223;
    _Tristan_ of, i. 577-82

  Gottschalk, i. 215, 221 _n. 2_, 224-5, 227-=8=;
    verses by, ii. 197-9

  Government:
    Church _v._ State controversy, ii. 276-7
      (_See also_ Papacy--Empire)
    Ecclesiastical, _see_ Canon Law
    Monarchical, ii. 277-8
    Natural law in relation to, ii. 278-=9=
    Representative assemblies, ii. 278

  Grace, Aquinas’ definition of, ii. 478-9

  Grail, the, i. 589, =596-7=, =607=, 608, 613

  Grammar:
    Chartres studies in, i. =298=; ii. 129-30
    Current usage followed by, ii. 163 _and_ _n. 1_
    Hugo of St. Victor on, ii. 67
    Importance and predominance of, in Middle Ages, i. 109 _and_ _n._,
        =292=; ii. =331-2=
    Italian study of, ii. =129=, 381
    Language continuity preserved by, ii. =122-3=, 151, 155
    Law studies in relation to, ii. 121
    Logic in relation to, ii. 127 _seqq._, 333-4;
      in Abaelard’s work, ii. 346
    Raban’s view of, i. 222
    Scholastic classification of, ii. 313
    Syntax, connotation of term, ii. 125
    Works on--Donatus, Priscian, Alexander, ii. 123 =seqq.=

  Grammarian, meaning of term, i. 250

  Gratianus, _Decretum_ of, ii. 268-9, =270-1=, 306, 380-2;
    _dicta_, ii. 271

  Greek classics, _see_ Greek thought, pagan

  Greek language:
    Oxford studies in, ii. 120, 391, =487=
    Translations from, direct, in 13th cent., ii. 391

  Greek legends, mediaeval allegorizing of, ii. 52, 56-9

  Greek novels, ii. 224 _and_ _n._

  Greek thought, pagan:
    Bacon’s attitude toward, ii. 492-3
    Breadth of interest of, ii. 109
    Christian standpoint contrasted with, i. 390; ii. 295-6
    Church Fathers permeated by, i. 33-4
    Completeness of schemes presented by, ii. 394
    Limitless, the, abhorrent to, i. 353-4
    Love as regarded by, i. 575
    Metaphysics in, ii. 335-7
    Scholasticism contrasted with, ii. 296
    _Summa moralium philosophorum_, ii. 373
    Symbolism in, ii. 42, =56=
    Transmutation of, through Latin medium, i. 4

  Greek thought, patristic (_See also_ Patristic thought):
    Comparison of, with Latin, i. 68
    Pagan philosophic thought contrasted with, ii. 295-6
    Symbolism in, ii. 43
    Transmutation of, through Latin medium, i. 5, 34 _and_ _n._

  Gregorianus, ii. =240=, 243

  Gregory, Bp. of Tours, i. 121;
    _Historia Francorum_ by, i. 234 _n. 2_; ii. 155

  Gregory I. (the Great), Pope, family and education of, i. 97;
    Augustine of Hippo compared with, i. 98-9;
    Augustinianism barbarized by, i. 98, 102;
    sends mission to England, i. 6, 33, =180-1 and n. 1=;
    estimate of, i. =56=, 89, =102-3=, =342=;
    estimate of his writings, i. 354;
    on miracles, i. 100, 182;
    on secular studies, ii. 288;
    letter to Theoctista cited, i. 102 _n. 1_;
    editions of works of, i. 97 _n._;
    works of, translated by King Alfred, i. 187;
    _Dialogues on the Lives and Miracles of the Italian Saints_, i. 85 and
        _n. 2_, 100;
    _Moralia_, i. =97=, 100; ii. 57;
    Odo’s epitome of this work, ii. 161;
    _Commentary on Kings_, i. 100 _n. 1_;
    _Pastoral Rule_, i. =102=, 187-8;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 16 _and_ _n. 4_, 65, 87, 104, 116

  Gregory II., Pope, i. 197-8; ii. 273

  Gregory III., Pope, i. 198; ii. 273

  Gregory VII., Pope (Hildebrand), claims of, i. =244-5=; ii. 274;
    relations with Damiani, i. 263;
    exile of, i. 244, 253;
    estimate of, i. 261;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 17, 174 _n. 1_, 243, 304

  Gregory IX., Pope, codification by, of Canon law, ii. 272;
    efforts of, to improve education of the Church, ii. 398;
    mentioned, i. 476; ii. 33

  Gregory of Nyssa, i. 53, 80, 87, 340

  Grosseteste, Robert, Chancellor of Oxford University and Bp. of Lincoln,
        Greek studies promoted by, ii. =120=, =391=, 487;
    estimate of, ii. 511-12;
    Augustinianism of, ii. 403-4;
    attitude toward the classics, ii. 120, 389;
    relations with Franciscan Order, ii. =487=, 511;
    Bacon’s relations with, ii. 487

  _Gudrun_ (_Kudrun_), i. 148, =149=-52; ii. 220

  Guigo, Prior, estimate of, i. 390-1;
    relations with St. Bernard, i. 405;
    _Consuetudines Carthusiae_ by, i. 384;
    _Meditationes_ of, i. 385-90

  Guinevere, i. 569, =584= _and_ _n. 1_, 585

  Guiot de Provens, “Bible” of, i. 475-6 _and_ _n. 1_

  Guiscard, Robert, ii. 189 _n. 2_

  Gumpoldus, Bp. of Mantua, _Life of Wenceslaus_ by, ii. 162 _n. 1_

  Gundissalinus, Archdeacon of Segovia, ii. 312 _and_ _n. 4_, 313

  Gunther, _Ligurinus_ of, ii. 192 _and_ _n. 4_

  Gunzo of Novara, i. 257-8


  Harding, Stephen, Abbot of Citeaux, i. =360=, =361=, 393

  Harold Fairhair, i. 153

  _Hartmann von Aue_, i. =348-9 and n.=, 567; ii. 29 _n._

  Harun al Raschid, Caliph, i. 210

  Heinrich von Veldeke, i. 567; ii. 29 _n._

  _Heliand_, i. =203 and nn.=, 308

  Helias, Count of Maine, ii. 138

  Hell:
    Dante’s descriptions of, ii. 546-7
    Fear of, i. 103, =339=, 342, =383=
    Visions of, i. 454-5, 456 _n._

  Heloïse, Abaelard’s love for, ii. 4-5, 344;
    his love-songs to, ii. =13=, 207;
    love of, for Abaelard, i. 585; ii. =3=, =5=, 8, 9, =15-16=;
    birth of Astralabius, ii. 6;
    opposes marriage with Abaelard, ii. 6-9;
    marriage, ii. 9;
    at Argenteuil, ii. 9, 10;
    takes the veil, ii. 10;
    at the Paraclete, ii. 10 _seqq._;
    letters of, to Abaelard quoted, ii. 11-15, 17-20, 23, 24;
    Abaelard’s letters to, quoted, ii. 16-17, 21-3, 24-5;
    Peter the Venerable’s letter, ii. 25-7;
    letter of, to Peter the Venerable, ii. 27;
    death of, ii. 27;
    intellectual capacity of, ii. 3

  Henry the Fowler, i. 241

  Henry II., Emp., i. 243;
    dirge on death of, ii. 216

  Henry IV., Emp., i. 244; ii. =167=

  Henry VI., Emp., ii. 32, 190

  Henry I., King of England, ii. 139, 146, 176-8

  Henry II., King of England, ii. 133, 135, 372

  Henry of Brabant, ii. 391

  Henry of Ghent, ii. 512

  Henry of Huntington cited, i. 525

  Henry of Septimella, ii. 190 _and_ _n. 3_

  Heretics (_For particular sects, see their names_):
    Abaelard’s views on coercion of, ii. 350, 354
    Insignificance of, in relation to mediaeval thought, ii. 283 _and_ _n._
    Theodosian enactments against, ii. 266
    Twelfth century, in, i. 305

  Herluin, Abbot of Bec, i. 271

  Hermann, Landgraf of Thüringen, i. 589; ii. 29

  Hermann Contractus, i. 314-15 _and_ _n. 1_

  Hermits:
    Irish, i. 133
    Motives of, i. 335, 363
    Temper of, i. 368 _seqq._

  Hermogenianus, ii. 240, 243

  Herodotus, i. 77

  Hesse, Boniface’s work in, i. 197-8

  Hilarion, St., i. 86

  Hilary, Bp. of Poictiers, i. =63=, 68, 70

  Hildebert of Lavardin, Bp. of Le Mans and Abp. of Tours, career of, ii.
        137-40;
    love of the classics, ii. =141-2=, =146=, 531;
    letters of, quoted, ii. 140, 143, 144-5, 146-7;
    Latin text of letter, ii. 172;
    Latin elegy by, ii. 191;
    otherwise mentioned, ii. 61, 134, 373 _n. 2_

  Hildebrand, _see_ Gregory VII.

  _Hildebrandslied_, ii. 220

  Hildegard, St., Abbess of Bingen, dedication of, i. 447;
    visions of, i. 267, =449-59=;
    affinity of, with Dante, ii. 539;
    correspondence of, i. 448;
    works of, i. 446 _n._;
    _Book of the Rewards of Life_, i. 452-6;
    _Scivias_, i. 457-9;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 20, 345, 443; ii. 302, 365

  Hildesheim, bishops of (11th cent.), i. 312

  Hilduin, Abbot, i. 230

  Hincmar, i. 215, 230, =233 n. 1=

  Hipparchus, i. 40

  Hippocrates, i. 40

  History:
    Carolingian treatment of, i. 234-5
    Classical attitude toward, i. 77-8
    Eleventh century treatment of, i. 300
    _Historia tripartita_ of Cassiodorus, i. 96-7
    Patristic attitude toward, i. 80-4
    _Seven Books of Histories adversum paganos_ by Orosius, i. 82-3

  Holy Roman Empire:
    Burgundy added to, i. 243 _n. 1_
    German character of, ii. 32
    Papacy, relations with, _see under_ Papacy
    Refounding of, by Otto, i. 243
    Rise of, under Charlemagne, i. 212

  Honorius II., Pope, i. 531

  Honorius III., Pope, i. 366, 482, 497; ii. 33, 385 _n._, =398=

  Honorius of Autun--on classical study, ii. 110, =112-13=;
    _Speculum ecclesiae_ of, ii. 50 _seqq._;
    _Gemma animae_, ii. 77 _n. 1_

  Hosius, Bp. of Cordova, i. 118 _n. 1_

  Hospitallers, i. 531

  Hrotsvitha, i. 311 _and_ _n. 2_, ii. 215 _n. 2_

  Huesca (Osca), i. 25

  Hugh, Abbot of Cluny, ii. 137

  Hugh Capet, i. 239-=40= _and_ _n._

  Hugh the Great, Count of Paris, i. 241

  Hugh of Payns, i. 531

  Hugo, Archdeacon of Halberstadt, ii. 62

  Hugo, Bro., of Montpellier, i. 510-14

  Hugo, King, i. 242

  Hugo of St. Victor, estimate of, ii. =63=, =111=, 118, 301, =356=;
    allegorizing by, ii. 367;
    on classical study, ii. 110-11;
    on logic, ii. 333;
    pupils of, ii. 87;
    works of, ii. 61 _n. 2_;
    _Didascalicon_, ii. 48 _n. 2_, =63=, =111=, 312, =357 and nn. 2-5=;
    _De sacramentis Christianae fidei_, ii. 48 _n. 2_, =64 seqq.=, 365,
        =395=, 540;
    _Expositio in regulam beati Augustini_, ii. 62 _n. 2_;
    _De arca Noë morali_, ii. 75 _n._, =365-7=;
    _De arca Noë mystica_, ii. 367;
    _De vanitate mundi_, ii. 75 _n._, =111-12=;
    _Summa sententiarum_, ii. 356;
    _Sermons on Ecclesiastes_, ii. 358-9;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 17, 20, 457; ii. 404

  Humanists, ii. 126

  _Humiliati_ of Lombardy, i. 365

  Hungarians, i. 241-=2=

  Huns, i. 112, 119, 193

  _Huon de Bordeaux_, i. 564

  Hy (Iona) Island, i. 136, =173=

  Hymns, Christian:
    Abaelard, by, ii. 25, =207-9=
    Estimate of, i. 21
    Evolution of, i. 347-9 _and_ _n._; ii. 196, =200 seqq.=
    Hildegard’s visions regarding, i. 459
    Hugo of St. Victor, by, ii. 86 _seqq._
    Sequences, development of, ii. 196, =201-6=;
      Adam of St. Victor’s, ii. 209-15


  Iamblicus, i. 42, =47=, 51, 56-7; ii. 295

  Iceland, Norse settlement in, i. 153

  Icelanders, characteristics and customs of, i. 154

  Icelandic Sagas, _see_ Sagas

  Ideal _v._ actual, i. 353 _seqq._

  Innocent II., Pope, i. =394=; ii. 10

  Innocent III., Pope, i. 417, 481, 497; ii. =32=, =274=, 384, =398=

  Innocent IV., Pope, i. 506

  _Intellectus agens_, ii. 464, =507 n. 2=

  Iona (Hy) Island, i. 136, =173=

  Ireland:
    Celts in, _see_ Irish
    Church of, missionary zeal of, i. 133, 136, 172 _seqq._
    Danish settlements in, i. 153
    Monasteries in, i. =153 n. 1=, 173
    Norse invasion of, i. 134
    Scholarship in, i. =180 n.=, 184-5

  Irenaeus, Bp. of Lyons, i. 225

  Irish:
    Art of, i. 128 _n. 1_
    Characteristics of, i. =128=, 130, 133, 179
    History of, i. 127 _and_ _n._
    Influence of, on mediaeval feeling, i. 179 _and_ _n._
    Literature of, i. =128 and n. 2=, =129 seqq.=, 134;
      poetry, ii. 194
    Missionary labours of, i. 133, 136, 172 _seqq._;
      defect of, i. 179, 196
    Norse harryings of, i. 133-4;
      intercourse with, i. 152 _n. 3_
    Oxford University, at, ii. 387

  Irnerius, ii. 121, =260=, 380-1;
    _Summa codicis_ of, ii. 255-9

  Irrationality (_See also_ Miracles):
    Neo-Platonic teaching as to, i. 42-4, 48, 52
    Patristic doctrine as to, i. 51-3

  Isabella, Queen, wife of Edward II., i. 550-1

  Isidore, Abp. of Seville, estimate of, i. 89, 103, 118 _n. 1_;
    Bede compared with, i. 185-7;
    _False Decretals_ attributed to, i. 118 _n. 1_; ii. =270=, 273;
    works of, i. 104-9;
    _Etymologiae_, _see_ Etymologies of Isidore;
    _Origines_, i. 236, 300;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 6, 88; ii. 46, 312

  Italian people in relation to the antique, i. 7-8

  Italy (_For particular districts, towns, etc., see their names_):
    Celtic inroads into (3rd cent. B.C.), i. 24
    Church in, secularization of, i. 472
    Cities in:
      Continuity of, through dark ages, i. 248, =494-5=; ii. 381
      Fighting amongst, i. 497-8
      Importance of, i. 241, 326, =494-5=
    Continuity of culture and character in, i. =326=, 495; ii. =120-2=
    Dante as influenced by, ii. 534-5
    Education in--lay, persistence of, i. 249-51;
      clerical and monastic, i. 250 _n. 2_
    Eleventh-century conditions in, i. 327
    Feudalism not widely fixed in, i. 241
    Feuds in, i. 515-16
    Grammar as studied in, i. 250 _and_ _n. 2_; ii. 129
    Irish monasteries founded in, i. 174
    Literature of, mediaeval, lack of originality in, ii. 189;
      eleventh-century verse, i. 251 _seqq._; ii. 165 _n. 1_, 186
    Lombard kingdom of (6th cent.), i. 115-16
    Medicine studied in, i. 250 _and_ _n. 4_, =251=; ii. 121
    Unification of, under Rome, i. 23


  Jacobus à Voragine, _Legenda aurea_ by, ii. 184

  Jacques de Vitry, Bp. and Card. of Tusculum, i. 461 and n.;
    Exempla of, i. 488 _n._, 490

  Jerome, St., estimate of, i. 344, 354;
    letter of, on asceticism, i. 335 _and_ =n. 1=;
    love of the classics, ii. 107, 112, 531;
    modification by, of classical Latin, ii. 152, 171;
    two styles of, ii. 171 _and_ _n. 4_;
    Life of Paulus by, i. 84, 86;
    Life of Hilarion, i. 86;
    _Contra Vigilantium_, i. 86;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 56, 75, 76, 104

  Jerome of Ascoli (Pope Nicholas IV.), ii. 491

  Jews:
    Agobard’s tracts against, i. 232-=3=
    Gregory the Great’s attitude toward, i. 102
    Louis IX.’s attitude toward, i. 545
    Persecution of, i. 118, 332

  Joachim, Abbot of Flora, _Evangelicum eternum_ of, 502 _n._, =510=,
        =512-13=, 517

  John, Bro., of Vicenza, i. 503-4

  John X., Pope, i. 242

  John XI., Pope, i. 242

  John XII., Pope, i. 243; ii. =160-1=

  John XIII., Pope, i. 282

  John XXII., Pope, _Decretales extravaganes_ of, ii. 272

  John of Damascus, ii. 439 _n. 1_

  John of Fidanza, _see_ Bonaventura

  John of Parma, Minister-General of Franciscans, i. 507, 508, =510-11=

  John of Salisbury, estimate of, ii. 118, 373-4;
    Chartres studies described by, ii. 130-2;
    attitude of, to the classics, ii. 114, 164, =173=, 531;
    Latin style of, ii. 173-4;
    _Polycraticus_, ii. 114-15, 174-5;
    _Metalogicus_, ii. 173-4;
    _Entheticus_, ii. 192;
    _De septem septenis_, ii. 375

  John the Deacon, _Chronicon Venetum_ by, i. 325-6

  Joinville, Sire de, _Histories_ of St. Louis by, i. 539, =542-9=

  Jordanes, compend of Gothic history by, i. 94

  Jordanes of Osnabrück cited, ii. 276 _n. 2_

  Joseph of Exeter, ii. 225 _n. 2_

  Jotsaldus, Life of Odilo by, i. 295-6

  Judaism, emotional elements in, i. 331-2

  Julianus, _Epitome_ of, ii. 242, =249=, 254

  Jumièges cloister, ii. 201

  Jurisprudence (_See also_ Roman law):
    Irnerius an exponent of, ii. 256, 259
    Mediaeval renaissance of, ii. 265
    Roman law, in, beginnings of, ii. 232

  Justinian, _Codex_, _Institutes_, _Novellae_ of, _see under_ Roman law;
    _Digest of_, _see_ Roman law--Pandects

  Jutes, i. 140

  Jutta, i. 447


  Keating quoted, i. 136

  Kilwardby, Richard, Abp. of Canterbury, _De ortu et divisione
        philosophiae_ of, ii. 313

  Kilwardby, Robert, ii. 128

  Knighthood, order of:
    Admission to, persons eligible for, i. 527
    Code of, i. 524
    Hospitallers, i. 531
    Investiture ceremony, i. 525-8
    Love the service of, i. 568, =573=
    Templars, i. 531-5
    Virtues and ideals of, i. 529-31, 567-8

  Knowledge:
    Cogitation, meditation, contemplation (Hugo’s scheme), ii. 358 _seqq._
    Forms and modes of, Aquinas on--divine, ii. 451-5;
      angelic, ii. 459-62;
      human, ii. 463 _seqq._
    Grades of, Aquinas on, ii. 461, 467
    Primacy of, over will maintained by Aquinas, ii. 440-1


  La Ferté Monastery, i. 362

  Lambert of Hersfeld, _Annals_ of, i. 313; ii. 167

  Lambertus Audomarensis, _Liber Floridus_ of, ii. 316 _n. 2_

  _Lancelot of the Lake_, i. 567, 569-70, =582-5=;
    Old French prose version of, i. 583 _seqq._

  Land tenure, feudal, i. 523-4

  Lanfranc, Primate of England, i. 174 _n. 1_, =261 n.=, 273

  _Langue d’oc_, ii. 222, 248

  _Langue d’oil_, ii. 222, 248

  Languedoc, chivalric society of (11th and 12th centuries), i. 572

  Latin classics:
    Abaelard’s reference to, ii. 353
    Alexandrian antecedents of the verse, ii. 152 _n. 1_
    Artificial character of the prose, ii. 151 _n._
    Breadth of interest of, ii. 109
    Characteristics of, ii. 153
    Chartres a home of, i. 298; ii. 119
    Common elements in, ii. 149, 157
    Dante’s attitude toward, ii. 541, 544;
      his quotations from, ii. 543 _n. 1_
    Ecclesiastical attitude toward, i. 260; ii. 110 _seqq._, 396-7
    Familiarity with, of Damiani, i. 260; ii. 165;
      Gerbert, i. 287-8; ii. 110;
      John of Salisbury, ii. 114, 164, =173=, 531;
      Bernard of Chartres, ii. 132-3;
      Peter of Blois, ii. 133-4;
      Hildebert, ii. =141-2=, =146=, 531
    Knowledge-storehouses for the Middle Ages, as, ii. 108
    Mastery of, complete, as affecting mediaeval writings, ii. 164
    Reverential attitude of mediaevals toward, ii. 107-9
    Scripture study as aided by study of, ii. 110, 112, 120
    Suggestions of new ideas from, for Northern peoples, ii. 136
    Themes of, in vernacular poetry, ii. 223 _seqq._
    Twelfth-century study of, ii. 117-18

  Latin Fathers (_See also their names and_ Patristic thought):
    Comparison of, with Greek, i. 68
    Style and diction of, ii. 150, 152 _seqq._
    Symbolism in, ii. 43-6
    Transmutation by, of Greek thought, i. 5, 34 _and_ _n._

  Latin language:
    Britain, position in, i. 10, 32
    Children’s letters in, ii. 123 _n._
    Christianity as modifying, ii. 152, =154=, 156, 164, 171
    Continuity of, preserved by universal study of grammar, ii. =122-3=,
        151, 155
    “Cornificiani” in regard to, ii. =132=, 373
    Educational medium as, ii. 109
    Genius of, susceptible of change, ii. 149
    German acquisition of, i. 10, 32, =307-8=, =313=; ii. =123=, 155
    Grammar of, _see_ Grammar
    Mediaeval modifications in, ii. 125, 164
    Patristic modifications of, ii. 150, 152 _seqq._;
      Jerome’s, ii. 152, 171
    Spelling of, mediaeval, i. 219
    Sphere of, ii. 219-20
    Supremacy of (during Roman conquest period), i. 4, =23-4 and n. 1=,
        25, =30-1=
    Translations from, scanty nature of, ii. 331 _n. 2_
    Translations into, difficulties of, ii. 498
    Universality of, as language of scholars, ii. 219, 331 _n. 2_
    Vernacular, developments of, ii. 151
    Vitality of, in relation to vernacular tongues, ii. 219

  Latin prose, mediaeval:
    Antecedents of, ii. 151 _seqq._
    Best period of, ii. 167-8
    Bulk of, ii. 157 _n._
    Carolingian, ii. 158-60
    Characteristics of, ii. 156
    Estimation of, difficulties of, ii. 157 _and_ _n._
    Influences upon, summary of, ii. 156
    Prolixity and inconsequence of, ii. 154
    Range of, ii. 154
    Simplicity of word-order in, ii. 163 _n. 1_
    Stages of development of, ii. 157 _seqq._
    Style in, beginnings of, ii. 164
    Stylelessness of, in Carolingian period, ii. 158-60
    Thirteenth-century styles, ii. 179
    Value of, as expressing the mediaeval mind, ii. 156, 164

  Latin verse, mediaeval:
    Accentual and rhyming compositions, ii. 194;
      two kinds of, ii. 196
    Antecedents of, ii. 187 _n. 1_
    Carmina Burana (Goliardic poetry), ii. 203, =217-19 and n.=
    Development of, stages in, ii. 187
    Leonine hexameters, ii. 199 _and_ _n. 3_
    Metrical composition, ii. 187 _seqq._;
      elegiac verse, ii. 190-2 _and_ _n. 1_;
      hexameters, ii. 192;
      Sapphics, ii. 192-3 _and_ _n. 1_
    Modi, ii. 215-16
    Rhyme, development of, ii. 195, =206=

  Law:
    Barbarian, Latin codes of, ii. 244 _seqq._
    Barbaric conception of, ii. 245, 248-9
    _Breviarium_, _see under_ Roman law
    Canon, _see_ Canon law
    English, principles of, i. 141-2
    Grammar in relation to, ii. 121
    Lombard codes, i. =115=; ii. 242, =246=, 248, 253;
      _Concordia_, ii. 259
    Natural:
      Gratian on, ii. 268-9
      _Jus gentium_ in relation to, ii. =234 and n.=, 268
      Occam on, ii. 519
      Sacraments of, ii. 74 _and_ _n. 1_
      Supremacy of, ii. 269, 279
      Roman, _see_ Roman law
      Salic, ii. 245-6
      Territorial basis of, i. 123; ii. 247
      Tribal basis of, i. 123; ii. =245-7=
      Visigothic codification of, in Spain, i. 118

  Leander, Bp. of Seville, i. 118 _n. 1_

  Légonais, Chrétien, ii. 230 _and_ _n. 2_

  Leo, Brother, _Speculum perfectionis_ by, ii. 183-4

  Leo I. (the Great), Pope, i. 113, 116

  Leo IX., Pope, i. 243

  Leon, Sir Guy de, i. 552-3

  Leon, Sir Hervé de, i. 552-3

  Leowigild, i. 117 _n. 2_, 118 _n. 1_

  Lerins monastery, i. 195

  Lewis, Lord, of Spain, i. 552-3

  Liberal arts, _see_ Seven Liberal Arts

  Liutgard of Tongern, i. 463-5

  Liutprand, Bp. of Cremona i. =256-7=; ii. 161 _n. 1_

  Liutprand, King of Lombards, i. 115-16

  Logic (_See also_ Dialectic):
    Albertus Magnus on, ii. =313-15=, 504, 506
    Aristotelian, mediaeval apprehension of, ii. 329 (_See also_
        Aristotle--_Organon_)
    Bacon’s attitude toward, ii. 505
    Gerbert’s preoccupation with, i. 282, 289, =292=
    Grammar in relation to, ii. 127 _seqq._, 333-4;
      in Abaelard’s work, ii. 346
    Importance of, in Middle Ages, i. 236; ii. 297
    Nature of, ii. 333;
      schoolmen’s views on, ii. 313-15, 333
    Occam’s views on, ii. 522
    Patristic attitude toward, i. 71
    Raban’s view of, i. 222
    Scholastic classification of, ii. 313 _seqq._
    Scholastic decay in relation to, ii. 523
    Second stage of mediaeval development represented by, ii. 332-4
    Specialisation of, in 12th cent., ii. 119
    Theology in relation to, ii. =340 n.=, 346
    Twofold interpretation of, ii. 333
    Universals, problem of, ii. 339 _seqq._;
      Abaelard’s treatment of, ii. 342, =348=

  Lombard, Peter, estimate of, ii. 370;
      Gratian compared with, ii. 270;
      Bacon’s attitude toward, ii. 497;
      _Books of Sentences_ by, i. 17, 18; ii. 134, 370;
        method of the work, ii. 306;
        Aquinas’ _Summa_ contrasted with it, ii. 307-10;
        its classification scheme, ii. 322-4;
        Bonaventura’s commentary on it, ii. 408

  Lombards:
    Italian kingdom of (6th cent.), i. 115-16
    Italian influence on, i. 7, 249
    Law codes of, _see under_ Law

  Louis of Bavaria, Emp., ii. 518

  Louis I. (the Pious), King of France, i. 233, 239, =359=;
    false capitularies ascribed to, ii. 270

  Louis VI. (the Fat), King of France, i. 304-5, 394, 400; ii. 62;
    Hildebert’s letter on encroachments of, ii. 140, 172

  Louis IX. (the Saint), King of France, Geoffrey’s _Vita_ of, i. 539-42;
    Joinville’s _Histoire of_, i. 542-9;
    Testament of, i. 540 _n. 1_;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 476, 507-=9=, 515

  Love, Aquinas on distinguishing definitions of, ii. 475-6

  Love, chivalric:
    Antique conception of love contrasted with, i. 575
    _Chansons de geste_ as concerned with, i. 564
    Code of, by Andrew the Chaplain, i. 575-6
    Dante’s exposition of, ii. 555-6
    Estimate of, mediaeval, i. 568, 570
    Literature of, _see_ Chivalry--Literature
    Marriage in relation to, i. 571 _and_ _n. 2_
    _Minnelieder_ as depicting, ii. 30
    Nature of, i. 572-5, 582-7
    Stories exemplifying--_Tristan_, i. 577 _seqq._;
      _Lancelot_, 582 _seqq._

  Love, spiritual:
    Aquinas’ discussion of, ii. 472-3, 476
    Bernard of Clairvaux as exemplifying, i. 394 _seqq._

  Lupus, Servatus, Abbot of Ferrières, i. 215;
    ii. 113

  Luxeuil, i. 175-7

  Lyons:
    Diet of the “Three Gauls” at, i. 30
    Law studies at, ii. 250


  Macrobius, _Saturnalia_ of, ii. 116 _and_ _n. 4_

  Magic, i. =46-8=; ii. 500 _and_ _n. 1_

  Majolus, Abbot of Cluny, i. 359

  Manichaeism, i. =49=; ii. =44=, 283

  Manny, Sir Walter, i. 552-4

  Mapes (Map), Walter, i. =475=, 567; ii. 219 _n._

  Marie, Countess, de Champagne, i. 566, 573, =576=

  Marie de France, i. =566=, 567, 573;
    _Eliduc_ by, i. 571 _n. 2_

  Marinus (hermit), i. 373

  Marozia, i. 242

  Marriage:
    Christian attitude toward, ii. 8;
      ecclesiastical view, ii. 529
    Feudalism as affecting, i. 571, 586
    German view of, ii. 30

  Marsilius of Padua, ii. 277 _n. 2_

  Martin, St., of Tours, i. 334;
    Life of, i. 52 and _n._, 84, 85 _n. 2_, =86=

  Martyrs:
    Mediaeval view of, i. 483
    Patristic attitude toward, i. 86

  Mary, St., of Ognies, i. =462-3=;
    nature of visions of, i. 459

  Massilia, i. 26

  Mathematics:
    Bacon’s views on, ii. 499-500
    Gerbert’s proficiency in, i. 282, =288=

  Mathew Paris cited, ii. 487

  Matthew of Vendome, _Ars versificatoria_ by, ii. 190 _and_ _n. 5_

  Maurus, Rabanus, _see_ Rabanus

  Mayors of the palace, i. 240

  Mechthild of Magdeburg, i. 20, 345; ii. 365;
    Book of, i. 465 _and_ _n. 2_-70

  Mediaeval thought:
    Abstractions, genius for, ii. 280
    Characteristics of, i. 13
    Commentaries characteristic of, ii. 390, 553 _n. 4_
    Conflict inherent in, i. 22; ii. =293-4=
    Deference of, toward the past, i. 13; ii. 534
    Emotionalizing by, of patristic Christianity, i. 345
    Metalogics rather than metaphysics the final stage of, ii. 337
    Moulding forces of, i. 3, 5, 12; ii. =293-4=
    Orthodox character of, ii. 283 _and_ _n._
    Political theorizing, ii. 275 _seqq._
    Problems of, origins of, ii. 294-5
    Restatement and rearrangement of antique matter the work of, i. 13-15,
        =224=, 237, =292=, 342; ii. 297, 329, 341:
      Culmination of third stage in, ii. 394
      Emotional transformations of the antique, i. 18 _seqq._
      Intellectual transformations of the antique, i. 14 _seqq._
    Salvation the main interest of, i. =58-9=, 334; ii. =296-7=, 300
    Scholasticism, _see that heading_
    Superstitions accepted by, i. 487
    Symbolism the great influence in, ii. 43, 102, 365
    Three stages of, ii. 329 _seqq._
    Ultimate intellectual interests of, ii. 287 _seqq._

  Medicine:
    Relics used in, i. 299
    Smattering of, included in Arts course, ii. 250
    Study of--in Italy, i. 250 _and_ _n. 4_, =251=; ii. 383 _n._
      at Chartres, i. 299; ii. 372

  Mendicant Orders, _see_ Dominican _and_ Franciscan

  Merovingian Kingdom:
    Character of, i. 208
    Church under, i. 194
    Extent of, i. 210 _n. 3_
    German conquests of, i. 121, 138

  Merovingian period:
    Barbarism of, i. 9
    Continuity of, with Carolingian, i. 210-12
    King’s law in, ii. 247

  Merovingians, estimate of, i. 195

  Metaphor distinguished from allegory, ii. 41 _n._ (_See also_ Symbolism)

  Metaphysics:
    Final stage of mediaeval development represented by, ii. 335-7
    Logic, mediaeval, in relation to, ii. 334
    Theology dissociated from, by Duns, ii. 510, 516, =517=

  Michelangelo quoted, ii. 113

  Middle Ages (_See also_ Mediaeval thought):
    Beginning of, i. 6
    Extremes characteristic of, i. 355

  Milan, lawyers in, ii. 251 _n. 2_

  _Miles_, signification of word, i. 525-6 _and_ _n. 2_

  _Minnelieder_, ii. 28-31

  Minorites, i. 430 (_See also_ Franciscan Order)

  Miracles (_See also_ Irrationality):
    Devil, concerned with, i. 488 _seqq._
    _Nostre Dame, Miracles de_, i. 491-2
    Patristic attitude toward, i. =85-6=, =100=, 182
    Roman Empire aided by, belief as to, ii. 536
    Salimbene’s instance of, i. 516
    Universal acceptance of, i. =74=, 182
    _Vitae sanctorum_ in regard to, i. 85 _and_ _n. 2_

  Mithraism, i. 49

  Modena (Mutina), i. 24

  Modi, ii. 215-16

  Monasteries:
    Immunities granted to, i. 523 _and_ _n._
    _Regula_ of, meaning of, ii. 62

  Monasticism (_For particular Monasteries, Orders, etc., see their
        names_):
    Abuses of, i. 357-8; Rigaud’s _Register_ quoted, i. 477-481
    Benedictine rule:
      Adoption of--in England, i. 184;
        among the Franks, i. 199, 201;
        generally, i. 358
      Papal approval of, i. 335
    Cassiodorus a pioneer in literary functions of, i. 94
    General mediaeval view regarding, i. =472=; ii. 529
    Ideal _v._ actual, i. 355
    Ireland, in, i. 135 _n. 1_
    Lament over deprivations of, ii. 218-19
    Modifications of, by St. Francis, i. 366
    Motives of, i. 357
    Nature of, i. 336-7
    Nuns, _see_ Women--monastic life
    Origin of, i. 335
    Pagan literature condemned by, i. 260
    Popularity of, in 5th and 6th centuries, i. 195-6
    Poverty--of monks, i. 365;
      of Orders, i. 366, =425=, =430=
    Reforms of, i. 358 _seqq._
    Schools, monastic, in Italy, i. 250 _n. 2_
    Sex-relations as regarded by, i. 338
    Studies of, in 6th cent., i. 94, 95
    Subordinate monasteries, supervision of, i. 361
    Uncloistered, _see_ Dominican _and_ Franciscan
    _Vita activa_ accepted by, i. 363-6
    _Vita contemplativa_, _see that title_
    Women vilified by devotees of, i. =354 n.=, 521 _n. 2_, 532, =533=;
        ii. 58

  Montanists, 332

  Monte Cassino, i. 250 _n. 2_, 252-3

  Montfort, Countess of, i. 552-4

  Moorish conquest of Spain, i. 9, 118

  Morimond monastery, i. 362

  Mosaics, i. 345-7

  Music:
    Arithmetic in relation to, ii. 291
    Chartres studies in, i. 299
    Poetry and, interaction of, ii. 195-=6=, =201-2=
    Scholastic classification of, ii. 313

  Mysticism:
    Hugo’s strain of, ii. 361-3
    Nature of, i. 443 _n. 1_; ii. =363 and n. 4=
    Symbolism as expressing, _see_ Symbolism


  Narbo, i. 26

  Narbonensis, _see_ Provincia

  Narbonne, law studies at, ii. 250

  Natural history and science, _see_ Physical science

  Nemorarius, Jordanus, ii. 501

  Neo-Platonism:
    Arabian versions of Aristotle touched with, ii. 389
    Augustinian, i. =55=; ii. 403
    Christianity compared with, i. 51;
      Patristic habit of mind compared, ii. 295
    Ecstasy as regarded by, i. 331
    Metaphysics so named by, ii. 336
    Pseudo-Dionysian, i. 54 _and_ _n. 1_
    Tenets and nature of, i. 41-9;
      a mediatorial system, i. 50, 54, 57-8, 70
    Trinity of, ii. 355

  Neustria, i. 200, =209=, 239

  _Nibelungenlied_, i. 145-6, =148-9=, 152, 193, 203 _n. 2_; ii. 220

  Nicholas II., Pope, i. 243 _n. 2_

  Nicholas III., Pope, i. 504

  Nicholas IV., Pope (Jerome of Ascoli), ii. 491

  Nicholas, St., sequence for festival of, ii. 213-15

  Nicolas of Damascus, ii. 427

  Nilus, St., Abbot of Crypta-Ferrata, i. 374 _n._

  Nithard, Count, i. 234-5

  Nominalism, i. 303

  Norbert, ii. 344

  Normandy, Norse occupation of, i. 153

  Norsemen (Scandinavians, Vikings):
    Characteristics of, i. 138, =154-5=
    Continental and insular holdings of, i. 153
    Eddic poems of, i. 154-5 _and_ _n. 3_
    Irish harassed by, i. 133-4;
      later relations, i. 152 _n. 3_
    Jumièges cloister sacked by, ii. 201
    Metal-working among, i. 152 _n. 3_
    Ravages by, in 8th and 9th centuries, i. 152-3
    _Sagas_ of, i. 155 _seqq._
    Settling down of, i. 240

  Notker, i. 308-9 _and_ _n. 1_; sequences of, ii. 201-2

  Numbers, symbolic phantasies regarding, i. 72 _and_ _nn. 1, 2_; ii. 49
        _n. 3_


  Oberon, fairy king, i. 564 _and_ _n._

  Occam, William of, career of, ii. 518;
    estimate of his work, ii. 522-3;
    attitude toward Duns, ii. 518 _seqq._;
    on faith and reason, ii. 519;
    on Universals, ii. 520-1

  Odilo, Abbot of Cluny, i. =294-5=, 359;
    Jotsaldus’ biography of, quoted, i. 295-6

  Odo, Abbot of Cluny, i. 343 _and_ _n. 3_, 359;
    Epitome by, of Gregory’s _Moralia_, i. 16 _n. 4_; ii. 161 _and_
        _n. 2_;
    Latin style of _Collationes_, ii. 161-2

  Odo of Tournai, ii. 340 _n._

  Odoacer, i. =114=, 145

  Olaf, St., i. 156, =160-1=

  Olaf Tryggvason, King, i. 156, =161-2=

  Old French:
    Formation of, ii. 155
    Latin as studied by speakers of, ii. 123
    Poetry, ii. 222, =225 seqq.=

  Ontology, _see_ Metaphysics

  Ordeal, trial by, i. 232-3 _and_ _n. 1_

  Ordericus Vitalis, i. 525;
    _Historia ecclesiastica_ by, ii. 176-8

  _Organon_, _see under_ Aristotle

  Origen, estimate of, i. 51, 62-3;
    on Canticles, i. =333=; ii. 369;
    _De principiis_, i. 68;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 53, 76, 80, 87, 104, 411; ii. 64

  Orleans School:
    Classical studies at, ii. 119 _n. 2_, 127
    Law studies at, ii. 250
    Rivalry of, with Chartres, ii. 119 _n. 2_

  Orosius, i. =82= _and_ _n. 1_, 188

  Ostrogoths, i. 7, 113, =114-15=, 120

  Otfrid the Frank, i. =203-4=, 308

  Other world:
    Irish beliefs as to, i. 131 _and_ _n. 2_
    Voyages to, mediaeval narratives of, i. 444 _n. 1_

  Othloh, i. 315;
    visions of, i. 443;
    _Book concerning the Temptations of a certain Monk_, i. 316-23

  Otric, i. 289-91

  Otto I. (the Great), Emp., i. =241-3=, 256-7, 309

  Otto II., Emp., i. 243, =282-3=, =289=

  Otto III., Emp., i. =243=, 283, 284;
    _Modus Ottinc_ in honour of, ii. 215-216

  Otto IV. (of Brunswick), Emp., i. 417; ii. =32-3=

  Otwin, Bp. of Hildesheim, i. 312

  Ovid, _Ars amatoria_ of, i. 574-5;
    mediaeval allegorizing of, and of _Metamorphoses_, ii. 230

  Oxford University:
    Characteristics of, ii. 388-9
    Curriculum at, ii. 387-8
    Foundation of, ii. 380, =386-7=
    Franciscan fame at, ii. 400
    Greek studies at, ii. 120, 391, 487


  Palladius, Bp., i. 172

  Pandects, _see under_ Roman law

  Papacy (_See also_ Church _and_ Popes):
    Ascendancy of, over prelacy, i. 304
    Character of, ii. 32
    Denunciations against, i. 475; ii. 34-5, 218
    Empire’s relations with:
      Concordat of Worms, i. 245 _n. 4_
      Conflict (11th cent.), i. 244;
        (12th cent.), i. 245 _n. 4_; ii. 273;
        (13th cent.), ii. 33, =34-5=;
        (14th cent.), ii. 518;
        allegory as a weapon in, ii. 60
      Recognition of ecclesiastical authority, ii. 265-7, 272-3
      Reforms by Otto I., i. 243
    Gregory VII.’s claims for, i. 245; ii. 274
    Mendicant Orders’ relations with, ii. =398=, 509
    Nepotism of, i. =504-5=, 511
    Schisms of popes and anti-popes, i. 264
    Temporal power of, rise of, i. 116;
      claims advanced, i. 245;
      realized, ii. 274, 276-7

  Papinian cited, ii. 235

  Paraclete oratory:
    Abaelard at, ii. 10, 344
    Heloïse at, ii. 10 _seqq._

  Paradise:
    Dante’s _Paradiso_, _see under_ Dante
    Hildegard’s visions of, i. 455-6

  Paris:
    Schools:
      Growth of, ii. 380
      Notre Dame and St. Geneviève, ii. 383
      St. Victor, ii. =61-3=, 143, 383
    University:
      Aristotle prohibited at, ii. 391-2
      Authorities on, ii. 381 _n._
      Bacon at, ii. 488
      Bonaventura at, ii. 403
      Curriculum at, ii. 387-8
      Dominicans and Franciscans at, ii. 399
      Prominence of, in philosophy and theology, ii. 283, =378-9=
      Rise, constitution, and struggles of, ii. 119-20, 383-6
    Viking sieges of, i. 153

  Parma, i. 497, 505-6

  _Parsival_:
    Chrétien’s version of, i. 567, =588-9=
    Wolfram’s version of, i. 12 _n._, 571 _n. 2_, =589-613=; ii. =29=

  Paschal controversy, _see_ Eucharistic

  Paschasius, Radbertus, Abbot of Corbie i. 215, =225-7=

  Patrick, St., i. 172-3

  Patristic thought and doctrine (_See also_ Greek thought, patristic,
        _and_ Latin Fathers):
    Abaelard’s attitude toward, ii. 305
    Achievement of exponents of, i. 86-7
    Bacon’s attitude toward, ii. 492
    Completeness of schemes presented by, ii. 394
    Emotion as synthesized by, i. 340-2
    Intellectual rather than emotional, i. 343-4;
      emotionalizing of, by mediaeval thinkers, i. 345
    Latin medium of, i. 5
    Logic as regarded by, i. 71
    Mediaeval attitude toward, i. 16
    Miracle accepted by, i. 51-3, =85-6=
    Natural knowledge as treated by, i. =61 seqq.=, =72-3=, =76-7=, 99;
        ii. 393
    Pagan philosophy permeating exponents of, i. =33-4=, =58=, 61
    Philosophy as classified by, ii. 312
    Rearrangement of, undertaken in Carolingian period, i. =224=, 237
    Symbolism of, _see under_ Symbolism

  Paulinus of Aquileia, i. 215

  Paulinus, St., of Nola, i. =86=, 126 _n. 2_

  Paulus--on _jus_, ii. 237:
    _Sententiae_ of, ii. 243

  Paulus, St., i. 84, 86

  Paulus Diaconus, i. 214-15, 252

  Pavia, law school at, ii. 251, =259=

  Pedro, Don, of Castille, i. 554-5

  Pelagians, i. 225

  Pelagius, i. 172 _n._

  Peripatetic School, i. 38-9
    (_See also_ Aristotle)

  Peter, Bro., of Apulia, i. 512-14

  Peter, disciple of St. Francis, i. 426

  Peter Damiani, _see_ Damiani

  Peter of Blois, ii. 133-4

  Peter of Ebulo, ii. 190

  Peter of Maharncuria, ii. 502-4

  Peter of Pisa, i. 214

  Peter the Venerable, Abbot of Cluny, i. 360;
    letter of, to Heloïse, ii. 25-7

  Petrarch, ii. 188, =219=

  Petrus Riga, _Aurora_ of, ii. 127

  Philip VI., King of France, i. 551

  Philip Augustus, King of France, ii. 33

  Philip Hohenstauffen, Duke of Suabia, i. 481; ii. =32=, 33

  Philo, i. 37, =231=;
    allegorizing of, ii. =42=, 364

  Philosophy:
    Division of, schemes of, ii. 312 _seqq._
    End of:
      Abaelard’s and Hugo’s views on, ii. 352, 361
      John of Salisbury on, ii. 375

  Philosophy, antique:
    Divine source of, Bacon’s view as to, ii. 507 _n. 2_
    “First” (Aristotelian), ii. 335
    Position of, in Roman Empire (3rd-6th cent.), i. 34 (_See also_ Greek
        thought)

  Philosophy, Arabian, ii. =389-90=, 400-1

  Philosophy, scholastic:
    Completeness of, in Aquinas, ii. 395
    Divisions of, ii. 312 _seqq._
    Importance of, as intellectual interest, ii. 287-8
    Physical sciences included in, _see_ Physical science
    Theology as the end of (Abaelard’s and Hugo’s view), ii. 352, 361
    Theology distinguished from, ii. 284, 288;
    by Aquinas, ii. =290=, 311;
    by Bonaventura, ii. 410 _and_ _n._;
    considered as superior to, by Aquinas, ii. 289-=90=, =292=;
    dominated by (Bacon’s contention), ii. 496;
    dissociated from, by Duns and Occam, ii. 510, =517=, 519

  Physical science:
    Albertus Magnus’ attitude toward, ii. 423;
      his works on, ii. 425-9
    Bacon’s predilection for, ii. 486-7
    Classifications of, ii. 312 _seqq._
    Experimental science or method, ii. 502-8
    Mediaeval attitude toward, i. 300
    Oxford school of, ii. 389
    Patristic attitude toward, i. 63, 66-7, =72-3=, =76-7=, 99; ii. 393
    Theology as subserved by, ii. =67=, 111, =289=, =486=, =492=, =496=,
        500, 530;
      denial of the theory--by Duns, ii. 510;
        by Occam, ii. 519-20

  _Physiologus_, i. =76-7 and n.=, 300; ii. 83

  Pippin of Heristal, i. =208-9=; ii. 197

  Pippin of Neustria, i. 115, =200=, =209=, 210 and _n. 1_; ii. 273

  Pippin, son of Charlemagne, ii. 197

  Placentia (Piacenza), i. 24

  Placentinus, ii. 261-2

  Plato, supra-rationalism of, i. 42;
    allegorizing by, i. 36; ii. 364;
    doctrine of ideas, i. =35=; ii. 339-340;
    Aquinas on this doctrine, ii. 455, 465;
    Augustine of Hippo as influenced by, ii. 403;
    “salvation” suggestion in, ii. 296 _n. 2_;
    _Republic_, i. 36;
    _Timaeus_, i. =35-6=, 291; ii. 64, 69, =118=, 348, 370, 372, =377=

  Platonism:
    Alanus’ _Anticlaudianus_, in, ii. 100 _n. 2_
    Augustinian, i. 55
    Nature of, i. =35-6=, 57, 59
    Philosophy as classified by, ii. 312

  Pliny the Elder, _Historia naturalis_ by, i. 39-40, 75

  Plotinus, estimate of, i. 43, 45;
    personal affinity of Augustine with, i. 55-7;
    philosophic system of, i. =42=-6, 50, 51;
    _Enneads_ of, i. 55;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 50, 51; ii. 64

  Plutarch, i. 44

  Poetry, mediaeval:
    Carmina Burana (Goliardic poetry), ii. 203, =217-19 and n.=
    Chivalric, _see_ Chivalry--Literature
    Hymns, _see that heading_
    Italian, of 11th cent., i. =251 seqq.=; ii. 186
    Latin, _see_ Latin verse
    Modi, ii. 215-16
    Music and, interaction of, ii. 195-=6=, =201-2=
    Old High German, ii. 194
    Popular verse, _see sub-headings_ Carmina _and_ Modi; _also_ Vernacular
    Prosody, Alexander de Villa-Dei on, ii. 126
    Vernacular:
      Germanic, Norse, and Anglo-Saxon, ii. 220-1
      Romance, ii. 221-3, 225 _seqq._

  Pontigny monastery, i. 362

  Poor of Lyons (Waldenses), i. 364, =365 n.=; ii. 34

  Popes (_See also_ Papacy; _and for particular popes see their names_):
    Avignon, at, ii. 510
    Decretals of, _see under_ Canon law
    Degradation of (10th cent.), i. 242
    Election of, freed from lay control, i. 243 _n. 2_

  Popular rights, growth of, in 12th cent., i. 305

  Porphyry, i. 42, =44-7=, 50, 51, 56; ii. 295;
    _Isagoge_ (Introduction to the _Categories_ of Aristotle), i. 45, 92,
        102; ii. 312, =314 n.=, 333, =339=

  Preaching Friars, _see_ Dominican Order

  Predestination, Gottschalk’s controversy as to, i. 224-5, 227-=8=

  Priscianus, i. 71; ii. 119 _n. 2_;
    _Institutiones grammaticae_ of (_Priscianus major_ and _minor_), ii.
        124-5

  Prosper of Aquitaine, i. 106 _n. 1_

  Provençal literature, i. 571; ii. 168;
    Alba (aube) poetry, i. 20, =571=; ii. 30

  Provincia (Narbonensis):
    Antique, the, in relation to, before Middle Ages, i. 9
    Latinization of, i. 26-7 _and_ _n. 1_
    Ligurian inhabitants of, i. 126
    Teutonic invasion of, i. 125

  Prudentius, ii. 63;
    _Psychomachia_ of, ii. 102-4

  Pseudo-Callisthenes, _Life and Deeds of Alexander_ by, ii. 224, 225,
        =229-230=

  Pseudo-Dionysius, ii. 302;
    _Celestial Hierarchy_ by, i. 54 _and_ _n. 1_

  Pseudo-Turpin, ii. 319

  Ptolemy of Alexandria, i. 40

  Purgatory:
    Dante’s _Purgatorio_, _see under_ Dante
    Hildegard’s visions as to, i. 456 _n._
    Popular belief as to, i. 486


  _Quadrivium_, _see under_ Seven Liberal Arts


  Rabanus Maurus, Abp. of Mainz, allegorizing of Scripture by, ii. 46-7;
    interest in the vernacular, i. 308;
    works of, i. 222-41;
    _De universo_, i. 300; ii. 316 _n. 2_;
    _Allegoriae in universam sacram scripturam_, ii. 48-9;
    _De laudibus sanctae crucis_, ii. 49 _n. 3_;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 16, 100, 215; ii. 302-303, 312, 332

  Race, tests for determining, i. 124 _n._

  Radbertus, _see_ Paschasius

  _Raoul de Cambrai_, i. 563-4

  Ratherius, i. 309 and =n. 2=

  Ratramnus of Corbie, i. 215, 227; ii. 199

  Ravenna:
    Gerbert’s disputation in, i. 289-91
    Grammar and rhetoric studies at, ii. 121
    Law studies at, ii. 251, 252
    S. Apollinaris in Classe, i. 373, 377

  Raymond of Agiles quoted, i. 536

  Realism, Duns’ exposition of, ii. 514 _and_ _n._

  Reason _v._ authority controversy:
    Berengar’s position in, i. 302-3
    Eriugena’s contribution to, i. 229-=30=

  Reccared, i. 118 _nn._

  Reinhard, Bp. of Halberstadt, ii. 62

  Relics of saints and martyrs:
    Arms enshrining, i. 528
    Curative use of, i. 299
    Patristic attitude toward, i. 86, 101 _n._

  Renaissance, misleading nature of term, i. 211 _n._

  _Renaud de Montaubon_, i. 564

  Rheims cathedral school, i. 293

  Rhetoric:
    Chartres study of, i. 298
    Hugo of St. Victor on, ii. 67
    Predominance of, i. 109 _and_ _n._

  Richard, Abbot of Jumièges, i. 480-1

  Richard of Middleton, ii. 512

  Richard of St. Victor, ii. 80, =87= _and_ _n. 2_, =367 n. 2=, 540

  Richer, Abbot of Monte Cassino, i. 252, 300 _n. 2_;
    history of Gerbert by, quoted, i. 287-91

  Ricimer, Count, i. 113

  Riddles, didactic, i. 218-19 _and_ _n. 1_

  Rigaud, Eude (Oddo Rigaldus), Abp. of Rouen, i. =476=, =508=, 509;
    _Register_ of, quoted, i. 476-81

  Robert, cousin of St. Bernard, i. 395-7

  Robert of Normandy, ii. 139

  Rollo, Duke, of Normandy, i. 153, 239-40

  _Roman de la rose_, i. =586-7=; ii. 103 _and_ _nn._, 104, 223

  _Roman de Thebes_, ii. 227, =229 n.=

  Roman Empire:
    Barbarization of, i. 5, 7, =111 seqq.=
    Billeting of soldiers, custom as to, i. 114 _n._, 117
    Christianity accepted by, i. 345
    Church, relations with, ii. 265-7, 272-3
    Cities enjoying citizenship of--in Spain, i. 26 _and_ _n. 2_;
      in Gaul, i. 30
    City life of, i. 27, 326
    Clientage system under, i. 117 _n. 2_
    Dante’s views on, ii. 536
    Decadence of, i. =84=, 97, =111=
    Eastern, _see_ Eastern Empire
    Enduring nature of, conditions of, i. 238 _n._
    Greek thought diffused by, i. 4
    Italian people under, i. 7
    Jurisconsults of, authority and capacity of, ii. 232-3 _and_ _n._, 236
    Latinization of Western Europe due to, i. 23 _seqq._, 110
    Mediaeval attitude toward, i. 11
    Scandinavians under influence of, i. 152 _n. 3_

  Roman law:
    Auditory, Imperial or Praetorian, ii. 233 _n._, 235 _n. 1_
    Bologna famed for study of, ii. =121=, 251, =259-62=, 378
    _Brachylogus_, ii. 254-5
    _Breviarium_ and its _Interpretatio_, i. =117=; ii. 243-4;
      Epitomes of, ii. 244, =249-50=;
      _Brachylogus_ influenced by, ii. 254
    Burgundian tolerance of, i. 121;
      code (_Papianus_), ii. 239, =242=
    Church under, ii. 265 _and_ _n. 2_
    Codes of:
      Barbaric, nature of, ii. 244
        (_See also sub-headings_ Breviarium _and_ Burgundian)
      Gregorianus’, ii. 240, 243
      Hermogenianus’, ii. 240, 243
      Nature of, ii. 239-40
      Theodosian, ii. 240 _and_ _n. 2_, 241 _n. 2_, 242-3, =249=, =266-7
        and n. 1=
    _Codex_ of Justinian, ii. =240=, =242=, 253:
      Azo’s and Accursius’ work on, ii. 263-4
      Glosses to, ii. 249-50
      Placentinus’ _Summa_ of, ii. 262
      _Summa Perusina_ an epitome of, ii. =249=, 252
    _Constitutiones_ and _rescripta principum_, ii. =235 and n. 1=, 239,
        =240=
    Custom recognized by, ii. 236
    Digest of, by Justinian, _see subheading_ Pandects
    Elementary education including smattering of, ii. 250
    Epitomes of, various, ii. 249-50;
      _Epitome of Julianus_, ii. 242, =249=, 254
    Glosses:
      Accursius’ _Glossa ordinaria_, ii. 263-4
      Irnerius’, ii. 261 _and_ _n. 1_
      Justinian’s _Codex_, to, ii. 249-50
    Gothic adoption of, i. 114
    _Institutes_ of Gaius, ii. 241, 243
    _Institutes_ of Justinian, ii. =241=, 243, =254=:
      Azo’s _Summa_ of, ii. 263
      Placentinus’ _Summa_ of, ii. 262
    Jurisprudential element in early stages of, ii. 232
    _Jus_ identified with _aequitas_, ii. 235
    _Jus civile_, ii. 237, 257
    _Jus gentium_:
      _Jus naturale_ in relation to, ii. 234 _and_ _n._
      Origin of, ii. 233-4
      Popular rights as regarded by, ii. 278
    _Jus praetorium_, ii. 235
    _Lex romana canonice compta_, ii. 252
    Lombard attitude toward, i. 115
    _Novellae_ of Justinian, ii. 240, =242=
    Pandects (Justinian’s _Digest_), ii. 235 _and_ _n. 2_, =236-8=,
        =241=-2, 248, 253, 255:
      Accursius’ _Glossa_ on, ii. 264
      Glossators’ interpretation of, ii. 265
    Permanence of, ii. 236
    _Petrus_ (_Petri exceptiones_), ii. 252-4
    Placentinus’ work in, ii. 261-2
    Principles of, examples of, ii. 237-8;
      possession and its rights, ii. 256-8
    Principles of interpretation of, ii. 256
    Provincia, in, i. 27 _n. 1_
    _Responsa_ or _auctoritas jurisprudentium_, ii. 235-6
    Sources of, multifarious, ii. 235
    Sphere of, ii. 248
    Study of, centres for--in France, ii. 250;
      in Italy, ii. =121=, 251 _and_ _n. 2_, =259-62=, 378
    _Summa codicis Irnerii_, ii. 255
    Theodosian Code, _see under subheading_ Codes
    Treatises on, mediaeval, ii. 252 _seqq._
    Twelve Tables, ii. 232, 236
    Visigothic code of, _see subheading_ _Breviarium_

  Romance, spirit of, i. 418

  Romance languages (_See also_ Old French):
    Characteristics of, ii. 152
    Dante’s attitude toward, ii. 537
    Latin as modified by, ii. 155
    Literature of, ii. 221-3
      (_See also_ Provençal literature)
    Strength of, i. 9

  Romance nations, mediatorial rôle of, i. =110-11=, 124

  _Romans d’aventure_, i. =564-5=, 571 _n. 2_

  Rome:
    Bishops of, _see_ Popes
    Factions in (10th cent.), i. 242
    Law School in, ii. 251, 255
    Mosaics in, i. 347
    Verses to, i. 348; ii. =200=

  Romualdus, St., youth of, i. 373;
    austerities of, i. 374, =379=, 381;
    relations with his father, i. 374-5;
    harshness and egotism of, i. 375-7;
    at Vallis de Castro, i. 376-7, 380;
    at Sytrio, i. 378-9;
    death of, i. 372 _n. 3_, =380=;
    Commentary of, on the Psalter, i. 379

  Romulus Augustulus, Emp., i. 114

  Roncesvalles, battle of, i. 559 _n. 2_-62

  Roscellinus, i. 303-4; ii. 339-=40=

  Rothari, King of Lombards, i. 115; ii. 251

  Ruadhan, St., i. 132-3

  Ruotger, Life of Abp. Bruno by, i. 310; ii. 162 _and_ _n. 1_


  _Sacra doctrina_, _see_ Theology

  Sacraments, _see under_ Church

  _Sagas_, Norse:
    Character of, i. 12 _n._, 155 _seqq._
    _Egil_, i. 162-4
    _Gisli_, i. 158
    _Heimskringla_, i. 160-2 _and_ _n. 2_
    _Njala_, i. 157 _and_ =n.=, =159=, =164-7=
    Oral tradition of, ii. 220

  St. Denis monastery, ii. 10, =344=

  St. Emmeram convent (Ratisbon), i. 315, =316=

  St. Gall monastery, i. 257-8;
    Notker’s work at, ii. 201-2

  St. Victor monastery and school, ii. =61-3=, 143, 383

  Saints:
    Austerities of, i. 374 _and_ _n._, 375
    Interventions of, mediaeval beliefs as to, i. 487-8, 490
    Irish clergy so called, i. 135 _n. 2_
    Lives of:
      Compend. of (_Legenda Aurea_), ii. 184
      Conventionalized descriptions in, i. 393 _n. 1_
      Defects of, i. 494
      Estimate of, i. =84-5 and nn.=
      otherwise mentioned, i. 298, 300
    Relics of, _see_ Relics
    Visions of, i. 444-5
    Worship of, i. 101

  Salerno medical school, i. =250 n. 4=, =251=; ii. 121

  Salian Franks, _see under_ Franks

  Salimbene, i. 496-7, 499-500;
    _Chronica_ of, quoted and cited, i. 498 _seqq._;
    editions and translations of the work, i. 496 _n._

  Salvation, _see under_ Christianity

  Salvian, _De gubernatione Dei_ by, i. 84

  Saracens:
    Crusades against, _see_ Crusades
    Frankish victories against, i. 209-10 _n. 1_
    Wars with, necessitating mounted warriors, i. 525
    otherwise mentioned, i. 239, 252, 274, 332

  Saxons, _see_ Anglo-Saxons _and_ Germans

  Scandinavians, _see_ Norsemen

  Scholasticism:
    Arab analogy with, ii. 390 _and_ _n. 2_
    Aristotle’s advanced works, stages of appropriation of, ii. 393-5
    Bacon’s attack on, ii. 484, =493-4=, =496=, 509
    Classification of topics by:
      Schemes of, various, ii. 312 _seqq._
      Twofold principle of, ii. 311
    Conceptualism, ii. 520-1
    Content of, i. 301
    Deference to authority a characteristic of, ii. 297, 300
    Disintegration of--through Duns, ii. 510, 516;
      through Occam, ii. 522-3
    Elementary nature of discussions of, ii. 347
    Evil, problem of, _see_ Evil
    Exponents of, ii. 283 _and_ _n._
    Final exposition of, by Aquinas, ii. 484
    Greek thought contrasted with, ii. 296
    Humour non-existent in, ii. 459
    Method of, ii. =302=, =306-7=, 315 _n._;
      prototype of, i. 95
    Nominalism, ii. 340
    Philosophy of, _see_ Philosophy, scholastic
    Phraseology of, untranslatable, ii. 348, 483
    _Praedicables_, ii. 314 _n._
    Present interest of, ii. 285
    Realism, ii. 340;
      Pantheism in relation to, ii. 370
    Salvation a main interest of, ii. =296-7=, 300, 311
    Scriptural authority, position of, ii. 289, =291-2=
    Secular studies as regarded by, ii. 349, 357
    Stages of development of, ii. 333 _seqq._
    Sympathetic study of, the key to contradictions, ii. 371
    Theology of, _see_ Theology
    Universals, problem of:
      Aquinas’ treatment of, ii. 462
      Duns’ treatment of, ii. 515
      Occam’s contribution toward, ii. 520-1
      Roscellin’s views on, i. 303-4

  Sciences, classifications of, ii. 312 _seqq._
    (_See also_ Physical science)

  Scotland, Christianizing of, i. 173

  Scriptures, Christian:
    Allegorizing of:
      Examples of:
        David and Bathsheba episode, ii. 44-6
        Exodus, Book of, ii. 47
        Good Samaritan parable, ii. =53-6=, 84, 90
        Hannah, story of, ii. 47 _n. 1_
        Pharisee and Publican parable, ii. 51-2
      Hugo of St. Victor’s view of, ii. 65 _n._
      Writers exemplifying--Philo, ii. 42-43;
        the Fathers, ii. =43 seqq.=, 68-9 _and_ _n. 2_;
        Rabanus, ii. 46-50;
        Bede, ii. 47 _n. 1_;
        Honorius of Autun, ii. 51 _seqq._;
        Hugo of St. Victor, ii. 67 _seqq._
    Anglo-Saxon version of, i. =142 n. 2=, 183
    Authority of--in patristic doctrine, ii. 295;
      acknowledged by Eriugena, i. 231;
        by Berengar, i. 303;
      in scholasticism, ii. 280, 291-2
    Bacon’s attitude toward, ii. =491-2=, 497
    Bonaventura’s attitude toward, and writings on, ii. 405 _seqq._
    Canon law based on, ii. 267-9
    Classical studies in relation to, _see subheading_ Secular
    Classification of topics based on, ii. 317, 324
    Commentaries on--Alcuin’s, i. 220-1;
      Raban’s, i. 222-3
    Duns’ attitude toward, ii. 516
    Francis of Assisi’s literal acceptance of, i. 365, 426-=7=;
      his realization of spirit of, i. 427 _n. 1_; ii. 183
    Gothic version of, i. 143 _n._
    _Heliand_, i. =203 and nn.=, 308
    Hymns based on, ii. 88 _seqq._
    Interpretation of--by the Fathers, i. =43 seqq.=, 68-9 _and_ _n. 2_;
      by Eriugena, i. 231;
      by Berengar, i. 303
    Isidore’s writings on, i. 104-5
    Love, human, as treated in Old Testament, i. 332-3
    Scenes from, in Gothic art, ii. 82 _seqq._
    Secular knowledge in relation to, i. 63, =66=; ii. =110=, =112=, 120,
        499
    Song of Songs, _see_ Canticles
    Study of, by monks, i. 94;
      Cassiodorus’ _Institutiones_, i. 95-6
    Theology identified with, ii. 406, 408
    Vulgate, the:
      Corruption in Paris copy of, ii. 497
      Language of, ii. 171

  Sculpture, Gothic:
    Cathedrals, evolution of, ii. 538-=9=
    Symbolism of, i. 457 _n. 2_; ii. =82-6=

  Sedulius Scotus, i. 215

  Seneca, i. 26, 41

  _Sentences, Books of_:
    Isidore’s, i. 106 _and_ _n. 1_
    Paulus’ _Sententiae_, ii. 243
    Peter Lombard’s, _see under_ Lombard
    Prosper’s, i. 106 _n. 1_

  Sequence-hymns, development of, ii. 196, =201-6=;
    Adam of St. Victor’s, ii. 209-215

  Serenus, Bp. of Marseilles, i. 102

  Sermons, allegorizing:
    Bernard of Clairvaux, by, i. 337 _n._, =409-13=; ii. =169=, 368-9
    Honorius of Autun, by, ii. 50 _seqq._

  Seven Liberal Arts (_See also separate headings_ Grammar, Logic,
        _etc._):
    Alanus de Insulis on functions of, ii. 98 _n. 1_
    Carolingian study of, i. 236
    Clerical education in, i. 221-2
    Compend of, by Cassiodorus, i. 96
    _De nuptiis_ as concerned with, i. 71 _n. 3_
    Hugo of St. Victor on function of, ii. 67, 111
    Latin the medium for, ii. 109
    Law smattering included with, ii. 250
    Quadrivium:
      Boëthius on, i. 90 _and_ _n. 2_
      Chartres, at, i. 299
    Thierry’s encyclopaedia of, ii. 130
    Trivium:
      Chartres, at, i. =298-9=; ii. 163
      Courses of, as representing stages of mediaeval development, ii.
        331 _seqq._
    otherwise mentioned, i. 217; ii. 553

  Severinus, St., i. 192

  Severus, Sulpicius, i. 126 _n. 2_;
    Life of St. Martin by, i. 52, 84, 85 _n. 2_, =86=

  Sidonius, Apollinaris, i. 126 _n. 2_;
    cited, i. 117 _n. 1_, 140

  Siger de Brabant, ii. 401 _and_ _n._

  _Sippe_, i. 122

  Smaragdus, Abbot, i. 215

  Socrates, i. 34-5; ii. 7

  Songs, _see_ Poetry

  Sophists, Greek, i. 35

  Sorbon, Robert de, i. 544-5

  Sorcery, i. 46

  Spain:
    Antique, the, in relation to, before Middle Ages, i. 9
    Arabian philosophy in, ii. 390
    Church in, i. 9, 103, =118 and n.=
    Latinization of, i. 25-6 _and_ _n. 2_
    Moorish conquest of, i. 9, 118
    Visigoths in, i. 113, 116-=17 and n. 2=, 118

  _Stabat Mater_, i. 348

  Statius, ii. 229 _n._

  Statius Caecilius, i. 25

  Stephen IX., Pope, i. 263

  Stephen, St., sequence for festival of, ii. 211-13

  Stephen of Bourbon quoted, i. 365 _n._

  Stilicho, i. 112

  Stoicism:
    Emotion as regarded by, i. 330
    Nature of, i. =41=, 57, 59
    Neo-Platonism contrasted with, ii. 296
    Philosophy as classified by, ii. 312
    Roman law as affected by, ii. 232
    otherwise mentioned, i. 40, 70

  Strabo, Walafrid, _see_ Walafrid

  Suevi, i. 116-17 _and_ _n. 2_, =139=

  _Summae_, method of, ii. 306-7
    (_See also under_ Theology)

  _Summum bonum_, Aquinas’ discussion of, ii. 438 _seqq._, 456

  Switzerland, Irish monasteries founded in, i. 174

  Sylvester II., Pope (Gerbert of Aurillac), career of, i. 281-4;
    disputation with Otric, i. 289-91;
    estimate of, i. 281, =285-7=;
    love of the classics, i. =287-8=; ii. 110;
    Latin style of, ii. 160;
    logical studies of, ii. 332, 338, 339, 345;
    letters of, quoted, i. 283-7;
    estimated, i. 284-5;
    editions of works of, i. 280 _n._;
    _Libellus de rationali et ratione uti_, i. =292 n.=, 299;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 249; ii. 35

  Symbolism:
    Alanus’ _Anticlaudianus_ as exemplifying, ii. 94-103
    Angels as symbols, ii. 457
    Art, mediaeval, inspired by, i. 21
    Augustine and Gregory compared as to, i. 56-7
    Carolingian, nature and examples of, ii. 46-50
    Church edifices, of, ii. 78-82
    Dante permeated with, ii. 534, =552-5=
    Greek, nature of, ii. 56-7
    Hildegard’s visions, in, i. 456 _seqq._
    Marriage relationship, in, i. 413-14
    Mass, of the, ii. 77-8
    Mediaeval thought deeply impressed by, ii. =43=, 50 _n. 1_, =102=,
        =365=
    Mysticism in relation to, ii. 364
    Neo-Platonic, i. 52
    Ovid’s works interpreted by, ii. 230
    Patristic, i. =37=, =43-6=, 52, 53, 58, =80=
    Platonic, i. 36
    Raban’s addiction to, i. 223 _and_ _n. 2_
    _Signum et res_ classification, ii. 322-3
    Twelfth century--in Honorius of Autun, ii. 51 _seqq._;
      in Hugo of St. Victor, ii. 64 _seqq._
    Universal in mental processes, ii. 41, 552 _n._
    Universe explained by, ii. 64, 66 _seqq._
    otherwise mentioned, i. 15, 22

  Sytrio, Romualdus at, i. 378-9


  Tacitus, i. 78; ii. 134

  Tears, grace of, i. 370-1 _and_ _n._, 462, 463

  Templars, i. 531-5

  Tenth century, _see_ Carolingian period

  Tertullian, i. 5, 58, 87, 99, 171, 332, 344, 354 _n._; ii 152;
    paradox of, i. 51; ii. 297;
    _Adversus Marcionem_, i. 68

  Teutons (_See also_ Anglo-Saxons, Danes, Germans, Norsemen):
    Celts compared with, i. 125
    Characteristics of, i. 138
    Christianizing of:
      Manner of, i. =181-3=, =196-7=, 193;
        results of, i. 5, =170=-1
      Motives of converts, i. 193
    Customs of, i. 122, 139, 141, 523
    Law of, early, tribal nature of, ii. 245-7
    Rôle of, in mediaeval evolution, i. 125
    Roman Empire permeated by, i. 111 _seqq._

  Theodora, i. 242

  Theodore, Abp. of Canterbury, i. 184

  Theodoric of Freiburg, ii. 501 _n._

  Theodoric the Ostrogoth, i. 89, 91 _n. 2_, 93, =114-15=, 120-1, 138, 249;
    in legend, i. 145-6;
    Edict of, ii. 244 _n._

  Theodosius the Great, Emp., i. 112; ii. 272;
    Code of, ii. 240 _and_ _n. 2_, 241 _n. 2_, 242, =249=, =266-7 and n. 1=

  Theodulphus, Bp. of Orleans, i. =9=, 215;
    Latin diction of, ii. 160

  Theology, scholastic:
    Abaelard’s treatises on, _see under_ Abaelard
    Aquinas’ _Summa_ of, _see under_ Aquinas
    Argumentative nature of, ii. 292-3
    Augustinian character of, ii. 403
    Course of study in, ii. 388
    Importance of, as intellectual interest, ii. 287-8
    Logic in relation to, ii. =340 n.=, 346
    Mysticism of, ii. 363-4
    Natural sciences, etc., as handmaids to, ii. =67=, 111, 289, =486=,
        =492=, =496=, 500, 530;
      denial of the theory--by Duns, ii. 510;
      by Occam, ii. 519-520
      (_See also_ Physical science--Patristic attitude toward)
    Paris the centre for, ii. 283, =379=
    Philosophy in relation to, _see under_ Philosophy
    Practical, not speculative, regarded as, ii. 512, =515=, 519
    Scientific nature of, as regarded by Albertus, ii. 291, 430
    Scripture identified with, ii. 406, 408
    _Summae_ of--by Alexander of Hales, ii. 399;
      by Bonaventura, ii. 408;
      by Albertus Magnus, ii. 430-1;
      by Aquinas, _see under_ Aquinas
    Thirteenth-century study of, ii. 118-=120=

  Theophrastus, i. 38

  Theresa, St., i. 443 _n. 1_

  Theurgic practice, i. 46-8

  Thierry, Chancellor of Chartres, ii. 119, =370-1=;
    _Eptateuchon_ of, ii. 130 _and_ _n._

  Thirteenth century:
    Intellectual interests of, ultimate, ii. 287
    Latin prose styles of, ii. 179
    Papal position in, ii. 509
    Personalities of writers emergent in, ii. 436
    Theology and dialectic the chief studies of, ii. 118-=20=
    Three phenomena marking, ii. 378

  Thomas à Kempis, _De imitatione Christi_ by, ii. 185

  Thomas Aquinas, _see_ Aquinas

  Thomas of Brittany, _Tristan_ fragment by, i. 582

  Thomas of Cantimpré, ii. 428-9

  Thomas of Celano, Life of St. Francis by, quoted, i. 435, 436-8;
    style of the work, ii. 182-3

  Thucydides, _History of the Peloponnesian War_ by, i. 77-8

  Thuringia:
    Boniface’s work in, i. 197-8
    Merovingian rule in, i. 121

  Thuringians, language of, i. 145 _n. 2_

  Torriti, i. 347

  Trance, _see_ Ecstasy

  Trèves, i. =30=, 31, 192

  _Tristan_:
    Chrétien’s version of, i. 567
    Gottfried von Strassburg’s version of, i. 577-82

  Trivium, _see under_ Seven Liberal Arts

  Troubadours (trouvères), i. 572-3 _and_ _nn._

  Troy, tales of, in mediaeval literature, ii. 200, =224-5 and n. 2=,
        =227-9=

  True and the good compared, ii. 441, 512

  Truth, Guigo’s _Meditationes_ as concerning, i. 385-6

  Twelfth century:
    Classical studies at zenith in, ii. 117-118
    Growth in, various, i. 305-6
    Intellectual interests of, ultimate, ii. 287
    Literary zenith in, ii. 168, 205-6
    Mobility increased during, ii. 379


  Ulfilas, i. 192; ii. 221

  Ulpian--on _jus naturale_ and _jus gentium_, ii. 234 _and_ _n._;
    on _justitia_, _jus_ and _jurisprudentia_, ii. 237

  Ulster Cycle, Sagas of, i. 128 _and_ _n. 2_, 129 _seqq._

  Universals, _see under_ Scholasticism

  Universities, mediaeval (_For particular universities see their names_):
    Increase in (14th cent.), ii. 523
    Rise of, ii. 379, 381 _seqq._
    Studies at, ii. 388 _and_ _n._

  Urban II., Pope, ii. 175

  Urban IV., Pope, ii. 391-2, 434

  Utrecht, bishopric of, i. 197


  Vallombrosa, i. 377

  Vandals, i. 112, =113=, 120

  Varro, Terentius, i. 39, 71, 78

  Vercingetorix, i. 28

  Vernacular poetry, _see under_ Poetry

  Verse, _see_ Poetry

  Vikings, _see_ Danes _and_ Norsemen

  Vilgard, i. 259-60

  Vincent of Beauvais, _Speculum majus_ of, ii. 82 _and_ _n. 2_, 315-22

  Virgil, Bernard Silvestris’ _Commentum_ on, ii. 116-17 _and_ _n. 2_;
    Dante in relation to, ii. 535, 536, 539, 543

  Virgin Mary:
    Dante’s _Paradiso_ as concerning, ii. 551
    Hymns to, by Hugo of St. Victor, ii. 86-7, 92
    Interventions of, against the devil, i. 487, =490-2=
    Mediaeval attitude toward, i. 53, 54 _and_ =n. 2=; ii. =431=, =551=,
        558

  Virtues:
    Aquinas’ classification of, ii. 326-8
    Odilo’s _Cardinales disciplinae_, i. 295

  Virtues and vices, poetic treatment of--by Alanus, ii. 102 _n._;
    by De Lorris and De Meun, ii. 103

  Visigoths:
    Arianism of, i. 120
    Dacian settlement of, i. 112
    Gaul, Southern, kingdom in, i. 7, 112, =116=;
      Clovis’ conquest of, i. 121
    Roman law code promulgated by, _see_ Roman law--_Breviarium_
    Spain, in, i. 9, 113, 116-=17 and n. 2=, 118

  Visions:
    Examples of, i. 444-6, 451, 452-9
    Monastic atmosphere in, i. 184 _and_ _n. 2_
    Nature of, i. 443, 449 and _n. 3_, =450=, 451 _and_ _n._

  _Vita contemplativa_:
    Aquinas’ views on, ii. 443, =481-2=
    Hildebert on, ii. 144-5

  _Vitae sanctorum_, _see_ Saints--Lives of


  Walafrid Strabo, i. 100, =215=; ii. =332=;
    _Glossa ordinaria_ of, i. 16, =221 n. 2=; ii. =46=;
    _De cultura hortorum_, ii. 188 _n. 2_

  Waldenses, i. =365 n.=; ii. 34

  Walter of Lille (of Chatillon), _Alexandreis_ of, ii. 192 _and_ _n. 3_,
        230 _n. 1_

  Walther von der Vogelweide, political views of, ii. 33;
    attitude of, toward Papacy, ii. 34-6;
    piety and crusading zeal of, ii. 36;
    melancholy, ii. 36-7;
    _Minnelieder_ of, ii. 29-31;
    _Sprüche_, ii. 29, =32=, 36;
    _Tagelied_, ii. 30;
    _Unter der Linde_, ii. 30;
    otherwise mentioned, i. 475, =482=, 589; ii. 223

  _Wergeld_, i. =122=, 139; ii. =246=

  Will, primacy of, over intellect, ii. 512, 515

  William, Abbot of Hirschau, i. 315

  William II. (Rufus), King of England, i. 273, 275; ii. =138-9=

  William of Apulia, ii. 189 _and_ _n. 3_

  William of Champeaux--worsted by Abaelard, ii. 342-3;
    founds St. Victor, ii. 61, 143;
    Hildebert’s letter to, quoted, ii. 143

  William of Conches, ii. 132;
    studies and works of, ii. 372-3;
    _Summa moralium philosophorum_, ii. 134-5, 373 _and_ _n. 2_

  William of Malmsbury cited, i. 525

  William of Moerbeke, ii. 391

  William of Occam, _see_ Occam

  William of St. Thierry, ii. 300, 344

  Willibrord, St., i. 197

  Winifried-Boniface, St., i. 6, =197-200=, 308; ii. 273

  Wisdom, Aquinas on, ii. 481

  Witelo, _Perspectiva_ by, ii. 501 _n._

  Witiza of Aquitaine, i. 358-9

  Wolfram von Eschenbach, ii. 223;
    _Parzival_ by, i. 12 _n._, 149 _n. 1_, 152, 567, 571 _n. 2_,
        =589-613=; ii. =36=;
      estimate of the work, i. 588; ii. 29

  Women:
    Emotion regarding, i. 349-50
    Emotional Christ-love experienced by, i. 442, =459 seqq.=
    Fabliaux’ tone toward, i. 521 _n. 2_
    German prae-mediaeval attitude toward, i. 139, 150;
      mediaeval, ii. 31
    Monastic life, in:
      Abuses among, i. 491-2;
        Rigaud’s _Register_ as concerning, i. 479-480
      Consecration of, i. 337 _and_ _n._
      Gandersheim nuns, i. 311
      Visions of, i. 442 _seqq._, 463 _seqq._
    Monkish vilification of, i. =354 n.=, 521 _n. 2_, 532, =533=; ii. 58
    Romantic literature as concerned with, i. 564
    Romantic poems for audiences of, i. 565
    Walther von der Vogelweide on, ii. 31

  Worms, Concordat of (1122), i. 245 _n. 4_


  Xenophon’s _Cyropaedia_, i. 78


  Year-books (_Annales_), i. 234 _and_ =n. 1=

  Yves, Bp. of Chartres, i. 262 _n._; ii. =139=


  Zacharias, Pope, i. 199

  Zoology:
    Albertus Magnus’ works on, ii. 429
    Aristotle’s work in, i. 38
    _Physiologus_, i. =76-7 and n.=, 300; ii. 83


THE END


_Printed by_ R. & R. CLARK, LIMITED, _Edinburgh_.




FOOTNOTES:

[1] See _post_, Chapter XXXVI., I.

[2] Lev. xxi. 20; Deut. xxiii. 1.

[3] Lucan, _Pharsalia_, viii. 94.

[4] Heloïse here in mediaeval fashion cites a number of examples from
Scripture showing the ills and troubles brought by women to men.

[5] Again she quotes to prove this, from Job and St. Gregory and Ambrose.

[6] Heloïse’s last _problema_ did not relate to Scripture, and may have
been suggested by her own life. “We ask whether one can sin in doing what
is permitted or commanded by the Lord?” Abaelard answers with a discussion
of what is permissible between man and wife.

[7] This letter of Heloïse is not extant.

[8] The _Tristan_ of Gottfried von Strassburg and the _Parzival_ of
Wolfram von Eschenbach have been given. One may also refer to works of
older contemporaries, _e.g._ to the _Aeneid_ of Heinrich von Veldeke,
translated (1184) from a French rendering of Virgil; and the two courtly
narrative poems, the _Erec_ and _Ivain_ (Knight of the Lion) taken from
Chrétien of Troies by Hartmann von Aue, who flourished as the twelfth
century was passing into the thirteenth.

[9] On Walther von der Vogelweide, see Wilmann, _Leben und Dichtung
Walthers, etc._ (Bonn, 1882); Schönbach, _Walther von der Vogelweide_ (2nd
ed., Berlin, 1895). The citations from his poems in this chapter follow
the Pfeiffer-Bartsch edition.

[10] No. 3 in the Pfeiffer-Bartsch edition.

[11] 184.

[12] 33.

[13] 22.

[14] 14, 16, 69.

[15] 18.

[16] 39.

[17] See _Lieder_, 46, 51, 56, 59, 61, 62, 71, 72, 75, 76, 77.

[18] A lucid account of this struggle is given in Luchaire, _Innocent
III._, vol. iii. (“La Papauté et l’Empire”), Paris, 1906.

[19] 81.

[20] From “Freidank in Auswahl,” in Hildebrand’s _Didaktik aus der Zeit
der Kreuzzüge_, p. 336 (Deutsche Nat. Lit.).

[21] 85, cf. 164.

[22] 110.

[23] 113, cf. 111, 112.

[24] 115, 116.

[25] 133. My statement of the opposition to the papacy might be much more
analytical, and contain further apt distinctions. But this would remove it
too far from the anti-papal feeling of the common man; and the period,
moreover, is not yet that of Occam and Marsilius of Padua--as to whom see
Gierke, _Political Theories of the Middle Age_, trans. by Maitland
(Cambridge, 1900).

[26] 88, 137.

[27] 158. Walter shared the crusading spirit. The inference that he was
himself a Crusader is unsafe; but he wrote stirring crusading poems, one
opening with a line that in sudden power may be compared with Milton’s

  “Avenge, O Lord, Thy slaughtered saints.”

  “Rich, hêrre, dich und dine muoter, megede kint.”
                                        167. See also 78, 79.

[28] 87.

[29] _Parzival_, i. 824.

[30] 186.

[31] 188.

[32] While an allegory is a statement having another consciously intended
meaning, metaphor is the carrying over or deflection of a meaning from its
primary application. According to good usage, which has kept these terms
distinct, allegory implies a definite and usually a sustained intention,
and suggests the spiritual; while metaphor suggests figures of speech and
linguistic changes often unconscious. Language develops through the
metaphorical (not allegorical) extension or modification of the meanings
of words. The original meaning sometimes is obscured (_e.g._ in _profane_
or _depend_), and sometimes continues to exist with the new one. In a vast
number of languages, such words as _straight_, _oblique_, _crooked_, seem
always to have had both a direct and a metaphorical meaning. Moral and
intellectual conceptions necessarily are expressed in phrases primarily
applicable to physical phenomena.

[33] Cf. Taylor, _Classical Heritage_, p. 97 _sqq._

[34] _Ante_, Chapters IV., V.

[35] _Contra Faustum_, xxii. 1-5.

[36] _Contra Faustum_, xxii. 66-68.

[37] Augustine’s method in this twenty-second Book is first to consider
the actual sinfulness or justification of these deeds, and afterwards to
take up in succession their typological significance. So, for example, he
discusses the blamefulness of Judah’s conduct with Tamar in par. 61-64 and
its typology in 83-86.

[38] _Contra Faustum_, xxii. 87. St. Ambrose, in his _Apologia Prophetae
David_, cap. iii. (Migne 14, col. 857), written some years before
Augustine’s treatise against Faustus, finds Bathsheba to signify the
“congregatio nationum quae non erat Christo legitimo quodam fidei copulata
connubio.”

[39] _Quaestiones in Vet. Testam. in Regum II._ (Migne 83, col. 411).
Isidore died A.D. 636 (_ante_, Chapter V.)

[40] _Comment. in Libros IV. Regum_, in lib. ii. cap. xi.; Migne, _Pat.
Lat._ 109, col. 98 (written in 834). On Rabanus and Walafrid see _ante_,
