CHAPTER VI. ORTHODOX IDEA OF SIN, AS DEPRAVITY AND AS GUILT.




§ 1. The Question stated.


We now approach the orthodoxy of Orthodoxy—the system of sin and
redemption, which constitutes its most essential character. The questions
hitherto treated—the natural and supernatural, miracles, the
Scriptures—belong to universal religion. On these points heretics and the
Orthodox may agree. But the essence of heresy, in the eyes of an Orthodox
man, is to vary from the standards of belief in regard to sin and
salvation.

We commence with the subject of human sinfulness; in other words, with the
character of man in relation to Orthodoxy. The theology of the East asked,
“What is God?” and entered on its course from the specially theological
side. It began with ontology, and proceeded to psychology. In this,
Oriental theology followed in the path of Oriental philosophy. But
Occidental theology, originating strictly with Augustine, followed the
practical and experimental method of European thought, and, instead of
asking, “What is God?” asked, instead, “What is man?”

We begin, therefore, with the great question, “What is man?” This is the
radical question in practical, experimental theology, as the question,
“What is God?” is the radical question in speculative theology. But we are
now concerned in the theology of experience and of life. We are seeking
for human wants. Knowing what man is, we can next ask what he needs.




§ 2. The four Moments or Characters of Evil. The Fall, Natural Depravity,
Total Depravity, Inability.


Orthodoxy answers the question, “What is man?” by saying, “Man is a
sinner;” and this answer has these four moments:—

1. Man was created at first righteous and good.

2. Man fell, in and with Adam, and became a sinner.

3. All now born are born totally corrupt and evil;—

4. And are utterly disabled to all good, so as not to have the power of
repenting, or even of wishing to repent.

These four ideas are,—

First, that of THE FALL, or INHERITED EVIL.

Second, of NATURAL DEPRAVITY.

Third, of TOTAL DEPRAVITY.

Fourth, of INABILITY.

These points are fully stated in the following passage from the
“Assembly’s Confession of Faith,” chap. 6:—


    “1. Our first parents, being seduced by the subtlety and
    temptation of Satan, sinned in eating the forbidden fruit. This
    their sin God was pleased, according to his wise and holy counsel,
    to permit; having purposed to order it to his own glory.

    “2. By this sin they fell from their original righteousness, and
    communion with God; and so became dead in sin, and wholly defiled
    in all the faculties and parts of soul and body.

    “3. They being the root of all mankind, the _guilt_ of this sin
    was IMPUTED, and the same _death in sin, and corrupted nature_,
    CONVEYED, to all their posterity, descending from them by ordinary
    generation.

    “4. From this original corruption, whereby we are utterly
    indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good, and wholly
    inclined to all evil, do proceed all actual transgressions.

    “5. This corruption of nature during this life doth remain in
    those that are regenerated; and although it be, through Christ,
    pardoned and mortified, yet both itself and all the motions
    thereof are truly and properly sin.

    “6. Every sin, both original and actual, being a transgression of
    the righteous law of God, and contrary thereunto, doth in its own
    nature bring guilt upon the sinner, whereby he is bound over to
    the wrath of God and curse of the law, and so made subject to
    death, with all miseries, spiritual, temporal, and eternal.”(13)


We assume the “Assembly’s Catechism” as almost _the_ standard of
Orthodoxy. It was prepared with the concurrence of the best minds in
England, in an age when theological discussion had sharpened all wits in
that direction. Thoroughly Calvinistic, it is also a wonderfully clear and
precise statement of Calvinism. Framed after long controversies, it had
the advantage of all the distinctions which are made only during
controversy. It is a fortress made defensible at all points, because it
has been attacked so often that all its weak places have been seen and
marked. It is a masterpiece of statement.

Now, it is very easy, and what has often been done, _to stand on the
outside_ and show the actual error and logical absurdity of this creed; to
show that men are not by nature totally depraved, and that, if they were,
this would not be guilt; that, if they have no power to repent, they are
not to blame for not repenting; and that God, as a God of justice even (to
say nothing of mercy, of love, of a heavenly Father), cannot condemn and
punish us for a depraved nature inherited from Adam.

It is easy to say all this. But it has often been said; and with what
result? Unitarians have been, by such arguments, confirmed in their
Unitarianism; but the Orthodox have not, by such arguments, been convinced
of the falsity of their creed. Let us see, then, if we cannot find some
truth in this system,—some vital, experimental truth,—for the sake of
which the Orthodox cling to these immense and incredible inconsistencies.
Let us take an _inside_ view of Orthodoxy, and see why, being
unreasonable, it yet commends itself to so many minds of the highest order
of reason.




§ 3. Orthodox and Liberal View of Man, as morally diseased or otherwise.


Let us begin with the substance of Orthodoxy (neglecting, at present, its
form), and say, in general, that it regards human nature as being in an
abnormal or diseased condition. The first thing to be done with man,
according to Calvinism, is to cure him. Many systems, differing from each
other in name, agree in this—that they do not believe in any such diseased
condition of man. According to them, he is not to be cured, but to be
educated. The Church is not a hospital, but an academy. Man needs, mainly,
instruction. His purposes, in the main, are right; but he errs as to what
he has to do. What he requires is precept and example.

As Orthodoxy believes man to be diseased, its object is twofold, and the
truths which it employs are of two kinds. First, it seeks to convince man
that he really has a dangerous disease; and then to convince him, that, by
using the right means, he can be cured. It therefore constantly dwells
upon two classes of truths: first, those which reveal man’s sinfulness and
his ruined condition; and, secondly, those which reveal the plan of saving
him from this condition—a plan which has been devised by the Almighty, and
which is accomplished in Christianity. Orthodoxy dwells upon sin and
salvation: these are its two pivotal doctrines.

On the other hand, all the systems which may be associated under the term
“Liberal Christianity” regard man, not as in a state of disease, and
needing medicine, but as in a state of health, needing diet, exercise, and
favorable circumstances, in order that he may grow up a well-developed
individual. It regards sin, not as a radical disease with which all are
born, but as a temporary malady to which all are liable. It does not,
therefore, mainly dwell on sin and salvation, but on duty and improvement.
Man’s nature it regards, not as radically evil, but as radically good; and
even as divine, because made by God.

Here, then, in the doctrine of evil, lies the essential distinction
between the two great schools of thought which have divided the Church.
What is evil? and how is it to be regarded? This is, perhaps, the most
radical question in Christian theology. Is evil positive, or only
negative? Is it a reality, or only a form? What is it? Whence comes it?
Until these questions are exhaustively discussed, there is little hope of
union in theology.




§ 4. Sin as Disease.


We regard Orthodoxy as substantially right in its views of sin as being a
deep and radical disease. Our Saviour says, “I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners, to repentance.” “The Son of man came to seek and
to save that which is lost.”

But the question recurs, Is there only one kind of sin,—namely, voluntary
and conscious transgression of God’s law, originating with the individual
himself, and in the moment of committing it, by means of his free will,
which is its only seat? or is there sin which is a tendency in man’s
nature, something permanent, involuntary, of which he is not conscious,
and which has its seat not merely in the will, but in the desires and
affections. To this question Liberal Christianity has commonly said, “No,”
and Orthodoxy has said, “Yes.”

And on this point I concur with Orthodoxy. Besides the sin which consists
in free choice, and which is essentially transient, there is also the sin
which consists in wrong desire, and which is essentially permanent,
because it is a habit of the mind. If it were not so, there could be no
such thing as a bad character, and no such thing as a vicious habit.

If we attempt to analyze evil, we shall find that it may be conveniently
distributed into these divisions:—

1. PHYSICAL EVIL.

(_a._) Pain.
(_b._) Weakness.
(_c._) Physical disease.

2. INTELLECTUAL OR MENTAL EVIL.

(_a._) Ignorance.
(_b._) Error, or mistake.
(_c._) Sophism, or falsehood.

3. MORAL EVIL. DISOBEDIENCE TO THE MORAL LAW.

(_a._) Ignorant and accidental, or transgression.
(_b._) Habitual disobedience, or vice.
(_c._) Wilful violation of human law; crime.
(_d._) Diseased moral state, as selfishness, bad temper, &c.

4. SPIRITUAL EVIL.

(_a._) Wilful alienation from God, or perverse choice.
(_b._) Spiritual inability.

Now, we see that in all these divisions of evil,—physical, intellectual,
moral, and spiritual,—it is found in the two forms of active and passive
evil. In the latter form it is disease, and independent of the will.

Returning, then, to the Orthodox view of evil, which it is our business to
examine, we find already that it has the advantage of the Liberal theology
in recognizing this passive side of evil, which we may call _disease_. It
is true that Orthodoxy has not yet succeeded in coming to any clearness on
this question, and has not yet any firm, intellectual hold of the main
points of its argument. Examples of this confusion are quite common. Not
to go back to the Calvinistic and Arminian controversies, which were but a
revival of the Augustinian and Pelagian dispute; not to recur even to the
Hopkinsian and Edwardian discussions,—we have only to refer to the
differences between new and old school theology in the Presbyterian
Church; to the trial of Dr. Beecher; to the book of his son Edward; to the
divergence of Andover from New Haven, and Princeton from Andover.
Unsettled, because superficial, views of evil are at the roots of all
these controversies.




§ 5. Doctrine of the Fall in Adam, and Natural Depravity. Their Truth and
Error.


The first point of the doctrine of evil regards the Fall, including the
doctrine of depravity.

Modern French philosophers have dwelt much on what they call the
solidarity of the human race. By this they mean that two individuals are
not independent of each other, like two trees standing side by side, but
like two buds on the same tree or bough. There is a common life-sap
flowing through them all. Let the life of the tree be attacked
anywhere,—in its roots, its trunk, its limbs,—and all these individual
buds feel it. Yet each bud has also a life of its own, and develops its
own stalk, leaves, blossom, fruit. It can be taken from its own tree, and
put into another tree, and grow. So it is with separate men grafted into
the great tree of mankind. No one lives to himself, nor dies to himself.
If one suffers, all suffer. The life of mankind, becoming diseased, pours
disease into all individual men.

Now, is there not something in this doctrine to which our instincts
assent? Do not we feel it true that we inherit not our own life merely,
but that of our race? and is not this the essential truth in the doctrine
of the fall?

It is true that we fell in Adam. It is also true that we fell in every act
of sin, in every weakness and folly, of any subsequent child of Adam. We
are all drawn downward by every sin; we are lifted upward, too, by every
act of heroic virtue, not by example only, but also by that mysterious
influence, that subtile contagion, finer than anything visible,
ponderable, or tangible,—that effluence from eye, voice, tone, manner,
which, according to the character which is behind, communicates an impulse
of faith and courage, or an impulse of cowardice and untruth; which may be
transmitted onward, forward, on every side, like the widening circles in a
disturbed lake,—circles which meet and cross each other without
disturbance, and whose influence may be strictly illimitable and infinite.

No doubt, sin began with the historical Adam—the first man who lived. “By
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin.” But still more true
is it that we fell in the typical Adam—Adam who stands for innocent,
ignorant human nature before temptation; truest of all, that we _fall_ in
Adam, because we are, each of us, at first an Adam.

We are all in the garden; we are at first placed in paradise; and each has
in himself all the four _dramatis personæ_—Adam, Eve, the Serpent, and the
Voice of God. Adam is the will, the power of choice, the masculine
element, in man; Eve is the affection, the desire, the feminine element,
in man; the Voice of God is the higher reason in the soul, through which
infinite truth commands,—i.e., the higher law; and the Serpent, the lower
reason in the soul, the cunning element, the sophistical understanding,
which can put evil for good, and good for evil. The garden is our early
innocence, where there is no struggle, no remorse, no anxiety; where
goodness is not labor, but impulse. But, when we go out of the garden, we
enter a life of trial, till we reach the higher paradise, the kingdom of
heaven; and then joy and duty become one again. Then—


    “Love is an unerring light,
    And joy its own security.”


From paradise, through the world, to heaven; from Egypt, through the
wilderness, to Canaan; from innocence, through temptation, sin,
repentance, faith, to regeneration,—such is the progress of man.

To me, the belief that I fell in Adam is not an opinion fraught only with
sadness. This tide of life which comes pouring through me comes from ten
thousand ancestors. All _their_ sorrows and joys, temptations and
struggles, sins and virtues, have helped to make it what it is. I am a
member of a great body. I am willing to be so—to bear the fortunes and
misfortunes of my race.

It is true that I find evil tendencies in me, which I did not cause; but I
know, that, for whatever part I am not the cause, I am not accountable.
For this part of my life I do not dread the wrath, but rather claim the
pity, of my God. My nature I find to be diseased—not well; needing cure,
and not merely food and exercise. I can, therefore, the more easily
believe that God has sent me a physician, and that I shall be cured by
him. I can believe in a future emancipation from these tendencies to
vanity, sensuality, indolence, anger, wilfulness, impatience,
obstinacy—tendencies which are, in me, not crime, but disease; and I can
see how to say with Paul, “Now, then, it is no more _I_ that do it, but
SIN THAT DWELLETH IN ME.”

If, now, we return to the consideration of the Orthodox doctrine of the
fall, as set forth by the Westminster Assembly, we shall find it to be
half true and half false. It states _truly_ (chap. 6, § 1) that our first
parents sinned, and also (§ 2) that by this sin they fell from their
original righteousness; for this only means that the first conscious act
of disobedience by man produced alienation from God, and degeneracy of
nature. This was no arbitrary punishment, but the natural consequence. The
creed also says _truly_ (§ 3) that this corrupted nature was conveyed to
all their posterity; for this only means, that, by the laws of descent,
good and evil qualities are transmitted; which all wise observers of human
nature knew to be the fact. It is also _true_ (§ 5) that this corrupt
nature does remain (to some extent at least), even in the regenerate, in
this life.

So far, so true. Sin, as disease, began with the first man, in his first
sin, and has been transmitted, by physical, moral, and spiritual
influences, from him to us all.

But now we find complicated with these truths other statements, which we
must need regard as falsehoods. Tried either by reason or Scripture, they
are palpably untrue, and are very dangerous errors.

The first error of Orthodoxy is in declaring transmitted or inherited evil
to be total. It declares that our first parents “were _wholly_ defiled in
all faculties and parts of soul and body,” and that _we_, in consequence,
“are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all good, and
wholly inclined to all evil.” This statement is indefensible. But we shall
consider this in another section on “Total Depravity,” and only allude to
it now in passing.

Another error, however, and a very important one, is to attribute the
_guilt_ of Adam and Eve to their descendants. This is the famous doctrine
of _imputation_, which is now rejected by all the leading schools of
modern Orthodoxy. That we can be _guilty_ of Adam’s sin, either by
imputation or in any other way, seems too absurd and immoral a statement
to be now received.

But though many intelligent Orthodox teachers and believers do now reject
the imputation of Adam’s sin, they admit what is just as false and just as
immoral a doctrine. They make us _guilty_ for that part of sin which is
_depravity_, as well as for that which is _wilful_.

Whatever, either of moral good or moral evil, proceeds from our nature,
and not from our will, has no character of merit or demerit. The reason is
evident, and is stated by the apostle Paul. We are only guilty for what we
do ourselves, we are only meritorious for what we do ourselves: but what
our nature does, we do not do. “Now, then, it is no more _I_ that do it,
but sin that dwelleth in me.”

Professor Shedd, late of Andover, some years ago published a very able
essay in the “Christian Review,” the title of which was, “Sin a Nature,
and that Nature Guilt.” This title is a sufficient refutation of the
essay. A man could not utter a more palpable contradiction, if he said,
“The sun solid, and that solid fluid,” or, “The earth black, and that
black white.”(14)

There are two kinds of moral good and two kinds of moral evil, which are
essentially different. The two kinds of moral good may be named _moral
virtue_ and _moral beauty_; the two kinds of moral evil may be named
_guilt_ and _depravity_. Now, so far as goodness proceeds from a beautiful
nature, it is not virtuous, and so far as sin proceeds from a depraved
nature, it is not guilty. We can conceive of an angelic nature with no
capacity of virtue, because incapable of guilt.

We can also conceive of a nature so depraved as to be incapable of guilt,
because incapable of virtue.




§ 6. Examination of Romans, 5:12-21.


The famous passage in Paul (Rom. 5:12-21), which is the direct scriptural
foundation claimed for the doctrine of Adam’s fall producing guilt in his
posterity, is in reality a support of our view. The only other passage (1
Cor. 15:22) where Adam is referred to, declares that we all _die_ in him,
but by no means asserts that we _sin_ in him.

The passage referred to runs thus (Rom. 5:12-18):—

Verse 12: “As by one man sin entered into the world,”—

(Paul here refers to the fact that sin BEGAN with the first man.)

“And death by sin;”—

(By means of the sin of one man, _death_ entered.)

“And so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.”

(Rather “death _came upon_ all men, _because_ all have sinned.” The
Vulgate has here _in quo_, “in whom;” that is, in Adam. So Augustine. But
even those who, like Olshausen, contend for Augustine’s views, admit that
ἐφ᾽ ῷ here is a conjunction, equivalent to _because_, and not a relative.)

The next five verses (13, 14, 15, 16, 17) constitute a parenthesis, and
refer to an objection which is not stated. Some one might say, “How could
all sin, from Adam to Moses, when there was no law till Moses? and you,
Paul, have said (Rom. 4:15), that ‘where there is no law there is no
transgression.’ ”

Paul replies that “sin is not _imputed_ without law;” that is, as I think
evident, it is not regarded as _guilt_. A man who sins ignorantly is not
_guilty_; but he _suffers_ the consequences of his sin, which are
depravity of his nature, or moral death. “Sin is not imputed,” says Paul;
“but death reigns.” Those who do not sin “after the similitude of Adam’s
transgression,”—that is, who do not violate a positive
command,—nevertheless are depraved morally, and are dead spiritually. The
Hottentots and Fejee Islanders violate no positive law given them by God,
and consequently are not guilty of that; but because they violate (even
ignorantly) the laws of their moral nature, they are depraved morally.

We see, then, that Paul distinctly recognizes the distinction made above
between _sin as guilt_ and _sin as depravity_.

He distinguishes between sin as sinfulness, or unconscious transgression
(ἡ ἁμαρτία), and sin as conscious transgression of a known command
(παράβασις).

The consequence of the first is death, or moral and spiritual depravity;
the consequence of the second is condemnation, or a sense of guilt.

Sinfulness, bringing with it depravity (the general demoralization of
human nature), began with Adam. All became involved in sinfulness, and
consequently all partook of the depravity which belongs to it as its
wages.

It should, however, be observed that it is not the purpose of Paul to
teach anything about Adam. His intention is to teach something about
Christ. He refers to Adam’s case as something they all are acquainted
with; he compares Christ’s case with it both by contrast and resemblance.
But his object is not to instruct us about Adam, but about Christ. He uses
Adam as an example to enforce his doctrine about Christ. Through Christ,
goodness and happiness were to come into the world. He illustrated this
fact, and made it appear probable, by the fact which they already
knew—that through Adam sin and death had entered the world. If it seemed
strange, in an age in which men were so disunited, that one man should be
the medium of communicating goodness to the whole human race, they might
remember that Adam also had been the medium of introducing sin to the
whole human race. If the Jews wondered that Christ should bring salvation
to those who were not under the law, they might remember that Adam had
brought death to those not under the law, and who did not sin as he did.
If they doubted how Christ’s goodness could help to make men righteous,
they might remember that in some way Adam’s transgression had helped to
make men sinners. Yet, after all, the main fact which he states is in the
twelfth verse, chapter five—“that by one man sin _entered into_ the world,
and death by sin.” This amounts to saying that sin _began_ with Adam. Then
he adds, in the same verse, “that death has passed upon all men, _because
all have sinned_.” He therefore distinctly declares that every man is
punished for his own sin, and not for the sin of Adam.

In the other passage (1 Cor. 15:22), Paul says, “As in Adam all die, even
so, in Christ, shall all be made alive.” He does not say here, either that
“all sinned in Adam,” or that “all fell in Adam,” or that “all died in
Adam.” It is the present tense, “all die in Adam.”

What he means by this, he explains himself afterwards. He tells us that as
“souls” descended from Adam, we are liable to death; as spirits quickened
by Christ, we are filled with spiritual and immortal life.

In the forty-fourth verse he gives the explanation. The body “is _sown_ a
natural body” (σῶμα ψυχικὸν)—literally a soul-body, a body vitalized by
the soul. “It is raised a spiritual body”—literally spirit-body (σῶμα
πνευματικὸν), a body vitalized by the spirit. “There is a soul-body, and
there in a spirit-body.” “And so it is written, The first man, Adam, was
made a living soul” (which is a quotation from Genesis 2:7—“and man became
a living soul”), “but the last Adam,” says Paul (meaning Christ), “became
a life-making spirit.” But, continues Paul, the soul-man (psychical man)
comes first; the spiritual-man afterwards, according to a regular order.
“The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second is the Lord from
heaven.” And then he adds,—and this is the key to the whole passage,—“_As
we have borne the __ image of the earthy_, we shall also bear the image of
_the heavenly_.” The doctrine, then, is plainly this: that we have two
natures—a soul-nature, which we derive from Adam, and share with all
mankind, which nature is liable to weakness, sin, and death; and a
spirit-nature, which we derive from God, which Christ comes to quicken and
vitalize, and the life of which constitutes our true immortality.

The apostle Paul, therefore, does not by any means teach Calvinism. The
Catechism says that “our first parents being the root of all mankind, the
guilt of their sin was imputed to all their posterity.” But Paul says, “So
death passed upon all men, because all have sinned.” The Catechism says
that “this same death in sin, and corrupted nature, being conveyed to
their posterity, makes us utterly indisposed and opposite to all good,”
and that “from this original corruption do proceed all actual
transgressions.”

But if this is so, there has been no such thing in the world as guilt
since Adam fell. If all actual transgressions proceed from original
corruption, and original corruption comes from the first transgression of
Adam, it logically follows that there has been but one sin committed in
the world since it was made, namely, the sin of Adam. All other sins have
been pure misfortunes; his alone was guilt. His transgression alone came
from a free choice; all others have come from an involuntary necessity of
nature.

Nothing can be more certain from reason and Scripture than this—that
transgressions which come from a corrupt nature are just so far done in
us, and not done by us. This the apostle distinctly affirms when he says
(7:17), “Now, then, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in
me.” No man is responsible for disease, when he has not brought that
disease on himself, but inherited it from his ancestors. The disease may
make him very odious, very disagreeable, but cannot make him blamable.
Therefore, when Calvin says that hereditary depravity “renders us
obnoxious to the divine wrath,” he utters an absurdity. This confusion of
ideas runs through all Orthodox statements on the subject, and the only
cure is, that we should learn how to make this distinction between natural
evil and moral evil, or the evil which proceeds from a corrupt nature and
the evil which comes from a free will.

If we were to sum up the doctrine of the apostle Paul on this subject, it
would be thus:—

1. The first man, Adam, consisted, as we all consist, of nature and will.
His nature consisted of innocent tendencies and appetites. None were
excessive; all were well balanced. His nature inclined him no more to evil
than to good, but each faculty was in proper poise. The first sin,
therefore, could not have been a gross one; it was a simple transgression;
but its effect was to introduce what the apostle calls _death_; that is, a
diseased or corrupt nature. The process is this: With the first conscious
and free transgression there arises a sense of guilt. This sense of guilt
leads the soul away from God. Adam and Eve hide in the garden. Every act
of sin tends to create a habit, and so destroys the moral equipoise. There
hence arises a tendency _towards_ evil, and _from_ good; and this is
called death, because it takes us away from God, who is the source of
life.

2. A tendency towards evil is thus introduced into the world by the
transgression of the first man. His descendants are now born with a nature
which is not in equipoise, but which leans more towards evil than towards
good. Their will remains free as before; but they cannot perform the same
amount of good as before. These corrupt tendencies tempt to greater sin
than the pure tendencies did, and, whenever yielded to, bring a greater
amount of moral evil into the race.

3. Things, therefore, are thus growing worse continually; for every new
act of sin makes it easier to sin again. And this tendency to death, or
estrangement from God, must go on increasing, unless some antagonist
principle can be communicated to the race. This is actually done by Jesus
Christ. The principle of life which Christ introduces consists in
reconciliation to God. Sin separates us from God, and therefore tends to
death. Christ reconciles us to God, and so gives life. The way in which
Christ reconciles us to God is by manifesting God’s pardoning and saving
love to the sinful soul. In his own life, but especially by his death, he
communicates this pardoning love, and so produces the atonement. This is
the central, Pauline view of the relation of Adam and Christ to the race.
Adam introduces death into the world: Christ introduces life. He does not
speak at all of _imputation_, or transfer of guilt; but he speaks of an
_actual communication_ of death and life. Adam and Christ both stand in
actual, and not merely ideal, connection with the whole race of man. Adam
is a living soul; Christ, a life-giving spirit. By inheritance, we receive
a depraved life of the soul from Adam; by communion, we receive an eternal
or spiritual life from Christ. And, in regard to both of these acts, the
notion of blame or merit is entirely excluded. We are not to blame for our
inherited depravity derived from Adam. We deserve no credit for the
salvation which comes to us from Christ. The compensation for the
misfortune of inherited evil is the free gift of divine goodness in Jesus.

We have thus considered the truth and the error contained in the Orthodox
doctrine of the fall. The truth of it is in its assertion of a depravity
of nature, to which we are liable in consequence of ancestral sins: the
error is in imputing guilt to us in consequence of them.




§ 7. Orthodox View of Total Depravity and Inability.


In speaking of the fall of man, we necessarily anticipated somewhat the
doctrine of total depravity. Still, we must say something further on this
doctrine, because it is so important in the Church system: it is, indeed,
at its foundation. Those who accept, in its strictness, the doctrine of
total depravity cannot avoid any point of the severest Calvinism.
Schleiermacher has shown, in his “Essay on Election,” that this latter
doctrine necessarily follows the doctrine of total depravity; for, if man
is wholly depraved, he has no power to do anything for his own conversion;
therefore God must do it. And if some are converted, and not others, it
must be because God chooses to convert some, and does not choose to
convert others.

Let us look, then, at what Orthodoxy says of the _extent_ of human
depravity. In all the principal creeds, this is stated to be unlimited.
Man’s sin is total and entire. There is nothing good in him. The
Westminster Confession and the Confession of the New England
Congregational churches describe him as “dead in sin, and wholly defiled
in all the faculties and parts of soul and body.” Other creeds use similar
language.

In considering this theory, we are struck at first by the circumstance,
that the Bible gives it very little support. The Bible continually speaks
of man as a sinner; but there are very few texts which can, without
straining, be made to _seem_ to teach that he is totally depraved. Let us
examine a few of them.




§ 8. Proof Texts.


1. A text often cited is Genesis 6:5,—the reason given for destroying the
human race, in the time of Noah, by the deluge: “And God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of
the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.” But this seems to be
a description of the state of the world at that particular time, not of
its character in all ages. It is not a description of man’s natural
condition, but of an extremely degenerate condition. If the state of the
world here described was its natural state, it would rather be a reason
for not having created the race at first; or, if it was a reason for
destroying it, it would, at best, seem to be as strong a one against
creating it again. If a man plants a tree in his garden, whose nature he
knows is to produce a certain kind of fruit, it would seem hardly a good
reason for cutting it down, that it produced that kind of fruit: certainly
it would not be a good reason for cutting it down, and planting another of
precisely the same kind in its place. The reason why the race of men was
destroyed was, that it had _degenerated_. But there were some good even
then; for in the ninth verse we are told that “Noah was a just man, and
perfect in his generation, and walked with God.”

2. There is another passage, in the fourteenth Psalm which is quoted by
Paul in Rom. 3: “There is none righteous; no, not one: there is none that
understandeth, none that seeketh after God. They have all gone out of the
way, they are together become unprofitable: there is none that doeth good;
no, not one. There is no fear of God before their eyes.”

This passage is relied on to prove total depravity. But we may reply,
that—

This also is a degenerate condition, not a natural one. It was a condition
into which men had fallen, not one in which they were born. “They have all
_gone_ out of the way; they are together _become_ unprofitable.” It does
not, therefore, apply to men _universally_, but to men in those particular
times.

It was not true of _all_, even at that particular time. It was not true of
David himself, that he did not seek after God, or have the fear of God
before his eyes; or else other passages in the same book are not true, in
which he says the contrary. “O God! early will I seek thee: my soul
thirsteth for thee; my flesh longeth for thee.” He also frequently speaks
of and to those who fear the Lord, and says, “I am a companion to all
those that fear thee.”

The “all” is not to be taken strictly. It means people generally at that
time. Just so it is said, “There went out to him Jerusalem and _all_
Judea, and _all_ the region round about Jordan;” which does not imply that
_no one_ staid at home.

“But,” it may be said, “does not Paul teach that this is to be taken
universally, when he quotes it, and adds, ‘Now we know that what the law
saith, it saith to those under the law, that every mouth be stopped, and
all the world guilty before God’ ”? We think he means to say, that, as
this is said to Jews, it proves that _Jews_, as well as Gentiles, are very
guilty. He is addressing the Jews, who boasted of their knowledge of the
law. Chap. 2: “Behold, thou art called a Jew,” &c.

3. Jer. 17:9. “The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked.”

If we suppose that we are to take this as an unlimited expression, and not
merely a strong declaration of the wickedness of the Jews, it still does
not prove total depravity of the nature, but merely that of the
affections, or “the heart.” Man’s nature has other things besides desire:
it has conscience, reason, and will; and it does not follow that these are
also depraved.

4. Rom. 8:7. “The carnal mind is enmity against God.”

This does not intend that the mind of man, in its _natural_ state, is
enmity, but in its _carnal_ state; that is, when subject to fleshly
desires. Nearly the same phrase is used in the verse before, and is
translated, “To be carnally minded is death.”

5. There is one famous passage, however, which seems to say that God is
angry with us on account of our nature. This is a passage very much
quoted, and we hear it so often that it seems as if the Bible was full of
such texts. It is in Eph. 2:3. “We were by nature _children of wrath_,
even as others.” This is quoted to prove that God is angry with men for
their natures, and hates them for being born evil—just as we may hate a
snake, a scorpion, or spider, for its nature. But, as it happens, the very
next verses show that this is impossible, unless God can be hating one of
his creatures and loving it at the very same moment.

For, in the next verse Paul says that God loved us with a great love _when
we were dead in trespasses and sins_, and children _of wrath_. It is
therefore evident that “_children of wrath_” must mean something else. It
may mean that men outside of Christianity—Jews and Gentiles—were afraid of
God; living under a constant sense of his displeasure; that God seemed to
them a terrible being, always disposed to punish them with severity. This
was the fact. Jews and Gentiles were afraid of their gods, before Christ
came, and so were “children of wrath.” Or it may mean that men are exposed
to the consequences of sin; for, in Scripture language,—


    “God’s wrathful said to be, when he doth do
    That _without wrath_ which wrath doth force us to.”


Moreover, “nature,” in Scripture usage, does not necessarily mean, “as
human beings.” It often intends external position, origin, and race. So
(in Gal. 2:15) we read, “Jews by nature;” and so (in Rom. 2:27)
“uncircumcision, which is by nature.”

The same word is used twice in James 3:7, and is translated _kind_. “Every
_kind_ of beasts, birds, serpents, things in the sea, is tamed of
man-_kind_:” literally, “the whole animal _race_ is tamed by the human
_race_.”

If φυσις here meant “constitutional depravity,” the same word in Rom. 2:14
must mean _constitutional goodness_, where we are told that some “do _by
nature_ the things contained in the law.” So, too, we read of the olive
tree, wild by nature, in Rom. 11:24.

“By nature,” here, plainly means the original condition, not the original
constitution. Just so we say that wild animals are in a state of nature,
and call savages the children of nature.

These five texts are the strongest in the Bible to support the doctrine of
total depravity, and, as such, are constantly quoted. They have very
little weight, and not one of them is from the words of Jesus.

On the other hand, there are many passages which seem to declare that
there is something good in man in his unconverted or natural state, and
that even in that state he may turn towards the light, and struggle
against evil.

John 3:20, 21. “Every one that doeth truth cometh to the light.”

Matt. 26:41. “... The spirit is willing, the flesh is weak.”

Rom. 2:24. “Gentiles, who have not the law, do by nature the things
contained in the law, and show the work of that law which is written in
the heart.”

Acts 10:35. “In every nation, he that feareth God, and worketh
righteousness, is accepted of him.”

But the passage most strikingly and thoroughly opposed to the doctrine of
total depravity, is the description, in the seventh chapter of Romans, of
the conflict between the law in the members and the law of the mind. Paul,
speaking evidently from his own experience in his unconverted state,
describes the condition of one morally depraved, who is trying to do
right, but is prevented by evil habits which have become a part of
himself. He describes this as moral death, but _not_ guilt. He says, “It
is no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me.” He describes
himself as morally impotent—_wishing_ to do right, but unable to do it. He
says _he delights in the law of God after the inner man_. The inmost is
right, but outside of that are evil habits, in the body, which drag down
the soul and enslave it. Paul therefore distinctly says that a man in such
a condition is not himself a sinner, because he does not commit the sin.
Thus he makes clear and strong the distinction we referred to above,
between depravity and guilt—between _natural evil_ and _moral evil_.

Paul teaches that man is not totally depraved, but that even in the carnal
man there is a good principle, only that it is conquered by the evil. If
the mind delights in the law of God, and the will to do right is present
with us, we evidently are not _totally_ depraved; but the total depravity,
if anywhere, is in the flesh only, as Paul plainly says: “I know that in
me (that is, in _my flesh_) dwelleth no good thing;” that is, the
depravity is physical, not moral. But physical depravity is not guilt, but
only disease.




§ 9. Truth in the Doctrine of Total Depravity.


Nevertheless there is a sense in which man may be said to be often totally
sinful; but this is only in a total alienation of the will from God. It is
not a total depravity, but a total alienation. There is a natural
depravity, but it is not total. But the choice may be totally perverted,
when it chooses darkness instead of light, evil instead of good.

Let us see what there is of this in man.

The gospel of Christ, as we understand it, undertakes to effect an entire
change, a radical reformation, in human character. It proposes to reform
the life by changing the heart, by giving new aims, new affections, new
aspirations, new objects of love and pursuit. Jesus does not endeavor to
alter and improve, a little here and a little there, on the outside of the
character, to improve a little our modes of action in this and the other
particular; but he alters the conduct and character by altering the
fundamental ideas, and inspiring an inward life. This wonderful change,
which takes place in the profoundest depth of our nature, under the
influence of the Gospel,—this great event of life, which forms the
turning-point of our being and history,—is called in the New Testament
“the new birth,” “regeneration,” “to be born again,” “conversion,” “a new
creation,” “to be born of God,” “to be baptized with the Holy Ghost and
with fire,” “to put off the old man,” “to have Christ formed within us.”
It is a very superficial view which explains away the meaning of all these
profound expressions, and supposes that they only signify a little outward
improvement and reformation. We need just such a change as is here
described—a radical one, not a superficial one. All need it. Those who are
the most pure in heart and most blameless in character (spotless children,
as they seem to us, of a heavenly world) feel their own need of this
change no less than do the profligate and openly vicious. Parents and
friends say, “We have no fault to find with them.” They do not say they
have no fault to find with themselves. They feel they have all kinds of
fault to find with themselves, and nothing is so painful to them as this
commendation. They say, “Outwardly we may seem innocent, but we feel an
inward want that weighs on our heart like a frost.”

“This is a true saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners.” It is because we are sinners that we
need to experience this great change. We do not wish to exaggerate the
amount of human sinfulness. Theologians have carried their attacks on
human nature quite too far, and the result has often been that men have
looked on sin as a sort of theological matter, which has nothing to do
with actual life. They have cheerfully admitted that they were totally
depraved by nature, and could not think or will a good thing, and then
have thought no worse of themselves than before. We know that there is
something good in man, something which God loves, some pure aspiration
even in the natural heart, some throbs of generosity, some warnings of
conscience, some pure love, some courageous virtue, in the humblest, the
most depraved, the most abandoned. There are some flowers of sweetest
perfume which spring up in the uncultivated soil of the natural heart on
which God and his angels smile, for the seeds of those flowers God himself
planted. We have seen harebells, graceful and lovely as the sweetest
greenhouse plant, growing out of a sand-heap; and we have seen some
disinterested, generous benevolence in the mind of a hardened profligate.
It is not, therefore, because there is nothing good in man that he needs a
change of heart, but because he is destitute of a deep-rooted and living
goodness till this change has taken place.

Look at the _actual sins_ of men. The majority of men, in a civilized
community like ours, do not commit great crimes, or fall into flagrant
vices, because they have little to attract them to such a course, and much
to deter them from it. They are aiming at those objects which they need
the countenance, aid, and good opinion of their fellow-men to obtain, to
be glaringly vicious would make it impossible. Also, there is a certain
amount of conscience which restrains them—the influence of good education
and good habits which preserves a certain uprightness and purity of
character. But is it a deep principle? If so, why do the vast majority of
men allow themselves in many small violations of the same laws which they
would not break on a large scale? They would not steal; yet they commit
every day some slight acts not perfectly honest; they take advantage of
others in little things. They would not lie; yet they exaggerate, and
conceal part of the truth, and color their statements to produce an
effect. They would not kill; but they are willing to injure one who has
interfered with their interests. With these tendencies and feelings, why
would they not, under different influences, commit greater crimes? How
often do we feel, in talking with the criminal and abandoned, that, in
their circumstances and with their temptations, we might have been as bad
as they!

Does not all this show that there is a deep and hidden fountain of evil
within our hearts which is restrained by external influences, by checks
and barriers with which God has kindly surrounded us? and if these were
taken away, it would break out into something far worse than now appears.
How much there is of evil under the smooth surface of refined society! How
many thoughts of sin pass to and fro in the heart while the countenance
seems pure and calm! Who ever looked into the interior depths of our most
moral community, and saw all the secret sins and pollutions which are
hidden there? Every now and then there occurs in the midst of the most
refined classes some startling revelation of long-concealed wickedness
which makes men look each other in the face and draw a long breath, as
though they should say, “Which of us will next fall?” So in the midst of a
fruitful country, of lakes, and valleys, and vine-clad hills, the earth
will sometimes open, and a river of melted lava pour forth, desolating all
around. We hear of this with wonder, and do not think that right beneath
our own feet, a few miles down, under these smooth fields and gentle
plains, that same fiery ocean is rolling its red billows. God has laid his
hand upon our heart, and restrains its lawless passions as he restrains
the tornadoes, and earthquakes, and volcanic fires; else they might easily
hurry us to swift destruction.

Still, if this were all, no radical change might be necessary. It might be
enough that by effort, and self-discipline, and direction of the thoughts,
we gradually overcome our evil habits and tendencies; but when we resolve
to do so, and make the effort, we meet with an unexpected resistance. “The
spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.” “I find a law in my members
warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the
law of sin in my members.” The Church has long asserted the doctrine of an
hereditary depravity; and we have seen that there is more truth in it than
we have sometimes supposed. It is not total, but it is real. Besides the
sins of our own committing, there are the sins which our ancestors have
committed, which have made themselves part of our bone and flesh. We are
not exactly balanced in our natural state; there is a preponderating
tendency towards evil in one or another direction.

This forms too fearful an alliance with circumstances, the moment they
become powerful to draw us away from good. A friend of ours, some years
since, was making a trip up the Lakes, late in the season. As they entered
Lake Huron from the River St. Clair in the noble steamer, the skies were
serene, and she ploughed her way on towards the north, so that by night
the land had sunk almost out of sight. But then the wind began to freshen,
the sea rose, and as the night advanced, and the wind blew harder and
harder, the boat strained and staggered along, occasionally struck hard by
a heavier sea, till at last one of her wheels was carried away, and the
fires were put out by the water. How long and anxious was that night! How
many prayed then who never prayed before! When morning came, the boat was
found to be drifting before the wind and waves, directly upon a rocky
shore on the south-east side of the lake. There was no help in man; but a
gracious Providence all at once caused the storm to lull, so that a fire
could be built, and with one wheel the boat got into a harbor. Man seems a
powerful being when he is surrounded by favorable circumstances, and is
going with a fair wind and fair weather; but let the wind change, and his
weakness becomes apparent. He who just now breasted the tide, is now
drifting helplessly before it.

But there is a difficulty far worse than any we have mentioned. We might
conquer the sin which most easily besets us, we might conquer our inherent
evil tendencies, and outgrow them, if we really wished to do so; but the
deepest of all evils is a want of love for God and for goodness. We know
that we ought to love and obey God; but our heart is alienated from him.
The great mass of men are living away from God. They are not conscious of
his presence, though they know that he is near to them. Though they know
that his eye is upon them, it does not restrain them from sin. Though they
know that their heavenly Father and best Friend is close at hand, how
seldom do they pray! how seldom look up with gratitude for all their
mercies and joys! This shows a terrible estrangement of soul from God. The
veil is on their _hearts_, not on their minds.

The question is sometimes asked, “whether sin is a positive or merely a
negative evil.” Now, whatever may be the case with other kinds of sin,
this alienation of the heart seems to us a very positive evil; for it is
an antagonism, and resistance of goodness. If the supreme goodness of God
does not attract us, does not excite our affection, does not irresistibly
draw us to him, then it repels us; it makes the thought of his presence a
restraint and burden; it makes us wish to go away from God. The goodness
of God is so very positive a thing, that we cannot be indifferent to it;
we cannot be neutral in regard to it. If we do not love it, it is
disagreeable, and we are uncomfortable in the thought of it. Swedenborg
relates that certain wicked persons were allowed to enter heaven on a
certain occasion; but they immediately became almost lifeless, and, from
the torment and pain in their head and body, prostrated themselves on the
ground, and writhed like worms; but, being taken and carried into hell,
became comparatively comfortable. What can be more terrible than the idea
thus conveyed of our aversion to goodness, which makes heaven intolerable,
and the presence of God insufferable torture! Can anything express, more
than this, the need of a change of heart?

Jesus, we think, asserts a similar view when he says, “He that is not with
me is against me.” “No man can serve two masters; for he will either love
the first and hate the last, or love the last and hate the first.” He will
not be indifferent to either, if their characters and commands are of an
opposite kind.

We do not mean to say that we _hate_ God; but we mean that there is
something within us, while our hearts are not wholly his, which makes it
unpleasant and burdensome to think of God and pray to him. We feel a
certain repugnance to a familiar and happy intercourse with our heavenly
Father. Our prayers, if we pray, are formal and cold; our hearts are hard,
and their affections do not flow easily upward.

Now, if there be such a thing as a change of heart, which will make it a
pleasure to pray, a joy to think of God; which will make it natural to us
to approach him, and dwell on the thought of his goodness; which will
enable us to see him in the majesty and sweetness of nature, in the rise
of empires or the death of an infant, in the coming of Christ, and in
every good thought which swells in our souls,—then it is evident that this
is what we need. Let us dig deep, and build our house upon a rock.

We shall see in another section that there is such a change of heart as we
have described. Jesus saves sinners by taking away the heart of stone, and
giving a heart of flesh. He saw the whole depth and extent of the disease
which he came to cure. There are some preachers who do not know how great
an evil sin is, and would not know what to do for a penitent and anxious
soul which really saw the greatness of its needs. Thus, when George Fox
went to the rector of his church to ask advice for the distress of his
soul, he was told to amuse himself and divert his mind. But Jesus saw all
the extent of sin, and yet was ready to encourage and help the sinner. He
knew that his remedy was equal to the emergency. The gospel of Christ can
give to us love to God and love to man; can soften our hearts in humility,
can enable us to fight with and conquer even the hereditary evil of our
organization; can ultimately redeem us from all evil. This is the
depravity we are to conquer; not of nature, but of will, and aim, and
purpose.




§ 10. Ability and Inability.


One of the pivotal points in the Orthodox theory of evil is that of _moral
inability_. Indeed, the doctrine of total depravity seems to be taught for
the sake of this. Total depravity resolves itself, in the mind of the
Orthodox teacher, into total inability, and means that man, unable to do
right by any power in himself, must throw himself wholly and absolutely on
the divine grace. The secret motive of the whole Orthodox doctrine of evil
is to lead through a sense of sin to humility, and at last to dependence.
Orthodoxy here becomes intelligible, so soon as we perceive that its
purpose is not speculative, but practical. As religion consists so greatly
in the sentiment of dependence, it is a leading purpose in the Orthodox
system to produce this sense of dependence. That group of
graces—reverence, humility, submission, trust, prayer—which lend such an
ineffable charm to the moral nature, which purify and refine it to its
inmost depths,—these spring almost wholly from the sense of dependence on
a higher and better being than ourselves. These being absent, the
elevating principle is wanting; the man cannot rise above himself. There
may be truth, courage, conscience, purity, but they are all stoical and
self-relying. It is only he who relies on a higher power, clings to a
higher being, and draws his moral life from above, who can ascend. He who
humbles himself, and he only, shall be exalted. But humility does not
consist in looking down, but in looking up. It does not come from looking
at our own meanness, but at something higher and better than ourselves.
The sense of sin is only elevating when connected with the sight of a
higher beauty and holiness.

It is, therefore, in order to produce a conviction of absolute dependence
that Orthodoxy urges so strongly the doctrines of total depravity and
total inability. A man will not pray, says the Orthodox system, till he
feels himself helpless. He will not seek a Saviour so long as he hopes to
save himself. He must see that he can do nothing more for himself; and
then, for the first time, he exercises a real faith in God, and casts
himself on the divine mercy.

Reasoning in this way, consciously or unconsciously, Orthodoxy has built
up its doctrine of human inability, which we will proceed to state,—first,
however, indicating the scriptural view of this subject.

Scripture teaches that man is able to choose the right, but not always
able to perform it. He is free in his spirit, but bound by circumstances
of position, and by bodily organization. He is free to choose, but not
free to do. His freedom is in effort, not necessarily in accomplishment.
He can always try; he cannot always effect what he tries.

Thus Jesus says (Matt. 26:41), “Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation; the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.” And so
Paul says, in the passage on this subject before referred to (Rom. 7:18),
“To will is present with me, but how to perform that which I will, I find
not.”

Without attempting here to enter into the tormented question of fate and
freedom, of necessity so irrefragably demonstrated by the logic of Edwards
and others,—of free-will perpetually reasserted by the intuitive reason in
the soul,—we may say this: Whether there be such a thing as metaphysical
freedom or not, there is such a thing as moral freedom. In proportion as
man sinks into the domain of nature, he is bound by irresistible laws. In
proportion as he rises into the sphere of reason, justice, truth, love, he
is emancipated, and can direct his own course. “Ye shall know the truth,
and the truth shall make you free.” “If the Son, therefore, shall make you
free, ye shall be free indeed.” (John 8:32, 36.) “Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free.” (Gal. 5:1.) It is therefore
true that only as we direct our course by eternal laws, we rise above the
controlling influence of habit, prejudice, public opinion, inherited and
original tendencies of the blood and brain. According to Paul (Rom.
6:16-22), man must be either the servant of sin or the servant of God. He
must serve, willingly or unwillingly. He must be the degraded slave of
desire and selfishness, or the willing, loyal subject of truth and right.
Paradoxically enough, however, he only feels free in these two cases. For
in these two states he is doing what he chooses to do. When he is blindly
and willingly following his lower instincts he feels free. When he is
rationally and freely choosing right, and doing it, he also feels free.
But when half way between these two states, when his conscience is pulling
one way and his desires drawing him the other, when he is choosing right
and doing wrong, he feels himself a slave.

There are therefore these three conditions of the will, corresponding to
the Pauline division of man into spirit, soul, and body (1 Tim. 5:23)—a
view of man which was held throughout antiquity. The carnal man (σαρκικος)
is one in whom the earthly appetites are supreme, and the soul, (ψυχη) and
spirit (πνευμα) subordinate. The natural man (ψυχικος ανθρωπος, 1 Cor.
2:14) is one in whom the soul, or central principle, the finite will, is
supreme. The spiritual man (πνευματικος, 1 Cor. 2:15) is he in whom the
infinite principle, the sense of eternal truth and right, is supreme. In
the first condition—that of the carnal man—one is the slave of sin, but
without knowing it, because there is no wish to become anything different.
In the second state—that of the natural man (or psychical man)—the soul
chooses the good, but is drawn down by the evil. The law of the mind is
warring against the law of the members, and the man is torn asunder by
this conflict. He tries to do right, and does wrong. He now first feels
himself a slave; yet he is in reality _less_ a slave than before, for now
he is endeavoring to escape. His _will_ is emancipated, though his habits
of conduct, his habits of thought, his habits of feeling, still bind him
fast. In the third condition, that of the spiritual man, he has broken
these chains. He not only wills to do right, but does it. His body shares
in the new life of his soul. He now is made free by the truth and the
spirit from the service of evil, and shares in “the glorious liberty of
the children of God.”

In all these conditions the human being has some freedom, but differing in
degree in each. In the lowest state he has freedom of action, for he does
what he wishes to do; but he has not freedom of choice, for he does not
choose at all. He acts not by intelligent choice, but by blind instinct,
habit or custom. In the middle state he has freedom of choice, but not of
action. He chooses the good, but performs the evil. This is the condition
described by Ovid, and other profane writers, before Paul described it in
the seventh chapter of Romans.(15) But in the highest state—a spiritual
condition—he has both freedoms; he can both choose and perform. The carnal
man seems to be free, but is most thoroughly enslaved of all. The
psychical man seems to himself to be enslaved, but has begun to be free.
The spiritual man both seems to be free and is so. The apparent freedom of
the carnal man differs from the real freedom of the spiritual man in
this—the spiritual man could do wrong if he chose to do so, but chooses to
do right. But the carnal man could not do right if he should choose. A
good man, if he chose to do so, might lie, and steal, and drink, and be
profane; but a bad man could not, by choosing, become temperate, pure,
truthful, and honest.

Scripture and experience give, therefore, the same account of human
ability and inability. In the lowest state man is the servant of sense,
and can neither will nor do right. In the higher condition he can will,
but cannot perform; for his ideal aim is above his actual power. In the
highest, or regenerate, state he can both will and do. Body, as well as
soul, serve the spirit.

                  -------------------------------------

These are the truths which lie at the basis of the Orthodox doctrine of
inability. But Orthodoxy, in its desire to awaken a sense of dependence,
has pushed them to an unreasonable extreme. It asserts that man, in his
natural state, before he is regenerated, has _no_ power to will or to do
right. It is evident, however, that all men have power to will and to do
_many_ right things. Even in the lowest condition, a man wills and does
much that is right. Though the governing principle be the lowest one, he
can yet perform many good actions. In the second condition also, the
psychical man, though not able _always_ to do right, _often_ succeeds in
doing so. And in this state the apostle declares that _he_ does not do the
evil, but “sin that dwells in him.” So long as his _purpose_ is right, he
is right.




§ 11. Orthodox Doctrine of Inability.


Let us see what Orthodoxy says of the inability of the unregenerate man.
The Assembly’s Confession declares (chap. 6, § 4), that by our corrupt
nature “we are utterly indisposed, disabled, and made opposite to all
good, and wholly inclined to all evil.” In chap. 9, § 3, it says that
“man, by his fall into a state of sin, hath wholly lost all ability of
will to any spiritual good accompanying salvation.”

This seems plain enough. It would justify the charge made by Dr. Cox, that
there are those who teach that “a man has no ability to do his duty,”(16)
and “that, where the means of grace are abundantly vouchsafed, a man can
do nothing for, but can only counteract, his own salvation.” It would also
seem to lay a fit foundation for that kind of Calvinistic preaching which,
according to Professor Finney, of Oberlin (see “Revival Lectures”),
virtually amounts to saying,


    “You can, and you can’t;
    You shall, and you shan’t;
    You will, and you won’t;
    You’ll be damned if you don’t.”


These charges, it must be noticed, are brought against Calvinism, not by
us, but by Presbyterian divines, themselves holding to this same
Westminster Confession.

But let us look at some of the expositions given to this doctrine of
inability by modern Orthodox authorities.

(_a._) _The Old School Presbyterians._—As stated by one of their own
number (Professor Atwater, of Princeton College, Bibliotheca Sacra,
January, 1864), they hold an inability “moral, sinful, and real,”
“irremovable by the sinner’s own power.” He sets aside the objection that
we are not bound to do what we are unable to do, by saying that this
applies to actions only, not to sinful dispositions. He illustrates this
by saying that an irrepressible disposition to slander would be only so
much more culpable. But in this he is evidently wrong. Such a habit has
become a disease, and the unfortunate victim is no longer accountable for
what he does.

(_b._) _The New School Presbyterians._—(Rev. George Duffield, in
Bibliotheca Sacra, July, 1863.) Although Dr. Duffield objects to the
language of the Old School Presbyterians in denying “free agency,” and
regarding man “as destitute of ability as a block of marble,” he yet
declares that the New School, as well as the Old, believe that in the
unconverted state “man can do nothing morally good.” Still, he adds, men
can accept the offers of salvation made by Jesus Christ. But he positively
denies that “man, in his natural state, independent of the gospel and
Spirit of Christ, has ability _perfectly_ to obey _all_ the commandments
of God.” We suppose that most persons would agree with him in this
statement.

(_c._) _The Old School in New England Theology._—(Bibliotheca Sacra,
April, 1863. Article by Professor Lawrence, East Windsor, Connecticut.)
This writer contends that human inability is moral, and not natural—a
distinction much dwelt upon by the Hopkinsians, but rejected by the Old
School Presbyterians. This system differs from the Arminian or Methodist
view in insisting that man has power enough to sin, though not enough to
obey.

(_d._) _Hopkinsianism._—(Bibliotheca Sacra, July, 1862.) The Hopkinsians
profess to contend for free agency, in order to save responsibility. They
adopt the ideas of Edwards on free agency. But freedom, with them,
consists only in choice. Whatever we choose, we choose freely. The carnal
man is as free in choosing evil as the spiritual man in choosing good. All
real freedom in this system disappears in a juggle of words.

The result of this examination will show that the great body of the
Orthodox, of all schools, continues to deny any real ability in the
unregenerate man to do the will of God. They do not _say_ that “man has no
power to do his duty,” but that is the impression left by their teaching.
The distinction between natural and moral inability is insufficient; for
it is as absurd to say that a man is unable not to sin, when you only mean
that he chooses to sin, as it would he to say, when invited to eat your
dinner, “I am unable to eat,” meaning only that you were unwilling.
Besides, if inability is moral, it is in the will, and not in the nature,
and so is not natural depravity at all. It is also making God unjust to
teach that he considers us guilty for a misfortune. If we derive a
corrupted nature from Adam, that is our misfortune, and not our fault, and
God owes us not anger, but pity. Instead of punishing us, he should
compensate us for this disaster.

Therefore the unreason, the want of logic, and the absence of any just
view of God, appear, more or less, throughout these statements. For where
there is no ability, there can be no guilt. Just as soon as man ceases to
have the power to do right, he ceases to have the power to do wrong.
Inability and guilt, which are connected by all these creeds, logically
exclude each other. If our nature is incapable of doing good, then it is
incapable of committing sin. One or the other must be given up. Keep which
you will, but you cannot keep both. We may be totally depraved by our
nature; but then we cease to be sinners, and cease to be guilty. Or we may
be going wholly wrong, and so be sinful, but then we have the power of
going right.

This is the inconsistency in almost all Orthodox systems. By dwelling so
much on human weakness, they destroy at last the sense of responsibility.




§ 12. Some further Features of Orthodox Theology concerning Human
Sinfulness.


In the article in the Bibliotheca Sacra before referred to (April, 1863),
by Edward A. Lawrence, D. D., Professor at East Windsor, Connecticut, on
“The Old School in New England Theology,” the writer gives the following
account of the doctrines of this body concerning sin:—

“God created man a holy being. He was not merely innocent, as not having
committed sin, not merely pure, as not inheriting any derived evil, but
was positively holy in his very being.” This, we suppose, must mean that
he was inclined by nature to do right, rather than wrong. It was as
natural for him to love God as for a fish to swim or a bird to fly.
Nothing less than this, certainly, would deserve to be called “holiness of
being.”

“The first man,” says Professor Lawrence, “was the federal head of this
race, representatively and by covenant, as no other father has been or can
be with his children.” This is illustrated by the fact of a legal
corporation, whose members are responsible in law for the actions of their
agent.

Professor Lawrence explains the belief of the Old School in the imputation
of Adam’s sin thus: It was not the personal guilt of Adam which was
imputed to his descendants, but “certain disastrous consequences.” They,
as well as he, became “subject to temporal and eternal death.” The next
consequence of Adam’s sin we must give in Professor Lawrence’s own
language, in order not to misrepresent him. “The first evil disposition
which led to the evil choice was not only confirmed in him as an
individual, but also as a quality of human nature, and it reappears,
successively, in each one of them.” Imputation, therefore, means not the
transfer of guilt, but of a corrupt nature. “It is not a sin to be born
sinful; but the sin with which men are born is nevertheless sinful.” Then
follows this statement: “We are strictly guilty only for our own sin; but
the sinfulness with which we are born is as really ours as if it
originated in our own act.”

This, again, is explained by defining guilt as liability to punishment on
account of the acts of another, “as when the members of a corporation
suffer from the ill management of its agent.” This he calls corporate
guilt.

The Old School doctrine, according to this writer, concerning sin, makes
it a state rather than an act. It is not merely the act of disobedience,
but the wrong bias of the will, out of which the act proceeds. He thinks
it wrong to call “sin a nature,” for neither the substance of the soul,
nor its faculties, are sinful. The depravity of nature is not choice, so
much as tendency which leads to choice. It is hereditary, being
transmitted from father to son.

The old theology, therefore, predicates sinfulness of human nature;
affirms sin to be a wrong state or bias of will; considers it to be
hereditary; regards new-born infants as depraved, but thinks that those of
them who die in infancy, before actual transgression, are renewed and
saved by the blood of Christ; and considers temporal death as a part of
the penalty of sin.

Upon this statement of the Old School doctrine, the following criticisms
naturally occur:—

First. If original righteousness was holiness of nature, and not mere
innocence; if it was a positive tendency to good, and not merely a state
of indifference between good and evil; then, we ask, What produced the
fall? What motive led to the commission of the first sin? If the nature of
the first man was holy, there was nothing in it which could lead him to
sin, and any external temptation addressed to such a nature must fall
powerless before it. It would be like trying to tempt a fish to fly in the
air, or like tempting a bird to go into the water. Even if the first man
could have been induced by any deception or external influence to commit a
wrong act, this would not be sinful, because there would be no sinful
motive behind it. A wrong act proceeding from a holy nature is either an
impossibility or a mere innocent mistake. Our first criticism, therefore,
on the Old School doctrine of sin, is, that it makes Adam’s fall an
impossibility.

Second. As regards Adam’s federal headship and the illustration of a
corporation, we say, that the members of a corporation are not considered
guilty in consequence of the acts of their agent, although they may suffer
in consequence of these acts. If he commits forgery they may lose money
thereby, but no one would think of calling them forgers. The sin of a
parent may be visited upon his children to the third or fourth generation,
but in their case it is neither punishment nor guilt, but only misfortune.
When Professor Lawrence, therefore, says, that “we are guilty for the
sinfulness with which we are born, because it is really ours,” he utters a
moral absurdity, and strikes at the root of all moral distinctions. He
says, “The sinfulness with which we are born is really ours;” but in what
sense ours? Only as any congenital disease may be called _ours_. If a man
is born with a tendency to consumption, blindness, lameness, he may say,
“my lameness, my near-sightedness.” But no one would suppose that he meant
thereby to hold himself responsible for them, or to consider himself
guilty because of them. It is absurd to speak of “corporate guilt.” The
corporate guilt, for example, of the stockholders of a bank, because of
the crime of an absconding teller!

The natural objection to this illustration of a corporation is, that those
who enter into a corporation do it by a free act, and make themselves
voluntarily responsible. But _we_ did not consent that Adam should be our
agent. We did not agree that if Adam should commit a single act of
disobedience we should be born totally depraved, and liable to everlasting
torments in consequence. Professor Lawrence replies, that it would have
been impossible for God to ask our consent, and therefore, apparently he
supposes that God took for granted that we would consent. This seems to be
no answer to the objection. If it was impossible for God to obtain our
consent, before we were born, to incur this awful danger, he was not
compelled to expose us to it. It is an insult to the justice of the
Almighty to assume that he could have done so.

Third. Professor Lawrence does not think it correct to say that “sin is a
nature.” But why not, if it be a universal and constant element, an
original and permanent state of the soul? To say that human nature is
sinful, but deny that sin is a nature, seems to be making a distinction
without a difference. It is a disposition to sin born with the child. Now,
say what we will, such a disposition to sin thus born with us is not guilt
but misfortune. A just God will not hold us responsible for it, but will
hold himself responsible to help us out of it. As a faithful Creator, he
is bound to do so, and will do so.

It is common for theologians to deny all such assertions as these last.
They hold it irreverent to say that God owes anything to his creatures.
They accumulate responsibility upon man, but deny responsibility to God.
But in doing this they take from the Almighty all moral character.
Calvinism, especially, makes of the Deity infinite power and infinite
will. But no blasphemy is worse than that which, though with the best
intentions, virtually destroys the moral character of the Almighty,
reducing him to an infinite will: that is, making of him an infinite
tyrant. For the essence of tyranny is the union of power and will in a
ruler, who recognizes no obligations towards his subjects.

The book of Job seems to have been written partly to refute this sort of
Calvinism. The friends of Job were Calvinists in this sense. The sum of
their argument was that, since God was all-powerful, therefore whatever he
did must be right; and, since he punished Job, Job must be a sinner, and
ought to confess his sin whether he saw it or not. This has been, in all
ages, the substance of Calvinism—Jewish Calvinism, Mohammedan Calvinism,
Christian Calvinism. It declares that we are bound to submit to God, not
because he is good, but because he is powerful. But the answer of Job to
his friends is a rebuke to the same spirit wherever shown. He asks them
“if they will speak with unfairness for God,” and “speak deceitfully for
him,” and “accept his person.” He declares that if he could find God he
would go before his throne and defend his own cause. “Would he contend
with me with his mighty power? No! he would have regard unto me.”

This is the sin of Calvinism, that it “accepts the person of the
Almighty,” assuming that he has a right to do as he pleases with his
creatures, and that they have no rights which he is bound to respect,
except that of being punished. Thus it destroys the moral character of the
Almighty.

Fourth. Professor Lawrence says, “It is the general belief of the Old
School that those who die in infancy before actual transgression, are
renewed and saved by the blood of Christ.”

The power of infancy is wonderful. It can even break down the logic of
Calvinism. Wordsworth was right in calling the infant—


    “Mighty prophet! Seer blest!
    On whom those truths do rest
    Which we are toiling all our lives to find.”


Every kind of theology, however savage and bitter it may be against adult
sinners, sending them into an eternal hell without the least hesitation or
remorse, hesitates and stammers when it comes to speak of little children.
Even the idolatrous Jews, sacrificing their children to Moloch in the
valley of Hinnom, beat drums to drown their cries, which they could not
bear to hear. Both schools of theology, Old and New, hasten to say that
infants are not to be damned. But _why_ not, if they are born with a
depraved nature, and die without being converted? Both the great schools
of Presbyterian theology hold to the doctrine of the Assembly’s Catechism,
which declares (chap. 6, § 6), that “every sin, both original and actual,
being a transgression of the righteous law of God, and contrary thereunto,
doth, in its own nature, bring guilt upon the sinner, whereby he is bound
over to the wrath of God.” Therefore the infant who dies before he has
exercised repentance and faith in Christ, is under the wrath of God.
Orthodoxy does not allow of repentance in the other life: how, then, can
infants be saved according to Orthodoxy? Professor Lawrence can only
reply, that it is _a general belief_ that they will be saved. The
Catechism declares, less decidedly, that “elect infants” will be saved.
Dr. Whedon (Bibliotheca Sacra, April, 1862), on behalf of the Methodists,
says, “That the dying infant is saved, and saved by the atonement, all
agree.” But _how_ he is saved, or what reason they have to think him
saved, except their wish to believe it, no one can tell. Death, in fact,
becomes to the infant a saving sacrament. As long as he lives he is
believed unregenerate and unconverted. As soon as he dies he is considered
ready for heaven. But he cannot be ready for heaven until he is
regenerate; and after death there is no such thing as obtaining a new
heart, and no opportunity for repentance. Logically, therefore, the infant
is converted by the mere act of dying. We presume that no Orthodox
theologians would assert this; and yet we really do not see how they can
avoid the conclusion.

But why is it any worse for children to be damned in consequence of Adam’s
sin than for adults to be damned? Orthodoxy assures us that in consequence
of Adam’s sin we are born depraved. Dr. Duffield, stating and defending
the doctrines of the New School Presbyterian Church (Bibliotheca Sacra,
July, 1863), says that Adam subjected his posterity to such a loss that
they are born without any righteousness, are exposed to the consequences
of his transgression, and all become sinners as soon as they are capable
of it. He quotes with approbation from a protest of the New School
minority, in the General Assembly of 1837 (which he calls a document of
great historic value), an assertion that “by reason of the sin of Adam,
the race are treated as if they had sinned;” and from another document of
the same school which says, that “we are all born with a tendency to sin,
which makes it morally certain that we shall do so.” Now, we do not see
why it is any worse to send infants to hell because of this depraved
nature, than to send grown persons there who have sinned in consequence of
possessing such a depraved nature. If it be said that adults have had an
opportunity to repent, and have not accepted it, we reply, that to the
mass of mankind no such opportunity is offered; that, where it is offered,
no one has the power to accept it, except he be one of the elect; and that
at all events, since infants are sure to be saved, and a very large
proportion of adults are very likely to be lost, _death in infancy is the
most desirable thing possible_. According to this doctrine, child-murder
becomes almost a virtue.

The radical difficulty in all these theories consists in refusing to apply
to God the same rules of justice which we apply to man. To do so implies
no irreverence, but the highest reverence. There is nothing more honorable
to the Almighty than to believe him to be actuated by the same great
principles of right which he has written in our conscience and heart.
Those laws of eternal justice, so deeply engraven on the fleshly tables of
the heart, are a revelation of the character of God himself. If we think
to honor him by rejecting these intuitions of the reason, and by
substituting for this divine idea of a God of justice that of a being of
arbitrary will, who is under no obligations to his creatures, we deeply
dishonor the Almighty and fatally injure our own character. From this
perverted view of God comes a cynical view of man. When we make _will_
supreme in God, we legitimate all tyranny and contempt from man to man.
Then comes the state of things described by Shakespeare:—


    “Force should be right, or, rather, right and wrong
    (Between whose endless jar justice resides)
    Should lose their names, and so should justice too.
    Then everything includes itself in power,
    Power into will, will into appetite;
    And appetite, a universal wolf,
    So doubly seconded with will and power,
    Must make perforce a universal prey,
    And, last, eat up himself.”

            _Shakespeare_, Troilus and Cressida.





