CHAPTER IV. TRUTHS AND ERRORS AS REGARDS MIRACLES.




§ 1. The Subject stated. Four Questions concerning Miracles.


In considering the truth and error in the Orthodox doctrine concerning
miracles, we must, _first_, find out what this doctrine is; _secondly_,
see what objections have been urged against it; and so, lastly, we may
come to some conclusion as to where the truth or the error lies. There
are, however, four distinct questions in regard to miracles, each of which
may be considered separately. There is the philosophic question, or
definition of a miracle, which asks, What is a miracle? Then there is the
historical question, which asks, Did such facts actually occur? Next is
the theological question, What are the value and weight of these facts in
determining our Christian belief? And lastly comes the religious question,
What are the spiritual meaning of miracles, and their influence on the
heart and life?




§ 2. The Definition of a Miracle.


As the creeds give no authoritative definition of a miracle, we must
examine individual statements, in order to get the Orthodox idea.

To answer the question, _What is a miracle?_ is not as easy as it would
seem, as will appear from considering the different definitions given by
different authorities, taking first those of the dictionary.


    JOHNSON. “_Miracle._ A wonder—something above human power. (In
    theology.) An effect above human or natural power, performed in
    attestation of some truth.”

    WEBSTER. “_Miracle._ (In theology.) An event or effect contrary to
    the established constitution and course of things, or a deviation
    from the known laws of nature; a supernatural event.”

    ROBINSON’S BIBLE DICTIONARY. “_Miracle._ A sign, wonder, prodigy.
    These terms are commonly used in Scripture to denote an action,
    event, or effect, superior (or contrary) to the general and
    established laws of nature. And they are given, not only to true
    miracles, wrought by saints or prophets sent by God, but also to
    the false miracles of impostors, and to wonders wrought by the
    wicked, by false prophets or by devils.” After giving examples of
    this from the Scriptures, Robinson adds, “Miracles and prodigies,
    therefore, are not always sure signs of the sanctity of those who
    perform them, nor proofs of the truth of the doctrine they
    deliver, nor certain testimonies of their divine mission.”

    AMERICAN ENCYCLOPŒDIA. _Miracle._ “It is usually defined to be a
    deviation from the course of nature. But this definition seems to
    omit one of the elements of a miracle, viz., that it is an event
    produced by the interposition of an intelligent power for moral
    purposes; for, otherwise, we must consider every strange
    phenomenon, which our knowledge will not permit us to explain, as
    a miraculous event. A revelation is itself a miracle. If one
    claims to be a teacher from God, he asserts a miraculous
    communication with God; this communication, however, cannot be
    visible, and visible miracles may therefore be necessary to give
    credibility to his pretensions. The use, then, of a miraculous
    interposition in changing the usual course of nature is to prove
    the moral government of God, and to explain the character of it.”

    THEODORE PARKER. “A miracle is one of three things.

    “1. It is a transgression of all law which God has made; or,

    “2. A transgression of all known laws, or obedience to a law which
    we may yet discover; or,

    “3. A transgression of all law known or knowable by man, but yet
    in conformity with some law out of our reach.”

    He says that a miracle, according to the first definition, is
    impossible; according to the second it is no miracle at all; but
    that there is no antecedent objection to a miracle according to
    the third hypothesis.

    PASCAL. “A miracle is an effect which exceeds the natural force of
    the means employed to bring it about.”

    HUME. “A miracle is a violation of a law of nature.”

    DR. THOMAS BROWN. “A miracle is as little contrary to any law of
    nature as any other phenomenon. It is only an extraordinary event,
    the result of extraordinary circumstances; an effect that
    indicates a power of a higher order than those we are accustomed
    to trace in phenomena more familiar to us, but whose existence
    only the atheist denies. It is a new consequent of a new
    antecedent.”

    HORNE’S INTRODUCTION TO THE NEW TESTAMENT. “A miracle defined is
    an effect or event _different from the established constitution or
    course of things_, or a _sign obvious to the senses that God has
    interposed this power to control the established powers of nature_
    (commonly termed the laws of nature), which effect or sign is
    wrought either by _the immediate act_, or by the assistance, or by
    the permission, _of God_, and accompanied with a _previous notice_
    or _declaration_ that it is performed according to the purpose and
    by the power of God, _for the proof or evidence_ of some
    particular doctrine, or in attestation of the authority or divine
    mission of some particular person.”—Vol. I. p. 203.

    “Since, as we already have had occasion to observe, the proper
    effect of a miracle is _clearly_ to mark the divine interposition,
    it must therefore have characters proper to indicate such
    interposition; and these _criteria_ are six in number.

    “1. It is required, then, in the first place, that a fact or event
    which is stated to be miraculous should have an important end,
    worthy of its author.

    “2. It must be instantaneously and publicly performed.

    “3. It must be sensible (that is, obvious to the senses) and easy
    to be observed; in other words, the fact or event must be such
    that the senses of mankind can clearly and fully judge of it.

    “4. It must be independent of second causes.

    “5. Not only public monuments must be kept up, but some outward
    actions must be constantly performed in memory of the fact thus
    publicly wrought.

    “6. And such monuments must be set up, and such actions and
    observances be instituted, at the very time when those events took
    place, and afterwards be continued without interruption.”—Vol. I.
    p. 214 and 215.


From these examples we may see what different definitions have been given
of miracles, and that the definition is not so easy a thing as one might
at first suppose. All depends on the point of view which we take. If we
look only at the outward fact, a miracle is a wonderful event, a portent,
something out of the common course of nature, and unparalleled in common
human experience. But if we look at it as regards the character of him who
works the miracle, it then becomes a supernatural work, or a preternatural
work, having a divine or a demoniac origin.

But, on the whole, the Orthodox doctrine of a miracle seems to be
this—that it is a wonderful work, contrary to the laws of nature, wrought
by the direct agency of God, in proof of the divine commission of him by
whom it is done. The two essential points of the definition are, that a
miracle is _contrary to the laws of nature_; and that it is _the only
logical proof of the divine authority of the miracle-worker_. We call this
the orthodox definition, although we must admit that no one in modern
times has presented this view more forcibly and decidedly than the
Unitarian Andrews Norton, and though many Orthodox men have taken a
different view.




§ 3. The different Explanations of the Miracles of the Bible.


The four explanations of the miracles of the New Testament (to which we
now confine ourselves) are these:—

I. _The Natural Explanation._—According to this, the miraculous facts of
the New Testament are to be explained as resulting from natural causes.
They are on the plane of our common human life. They are such events as
might easily happen anywhere at the present time. Christ himself was but a
natural genius of a high order. His miracles were merely the natural
results of his intellect and strength of will, or they were mistakes on
the part of the observers and narrators, or myths which have grown up
subsequently in the Church. Great ingenuity has been used in attempting to
show how each miracle may be explained so as to be nothing very
extraordinary, after all. But these explanations are often very forced.
Some events which are at first sight seemingly miraculous, are often
explained as natural events by the majority of commentators. Thus the
account of the angel who went down into the pool and troubled the water is
usually interpreted as a natural phenomenon, and no real miracle. Modern
travellers have noticed that this pool of Bethesda is an intermittent
spring, which may have possessed medicinal qualities.

The old-fashioned naturalism, however, has mostly gone by. Its
explanations were too forced and unnatural to continue long. The more
common account at present is that which assumes that the narrators were
mistaken in the stories which they have given us. Mr. Parker thinks that
there is not sufficient evidence of the miracles. If there were more he
would believe them. He gives no explanation of their origin farther than
this. But Strauss attempts an explanation based upon an unconscious action
of the fancy and feelings on the part of the New Testament writers,
causing them to create these incidents out of some trifling basis of fact
or of history. Renan follows in the same general direction.

II. _The Unnatural Explanation._—A miracle is a violation or a suspension
of a law of nature.

This, until recently, has been the favorite view of miracles among
theologians, and is the view of miracles against which the arguments of
those who reject them have been chiefly directed.

The arguments in favor of this view are these:—

1. The miracles of the New Testament _seem_ to be violations of laws of
nature. For example: the turning water into wine; healing by a word or
touch; stilling the tempest; feeding five thousand; walking on the sea;
transfiguration; raising of Lazarus; Christ’s own resurrection. The law of
gravitation seems to have been suspended when he walked on the sea, &c.

2. Miracles are appealed to by Christ and his apostles in proof that God
was with him. But, unless these miracles had suspended the laws of nature,
they would not be proofs of this.

These are the two principal reasons for this view of miracles.

_Objections._—On the other hand, it is objected,—

1. That apparent violations may not be real violations of the laws of
nature. Examples: The Arab emir in “The Talisman” who was told that water
sometimes became solid, so as to support a man on horseback; a steamboat
sailing against wind and current; the telegraph; the daguerrotype. In all
such cases the laws of nature are not violated or suspended, but new
powers come in.

2. Christ appeals to the moral character of his miracles, and not merely
to their supernatural character. They are miracles of benevolence.

3. If the proof of Christ’s mission depends on this view of miracles, it
can never be proved. We can never be sure that the event is a violation of
a law of nature.

4. On this view the sceptic’s objections to miracles are unanswerable.

So says Dr. Thomas Brown, in an article reprinted by Dr. Noyes, of
Cambridge, in the “Theological Essays” published by the American Unitarian
Association. He admits the principle of Hume’s Essay on Miracles, but says
that his error lies in the false definition of the miracle as a violation
of the laws of nature. False, because,—

(_a._) On the principle of continued uniformity of sequence our whole
belief of causation, and consequently of the divine Being, is founded.

(_b._) Gives an air of inconsistency, and almost of absurdity, to a
miracle.

(_c._) Laws of nature are not violated when a new antecedent is followed
by a new consequent, but when, the antecedent being exactly the same, a
different consequent is the result.

(_d._) No testimony could prove such a miracle. Suppose testimony so
strong that its falsehood would be an absolute miracle; then we should
have to believe, in either case, that a law of nature has been violated.
No ground of preference between them.

5. A miracle may be supernatural, or above nature, without being
unnatural, or against nature.

6. The greatest church teachers have maintained that miracles were not
against law or without law, but above common law. Hahn, after mentioning
the view of a miracle as a suspension of law, and calling it one neither
scriptural nor conceivable, proceeds to quote Augustine and other writers,
who held that miracles were by no means opposed to law.(9)

III. _The Preternatural View of Miracles._—This view admits the reality of
the phenomena, but explains them as resulting from mysterious forces,
which are neither divine on the one hand, nor human on the other, but
which are outside of nature. This is the demoniacal view, or that which
supposes that evil spirits, departed souls, or spirits neither good nor
bad, surround the earth, and can be reached by magic, witchcraft, sorcery,
magnetism, or what is now called Spiritualism. This theory supposes that
the works of Jesus were performed by the aid of spiritual beings. The
objections to this view are,—

1. If it is supposed, as it was by the Jews, that Jesus had the aid of
evil spirits, the sufficient answer is, that his works were _good_ works.

2. If it is argued that he performed his miracles by the aid of departed
spirits who were good spirits, the answer is, that he himself never took
this view, but always declared, “My Father, who dwelleth in me, he doeth
the works.” Moreover, the whole character of the miracles of Jesus differs
not only from everything ever done by magnetism or spiritualism, but from
everything ever claimed to be done.

IV. _The Supernatural View of Miracles._—This view asserts that the
miracles were performed by higher forces, which came into this world from
a higher world than this. It asserts that besides the forces which are at
work regularly in the world, there are other forces outside of the world,
which may from time to time come into it. We call them higher forces not
only because they are more powerful than the forces before at work in the
world, by overcoming which they produce the extraordinary outward
phenomena, but because they always tend to elevate the world nearer to
God. They are thus proved to come from a world which is nearer to God than
this. The reasons in support of this view are, as before suggested.—

1. Geology teaches it. The rocks show not only an original creation of the
world, but successive creations of vegetable and animal life.

2. The creation of the world teaches it. Creation was a miracle in this
sense of the word.

3. There seems to be in the constitution of man a faculty provided for
recognizing the supernatural element. Phrenologists call it the organ of
marvellousness. Such a faculty would argue the existence of an appropriate
object on which it might be exercised.

4. The whole life and character of Jesus were supernatural and miraculous
in this sense. They cannot be satisfactorily explained as the result of
anything existing in the world before.




§ 4. Criticism on these Different Views of Miracles.


In attempting to discover the truths and errors contained in these
statements it is a great satisfaction to feel that our faith in Christ and
Christianity is not depending on them. If we believed with those who
consider miracles the only or the principal proof of Christianity, we
could hardly hope to be candid and just in examining the arguments of
those who deny the marvellous facts of the New Testament. There is no
doubt that the number of religious and Christian men who have relinquished
all belief in the marvellous part of the Bible has largely increased
within a few years. At the present time there is a strong tendency to
disbelieve and deny all miracles as incredible and impossible. Renan, in
his “Life of Jesus,” says, “Miracles never happen except among people
disposed to believe them. We banish miracles from history in the name of a
constant experience. No miracle has, as yet, been proved.” Renan adds,
that “if a commission of men of science should decide that a man had been
raised from the dead he would believe it.” “Till then,” he says, “it is
the duty of the historian not to admit a supernatural fact, but to find,
if he can, what part credulity and imposition have had in it.”
Accordingly, Renan writes his “Life of Jesus” in this sense, discarding
most of the miracles, or explaining them away, and trying to put together
into some kind of shape the fragments which remain. But Renan does not go
far enough to satisfy some others. Gerritt Smith, for example, in a recent
lecture which he has published, called “Be Natural,” says, “Jesus neither
performed nor attempted to perform miracles. His wisdom and sincerity
forbid the supposition. Am I an unbeliever in the historical Jesus because
I hold him innocent of the absurdities which superstition and folly tax
him with? No more than I should disbelieve in Shakespeare, by denying that
he walked on the Avon, or changed its waters into wine. M. Renan ought to
have made no account of these stories of miracles. He should have dropped
them entirely, as did Rammohun Roy in his Hindoo translation of the New
Testament. Let the credulous feed on these creations of superstition, but
let men of sense turn away from them.”

The reason why so many intelligent men find it impossible to believe the
miracles of the New Testament, while they find it very easy to believe the
religious and moral teaching of Jesus is partly due to the spirit of the
age. The intellect of this age is more and more scientific. Now, science
is the knowledge of facts and laws. A miracle is opposed to all usual
observation of facts, and is often called by theologians a violation of
the laws of nature. It is not therefore strange that men imbued with the
spirit of science should dislike the notion of miracles.




§ 5. Miracles no Proof of Christianity.


Now, we should have little objection, on purely theological grounds, to
give up the miracles of the New Testament. Theologians have built up the
proof of Christianity on miracles. They have declared them the chief
evidence of Christianity. They have said, “A miracle is a violation of a
law of nature. Now, no one but God can violate a law of nature. If Jesus
violated a law of nature, it proved that God was with him. But that he did
so we know from the New Testament. That it tells the truth we know,
because it was written, by eye-witnesses, who could not have been
mistaken, because they saw the miracles with their own eyes, and were not
liars, because they laid down their lives in testimony of the truth of
what they asserted.” Therefore, it is argued, “Christ worked miracles;
therefore he had God’s help and power; therefore he has God’s authority to
teach the religion of the New Testament.”

Now, for those who hold this view of Christianity, if they renounce
miracles, it is evident that the foundation of faith is gone. No wonder,
therefore, that they bitterly oppose all attacks of miracles. In defending
miracles, they are fighting for their lives.

But we need not hold this view of the foundation of Christianity.
Christianity does not rest necessarily on the physical miracles of Christ,
but on his moral miracles, which no one has ever doubted, or can doubt.
Christianity proceeded from Jesus, and was transmitted by him, not as a
philosophy, but as a power, a life, which renewed the old world, and
created a new dispensation. This is the great miracle. We do not really
believe Christianity on the ground of miracles, but we believe miracles on
the ground of Christianity.

Let us explain this. If miracles had been asserted to be wrought by God in
order to prove the truth of a doctrine irrational, self-contradictory,
odious to the conscience and to the heart,—to prove, for example, the
justice of the Spanish Inquisition, the lawfulness of slavery, or that God
loves some of his children and hates the rest,—then all the outward
evidence in the world would not have convinced us that God had taught such
a doctrine and confirmed it by miracles. If we had seen with our own eyes
a dead man raised to life, or if M. Renan’s committee of scientific men
had testified that they had seen it, we should either say they were
deceived, or we should say, with the Jews, “It is done by some devilish
power, not by a divine power. It is not supernatural, it is
preternatural.” But Christianity itself is the great miracle of human
history. It is more marvellous than raising a dead man, for it was the
_resurrection of a dead world_—of a dead humanity. Read Gibbon. He is an
infidel writer, but he is a perfect historian. He shows you Christianity,
as a living force, coming into history, pouring a tide of life into the
decaying civilization of Rome, overflowing upon the German tribes, and
changing their whole character, so as to make out of those savage warriors
merciful and reverential soldiers, who knew how to pardon and how to
spare. Now, there seems something quite as supernatural in this as in the
coming of new trees and plants into the world in the carboniferous epoch,
or the coming in of mammalia, a hundred thousand years or so after. It
seems as if God came near the world, and touched it in Jesus Christ; for
the power of one man was wholly inadequate to such results as followed his
coming. I believe Christianity a divine religion, a religion from God,
because it lifts the soul nearer to God—because it has lifted mankind
nearer to God, and enabled men to believe God a friend—not a tyrant, not a
stern king—but a father. Christianity is divine, because its truth and
love are divine—because it purifies, consoles, and elevates human hearts;
because the life of Jesus is, by the testimony of such men as Theodore
Parker, Rousseau, and Renan, infinitely superior to all other lives ever
lived in this world. Now, believing in Christianity and Christ on such
grounds, we may look with much more deference and respect upon the stories
of miracles which are intertwined in his life. We should not attend to
them at all if we found them told about only common men; but told about
Jesus, we are led to examine them more critically, and ask whether it is,
or is not, possible for them to have been, in the main, real facts.

The Orthodox doctrine has been, and still is, that Christianity rests on
miracles. Our view is, that miracles rest on Christianity. But we close
this section with extracts from Luther, Channing, Trench, and Walker, to
show that the view for which we contend is not without able supporters in
all parts of the Church.

Martin Luther says,—


    “People cry it up as a great miracle, that Christ made the blind
    see, the deaf hear, and the lepers clean; and it is true such
    works are miraculous signs; but Christ regards his influence on
    the soul as far more important than that on the body; for as the
    soul excels the body, so do the miracles wrought on the former
    excel those wrought on the latter....

    “The miracles which Christ wrought on the body are small and
    almost childish, compared with the high and true miracles which he
    constantly performs in the Christian world by his divine, almighty
    power; for instance, that Christianity is preserved on the earth;
    that the word of God and faith in him can yet hold out; yea, that
    a Christian can survive on earth against the devil and all his
    angels; also against so many tyrants and factions; yea, against
    our own flesh and blood. The fact that the gospel remains and
    improves the human heart,—this is indeed to cast out the devil,
    and tread on serpents, and speak with tongues; for those visible
    miracles were merely signs for the ignorant, unbelieving crowd,
    and for those who were yet to be brought in; but for us, who know
    and believe, what need is there of them? For the heathen, indeed,
    Christ must needs give external signs, which they could see and
    take hold of; but Christians must needs have far higher signs,
    compared with which the former are earthly. It was necessary to
    bring over the ignorant with external miracles, and to throw out
    such apples and pears to them as children; but we, on the
    contrary, should boast of the great miracles which Christ daily
    performs in his church.”


In the “Christian Examiner,” Dr. James Walker says,—


    “Christianity embodies a collection of moral and vital truths, and
    _these truths_, apart from _all history_ or philosophy, constitute
    Christianity itself. Instead, therefore, of perplexing and
    confounding the young with what are called the evidences of
    Christianity, give them Christianity itself. Begin by giving them
    Christianity itself, as exhibited in the life and character of the
    Lord Jesus, as illustrated by his simple, beautiful and touching
    parables, and as it breathes through all his discourses. They will
    _feel it to be true_. Depend upon it, paradoxical as it may sound,
    children will be much more likely to believe Christianity without
    what are called the evidences, than with them; and the remark
    applies to some who are not children.

    “Why talk to one about the argument from prophecy, or the argument
    from miracles, when these are the very points, and the only
    points, on which his mind, from some peculiarity in its original
    constitution, or from limited information, chiefly labors. Give
    him Christianity itself, by which we mean the body of moral and
    vital truths which constitute Christianity. Observe it when you
    will, you will find that the doubts and difficulties suggested by
    children relate almost exclusively to the _history_ of
    Christianity, or to what are called the _external_ evidences of
    Christianity, and not to the _truth_ of Christianity itself. Give
    them Christianity itself: for if they believe in that, it is
    enough. Nothing can be more injudicious than to persist in urging
    the argument from miracles on a mind, that, from any cause, has
    thus become indifferent, and perhaps impatient of it. How idle to
    think to convince a person of Christianity by miracles, when it is
    these very miracles, and not Christianity, that he doubts! The
    instances, we suspect, are not rare, even of adults, who are
    _first converted to Christianity itself_, and afterwards, through
    the moral and spiritual change which Christianity induces, are
    brought to believe entirely and devoutly in its _miraculous origin
    and history_.”


Dr. Channing says,—


    “There is another evidence of Christianity still more _internal_
    than any on which I have yet dwelt; an evidence to be _felt_
    rather than described, but not less _real_ because founded on
    feeling. I refer to that conviction of the divine original of our
    religion which springs up and continually gains strength in those
    who apply it habitually to their tempers and lives, and who imbibe
    its spirit and hopes. In such men there is a consciousness of the
    adaptation of Christianity to their noblest faculties; a
    consciousness of its exalting and consoling influences, of its
    power to confer the true happiness of human nature, to give that
    peace which the world cannot give; which assures them that it is
    not of earthly origin, but a ray from the everlasting Light, a
    stream from the fountain of heavenly Wisdom and Love. This is the
    evidence which sustains the faith of thousands, who never read and
    cannot understand the learned books of Christian apologists, who
    want, perhaps, words to explain the ground of their belief, but
    whose faith is of adamantine firmness, who hold the gospel with a
    conviction more intimate and unwavering than mere arguments ever
    produced.”


And here is an extract from another writer:—


    “Doubtless Christ’s spiritual glory is in itself as
    distinguishing, and as plainly showing his divinity, as his
    outward glory, and a great deal more; for his spiritual glory is
    that wherein his divinity consists, and the outward glory of his
    transfiguration showed him to be divine only as it was a
    remarkable image or representation of that spiritual glory.
    Doubtless, therefore, he that has had a clear sight of the
    spiritual glory of Christ may say, ‘I have not followed cunningly
    devised fables, but have been an eye-witness of his majesty,’ upon
    as good grounds as the apostle, when he had respect to the outward
    glory of Christ that he had seen. A true sense of the divine
    excellency of the things of God’s Word doth more directly and
    immediately convince of the truth of them; and that because the
    excellency of these things is so superlative. There is a beauty in
    them that is so divine and godlike, that is greatly and evidently
    distinguishing of them from things merely human, or that men are
    the authors and inventors of,—a glory that is so high and great,
    that when clearly seen, commands assent to their divinity and
    reality. The evidence which they who are spiritually enlightened
    have of the truth of the things of religion, is a kind of
    intuition and immediate evidence. They believe the doctrines of
    God’s Word to be divine, because they see divinity in them. That
    is, they see a divine, and transcendent, and most evidently
    distinguishing glory in them; such a glory as, if clearly seen,
    does not leave room to doubt of their being of God, and not of
    men.”


Trench, also, denies that the miracle can have absolute authority, since
Satanic powers may work evil too. This convinces us, he says, that
miracles cannot be appealed to in proof of the doctrine or of the divine
mission of him who brings it to pass. The doctrine must first commend
itself to the conscience as being good; then the miracle shows it to be a
new word from God. But when the mind and conscience reject the doctrine,
the miracle must be rejected too. The great act of faith is to believe, in
despite of all miracles, what God has revealed to the soul of the holy and
the true; not to believe another gospel, though an angel from heaven
should bring it. Instead of compelling assent, miracles are _then_ rather
warnings to us that we keep aloof; for they tell us not merely that lies
are here, but that he who utters them is an instrument of Satan.

False miracles, or lying wonders, are distinguished from the true, not by
the intellect, but by the moral sense, which finds in them something
immoral, or ostentatious, or futile, leading to nothing. Origen says the
miracles of Moses issued in a Jewish polity; those of our Lord in a
Christian Church. But what fruits have the miracles of Apollonius or
Æsculapius to show?

The miracles of Christ are redemptive. Modern writers of evidences make a
dangerous omission when they fail to say that the doctrine is to try the
miracle, as well as the miracle to seal the doctrine. To teach men to
believe in Christ on no other grounds than his wonderful works is to pave
the way of Antichrist. Those books of Christian evidences are utterly
maimed and imperfect, fraught with the most perilous consequences, which
reverence in the miracle only its power.(10)




§ 6. But Orthodoxy is right in maintaining their Reality as Historic
Facts.


The first thing we notice about the miracles of Jesus is, that they are
intertwined inextricably with the whole narrative. It is almost impossible
to disentangle them, and to leave any solid historic residuum. There is a
story in Goethe of a statue of iron and silver, with veins of gold. The
flames licked out the gold veins of the colossus, and it remained standing
a little while; but when at last the tenderest filaments had been licked
out, the image crashed together, and fell in a shapeless, miserable heap.
So when the tongue of criticism shall have eaten out the supernatural
elements of the gospel narrative, the heroic figure will fall, as it has
already in Renan’s construction, into an amorphous mass of unhistoric
rubbish.

Then we see that most of these miracles are miracles of healing, which
have their analogues in many similar events scattered through history.
Many such facts might be collected to show that there is in man a latent
power of overcoming disease, in himself and others, by a great exertion of
will. If in common men there is such a power, latent, and as yet
undeveloped, why should it be an unnatural thing that one so full of a
superhuman life as Jesus should be raised to a position where, by his very
word or touch, he could cure disease, and that even at a distance?

We see such wonderful discoveries made every day of latent powers in
nature, and secrets hidden till now from all men, that we do not know
where to put limits to the possibility of the wonderful. To go into a
telegraphic office in Boston, and speak to a man in New York or
Washington, and have an answer in five minutes; to have your portrait
painted in a moment by the rays of the sun,—such things as these would
have seemed miracles to us a few years ago. To be able to tell what metals
there are in the sun’s atmosphere, and what not there; to say, “In the
atmosphere of the sun there is silver, but not gold; there are iron, and
antimony, and lead, and aluminum, but no copper nor zinc,”—does not this
seem incredible? But we know that we _can_ now tell just that.

When we read the Gospels, we find everything in them so simple, so
unpretending, so little of an attempt at making out a consistent story,
such a harmony in the character of the works attributed to Jesus (with one
or two exceptions), that we are irresistibly inclined to say, “These
stories must be simple facts. Delusion never spoke in this tone,—so clear,
so luminous,—in language so honest and sincere.”

I do not deny that some mistakes or misapprehensions may have crept into
the records. Occasionally we can see signs of something being mistaken for
a miracle which was really not one. For example, the finding of a piece of
money in the fish’s mouth may have been the mistake of a proverbial
expression, common among fishermen, and used by Matthew in his original
Hebrew Gospel, but which the Greek translator, ignorant of the popular
phrase, considered to be meant for a miracle.

The most natural supposition is, that a wonderful power dwelt in Jesus,
which enabled him to heal the sick, cure the insane, and sometimes even
bring back life to the dead. What do we know about death? The last breath
has been drawn. The heart has ceased to beat, the lungs to move. We say,
“He is dead.” But people have lain two or three days in this state,
declared dead by the physicians, and then have come to life again by
natural causes. A drowned man has all the marks of death; but after lying
in this state half an hour, he is brought to life again. What, then, might
not have been done by that supernatural power of life which, as history
shows, dwelt in Jesus of Nazareth?




§ 7. Analogy with other Similar Events recorded in History.


It may very properly be asked whether miracles have occurred since the
Bible record was closed; and if not, why not. Since we have regarded the
miracles of the New Testament as no violations of law, but the coming in
of higher laws or forces than those usually at work in the world, why may
they not have taken place in our own time? If Christ’s miracles differ
only from other miracles in being higher and more perfect, what are the
miracles of a lower class? Can we point out any events belonging to the
same class of phenomena which have happened during the last thousand
years?

In reply to this question, we will proceed to mention certain phenomena
which seem to belong to the same order as the works of Jesus. The
_distinction_ between the miracles of Christ and all those portents will
be pointed out hereafter.

In the “Atlantic Monthly” for February and March, 1864, there appeared an
account (written, we believe, by R. Dale Owen), of the Convulsionists of
St. Médard. The facts therein stated _seem_ to contradict all the known
laws of physiology. The lower side of miracles, namely, their apparent
violation of physical laws, here appears as fully developed and as fully
attested as the most careful sceptic could desire. If, therefore, any one
objects to believing the miracles of Jesus on the ground that they _seem_
to be violations of physical laws, we ask what they mean to do with these
facts, so extraordinary, and yet so fully attested. If believed, there is
no reason, based on the abnormal character of Christ’s works, for
rejecting those. But if disbelieved, it can be done only by setting aside
all the ordinary rules of evidence, and all the laws of belief, in favor
of a negative prepossession of a purely empirical character. Phenomena
somewhat similar to these have occurred elsewhere, among Protestants as
well as Catholics, during periods of great religious excitement. The
beginnings of most religious systems—Methodism, Quakerism, &c.—have
stories like these of supernatural influences. They have usually been
disbelieved because their friends have claimed too much: they have claimed
that such phenomena were divine attestations to the truth of the doctrine
preached. What _is_ proved by them is the simple fact that the soul of man
is capable, under high excitement, of suspending, or rather overcoming,
all common physiological laws. We have seen similar results follow often
from such causes, only in ordinary ways. A sick person is made well in a
moment by some moral influence; a weak and sickly mother will nurse a sick
child, night after night, without rest or sleep, and keep well, where a
strong man would break down. Mesmerism brings forward multitudes of like
facts. There are, for example, the well-attested facts concerning the
transfer of the senses: that people under the influence of animal
magnetism can read with their forehead, the pit of their stomach, or the
back of their head. We have seen a weak boy, some thirteen years old, when
magnetized, lift a chair with three heavy men standing on it.
Clairvoyance, or seeing things at a distance, though not so well proved,
is confirmed by a vast number of facts. We come, then, to our final
statement concerning miracles, which is this:—

I. There is in man a power, as yet undeveloped, and only occasionally seen
in exceptional conditions, of overcoming the common laws of nature by
force of will; and this is sometimes voluntary, and sometimes involuntary.

II. This phenomenon takes these forms:—

A. _Power of the soul over the body (a.) to resist pain_, as in the case
of martyrs, who are burned alive without any appearance of suffering;
_(b.) to resist physical injury_, as in the case of the Convulsionists;
_(c.) to dispense with the usual service of the senses_, as in the case of
the girl at Worcester Insane Asylum, Massachusetts, under the care of Dr.
Woodward, who could read a book in a perfectly dark room and with bandaged
eyes; _(d.) to give a preternatural energy and strength to the body_.

B. _Preternatural knowledge_—such cases as that narrated by Dr. Bushnell,
of Yonnt, in California; or _knowledge through dreams_, waking
presentiments; cases of _foresight_, or prophecy; of _insight_, or
knowledge of what is passing in other minds; of _clairvoyance_, or
knowledge of what is happening at a distance, of which multitudes of facts
are narrated in such books as the “Seeress of Provorst,” Mrs. Crowe’s
“Night Side of Nature,” Robert Dale Owen’s “Footfalls from the Boundary of
the Unseen World,” which, after being sifted by a fair criticism, will
leave a large residuum of irresolvable facts.

C. Higher than these is a preternatural elevation of the whole character,
as in such cases as that of JOAN OF ARC, where a young girl, ignorant, a
peasant, destitute of all common means of influencing any one, by the
simple power of faith, because she believed herself inspired and
commissioned, succeeded in gaining the command of the armies of France,
and then of achieving a series of victories, equal, on the whole, as mere
military exploits, to those of the first captains of the world.

In all these cases we see manifestations of a power in the soul over
nature, body, men, and the laws of time and space. So we say, _secondly_,—

III. This power was possessed in the highest degree known in this world by
Jesus of Nazareth, and it differed in him from these other cases in these
points:—

1. It was always voluntary in its exercise, never involuntary. He was not
possessed by it, he possessed it. He used it just when and where he chose
to use it. It was always at his command; he never appears to have tried to
work a miracle, and failed. So,—

2. It was in him constant, and not occasional. In other cases where the
miraculous element appears, it seems to come and go; but to Jesus the
spirit was not given by measure. He had it always.

3. This power in him was total, and not partial. It was therefore
harmonious—in harmony with all his other qualities. He had power over
diseases of the body, and also those of the soul. He knew what was in man,
and what was in nature—in the present, and in the future. There was
nothing ecstatic, enthusiastic, nothing of excitement, about him; but
everything denoted a fulness, a PLEROMA, of this spiritual life.

4. The exercise of this power in Christ was always eminently moral, never
wilful. The one or two seeming exceptions, as, for example, the cursing
the fig tree, and the causing the evil spirits to go into the swine, ought
to be explained in harmony with the vast majority of his actions, which
always are guided by love, and justice, and a holy sense of what is true
and good.

5thly, and lastly. The miracle power of Jesus reached a higher point of
development than in any one else. The raising of the dead to life, and the
mysterious power over nature indicated by the turning of water into wine,
by the miracle of the loaves and fishes, calming the storm, if facts, are
facts unparalleled in any other biography, but seem possible, however
unintelligible, when considered as emanating from such a masterly and
commanding spirit as that of Jesus.

And this finally brings us to the miracle of the resurrection, concerning
which we will first quote from an article in a late number of the
“Westminster Review,” to show the most recent ideas of the critical and
negative school on this point.




§ 8. Miracle of the Resurrection. Sceptical Objections.


In an article in the “Westminster Review,” in “The Life of Christ, by
Strauss,” occurs the following passage:—


    “For of the two alternatives open to free inquiry, that if Jesus
    died he never reappeared, or if he reappeared he never died,
    Strauss considers the former not only preferable, but the only
    tenable one; for he cannot persuade himself that a feeble
    sufferer, who at first had scarcely strength to leave the tomb,
    and in the end succumbed to death, could have contrived to inspire
    his followers with the conviction that he was the Prince of life,
    the Conqueror of the grave. Strauss thus admits that faith in the
    supernatural revival of the buried Nazarene was undoubtedly the
    profession of the Christian Church, the unconditional antecedent
    without which Christianity could have had no existence. If, then,
    we refuse to assume the resurrection to be an historical fact, we
    have to explain the origin of the Church’s belief in it. The
    solution which satisfies Strauss, and which seems to us also an
    adequate interpretation of the problem, is dependent on the two
    following positions: 1. The appearance of Jesus was literally an
    appearance, an hallucination, a psychological phenomenon. 2. It
    was also a sort of practical fallacy of confusion, a case of
    mistaken identity.

    “But it will be said that this natural solution of the problem
    implies a foregone conclusion—the rejection of the Orthodox or
    supernatural solution. Of course it does; and accordingly Strauss
    has been accused of dogmatical or unphilosophical assumption. But
    the rejection of the theological solution is not the result of
    ignorant prejudice, but of enlightened investigation.
    Anti-supernaturalism is the final irreversible sentence of
    scientific philosophy, and the real dogmatist and hypothesis-maker
    is the theologian. That the world is governed by uniform laws is
    the first article in the creed of science, and to disbelieve
    whatever is at variance with those uniform laws, whatever
    contradicts a complete induction, is an imperative, intellectual
    duty. A particular miracle is credible to him alone who already
    believes in supernatural agency. Its credibility rests on an
    assumption—the existence of such agency. But our most
    comprehensive scientific experience has detected no such agency.
    There is no miracle in nature; there is no evidence of any
    miracle-working energy in nature; there is no fact in nature to
    justify the expectation of miracle. Rightly has it been said by an
    English _savant_ and divine, that testimony is a second-hand
    assurance, a blind guide, that can avail nothing against reason;
    and that to have any evidence of a Deity working miracles, we must
    go out of nature and beyond reason.

    “Strauss’s prepossession, therefore, is justifiable. It is the
    prepossession of the rational theist, who does not believe in a
    God who changes his mind and improves with practice—the prentice
    maker of the world; it is the prepossession of the pantheist, in
    whose theory of the perfect government of an immanent God, miracle
    is an extravagance and absurdity; it is the prepossession of the
    philosophical naturalist, whose experience of the operations of
    nature recognizes no extra-mundane interventionalism.”


We have quoted this passage as containing the most distinct statement of
an extreme anti-supernaturalism. Admitting the death of Jesus as a fact,
it denies his resurrection as a fact, and that on doctrinal and theoretic
grounds. Declaring anti-supernaturalism to be the final irreversible
sentence of scientific philosophy, it assumes supernaturalism to be a
denial that the world is governed by uniform laws. It assumes the
resurrection of Christ to be at variance with those uniform laws. It
denies the existence of any supernatural agency in the affairs of this
world. It denies that there ever has been a miracle in nature, or any
extra-mundane intervention in the history of nature or man.

This is what claims to be science, at the present time. We deny that it is
science, and assert it to be pure dogmatism and theory, contradicted by
numerous facts. It is pure theory to assume the resurrection of Jesus to
be a violation of law. It is pure theory to define a miracle to be
something opposed to law. It is pure theory to assume that the miraculous
facts ascribed to Jesus in the Gospels must have been, if they occurred,
violations of law. It is an assumption, contradicted by geology, that
there is nothing in the experience of the naturalist of the operations of
nature to show any extra-mundane intervention.

We have admitted, indeed, that these same assumptions have been made by
Orthodox theology. Orthodox theologians have also assumed the miracles of
Christ to be violations of the laws of nature. But some of the most
distinguished theologians, in all ages of the Church, have not so defined
them. And there is no reason why the man of science should deny the
possibility of fact because an unscientific explanation has been given of
that fact by others. This writer virtually says, “I will not believe that
Christ appeared after his death, on any amount of testimony, because some
persons have defined such appearances as being opposed to the laws of
nature.” It is certainly true that we cannot fully believe in the reality
of any phenomenon which seems to us to be a violation of law. It is also
true that the reported facts concerning the appearances of Jesus _seem_
like a violation of law. But the scientific course is neither to deny the
facts, nor to explain them away, but to study them, in order to see
whether, after all, they may not lead us to some new laws, before unknown.

The resurrection of Jesus deserves this study, since, according to the
confession of science itself, the Christian Church rests upon that belief.
Strauss admits that Christianity could not have existed without it. But,
hastily assuming that the real appearance of Jesus himself would be a
violation of a law of nature, he supposes this immense fact of Christendom
to rest on an hallucination and a case of mistaken identity.

But perhaps, after all, the resurrection may have been an example of a
universal law. Like other miracles, which are sporadic instances, in this
world, of laws which may be the nature of other worlds, so the
resurrection may have been as natural an event as any other in the life of
Jesus. Perhaps it is a law of nature that all souls shall become
disengaged from the earthly body on the third day after death. Perhaps
they all rise in a spiritual body, substantial and real, but not usually
perceptible by the senses. Perhaps, in the case of Jesus, that same
superior command of miraculous force, which appeared during his life,
enabled him to show himself easily and freely whenever he would. What
became of the earthly body we do not know; it may have been removed by the
priests or soldiers to prevent the disciples from getting possession of
it. The body in which Christ appeared differed evidently from the earthly
body in various ways. It came and went mysteriously; it was sometimes
recognized, and sometimes not; and it ascended into the spiritual world
instead of passing again to death and the grave. Perhaps, therefore, it
may be a universal law that souls rise out of the material body into a
higher state, clothed in another body, substantial and real, but not
material. The essence of the resurrection is this: Resurrection is not
coming to life again with the same body, but ascent into a higher life
with a new body.

It may be said that all this is only a _perhaps_. Very well; it _is_ only
a _perhaps_, but that is all we want in order to refute the logic of the
article just quoted. The scientific sceptic says, “I will not believe that
Jesus was really seen after death, because that would be a violation of a
law of nature.” We reply, “No, not necessarily. It might _perhaps_ have
been thus and so.” That will do; for if we can show that it is not
_necessarily_ a violation of a law of nature, we wholly remove the
objection.

But we may go farther, and assert that such a supposition as we have made
not only accords with the story in the Gospels, but also with the whole
spirit of Christianity, and with all the analogies of nature. The
resurrection of Jesus, so regarded, becomes the most _natural_ thing in
the world. If souls live after death, as even natural instinct teaches,
they live somewhere. As by the analogy of nature we see an ascending scale
of bodily existence up to man, whose body is superior to that of all other
animals, because fitted for the very highest uses, so if man is to live
hereafter and elsewhere, and not in this earthly body, analogy would
anticipate that he should live in a body still, but in a higher form. If
Jesus, therefore, rose in this higher body, and appeared to his disciples,
it was to lift them above fear of death by showing that this corruptible
must put on incorruption. So his resurrection was not merely coming to
life again in the same body, but rising up into a higher body and a higher
state, to show us how we are to be, to give us a glimpse of the hereafter,
to bridge over the gulf between this life and that to come.




§ 9. Final Result of this Examination.


We have thus examined, as thoroughly as our limited space will allow, the
questions at issue, on the subject of miracles, between the old Orthodox
and recent heterodox views; and the result to which we have arrived may be
thus stated:—

1. We may believe, on the testimony of history, that through Jesus of
Nazareth there entered the world a great impulse of creative moral life,
which has been, and is now, renewing society. This new impulse of life may
be regarded as miraculous or supernatural.

2. We may believe, though perhaps less strongly, but still decidedly, that
during the stay of Jesus on earth many extraordinary phenomena took place,
such as the sudden healing of the sick, the raising of the dead to life, a
display of miraculous insight and foresight, or knowledge of the present
and the future, and some influence over organic and material life, and
over the lifeless forces of nature. The precise limits of this we do not
know, and need not pretend to define. We need not think it essential to
fix the boundary. It may be interesting as speculation, but it is not
important as religion.

3. For, in the third place, we may say that these miracles of Jesus have
very little direct bearing on our _religion_. As they illustrate his
character, they are valuable, and also as they help us to believe that the
laws of nature are not stiff and rigid, like the movement of a machine,
but that there is force above force, a vortex of living powers, in the
universe, rising higher and higher towards the fountain of all force and
life in God. All portents and wonders are useful, as they shake us out of
the mechanical view of things, and show that even the outward, sensible
world is full of spiritual power.

4. We may also believe the miracles of Jesus to be _natural_ in this
sense—that under the same conditions they could have been done by others,
and that they are probably prophetic of a time in which they _shall_ be
done by others. Looked at as mere _signs_ or _portents_, he himself
discouraged any attention being paid to them. Looked at as logical proofs
to convince an unbeliever, he never brought them forward. His object in
miracles, as stated by Mr. Furness, was simply to express his character.
Some, indeed, were symbolical, as the cursing of the fig tree. It is the
custom in the East for teachers to speak in symbolic language.

Miracles were at first believed, on low grounds, as violations of law by a
God outside of the world. Now they are disbelieved on scientific grounds.
They may possibly be believed again on grounds of philosophy and historic
evidence, not as portents, not as violations of law, not as the basis of a
logical argument, but as the natural effluence and outcome of a soul like
that of Jesus, into which a supernatural influx of light and life had
descended. They are not more wonderful than nature; they are not _so_
wonderful as the change of heart by which a bad man becomes a good man.
But they will find their proper place as evidence how plastic the lower
laws are to the influence of a higher life.





