CHAPTER XVI. THE TRINITY.




§ 1. Definition of the Church Doctrine.


“The fundamental formula for the doctrine of the Trinity, as defined by
the Church,” says Twesten,(72) “is, that in one divine essence or nature
there are three persons, distinguished from each other by certain
characteristics, and indivisibly participating in that one nature.” The
“Augsburg Confession,” says, in like manner, “three persons in one
essence.”(73) So the “Gallic Confession,” and other Church Confessions,
which say almost the same thing in the same words.(74)

The explanations given to these phrases vary indefinitely. Nitzsch (System
d. Christ. Lehre, § 80) says, “We stand related in such a way, with all
our Christian experience (Gewerdensein und Werden), to the one, eternal,
divine essence, who is love, that in the Son we adore love as mediating
and speaking, in the spirit as fellowship and life, in the Father as
source and origin.” Schleiermacher considers this doctrine as not any
immediate expression of the Christian consciousness, and declares that
“our communion with Christ might be just the same if we knew nothing at
all of this transcendent mystery.” Hase says,(75) “This Church dogma
always has floated between Unitarianism, Tritheism, and Sabellianism,
asserting the premises of all three, and denying their conclusions only by
maintaining the opposite.”

All sorts of illustrations have been used from the earliest times—such as
fountain, brook, river; root, stalk, branch; memory, understanding,
will;(76) soul, reason, sense;(77) three persons in grammar, the teacher,
the person spoken to, and that spoken of.(78) Some mystics argued the
necessity of three persons in the Deity for the sake of a divine society
and mutual love.(79) Lessing argues that “God from eternity must have
contemplated that which is most perfect, but that is himself; but to
contemplate with God, is to create; God’s thought of himself, therefore,
must be a being, but a divine being, that is, God, the Son God; but these
two, God the thinker and God the thought, are in perfect divine harmony,
and this harmony is the Spirit.”(80) Leibnitz also considers the Trinity
as illustrated best by the process of reflection in the human mind.
Strauss objects to this class of definitions, that they are two elements
united in a third, while the Church doctrine requires three united in a
fourth.

The Church doctrine concerning the Trinity appears most fully developed in
its Orthodox form in what is called the Creed of St. Athanasius. It was
not written by him, but by some one in the fifth or sixth century.

1. Whosoever will be saved, before all things must take care to keep the
Catholic faith:

2. Which except one keeps it entire and inviolate, he shall without doubt
perish everlastingly.

3. But the Catholic faith is this: that we adore one God in Trinity, and
the Trinity in Unity;

4. Neither confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance.

5. For there is one person of the Father, another of the Son, and another
of the Holy Spirit.

6. But the divinity of the Father, Son, and Spirit, is one, the glory
equal, the majesty equal.

7. As is the Father, so is the Son, and so is the Holy Spirit.

8. The Father is uncreated, the Son is uncreated, and the Holy Spirit
uncreated.

9. The Father immeasurable,(81) the Son immeasurable, and the Holy Spirit
immeasurable.

10. The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and the Holy Spirit eternal.

11. And yet there are not three Eternals, but one Eternal.

12. And so there are not _three_ uncreated, nor _three_ immeasurable, but
_one_ uncreated, and _one_ immeasurable.

13. So the Father is omnipotent, the Son is omnipotent, and the Holy
Spirit is omnipotent.

14. And yet there are not _three_ omnipotents, but one omnipotent.

15. So the Father is God, the Son is God, and the Holy Spirit is God.

16. And yet there are not _three_ Gods, but _one_ God.

17. So the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord, and the Holy Spirit is Lord.

18. And yet there are not _three_ Lords, but _one_ Lord.

19. For as we are compelled by Christian truth to confess of each one,
that each person(82) is God and Lord; so we are forbidden by the Catholic
religion from saying three Gods or three Lords.

20. The Father is not made, nor created, nor begotten.

21. The Son is from the Father alone; not made, nor created, _but
begotten_.

22. The Holy Spirit is from the Son and the Father; not created, nor
begotten, but _proceeding_.

23. Therefore there is one Father, and not three; one Son, and not three;
one Holy Spirit, and not three.

24. And in this Trinity there is none before or after, none greater or
less, but all three Persons are coeternal and coequal.

25. So that everywhere we must adore the Unity in Trinity, and the Trinity
in Unity.

26. Whoever, therefore, would be saved, must think thus of the Trinity.




§ 2. History of the Doctrine.


In the Christian Church, the history of this doctrine is interesting and
important. Some sort of Triad, or Trinity, existed in very early times,
although the Orthodox form was not established until later.

At first, the prevailing doctrine is that of subordination; that is, that
the Son and the Spirit are inferior to the Father. But, as the Son and the
Spirit were also called divine, those who thought thus were accused of
believing in three Gods.(83) Some then said, that the Father was alone
divine; and these were called Monarchians. Others, wishing to retain the
divinity of the Son and Spirit, and yet to believe in one God, said that
the _divinity_ in the Father, in the Son, and in the Spirit, was
essentially the same, but that the divinity of the Father was the fountain
from which that of the Son and Spirit was derived. This was fixed as
Orthodox at the Council of Nice, A.D. 325, and was the beginning of
Orthodoxy in the Church. It was a middle course between Scylla and
Charybdis, which were represented on the one side by Arius, who maintained
that the Son was created out of nothing; and by Sabellius on the other
hand, who maintained that the Son was only a mode, manifestation, or name
of God; God being called the Father, as Creator of the world; called Son,
as Redeemer of the world; and Spirit, as Sanctifier of the world. The
Council of Nice declared that the Son was not a manifestation of God, as
Sabellius said, nor a creation by God, as Arius said, but a derivation
from God.(84) Just as the essence of the fountain flows into the stream
derived from it, so the essence of the Father flows into the Son, who is
derived from him. Here, then, we have the three formulas of the early
Church—that of Arius, who says, “The Son was created by the Father, and is
inferior to him;” that of Sabellius, who says, “The Father, Son, and
Spirit, are manifestations of God, and the same essence;” and Orthodoxy,
as the Council of Nice, trying to stand between them, and saying, “The Son
is derived from the Father, and is of the same essence with him.”

The Church, ever since, has been like a ship beating against head winds
between opposing shores. It has stood on one tack to avoid Arianism or
Tritheism, till it finds itself running into Sabellianism; then it goes
about, and stands away till it comes near Arianism or Tritheism again.
Unitarianism is on both sides: on one side in the form of one God, with a
threefold manifestation of himself; on the other side in the form of a
Supreme God, with the Son and Spirit subordinate. It has always been very
hard to be Orthodox; for, to do so, one must distinguish the Persons, and
yet not divide the substance, of the Deity. In keeping the three Persons
distinctly separate, there was great danger of making three distinct Gods.
On the other hand, if one tried to make the Unity distinct, there was
danger that the Persons would grow shadowy, and disappear.

The heaviest charge against the Church doctrine of the Trinity is, that,
driven to despair by these difficulties, it has at last made Orthodoxy
consist, not in any sound belief, but only in sound phrases. It is not
believing anything, but saying something, which now makes a man Orthodox.
If you will only use the _word_ “Trinity” in any sense, if you will only
call Christ God in any sense, you are Orthodox.




§ 3. Errors in the Church Doctrine of the Trinity.


The errors in the popular view concerning the Trinity, as it is at present
held, appear to be these:—

1. _The Trinity is held as a mere dogma_, or form of words, not as a
reality. It is held in the letter, not in the spirit. There is no power in
it, nor life in it; and it is in no sense an object of faith to those who
accept it. They do not believe it, but rather believe that they ought to
believe it. There are certain texts in Scripture which seem to assert it,
certain elaborate arguments which appear convincing and irrefutable. On
the strength of these texts and these arguments, they believe that they
ought to believe it. But it is a matter of conscience, not of heart; of
logic, not of life; of law, not of love. It is not held as a Christian
doctrine ought to be held, with the heart; but only philosophically, with
the head. If it should cease to be preached for a few years in Orthodox
pulpits, it would cease to be believed; it would drop out of the faith, or
rather out of the creed, of the community. Unitarianism has extended
itself, without being preached, from the simple reading of the Bible. But
Trinitarianism cannot be trusted to its own power. It has no hold on the
heart. Here, in Massachusetts, the ministers left off preaching the
Trinity, and the consequence was, that the people became Unitarian.
Unitarianism in New England was not diffused by preaching: it came of
itself, as soon as the clergy left off preaching the Trinity. This shows
how worthless, empty, and soulless the doctrine was and is. Instead of
this formal doctrine, we want something vital.

2. _Another objection to the present form of the Trinity is, that it is
not only scholastic, or purely intellectual, but that it is also
negative._ It is not even a positive doctrine. It is often charged against
Unitarianism, that it is a mere negation; and, in one sense, the charge is
well founded. Unitarianism is a negation, so far as it is a mere piece of
reasoning against Orthodoxy; but, as asserting the divine Unity, it is
very positive, But the doctrine of the Trinity _is_ a mere negation, as it
is usually held; because it is an empty form of denial. It only can be
defined or expressed negatively. The three Persons are not substances, on
the one hand; nor qualities, on the other hand. It is not Sabellianism,
nor is it Arianism. Every term connected with the Trinity has been
selected, not to express a truth, but to avoid an error. The term “one
essence” was chosen in order to exclude Arianism; the term “three
Persons,” or subsistences, was chosen in order to avoid Sabellianism.

Because the doctrine is thus a negation, it has failed of its chief use.
It has become exclusive; whereas, when stated truly, as a positive truth,
it would become inclusive. Rightly stated, it would bind together all true
religion in one harmonious whole, comprehending in its universal sweep
everything true in natural religion, everything true in reason, and
uniting them in vital union, without discord and without confusion. Every
manifestation which God has made of himself in nature, in Christ, and in
the human soul, would be accepted and vitally recognized by Christianity,
which comes, not to destroy, but to fulfil. The doctrine of the Trinity
would be the highest form of reconciliation or atonement,—reconciling all
varieties in one great harmony; reconciling the natural and supernatural,
law and grace, time and eternity, fate and freedom.

But, before illustrating this, we must consider further some of the
objections to the common form of the doctrine.

3. _It is also charged against the doctrine of the Trinity, __“__that it
is a contradiction in terms, and therefore essentially incredible.__”_ To
this it is replied, that it would be a contradiction if God were called
Three _in the same sense_ in which he is called One; but not otherwise.
The answer is perfectly satisfactory; and we therefore proceed to ask, In
what sense is he called Three, and in what sense is he called One? The
answer is, The Unity is of essence, or substance: the Trinity is of
persons. This answer, again, is satisfactory, provided we know what is
meant by these two terms. But the difficulty is to know what is meant by
the word “person.” We are expressly informed, that this term is not used
in its usual sense; for, if it were, it would divide the essence, and
three Persons would be the same as three Gods. On the other hand, we are
told that it means more than the three characters or manifestations. Here
lies the difficulty, and the whole of the rational difficulty, in the
doctrine of the Trinity. It is all on the side of the Triad. When we ask,
What do you mean by “the three”? there can be given but three answers,—two
of them distinct, and one indistinct. These answers are, (1.) We mean
three somethings, which we cannot define; (2.) We mean three Persons, like
Peter, James, and John; (3.) We mean three manifestations, characters, or
modes of being. Let us consider these three answers.

(_a._) “The three Persons are three somethings, which cannot be defined.
It is a mystery. It is above reason. There is mystery in everything, and
there must be mystery in the Deity.” So Augustine said, long ago, “We say
three Persons, not because we have anything to say, but because we want to
say something.”(85) But if one uses the phrase “three Persons,” and
refuses to define it positively, merely defining it negatively, saying,
“It does not mean this, and it does not mean that, and I don’t know what
it does mean,” he avoids, it is true, the difficulties, and escapes the
objections; but he does it by giving up the article of faith. No one can
deny that there _may be_ three unknown distinctions in the divine nature;
but no one can be asked to believe in them, till he is told what they are.
To say, therefore, that the Trinity is a mystery, is to abandon it as an
article of faith, and make of it only a subject of speculation. We avoid
the contradiction; but we do it by relinquishing the doctrine.

This fact is not sufficiently considered by Trinitarians. They first
demand of us to believe the doctrine of the Trinity, and, when pressed to
state distinctly the doctrine, retire into the protection of mystery, and
decline giving any distinct account of it. Now, no human being ever denied
the existence of mysteries connected with God, and nature, and all life.
To assure us, therefore, that such mysteries exist, is slightly
superfluous. But, on the other hand, no human being ever _believed_, or
could _believe_, a mystery, any more than he could see anything invisible
or hear anything inaudible. To believe a doctrine, the first condition is,
that all its terms shall be distinct and intelligible.

(_b._) The second answer to the question is, “We mean, by Persons, three
Persons, like Peter, James, and John.” According to this answer, the
_Trinity_ remains, but the _Unity_ disappears. This answer leaves the
Persons distinct, but the Unity indistinct. The Persons are not
confounded; but the essence is divided. The Tri-personality is maintained,
but at the expense of the Unity. In fact, this answer gives us Tritheism,
or three Gods, whose unity is only an entire _agreement_ of feeling and
action. But this answer we may set aside as unorthodox, no less than
unscriptural.

(_c._) Having thus disposed of each other possible answer, there remains
only that which makes of the three Persons three revelations or
manifestations of God, or representations of God. This answer avoids all
the difficulties. It avoids that of _contradiction_; as we do not say that
God is one in the same sense in which he is three, but in a different
sense. It avoids the objection of _obscurity_; for it is a distinct
statement. It avoids the objection of Tritheism; for it leaves the Unity
untouched. Moreover, it is a real Trinity, and not merely nominal. The
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are not merely three different names
for the same thing, but they indicate three different revelations, three
different views which God has given of his character, which, taken
together, constitute the total divine representation. It remains,
therefore, simply to ask, Is this view _a true one_? Is there any
foundation for it in Scripture, in reason, and in Christian consciousness,
the three sources of our knowledge of the truth?




§ 4. The Trinity of Manifestations founded in the Truth of Things.


We repeat, that this view is an Orthodox view of the Trinity, according to
the teaching of the greatest fathers of the Church. If we suppose that the
Deity has made, and is evermore making, three distinct and independent
revelations of himself,—each revelation giving a different view of the
divine Being, each revelation showing God to man under a different
aspect,—then each of these is a personal manifestation. Each reveals God
as a Person. If we see God, for example, in nature, we see him not merely
as a power, a supreme cause, but also a living Person, who creates
evermore out of a fulness of divine wisdom and love. God in nature is,
then, a Person. Again: if God reveals himself in Christ, it is not as
abstract truth or as doctrinal statement. But we see God himself, the
personal God, the Father and Friend, the redeeming grace, the God who
loved us before the foundation of the world, approaching us in Christ to
reconcile us and save us. It is a God who “so loved the world” that we see
in Christ, therefore, a Person. And so the Spirit, which speaks in the
human conscience and human heart, is not a mere influence, or rapture, or
movement, but is one who communes with us; one who talks with us; one who
comforts us; one who hears and answers us; therefore a Person.

If, then, there is no antecedent objection to this form of the Trinity as
a threefold manifestation of the divine Being, we have only to ask, Is it
_true_ as a matter of fact? Has such a threefold manifestation of God
actually taken place? We reply, that it is so. According to Scripture,
observation, and experience, we find such to be the fact. Scripture shows
us God, the Father, as the source of all being, the fountain and end of
all things; from whom all things have come, and to whom all things tend.
As the Creator, he reveals himself in nature and providence (as the
apostle Paul declares), “being understood by the things that are made,”
and “not leaving himself without a witness.”

Supreme power, wisdom, and goodness are manifested in nature as unchanging
law, as perfect order. But God is seen in Christ again as Redeemer, as
meeting the exigencies arising from the freedom of the creature by what we
call miracle; not contrary to nature, but different from nature, showing
himself as the Friend and Helper of the soul. As the essence of the first
revelation of God is the sight of his goodness, and wisdom, and power,
displayed in law, so the essence of the second revelation is of the same
essential Being displaying himself as love. In the first revelation, he is
the universal Parent; in the second, he is the personal Friend. But there
is a third revelation which God makes of himself,—within the soul as life.
The same power, wisdom, and goodness which we see displayed externally in
outward nature, we find manifested internally in the soul itself, as its
natural and its spiritual life. That which is displayed outwardly as power
is manifested within the soul as cause; that which is manifested outwardly
as wisdom is revealed inwardly as reason; and that which is manifested
outwardly as goodness is manifested inwardly as conscience, or the law of
right.




§ 5. It is in Harmony with Scripture.


The Scriptures also speak of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. When
they speak of the Father, they usually mean God as the Supreme Being.
Matt. 11:25: “Jesus said, I thank thee, _O Father_, Lord of heaven and
earth.” As omniscient: “Of that day knoweth no man, nor the angels, nor
the Son, but _the Father_ only.” As omnipotent: “Abba, _Father_, all
things are possible to thee.” As having life in himself, and as spirit:
“They shall worship _the Father_ in spirit and in truth.” As the source of
all power, life, and authority of the Son: “I came forth _of the Father_;”
“_the Father_, which hath sent me;” “the works which _the Father_ hath
given me to do.” The apostle Paul says, “To us there is but _one God, the
Father_;” and calls him “the God of our Lord Jesus;” also “the one God
_and Father_ of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all.”
The great order of the universe depends on him: “He has put the times and
the seasons in his own power.” Christ will at last “deliver up the kingdom
to God, _the Father_.” By Christ, “we have access in one spirit _to the
Father_.” “All things were delivered” to Christ “of _his Father_,” whose
will Christ always sought. Thus is _the Father_ spoken of in the New
Testament as the Source from which all things have proceeded, and the End
to whom all things tend.

_The Son_ (or Son of God) is spoken of in the New Testament as distinct
from the Father, but intimately united with him. The Father gives power;
the Son receives it. The Father gives light; the Son receives it. The Son
does nothing but what he seeth the Father do. “The Father hath sent me,”
he says, “and I live by the Father.” “I am not alone; but I, and the
Father who sent me.” “The Son is in the Father, and the Father in him.”
“No man cometh to the Father but by” him. He shows the Father to the
world. The Father is glorified in the Son. He is in the bosom of the
Father. The Father sent him to be the Saviour of the world. “He that hath
the Son hath life;” “And in him is everlasting life.”

_The Holy Spirit_, which came after Jesus left the world (also called the
Holy Ghost and the Spirit of God), is an inward revelation of God and of
Christ. It teaches all things, comforts, convinces. It is a spirit of
life, lifts one above the flesh, makes one feel that he is a Son of God,
communicates a variety of gifts, produces unity in the Church, sanctifies,
sheds the love of God into the heart, and renews the soul. The New
Testament speaks of joy in the Holy Ghost, power of the Holy Ghost, and
communion of the Holy Ghost.

According to the New Testament, the Father would seem to be the Source of
all things, the Creator, the Fountain of being and of life. The Son is
spoken of as the manifestation of that Being in Jesus Christ; and the Holy
Ghost is spoken of as a spiritual influence, proceeding from the Father
and the Son, dwelling in the hearts of believers, as the source of their
life,—the idea of God seen in causation, in reason, and in conscience, as
making the very life of the soul itself.

There are these three revelations of God, and we know of no others. They
are distinct from each other in form, but the same in essence. They are
not merely three names for the same thing; but they are real personal
manifestations of God, real subsistences, since he is personally present
in all of them. This view avoids all heresies, since it neither “divides
the substance” nor “confounds the persons.” And these are really the two
heresies, which are the most common and the most to be avoided. We think
it can be easily shown that these are the great practical dangers to be
avoided. To “divide the substance” is so to separate the revelations of
God as to make them contradict or oppose each other: to “confound the
persons” is not to recognize each as an independent source of truth to the
soul.




§ 6. Practical value of the Trinity, when rightly understood.


There is, therefore, an essential truth hidden in the idea of the Trinity.
While the Church doctrine, in every form which it has hitherto taken, has
failed to satisfy the human intellect, the Christian heart has clung to
the substance contained in them all. Let us endeavor to see what is the
practical value of this doctrine, for the sake of which its errors of
statement have been pardoned. What does it say to the Christian
consciousness?

The Trinity, truly apprehended, teaches, by its doctrine of
Tri-personality, that God is _immanent_ in nature, in Christ, and in the
soul. It teaches that God is not _outside_ of the world, making it as an
artisan makes a machine; nor _outside_ of Christ, sending him, and giving
to him miraculous powers; nor outside of the soul, touching it _ab extra_
from time to time with unnatural influences, revolutionizing and
overturning it; but that he is personally present in each and all. So
that, when we study the mysteries and laws of nature, we are drawing near
to God himself, and looking into his face. When we see Christ, we see God,
who is in Christ; and when we look into the solemn intuitions of our soul,
the monitions of conscience, and the influences which draw our heart to
goodness, we are meeting and communing with God.

Moreover, the Trinity, truly apprehended, teaches, by its doctrine of _One
Substance_ (the Homoousion), that these three revelations, though
distinct, are essentially at one; that nature cannot contradict
revelation; that revelation cannot contradict nature; and that the
intuitions of the soul cannot be in conflict with either. Hence it teaches
that the Naturalist need not fear revelation; nor the Christian believer,
natural Theism. Since it is one and the same God who dwells in nature, in
Christ, and in the soul, all his revelations must be in harmony with each
other. To suppose otherwise is to “divide the substance” of the Trinity.

And again: the Trinity, rightly understood, asserts the distinctness of
these three personal revelations. It is the same God who speaks in each;
but he says something new each time. He reveals a new form of his being.
He shows us, not the same order and aspect of truth in each manifestation,
but wholly different aspects.

And yet again: as the doctrine teaches that the Son is begotten of the
Father, and the Spirit proceeds from the Father and Son, it thereby shows
how the revelation in nature prepares for the revelation in Christ, and
both for the revelation in the soul.

The error of “dividing the substance” is perhaps the most common. The man
who sees God in nature, sees him only there: therefore God loses to him
that personal character which seems especially to be seen through Christ;
for God, as a person, comes to us most in Christ, and then is recognized
also in nature and the soul as a personal being. So, without Christ,
natural religion is cold: it wants love; it wants life. But, on the other
hand, the Christian believer who avoids seeing God in nature, and who
finds him only in his Bible, loses the sense of law or order, of
harmonious growth, and becomes literal, dogmatic, and narrow. And so, too,
the mystic, believing only in God’s revelation through the soul, and not
going to nature or to Christ, becomes withdrawn from life, and has a
morbid and ghastly religion, and, having no test by which to judge his
inward revelations, may become the prey of all fantasies and all evil
spirits, lying spirits, foul spirits, and cruel spirits.

Such errors come from “dividing the substance;” and they are only too
common. So that, when the true doctrine of Trinity in Unity is
apprehended, the most beneficial results may be expected to flow into the
life of the Church. No longer believed as a dead formula, no longer held
in the letter which killeth, no longer accepted outwardly as a dogma or
authority, but seen, felt, and realized in the daily activity of the
intellect and heart, the whole Church will recover its lost union, sects
will disappear, and the old feud between science and religion forever
cease. Science will become religious, and religion scientific. Science, no
longer cold and dead, but filled through and through with the life of God,
will reach its hand to Christianity. Piety, no longer an outlaw from
nature, no longer exiled from life into churches and monasteries, will
inform and animate all parts of human daily action. Christianity, no
longer narrow, Jewish, bigoted, formal, but animated by the great liberty
of a common life, will march onward to conquer all forms of error and evil
in the omnipotence of universal and harmonious truth.

Natural religion, Christianity, and spiritual piety, being thus
harmonized, nature will be more warm, Christ more human, and the divine
influences in the soul more uniform and constant. Nature will be full of
God, with a sense of his presence penetrating it everywhere. Christianity
will become more natural, and all its great facts assume the proportion of
laws, universal as the universe itself. Divine influences will cease to be
spasmodic and irregular, and become calm, serene, and pure, an indwelling
life of God in the soul.

A simple Unity, as held by the Jews and Mohammedans, and by some Christian
Unitarians, may be a bald Unity and an empty Unity. Then it shows us one
God, but God withdrawn from nature, from Christ, from the soul; not
immanent in any, but outside of them. It leaves nature godless; leaves
Christ _merely_ human; leaves the soul a machine to be moved by an
external impulse, not an inward inspiration.(86)

We conclude, finally, that no doctrine of Orthodoxy is so false in its
form, and so true in its substance, as this. There is none so untenable as
dogma, but none so indispensable as experience and life. The Trinity,
truly received, would harmonize science, faith, and vital piety. The
Trinity, as it now stands in the belief of Christendom, at once confuses
the mind, and leaves it empty. It feeds us with chaff, with empty phrases
and forms, with no real inflowing convictions. It seems to lie like a
vessel on the shore, of no use where it is, yet difficult to remove and
get afloat; but when the tide rises, and the vessel floats, it will be
able to bear to and fro the knowledge of mankind, and unite various
convictions in living harmony. It is there for something. It is
providentially allowed to remain in the creeds of the Church for
something. It has in itself the seed of a grand future; and, though
utterly false and empty as it is taught and defended, it is kept by the
deeper instinct of the Christian consciousness, like the Christ in his
tomb, waiting for the resurrection.





APPENDIX. CRITICAL NOTICES.


In this Appendix we shall add a brief critical examination of certain
recent works on points connected with our previous subjects. These
criticisms will complete the discussion in these various directions, so
far as space will allow here. The largest part of what follows has been
printed already, either in the “Christian Examiner,” or in the “Monthly
Journal of the American Unitarian Association.”




§ 1. On the Defence of Nescience in Theology, by Herbert Spencer and Henry
L. Mansel.


Mr. Herbert Spencer, in his book called “First Principles,” lays down the
doctrine of theological nescience, as the final result of religious
inquiry. In his chapter on “Ultimate Religious Ideas” he argues thus: The
religious problem is, Whence comes the universe? In answer to this
question only three statements are possible. It is self-existent. It was
self-created. It was created by external agency. Now, none of these, says
Spencer, is tenable. For, (1.) Self-existence means simply an existence
without a beginning, and it is not possible to conceive of this. The
conception of infinite past time is an impossibility. (2.) Self-creation
is Pantheism. We can conceive, somewhat, of self-evolution, but not of a
potential universe passing into an actual one. (3.) The theistic
hypothesis is equally inconceivable. For this is to suppose the world made
as a workman makes a piece of furniture. We can conceive of this last,
because the workman has the material given; he only adds form to the
substance. To produce matter out of nothing is the real difficulty. No
simile enables us to conceive of this production of matter out of nothing.
Again, says Spencer, space is something, the non-existence of which is
inconceivable; hence the creation of space is inconceivable. And lastly,
says Spencer, if God created the universe, the question returns, Whence
came God? The same three answers recur. God was self-existent, or he was
self-created, or he was created _ab extra_. The last theory is useless.
For it leads to an endless series of potential existences. So the theist
returns to self-existence; which, however, says Spencer, is as
inconceivable as a self-existent universe, involving the inconceivable
idea of unlimited duration.

Nevertheless, continues Spencer, we are compelled to regard phenomena as
effects of some cause. We must believe in a cause of that cause, till we
reach a _first cause_. The First Cause must be infinite and absolute. He
then follows Mansel in showing the contradiction between the two ideas.

But total negation is not the result,—only nescience. Atheism, Pantheism,
and Theism agree in one belief, namely, that of a problem to be solved. An
unknown God is the highest result of theology and of philosophy. “If
religion and science are to be reconciled, the basis of the reconciliation
must be their deepest, widest, and most certain of all facts—that the
power which the universe manifests is utterly inscrutable.”

Thus Mr. Spencer proposes to take back human thought eighteen centuries,
and ignoring the conquests of Christian faith in civilization, theology,
and morals, carries us to Athens, in the time of Paul, to worship at the
altar of an unknown God. He makes a solitude in the soul, and calls it
peace. He makes peace between religion and science, by commanding the
first to surrender at discretion to the other. Science knows nothing of
God; therefore theology must know nothing of God. But not so. Let each
impart to the other that which it possesses, and which the other lacks.
Let science enlarge theology with the idea of law, and theology inform
science with the idea of a living God.

It is not difficult to detect the fallacies in this argument of Spencer
for religious nescience. His notion of conception is that of a purely
sensible image. He assumes that we have no knowledge but sensible
knowledge, and then easily infers that we do not know God. We can
conceive, he says, of a rock on which we are standing, but not of the
whole earth. No great magnitudes, he declares, can be conceived. The
conception of infinite time is, therefore, an impossibility.

But it is clear to any one, not bound hand and foot by the assumptions of
sensationalism, that it is just as easy to conceive of the whole globe of
earth, as of the piece of it which we see. We cannot have _a visual image_
of the whole earth, indeed, but the mental conception of the globe is as
distinct as that of the stone we throw from our hand. And so far from the
conception of infinite duration being an impossibility, not to conceive of
time and space as infinite is the impossibility. It is impossible to
imagine or conceive of the beginning of time, or the commencement of
space.

Looking at his trilemma concerning the universe, namely, that it was
either, (1.) Self-existent, (2.) Self-created, or, (3.) Created by an
external power, we say,—

1. The real objection to a self-existent universe, is not that we cannot
conceive of existence without beginning. Nothing is easier than to
conceive of an everlasting, unchanging universe, without beginning or end.
It is not existence, but change, that suggests cause. Phenomena, events,
require us to believe in some power which produces them. Now, the events
which take place in the universe suggest an intelligent, absolute, and
central cause, that is, a cause combining supreme wisdom, power, and
goodness. A self-existent universe is not inconceivable, but it is
incredible.

2. Self-creation, he objects, is Pantheism. But this is no reason for
denying it, since Pantheism may, for all we see at this stage of the
argument, be the true explanation of the universe. The real objection to
the hypothesis of a self-created universe (or of a self-created God), is
that it involves the contradiction of something which exists and which
does not exist at the same moment; at the moment of self-creation, the
universe must exist in order to create, but must be non-existent in order
to be created. A self-created universe, then, is not incredible because it
involves Pantheism, but because it involves a contradiction.

3. He objects to the Theistic hypothesis, that we cannot conceive of the
production of matter (more strictly, of substance) out of nothing. He adds
that no simile can enable us to imagine it.

But I can produce, out of nothing, something visible, tangible, and
audible. There is no motion and no sound. I move my arm by the power of
will, and I produce both sound and motion. The motion of a body in space
is a material phenomenon; for whatever is perceived by the senses is
material. We do then constantly perceive material phenomena created out of
nothing, by human will.

His argument against the Theist, that space could not have been created by
God, since its non-existence is inconceivable, is much more plausible. But
suppose we grant that space, supposed to be a real existence, was not
created in time. Does it follow from that, that it does not proceed from
God? Not being an event in time, it does not require a cause; but being
conceived of as a reality, it may have eternally proceeded from the divine
will, and so not be independent of the Creator.

And as regards his trilemma concerning Deity, that also fails in the
failure of his thesis that eternal duration is inconceivable. His argument
against the self-existent Deity, only rests on that assumption which we
have shown to be untenable.

But Mr. Spencer, who is not a theologian, is at this point reënforced by
Mr. Mansel, on whose former work, “The Limits of Religious Thought,” we
proceed to offer some criticism. This also is an argument for nescience in
theology, in the presumed interests of revelation. Mr. Martineau has ably
shown the weakness and the dangerous tendency of this whole argument of
Mansel, in an article to which we earnestly refer our readers.

The work of Mr. Mansel is a desperate attempt to save Orthodox doctrines
from the objections of reason, not by replying to those objections and
pointing out their fallacy, but by showing that similar objections can be
brought against all religious belief. For example, when reason objects to
the Trinity, that it is a contradiction, Mr. Mansel does not attempt to
show that it is _not_ a contradiction, but argues that our belief in God
is another contradiction of the same kind. His inference therefore is,
that as we believe in God, notwithstanding the contradiction, we ought to
believe in the Trinity also, notwithstanding the contradiction. If we
believe one, we may believe both.

But this is a dangerous argument; since it is evident that one might
reply, that there remains another alternative; which is, to believe
_neither_. If Mr. Mansel succeeds in convincing his readers, the result
may be a belief in the Trinity, or it may be a disbelief in God
altogether; one of two things—either a return to Orthodoxy, or a departure
from all religion. Either they will renounce reason in order to retain
religion, or they will renounce religion in order to retain reason.

At the very best, also, the help which this argument offers us is to be
paid for somewhat dearly. It proposes to save Orthodoxy by giving up the
use of reason in religion. Mr. Mansel would say, “by giving up the
unlimited use of reason;” but, as we shall presently see, this comes very
much to the same thing at last.

What, then, is the nature of Mr. Mansel’s argument? It is an argument
founded upon Sir William Hamilton’s philosophy of the Unconditioned. Now,
this has been generally considered the weak side of Hamilton’s system.
According to him, the unconditioned is inconceivable: in other words, of
the Absolute and Infinite we have no conception at all. But this denies to
man the power of conceiving of God, and so leads directly to Atheism. This
charge has already been brought against Hamilton’s philosophy, in various
quarters; for example, in the “North British Review ” for May, 1835. But
we will not here attempt any examination of Hamilton’s theory, but confine
ourselves to Mr. Mansel.

The argument of Mansel is this (p. 75): “To conceive the Deity as he is,
we must conceive him as First Cause, as Absolute, and as Infinite. By the
First Cause is meant that which produces all things, and is itself
produced of none; by the Absolute is meant that which exists in and by
itself, having no necessary relation to any other being; by the Infinite
is meant that which is free from all possible limitation.”

Having thus defined the Deity as the First Cause, the Absolute, and the
Infinite, Mansel goes on to show that these ideas are mutually
contradictory and destructive. A First Cause necessarily supposes effects,
and therefore cannot be absolute: nor can the Infinite be a person; for
personality is a limitation. By a course of such arguments as these,
Mansel endeavors to show that the reason is as incapable of conceiving God
as it is of conceiving the Trinity, the Atonement, or any other Orthodox
doctrine; and since we do not renounce our belief in God because of these
contradictions, neither ought we, because of similar contradictions, to
renounce our belief in the Trinity.

Such is the substance of Mansel’s statement, though the arguments by which
it is proved are varied with great ingenuity and to great extent. This
course of thought is by no means original, either with Mr. Mansel or Sir
William Hamilton. A far greater thinker than either of them (Immanuel
Kant) had long before shown the logical contradictions of the
understanding in what he called the Antinomies of the pure reason. But the
important question is, If the reason contradicts itself thus in its
conception of Deity, how are we to obtain a ground for our belief in God?
Mansel answers, “Through revelation; that is, through the direct
declarations of Scripture.” This he calls faith. We are to believe in a
personal God on the ground of a Bible confirmed by miracles.

This result is so strange, that it may well seem incredible. Yet we cannot
think that we have misrepresented the tendency of the argument; though, of
course, we have given no ideas of the acuteness and flexibility of the
reasoning, the extent of the knowledge, and mastery of logic, in this
work. That such a position should be taken by a religious man, in the
supposed interest of Christianity, is sufficiently strange; for it seems
to us equally untenable in its grounds, unfounded in its statements, empty
of insight, destructive in its results. We will add, very briefly, a few
of the criticisms which occur to us.

The first thing which strikes us in the argument is, that everywhere it
deals with words rather than with things. The whole object of the
discussion concerns the meaning of terms, and it deals throughout with the
relation of words to other words. It is an acute philological argument. We
feel ourselves to be arguing about forms, and not about substances. Now,
such arguments may confuse, but they cannot convince. We do not know,
perhaps, what to say in reply; but we remain unsatisfied. One not used to
logic may listen to an argument which shall conclusively prove that white
is black; that nothing is greater than something; that a man who jumps
from the top of the house can never reach the ground; but, though the
thing is proved, he is not convinced. So, when Mr. Mansel proves to us
that we cannot conceive of a Being who is at the same time Infinite and
Personal, we are unable, perhaps, to reply to the argument; but we know it
to be false, since we actually have the two conceptions in our mind.

We _do_ conceive of the Deity as an infinite personality. Of what use to
tell us that we _cannot_ have an idea, when we know that we _do_ have it?

Mansel tells us that we cannot think the idea of the Infinite and
Absolute. He says (p. 110), “The Absolute and the Infinite are thus, like
the Inconceivable and Imperceptible, names indicating, not an object of
thought or of consciousness at all, but the mere absence of the conditions
under which consciousness is possible.”

But, then, they are only words, with no meaning attached; and, if so, how
can we argue about them at all? All argument must cease when we come to an
unmeaning phrase; therefore the existence of Mr. Mansel’s argument proves
the falsehood of his assertion. Since he argues about the Infinite, it is
evident that he has the idea of the Infinite in his mind.

Mr. Mansel agrees in principle wholly with the Atheists; for the Atheists
do not say that God does not exist, or that God cannot exist, but that we
cannot know that he exists. So says Mr. Holyoake, a leading modern
Atheist. This is what Mansel also asserts, only he goes farther than they,
contending that the very idea of God is impossible to the human reason. It
is true that he believes in God on grounds of revelation, which the
Atheists do not; but he agrees with them in setting aside all natural and
reasonable knowledge of Deity.

But how is it possible to obtain an idea of God from revelation, if we are
before destitute of such an idea? When Paul preached to the Athenians, he
addressed them as having already a true, though an imperfect, idea of God.
“Whom, therefore, ye ignorantly worship, him declare I unto you.” But, if
they had not already an idea of God, how could he have given them such an
idea? Suppose that he works a miracle, and says, “This miracle proves that
God has sent me to teach you.” But, by the supposition, they know nothing
about God; consequently, they have nothing by which to test the truth of a
revelation professing to come from him. Neither miracles, nor the nature
of the truth taught, nor the character of the teacher, avail anything as
evidence of a revelation from a Being of whom we know nothing. Without a
previous knowledge of God, only immediate revelation is possible.

Mr. Mansel, therefore, is one who, without a foundation, builds a house on
the sand. He attempts to erect faith in God after taking away the
foundation of reason. The apostles built revealed religion upon natural
religion, revealed theology upon natural theology, according to the rule,
“That is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural;
afterward that which is spiritual.” Christ said, “Ye believe in God:
believe also in me.” Mr. Mansel reverses all this, and makes Christ say,
“Ye believe in me: believe also in God.”

But, even if it were possible to ascend to belief in God through belief in
Christ, we must ask, Is not belief thought? If the mind cannot _think_ the
Infinite, how can it believe the Infinite? Must we not apprehend a
proposition before we can believe it? Does not the conception of a thing
logically precede the belief of it? If it is impossible to apprehend the
Absolute, if this is only an empty name, how is it possible to believe in
the Absolute on grounds of revelation, or on any other grounds? A miracle
cannot communicate to the mind an idea which is beyond its power of
conception.

Mr. Mansel declares that our religious knowledge is _regulative_, but not
_speculative_.

He lays great stress on this distinction: by which he means that we have
ideas of the Deity sufficient to guide our practice, but not to satisfy
our intellect; which tell us, not what God is in himself, but how he
_wills_ that we should think of him. According to this view, all
revelation is overturned, just as all natural religion has been previously
overturned. Revelation does not reveal God on this theory. We have no
knowledge of God in the gospel, any more than we had in nature. Instead of
knowledge, we have only law. But this seems to despoil Christianity of its
vital force. Christ says, “This is life eternal, to _know_ thee, the only
true God.” But Mr. Mansel tells us that such knowledge of God is
impossible. Therefore, instead of the gospel, he gives us the law; for it
is certain that his _regulative_ truths are simply moral precepts,
addressed to the will, not to the intellect; capable of being obeyed, but
not of being understood.

The radical error of Mansel seems to be this,—that his mind works only in
the logical region belonging to the understanding, and is ignorant of
those higher truths which are beheld by the reason. He has tried to find
God by logical processes, and, of course, has failed. He therefore
concludes that God cannot be known by the intellect. He has fully
demonstrated that God cannot be comprehended by the logical understanding;
and in this he has done a good work. But he has not shown that God cannot
be known by the intuitive reason. The understanding comprehends: the
reason apprehends. The understanding perceives the form: reason takes
holds of the substance. The understanding sees how things are related to
each other: the reason sees how things are in themselves. The
understanding cannot, therefore, see the infinite and absolute; cannot
apprehend substance or cause; knows nothing of the eternal. But the reason
is as certain of cause as of effect; knows eternity as really as it knows
time; it is as sure of the existence of spirit as it is of matter; and
sees the infinite to be as real as the finite. Therefore, though we cannot
comprehend God by logic, we can apprehend him by reason. We can be as sure
of his being as we are of our own, and we are not obliged to explain away
all those profound scriptures which teach us that the object and end of
our being is to know God.

Since, therefore, Mr. Mansel’s argument, with all its acuteness, learning,
and honesty, tends directly to Atheism; since, by overturning the
foundation of Christianity, it overturns Christianity itself; since it
substitutes mere moral laws in place of the vital forces of the gospel,—it
is no wonder that its positions have been rejected with much unanimity by
the most eminent Orthodox scholars. Its defence of Orthodoxy costs too
much. Leading thinkers of very different schools—for example, Mr.
Brownson, the Roman Catholic, in his “Quarterly Review;” Professor Hickok,
the Presbyterian, in the “Bibliotheca Sacra;” and Mr. Maurice, of the
Church of England, in an able pamphlet—have opposed with great force the
arguments and conclusions of this volume. It is true that some Orthodox
divines consider that Mr. Mansel has _demonstrated_ that the human
consciousness is unequal to the speculative conception of a Being at once
absolute, infinite, and personal, and seem gladly to have the aid of this
book in defending the Trinity. But the more distinguished and experienced
thinkers mentioned above are cautious of accepting the help of so
dangerous an ally.




§ 2. On the Defence of Verbal Inspiration by Gaussen.


Following the declaration of the apostle Paul, that “the letter killeth,”
we have, in the text of this volume, set aside all the theories of the
Bible which assume its absolute and literal infallibility. But within a
few years, a work in defence of this doctrine has been published abroad,
by an excellent man, M. Gaussen, of Geneva, and translated and republished
in America by Rev. Dr. Kirk, of Boston. Such a work, coming from such
sources, deserves some examination. We shall, therefore, show the course
of argument followed in this book, and the reasons which lead us to
consider its conclusions unsound, and its reasoning inadequate.

Inspiration, as defined by Gaussen, is “that inexplicable power which the
divine Spirit formerly exercised over the authors of the Holy Scriptures,
to guide them even in the employment of the words they were to use, and to
preserve them from all error, as well as from every omission.

“We aim,” says he, “to establish, by the word of God, that the Scriptures
are from God—that all the Scriptures are from God—and that every part of
the Scripture is from God.”

Let us consider the arguments in support of this kind of inspiration, and
the objections to them.

_Argument I. Plenary Inspiration is necessary, that we may know with
certainty what we ought to believe._

Great stress is laid upon this supposed _necessity_, both by Gaussen and
Kirk.

“The book so written,” say they, “is the Word of God, and binds the
conscience of the world; and nothing else does so bind it, even though it
were the writings of Paul and Peter.

“With the Infidel, whether he be Christian in name or otherwise, the sharp
sword of a perfect inspiration will be found, at last, indispensable. If
the ground is conceded to him that there is a single passage in the Bible
that is not divine, then we are disarmed; for he will be sure to apply
this privilege to the very passages which most fully oppose his pride,
passion, and error. How is the conscience of a wicked race to be bound
down by a chain, one link of which is weak?”

_Reply to Argument I._—It is no way to prove a theory _true_ to assume its
_necessity_. The only legitimate proof of a theory is by an induction of
facts. This method of beginning by a supposed necessity, this looking
first at consequences, has always been fruitful of false and empty
theories. The great advance in modern science has come from substituting
the inductive for the ideological method. Find what the facts say, and the
consequences will take care of themselves. An argument from consequences
is usually only an appeal to prejudices.

Again: This argument is fatal to the arguments drawn from the Scriptures
themselves. In arguing from the Scripture to prove that every passage is
divine, we have, of course, no right to assume that every passage is
divine, for that is the very thing to be proved. Then the texts which we
quote to prove our position may themselves not be divine, and if we grant
that, “we are disarmed.” For, according to this argument, nothing can be
proved conclusively from Scripture except we believe in plenary
inspiration—then plenary inspiration itself cannot be proved from
Scripture. But Gaussen admits that this doctrine can be proved “only by
the Scriptures;” therefore (according to this argument) it cannot be
proved at all.

If, therefore, the doctrine of plenary inspiration is necessary “to bind
the conscience of the world,” it is a doctrine incapable of proof. If, on
the other hand, it can be proved, it is then clearly not necessary “to
bind the conscience of the world.”

But again. This theory of plenary inspiration does _not_ bind the
consciences of men. If men are naturally disposed (as Messrs. Gaussen and
Kirk maintain) to deny and disbelieve the doctrines and statements of the
Bible, they have ample opportunity of doing so, notwithstanding their
belief in this theory. For, after admitting that the words of Scripture,
just as they stand, are perfectly true and given by God, the question
comes, What do they mean? For instance, I wish, we will suppose, to deny
the doctrine of the Deity of Christ. Now, you quote to me the text Rom.
9:5. “Of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is over all, God,
blessed forever,”—which is the strongest text in the Bible in support of
that doctrine. Now, though I believe in the doctrine of plenary
inspiration, I am not obliged to accept this passage as proof of the Deity
of Christ. For I can, 1. Assert that the verse is an interpolation; 2.
Assert that it is wrongly pointed; 3. Assert that it is mistranslated; 4.
Assert that Christ is called God in an inferior sense, as God over the
Church. And, as a matter of fact, these are the arguments always used,
even by those who deny the doctrine of a plenary inspiration. They seldom
or never accuse the writer of a mistake, but always rely on a supposed
mistranslation, or misinterpretation, in order to avoid the force of a
passage. Hence, also, we find believers in this doctrine of plenary
inspiration, differing in opinion on a thousand matters, and with no
probability of ever coming to an agreement.

_Argument II. Several Passages of the New Testament plainly teach the
Doctrine of the Plenary Inspiration of the Bible._

The passages quoted by Gaussen, and mainly relied upon, are 2 Tim. 3:16.
“All Scripture is given by inspiration,” &c.; 2 Peter 1:27, “Holy men of
God spake as they were moved,” &c. Besides these, he refers to many
passages in the Old and New Testaments, but his chief stress is laid on
these.

_Reply to Argument II._—It is well known that both these passages refer
only to the Old Testament Scriptures. It is well known that the first may
be translated so as to read, “All Scripture, given by inspiration, is
profitable,” &c. But it is reply enough to both these passages, to say,
that neither of them indicates what kind of inspiration is intended. They
assert an inspiration, which we also maintain. But they do _not_ assert a
verbal inspiration, nor one which makes the Scriptures _infallible_, but
simply one which makes them _profitable_.

The stress laid on the passage 2 Tim. 3:16, “All Scripture,” &c., is
itself an argument against the theory of plenary inspiration. The most
which can be made of this text, by _any_ punctuation or translation, is,
that all the Scripture is written by inspired men. What was the degree or
kind of their inspiration, is not in the least indicated. It might have
been verbal, it might have been the inspiration of suggestion, or of
superintendence, or the general inspiration of all Christians.

Gaussen’s only argument on this point is, “that it is the _writing_ which
is said to be inspired, and writing must be in words; hence the
inspiration must be verbal.” To this we must reply, that inspired writing
can only mean what is written by inspired men. The writing itself cannot
be inspired. This argument is too flimsy to be dwelt upon.

But further still. There is another argument which lies against every
attempt to prove plenary inspiration out of the Scripture. _Every such
attempt is necessarily reasoning in a circle._ Gaussen and Kirk have
labored earnestly to reply to this argument, but in vain. The answer they
make is, “We are not reasoning with Infidels, but with Christians. We
address men who respect the Scriptures, and who admit their truth. The
Scriptures are inspired, we affirm, because, being authentic and true,
they declare themselves inspired; and the Scriptures are plenarily
inspired, because, being inspired, they say that they are so totally, and
without any exception.”

But we answer Messrs. Gaussen and Kirk thus: “You are indeed reasoning
with Christians, not with Deists; but you are reasoning with Christians
who do not believe that _every passage_ of Scripture is infallibly
inspired. To prove your doctrine from any particular passages or verbal
expressions, you must prove that those particular passages and expressions
are not themselves errors. You yourselves assert that this cannot be done,
except we believe these passages to be infallibly inspired. Therefore you
must assume infallible inspiration in order to prove infallible
inspiration. In other words, you beg the question instead of arguing it.”

In this vicious circle the advocates of a verbal inspiration of
infallibility are necessarily imprisoned whenever they attempt to argue
from the words of Scripture. They contend that one must believe their
theory in order to be sure that any passage is absolutely true, and then
they quote passages to prove their theory, as if they were absolutely
true.

_Argument III. The theory of plenary inspiration is simple, precise,
intelligible, and easy to be applied._

We admit this to be true. It has this merit in common with the opposite
theory of no inspiration. Both are simple, precise, and very easy of
application. But simplicity is not always a sign of truth. The facts of
nature and life are more apt to be complex than simple. Theories
distinguished by their simplicity most commonly ignore or omit a part of
the facts. Simplistic theories are generally one-sided and partial.
Materialism, Atheism, Idealism, Fatalism, are all very simple theories,
and explain all difficulties with a marvellous rapidity. This makes them,
at first, attractive to the intellect, which always loves clear and
distinct views; but afterwards, when it is seen that they obtain clearness
by means of shallowness they are found unsatisfactory.

_Argument IV. The quotations from the Old Testament, by Jesus and his
apostles, show that they regarded its language as infallibly inspired._

This argument, upon which great stress is laid, both by Prof. Gaussen and
Dr. Kirk, though plausible at first sight, becomes wholly untenable on
examination.

Thus, in the temptation of Jesus, in his reply to the tempter, he says,
“Thou shalt not live by bread alone;” the whole force of the argument
depending on the single word _alone_.

Replying to the Sadducees, who denied the resurrection, he says, “Have ye
not read that God says, I _am_ the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of
Jacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the living.” Then the whole
stress of the argument rests on the use of the verb in the present tense,
“_I am_.”

Arguing with the Pharisees, “How did David, by the Spirit, call him
_Lord_, saying, The Lord said to my Lord,” &c.? Here the argument depends
on the use of the single word _Lord_.

Many more instances could be produced of the same kind; and Gaussen
contends, that when Jesus and his apostles thus rest their argument on the
force of a single word of the Old Testament, they must have believed that
the very words were given by inspiration. For otherwise the writers might
not have chosen the right word to express their thought in each particular
case. And unless the Jews had also believed in the verbal inspiration of
their Scriptures, they would have replied that these particular words
might have been errors.

_Reply to this Argument._—Plausible as this argument may seem, it turns
out to be wholly empty and worthless. Whenever any writer is admitted to
be an authority, then his words become authoritative, and arguments are
necessarily based on single words and expressions. In all such cases, we
assume that he chose the best words by which to convey his thought, and
yet we do not ascribe to him any inspiration or infallibility.

Thus, go into our courts of law, and you will hear the language of the
United States constitution, of the acts of legislature, of previous
decisions of the courts, argued from, word by word. Counsel argue by the
hour upon the force and weight of single words in the authorities. Judges
in their charges instruct the jury to determine the life and death of the
criminal according to the letter of the law. And this they do necessarily,
according to the rule, “_Cum recedit a litera, judex transit in
legislatorem_.” But will any one maintain that the counsel and court
believe that the legislature was infallibly inspired to choose the very
language which would convey their meaning?

In this very argument for plenary inspiration, Gaussen and his associates
rest their argument on the single word “all,” in the text, “All Scripture
is given by inspiration,” &c. Yet, say they, we are not assuming that this
text is plenarily inspired, for that, we admit, would be begging the
question. If, then, Mr. Gaussen can argue from the force of the single
word _all_, without assuming the doctrine of plenary inspiration, why
could not Jesus and his apostles argue from single words, without assuming
the doctrine of plenary inspiration?

There is, however, a passage in Paul (Gal. 3:16), in which the apostle
quotes a text from the Old Testament, and lays the whole stress of his
argument on two letters. “He says not, ‘And to seeds’ σπέρμασιν, as of
many, but as of one, ‘And to thy seed’ σπερματι.” According to Gaussen’s
argument, Paul must have believed in the inspiration of the letters. But
Gaussen is careful not to adduce this instance, which seems at first so
much in his favor. For, in fact, both in Hebrew and Greek, as in English,
“seed” is a collective noun, and does mean _many_ in the singular. The
argument of Paul, therefore, falls through; and it is evident that he is
no example to be imitated here, in laying stress on one or two letters.
Most modern interpreters admit that he made a mistake; and so, among the
ancients, did Jerome, who nevertheless, said the argument “was good enough
for the foolish Galatians.”

Having thus replied, very briefly, but we believe sufficiently, to the
main arguments in support of this theory, we say, in conclusion, that it
cannot be true, for the following reasons, which we simply state, and do
not now attempt to unfold.

1. The New Testament writers nowhere claim to be infallibly inspired to
write. If they had been infallibly inspired to write the Gospels and
Epistles, they certainly ought to have announced this important fact.
Instead of which Luke gives as his reason for writing, not that God
inspired him to write, but that “inasmuch as others have taken in hand” to
write, it seemed good to him also to do the same, and that for the benefit
of Theophilus. John and Paul assert the truth of what they say, but not on
account of their being inspired to write, but because they are disciples
and apostles.

2. The differences in the accounts of the same transactions show that
their inspiration was not verbal.

These differences appear on every page of any Harmony of the New
Testament. They are numerous but unimportant; they go to prove the truth
of the narrative, and give probability to the main Gospel statements. But
they utterly disprove the theory of plenary inspiration.

3. Paul declares that some things which he says are “of the Lord,” other
things “of himself;” that in regard to some things he was inspired, in
regard to others, not.

4. Every writer in the New Testament has a style of his own, and there is
no appearance of his being merely an amanuensis.

5. While the New Testament writers lay no claim to any such inspiration as
this theory assumes, they do claim for themselves and for all other
Christians another kind of inspiration, which is sufficient for all the
facts, and which gives them ample authority over our faith and life, and
makes them independent sources of Christian truth.

This view we have already sufficiently considered in our chapter on
inspiration.




§ 3. Defence of the Doctrine that Sin is a Nature, by Professor Shedd.


In the “Christian Review” for 1852 appeared an article of great power,
written by a gentleman who has since become eminent as a thinker and
writer—Professor W. G. T. Shedd. The title of the article was calculated
to attract attention, as a bold attempt to defend an extreme position of
Calvinism—“Sin a Nature, and that Nature Guilt.” The article was so
rational and clear that we consider it as being even now the best
statement extant of this thorough-going Calvinism, and therefore devote a
few pages here to its examination.(87)

After some introductory remarks, which it is not necessary to notice, the
writer lays down his first position, that sin is a nature. His statement
is, that we all sin necessarily and continually in consequence of _our
nature_, i.e., the character born with us, original and innate.

The proofs of this position are, 1. The language of St. Paul (Eph. 2:3),
“We were by nature the children of wrath, even as others.” 2. That we are
compelled by the laws of our mind to refer volitions to a nature, as
qualities to a substance. We cannot stop in the outward act of sin, but by
a mental instinct look inward to the particular volition from which the
sin came. Nor can the mind stop with this particular volition. There is a
steady and uniform state of character, which particular volitions cannot
explain. The instinct of reason causes us to look back for one common
principle and source, which shall give unity to the subject; and, having
attained a view both central and simple, it is satisfied. As our mind
compels us to refer all properties to a substance in which they inhere, so
it compels us to refer all similar volitions to a simple nature. When we
see exercises of the soul, we as instinctively refer them to a nature in
that soul, as we refer the properties of a body to the substance of that
body. 3. Christian experience proves that sin is a nature. The Christian,
especially as his experience deepens, is troubled, not so much by his
separate sinful actions and volitions, as by the sinful nature which they
indicate, and out of which they spring. We are compelled to believe, as we
look inward, that there is a principle of evil within us, below those
separate transgressions of which we are conscious. There is a diseased
condition of the soul, which these transgressions, indicate. There are
secret faults from which we pray to be cleansed. 4. The history of
Christian doctrine shows that the Church has in all ages believed in a
sinful nature, as distinguished from conscious transgressions.

These are the proofs of the first position, that sin is a nature. We have
stated them concisely, but with sufficient distinctness and completeness.
Let us now examine their validity.

The first argument is the text in Ephesians, “We were by nature children
of wrath,” ἦμεν τέκνα φύσει ὀργῆς. The word φύσις, the writer contends,
“always denotes something original and innate, in contradistinction to
something acquired by practice or habit.” This text, we know, is the
proof-text of original sin, and is considered by many commentators as
teaching that man’s nature is wholly corrupt. But plainly this is going
too far. Granting the full meaning claimed for the word φύσις, the text
only asserts that there is something in man’s nature which exposes him to
the divine displeasure by being the source of sin. It does not assert the
corruption of the whole nature, nor preclude the supposition that we are
born with tendencies to good, no less than to evil. That we are so, the
writer is bound by his own statement to admit; for if this Greek word
“always denotes something original and innate,” it denotes this in Rom.
2:14,(88) which declares that the Gentiles “do by nature the things
contained in the law.” According to this passage in Romans, if there be
such a thing as natural depravity, it is not total; and if there be such a
thing as total depravity, it is not natural. Those who wish to maintain
both doctrines can only do it by admitting two different kinds of
sinfulness in man, one of which is natural, but not total; the other
total, but not natural—a distinction which we esteem a sound one.
According to this passage in Rom 2:14, we must understand φύσις as
referring to the good side of man’s nature, and the same word in Eph. 2:3
as referring to the corrupt side of man’s moral nature. The first refers
to the “law of the mind;” the second, to the other “law in the members”
(Rom. 7:23). But there is another passage (Gal. 2:15), which asserts that
the Jews by nature are not sinners, like the heathen. Now, as we can
hardly suppose that the original instincts and innate tendencies of the
Jewish child were radically good from birth, and essentially different
from those of the heathen, and as such a supposition would contradict the
whole argument of Paul in Rom. ch. 2, it is evident that φύσις in Gal.
2:15 does not denote something original and innate. The meaning of this
verse probably is, that the Jew from birth up, and by the mere fact of
being born a Jew, came under the influences of a religious education,
which preserved him from many forms of heathen depravity. The word,
therefore, means in that passage, not a Jew by nature, but a Jew by birth;
and, if so, we are at liberty, if we choose, to ascribe the same meaning
to the word in Ephesians, and to understand the text to teach that we were
by birth placed under circumstances which tended necessarily to deprave
the character.

This passage, therefore, quoted by the writer, does not teach entire
depravity by nature, but a partial depravity, either found in the
hereditary tendencies and instincts, or acquired by means of the evil
circumstances surrounding the child from his birth.

The second argument of the writer is, that the laws of mind compel us to
refer sinful volitions to a sinful nature, as they compel us to refer
qualities to a substance.

We admit that, where we see uniform and constant habits of action, we are
compelled to refer these to a permanent character or state of being. If a
man once in his life becomes intoxicated, we do not infer any habit of
intemperance, or any vicious tendency; but if he is habitually
intemperate, we are compelled, as the writer justly asserts, to look
beneath the separate single actions for one common principle and source.
But in assuming that this source is a nature brought with us into the
world, the writer seems to us to jump to a conclusion. It may be an
acquired character, not an original nature. It may be an induced state of
disease either of body or mind, a depravity which has commenced this side
of childhood. We know that there are acquired habits both of mind and of
body; otherwise, not only would it be impossible for a man to grow worse,
but it would also be impossible for him to grow better, and there would be
an end to all improvement and progress. Such an acquired character
introduces unity into the subject of investigation, as completely as does
an original nature, and therefore satisfies all the wants of the mind.

A precisely similar answer may be made to the writer’s third argument,
drawn from Christian experience. He is perfectly right, we think, in
saying that the Christian is troubled, not merely, nor chiefly, by the
recollection of single acts and volitions of evil, but in the evidence
which they seem to give of a sinful state of mind and heart. He is right
in considering any theory of moral evil shallow and inadequate which only
takes into account sinful actions and sinful volitions. What earnest man,
who has seriously set about correcting a fault, or improving his
character, but has been obliged to say, “To will is present with me; but
how to perform that which I will, I find not”? Every earnest effort shows
us more plainly how deep the roots of evil run below the surface. We find
a _law_ in the members warring against the law of the mind, and bringing
us into captivity to the law of sin. This is the description which Paul
gives of it. It is a _law_; that is, something regular, constant,
permanent—a steady stress, a bias towards evil. The apostle, however,
differs from the writer in placing this law, not in the will, but in the
members; and also in stating that there is another law,—that of the
mind,—which has a tendency towards good. In the unregenerate we understand
him to teach that the law of evil is the stronger, and holds the man, the
personal will, captive. In the regenerate, the reverse is the case. Nor
does Paul teach that this sinful tendency is guilt. It is not “O _guilty_
man that I am!” but “O _wretched_ man that I am!”

Now, while we agree with the writer in rejecting as superficial and
inadequate any theory of evil, whether emanating from our own denomination
or from any other, which does not recognize this evil state or tendency
lying below the volitions, we differ from him in that we think it not
always a nature, but a character. He has not proved, nor begun to prove,
that this dark ground of evil in man is always innate or original. It may
or may not be; but the argument from Christian experience shows nothing of
the sort.

The writer’s fourth and remaining argument is, that the Church has, in all
ages, believed in a sinful nature, as distinguished from conscious
transgressions. If this were so, we admit that it should have weight in
the inquiry; but we deny the fact so far, at least, as the sinful nature
is concerned.(89)

The writer proceeds thus: “Assuming, then, that the fact of a sinful
nature has been established, we pass to the second statement of St. Paul,
that man is by nature a child of wrath. We pass from his statement that
sin, in its ultimate form, is a nature, to his statement that this nature
is guilt.” If we have done justice to the writer’s arguments,—and it has
been our object to state them fairly, though briefly,—we submit that the
fact of a sinful nature has not been established by them. He has shown
that in man there is a tendency to evil running below the conscious,
distinct volitions—that there is a permanent character, good or evil,
which manifests itself, and becomes first apparent to ourselves, or to
others, in these separate, spiritual exercises or actions. But that this
stress either to good or evil, this law either of the mind or members, is
original and inborn, is yet to be proved. Let us then consider the second
point, namely, whether this character or nature, whichever it may be, is
also guilt.

As the writer’s first argument to prove a sinful nature was drawn from the
Greek word φύσις, so his first argument to prove that nature guilt is
derived from the Greek word ὀργή in the same passage. “The apostle
teaches,” he says, “that sinful man is a child of wrath. Now, none but a
guilty being can be the object of the righteous and holy displeasure of
God.” But this word, translated _wrath_, is confessedly used in other
senses besides that of the divine anger or displeasure. It may mean the
sufferings or punishments which come as the result of sin, in which sense
it is used in Matt. 3:7, “Who hath warned you to flee from the wrath to
come?” and other places. This word is used in the passage just quoted for
some future evil; in John 3:36, for a present evil—“The wrath of God
abides on him;” and in 1 Thess. 2:16, for a past evil—“For the wrath is
come [lit. _has_ come] on them to the uttermost.” It may mean the
subjective feeling of guilt; the sense that we deserve the divine
displeasure, which is removed by the assurance of forgiveness. It may mean
the state of alienation from God, which results by a law of the conscience
from this sense of guilt—an alienation removed by the divine act by which
God reconciles the sinner to himself. And the radical meaning, from which
these secondary meanings flow, may be the essential antagonism existing
between the holy nature of God and all evil. But whatever it means, it
cannot intend anything like human anger. In the divine wrath there is
neither selfishness nor passion; and it must consist with an infinite love
towards its object. The word, therefore, as used in Eph. 2:3, does not
convey the idea of guilt, _a vi terminis_. It may mean as well, that this
sinful tendency in man, manifesting itself in sinful actions, produces a
state of estrangement or alienation between man and God. How far this is a
guilty alienation, and how far it is evil and sorrowful, is not to be
learned from the term itself.

But the main proof of the writer in support of his second position is
found in the assertion, that this sinful tendency in man, out of which
evil acts continually flow, is not a tendency of the physical nature, but
of the will itself. He distinguishes the will proper from the mere faculty
of single choices, and considers it to be a deeper power lying at the very
centre of the soul, which determines the whole man with reference to some
great and unlimited end of living. It is, in fact, the man himself—the
person. For man, he asserts, is not essentially intellect or feeling; but
is essentially and at bottom a will, a self-determining creature. “His
other faculties of knowing and feeling are grafted into this stock and
root; and hence he is responsible from centre to circumference.” He then
affirms the will, thus defined, to be the responsible and guilty author of
the sinful nature; being nothing more nor less than its constant and total
determination to self as the ultimate end of living. This voluntary power,
which is the man himself, has turned away from God and directed itself to
self as an ultimate end; and this state of the will is the sinful nature
of man.

We have no disposition to quarrel with the psychology of this statement.
We admit man to be essentially will, in the sense here described. He is
essentially activity; an activity limited externally, by special
organization and circumstances,—limited internally, by quantity of force,
and knowledge.

Nor, again, do we deny that in the unregenerate state the will of man is
directed to self rather than to God as its ultimate end; and that this is
guilt, and in a certain sense total guilt. No man can serve two masters.
If he is obedient to one, he is necessarily disobedient to the other. This
disobedience may, or may not, appear in act; but it is there in state. He
whose ultimate end is self-gratification is always ready to sacrifice the
will of God to his own. He whose ultimate end is God is always ready to
sacrifice his own will. In this sense, the unregenerate man may be said to
be wholly sinful; and he who is born of God, not to commit sin.

Thus much we grant; and the admission is a large one. But we must now
object to the writer, that this is but one side of the question; and that
he has omitted to see the other side. The sources of evil are not so
simple as he seems to suppose; for man is a very complex being, and the
world in which he lives is a very complex world. We therefore would
inquire,—

What proof have we that this guilty direction of the will is a _nature_,
in the sense claimed, i.e., something innate or original? Why may not the
will have been turned gradually in this direction as we grow up, by
enticements of pleasure; and why might not the will, in like manner, by
means of wise culture, have been gradually directed to God?

Again: what proof have we that we are so wholly _unconscious_ of this
direction of the will, as our author contends? That a great many of the
acts of the will are unconscious acts, like the separate movements of the
finger in a skilful pianist, or lifting of the feet in walking, we admit;
and we are not responsible for these separate acts, but for the _preceding
choice_, by means of which we determine to play the tune, or walk the
mile. In like manner, the direction of the soul to self rather than to God
may be moral evil; but is not moral guilt, until we become conscious of
it, in a greater or less degree. Then, when partially or wholly awakened
to the evil direction of the soul, if we allow ourselves to neglect this
discovery, to turn away from the fact and forget it, on that conscious act
presses the whole burden of guilt, and not on the unconscious volitions
which may result from it. We say, therefore, in opposition to the writer,
that though there may be depravity without consciousness of the depraved
state, there cannot be guilt without consciousness of the evil choice, or,
as the apostle says, “Sin is not imputed where there is no law.”

Again: we totally dissent from the statement that this deep-lying will in
man is unable to obey the commands, “Turn ye, turn ye from your evil way,
for why will ye die?”—“Repent and be converted, that your sins may be
blotted out,”—“Make you a new heart and a new spirit,”—“Choose you this
day whom you will serve,”—“Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ and be saved.”
The writer says, that “such a power as this, including so much, and
running so deep, which is a determination of the whole soul, cannot, from
the very nature of the case, be such a facile and easily managed power as
that by which we resolve to do some particular thing in every-day life.”
True: not _so_ easily managed; but can it not be managed at all? It may
require _more_ self-examination to understand what the direction of the
will is, and more concentration of thought and will, and more leaning on
God’s help; but _with_ all these are we able or not able to turn to God?
He says, the great main tendency of the will to self and sin as an
ultimate end, though having a free and criminal origin, “is not to be
reversed so easily.” True, again; but why not _less_ easily? The writer
speaks of the sinful will as a “total determination of itself to self;”
and asks “how the power that is to reverse all this process can possibly
come out of the will thus shut up, and entirely swallowed in the process.
How is the process to destroy itself?” But what! Has man become _a
process_? He is essentially will, but is this will blind mechanism? Has it
not, according to our author’s own theory, intelligence, conscience,
affection, rooted into it? The moment that the writer begins to speak of
the will, as unable to change its direction, he is compelled to conceive
of it materially and mechanically, and not as the moral, responsible soul.
He says, “The human will becomes a current that becomes unmanageable
simply because of its own momentum.” And therefore, again, he is obliged
to conceive of the whole voluntary power as lost, and lost before man was
born; and he reduces all our real freedom to the original act of the will
previous to birth, which took place when we were present in Adam’s soul,
and committed the first transgression with him.

This is plainly the denial of all human freedom since the fall of Adam. We
bring into the world, according to the writer, a will wholly and
inevitably bent to evil. We have no consciousness of this tendency, and if
we were conscious of it we have no power to change it; but we yet are
responsible for it, and guilty because of it, inasmuch as we began this
state ourselves when all our souls were mystically present in the soul of
Adam. Of this theory, we merely say now, that, if it be true, man is not
_now_ guilty of any sin which he commits in his mortal life; for he is not
now a free being. He is only responsible for the sin which he freely
committed in Adam. He is no more responsible when we suppose his sin to
proceed from his will, than when we suppose it to proceed from a depraved
sensuous nature, or from involuntary ignorance, for he is no more free in
the one case than in the other. He may be an infinitely depraved and
infinitely miserable being, but he can in no true sense be called a
_guilty_ being. Again we say, if this theory be true, it is an awful
theory, and one which we cannot possibly reconcile with the justice or
goodness, and still less with the fatherly character, of God. That God
should so have constituted human nature that all the millions of the human
race should have had this fatal opportunity of destroying themselves
utterly, by one simultaneous act, in Adam, is, to say the least, an
_awful_ theory to propound concerning our heavenly Father. We might put
Christ’s argument to any man not hardened by theological study, as it
seems to us, with irresistible force. “What man is there among _you_,
BEING A FATHER,” who could do anything of this sort? But we know too well
that all such appeals fall harmless from the sevenfold shield of a
systematized theology.

Therefore we will only say further, concerning this theory, that, as being
_apparently_ in direct conflict with the divine attributes as taught in
the New Testament; as making man a mere process deprived of real freedom;
as proving man not guilty for any sin committed in this life; and as
thereby deadening the sense of responsibility, and showing that we cannot
possibly obey the command, “Repent and turn to God,”—this theory of a sin
committed in Adam _ought to have the amplest proof_ before we believe it.
We admit that it may be true, though opposed to all our ideas of God, man,
and duty. But being thus opposed, it ought to be sustained by the most
unanswerable arguments. If Jesus and his apostles have told us so plainly,
we will believe it if we can. How is it, then? Not a word on the subject
in the four Gospels. Not a text from the lips of Jesus which can be
pretended to lay down any such theory. He does not even mention the name
of Adam once in the Gospels, nor allude to him, except when speaking of
marriage. This theory rests, not on anything contained in the Gospels,
book of Acts, or Epistles of Peter, James, or John, but on two texts in
two Epistles of Paul (Rom. 5:14; 1 Cor. 15:22). In the latter passage Paul
says not a word of Adam’s sin, but only of his death,—the whole chapter
treating, not of sin, but of death and the resurrection. This passage,
therefore, can hardly be considered a plain statement of the theory. The
other, in Romans, is confessedly so far from plain, that it is difficult
to make it agree with any theory; but the most evident meaning, to one who
has no theory to support, is, that sin began with Adam, and the
consequences of sin, which are moral and physical evil, began also with
him; and as he thus set in motion a series of evil tendencies which we
find in our organization, and which Paul elsewhere calls the law of the
members, and a series of evil circumstances which we find around us in the
world, both of which are the occasion of sin, we may trace back to him the
commencement of human disobedience. If the passage teaches anything more
than this, it certainly does not teach it plainly or explicitly.




§ 4. Defence of Everlasting Punishment, by Dr. Nehemiah Adams and Dr. J.
P. Thompson.


Two defences of this dreadful doctrine have appeared within a few
years—one by Rev. Nehemiah Adams, D. D. (chiefly known by his many and
determined pleas for slavery), and the other by Dr. Thompson of New York.

We will first examine Dr. Adams’s tract on “The Reasonableness of Eternal
Future Punishment.”

We have these three objections to it:—

I. It, throughout, denies the sovereignty of God.

II. It is, throughout, a system of naturalism.

III. It, throughout, ignores the central truth of the gospel.

It is our business to substantiate these assertions by sufficient proof.

1. The view taken in his tract, of God, cannot be true, because it
conflicts with his supreme and sovereign deity.

Of course, this is to dethrone God. God, if not sovereign, is not God. Any
view which disturbs, however remotely, the supremacy of the Deity, must be
a relapse towards Pagan idolatry. We charge this tendency on the whole
tenor of this tract. We affirm that it seriously impairs that confidence
and strength which can only come from reliance on Omnipotence, and remands
us to the terrors and narrowness of Polytheism: not consciously, of
course, or intentionally, but by the logic of its ideas and the tendency
of its argument.

According to Dr. Adams’s view of the world, it is a scene of conflict
between God and the Devil. The prize contended for is the souls of men.
God wishes to save them: the Devil wishes to damn them. By immense
efforts,—by the unparalleled sacrifice of himself on the cross,—God
succeeds in saving a portion of this race, whom the Devil had plunged into
fearful and desperate sin. As for the rest, He can do nothing with them,
but must go away and leave them; escaping with the saved to some other
region, where the sin and misery of the rest may be lost sight of.

The only divine supremacy which Dr. Adams admits is that of force. God is,
on the whole, _stronger_ than the Devil; so that He can prevent him from
carrying his ravages beyond certain limits. God can “hem in and overrule”
the power of sin; but he cannot conquer it. He has no complete power over
the heart and will of men to become supreme there; but he has power over
their conduct, and can restrain that within certain limits.

God’s sovereignty, according to Dr. Adams, is only like that of a human
government, and that, again, a weak one. A human government is strong when
it is able to dispense with standing armies, with an omnipresent police,
with prisons and dungeons: it is weak when its authority is only
maintained by these. In the first case, it rests on the love of the
people; in the other case, only on force.

Now, according to Dr. Adam’s tract, God’s sovereignty is essentially one
of force. He is not sovereign by overcoming sin through his own holiness,
but only by restraining its outbreaks by externally applied force. So far
from conquering sin, he is represented as giving up all hope of conquering
it. He has tried everything in his power, and has failed. He can do
nothing more. Dr. Adams speaks of God’s “having expended upon us all which
the gospel of his grace includes,” and of “the failure of that which is
the brightness of his glory.” Now, Dr. Adams says, “What God will probably
do is, to go away and leave us,” God says, according to the idea of this
tract, “I will place all of you, who sin, in a world by yourselves, from
which I and my friends will forever withdraw.” In substance, He gives up,
and acknowledges himself defeated. He is beaten by sin, which is more
powerful than his gospel. Sin compels the Deity to compromise; to take
some souls, and to leave others; to divide the universe,—love reigning in
one part of it, hatred and wickedness in another.

2. The second objection to the doctrine of everlasting punishment, as
taught in these works, is, that it is a system of pure materialism. It is
naturalism, as opposed to supernaturalism. All its arguments from
Scripture interpret Scripture according to its letter, and not according
to its spirit. While much stress is laid on the word “eternal,” no real
eternity is believed in, or even conceived of. The fundamental law of
religious knowledge—namely, that a man must be born of the Spirit in order
to see the kingdom of God, and that spiritual things must be spiritually
discerned—is wholly lost sight of. The spiritual world, with its bliss and
its woe, is supposed to be a continuation of the natural world, instead of
being its exact opposite. The same conditions of space and time are
supposed to prevail there as here. Hell is regarded by Dr. Adams as a
large place, located in some remote part of the universe, where the
sufferings and blasphemies of damned souls and devils will not disturb the
sentimental happiness of himself and his pious companions. Eternity he
regards as an enormous and quite inconceivable accumulation of time,
instead of being the very negation of time. An unlimited quantity of days,
months, and years, is his notion of eternity.

In like manner, all the arguments by which the school to which he belongs
maintains this doctrine, are drawn from relations which exist in this
world. Great use is made of the analogies of human government. It is said
that it would not be safe for the Deity to forgive sins on the simple
condition of repentance, without an atonement, because it would not be
safe for human governments to do so. The government of God is made wholly
similar to the imperfect and ignorant governments of men. When we say that
God, as described in the New Testament, is not a Being to inflict
everlasting suffering hereafter, we are told that he inflicts suffering
here; as though there were no essential distinction between the finite and
the infinite, the temporal and the eternal. When we argue that God would
not suspend the eternal destiny of a soul upon the conduct and the
determination of a brief earthly life, we have instances given us of great
risks to which we are exposed, and great evils which we may incur, in this
world; as though there were no difference between a partial loss and total
destruction. When we say that the justice of God will not permit him to
punish everlastingly those who, like the heathen, have never known Christ,
we have instances given of those who have ignorantly burned themselves or
have fallen down precipices. In all such examples, these reasoners
overlook the essential distinction between the finite and the infinite.
They forget that all finite evil can be made the means of a greater
ultimate good, but that infinite evil cannot.

It is a curious fact, that those who are most Orthodox fall most easily
into a very hard and dry naturalism. God is to them a king sitting on a
throne in some far heaven outside of the world, not a spirit pervading it
and sustaining it. He governs men from without by offering them rewards
and threatening them with punishments, not by inward inspirations and
influence. He teaches them from without by an outward Christ, an outward
Bible, outward preachers, pulpits, creeds, Sabbaths, and churches; not by
Christ formed within us, not by epistles and gospels written on the
fleshly tables of the heart. The day of judgment is a particular time,
when God shall sit on his throne, and all appear before him; not the
perpetual spiritual sentence pronounced in each human soul by the divine
law. And so heaven is a place where there is to be some singing of psalms,
and such amusements as are here considered proper in Orthodox families;
hell, another place, where souls are shut up, to suffer from physical
fire, or at least from some external infliction. The doctrine taught by
the Saviour in the first twelve verses of his first sermon, that the
humble, the generous, the merciful, are already blessed, and have heaven
now, does not appear to be at all comprehended. That heaven and hell are
in this world already; that truth, love, and use are its essence, whilst
falsehood and selfishness are the essence of hell,—these, though
rudimental facts of Christianity, are commonly considered mere mysticism.
But those who do not see all this have not seen the kingdom of heaven, and
must be born again, into a new world of spiritual ideas, in order to see
it.

3. The third and principal argument against the doctrine of everlasting
punishment is, that it is _inconsistent with the divine love to his
creatures_. It is impossible for God to manifest love to a human being by
inflicting everlasting torment upon him. It cannot do him good, because,
according to this theory, the period of probation is past, and he has no
power now to repent. As far, therefore, as the man himself is concerned,
it is gratuitous suffering—torment inflicted without any purpose. It
cannot be said that God has any love for the soul which he is treating in
this way. He has cast it off. To that soul, nevermore, throughout the ages
of an everlasting existence, shall God appear as a friend, but always as
an enemy.

We sometimes hear of a father who disinherits a child in consequence of
some act of disobedience. In one of the most touching tragedies in the
English language, a father refuses to forgive his daughter who had married
contrary to his wishes. He leaves her to starve, and refuses to forgive
her or to see her. No one approves of this conduct in the parent. But
every Orthodox man, who believes in everlasting punishment, attributes an
infinitely greater cruelty to God; infinitely greater, because the
obstinacy of the human parent endures only during a short life, but the
severity of God endures forever.

The force of this objection is such, that Dr. Adams has felt obliged to
add to his tract on “Everlasting Punishment” another tract upon the text,
“God is love,” endeavoring to show a consistency between the two. But he
does this by substituting something else in the place of the last. It is
curious enough, that a master in Israel should have written a tract upon
the “love” of God, and should have substituted “benevolence” instead of
it. In other words, instead of that fatherly love to every individual
which is the essential fact revealed in the gospel, he gives us a general
good-will towards the human race. Such a general benevolence he finds not
inconsistent with the doctrine of everlasting punishment; for, if love be
only general good-will, then, the greatest good of the greatest number
being the object, there is nothing to complain of if a few are sacrificed
for the sake of the rest. It is not, to be sure, easy to see how those who
have safely reached glory, and are in no danger of relapse, can be
benefited by the knowledge that their old neighbors and friends are in
hell; but there may be some benefit which is not apparent. By quietly
substituting, therefore, the idea of benevolence in the place of love, the
difficulty may be evaded, which otherwise is unanswerable.

But what an entire confusion of ideas is this, which substitutes a general
benevolence for a personal affection, good-will towards the race for love
to the individual! It is, in fact, abolishing the idea of Father, and
substituting that of Ruler. The kind ruler, actuated by benevolence,
desires the good of all his subjects; but he does not love them as
individuals. But the father loves the child with a wholly different
feeling. The tie is personal, not general. It is one of mutual knowledge
and mutual dependence. We cannot love one whom we do not know; but we can
exercise benevolence towards him very easily. Benevolence depends wholly
on the character of the benevolent person; but love is drawn out by the
object loved. I do not love my child because I am benevolent, but because
it is my child. The infant draws forth a host of feelings, before unknown,
in the mother’s heart. She does not love her infant because she is a
benevolent woman, but because the infant excites her love. A man is
benevolent towards the sufferers in Kansas, whom he has never seen; but he
does not love them. He loves his wife, but is not benevolent towards her.
Benevolence and love, therefore, are not only essentially different in
their nature, origin, and manifestations, but so different as often to
exclude each other.

Now, it has always been seen that God is benevolent. This is taught by
natural religion. We see it in all the arrangements of divine Providence.
The infinitely varied provisions for the good of his creatures, the myriad
adaptations by which their wants are met, are ample evidence of this. But
Christianity comes to teach us something else,—to teach us that God is our
Father, and so to see in him benevolence swallowed up in love. God does
not love his children because he is benevolent, but because they are his
children. He does not love them for the sake of others, but for their own
sake. His love does not depend upon their being good, pious, or Christian;
it depends only upon the fact that they are his children. This is the
doctrine of the prodigal son; in which wonderful parable it is more
distinctly stated than in any other part of the New Testament. The
doctrine there taught, that there is more joy in heaven over one sinner
who repents than over ninety and nine just persons who need no repentance,
is somewhat different from that other doctrine, that the redeemed in
heaven look down with joy upon the sufferings of the damned below. This
parable teaches that God has a personal, fatherly love towards the
impenitent sinner who has gone away from him into a far country. The
father’s joy when his child returned is the evidence of the love which had
continued in his heart while his child was absent from him.

This being the character ascribed by Christ to the Deity, we assert that
it is wholly inconsistent with the doctrine of everlasting punishment as
taught in the pamphlet before us. There are, it is true, many widely
different doctrines to which the term “eternal punishment” is applied.
Some of these may not be inconsistent with the love of God. Let us give
some instances.

Some, by eternal punishment, intend the punishments of eternity, as
distinguished from those of time. They mean spiritual punishment, as
distinguished from temporal punishment. They mean the sufferings which
have their root in the sight of eternal things, as distinguished from
those which originate in the sense of earthly things—sufferings which come
to us from within, and not from without. “Eternal,” in this sense,
describes the quality, and not the quantity, of the suffering; and in this
sense eternal punishment is not inconsistent with the divine love. But
this is not the sense which Dr. Adams intends.

Some mean by endless punishment, that, as long as men continue to sin,
they will continue to suffer; that sin is eternally suffering. But this is
not the sense which Dr. Adams intends.

And some say that they believe in eternal punishment; meaning thereby,
that the consequences of sin are everlasting,—either positively, by
leaving forever some remorseful sorrow in the mind, or negatively, by
leaving men forever lower down in the scale of excellence and happiness
than they would otherwise be. But this is not what Dr. Adams means by it.

And some men believe in eternal punishment in the sense of a dark
background to the universe, which will always continue, a shadow as
permanent as light,—necessary for the full perfection and beauty of an
infinite divine creation. Into this shadow man may forever plunge; out of
it he may forever emerge: and it will always continue so to be. But this
is not the view taken by Dr. Adams.

The view which Dr. Adams takes is of endless punishment inflicted as a
consequence of temporal sin committed in this life. There will be no
opportunity to repent hereafter, no pardon offered. There is nothing done
by God, after this life, to save men. The heathen who have never heard of
Christ, unconverted infants, those who have been brought up in the midst
of evil, and heretics who do not accept the theory of Calvin concerning
Christianity, are to be tormented forever in the other world. This view he
thinks not only scriptural, but reasonable. It corresponds nearly to the
human penalty of imprisonment for life; except that, instead of a few
years of earthly life, it is a never-ending existence; and, instead of
simple imprisonment, it is imprisonment with torture added.

We are accustomed to complain of the “horrors of the Inquisition;” but
wherein do they differ in principle from the doctrine of Dr. Adams? The
inquisitors tortured men for heresy; Dr. Adams thinks that God will do the
same. The power of the Inquisition, however, was limited, on the
principle, _Dolor, si dura, brevis; si longa, levis_. But not so with
everlasting punishment.

That this view is absolutely inconsistent with the fatherly love of God to
every soul, is apparent. It would be impossible for a father to torment
his child forever in consequence of temporal sin. No earthly parent could
be found cruel enough to inflict a million years of torture upon his child
for each sin committed by him; but a million years for every sinful action
would be but a trifling penalty compared with everlasting punishment.

As it is absolutely impossible to defend this doctrine on the ground of
the fatherly love of God, it is defended by Dr. Adams and his companions
on other grounds, namely, of the divine benevolence, and the duty of God
as a governor. The argument is this: If God was dethroned, all sorts of
evil would ensue. But sin is always endeavoring to dethrone God; therefore
it is his duty to use the most strenuous measures to prevent this result.
These strenuous measures consist in the highest rewards offered to
obedience, and the severest punishments threatened to disobedience. But no
punishment is so severe as everlasting punishment; therefore the
benevolence of God requires him to threaten it; and, if threatened, his
truth requires him to inflict it. This is the sort of argument by which
the doctrine is defended. Its fallacies are manifest. It is based on a
sort of Manicheism, making evil a hostile power in the universe, which
threatens the supremacy of God. It makes God in danger of outward
overthrow in consequence of the external assaults of sin. But we have
always supposed that the essence of sin was the state of the heart, and
the evil of sin to consist in the estrangement of the heart from God, and
not in any danger that Omnipotence would be dethroned by it. Besides,
though the fear of future punishment may restrain the outward act, it
cannot change the heart, and cannot, therefore, remove the real evil of
sin. Here is the fallacy of this whole argument.

Another weak point in the argument for everlasting punishment regards its
proof, that all opportunity for repentance is confined to this life. Only
two or three texts are quoted in proof of this very important position.
One is taken from the book of Ecclesiastes, and declares, that, “in the
place where the tree falleth, there it shall be;” of which there is no
evidence that it has any relation to the subject; or, if it has, that it
carries the least authority with it. Another passage asserts that “there
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave whither
thou goest.” But this would prove too much; for it would prove that there
was no knowledge in the other life. Another passage, quoted by Dr. Adams
from the book of Revelation, says, “Let him that is unjust be unjust
still;” from which it is inferred that men have no opportunity hereafter
for repentance. But, as this is said to those who are in _this_ world
waiting for the coming of Christ, it also proves too much, if taken
literally; since it would declare that men cannot repent even in this
world. Such is the extremely slight foundation on which this essential
part of the doctrine is made to rest. Never was there so weak a support
for so important a position.

The arguments from reason, by which our writer supports this part of his
doctrine, are all taken from the plane of the lowest naturalism. He thinks
it reasonable that the Almighty should suspend the everlasting destiny of
his creatures upon what they do or omit doing in this life, because men,
in earthly transactions, adopt a similar principle. A railroad train is
advertised to start at a certain hour. If we are there a minute too late,
we lose our opportunity of going on an important journey. We think this
reasonable; why, then, argues Dr. Adams, should we think it unreasonable
for God to make us lose our chance throughout eternity if we do not take
the opportunity during life? God has given us full notice, he says, of his
intention; we have been duly notified; and, after due notice, it is
thought reasonable, in earthly business transactions, for people to run
their chance. A man may commit a crime in a minute, for which he is
sentenced to imprisonment for life or to capital punishment. We think this
reasonable; why should we think it unreasonable that God should send men
to an everlasting hell in consequence of sin committed in a short
lifetime?

All these arguments are fallacious, because they apply to the infinite,
conditions belonging wholly to the finite; because they transfer to Him,
whose ways are not as our ways, and whose thoughts are not as our
thoughts, the poor necessities of human ignorance and weakness. To those
who reason thus, the Almighty may say, “Thou thoughtest me altogether such
a one as thou thyself.” It is because man is weak and ignorant that he is
obliged to live under these limitations. If we were able to do
differently, we should not make such severe consequences flow from human
ignorance and weakness. We do such things, not because we think them
absolutely just and good, but because we cannot help it. To argue that,
because it is reasonable for human weakness to do something which it
cannot help, it is reasonable for divine Omnipotence to do an infinitely
more injurious thing of the same kind, is to fly in the face of all logic
and reason.

Men make a rule, that, if I am not at the station when the train starts, I
shall lose my trip for that day. Yes; but suppose the rule should be,
that, if I arrived a moment too late, I should be crucified. Suppose a
father should give full notice to his children, that, whenever any of them
mispronounced a word, he should be burned alive. But it is easier,
according to Dr. Adams’s theory, for a child never to make a mistake, than
not to commit the sins for which it is to be punished with everlasting
torment. “What man among you is there, being a father,” who would cause
his children to come into the world exposed to such fearful risks; who
would allow them to be born with constitutions tending inevitably to sin,
the inevitable consequence of which, after a few short years of life, is
never-ending torment, the only possible escape from which is salvation
through a Being of whom the majority never heard, according to a system
which the majority cannot believe, and by a process, which, except by a
special help, none of them are able to accomplish? We should say, that we
would not have children under these conditions. It were better that such
children had never been born. If we then, being evil, would not subject
our children to such risk, how much less would our Father in heaven do
anything of the kind!

The reply to such arguments, by those whom Thomas Burnet calls the
“unmerciful doctors” and “ferocious theologians,” is always the same.
Because finite evil exists, and is not inconsistent with the divine plan,
therefore infinite evil may also exist, and not be inconsistent with the
divine plan. Because one may suffer for a time in this world, therefore he
may be compelled to suffer forever in the other world. It is assumed that
there is no essential distinction between time and eternity, between
finite and infinite evil. Here is the immense fallacy of the argument. The
difference is simply this: All finite _suffering_, however great, is as
nothing when compared with everlasting happiness afterwards; but all
finite _happiness_, however great, is as nothing when compared with
everlasting suffering afterwards. If we deny, therefore, the doctrine of
everlasting suffering, evil virtually disappears from the universe; if we
accept it, good virtually disappears, as far as the sufferers are
concerned. If all evil is finite, the goodness of God can be fully
justified; but, if to any one it is infinite, no such theodicy is
possible.

This is the fatal objection to the doctrine of everlasting punishment. It
clouds the face of the heavenly Father with impenetrable gloom. It takes
away the best consolations of the gospel. When Jesus tells us to forgive
our enemies, that we may be like our heavenly Father, who sends his
blessings upon the evil and the good, this doctrine adds, that God’s
character is thus forgiving only in this world; but that, in the other
world, he will torment his enemies forever in hopeless suffering. When we
seek consolation amid the griefs and separations of this world by looking
to a better world, where all tears will be wiped away, we have presented
to us instead this awful vision of unmitigated horror. Instead of finite
evil being swallowed up into infinite good, it darkens down into infinite
woe.

Dr. Adams quotes Thomas Burnet, Master of the Charter-house, as a striking
instance of one, who, though he denied or doubted this doctrine, admitted,
nevertheless, that the Scriptures were probably against him. He quotes him
correctly as saying, “Human nature shrinks from the very name of eternal
punishment; yet the Scriptures seem to hold the other side.” Though Dr.
Adams gives the Latin, and refers to the page of the book, let us hope,
for his own sake, that he quotes it at second-hand; which, as he twice
misspells the name, is not unlikely; for Dr. Burnet, so far from admitting
that the Scriptures are “probably against him,” concludes, after an
examination of the leading passages, that they prove nothing certainly as
to the eternal duration of future punishment. He quotes the passage in
which the Jewish servant is said to become a slave _forever_,—meaning till
the year of jubilee; in which circumcision is called an _everlasting
covenant_,—meaning that it shall be abolished by the same divine
authority; in which the land of Canaan was given for an _everlasting
possession_ to Abraham and his seed, from which they have long since been
expelled; &c. Dr. Burnet does, indeed, say that the Scriptures _seem_ to
favor the doctrine he opposes; but he then goes on to show that such is
not the case. He also “awakens antiquity,” and calls to his aid the
merciful doctors of the early church (Justin Martyr, Jerome, the
Gregories, &c.) to support his hope in a merely limited future suffering.

We will now consider the meaning of some of the texts usually adduced in
support of this doctrine. Of these texts, there are some six or seven only
upon which much stress is laid; and of these the principal ones are as
follows:—

1. Matt. 18:8, “Having two eyes, two hands,” &c., “to be cast into hell
fire,” or “into everlasting fire” (τὸ πῦρ τὸ αἰώνιον)—(τὴν γέεναν τοῦ
πυρός).

2. Matt. 25:46, “These shall go away into everlasting (eternal)
punishment, but the righteous into life eternal ”(κόλασιν αἰώνιον and ζωὴν
αἰώνιον). The same adjective is used in both places here, in the Greek;
but our translators have seen fit to render it “everlasting” in the first
place, and “eternal” in the second. There is no authority for such a
different translation. The word κόλασις, translated “punishment,” occurs
in one other place in the New Testament: this is (1 John 4:18), “Perfect
love casteth out fear, because fear hath torment.” In this last instance,
it is evident that the idea of punishment is not found, but only that of
suffering. In the LXX. (Ezek. 14:3, 4, 7) it is translated
“stumbling-block,” and means, says Schleusner (Lexicon in LXX.), “all that
is the source of misfortune or suffering.” Donnegan gives as its meaning,
“the act of clipping or pruning; _generally_, restriction, restraint,
reproof, check, chastisement; _lit. and met._, punishment.”

The true translation of the passage, then, is,—

“These shall go away into the sufferings or punishments of eternity; and
the righteous, into the life of eternity.”

The simple, direct, and natural meaning, therefore, of this passage is,
that, besides temporal joy and suffering, there are eternal joy and
suffering: besides the joys and sufferings which have their root in time
and in temporal things, there are joys and sufferings which have their
root in eternity and in eternal things. In the twenty-fifth chapter of
Matthew, the sufferings of eternity are described as following directly
upon judgment, and as being its natural consequence. The judgment on each
soul consists, according to this passage, in showing it its real
character. Both the good and the bad are represented as needing such a
judgment as this. Until the judgment takes place, men are described as
being ignorant of the true nature of their own past conduct. They do not
know their own good or their own evil: they do not understand themselves
as they really are. They have done good and bad actions, but have not
understood the value of those actions. They have not seen, that in every
deed of charity, in every act of humble benevolence, they were helping
Christ and his cause. They have not understood, that, by every selfish and
cruel deed, they were injuring their Master. But the judgment reveals all
this to them, and lifts them immediately out of temporal joy or pain into
eternal joy or pain. They rise out of temporal things into eternal things,
and the new insight is to them a source of spiritual joy or spiritual
suffering.

In some instances, if αἰώνιος were translated “everlasting” or
“never-ending,” it would make such palpable nonsense, that our translators
have been obliged to give it an entirely different rendering. Thus (2 Tim.
1:9; Tit. 1:2) we have the phrase πρὸ κρόνων αἰώνιον; which would be,
literally, “before eternity,” or “before everlasting time began,”
according to the common rendering. They have, therefore, translated it
“before the world began.” In the same way (Matt. 24:3; 1 Cor. 10:11), they
are obliged to change their usual rendering, or they would have to say,
“So shall it be at the end of forever;” or, “The ends of eternity have
arrived.”

Mark 9:43-50, it is said that the “worm does not die” in Gehenna, and “the
fire is not quenched.” This, therefore, is thought to teach the doctrine
of never-ending punishment hereafter; but this was a proverbial
expression, taken from the book of Isaiah.

Chap. 66:24, the prophet says, that, in the times of the Messiah, all men
shall come, and worship in the presence of Jehovah; and shall then go out,
and look upon the dead bodies of the men who had transgressed against the
Lord; “for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched;
and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.” Our Saviour, therefore, is
not making an original doctrinal statement, but he is quoting from Isaiah.
Now, the passage in Isaiah refers, not to punishment of the soul
hereafter, but to the destruction of the bodies of transgressors in the
valley of Hinnom. The fire and the worms in that valley were not
everlasting in any strict sense. When Isaiah says, “Their worm shall not
die, nor their fire be quenched,” he expresses merely the utter
destruction which would fall upon them. The fire and the worms of the
valley of Hinnom have long since disappeared; but, while the fire lasted,
it was the emblem, to the Jews, of the destruction which was to fall upon
those who resisted the will of Jehovah. But it is not to be supposed that
the idea of eternity, which is not in the original image, should be added
in the figure. The fire and the worms were to last in the valley of Hinnom
as long as there were idolaters to be punished for their idolatry; and so
the spiritual suffering consequent upon sin lasts as long as sin lasts.
Sin is perpetual misery; conscience is a worm which never dies; bad
passions are a fire which is never extinguished. This is the simple and
natural meaning of this passage.

3. Matt. 26:24. In this passage, as it stands in our translation, Jesus
says concerning Judas, “Woe to that man by whom the Son of man is
betrayed! It were good for that man if he had never been born.” (Mark
14:21.) The argument is, that, if it were good for Judas not to have been
born, it must be impossible that he should ever repent and be saved;
because, if he should ever be saved, and his punishment should cease
(though at ever so remote a period), it would be better for him to have
been born than not to have been born; since there would remain an eternity
of happiness to be enjoyed afterwards. And if this be true of Judas, it
may be also true of others.

But, in reply to this argument, we say,—

1. The translation is doubtful. The literal translation is, “Woe to that
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! It had been good for him if that
man had never been born.” This is the literal rendering of the Greek; and
the apparent meaning seems to be, “that it had been good for the Son of
man if Judas had not been born.” Jesus seems to say that it is a great woe
to him, a great sorrow, to be betrayed by one of his own friends, by a
member of his own household. It would have been good for Jesus, if this
traitor, who was to wound his heart so deeply, had never existed.

2. But, retaining our present translation, the natural application of it
is to this life. It means simply this: The earthly life of this man is an
entire failure. His life is wholly thrown away. He had better never have
been in the world, than to stand, as he will to all time, a monument of
the basest treachery. The idea of the future life does not come it at all
here.

On the whole, one must feel, in reading these books and tracts, that such
writers are more to be pitied than to be blamed. Confined in the
strait-jacket of an austere theology; steeped to the lips in Calvinism;
working painfully all his life in sectarian harness; with an angry heaven
over his head, and a ruined earth about his feet; his friends and
neighbors dropping into hell by thousands every year; never having had any
real sight of the blessed face of Jesus; having for them no hope full of
immortality, but, instead thereof, a tenor full of damnation,—even a
kindly nature and an affectionate heart must suffer, be dwarfed and
crippled.

It is not an agreeable task to refute such errors; but believing them
equally destructive, in their tendency, to piety and morality,—corrupting
the Christian life at its centre, and weakening its chief source of
power,—we feel it a duty not to be avoided. Advancing age does not make us
conservative in regard to such doctrines. The longer we live, the more we
see of their evil tendency. When young, we shrank from attacking them,
fearing lest they might contain some truth beyond the range of our limited
experience. But, having come to see wherein the essence of Christian truth
lies in all varieties of pious experience, we know that this doctrine is
an excrescence, weakening always the vital power of the gospel. It rests
on custom, on cowardice, on the fear of change, not on any positive
insight or substantial knowledge. But, as Tertullian declared of another
doctrine defended by precedent, “Christ did not say, ‘I am the Custom,’
but, ‘I am the Truth.’ ”

The time will come in which the Christian Church will look back upon its
past belief in this doctrine as it looks back now on its former universal
belief in the duty of persecution, the primacy of the pope, or the
atonement made by Christ to Satan. It will regard it with the horror with
which it now regards its former universal conviction, that God was pleased
when his children burned each other alive for difference of opinion. We
now shudder when we hear of “AN ACT OF FAITH,” consisting in burning at
the stake ten or twenty Jews and Protestants. Our children will shudder
with a still more inward grief that we could make it _an act of faith_ to
believe that GOD burns millions of his own children in unquenchable fire
forever because they deny Calvin’s view of the atonement, or the Church
definition of the Trinity, or because of any possible amount of sin
committed in this world.

                  -------------------------------------

We now proceed to add some remarks upon a recent work by Dr. Thompson of
New York, a zealous and favorite disciple of the late Dr. Taylor of New
Haven. This book, the title of which is, “Love and Penalty,” consists of
nine lectures delivered in the Broadway Tabernacle.

With the contents of some of the chapters we have nothing to do. All the
arguments for retribution, derived from the nature of God, the nature of
man, the course of Providence, the demerit of sin, have for their object
to prove what all Christians fully believe. Unitarians and Universalists,
Theodore Parker and R. W. Emerson, teach retribution, present and future,
with a force which leaves little need of additional arguments from
Orthodoxy. They teach a perfect and inevitable retribution, proceeding
both from the truth and goodness of God, by means of which every man reaps
as he sows. Orthodoxy, they complain, teaches no such full and perfect
retribution. All that part of this volume, therefore, which is intended to
show the probability of retribution, is wasted, so far as any opposers are
concerned. In this part of his book, Dr. Thompson fights as one who beats
the air. He is very zealous to disprove that which no one asserts, to
prove that which no one denies, and to show the folly of a position which
no one assumes.

The confusion referred to runs through the whole book; and perhaps there
is no better illustration than this volume presents of that logical
fallacy which is called “the irrelevant conclusion.” This fallacy consists
in proving one thing, and making men think you have proved another. Dr.
Thompson’s hearers saw that he proved future retribution, and thought that
he proved eternal punishment. We do not suppose that he intended to
sophisticate them: the difficulty seems rather to be, that he has
sophisticated himself. The _ignoratio elenchi_ is in his own mind. He
thinks, because he sees penalty, that he has seen vengeance; that, because
he has established retribution, he has demonstrated everlasting
punishment.

A reasoner has, no doubt, a perfect right to try to prove two distinct and
independent propositions; but he must keep them distinct and independent,
and not pretend to be proving one when he is proving the other. He has
also a perfect right, if he desires to establish one proposition, to prove
another, as the first step towards it; but he has no right to assume or
imply that he has made out one of his points, when he has only shown the
probability of the other.

Now, our author (p. 19) declares that he has one object; viz., to show the
truth of the doctrine of everlasting punishment. He says, “It will be the
aim of this series of lectures to show that _the doctrine of the eternal
punishment of the wicked is in entire harmony with the paternal character
of God_.” He then proceeds to give the substance of his argument, under
eight heads. Six of these only prove future retribution, and only two of
them have any direct bearing upon the main question. Yet, through all of
them, there runs a quiet assumption, that they are bearing directly on the
main question. This is the radical sophism of the whole volume. We may see
this more plainly by analyzing some of his chapters.

His first position is this, in Lecture I.: “Our own nature, which is
appealed to as refusing to recognize the attribute of punitive justice in
a God of love, in fact demands this attribute, as essential to the moral
perfection of the Deity—an attribute without which he could not command
the confidence and homage of his intelligent creatures.”

Before attempting to demonstrate any theorem, it is important to define
its terms. An accurate definition at first of what we wish to prove would
often make a long discussion unnecessary. What is meant by the “_attribute
of punitive justice_”? Does it mean that God’s nature is such that he
causes happiness to flow from goodness, and suffering from wickedness, in
the constitution of the universe? If this is meant, Dr. Thompson will find
no one to oppose him; for all this can take place in perfect accordance
with divine love to the sinner himself. What he _needs_ is suffering: this
is the way by which he is to be cured of that sin which is a greater evil
than suffering. Or does the author mean, by “punitive justice,” some
attribute of the divine nature which finds pleasure in punishing the
sinner, without regard to any good which is to come from it, either to him
or to any one else? Apparently, this last is what he means; for he goes on
to quote from Pagan authorities and Pagan religions, to show that
conscience in man requires that the wicked should be punished, without any
regard to any good to result from it. But these authorities only show,
that, in the one-sided action of man’s nature, the sense of justice acts
independently of love. What Dr. Thompson has undertaken to show is, that
it can act in God in harmony with love. In man, conscience produces hatred
of sin, without regard to the good of the sinner; but the divine
conscience acts in no such one-sided way. “Mercy and truth meet together;
righteousness and peace kiss each other.” The law is vindicated and the
sinner benefited at the same moment.

The atonement of Christ, objectively considered, consisted exactly in
this, that he showed a perfect reconciliation, in his own life, of God’s
hatred to sin, and love to the sinner. No one was ever so averse from sin,
no one was ever so in sympathy with the sinner, as Jesus. The power of his
life, death, and higher life, lay in this union of holiness and love. This
was the objective atonement in Christ, and in this he was God manifest in
the flesh. He who has seen him has seen the Father. The Christianized
conscience, following Christ, pities the sinner, while it abhors the sin.
Christian legislation lays aside the vindictive tendencies of natural law,
and seeks at the same time to destroy evil, to protect society, and to
reform the criminal. From this gospel view our author remands us to
Paganism, and to the dicta of the natural conscience in unregenerate man.
These testimonies only show, that conscience, in its unregenerate state,
demands that the sinner be punished, and does not care whether that
punishment does him good or harm, makes him better or worse. But
conscience, when Christianized, does care: it wishes to save the sinner,
while it punishes the sin. As far as the natural conscience goes, it
speaks truly in saying that evil should follow sin. But why it should
follow it, and what shall be the result, it does not say. That was left to
Christ to reveal.

Dr. Thompson himself bears witness, unconsciously, to the truth of this
distinction. Along with his testimonies from the Heathen conscience, he
gives us two testimonies from the Christian conscience. The one is his own
feelings on seeing a woman carried to the Tombs. He says he felt sympathy
for her, and would fain have saved her from that shame, while he wished
her crime to be punished. The other is the testimony of Dr. Bushnell, that
the “necessary reason” why wicked people, remaining wicked, should not be
in heaven, is, that it would destroy the happiness of heaven. These two
Christians, therefore, have consciences which do not testify to punishment
proceeding from naked, arbitrary, and vindictive law, such as the Pagan
conscience accepts, but punishment having a reasonable end, a benevolent
purpose, and accompanied with sympathy for the sinner.

Another position of Dr. Thompson is, however, so extraordinary, that it
needs more consideration. His fifth proposition is this: “_The high and
sacred Fatherhood which the gospel reveals is a Fatherhood in Christ
towards those who love him, and not a general Fatherhood of indiscriminate
love and blessing for the race._”

A certain want of logical clearness in our author’s mind appears in the
very statement of this proposition. He joins together a positive and a
negative, which have no antithetical relation. We entirely agree with him,
that the Fatherhood of God is _not_ one of _indiscriminate_ love and
blessing for the race; but we utterly reject the proposition, that the
Fatherhood which Christ reveals is only one towards those who love him.
The apostle John tells us that “we love him because he first loved us.”
And again: “Herein is love; not that we loved God, but that he loved us,
and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins.” The doctrine of the
apostle is exactly opposite to that of Dr. Thompson. The modern divine
teaches that God only loves those who first love him; but the ancient
divine teaches that only by God’s loving us first do we come to love him.
Nor is this doctrine peculiar to John. It is a fundamental truth of the
New Testament, that God’s fatherly love, manifested to the soul, creates
an answering love, and that nothing else can create it. Jesus said of the
woman, “She loved much; but to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth
little.” God’s forgiving love comes first, and creates a grateful love in
return. And again we read (John 3:16), “God so loved the world, that he
gave his only-begotten Son.” He therefore loved the world while it was
still alienated from him. And again we are told by the Saviour (Matt.
5:44) to “love our enemies, that we may be the children of our Father in
heaven,” who loves his enemies.

Possibly our friend may say, “Yes, God loves the sinner; but he does not
love him with a _fatherly_ love, but only with a general love.” Perhaps a
copy of the New Testament may be used in the Tabernacle Church, New York,
which does not contain the Parable of the Prodigal Son. Only on some such
supposition can we account for this assertion of Dr. Thompson, that “the
high and sacred Fatherhood which the gospel reveals is a Fatherhood in
Christ towards those who love him.” Is that “_high and sacred Fatherhood
of God_” revealed anywhere more fully and plainly than in this parable?
and does it not teach expressly that the father loved the son, while he
was absent, as a son? Is not his joy at the return of his son the evidence
of that love which clung to him while he was away? Even after the son
returned, he had not begun to love his father as a son: he did not think
he had any right to do so. He did not expect that his father would love
him again: he only expected to be as a servant. It is evidently, then,
utterly false to say that God’s Fatherhood, revealed in the gospel, is
only a Fatherhood towards those who love him: it is a Fatherhood to those
who hate him and to those who fear him. His love creates theirs, and is
not created by it. Such a doctrine as this of Dr. Thompson, if generally
believed, would sap the foundations of Christian life, and turn the gospel
of reconciling grace into a cold system of retribution.

As a proof of this melancholy opinion,—an opinion which takes the life out
of the gospel,—the author relies chiefly on that passage in which Jesus
says to the Jews that they were of their father the devil. (John 8:44.)
From this he argues that they had no right to regard God as Father, and
that no one has that right except pious believers in Christ. But was not
God at that very moment their Father, in the same way that the father of
the prodigal son was his father while he was yet in the far country? The
prodigal son could not see his father’s love: while absent from him, he
could not tell how much his father loved him. Only when he returned, and
came back to his father’s house, could he behold that blessed countenance
and feel that pardoning love. But none the less did his father love him
during all that absence; none the less did he desire his return.

When Jesus said to the unbelieving Jews, “Ye are of your father the
devil,” was he describing God’s state of mind, or their state of mind? Did
he mean that God was alienated from them, or that they were alienated from
God? He evidently meant to say that they were in a _devilish_ state of
mind; that in their character and feelings they partook of the spirit of
the devil, and not of the spirit of God. He was describing their position
in relation to God, not God’s position in relation to them. The text,
therefore, appears to have no direct bearing on the subject. It teaches,
indeed, that they could have no truly filial feeling towards God; but it
does not show that he might not have a truly parental feeling towards
them. If they could not truly say, “Abba, Father,” he could say, “My son,
give me thy heart.”

We dwell on this because our author seems to us to have assumed a position
injurious, if not fatal, to the most vital force of the gospel. That which
subdues and converts the heart, and makes all things new in the soul, is
not to be told, that God will be our Father when we love him, but that he
is our Father now. “Herein is love; not that we loved God, but that he
loved us.” “God commends his love toward us, that, _while we were
sinners_, Christ died for us.” But why multiply quotations to prove that
which is written on the face of the gospel, and to which all Christian
experience bears testimony? It is God’s love to us, descending in Christ,
while we are estranged and far off, which draws up our affection to him:
it is not our love which takes the initiative, and draws his down.

The sixth position argues future retribution from the demerit of sin, and
asserts that “no punishment equal to the demerit of sin is, or can be,
inflicted in the present life.”

The boldness of this proposition is only equalled by the poverty of the
reasoning by which it is supported. To assert that it is not in the power
of God adequately to punish sin in this world, is to profess a knowledge
of the resources of Omnipotence, and an acquaintance with the deserts of
man, which it seems to us presumptuous to claim. On this point it is not
necessary to enlarge. An _a priori_ argument to prove that God cannot
punish sin in this life as much as it deserves to be punished, can carry
conviction to no mind which possesses any intellectual humility.

The seventh position declares that “there is no conceivable mode and no
revealed promise by which the Fatherhood of God can make one, dying in
impenitence and unbelief, holy and blessed in the future world.”

This is, of course, the very key-stone of the argument in support of the
doctrine of everlasting punishment. The burden of proof rests upon those
who assert that doctrine. It is not enough that Scripture does not
expressly declare that there is an opportunity in the other life for
repentance and pardon; for Scripture is dealing with us in this life, and
has no occasion to say much of the opportunities of the other. Those who
wish to prove that there is no opportunity hereafter must show some text
which expressly declares it. No such text is produced, and there is no
such text in the Bible. If Jesus had said, “You must repent in this life,
for after death there will be no opportunity;” or, “At death, man’s
spiritual condition is finally determined;” or, “After this life, man
cannot turn from evil to good,”—we should have some distinct proof of the
doctrine. But now we have none.

The Parable of Dives and Lazarus is referred to more than once by our
author in support of his position. It is sufficient to say in regard to
this, that the most Orthodox commentators, provided they are scholars,
expressly deny that this refers to the doctrine of everlasting punishment.
Olshausen, for instance, says, “Rightly to understand the whole
delineation, we must, above all, keep clearly in view, that it is not
everlasting salvation or condemnation which is here described, but the
middle state of departed souls, between death and the resurrection.” “In
our parable, there is no possible reference to the everlasting
condemnation of the rich man, inasmuch as the germ of love, and of faith
in love, is clearly expressed in his words.” The word translated “hell” in
this parable is not Gehenna, but Hades.

Our author says, and says justly, that we can form no opinion as to
another probation hereafter from _a priori_ reasoning, but that the
question must be answered only from Scripture. Having said this, he
immediately proceeds to argue it, _a priori_, stating that there are only
three conceivable modes by which those dying impenitent can be saved; and
then tries to show that neither is possible. After this, he quotes a few
passages bearing only indirectly, and by inference, upon the question. The
Parable of the Ten Virgins is one of these, because in it it is said, “The
door is shut;” and, “Depart! I know you not.” With regard to this parable,
also, Olshausen says that “the words ‘I know you not’ cannot denote
eternal condemnation;” that the foolish virgins were “saved, but not
sanctified;” and that the parable does not distinguish between the
penitent and the impenitent, but between the penitent believers who watch
and those who do not watch.

Of course, we have not been able to notice all the arguments of this book,
or all the texts referred to; but we have perhaps said enough to show that
its positions are not all tenable, and that its arguments are not
absolutely unanswerable. This book of Dr. Thompson, though able, cannot be
called conclusive.




§ 5. Defence of the Trinity, by Frederick D. Huntington, D. D.


The last section of this Appendix shall be devoted to an examination and
criticism of Dr. Huntington’s sermon, printed some time since, in defence
of the Trinity. The course of our argument will be as follows. We shall
give the reasons which have induced Unitarians to reject the Church
doctrine of the Trinity; also examining Dr. Huntington’s positions and
arguments in its support.

The principal reasons, then, for rejecting the Church doctrine of the
Trinity, as assigned by Unitarians, are these:—

1. That it is nowhere taught in the New Testament.

2. That every statement of the Trinity, which has ever been made, has been
either, (1.) Self-contradictory; (2.) Unintelligible; (3.) Tritheistic;
or, (4.) Unitarian, in the form of Sabellianism, or of Arianism.

3. That the arguments for it are inadequate.

4. That the arguments against it are overwhelming.

5. That the good ascribed to it does not belong to it, but to the truths
which underlie it.

6. That great evils to the Church come from it.

7. That it is a doctrine of philosophy, and not of faith.

8. That we can trace its gradual historic formation in the Christian
Church.

9. That it is opposed to a belief in the real divinity of Christ, and to a
belief in his real humanity; thus undermining continually the faith of the
Church in the divine humanity of Christ Jesus the Lord.

                  -------------------------------------

Proceeding, then, to an examination of these reasons, we say,—

I. The Church doctrine of the Trinity is nowhere stated in the New
Testament.

To prove this, as it is a negative proposition, would require us to go
through the whole New Testament. But we are saved this necessity by the
fact that we have a statement on this point from one of Dr. Huntington’s
own witnesses, and one on whom he mainly relies. He brings forward
Neander, the great Church historian, as a believer in the Trinity (p.
361), and again (p. 378), by an error which he has since candidly
admitted, quotes him as saying, “It is the fundamental article of the
Christian faith,”—which is just what he denies in the following passage.
We call Neander to the stand, however, _now_, to have his unimpeachable
testimony as a Trinitarian (and a Trinitarian claimed by Dr. Huntington
with pride) to the fact, that the doctrine of the Trinity is nowhere
stated in the New Testament. This is what Neander says of the Trinity, in
the first volume of his great work on Church History (p. 572, Torrey’s
translation):—


    “We now proceed to the doctrine in which Theism, taken in its
    connection with the proper and fundamental essence of
    Christianity, or with the doctrine of redemption, finds its
    ultimate completion—_the doctrine of the Trinity_. This doctrine
    does not strictly belong to the fundamental articles of the
    Christian faith, as appears sufficiently evident from the fact,
    that it _is expressly held forth in no one particular passage of
    the New Testament_; for the only one in which it is done, the
    passage relating to the three that, bear record (1 John 5:7), is
    undoubtedly spurious, and in its ungenuine shape, testifies to the
    fact, how foreign such a collocation is from the style of the New
    Testament Scriptures. We find in the New Testament no other
    fundamental article than that of which the apostle Paul says, that
    other foundation can no man lay than that is laid—the annunciation
    of Jesus as the Messiah.”


With this authority we might be content. But Dr. Huntington differs from
Neander in thinking that Jesus has himself stated the doctrine of the
Trinity, and stated it clearly and fully, in the baptismal formula. (Matt.
28:19.) He says that this is “a clear and full declaration of the
fundamental article of Christian belief.” He says, “Now, if ever, Christ
will distinctly proclaim the doctrine of Christendom;” and he then
declares that Christ, in this passage, told his Church to baptize “in the
Triune name.”(90)

Not in the Tri_une_ name, certainly. This is an assumption of our friend.
He may think that this is implied; that this is to be inferred; that this
is what Christ meant; but certainly it is not what Christ said. Christ
gives us here _three_ objects of baptism, no doubt; but he does not say
that they are one. How far this baptismal formula is “a clear and full
declaration” of the doctrine of the Trinity will appear thus. The doctrine
of the Trinity declares,—

1. That the Father is God.

2. That the Son is God.

3. That the Holy Ghost is God.

4. That the Holy Ghost is a person, like the Father and the Son.

5. That these three persons constitute one God.

Of these five propositions, all of which are essential to the doctrine of
the Trinity, _not one is stated in the baptismal formula_. Christ here
says _nothing_ about the deity of the Father, the Son, or the Holy Ghost;
_nothing_ about the personality of either of them; and _nothing_ about
their unity: It is difficult to conceive, therefore, how Dr. Huntington
can bring himself to call this a command to baptize in the Triune name.

Dr. Huntington adds, “Our faith is summoned to the three persons, of the
one God.” But nothing is said of three _persons_; nothing is said of their
being one God.

He says, “No hint is given that there is any difference of nature,
dignity, duration, power, or glory, between them.”

We admit it, but also say, that no hint is given of any _equality_ of
nature, dignity, duration, power, or glory, between them. Which way, then,
is the argument? Christ does not state, on the one hand, that the three
are unequal or different: he does not state, on the other hand, that they
are equal and the same. The inference of proof from this fact seems to us
to be this: If the apostles, when Christ spoke to them, were already full
believers in the church doctrine of the Trinity, the fact that Christ did
not deny it would be an argument in its favor; but if the apostles were,
at that time, wholly ignorant of the Trinity, then the fact, that he did
not assert it distinctly, at least shows that he did not mean to teach it
at that time. That inference appears to us a very modest one. But Dr.
Huntington will admit that they did not know the doctrine; for he tells us
that it was the purpose of Christ to teach it to them at that time. To
which we can only reply, If he meant to teach the doctrine, why did he not
teach it?

That the _word_ TRINITY is not to be found in the New Testament, and that
it was invented by Tertullian, is a matter of little consequence; but that
the doctrine itself should be nowhere stated in the New Testament we
conceive to be a matter of very great consequence. We have seen that Dr.
Huntington’s attempt to show that it _is_ stated in the baptismal formula
is a failure. If not stated there, we presume that he will not maintain
that it is stated anywhere. We therefore agree with Neander in saying,
that, whether the doctrine be true or not, it is not taught distinctly in
the New Testament. If taught at all, it is only taught inferentially; that
is, it is a matter of reasoning, not a matter of faith. It is metaphysics:
it is not religion.

II. The second reason why Unitarians reject the Church doctrine of the
Trinity is this:—

That every statement of the Trinity has proved, on examination, to be
either, (1.) A contradiction in terms; or, (2.) Unintelligible; or, (3.)
Tritheistic; or, (4.) Unitarianism under a Trinitarian form.

Let us examine this objection. What is the general statement of the
Trinity, as made by the Orthodox Church, Catholic and Protestant?
Fortunately, this question is easily answered.

Orthodoxy has been consistent since the middle ages in its general
statement, however much it may have varied in its explanations of what it
meant by that statement.

The doctrine of the Trinity, as it stands in the creeds of the churches,
is this:—

There is in the nature of God three persons,—the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost,—and these three are one being. They are the same in substance,
equal in power and glory. Each of these three persons is very God,
infinite in all attributes; and yet there are not three Gods, but one God.

According to the general doctrine of Orthodoxy, the unity of God is in
being, essence, and substance; that is, God is one being, God is one
essence, God is one substance. The threefold division stops short of the
being of God: it does not penetrate to his essential nature: it does not
divide his substance.

What, then, is the Trinity? It is a Trinity of persons.

But what is meant by “person,” as used in this doctrine? According to the
common and familiar use of the word at the present time, three persons are
three beings. Personality expresses the most individual existence
imaginable. If, therefore, the word “person” is to be taken according to
the common use of the phrase, the doctrine of the Trinity would be
evidently a contradiction in terms. It would be equivalent to saying, God
is one being, but God is three beings; which again would be equivalent to
saying that one is three.

Now, Trinitarians generally are too acute and clear-sighted to fall into
such a palpable contradiction as this. It is a common accusation against
them, that they believe one to be three, and three one; but this charge
is, in most cases, unjust. This would be only true in case they affirmed
that God is three in the same way in which he is one; but they do not
usually say this. They declare that he is one being,—not three beings.
They declare that the threefold distinction relates to personality, not to
being, and that they use the word “person,” not in the common sense, but
in a peculiar sense, to express, as well as they can, a distinction,
which, from the poverty of language, no word can be found to express
exactly. Thus St. Augustine confessed, long ago, “We say that there are
three persons, not in order to say anything, but in order not to be wholly
silent.” _Non ut aliquid diceretur, sed ut ne taceretur._ And so
Archbishop Whately, in the notes to his Logic, regrets that the word
“person” should ever have been used by our divines; and says, “If
_hypostasis_, or any other completely foreign word, had been used instead,
no idea at all would have been conveyed, except that of the explanation
given; and thus the danger, at least, of being misled by a word, would
have been avoided.”

(1.) _The Unintelligible Statement._

The Trinitarian thus avoids asking us to believe a contradiction; but, in
avoiding this, he runs upon another rock—that, namely, of not asking us to
believe anything at all; for if “person” here does _not_ mean what it
commonly means, and if it be impossible, from the poverty of language, to
define precisely the idea which is intended by it, we are then asked to
believe a proposition which Trinitarians themselves are unable to express.
But a proposition which is not expressed is no proposition. A proposition,
any important term of which is unintelligible, is wholly unintelligible.

To make this matter clear, let us put it into a conversational form. We
will suppose that two persons meet together,—one a Unitarian, the other a
Trinitarian.

_Trinitarian._ You do not believe the Trinity? Then you cannot be saved.
No one can be saved who denies the Trinity. It is a vital and fundamental
doctrine.

_Unitarian._ Tell me what it is, and I will see if I can believe it. What
is the Trinity?

_Trin._ God exists as one being, but three persons.

_Unit._ What do you mean by “person”? Do you mean a person like Peter,
James, or John?

_Trin._ No; we use “person” from the poverty of language. We do not mean
that.

_Unit._ What, then, do you mean by it?

_Trin._ It is a mystery. We cannot understand it precisely.

_Unit._ I have no objection to the doctrine being mysterious; I believe a
great many things which are mysterious; but I don’t want the _language_ to
be mysterious. You might as well use a Greek, or a Hebrew, or a Chinese
word, and ask me to believe that there are three _hypostases_ or three
_prosopa_ in Deity, if you do not tell me what you mean by the word
“person.”

_Trin._ It is a great mystery. It is a matter of _faith_, not of
_reasoning_. You must believe it, and not speculate about it.

_Unit._ Believe _it_? Believe _what_? I am waiting for you to tell me what
I am to believe. I am ready to exercise my faith; but you are tasking, not
my faith, but my knowledge of language. I suppose that you do not wish me
to believe _words_, but thoughts. I wish to look through the word, and see
what thought lies behind it.

Now, it seems to us that this is a very fair demand of the Unitarian. To
ask us to believe a proposition, any important term of which is
unintelligible, is precisely equivalent to asking us to believe no
proposition at all. Let us listen to Paul: “Even things without life,
giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they give a distinction in the
sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or harped? For, if the trumpet
give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself for battle? So likewise
ye, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall
it be known what is spoken? _for ye shall speak into the air_.... For, if
I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaketh a
barbarian; and he that speaketh, a barbarian unto me.”

It is of no use to talk about mystery in order to excuse ourselves for not
using intelligible language. That which is _mysterious_ is one thing; that
which is _unintelligible_ is quite another thing. We may understand what a
mystery is, though we cannot comprehend _how_ it is; but that which is
unintelligible we neither comprehend nor understand at all. We neither
know _how_ it is, nor _what_ it is. Thus, for example, the fact of God’s
foreknowledge and man’s freedom is a mystery. I cannot comprehend how God
can foreknow what I am to do to-morrow, and yet I be free to do it or not
to do it. I cannot comprehend how Jesus should be delivered to death by
the determined counsel and foreknowledge of God, and yet the Jews have
been free agents in crucifying him and accountable for it. These things
are mysteries; but they are not unintelligible as doctrines. I see what is
meant by them. There is no obscurity in the assertion that God foreknows
everything, nor in the other assertion that man is a free agent. I can see
clearly what is implied _in both statements_, although my mind cannot
grasp both, and bring them together, and show the way in which they may be
reconciled. So, too, infinity is a mystery. We cannot comprehend it. Our
mind cannot go round it, grasp it, sustain it. Our thought sinks baffled
before the attempt to penetrate to the depth of such a wonderful idea. But
we understand well enough what is meant by infinity. There is nothing
obscure in _the statement_ of the fact, that the universe is unbounded. So
the way in which a flower grows from its seed is mysterious. We cannot
comprehend how the wonderful principle of life can be wrapped up in those
little folds, and how it can cause the root to strike downward, and the
airy stalk to spring lightly upward, and the leaves to unfold, and, last
of all, the bright, consummate flower to open its many-colored eye. But
certainly we can understand very well _the statement_ that a flower grows,
though we do not comprehend how it grows.

Do not, then, tell us, when you have announced a doctrine, the language of
which is unintelligible, that you have told us a mystery. You have done no
such thing. Your proposition is not mysterious: it is unintelligible. It
is not a mystery: it is only a mystification.

(2.) _The Tritheistic Statement._

Leaving, then, this ground of mystery, and attempting to define move
clearly what he means by three persons and one substance, the Trinitarian
often sinks the Unity in the Triplicity, and so runs ashore upon
Tritheism. This happens when he explains the term “person” as implying
independent existence; in which case the Unity is changed into Union. Then
we have really three Gods: the FATHER, who devises the plan of redemption;
the SON, who goes forth to execute it; and the HOLY SPIRIT, who sanctifies
believers. If there are these three distinct beings, they can be called
one God only as they are one in will, in aim, in purpose,—only as they
agree perfectly on all points. The Unity of God, then, becomes only a
unity of agreement, not a unity of being. This is evidently not the Unity
which is taught in the Bible, where Jesus declares that the _first of all
the commandments is_, “Hear, O Israel! the Lord our God is ONE Lord.”

Moreover, against such a Trinity as this there are insuperable objections,
from grounds of reason as well as of Scripture. For God is the Supreme
Being, the Most High; and how can there be _three_ Supreme Beings, three
Most High Gods? Again: God is the First Cause; but if the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost are each God, and all equal in power and majesty, and
have each an independent existence, then there are three first causes;
which is evidently impossible. Again: one of the attributes of God is his
independent or absolute existence. A being who depends on another cannot
be the Supreme God. The Father, Son, and Spirit, therefore, cannot depend
on each other; for each, by depending on another, would cease to be the
independent God. But, if they do not depend on each other, then each
ceases to be God, who is the First Cause; for that being is not the First
Cause who has two other beings independent of him. Other arguments of the
same kind might be adduced to show that there cannot be three necessary
beings. In fact, all the arguments from reason, which go to prove the
Unity of God, prove a unity of nature, not of agreement.

“But why argue against Tritheism?” you may say. “Are any Tritheists?” Yes:
many Trinitarians are in reality Tritheists, by their own account of
themselves. There are many who make the _Unity_ of God a mere unity of
agreement, and talk about the society in the Godhead, and the
_intercourse_ between the Father, Son, and Spirit.(91)

Opposed to this kind of Trinity is another view, in which the Unity is
preserved, but the Trinity lost. According to this view, God is one Being,
who reveals himself in three ways,—as Father, as Son, as Spirit,—or
sustains three relations, or manifests himself in three modes of
operation. The Trinity here becomes a nominal thing, and is, in reality,
only Unitarianism with an Orthodox name. This kind of Trinity also is very
prevalent, and is the one really maintained by men of high standing in the
Orthodox Church, both in Europe and America. According to this view, the
word “person” in the doctrine of the Trinity means the same as the
corresponding word in Greek and Latin formerly meant; namely, the outward
character, not the inward individuality. Thus Cicero says, “I, being one,
sustain three persons or characters; my own, that of my client, and that
of the judge”—_Ego unus, sustineo tres personas_.

This view of the Trinity is commonly called Modalism, or Sabellianism, and
is also widely held by those who call themselves Trinitarians. It is, in
fact, only Unitarianism under a Trinitarian name.(92)

(3.) _The Subordination View._

Avoiding these two extremes, and yet wishing to retain a distinct idea of
Unity and Tri-personality, the Trinitarian is necessarily driven upon a
third view, in which the Father is the only really Supreme and Independent
Being, the Son and the Holy Spirit subordinate and dependent.

This view, which is called the subordination scheme, or Arianism, is
Unitarianism again in another form; and this view also is entertained by
many who still retain the name of “Trinitarians.” According to this view,
the Son and the Holy Ghost are really God, but are so by a derived
divinity. God the Father communicates his divinity to the Son and the Holy
Ghost. This is the view really taken in the Nicene Creed, though adopted
in opposition to the Arians, and was the doctrine of the earliest Church
Fathers before the Arian controversy began. In the Nicene Creed, we read
that the Son is “God of (ἐκ) God, Light of (ἐκ) Light, true God of true
God;” the “_of_” here being the same as “from,” and denoting origin and
derivation.

This doctrine seems, in reality, to have less in its favor than either of
the others. By calling the Son and Holy Spirit God, it contrives to make
three distinct Gods, and so is Tritheism; and yet, by making them
dependent on the Father, it becomes Unitarianism again. Thus, singularly
enough, this attempt at making a compromise between Unity and Trinity
loses both Unity and Trinity; for it makes three Gods, and so loses the
Unity; and yet it makes Christ not “God over all,” not the Supreme Being,
and so loses the Trinity.

Between these different views, between Tritheism, Sabellianism, and
Arianism, the Orthodox Trinity has always swung to and fro,—inclining more
to one or to the other according to the state of controversy in any
particular age. When the Arian or Tritheistic views were proclaimed and
defended, the Orthodoxy of the Church swung over towards Sabellianism,
making the Unity strong and solid; and the Trinity became a thin mode or
an airy abstraction. When Sabellianism, thus encouraged, came openly
forward, and defended its system and won adherents, then Church Orthodoxy
would hasten to set up barriers on that side, and would fall back upon
Tritheistic ground, making the Threefold Personality a profound and real
distinction, penetrating the very nature of Deity, and changing the Unity
of Being into a mere Unity of Will or agreement. We will venture to say,
that there has never yet been a definition of the Trinity which has not
been either Tritheistic or Modalistic; and Church Orthodoxy has always
stood either on Tritheistic or on Sabellian ground. In other words, the
Orthodox Trinity of any age, when searched to the bottom, has proved to be
Unitarianism, after all—Unitarianism in the Tritheistic or in the
Sabellian disguise; for the Tritheism of three coequal, independent, and
absolute Gods, is too much opposed both to reason and Scripture to be able
ever to maintain itself openly as a theology for any length of time.

The analogies which are used to explain the Trinity are all either
Sabellian or Tritheistic. Nature has been searched in all ages for these
analogies, by which to make the Trinity plain; but none have ever been
found which did not make the Trinity either Sabellianism or Tritheism.
They are either three parts of the substance, or else three qualities or
modes of the substance.

Thus we have instances in which the three are made the three parts of one
being, or substance; as in _man_,—spirit, soul, body; thought, affection,
will; head, heart, hand.

One Being with three distinct faculties is Tritheism: one Being acting in
three directions is Sabellianism.

Time is past, present, and future. Syllogism has its major, minor, and
conclusion. There are other like analogies.

St. Patrick took for his illustration the three leaves of trefoil, or
clover. Others have imagined the Trinity like a triangle; or they have
referred to the three qualities of space,—height, breadth, width; or of
fire,—form, light, and heat; or of a noun, which has its masculine,
feminine, and neuter; or of a government, consisting of king, lords, and
commons; or of executive, legislative, and judiciary.

This survey of Church Trinity shows that it is either one in which,—

1. The persons are not defined; or an unintelligible Trinity.

2. Or which defines person and Unity in the usual sense; or a
contradictory Trinity.

3. Or which defines person as usual, and the Unity as only Union; or
Tritheism.

4. Or which defines person as only manifestation; or Sabellianism.

These four are all the views ever hitherto given, and are all untenable.
We might stop here, and say that the Trinity is utterly unsupported. There
is no need of going to the Scripture to see if it is taught there; for we
have, as yet, nothing to look for in Scripture.

The Trinitarian’s difficulty appears to be in defining person. But
possibly he may say, “I cannot, indeed, give a positive idea of person;
but I can give a _negative_ one. I cannot say what it _is_; but I can say
what it is _not_. It is _not_ a mere _mode_ on the one hand; and not
_being_, on the other. We must neither confound the persons nor divide the
substance.”

We will, then, go further, and say, as Trinitarians have never yet defined
person, without making it either a mode or a being, so they never can
define it otherwise. There is no third between being and mode. They _must_
either confound the persons or divide the substance.

Again: that which differences one person in the Deity from another must be
either a perfection or an imperfection. There is nothing between these.
But it cannot be an imperfection; for no imperfection exists in God: and
it cannot be a perfection; for then the other two persons would want a
divine perfection, and would be imperfect.

III. The arguments in support of the Trinity are wholly inadequate. Since,
according to Neander, the Trinity is not stated in the New Testament, it
follows that it is a doctrine of _inference_ only; that is, a piece of
human reasoning. Now, we have, no doubt, a perfect right to infer
doctrines from Scripture which are not stated there; but, as Protestants,
we have no right to make these inferences fundamental, or essential to the
religious life. They may, indeed, be metaphysically essential; that is,
essential to a well-arranged system; but they are not morally essential;
that is, not essential to the moral and spiritual life of the soul.

But this is just what Dr. Huntington attempts to do. He tries to show that
there is a doctrine essential to the life, peace, and progress of man,
which the New Testament has omitted to state; which is neither distinctly
stated by our Saviour nor by any of his apostles; which has been left to
be inferred, and inferred by the mere processes of unaided human reason.

What arguments does he allege for this?

His first and principal argument is the _universal belief of the Christian
Church in the doctrine of the Trinity_.

On this Dr. Huntington lays great stress. He says,—

“Truth is not determined by majorities; and yet it would be contrary to
the laws of our constitution not to be affected by a testimony so vast,
uniform, and sacred as that which is rendered by the common belief of
Christian history and the Christian countries to the truth of the Trinity.
There is something extremely painful, not to say irreverent, towards the
Providence which has watched and led the true Christian Israel, in
presuming that a tenet so emphatically and gladly received in all the ages
and regions of Christendom, as almost literally to meet the terms of the
test of Vincentius,—believed always, everywhere, and by all,—is unfounded
in revelation and truth. Such a conclusion puts an aspect of uncertainty
over the mind of the Church, scarcely consistent with any tolerable
confidence in that great promise of the Master, that he would be with his
own all days.” (p. 359.)

To which we answer,—

(1.) That, according to Dr. Bushnell (Dr. Huntington’s own witness), there
never has been, nor is now, any such belief in the doctrine of the Trinity
as he asserts. The largest part of the Church have always “divided the
substance” of the deity, and another large portion have “confounded the
persons;” and so the majority of the Church, while holding the word
“Trinity,” have never believed in the Triunity at all.

Dr. Huntington summons Dr. Bushnell as a witness to the practical value of
the Trinity; and we may suppose something such an examination as this to
take place:—

_Dr. Huntington._ Tell us, Dr. Bushnell, what instances you know of
persons who have been converted or deeply blessed by the holy doctrine of
the Trinity.

_Dr. Bushnell._ I have known of “a great cloud of witnesses,” “living
myriads,” “who have been raised to a participation of God in the faith of
this adorable mystery,” (Huntington, p. 413.)

_Dr. H._ Mention some of them.

_Dr. B._ “Francis Junius,” “two centuries and a half ago,”—a professor “at
Heidelberg (Leyden?), testified that he was, in fact, converted from
atheism by the Christian Trinity;” also “the mild and sober Howe;” “Jeremy
Taylor;” also “the Marquis de Rentz;” “Edwards,” and “Lady Maxwell.”
(Huntington, p. 414.)

_Unitarian._ Say, Dr. Bushnell, whether, in your opinion, the majority of
Christians really believe in the Church doctrine of the Trinity.

_Dr. B._ “A very large portion of the Christian teachers, together with
the general mass of disciples, undoubtedly hold three living persons in
the interior nature of God.” (Bushnell: “God in Christ,” p. 130.)

_Unit._ Is that scriptural or Orthodox?

_Dr. B._ No. It is only “a social Unity.” It is “a celestial
Tritheocracy.” It “boldly renounces Orthodoxy at the point opposite to
Unitarianism.” (Bushnell: “God in Christ,” p. 131.)

_Unit._ Do I understand you to be now speaking of the properly Orthodox
ministers and churches generally?

_Dr. B._ “Our properly Orthodox teachers and churches, while professing
three persons, also retain the verbal profession of one person. They
suppose themselves really to hold that God is one person; and yet they
most certainly do not: they only confuse their understanding, and call
their confusion faith. This I affirm on the ground of sufficient evidence;
partly because it cannot be otherwise, and partly because it visibly is
not.” (_Ibid._ p. 131.)

_Unit._ Do you believe, Dr. Bushnell, that spiritual good can come from
such a belief in the Trinity as you describe to be “undoubtedly” that of
“the general mass of disciples”?

_Dr. B._ “Mournful evidence will be found that a confused and painfully
bewildered state is often produced by it. They are practically at work in
their thoughts to choose between the three, sometimes actually and
decidedly preferring one to another; doubting how to adjust their mind in
worship; uncertain, after, which of the three to obey; turning away,
possibly, from one with a feeling of dread that might well be called
aversion; devoting themselves to another, as the Romanist to his patron
saint. This, in fact, is Polytheism, and not the clear, simple love of
God. There is true love in it, doubtless; but the comfort of love is not
here. The mind is involved in a dismal confusion, which we cannot think of
without the sincerest pity. No soul can truly rest in God, when God is in
two or three, and these in such a sense that a choice between them must be
continually suggested.” (_Ibid._ p. 134.)

_Unit._ This state of mind is undoubtedly that of the general mass of the
disciples?

_Dr. B._ It is. (_Ibid._ p. 130.)

_Unit._ Are there others, calling themselves Trinitarians, who hold
essentially the Unitarian doctrine?

_Dr. B._ Yes. “It is a somewhat curious fact in theology that the class of
teachers who protest over the word ‘person,’ declaring that they mean only
a _threefold distinction_, cannot show that there is really a hair’s
breadth of difference between their doctrine and the doctrine asserted by
many of the later Unitarians. They may teach or preach in a very different
manner; they probably do: but the theoretic contents of their opinion
cannot be distinguished. Thus they say that there is a certain divine
person in the man Jesus Christ; but that, when they use the term ‘person,’
they mean, not a person, but a certain indefinite and indefinable
distinction. The later Unitarians, meantime, are found asserting that God
is present in Christ in a mysterious and peculiar communication of his
being; so that he is the living embodiment and express image of God. If,
now, the question be raised, ‘Wherein does the indefinable _distinction_
of one differ from the mysterious and peculiar _communication_ of the
other?’ or ‘How does it appear that there is any difference?’ there is no
living man, I am quite sure, who can invent an answer.” (_Ibid._ p. 135.)

_Unit._ Is it not true that both of these views are sometimes held
alternately by Trinitarians?

_Dr. B._ “Probably there is a degree of alternation, or inclining from one
side to the other, in this view of Trinity, as the mind struggles, now to
embrace one, and now the other, of two incompatible notions. Some persons
are more habitually inclined to hold the three; a very much smaller
number, to hold the one.” (_Ibid._ p. 134.)

_Unit._ But can they not hold the Unity with this Trinity?

_Dr. B._ “No man can assert three persons, meaning three consciousnesses,
wills, and understandings, and still have any intelligent meaning in his
mind, when he asserts that they are yet one person. For, as he now uses
the term, the very idea of a person is that of an essential,
incommunicable monad, bounded by consciousness, and vitalized by
self-active will; which being true, he might as well profess to hold that
three units are yet one unit. When he does it, his words will, of
necessity, be only substitutes for sense.” (_Ibid._ p. 131.)

(2.) But suppose that the belief of the Church in the Trinity was as
universal as Dr. Huntington asserts and Dr. Bushnell denies, what would be
its value? His argument proves too much. If it proves the Trinity to be
true, it proves, _a fortiori_, the Roman Catholic Church to be the true
Church, and Protestantism to be an error; for Martin Luther, at one time,
was the only Protestant in the world. Suppose that a Roman priest had come
to him then. He might have addressed him thus:—

“It is certainly an impressive testimony to the truth of the Church of
Rome, that the Christian world have been so generally agreed in it. Truth
is not determined by majorities; and yet it would be contrary to the laws
of our constitution not to be affected by a testimony so vast, uniform,
and sacred as that which is rendered by the common belief of Christian
history and the Christian centuries to the doctrines and practices of the
Roman Catholic Church. We travel abroad, through these converted lands,
over the round world. We enter, at the call of the Sabbath morning light,
the place of assembled worshippers; let it be the newly planted
conventicle on the edge of the Western forest, or the missionary station
at the extremity of the Eastern continent; let it be the collection of
Northern mountaineers, or of the dwellers in Southern valleys; let it be
in the plain village meeting-house, or in the magnificent cathedrals of
the old cities; let it be the crowded congregation of the metropolis, or
the ‘two or three’ that meet in faith in upper chambers, in log-huts or
under palm-trees; let it be regenerate bands gathered to pray in the
islands of the ocean, or thankful circles of believers confessing their
dependence and beseeching pardon on ships’ decks, in the midst of the
ocean. So we pass over the outstretched countries of both hemispheres; and
it is well nigh certain—so certain that the rare and scattered exceptions
drop out of the broad and general conclusion—that the lowly petitions, the
fervent supplications, the hearty confessions, the eager thanksgivings, or
the grand peals of choral adoration, which our ears will hear, will be
uttered according to the grand ritual of the Church of Rome. This is the
voice of the unhesitating praise that embraces and hallows the globe.”

What would Luther have replied to that? He would have said, “Truth must
have a beginning. It is always, at first, in a minority. The gate of it is
strait, the path to it narrow, and few find it. All reforms are, at the
beginning, in the hands of a small number. If God and truth are on our
side, what do we care for your multitudes?” We can make the same answer
now.

Dr. Huntington proceeds to give his own creed in regard to the Trinity,—to
state his own belief.

God, in himself, he declares, we cannot know at all. We know him only, in
his revelation. “Out of that ineffable and veiled Godhead—the groundwork,
if we may say so, of all divine manifestation; a theocracy—there emerge to
us, in revelation, the three whom we rightly call persons—Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost.”

We can only conceive of God, he says, in action; and in action we behold
him as three. But action and revelation take place in time. The Trinity,
therefore, according to Dr. Huntington, is only known to us in temporal
manifestation: whether it exists in eternity or not, we cannot tell. And
yet, in the next sentence, he goes on to say that “the Son is eternally
begotten of the Father,” and “the Holy Ghost proceeds out of the Father,
_not in time_;” which is the very thing he had a moment before professed
to know nothing about. It is very difficult, therefore, to tell precisely
what his view is. With regard to the incarnation of the Son, he is still
more obscure. He says that “Christ comes forth out of the Godhead as the
Son;” that he “leaves the glory he had with the Father;” that, while he is
on earth, the Father alone represents the unseen personality of the
Godhead, and that therefore the Son appears to be dependent on him, and
submissive; that temporarily, while the Son is in the world, he remains
ignorant of what the Father knows, and says that his Father is greater
than he. “He lessens himself to dependency for the sake of mediation.”
“All this we might expect.” This he calls an “instrumental inequality
between Son and Father:” it “is wrought into the biblical language,
remains in all our devotional habit, and ought to remain there.”

In other words, Dr. Huntington believes that the Infinite God became less
than infinite in the incarnation. The common explanation of those
passages, where Christ says, for example, “My Father is greater than I,”
does not satisfy him. He is not satisfied that Jesus said it “in his human
nature.” No. It was the divine nature which said it; and it was really GOD
THE SON, who did not know the day nor the hour of his own coming. He lost
a part of his omniscience. He ceased to be perfect in all his attributes.
We should say, then, that he ceased to be God; but Dr. Huntington
maintains that he was God, nevertheless; but God less than omnipotent,—God
less than omniscient; God the Son, so distinct from the Father as to be
ignorant of what the Father knew, and unable to perform what the Father
could do.

Dr. Huntington (p. 366) ascribes it to “condescension” in Christ, to say
that “of that day and hour knoweth not the Son.” “_It is condescension
indeed!_” says he. But this word “condescension” does not well apply here.
One does not condescend to be ignorant of what he knows: still less does a
truthful person condescend _to say_ he is ignorant of what he knows. We
may wisely condescend to help the feeble, and sympathize with the lowly,
but hardly to be ignorant with them, or to pretend to be ignorant. It is a
badly chosen word, and seems to show the vacillation of the writer’s
thought.

IV. The arguments against the doctrine of the Trinity are unanswerable.

We infer that they are unanswerable from the fact that they are not
answered. It is to be presumed that Dr. Huntington, having been for so
many years a preacher of Unitarian doctrine, is acquainted with our
arguments. It is a remarkable fact that, in this sermon, he has nowhere
attempted to reply to them. He has passed them wholly by. You would not
know, from reading the discourse, that he had ever been a Unitarian, or
had ever heard of the Unitarian objections to the Trinity; still less that
he had himself preached against it. Unitarians, for instance, have said,
that _if the Trinity be true, and if it be so important to the welfare of
the soul as is contended, it would be somewhere plainly taught in the New
Testament_. Does Dr. Huntington answer this argument? No; he answers the
argument from the _word_ “Trinity” not being in the Bible, and his answer
is sufficient; but he does not answer the argument from the fact, that the
doctrine itself is not anywhere distinctly taught, and that none of the
terms which have been found essential to any Orthodox statement of the
doctrine are to be met with in the New Testament.(93)

Nor does Dr. Huntington anywhere fairly meet the Unitarian argument from
the impossibility of stating the doctrine in intelligible language. He
tells us, with his usual eloquence, what we have often enough been taught
before, that there are many things which we do not understand, and that we
must believe many facts the _mode_ of which is unintelligible. But when we
say, “Can we believe _a doctrine_ or proposition which cannot be
distinctly stated?” He has no answer. The Trinity is _a doctrine_, and
must therefore be distinctly stated in order to be believed. It has not
been distinctly stated,(94) and therefore cannot be believed. To this
objection Dr. Huntington has no reply; and we may conclude that it is an
unanswerable objection.

Dr. Huntington uses an unnecessary phrase about those who object to
mystery. He calls the objection “shallow self-illusion,” and proceeds with
the usual declaration, that all of life is mysterious. Can he have been a
Unitarian preacher for twenty years, and not have known that Unitarians
object to mystery only when it is used by Trinitarians as a cover for
obscurity and vagueness of statement?

You ask us to believe a precise statement, viz., that “there are three
_persons_ in the Godhead.” We say, “What do you mean by ‘person’?” The
Trinitarian answers, “It is a mystery.” We say, “We cannot believe it,
then.” The Trinitarian replies, “Why, all is a mystery. How the grass
grows is a mystery; yet you believe it.” “No,” we say, “we do not believe
it. When the mystery begins, our belief ends; we believe up to that point,
and no farther.” The statement, “the grass grows,” is _not_ a mystery; the
fact, “the grass grows,” is _not_ a mystery. We believe the fact and the
statement. The _way_ in which it grows _is_ mysterious; and we do not
believe anything about it. “You cannot understand _how_ the grass grows.”
No; and, accordingly, we do not believe anything about _how_ the grass
grows. But the whole purpose of the Trinity is to show _how_ the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Spirit exist. You are not satisfied that we receive
_what_ the Scripture teaches; you try to show us the _how_, and then leave
it in obscurity at last.

Nor does Dr. Huntington reply to the Unitarian explanation of the
Trinitarian proof-texts. Trinitarians have often quoted the texts—“_I and
my Father are one_;” “_He who has seen me has seen the Father_”—in proof
of the Deity of Christ. Unitarians have often replied to both of them: to
the first passage, that since Jesus has also said that his _disciples were
to be one with him, as he is one with God_, it either proves that the
disciples are also to be God, or does _not_ prove that Christ is God. To
the second passage, Unitarians have replied by reading the next clause, in
which Christ says, “Believest thou not that I am _in_ the Father?” showing
how it is that he reveals the Father. He is _in_ the Father, and his
disciples are _in_ him. Those who see him, see the Father; those who see
his true disciples, see the face and image of Christ. These answers are so
obvious, and Dr. Huntington must have heard them so often, that he should,
as a controversialist, have taken some notice of them. He has not done so.

He quotes the passage from Eph. 1:20, 21, and says, “_Can this be a
creature?_” We reply, “Can he be anything _but_ a creature?—he who was
_set_ by God in this place of honor.” Does God set God, as a reward, above
principalities and powers? Does God make God “head over all things in the
Church”? Again: Dr. Huntington quotes, “that, at the name of Jesus, every
knee should bow, and every tongue confess that he is Lord;” but he omits
the conclusion, “to the glory of God the Father.”

He even quotes the passage, “Him _hath God exalted_ to give repentance and
forgiveness of sin.”

And he quotes the passage, which has staggered the strongest believers in
the Trinity, where Paul declares (1 Cor. ch. 15), that, _at the end_,
Christ will give up his kingdom to the Father, that “God may be all in
all,” and explains it as meaning that “he will resume his place in the
coequal Three, the indivisible One.” Has he _left_ his place, then? Is
that Orthodox? Dr. Huntington evidently thinks so; for he says, “The Son,
in his character of Sonship, is retaken, so to speak, into the everlasting
undivided One.” _So to speak._ We may _speak_ so: “But what do we mean by
it?” is the question. Did God the Son leave his place in the Godhead? Did
he become less than God? Did he become ignorant? Did he suffer and die?
Did he arise, and at last reascend, and take his place, “so to speak,” in
the Godhead? If this is meant as real statement, what better is it than
the Avatars of Vishnu? What sort of Unity is left to us? We have a Trinity
of council; but where is the Unity, except of agreement? One divine Being
descending, and leaving the other divine Being alone, temporarily, on the
throne of the universe, until the divine Being who had descended should
reascend to take his seat again “in the coequal Three and indivisible
One”!

One Unitarian argument, which appears to us unanswerable, is in the fact,
that the very passages in which the highest attributes are ascribed to
Christ are always those in which his dependence and subordination are most
strongly asserted. We could throw aside all the passages in which Jesus
asserts directly his inferiority,—as, “My Father is greater than I;” “Of
mine own self I can do nothing,”—and take the strongest proof-texts of the
Trinitarians, and ask for no better proof for the Unitarian doctrine: “All
power is given to me in heaven and earth;” “The image of the invisible
God, the first-born of every creature;” “In him dwelt all the fulness of
the Godhead bodily.” Are these passages written of Christ in his divine or
human nature? Not his divine nature; for to God the Son all power cannot
be “given.” God the Son cannot be “the image of God,” or the “first-born
of every _creature_.” The “fulness of the Godhead” cannot dwell in God the
Son. They must, then, be said of him in his human nature; and, if so, they
show that the loftiest titles and attributes do not prove him to be God.

V. The good ascribed to the doctrine of the Trinity does not belong to it,
but to the truths which underlie it.

Dr. Huntington asserts, for example, that “the Triunity of God appears to
be the necessary means of manifesting and supporting in the mind of our
race, a faith in the true personality of God.”

If so, it is remarkable that the two forms of religion in which the
personality of God, as absolute will, is most distinctly recognized (i.e.,
the _Jewish_ religion and the _Mohammedan_ religion), should both be
ignorant of the Trinity. It is equally remarkable that the most
Pantheistic religion in the world, in which the personality of God most
entirely disappears (i.e., Braminism), should have a Trinity of its own.
It is also remarkable, on this hypothesis, that idolatry in the Christian
Church (as worship of Mary, worship of saints and relics, &c.) should come
up with the Trinity, and flourish simultaneously with it.

No; it is not the Trinity which brings out most distinctly the personality
of God, but the faith in a divine revelation through inspired men. If God
can dwell in the souls of men, teaching and guiding them, he must be a
person like the soul with which he communes. Especially does the religious
consciousness of Jesus, his simple and child-like communion with the
heavenly Father, bring God near to the soul as a personal being. It is not
the Trinity, but the Christian faith which underlies it, which teaches the
divine personality.

Nor is it the doctrine of the Trinity which is necessary for a living
faith in God through Christ, reconciling the world unto himself. All that
Dr. Huntington says of the evil of sin is well said, but has no bearing on
the point before us. According to Dr. Huntington’s own witnesses, as we
have seen above, the Trinity was unknown in the earlier ages of the
Church. Was reconciliation unknown? Was the forgiving love of Christ
unknown? If he cannot assert this, the doctrine of the Trinity is not
necessary to a living faith in a reconciling God.

Dr. Huntington argues, that only the sufferings, and actual sufferings, of
God himself, can touch the sinful heart; and, therefore, the Trinity is
true. The conclusion is a long way from the premise, even supposing that
to be sound. But as regards the premise, he has read and quoted Mansel.
Has he not verged towards the dogmatism which that writer condemns? Would
it not be more modest, and better accord with Christian humility, to be
satisfied with believing the scriptural assertions, that “God so loved the
world, that he gave his only-begotten Son;” that “He who spared not his
own Son, but gave him up for us all,—shall he not, with him, freely give
us all things?” Is not this enough, without an argument to prove that the
_only_ way by which man can be saved is the method of a suffering God?

We will not dwell further on this head, nor examine our friend’s argument
to show that we cannot consistently, as Unitarians, have any piety. We
will try, then, to have it inconsistently.

VI. Great evils to the Church have come from the doctrine of the Trinity.

It has tended to the belief in three Gods. It has tended to a confusion of
belief between three Gods of equal power and majesty, united only in
counsel; one supreme and two inferior Deities; one Deity with a threefold
manner of manifestation; and a vague, undetermined use of words, with no
meaning attached to them—unhappy confusion, which none have been more
ready to recognize and to point out than Trinitarians themselves.

And what shall we say of the continual struggles, conflicts, and bitter
controversies, which this doctrine has caused from the time of its
entrance into the Church? What is there more disgraceful in the history of
the Church, than the mutual persecutions of Arians and Athanasians, and of
all the minor sects and parties, engendered by this disputed doctrine?

This is what Dr. Bushnell says of one of these matters; and his testimony
is, perhaps, sufficient on this point,—

“No man can assert three persons,—meaning three consciousnesses, wills,
and understandings,—and still have any intelligent meaning in his mind,
when he asserts that they are yet one person; for, as he now uses the
term, the very idea of a person is that of an essential, incommunicable
monad, bounded by consciousness, and vitalized by self-active will; which
being true, he might as well profess to hold that three units are yet one
unit. When he does it, his words will, of necessity, be only substitutes
for sense.

“At the same time, there are too many signs of the mental confusion I
speak of not to believe that it exists. Thus, if the class I speak of were
to hear a discourse insisting on the proper personal Unity of God, it
would awaken suspicion in their minds, while a discourse insisting on the
existence of three persons would be only a certain proof of Orthodoxy;
showing that they profess three persons, meaning what they profess, and
one person, really not meaning it.

“Such is the confusion produced by attempting to assert a real and
metaphysical Trinity of persons in the divine nature. Whether the word is
taken at its full import, or diminished away to a mere something called a
_distinction_, there is produced only contrariety, confusion, practical
negation, not light.”

So far Dr. Bushnell. On another point thus testifies Twesten:—

“There are many to whom the biblical and religious basis of the doctrine
is exceeding sure and precious, who are dissatisfied with the Church form
of the doctrine, and even feel themselves repelled or fettered by it. It
is to them more negative than positive, more opposed to errors than giving
any insight into truth. It solves no difficulty, it unseals no new
revelation.”

Twesten goes on to admit that the Trinity has really hemmed in the free
movement of the mind, substituting a dead uniformity for a manifold and
various life; and yet Twesten is a very strong and able Trinitarian.

VII. The doctrine of the Trinity is a doctrine of philosophy, and not of
faith.

As philosophy, it might be ever so true and important; but, when brought
forward as religion (as Dr. Huntington has done), it would become at once
pernicious. To offer theology for religion, belief for faith, philosophy
born of speculative reflection in place of spiritual insight and pious
experience, have always been most deleterious both to religion and to
philosophy.

The objects of faith are the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Through
Christ we have access to the Father in the Spirit. We see the Father
revealed to us in the Son; we feel the power of the Spirit in our hearts.
This is religion; but this has nothing to do with the doctrine of the
Trinity.

VIII. We can trace the gradual formation of the doctrine in the Christian
Church.

The following facts we suppose to be incontrovertible:—

1. Down to the time of the synod of Nice (A.D. 325), the Son was
considered to be subordinate, or inferior to the Father, by the great
majority of writers and teachers in the Christian Church, and by the
multitude of believers; and no doctrine of Trinity existed in the Church.

2. The _Nicene symbol_, which declared Christ to be “God from God, Light
from Light, true God from true God, of the same substance with the
Father,”(95) was directed against the two Arian positions,—that Christ was
created, and that there was a time when he did not exist; but it did not
declare his equality with God the Father, nor teach the personality of the
Holy Spirit, nor say anything of the Trinity.

3. The councils vacillated to and fro during three hundred years,
gradually tending towards the present Church doctrine of the Trinity;
thus,—

1. _Synod of Nice_ (A.D. 325) opposed the Arian doctrine of the creation
of Christ out of nothing, and maintained that his substance was derived
from that of God.

2. _Synod of Tyre_ (A.D. 335) favored the Arians, and deposed Athanasius.

3. _Council of Antioch_ (A.D. 343) opposed the views of the Arians, and
also the views of their opponents.

4. _Council of Sardica_ (A.D. 344) resulted in a division between the
Eastern and Western Churches—the East being semi-Arian, and the West,
Athanasian—in their view of the nature of Christ.

5. The Western Church tending to Sabellianism (taught by Marcellus and his
pupil Photinus), this view was condemned by two councils in the East and
West, viz.:—

Second council of Antioch (A.D. 343).

Council of Milan (A.D. 346).

6. Constantius, an Arian emperor, endeavored to make the Western Churches
accept the Arian doctrine, and, at two synods (A.D. 353 and 355, at
Arelate and Mediolanum), compelled the bishops to sign the condemnation of
Athanasius, deposing those who refused so to do.

7. The Arians, being thus dominant, immediately divided into Arians and
Semi-Arians,—the distinction being the famous distinction between _o_ and
_oi_. Both parties denied the _Homoousios_; but the Semi-Arians admitted
the _Homoiousios_.

8. At the synod of Ancyra (A.D. 358), the Semi-Arian doctrine was adopted,
and the Arian rejected. The third synod of Sirmium (A.D. 358) did the same
thing.

9. Down to this time (A.D. 360), nothing was said about the Holy Spirit in
its relation to the Trinity. The Emperor Valens, an Arian, persecuted the
Athanasians from A.D. 364 to 378. Then Theodosius, an Athanasian emperor,
persecuted the Arians. Semi-Arianism, however, continued Orthodox in the
East.

10. The Nestorian controversy broke out A.D. 430. Council of Ephesus (A.D.
431) condemned Nestor. The Nestorians (who were Unitarians) separated
entirely from the Church, and became the Church of the Persian empire.

11. The Monophysite controversy broke out. The council of Chalcedon (A.D.
451) decided that there were two natures in Christ; and the Monophysites
separated, and formed the Coptic Church. Their formula was, that “God was
crucified in Christ.” The Nestorians were too Unitarian, and the
Monophysites too Athanasian. The Church decided (against the Nestorians)
that Mary was God’s mother, but decided (against the Monophysites) that
God was not crucified.

12. _First Lateran Council_ was called (in A.D. 640) to settle a new
point. It having been decided that there were _two_ natures in Christ, it
was now thought best by many to yield to the Monophysites—that there was
only one will in Christ. Hence the Monotheletic controversy, finally
settled at the,—

13. Sixth General Council (A.D. 680), when _two_ wills in Christ were
accepted as the doctrine of the Church.

Thus it appears that it took the Church from A.D. 325 to A.D. 680 to
settle the questions concerning the relation of Christ to God. During all
this time, opinion vacillated between Arianism on the one hand and
Sabellianism on the other. At the end of this period, the Church had
become consolidated, and strong enough to compel submission to its
opinions: but the relation of the Holy Spirit to the Trinity remained
unsettled for several centuries more; and finally the Eastern Church
separated altogether from the Western Church on this point. The whole
Greek Church remains, to this day, separated from the Latin Church on a
question belonging to this very doctrine of the Trinity. So much, then,
for Dr. Huntington’s assertion, that the Trinity is a doctrine which can
almost literally be said to have been believed “always, everywhere, and by
all.”

IX. The doctrine of the Trinity is opposed to the real divinity of Christ
and to his real humanity; thus undermining continually the faith of the
Church in the divine humanity of Jesus Christ the Lord.

Our final and chief objection to the Trinity is, not that it makes Christ
divine, but that it does _not_ make him so. It substitutes for the
divinity of the Father, the Supreme God, which Unitarians believe to dwell
in Christ, a subordinate divinity of God the Son. This is subordinate,
because derived; and, because derived, dependent. The Son may be said to
be “eternally generated;” but this is only an eternal derivation, and does
not alter the dependence, but makes it also to be eternal. The tendency of
the Church doctrine of the Trinity is always to a belief, not in the
supreme divinity dwelling in Christ, but in a derived and secondary
divinity.

How is it, for example, with the Nicene doctrine concerning Christ? Dr.
Huntington claims Nice as Trinitarian. (p. 361.)

But what says Prof. Stuart concerning the Nicene doctrine? Listen.

“The Nicene symbol presents the Father as the Monas, or proper Godhead, in
and of himself exclusively; it represents him as the _Fons et Principium_
of the Son, and therefore gives him superior power and glory. It does not
even assert the claims of the blessed Spirit to Godhead, and therefore
leaves room to doubt whether it means to recognize a Trinity, or only a
Duality.” (Moses Stuart, Bib. Repos., 1835, quoted by Wilson, Trin. Test.,
p. 264.)

And how is it with the ante-Nicene fathers, whom Dr. Huntington also
considers to be Trinitarian? else certainly his rule of “always,
everywhere, and by all,” does not hold. If, for the first three hundred
years after Christ, there were no Trinitarians, it cannot be said that the
Trinity has “always” been held in the Church. Listen, again, to Prof.
Stuart, whose learning no one can question.

“We find that all the Fathers before, at, and after the Council of Nice,
who harmonize with the sentiments there avowed, declare the Father only to
be the self-existent God.” (See the whole paragraph in Wilson, Trin.
Test., p. 267.)

“To be the author of the proper substance of the Son and Spirit, according
to the Patristical creed; or to be the author of the _modus existendi_ of
the Son and Spirit, according to the modern creed,—both seem to involve
_the idea of power and glory in the Father, immeasurably above that of the
Son and Spirit_.” (Moses Stuart, Bib. Repos., 1835.)

So Coleridge asserts that “both Scripture and the Nicene Creed teach a
subordination of the Son to the Father, independent of the incarnation of
the Son.... Christ, speaking of himself as the coeternal Son, says, ‘My
Father is greater than I.’ ” (Wilson, Trin. Test., p. 270.)

According to the Trinitarian doctrine, then, we do not find God—the
Supreme God, our heavenly Father—in Christ; but a derived, subordinate,
and inferior Deity. Not the one universal Parent do we approach, but some
mysterious, derived, inscrutable Deity, less than the Father, and distinct
from him. Do we not, then, lose the benefit and blessing of the divinity
of Jesus? Can we believe him when be says, “He who has seen me has seen
the Father?” No; we do not believe that, if we are Trinitarians; but
rather, that, having seen him, we have seen “THE SON;” whom Coleridge
declares to be an inferior Deity; over whom Bishop Pearson, in his
“Exposition of the Creed,” says, the Father holds “preeminence,”—the
Father being “the Origin, the Cause, the Author, the Root, the Fountain,
the Head, of the Son.” The doctrine of the Trinity is therefore opposed,
as Swedenborg ably contends, to the real divinity of Christ.(96)

But it is equally opposed to his real humanity. It constantly drives out
of the Church the human element in Christ. Dr. Huntington is astonished at
Unitarians not perceiving that the humanity of Christ is as dear to
Trinitarians as his Deity; yet it cannot be denied, that the mysterious
dogma of deity has quite overshadowed the simple human life of our dear
Lord, so that the Church has failed to see the Son of man. All his highest
human traits become unreal in the light of this doctrine of his deity. He
is tempted; but that is unreal, for God cannot be tempted. He prays, “Our
Father;” but this also is no real prayer, for he is omnipotent, and can
need nothing. He encounters opposition, hatred, contumely, and bears it
with sweetest composure; but what of that? since, as God, he looked down
from an infinite height upon the puny opposition. He agonizes in the
garden; but it is imaginary suffering: how can God feel any real agony,
like man? Jesus ceases to be example, ceases to be our best beloved
companion and brother, and becomes a mysterious personage, inscrutable to
our thought, and far removed from our sympathy.






FOOTNOTES


    1 The following passage, from an article in the “Independent,” by
      Henry Ward Beecher, is valuable, perhaps, as the testimony of one
      who has “summered it and wintered it” with Orthodoxy:—

      “Does anybody inquire why, if so thinking, we occasionally give such
      sharp articles upon the great religious newspapers, ‘The Observer,’
      ‘The Intelligencer,’ and the like? O, pray do not think it from any
      ill will. It is all kindness! We only do it to keep our voice in
      practice. We have made Orthodoxy a study. And by an attentive
      examination of ‘The Presbyterian,’ ‘The Observer,’ ‘The Puritan
      Recorder,’ and such like unblemished confessors, we have perceived
      that no man is truly sound who does not pitch into somebody that is
      not sound; and that a real modern orthodox man, like a nervous watch
      dog, must sit on the door-stone of his system, and bark incessantly
      at everything that comes in sight along the highway. And when there
      is nothing to bark at, either he must growl and gnaw his reserved
      bones, or bark at the moon to keep up the sonorousness of his voice.
      And so, for fear that the sweetness of our temper may lead men to
      think that we have no theologic zeal, we lift up in objurgation now
      and then—as much as to say, ‘Here we are, fierce and orthodox; ready
      to growl when we cannot bite.’ ”

    2 Thus Theodore Parker (“Experience as a Minister”) speaks of a review
      of his “Discourse on Religion” in a Trinitarian work, which did it
      no injustice.

    3 According to the “Chart of Religious Belief” in Johnston’s Physical
      Atlas, there are in the world 140,000,000 of Catholics, 70,000,000
      of Protestants, 68,000,000 of the Greek Church, and 14,000,000 of
      minor creeds. _About_, in his “Question Romaine,” gives the Roman
      Church 139,000,000. He says, “The Roman Catholic Church, which I
      sincerely respect, is composed of 139,000,000 of individuals, not
      including the little Mortara.”

    4 Mr. Taylor shows that the Church, A.D. 300, was essentially corrupt
      in doctrine and practice; that the Romish Church was rather an
      improvement on it; that Jerome, Ambrose, Gregory, and Athanasius are
      full of false doctrine; and that a Gnostic theology, a Pagan
      asceticism, and a corrupt morality prevailed in the Church in those
      early centuries.

    5 Of course we do not mean to charge our Orthodox friends with
      believing in persecution. We only show that _if Orthodoxy is in the
      letter_, they _ought_, consequentially, to believe in persecution.
      No doubt Protestantism has put an end to persecution. When Luther
      came, all believed in persecution; now, no one does. This is because
      the Reformation contained a double principle: first, that we are
      saved by faith, not by sacraments, and that faith is the belief of
      doctrines; second, that to see them aright, we must use our own
      minds, and consequently seek for truth as the paramount duty of
      life. But in order to seek effectually, we must seek freely—hence
      the right of private judgment as against authority in Church and
      State. The last principle is that of toleration; the first is the
      principle of intolerance. The last has proved the stronger, because
      it rests on the logic of things, the other only on the logic of
      words.

    6 Heb. 11:1.

    7 Jacobi—whose words have been said to let the thoughts shine through,
      as wet clothes around the limbs allow the form to be seen—says that
      all knowledge begins with faith. Faith is, according to Jacobi, (1)
      a knowledge proceeding from immediate revelation; (2) knowledge
      which does not need, and cannot have, proofs; (3) much more certain
      knowledge than any derived from demonstration; (4) a perception of
      the super-sensual world; (5) A well-grounded and reliable
      prepossession in favor of certain truths; (6) a faith which sees,
      and a sight which believes; (7) a vision, an impenetrable mystery, a
      perception of the thing in itself.

    8 See “Broken Lights,” p. 207, note.

    9 A story is told of a clock, on one of the high cathedral towers of
      the older world, so constructed that at the close of a century it
      strikes the years as it ordinarily strikes the hours. As a hundred
      years come to a close, suddenly, in the immense mass of complicated
      mechanism, a little wheel turns, a pin slides into the appointed
      place, and in the shadows of the night the bell tolls a _requiem_
      over the generations which during a century have lived, and labored,
      and been buried around it. One of these generations might live and
      die, and witness nothing peculiar. The clock would have what we call
      an established order of its own; but what should we say when, at the
      midnight which brought the century to a close, it sounded over the
      sleeping city, rousing all to listen to the world’s age? Would it be
      a violation of law? No; only a variation of the accustomed order,
      produced by the intervention of a force always existing, but never
      appearing in this way till the appointed moment had arrived. The
      tolling of the century would be a variation from the observed order
      of the clock; but to an artist, in constructing it, it would have
      formed a part of that order. So a miracle is a variation of the
      order of nature as it has appeared to us; but to the Author of
      nature it was a part of that predestined order—a part of that order
      of which he is at all times the immediate Author and Sustainer;
      miraculous to us, seen from our human point of view, but no miracle
      to God; to our circumscribed vision a violation of law, but to God
      only a part in the great plan and progress of the law of the
      universe.—_Ephraim Peabody._

   10 Trench, “Notes on the Miracles of our Lord.”

   11 We use the term “plenary inspiration” rather than “literal
      inspiration,” or “verbal inspiration,” for “_literal inspiration_”
      is a contradiction in terms, like “_bodily spirit_.”

   12 Tholuck, in his Essay on the Doctrine of Inspiration, ascribes the
      origin of the belief in the infallibility of Scripture to this
      supposed need of an authoritative outward rule of faith among
      Protestants. He says, “In proportion as controversy, sharpened by
      Jesuitism, made the Protestant party sensible of the necessity of an
      externally fortified ground of combat, in that same proportion did
      Protestantism seek, by the exaltation of the outward authoritative
      character of the Sacred Writings, to recover that infallible
      authority which it had lost through its rejection of inspired
      councils and the infallible authority of the pope. In this manner
      arose, not earlier than the seventeenth century, those sentiments
      which regarded the Holy Scripture as the infallible production of
      the Divine Spirit,—in its entire contents and its very form,—so that
      not only the sense, but also the words, the letters, the Hebrew
      vowel points, and the very punctuation were regarded as proceeding
      from the Spirit of God.”—_Tholuck’s Essay—Noyes’s
      __“__Collection.__”_

   13 The doctrine of the Roman Catholics, as stated by Moehler, a
      distinguished Roman Catholic, is as follows:—

      “The doctrine of the Catholic Church on original sin is extremely
      simple, and may be reduced to the following propositions: Adam, by
      sin, lost his original justice and holiness, drew down on himself,
      by his disobedience, the displeasure and judgments of the Almighty,
      incurred the penalty of death, and thus, in all his parts,—in his
      body as well as soul,—became strangely deteriorated. Thus his sinful
      condition is transmitted to all his posterity as descended from him,
      entailing the consequence that man is, of himself, incapable—even
      with the aid of the most perfect ethical law offered to him from
      without (not excepting even the one in the Old Covenant)—to act in a
      manner agreeable to God, or in any other way to be justified before
      him, save only by the merits of Jesus Christ.”

      The doctrine of the Church of England concerning original sin and
      free will is in its ninth and tenth articles, and declares that,—

      “Original sin is ... the fault and corruption of the nature of every
      man, that naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam; whereby
      man is very far gone from original righteousness, and is, of his own
      nature, inclined to evil, ... and therefore in every person born
      into the world it deserveth God’s wrath and damnation....

      “The condition of man after the fall of Adam is such that he cannot
      turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works
      to faith and calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good
      works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without the grace of God by
      Christ preventing us, that we may have a good will, and working with
      us when we have that good will.”

      The early Fathers took different views of the origin of sin.
      Tertullian ascribed it to human _impatience_. “Nunc ut compendio
      dictum sit, omne peccatum impatientiæ adscribendum.” (Tertul. _De
      Patien._ 5.) Origen thinks _laziness_ the cause of sin; sin is a
      negation—_not_ doing right. Justin Martyr ascribes the origin of sin
      to _sensuality_. Origen (after Philo) considered the story of the
      fall as an allegory, and a type of what takes place in all men.

   14 See, in the Appendix, an examination of Professor Shedd’s article.

   15 Ovid. Metam. 7:18.

      “Si possem, sanior essem.
      Sed trahit invitam nova vis; aliudque cupido,
      Mens aliud suadet, video meliora, proboque,
      Deteriora sequor.”

      See, also, the story, in the Cyropædia, of Araspes and his two
      souls.

   16 See Dr. Cox’s Sermon on Regeneration, reviewed by Dr. Hodge, in
      “Essays and Reviews.”

   17 Luther, in his “Table-talk,” says of his preaching against the pope,
      and the enormous labors it entailed, “If I had known then what I now
      know of the difficulty of the task, ten horses should not have drawn
      me to it.” “At that time Dr. Jerome withstood me, and said, ‘What
      will you do? They will not endure it.’ But said I, ‘What if they
      _must_ endure it?’ ”

   18 See Raumer, “Geschichte Europas,” zweiter Band.

   19 God in Christ, by Horace Bushnell, p. 193, &c.

   20 Heb. 2:9, 17, 18. 4:15. 5:8, 9.

   21 No sooner was Socrates dead than he rose to be the chief figure in
      Greek history. What are Miltiades, Pericles, or Alcibiades to him?
      Twenty years after Joan of Arc was burned by a decree of the Roman
      Catholic Church, the same Church called a council to reconsider and
      reverse her sentence. Twenty years after the death of Savonarola,
      Rafaelle painted his portrait among the great doctors, fathers, and
      saints in the halls of the Vatican. Within a few years after John
      Brown was hanged, half a million of soldiers marched through the
      South chanting his name in their songs. Abraham Lincoln was killed,
      and he is now the most influential figure in our history.

   22 “Doctrinal Attitude of Old School Presbyterians.” By Lyman B.
      Atwater, Professor of Mental and Moral Philosophy in Princeton
      College. Bibliotheca Sacra, January, 1864.

   23 “The Old School in New England Theology.” By Professor Lawrence, of
      East Windsor. Bibliotheca Sacra, April, 1863.

   24 “Doctrines of the New School Presbyterians.” By Rev. George
      Duffield, D. D., of Detroit. Bibliotheca Sacra, July, 1863.

   25 “Hopkinsianism.” By Rev. Enoch Pond, D. D., Professor in Bangor
      Theological Seminary. Bibliotheca Sacra, July, 1862.

   26 “Doctrines of Methodism.” By Rev. Dr. Whedon. Bibliotheca Sacra,
      April, 1862.

   27 “Theologische Zeitscrift.” Herausgegeben von Dr. Friedr.
      Schleiermacher, Dr. W. M. L. DeWette, und Dr. Friedr. Lücke. Erstes
      Heft, Berlin, 1819. _Ueber die Lehre von der Erwählung._

   28 Rom. 11:29. “The gifts and callings of God are without repentance.”
      By this we understand the apostle to mean the same thing as is
      implied in Ecclesiastes (3:14): “I know that what God doeth, it is
      forever.” God, having chosen the Jews for a work, will continue to
      them the gifts, and will see that somehow or other, some time or
      other, the work is done.

   29 A person who never had an intellectual doubt concerning a future
      life may be so poorly provided with an inward sense of immortality
      that he may never feel quite willing to die, or confident in view of
      death. Such a man was Dr. Johnson, who had not the least scepticism;
      who was a dogmatic believer, and hated a heretic; who, yet, never
      attained to any sort of comfort in view of death, and was always
      afraid to die. So there may be another person who may have no
      intellectual belief in a future life, but who will have the instinct
      of immortality so strong as to be quite easy and happy in looking
      forward to death. Such a person is Miss Martineau, who, in
      consequence of a poor philosophy of _materialism_ which she was
      taught in her childhood, and has always held, has been brought very
      logically at last to disbelieve immortality, and even the existence
      of God, and yet is very contented about it, and quite happy.

   30 “Nescio, quomodo, dum lego, assentior; cum posui librum, et mecum
      ipse de immortalitate animorum cœpi cogitare, assensio omnis illa
      illabitur.”

   31 Thus it is said, “In Christ shall all be made alive.” The meaning
      is, that when we live in reference to God, to immortal truth, to the
      infinite law of right,—when we really love anything out of
      ourselves,—we lose all fear of death. “Perfect love casts out fear;”
      that is, pure love. The love of a mother for a child casts out fear.
      She is not afraid of death; she will run the risk of death twenty
      times over to save her child. The immortal element is aroused in
      her. The soldier is roused by the general’s fiery speech to a thrill
      of patriotism, and thinks it sweet and beautiful to die for his
      country. Love of his country has cast out his fear. This is
      something more than any mere insensibility. Men can harden
      themselves against danger and death; they can think of something
      else. But that insensibility is merely a thick shell put round it—a
      sevenfold shield perhaps; but the mortal fear lies hidden all the
      same within. True life is very different.

   32 The word here rendered ABOLISHED is elsewhere translated
      “destroyed,” “made void,” “made of none effect,” “brought to
      nothing,” “vanished away,” “done away,” “put down.” The meaning is,
      that all its force, importance, value, is taken out of it.

   33 “The State of the Impenitent Dead. By Alvah Hovey, D. D.” Boston,
      1859.

   34 For ἵνα before a defining clause, see John 6:29; 4:34; 1 John 3:11,
      23; 4:21; 2 John 6.

   35 Die Bestimmung des Menschen. Berlin, 1800.

   36 In addition to the extracts from Professor Hovey, Meyer, Lücke, and
      De Wette, the following passages from F. D. Maurice (“Theological
      Essays”) are interesting, as showing a concurrence of testimony from
      yet another quarter to the thesis of this section:—

      “When any one ventures to say to an English audience, that eternity
      is not a mere negation of time, that it denotes something real,
      substantial, before all time, he is told at once that he is
      departing from the simple, intelligible meaning of words; that he is
      introducing novelties; that he is talking abstractions. This
      language is perfectly honest in the mouths of those who use it. But
      they do not know where they learned it. They did not get it from
      peasants, or women, or children. They did not get it from the Bible.
      They got it from Locke. And if I find that I cannot interpret the
      language and thoughts of peasants, and women, and children, and that
      I cannot interpret the plainest passages of the Bible, or the whole
      context of it, while I look through the Locke spectacles, I must
      cast them aside....

      “Suppose, instead of taking this method of asserting the truth of
      all God’s words, the most blessed and the most tremendous, we reject
      the wisdom of our forefathers, and enact an article declaring that
      all are heretics, and deniers of the truth, who do not hold that
      eternal means endless, and that there cannot be a deliverance from
      eternal punishment. What is the consequence? Simply this, I believe:
      the whole gospel of God is set aside. The state of eternal life and
      eternal death is not one we can refer only to the future, or that we
      can in any wise identify with the future. Every man who knows what
      it is to have been in a state of sin, knows what it is to have been
      in a state of death. He cannot connect that death with time; he must
      say that Christ has brought him out of the bonds of _eternal_ death.
      Throw that idea into the future and you deprive it of all its
      reality, of all its power. I know what it means all too well while
      you let me connect it with my present and personal being, with the
      pangs of conscience which I suffer now. It becomes a mere vague
      dream and shadow to me when you project it into a distant world. And
      if you take from me the belief that God is always righteous, always
      maintaining a fight with evil, always seeking to bring his creatures
      out of it, you take everything from me—all hope now, all hope in the
      world to come. Atonement, redemption, satisfaction, regeneration,
      become mere words, to which there is no counterpart in reality.”

   37 In the German Bible we have the true word—“Auferstehung.”

   38 So De Wette, Kurzgefasstes exegetisches Handbuch zum N. T., ad
      locum.

   39 So Schleusner, Lexicon in LXX.

   40 So Usteri (Paulinischen Lehrbegriff) says that σάλπινξ appears to
      denote partly the startling power of the truth, and partly its power
      of calling men together from all the regions of the earth.

   41 Christ only comes when he comes to reign. His first coming was as
      Jesus, not as Christ. The human life is “the life of Jesus.”
      Christian history is “the life of Christ.” In his earthly life he
      was Prophet; in his death he was Priest; in his resurrection, or
      risen state, he was King.

   42 The book of the Revelation of John is the account of Christ’s
      coming; and the true interpretation of that book depends on the
      proper understanding of his coming. If Christ’s coming began at the
      destruction of Jerusalem, and has continued in all the developments
      of human history, then the key to “the Revelation” is to be found in
      the progress of Christian principles and ideas in the world.
      Bertholdt (Christologia Judæorum Jesu Apostolorumque ætate), note to
      § 11, quotes from the Sepher Ikkarim this passage—“The future age
      will come _gradually_ to men after the day of the great judgment,
      which will take place after the resurrection.” Resurrection and
      judgment both come with Jesus, and his were “the last days.”

   43 1 Thess. 4:17. “We, who are alive, and remain, shall be caught up
      together with them, in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air.”
      Usteri (Paul. Lehrbeg.) says that “this εἰς ἀέρα has no analogy in
      any other passage of the Epistles, or indeed of the New Testament.”
      But Paul outgrew this literalism, and in his later Epistles speaks
      of sitting already with Christ in “heavenly places.”

   44 Olshausen, an Orthodox commentator, speaks thus in regard to
      Christ’s predictions concerning his coming, in Matt. ch. 24, 25:—

      “One of the most striking examples of the binding of the present and
      future in one narrative, and one which presents many difficulties,
      is to be found in these passages. Plain descriptions of the
      impending destruction of Jerusalem and of the Jewish state blend
      with no less apparent descriptions of the coming of Christ in his
      kingdom. It cannot be denied that the Orthodox interpreters are far
      less natural and unforced than the others, in their treatment of
      this passage. Their dogmatic views lead them to put apart from each
      other elements which are blended together by Matthew and by the
      other evangelists. For example, Schott says, that the description of
      Christ’s coming begins (Matt. 24:29) immediately after ‘the
      tribulation,’ &c., and that all before that belongs to the
      destruction of Jerusalem. But apart from the impossibility of
      regarding the 29th verse as the beginning of something entirely new,
      there are also in the passages which follow distinct references to
      the present generation (verse 34), and in the first part as distinct
      references to ‘the last time.’ We do not, therefore scruple (says
      Olshausen) to accept the simple explanation which alone suits the
      text, that Christ speaks of his coming as coincident with the
      destruction of Jerusalem, and with the downfall of the Jewish
      state.”

      The most interesting question, perhaps, is as to the opinions of
      Jesus _himself_ about his coming. That he forsaw the overthrow of
      Jerusalem and the Temple is certain. Everything indicates that he
      possessed a marvellous power of reading the future in the present,
      and saw in the condition of the Jewish mind the inevitable overthrow
      of their state. He also saw that through his death all men should be
      brought to him, and that he should become King in the way in which
      he described to Pilate his royalty, i.e., King of the truth. All who
      love the truth shall, sooner or later, obey his voice. In what way,
      then, did he expect to come? In the way he himself indicates the
      coming of his kingdom—like leaven, working secretly in the dough;
      like seed, sprouting mysteriously in the ground; like lightning,
      seen everywhere at once. By these images alone could he convey to
      his disciples his ideas. He longed to tell them many things more,
      but they were not able; to bear them.

   45 The difficulties (of which Olshausen and other candid Orthodox
      interpreters speak) in harmonizing the different parts of Matthew’s
      two chapters (24 and 25) about Christ’s coming and judgment, may
      perhaps be relieved in some such way as this. (1.) The end of the
      Mosaic age and the beginning of the Messianic age are fixed at the
      destruction of Jerusalem. (2.) Christ’s coming begins there, and
      continues through Christian history, till all mankind are
      Christians. His coming, therefore, verifies what Schiller says of
      truth, that it “_nimmer ist, immer wird_.” (3.) Whenever he comes,
      he judges men according to the state of mind in which they are. (4.)
      The three parables (virgins, talents, king on his throne) represent
      the judgment of three different classes. The first class (of wise
      and foolish virgins) are those who _are not yet converted_, and have
      not become disciples of Christ. When he comes, those of them who
      have oil in their lamps—or who receive truth into an honest heart
      (Luke 8:15)—are ready to receive him, and to become Christians;
      those who have no oil reject him. The second class (in the talents)
      are Christians, who receive more or less of power and of good,
      according to past fidelity. The third class (the “nations ”) are the
      heathen, and others, who have never known of Christ at all, but are
      Christians outside of Christianity.

   46 The latest illustration of Orthodox ideas on this subject we have
      met with is contained in a little tract which has fallen in our way,
      containing “extracts from a sermon addressed to the students in the
      United Presbyterian Theological Seminary of Xenia, Ohio, by Rev.
      William Davidson.” It begins in this somewhat enigmatical way:—

      “It is an unspeakably terrible thing for any one—for even a youth or
      a heathen—to be _lost_.”

      Why this limiting particle “even” is introduced is not explained. It
      seems to be implied either that a youth and a heathen have not as
      much to lose as others, or else that we are not bound to feel so
      much for their loss as for that of others. After a little poetry
      (which we omit, as it is altogether too stern a matter for any
      sentimental ornament), Mr. Davidson proceeds:—

      “Nor is this all to those who suffer _least_. It is not only the
      loss of all, and a horrible lake of ever-burning fire, but there are
      _horrible objects_, filling every sense and every faculty; and there
      are _horrible engines and instruments of torture_. There are the
      ‘chains of darkness,’ thick, heavy, hard, and smothering as the
      gloom of blank and black despair—chains strong as the cords of
      omnipotence, hot as the crisping flames of vengeance, indestructible
      and eternal as justice. With chains like these, every iron link
      burning into the throbbing heart, is bound each doomed, damned soul,
      on a bed of burning marl, under an iron roof, riven with tempests,
      and dripping with torrents of unquenchable fire.”

      The object of the preacher being to make as terrific a picture as
      possible, he accumulates these material images of bodily torment in
      order to excite the imagination to the utmost. We can conceive of
      his writing these sentences carefully in his comfortable study, in
      an easy chair, by the side of a cheerful fire, with a smile of
      self-complacency, as he selects each striking expression. Then he
      proceeds:—

      “Nor is this all. Unmortified appetites, hungry as death, insatiable
      as the grave, torture it. Every passion burning, an unsealed volcano
      in the heart. Every base lust a tiger unchained—a worm undying, let
      loose to prey on soul and body. Pride, vanity, envy, shame,
      treachery, deceit, falsehood, fell revenge, and black despair,
      malice, and every unholy emotion, are so many springs of
      excruciating and ever-increasing agonies, are so many hot and
      stifling winds, tossing the swooning, sweltering soul on waves of
      fire. And there will be deadly hunger, but no food; parching thirst,
      but no water; eternal fatigue, but no rest; eternal lust of sensuous
      and intellectual pleasures, but no gratification. And there will be
      _terrible companions_, or rather _foes_, there. Eternal longings
      after society, but no companion, no love, and no sympathy there.
      Every one utterly selfish, hateful, and hating. Every one cunning,
      false, malignant, fierce, fell, and devilish. All commingle in the
      confusion and the carnage of one wide-spread, pitiless, truceless,
      desperate strife. And there will be terrible sights and sounds
      there. Fathers and sons, pastors and people, husbands and wives,
      brothers and sisters, with swollen veins and bloodshot eyes,
      straining towards each other’s throats and hearts, reprobate men,
      and devils in form and features, hideous to as great a degree as are
      the beauties of the blest in heaven beautiful. And there are groans
      and curses, and everlasting wailings, as harsh and horrible as
      heaven’s songs, shouts, and anthems are sweet, joyous, and
      enrapturing. And there will be terrible displays of the divine power
      and skill, and infinitely awful displays of merciless and omnipotent
      justice, in the punishment of that rebel crew, that generation of
      moral vipers full grown, that congregation of moral monsters.”

      All this, however, is not enough. It is necessary to go further, and
      represent God in the character of the devil, in order to complete
      the picture.

      “Upon such an assembly, God, who is of purer eyes than to behold
      iniquity, cannot look but with utter detestation. His wrath shall
      come up in his face. His face shall be red in his anger. He will
      whet his glittering sword, and his hand shall take hold on
      vengeance; and he shall recompense. He shall launch forth his
      lightnings, and shoot abroad his arrows. He shall unseal all his
      fountains, and pour out his tumbling cataracts of vengeance. He
      shall build his batteries aloft, and thunder upon them from the
      heavens. His eye shall not pity them, nor shall his soul spare for
      their crying. The day of vengeance is in his heart, and it is what
      he has his heart set on. He will delight in it. He will show his
      wrath, and _make his power known_. That infinite power has never
      been fully made known yet; but it will be then. It is but a little
      that we see of it in creation and providence; but we shall see it,
      fully revealed, in the destruction of that rebel crew. He will tread
      them in his anger, and trample them in his fury, and will stain his
      raiment with their blood. The cup of the wine of his fierce wrath
      shall contain no mixture of mercy at all. And they will not be able
      to resist that wrath, nor will they be able to endure it; but they
      shall, in soul and body, sink wholly down into the _second death_.
      The iron heel of omnipotent and triumphing justice, pitiless and
      rejoicing, shall tread them down, and crush them lower still, and
      lower ever, in that burning pit which knows no bottom. All this, and
      more and worse, do the Scriptures declare; and that preacher who
      hesitates to proclaim it has forsworn his soul, and is a traitor to
      his trust.”

      Now, it is simple truth to say that the blasphemer and profane
      swearer who spends fifty years in cursing God and Christ is not so
      blasphemous as the man who writes such sentences as these about the
      Almighty, and utters them to young men as a preparation for their
      work in the ministry. The people of Sodom and Gomorrah shall rise up
      in the day of judgment against those who speak thus of God, and
      shall condemn them. The Pagans, who represent their gods as horrid
      idols, pleased with blood and slaughter, have an excuse, which Mr.
      Davidson has not, for they do not have the gospel of the Lord Jesus
      in their hands. Thus he continues:—

      “And _all this shall be forever_. It shall never, never end. (Matt.
      ch. 25.) The wicked go away into everlasting torments. This is a
      bitter ingredient in their cup of wormwood, a more terrible thing in
      their terrible doom. If after enduring it all for twice ten thousand
      times ten thousand years, they might have a deliverance, or at least
      some abatement, it were less terrible. But this may never, never be.
      Their estate is remediless. There is a great gulf fixed, and they
      cannot pass from thence. Or, if after suffering all this as many
      years as there are aqueous particles in air and ocean, they might
      then be delivered, or if, after repeating that amazing period as
      many times as there are sand-grains in the globe, they might then be
      delivered, there would be _some_ hope. Or, if you multiply this
      latter sum—too infinite to be expressed by figures, and too
      limitless to be comprehended by angels—by the number of atoms that
      compose the universe, and there might be deliverance when they had
      passed those amazing, abysmal gulfs of duration, then there would be
      _some_ hope. But no! when all is suffered and all is past, still all
      beyond is eternity.”

   47 To show how some _Roman Catholics_ write in the middle of the
      nineteenth century, we quote the following from a Roman Catholic
      book, published in England, by Rev. J. Furniss, being especially “a
      book for children.” Wishing to spare our readers such horrors, we
      put it here, advising no one of weak nerves to read its atrocious
      descriptions.

      “The fourth dungeon is ‘the boiling kettle.’ Listen: there is a
      sound like that of a kettle boiling. Is it really a kettle which is
      boiling? No. Then what is it? Hear what it is. The blood is boiling
      in the scalded veins of that boy; the brain is boiling and bubbling
      in his head; the marrow is boiling in his bones. The fifth dungeon
      is the ‘red-hot oven,’ in which is a _little child_. Hear how it
      screams to come out; see how it turns and twists itself about in the
      fire; it beats its head against the roof of the oven. It stamps its
      little feet on the floor of the oven. To this child God was very
      good. Very likely God saw that this child would get worse and worse,
      and would never repent, and so it would have to be punished _much
      more_ in hell. _So God in his mercy called it out of the world in
      its early childhood._”

   48 We take the following from the “Monthly Religious Magazine:”—

      “The ‘Country Parson,’ in his late work, the ‘Autumn Holidays,’
      contends that the fear of future punishment in another world has
      little influence in deterring from crime. He ought to have added,
      that the reason may be, that there is so little belief in any
      spiritual world whatever, among men of grosser sensuality; and that
      future punishment, as it is preached in the old theology, is so
      arbitrary as to seem unreal, and is losing its power over all
      thinking minds. The following case is cited from the experience of a
      Scotch minister. No ministers, let it be remembered, preach the
      literal flames of a local hell in tones more awful than they.

      “His parishioners were sadly addicted to drinking to excess. Men and
      women were given alike to this degrading vice. He did all he could
      to repress it, but in vain. For many years he warned the drunkards,
      in the most solemn manner, of the doom they might expect in another
      world; but, so far as he knew, not a pot of ale or glass of spirits
      the less was drunk in the parish in consequence of his
      denunciations. Future woe melted into mist in the presence of a
      replenished jug or a market-day. A happy thought struck the
      clergyman. In the neighboring town, there was a clever medical man,
      a vehement teetotaler; him he summoned to his aid. The doctor came,
      and delivered a lecture on the _physical_ consequences of
      drunkenness, illustrating his lecture with large diagrams, which
      gave shocking representations of the stomach, lungs, heart, and
      other vital organs as affected by alcohol. These things came home to
      the drunkards, who had not cared a rush for final perdition. The
      effect produced was tremendous. Almost all the men and women of the
      parish took the total abstinence pledge; and since that day
      drunkenness has nearly ceased in that parish. Nor was the
      improvement evanescent; it has lasted two or three years.”

   49 So Erigena (quoted by Strauss), _De Divis Nat._ “Vera ratio docet,
      nullum contrarium divinæ bonitati vitæque ac beatitudini posse esse
      coeternum; divina siquidem bonitas consumet malitiam, æterna vita
      absorbet mortem, beatitudo miseriam.”

   50 The name given to them by Augustine (“Civ. Dei,” lib. 21, c. 17):
      “Denique hujus sententiæ Patronos S. Augustinus appellat titulo non
      incongruo, ‘Doctores Misericordes’ tractatque non inhumaniter.”
      Thomas Burnet, “De Statu Mortuum et Resurgentium.” Chap. XI.

   51 See Bretschneider, “Dogmatik,” and Strauss, “Christliche
      Glaubenslehre.”

   52 “Nos et angelos futuros dæmones si egerimus negligenter; et rursum
      dæmones, si voluerint capere virtutes, pervenire ad angelicam
      dignitatem.” Origen, quoted by Jerome.

   53 “Nihil enim omnipotenti impossibile est, nec insanabile aliquid est
      factori suo.”

   54 “Quod tamen non ad subitum fieri, sed paulatim et per partes
      intelligen dum est, infinitis et immensis labentibus sæculis, cum
      sensim per singulos emendatio fuerit et correctio prosecuta,
      præcurrentibus aliis, aliis insequentibus.” See these quotations in
      Strauss, Hase, &c.

   55 Matt. 25:46. The Greek word translated in the English as
      “everlasting” punishment in the beginning of the verse, and as life
      “eternal” at the end, is the same word (ἀιώνιος) in both places, and
      should be translated “eternal” in both.

_   56 Remorse_—from _mordeo_, to gnaw. So St. Thomas (Summa, Pars III. 2,
      97): “Vermis non debet esse intelligi corporalis sed spiritualis,
      qui est con scientiæ remorsus.”

   57 “Pauci res ipsas, sed rerum imagines, tanquam in speculo, intuentur:
      at res ipsas, facie ad faciem, ut dicitur, et ablato velo, visuri
      sumus tandem si Deo placuerit, partim sub occasu hujusee mundi,
      plenius autem in futuro.”—_Thomas Burnet_, De Statu Mortuorum et
      Resurgentium Tractatus. Londini. Typis et impensis J. Hooke, in vico
      vulgò dicto _Fleet Street_, 1737.—No one has spoken more powerfully
      and eloquently than he against everlasting punishment, particularly
      in the passage beginning “Nobis difficile est omnem exuere
      humanitatem.” p. 309.

   58 Is it not remarkable (as showing how little the New Testament has as
      yet been really studied) that there should be so many discussions as
      to the future doom of _the heathen_, when Jesus himself here
      distinctly tells us what it will be. The word ἔθνη is the only word
      in the New Testament which is ever translated _heathen_: wherever
      the word _heathen_ occurs in our Bible, it is always this. Jesus
      teaches that the heathen (inside and outside of Christendom) will be
      judged _according to their humanity_, their obedience to the law
      written in their hearts; and he shows that this is coincident with
      the law of Christianity. So, when the Church of England says (in its
      18th article) that “they also are to be had accursed that presume to
      say that every man shall be saved by the law or sect he professeth,
      so that he be diligent to frame his life according to that law and
      the light of nature;” it denounces this curse on Christ himself, and
      thus proves conclusively that it is not speaking by the Spirit of
      God, since “no man, speaking by the Spirit of God, calleth Jesus
      accursed.” (1 Cor. 12:3) This comes of the habit (happily less
      common now than formerly) of throwing about curses at random,
      against those who differ from our opinions. Some of them may thus,
      accidentally, hit the Master himself. It is, perhaps, of less
      consequence that this anathema also touches the apostle Paul, who
      declares that the heathen who have not the law are a law to
      themselves when they do right, and are absolved by their conscience.
      (Rom. 2:14.)

   59 Origen, Homil. in Levit. 7:2. “Salvator meus luget etiam nunc
      peccata mea; Salvator meus lætari non potest, donec ego in
      iniquitate permaneo. Non vult solus in regno Dei bibere vinum
      lætitiæ—nos expectat.”

   60 Guericke, Christ. Symbolik, § 70.

   61 “Ecclesia enim est cœtus hominum ita visibilis et palpabilis ut est
      cœtus populi Romani, vel regnum Galliæ, aut respublica Venetorum.”
      Bellarmin. Eccles. Milit. c. 2.

   62 Moehler, Symbolism, § 36.

   63 “Bonos et malos ad ecclesiam pertinere Catholica fides vere et
      constante affirmat.” Cat. Rom.

   64 The chief passage in proof of this, as is well known, is Matt.
      16:18, 19 “Thou art Peter,” &c. But even Augustine, the great light
      of the Latin Church, says that “Peter was not the Rock, but Christ
      was the Rock.” (Neander, vol. ii. p. 168.) The same power was given
      to the other apostles. Matt. 18:18. John 20:23. Rev. 21:14.

   65 Le Protestantisme Libéral par le Pasteur Bost. Paris, Baillière,
      1865.

   66 “Il est de fait que le Catholicisme, qui est essentiellement un
      principe d’authorité, ne sait pas dire où reside cette authorité.”

   67 “Thirty-nine Articles, art. xix.” So Augs. Conf. art. 7:
      “Congregatio sanctorum, in qua evangelium recte docetur, et recte
      administrantur sacramenta.” But it may be asked, Who is to decide on
      the “_recte_”?

   68 In the remarkable work “Ecce Homo”.

   69 Tholuck, in his charming work on the Sermon on the Mount, speaks
      thus (“_Bergpredigt Christ. von A. Tholuck._”) “Two principal
      defects are found in the usual treatment of this doctrine: first,
      the different aspects and relations of the kingdom of God are by
      many considered as different _meanings_ of the word, and are left
      standing side by side, without any attempt to ground their unity in
      some fundamental idea. Or, secondly, and still worse, a single
      aspect of the term is taken up, and the rest are wholly neglected.
      Examples of the first defect are to be found in Zwingle, in his note
      to John 3:3. (Here the kingdom of God is considered as divine
      doctrine and preaching of the gospel, as in Luke 18; sometimes it is
      taken for eternal life, Matt. 25; Luke 14; sometimes for the church
      and congregation of the faithful, as Matt. 13:24.) The later
      lexicographers, as Schleusner and Bretschneider, have not avoided
      these vague statements; and the last of them is particularly
      defective in his article on this phrase. Trahl more correctly sums
      up all these significations of the word thus: ‘Happiness, present
      and future, obtained through Christ.’ But in this definition the
      notion of ‘a kingdom’ is omitted. The opposite defect of taking only
      one of the meanings of the matter, to the neglect of the rest, is to
      be found, for example, in Koppe and Keil, according to whom the
      expression relates merely to the future reign of the Messiah one day
      to be established.

      “Our own explanation of this expression starts from the phrase
      ‘kingdom of God,’ which explains the others, ‘kingdom of heaven’ and
      ‘kingdom of Christ.’ We think that the fundamental idea has been
      grasped by none more correctly than by Origen among the ancients,
      and by Calvin among the reformers. The phase of the idea principally
      dwelt upon by the Church Fathers may be seen in their explanation of
      the third petition of the Lord’s Prayer, which Augustine especially
      examines profoundly. Most of them understand by it the realm of
      glory, the future revelation of Christ. Origen alone, in his book on
      Prayer, taken a more exact view of the subject. In like manner
      Calvin, in his Commentary on the Harmony. So Luther, in his fine
      Sermon on the Kingdom of God. Our own fundamental view we express
      thus: ‘A community in which God reigns, not by force, but by being
      obeyed freely from love, and which is therefore necessarily united
      in itself by mutual love.’ The Saviour came upon the earth to found
      such a community, and since it can only be completely established
      after he has conquered all his enemies, this kingdom of Christ
      belongs in its perfection to the other world.”

   70 An eminent and learned gentleman told me of this conversation which
      he had with a Roman priest: “When the wine of the Eucharist is
      consecrated, it becomes the real blood of Christ—does it not?”
      Priest, “It does.” “What, then, do you do with that which remains in
      the cup, after communion?” Priest, “We drink it.” “Does not some
      adhere to the glass?” Priest, “Yes; but we wash the glass.” “What do
      you do with the water?” Priest, “We drink it.” “But must there not
      yet remain, on the napkin, with which you wipe the glass, some
      portion of the blood of Christ, even though it be an infinitesimal
      portion?” Priest, “Yes.” “Then, might it not happen that when the
      napkin is washed, this portion of Christ’s blood may go into the
      water, and be poured on the ground, and be taken up by the root of a
      plant—say a cabbage. Would, then, the flesh of that cabbage contain,
      or would it not a portion of the blood of Christ?”

   71 See, in the New York “Independent,” June 9, 1866, the account of the
      “Recognition of Congregational Churches in Philadelphia,” where the
      existence of this principle is admitted and defended by some eminent
      Congregational ministers; admitted and deplored by others.

   72 Twesten, “Vorlesungen,” &c., vol ii., p. 216. He adds to this
      definition its Latin form, in which the words “certain
      characteristics” stand “certis characteribus hypostaticis.”

   73 Quoted by Schleiermacher, “Glaubenslehre,” § 170.

   74 See the full discussions of these terms in Twesten (as above), Hase,
      “Christl. Glaubenslehre,” § 56. Strauss, “Christl. Glaubenslehre,”
      vol. i. Hase, “Dogmatik,” &c.

   75 Dogmatik, § 239.

   76 Augustine (de Trinit.), says, “One life in man, but three
      faculties—memory, intelligence, will.” But how if this is bad
      psychology?

   77 Erigena, “The Father in the soul, the Son in the reason, the Spirit
      in the sense—this makes the most luminous illustration.”

   78 Abelard (quoted by Strauss).

   79 Richard St. Victor (quoted by Hase), “There can be no possible
      communion of affection between a less number than three persons.” So
      Augustine, “Cum aliquid amo, tria sunt—_ego_, et _quod_ amo, et ipse
      _amor_.” Such illustrations are hardly satisfactory at the present
      day. Poiret says the Father is “_Deus a se_,” the Son is “_Deus ex
      se_,” the Holy Spirit “_Deus ad se refluens_.” Angelus Silecius
      makes the Trinity a divine kiss. “God kisses himself—the Father
      kisses, the Son is kissed, the Spirit is the kiss.”

   80 Translated from the Latin in Hagenbach (Compend of the History of
      Doctrines, vol. i. p. 289). We agree with Strauss, who says,
      “Fürwahr, wer das _Symbolum Quidcunque_ beschworen hatte, der hatte
      die Gesetze des menschlichen Denkens abgeschworen.” So the Pastor
      Bost (Le Protestantisme Liberal), after giving the Creed, in a
      somewhat different form, adds, “ubi insana faciunt, mysterium
      appellant.”

   81 “Incomprehensible,” Church of England Liturgy.

   82 Or “each person by himself.” The word in the Latin is “sigillatim,”
      a word not in most of the dictionaries, but in some of them made
      equivalent to “singulatim.”

   83 Tertullian said, we can call Christ “God” when we speak of him
      alone; but if we mention him with the Father, then we must call the
      Father “God,” and call Christ only “Lord.” “For a ray of light
      shining into a room, we may call the sun shining there; but if we
      speak of the sun at the same time, then we must distinguish the ray,
      and call it not sun, but sunbeam.”

   84 The decrees of the Council of Nice inclined to Sabellianism. The
      term ὁμοούσιος (_of the same essence_) was a Sabellian term.
      Sabellianism could, in fact, stand most of the tests of modern
      Orthodoxy, since it maintains _three persons and one essence_, μίαν
      ὑπόστασιν and τρία πρόσωπα; and Schleiermacher, in one of his most
      elaborate treatises (Ueber den Gegensatz zwischen der
      Sabellianischen und der Athanasianischen Vorstellung von der
      Trinitat. Theolog. Zeitschrift. Berlin, 1822), has sought to
      rehabilitate Sabellianism. Moses Stuart translated this treatise,
      and plainly advocated a similar view. Hase (Kirchengeschichte, § 91)
      defines the view of Sabellius as making “Father, Son, and Spirit the
      different forms of revelation of the Supreme Unity unfolding itself
      in the world history as the Triad.” Perhaps (see Baur) the chief
      peculiarity of Sabellius is in making the Triad begin and end with
      the process of revelation. The Monad is God in himself: the Triad is
      God in the process of self-revelation (Baur, “Christliche Lehre von
      der Dreieinigkeit,” and “Lehrbuch der Christlichen
      Dogmengeschichte”).

   85 “Dictum est tamen tres personæ, non ut illud diceretur, sed ut ne
      taceretur.” Aug. de. Trin., quoted by Hase, Dog. § 238.

   86 John of Damascus (quoted by Twesten) made his boast of Christianity,
      that it united what was true in Polytheism with what was true in
      Judaism. “From the Jews,” he says, “we have the oneness of nature,
      from the Greeks the distinction in hypostases.”

   87 The substance of what follows in this section, appeared in the
      “Christian Examiner.”

   88 The _nature_ by which the heathen “do the things contained in the
      law,” i.e., obey God, which is here (Rom. 2:15) called “the law
      written in the heart,” is in Rom. 7:23 called the “law of the mind.”
      Olshausen (a sufficiently Orthodox commentator), says, “It is wholly
      false to understand ὅταν ποιῆ of a mere ideal _possibility_; the
      apostle speaks evidently of a real and actual obedience. Paul infers
      that, because there are actually pious heathen, they must have a law
      which they obey.” _Ad locum._

   89 We have no room to enter into an examination of this question at
      this time, and can only give a general statement on this subject
      from one of the authorities which happens to be at hand:—

      “_All_ the Fathers” (before Augustine, fourth and fifth century)
      “differed from Augustine in attributing freedom of will to man in
      his present state. Thus Justin: ‘Every created being is so
      constituted as to be capable of vice or virtue.’ Cyril of Jerusalem:
      ‘Know that thou hast a soul possessed of free will; for thou dost
      not sin by birth (κατὰ γένεσιν), nor by fortune, but we sin by free
      choice.’ _All_ the Latin Fathers also maintained that free will was
      not lost after the fall. The Fathers also denied in part, that man
      is born infected with Adam’s sin. Thus Athenagoras says in his
      Apology, ‘Man is in a good state, not only in respect to his
      Creator, but also in respect to his natural generation.’ ”—Wiggers,
      _Augustinism and Pelagianism_. Translated by Rev. Ralph Emerson,
      Professor in the Theological Seminary, Andover, Mass.

   90 “Abi ad Jordonum, et Trinitatem disce,” was on early notion.

   91 Dr. Horace Bushnell, a favorite authority with Dr. Huntington, whom
      Dr. Huntington quotes largely, and whose views he earnestly
      recommends, gives us his testimony to this point, thus (“God in
      Christ,” pp. 130, 131):—

      “A very large portion of Christian teachers, together with the
      general mass of disciples, undoubtedly hold three real living
      persons in the interior nature of God; that is, three
      consciousnesses, wills, hearts, understandings.”

      “_A very large portion of Christian teachers_” hold, then, to a
      belief in three Gods; and with them is joined “_the general mass of
      the disciples_.” The only Unity held by these teachers is, he goes
      on to say, “a social Unity.” Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are, in
      their view, socially united only, and preside in that way, as a kind
      of celestial Tritheocracy, over the world. This heresy, he says,
      “because of its clear opposition to Unitarianism, is counted safe,
      and never treated as a heresy.” That is, the Christian Church allows
      the belief in _three Gods_, and will not discipline those who hold
      that opinion; but, if you believe strictly and only in _one God_,
      you cannot be saved!

   92 Dr. Bushnell goes on to say (p. 133), “While the Unity is thus
      confused and lost in the threeness, perhaps I should admit that the
      threeness sometimes appears to be clouded or obscured by the Unity.
      Thus it is sometimes protested, that in the word, ‘person’ nothing
      is meant beyond a threefold distinction; though it will always be
      observed, that nothing is really meant by the protestation; that the
      protester goes on to speak and to reason of the three, not as being
      only somewhats or distinctions, but as metaphysical and real
      persons.... Indeed, it is a somewhat curious fact in theology, that
      the class of teachers who protest over the word ‘person,’ declaring
      that they mean only a _threefold distinction_, cannot show that
      there is really a hair’s breadth of difference between their
      doctrine and the doctrine asserted by many of the later Unitarians.”

   93 “It has often been asserted _and admitted_,” says Tweaten, one of
      the strongest of modern Trinitarians, “that even the principal
      notions about which the Church doctrine turns are foreign to the New
      Testament; as οὐσία and ὑπόστασις, τρόπος ὑπάρξεως and ἀποκαλύψεως,
      τριάς and ὁμοούσια.”(Twesten: Dogmatik, vol. ii. p. 281.)

   94 “Who will venture to say that any of the definitions heretofore
      given of personality in the Godhead, in Itself considered,—such
      definitions as have their basis in the Nicene or Athanasian
      Creed,—are intelligible and satisfactory to the mind? At least, I
      can truly say, that I have not been able to find them, if they do in
      fact exist; nor, so far as I know, has any one been able, by any
      commentary on them, to make them clear and satisfactory.” (Prof.
      Stuart, Biblical Repository, April, 1835. See Wilson, Trin. Test.,
      p. 272.)

   95 See the creed in Hagenbach (History of Doct., vol. i. p. 208): “Θεος
      ἐκ Θεοῦ, φῶς ἐκ φωτὸς, Θεον ἀληθινὸν ἐκ Θεοῦ ἀληθινοῦ.”

   96 Thus speaks Dr. Bushnell on this head (“God in Christ,” p. 139):—

      “Besides, it is another source of mental confusion, connected with
      this view of three metaphysical persons, that, though they are all
      declared to be infinite and equal, they really are not so. The
      proper deity of Christ is not held in this view. He is begotten,
      sent, supported, directed, by the Father, in such a sense as really
      annihilates his deity. This has been shown in a truly searching and
      convincing manner by Schleiermacher, in his historical essay on the
      Trinity; and, indeed, you will see at it at a glance, that this view
      of a metaphysical Trinity of persons breaks down in the very point
      which is commonly regarded as its excellence—its assertion of the
      proper deity of Christ.”





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ORTHODOXY: ITS TRUTHS AND ERRORS***



CREDITS


June 6, 2009

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Marilynda Fraser-Cunliffe, David King, and the
            Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
            <http://www.pgdp.net/>. (This file was made using scans of
            public domain works from the University of Michigan Digital
            Libraries.)



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 29054-0.txt or 29054-0.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/9/0/5/29054/


Updated editions will replace the previous one — the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg™ concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
— you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project Gutenberg”),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg™
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™ electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg™ electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


“Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg™ electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the Foundation” or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg™ works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg™ work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work on which the phrase
“Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the phrase “Project Gutenberg”
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.3.


If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted with the
permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply
with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional terms imposed
by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project
Gutenberg™ License for all works posted with the permission of the
copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.


1.E.4.


Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™ License
terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any
other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.


1.E.5.


Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this electronic
work, or any part of this electronic work, without prominently displaying
the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg™ License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format other than
“Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg™ web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg™ License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in Section 4,
      “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
      Archive Foundation.”

      You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
      you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
      does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™ License.
      You must require such a user to return or destroy all copies of the
      works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue all use of and
      all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™ works.

      You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
      any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
      electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
      receipt of the work.

      You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
      distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.


1.E.9.


If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg™ electronic
work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this
agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from both the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael Hart, the owner of the
Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in
Section 3 below.


1.F.


1.F.1.


Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to
identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread public domain
works in creating the Project Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these
efforts, Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, and the medium on which they
may be stored, may contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to,
incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright
or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk
or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot
be read by your equipment.


1.F.2.


LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES — Except for the “Right of
Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg™
trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg™
electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY
OF SUCH DAMAGE.


1.F.3.


LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND — If you discover a defect in this
electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can receive a refund
of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a written explanation to
the person you received the work from. If you received the work on a
physical medium, you must return the medium with your written explanation.
The person or entity that provided you with the defective work may elect
to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received the
work electronically, the person or entity providing it to you may choose
to give you a second opportunity to receive the work electronically in
lieu of a refund. If the second copy is also defective, you may demand a
refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.


1.F.4.


Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth in
paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ’AS-IS,’ WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.


1.F.5.


Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the
exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or
limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state
applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be interpreted to make
the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state
law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement
shall not void the remaining provisions.


1.F.6.


INDEMNITY — You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark
owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of
Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and
any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and distribution
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs
and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from
any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of
this or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any Defect
you cause.


Section  2.


           Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™


Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic
works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including
obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the
efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks
of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance
they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s goals and ensuring
that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will remain freely available for
generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg™ and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation’s web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or
determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have
not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against
accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us
with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the
United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods
and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including
checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please
visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.


      General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg™
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with
anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg™
eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed editions,
all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright
notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance
with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook’s eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII, compressed
(zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over the
old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:


    http://www.gutenberg.org


This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg™, including how
to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation,
how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email
newsletter to hear about new eBooks.






***FINIS***

