CHAPTER V. ORTHODOX IDEA OF THE INSPIRATION AND AUTHORITY OF THE BIBLE.




§ 1. Subject of this Chapter. Three Views concerning the Bible.


The subject of this chapter is the Orthodox idea concerning the
inspiration and authority of the Bible. We shall consider the conflict of
opinion between those who believe in the full inspiration of every word of
Scripture, and those who treat it like a common book, and endeavor to see
how far we ought to believe a fact or a doctrine, because it is asserted,
or seems to be asserted, by some writer in the Bible.

Such questions are certainly of great importance to us all at the present
time, when opinions on these subjects are unsettled, and few people know
exactly what to believe. Especially in regard to the Old Testament, not
many persons have any distinct notions. They do not know what is its
inspiration or its authority; they do not know whether they are to believe
the account of the creation and of the deluge in the book of Genesis, in
opposition to the geologists, or believe the geologists, in opposition to
Genesis. Certainly it is desirable, if we can, to have some clear and
distinct opinions on these points.

And, first, in regard to Inspiration: there are three main and leading
views of the inspiration of the Bible. There cannot be a fourth. There may
be modifications of these, but nothing essentially different. These three
views are,—

(_a._) _Plenary Inspiration._—That is, that everything in the Bible is the
word of God. All the canonical books are inspired by God, so as to make
them infallible guides to faith and practice. Every word which really
belongs to these books is God’s truth, and to be received without question
as truth, no matter how much it may seem opposed to reason, to the facts
of nature, to common sense, and common morality.

This is _the Orthodox theory_ even at the present time. Any variation from
this is considered a deviation into heresy. No doubt, in practice it _is_
deviated from, by very Orthodox people; but all Protestant sects, claiming
to be Orthodox, profess to hold to the plenary inspiration of the Bible.

(_b._) _The Rationalist or Naturalistic View of the Bible._—The Bible is
not inspired at all, or at least in no way differing from any other book.
Its authors were inspired, perhaps, just as Homer, or Thucydides, or
Cicero were inspired, but not differently. It has no _authority_,
therefore, over any other book, and is just as liable to be in error as
any other. If you should bind in one volume the histories of Herodotus,
Tacitus, Gibbon, and Mr. Bancroft, the poems of Horace, Hafiz, and Dante,
and the letters of Cicero and Horace Walpole, this collection would have
to the Naturalist just as much authority as the Bible.

(_c._) The _mediatorial_ view of the Bible, or the view which _mediates_
between the others. This view endeavors to _reconcile_ the others, by
accepting the truths in each, and eliminating their errors or defects.

To this third division of opinions belong those of a large class, who are
not prepared to accept either the first or the second. They cannot believe
every word in the Bible to be the word of God, for they find things in it
contradicting the evidence of history and the intuitions of reason, and
also contradicting other teachings of the same book. They cannot see why,
as Christians, they should believe everything in the Jewish Scriptures. As
Christians, they go to the New Testament as a main source of faith and
practice, but do not see why they should go to the Old Testament for
Christian truth. On the other hand, they cannot look upon the Bible as a
common book. They remember that it has been a light to the world for
thousands of years, that it has been the means of awakening the human
intellect and heart, of reforming society, and purifying life. Even in the
Old Testament they find the noblest truth and the tenderest piety. The
Bible has been the litany, prayer-book, inspirer, comforter of nations and
centuries. They cannot and would not emancipate themselves from the
traditions in which they were born, nor cut off history behind them. The
Christian Church is their mother; she has taught them out of this book to
know God, and out of this book to pray to him, and they cannot regard it
without a certain prepossession.

To this third class I myself belong. I would not be unjust to the past or
to the future. I would be loyal to truth, and not shut my eyes to what God
reveals which is new; and I would not be unfaithful to what has already
been taught me, or ungrateful for the love which has taught the world by
the mouths of past prophets and apostles.




§ 2. The Difficulty. Antiquity of the World, and Age of Mankind.


Let us then see, first, what the problem before us is; and this can
perhaps be best understood by means of an example.

The common opinion among Christians is, that the world was made four
thousand and four years before Christ, and that all mankind are descended
from Adam and Eve. These opinions are derived from the book of Genesis,
which tells us that after God had made the world and other things in five
days, on the sixth day he made man in his own image; and that, when the
first man, Adam, was a hundred and thirty years old, he had a son, named
Seth; and from Seth, according to Genesis, are descended, by a genealogy
given in the fifth chapter of Genesis, Noah and his sons; and the ages
being given from Adam down to Abraham, and from Abraham to Christ, the age
of the world and the age of the human race have been computed.

As long as there was no reason for supposing any different period for the
antiquity of the world, these numbers were quietly accepted. But various
new facts have been noticed, and new sciences have arisen, within the past
fifty years, which have thrown doubt upon this chronology. In the first
place the great science of geology has examined the rocky leaves which
envelop the surface of the earth, and has found written upon them proofs
of an immense antiquity. It is found that the earth, instead of being
created four thousand years ago, must have existed for myriads of years,
in order to have given time for the changes which have taken place in its
structure. This evidence was long doubted and resisted by theologians, as
they supposed in the interest of Scripture; but the evidence was too
strong to be denied, and no intelligent theologian, however Orthodox, now
believes the world to have been made in six days, or to have been created
only six thousand years ago. With some, the six days stand for immense
periods of time; with others, the whole story is considered a vision, or a
symbolical account of geological events; but no one takes it literally.
This result has come from the overwhelming amount of evidence for the
antiquity of the earth, derived mainly from the fossil rocks. Of these
fossiliferous rocks there are over thirty distinct strata, lying
superimposed, in a regular series, each filled with the remains of
distinct varieties of animals or of plants. These rocks must each have
been an immense period of time in being formed, for the shells which they
contain, although very delicate, are unbroken, and could only be slowly
deposited in the quiet depths of a great ocean. There are also evidences
that after those strata were formed, violent and sudden upheavals took
place, throwing them into new positions, then slow uprisings of the bottom
of the sea, or slow subsidings of the land. At one time the northern parts
of Europe and America were covered with ice. Great glaciers extended over
the whole of Switzerland, and icebergs floated from the mountains of
Berkshire in Massachusetts upon a sea which filled the valley of the
Connecticut River, dropping erratic blocks of stone, taken from those
mountains, in straight lines, parallel with each other, half way across
the valley, where they still lie. Similar icebergs floated from Snowdon,
in Wales, and Ben Lomond, in Scotland, over the submerged islands of Great
Britain. At one time the whole surface of the earth, instead of being
covered with icy glaciers, was filled with a hot, damp atmosphere, laden
with carbonic gas, which no creature could breathe, but in which grew
great forests of a strange tropical vegetation. Then came another period,
in which all these forests were submerged and buried, and at last turned
into coal. Long after this hot period had passed, and long after the cold,
glacial period, which followed it, had departed, came a time when the
elephant, the rhinoceros, and the hippopotamus covered the whole of
Europe, and the mammoth roamed in North America. Such facts as these,
incontestably established by the amplest evidence, have made it impossible
for any reasonable man to believe that the earth was made in six days, or
that it was made only six thousand years ago.

But this question being thus disposed of, other questions arise in their
turn. Are all mankind descended from one pair, or from many? Has the human
race existed on the earth only six thousand years, or during a longer
period? Was the deluge of Noah a real event? and if so, was it universal
or partial? Did the sun stand still at the command of Joshua? or is that
only a poetic image taken from an ancient book of poems—the book of
Jasher? Is there any truth in the story of the passage of the Red Sea by
the Israelites? of the passage of the Jordan? of the walls of Jericho
falling when the trumpets were blown? of the story of Samson? If we once
begin to doubt and disbelieve the accounts in the Bible, where shall we
stop? What rule shall we have by which to distinguish the true from the
false? Is it safe to begin to question and deny? Is it not safer to accept
the whole book as the word of God, and to let everything in it stand
unexamined?

No! “It is never safe,” said Luther, “to do anything against the truth!”
Truth alone is safe; and his soul only is safe who loves and honors truth
more than human approbation—more than ease, comfort, or life. It is not
safe to pretend to believe what we do not. And in this instance, half of
the infidelity of the age and country has come from the teaching that
everything in the Bible is the word of God. Sincere men have been
disgusted when told they must believe things contrary to their common
sense and reason.

Another question, which is now being investigated, is the age of
mankind—the antiquity of the human race. The Bible gives the list of
generations from Adam to Abraham; and the length of each, and other data,
given in Scripture, make six thousand years for the life of man on this
earth. Greek history only goes back some twenty-three hundred years; the
Egyptian monuments go back fifteen hundred or two thousand years
earlier—to 2000 B.C., or 3000 B.C. The “Vedas,” in India, may have been
written 1500 B.C.; the “Kings,” in China, before that. But recently we
have been carried back to a yet earlier period,—to a time when man existed
on the earth, before any written monument or sculptured stone which now
exists. _Two_ different sources have been discovered within a few
years,—one of them by philology, the other by geology.

It has been found that the languages spoken by Europeans, in their airy
sounds, are more permanent monuments than granite or enduring brass.
Stamped on these light, imponderable words are marks of a gray antiquity
going back to times before Herodotus, before Moses and the book of
Genesis, before the Vedas in India, before the Zendavesta in Persia. It
has been proved, first, that nearly all the languages of Europe belong to
one linguistic family, and therefore that those who speak them were
originally of one race. These different languages—seven sister languages,
daughters of a language now wholly gone—are the Sanscrit or ancient
Hindoo, the Zend or ancient Persian, the Greek, the Latin, the Keltic, the
German, and the Slavic languages. By a comparison of these, it has been
found that originally there lived, east of the Caspian, a race of
shepherds and hunters, calling themselves _Aryan_; that one branch
descended into India at least five thousand years ago, and drove out the
aboriginal inhabitants, a second branch went into Persia, a third into
Italy, a fourth into Greece, a fifth vast immigration filled Northern
Europe with the Kelts, a sixth with Scandinavians and Germans, and a
seventh with the Slaves. But long ago as this immigration was,—before all
history,—it found aboriginal inhabitants everywhere, whose descendants
remain. The Lapps and Finns in Northern, Europe, the Basques in Spain, and
Magyars in Hungary, are probably descended from this earlier European
race. It is difficult to suppose mankind only six thousand years old, when
we find such great movements taking place four or five thousand years ago.

But now come the geologists, and tell us that they find evidence of three
different races existing in Europe in three distinct periods of
civilization, some of which probably preceded the immigration of these
Indo-European races. These three belong to what they call the Stone, the
Bronze, and the Iron Age. In the gravel and drift, from ten to twenty feet
below the surface, along with the bones of the elephant and the
rhinoceros, and other animals long since extinct, are found hundreds of
flint instruments, axes, arrow-heads, and tools, indicating that men lived
in Europe in great numbers, contemporaries with these extinct animals. If
this should be proved, we should then be brought to admit, with respect to
the antiquity of man, what we have already admitted with regard to the
antiquity of the world, that the account in Genesis is not to be
understood as theologians have hitherto taught; that is, that we must not
go to Genesis, but to philology and geology, for our knowledge of the most
ancient history.

In this case, then, it will be evident that the old notion of a literal
inspiration cannot be maintained. God certainly did not inspire men to
teach anything about the creation which was adapted to mislead and deceive
men for two thousand years. We shall be obliged to say, then, that Moses
was not inspired to teach geology or history; that what he taught on these
subjects he taught from such sources as were available to him, and that he
was liable to error.

The old Orthodox theory of plenary inspiration has received very damaging
blows from such scientific researches as these which we have been
describing. The letter of the Bible seems, in such cases, to be at war
with the facts of nature.




§ 3. Basis of the Orthodox Theory of Inspiration.


Why, then, should the Orthodox doctrine be so stoutly maintained? What are
the reasons used in its defence? What its arguments? What is its basis? On
what does it rest? Do the writers of the Bible say that they were inspired
by God to write these books? Not at all. Do they claim infallibility?
Nowhere. Do they lay down any doctrine of plenary, verbal, literal
inspiration? No. We do not even know who wrote many of these books. We do
not know who collected them, or why just these books were put into the
collection, and no others. The Orthodox theory rests on few facts, but is
mainly an assumption. It seemed necessary that there should be _authority_
somewhere; and when Protestants rejected the authority of the Church, they
took the Bible in its place. The doctrine of inspiration, therefore, was
adopted as a basis for the authority of the Bible.

The principal reason given by those who believe in the plenary inspiration
of the Bible, for holding to this doctrine, is the necessity of _some_
authority. The argument is this: Unless every part of the Bible is
believed to be fully inspired, some part of it may be believed to be
erroneous; and if we admit error in any part, the Bible loses its
authority, and we do not know what to believe. The doctrine of literal and
plenary inspiration rests, therefore, in the last analysis, on no basis of
fact, but on a purely _a priori_ argument. Let us therefore examine this
argument, and see what is its force.

Revelation, it is said, is a communication of truth with authority. It is
truth shown to us by God, not truth reasoned out by man. Its value is,
that we can rely upon it entirely, live by it, die by it, without doubt or
hesitation. We do not want speculation, opinion, probability; we want
certainty; otherwise religion ceases to be a power, and becomes a mere
intellectual amusement.

The only religion, it is added, which is of any real value, is that which
carries with it this authority. The outward world, with its influences and
its temptations, is so strong, that we shall be swept away by it unless we
can oppose to it some inward conviction as solid and real. Amid the
temptations of the senses, the allurements of pleasure, the deceitfulness
of riches, will it enable a man to hold fast to honesty, temperance,
purity, generosity—to believe that in all probability these things are
right, and that there is something to be said in favor of the opinion that
God approves of them?

Will it help him, to think that unless the writer of the Gospel is
mistaken, or his words mistranslated, Christ may have said that goodness
leads to heaven, and sin to hell? No. We need authority in order to have
certainty; and we need certainty in our convictions in order that they
should influence us deeply and permanently.

This is the chief argument in favor of the plenary inspiration(11) of the
Bible. We see it amounts to this—that it is very desirable, for practical
purposes, that we should believe everything in the Bible to be true.(12)

In reply to this, we ought first to say, that the question in all these
cases is not, What is desirable? but, What is true? We should begin by
investigating the facts. We should ask, Does the Bible anywhere say of
itself that it is inspired in this sense? Do any of the writers of the
Bible declare themselves to be thus inspired, so that all that they say is
absolutely true in every particular? Does Christ say that those who are to
write the Gospels or the Epistles of the New Testament shall be thus
guarded against every possible error? Or is there any evidence in the
books themselves that the writers were thus protected? Do they never
contradict each other or themselves? Do they never contradict facts of
nature or facts of history?

Now, to all these questions, we are obliged to say, No. The Bible claims
no such absolute inspiration for itself. It says that “holy men of old
spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit,” but it does not say that the
Holy Spirit made them infallible. It says, “All Scripture is given by
inspiration, and is profitable for doctrine,” but it does not say what are
the limits of Scripture; and to be profitable or useful for doctrine is
surely not the same thing as to have infallible authority over belief.
Besides, if those who wrote certain Scriptures were infallibly inspired,
those who collected the present books of the Old and New Testament, and
made our canon, were _not_ so inspired. Those who transcribed their
autographic manuscripts were not inspired. The manuscripts of the Gospels
and Epistles, written by their authors, have long since perished. There
were no autograph collectors in ancient times. There was no such reverence
then paid to the letter of religion, to cause the original manuscript of
an apostle to be kept in a church as a sacred relic. We have plenty of
pieces of wood claiming to be parts of the true cross, but not a
manuscript claiming to be the original writing of an apostle. The earliest
manuscript goes only to the fourth century, and that contains the Epistle
of Barnabas. If, then, the writers of the New Testament were inspired,
those who collected their writings were not inspired, and may have left
out the right books, and put in the wrong ones. Those who copied their
manuscripts were not inspired, and may have left out the right words, and
put in wrong ones. Those who translated their manuscripts were not
inspired, and may have made mistakes in their translating. So that, after
all, the plenary inspiration of the apostles does not bestow that
infallibility upon our English Bible which this theory demands in order to
give it authority.

And yet we admit the importance of having some authority. Truth which does
not come with authority is _not_ truth; it is only speculation; it cannot
influence life. Revelation and philosophy differ in this, that philosophy
tells us what men think about God, revelation what God thinks about men.
Revelation is the drawing aside of the veil which hides God, duty,
immortality. It does not give us speculations about them, but shows us the
things themselves.

If, therefore, we can show that the Bible can be authority _without being_
plenarily inspired, very possibly Orthodoxy would no longer cling to this
doctrine with such remarkable tenacity. This point of authority we shall
consider in another section of this chapter, and so we will say no more
about it now. We shall try to show, then, that the Bible may be, and is
authority, without being inspired as regards every page and word, and that
inspiration is one thing and infallibility another. At present we desire
to see the truth there is in the Orthodox doctrine of inspiration.




§ 4. Inspiration in general, or Natural Inspiration.


There is a foundation for inspiration in human nature, a capacity for
inspiration which all possess. Were it not so, Christian inspiration would
be something unnatural, and not in the order of providence. Moreover, we
commonly speak of the inspiration of the poet, the painter, the inventor,
the man of genius. The man of genius is he who has more of this capacity
for inspiration than other men. But all men have it in a greater or a less
degree. All men have their hours or moments of inspiration. By these
experiences of their own, they understand the larger inspirations of
genius. If we distribute the thoughts we possess according to their
source, we shall find that we have obtained them all, either _from other
persons_, or by means of _mental effort_, or by _inspiration_. The largest
part of our thoughts and opinions we have taken in ready made, and
reproduced them just as we received them. We suppose ourselves thinking,
when we utter them, but we are only remembering. A much smaller proportion
of our thoughts we have obtained reflectively, by personal efforts of the
active intellect. Another part are those which have come to us in some
happy moments, when the inner eye was unclouded, and when we seem to see
at a glance truth and beauty. These inspired moments give us the most
solid knowledge we have. They are mental experiences, which are the master
lights of all our being. They give direction and unity to all our other
thoughts and opinions. They constitute mental originality. The peculiarity
of inspiration, in this general sense, does not lie in the subjects of the
thoughts, but in the manner of their coming. Ideas and thoughts of very
different kinds may all be inspired thoughts. The poet, the artist, have
their inspirations. But the scholar, the thinker, has his also. The man
who invents a machine often has the idea come to him by an inspiration.
The man who discovers a continent has seen it in idea before he sees it in
reality. If Shakespeare was an inspired man, so was Newton, so was
Columbus, so was Lord Bacon, so was Faust when he discovered printing,
Watt when he improved the steam engine, and Daguerre when he found out
photographic pictures; for, in all great discoveries and inventions, and
in small ones too, the original idea is an inspiration, though it has to
be worked out mechanically by hard thinking.

It will be seen, then, what we understand by inspiration, in this general
sense. It is a mental sight, corresponding as nearly as anything can to
physical sight. It seems, in the inspired moment, as if we looked into
another world, and saw new truths and facts there. We do not bring them up
out of our memory; we see them in all their own fresh life and reality. We
do not think them out by an effort of the will; we stand still and see
them. All that our will has to do with it is negative rather than
positive. It is to keep off disturbing influences of memory and sense, to
hold the mind still, attentive, receptive, and ready. If we believe in
these inspirations, we can thus prepare the way for them, but nothing
more. We can wait and look, till the vision is presented, and then we
shall see it; but this is all. The man of genius is he who believes in
these inspirations, and so looks for them. _What_ he shall see will depend
on what he looks for. The man whose taste is in the world of imagination
looks for forms of poetic or artistic beauty, and so sees these. Every man
looks for that which he is most interested in, whether he be metaphysician
or mechanic. The world of ideal beauty and truth, which overhangs ours,
has a thousand portals, and we can pass in through one or another, and see
that which suits our various tastes and desires. Memory, reflection, and
sight,—these are the three sources of our thoughts. The inspired man is a
seer—he has insight and foresight; and these objects of mental sight are
to him more real and certain than any others. But he is unable to prove
their reality or justify them to the sceptic. And hence his fate is often
that of Cassandra,—to be a true prophet, but not to be believed, until by
and by the strength of his own conviction wins its way, and produces faith
in others.

There are, therefore, two principal intellectual states of the mind—the
one receptive, the other plastic; the one by which it takes in truth, the
other by which it works it up into shape. By the one it obtains the
substance of thought, by the other the form of thought. The one may be
called the perceptive state, the other the reflective state. Thus, too, we
see that the perceptive faculty may be exercised in two directions,
outwardly and inwardly. It is the same intellectual faculty which, through
the senses, looks at and perceives the outward material universe, and
through the mind itself, the inward world of thought. It is this power of
looking inward which gives us all that we call inspiration. We have, thus,
outsight and insight.

There is, then, a _universal inspiration_, on which the special
inspiration of the Old and New Testament rests. There are inspired men and
uninspired men. There are inspired writings and uninspired writings. There
is a general inspiration, out of which the particular inspiration of Bible
writers grew. Universal inspiration is a genus, of which this is a
species. We cannot understand the inspiration of the writers of the Bible
till we understand this universal inspiration on which it rests. We can
best explain the special inspiration of Scripture by first knowing the
general inspirations of mankind.

Mr. Emerson, in one of his poems, called the “Problem,” describes this
universal inspiration. He describes Phidias as being inspired to make his
Jupiter, as well as the prophets to write their burdens. He says the
architect that made St. Peter’s was guided by some divine instinct in his
heart—he wrought in a sad sincerity. He says we cannot tell how such
buildings as the Parthenon and St. Peter’s were built, any more than how
the bird builds its nest; they were formed by a natural architecture; they
grew as the grass grows; they came out of thought’s interior sphere, just
as the pine tree adds a myriad of new leaves to its old arms every year.


    “The passive master lent his hand
    To the vast soul that o’er him planned;
    And the same power that reared the shrine
    Bestrode the tribes that knelt within.”




§ 5. Christian or Supernatural Inspiration.


Having thus spoken of inspiration in general, we proceed to speak of
Christian inspiration in particular.

Christian inspiration is the work of the Holy Spirit on the heart. It is
that influence which came to the apostles, and to all Christians after
Jesus had left the earth, to unite them inwardly with Christ, and to show
them the true Christ. It is that of which Paul speaks, when he says, It
pleased God to reveal his Son in me. All Christians were baptized with the
Holy Ghost; had the spirit of Christ dwelling in them; were led by the
spirit of God; received the spirit of adoption, which bore witness that
they were the sons of God; which helped their infirmities; helped them to
pray; enabled them to mortify the deeds of the body, and produced many
gifts and graces. It is quite certain that all Christians were expected to
partake of this Christian inspiration. This enabled them inwardly to see
and know Christ—the true Christ. And only thus could they become truly
his.

Now, the Christian inspiration, so necessary at first, is equally
necessary now, for its object is, as it was then, to turn nominal
Christians into living Christians; to turn historical Christianity into
vital Christianity; to enable those who already know Christ after the
flesh, also to know him after the spirit. What is it which we need for
comfort, improvement, usefulness? We need a living, practical faith in
God’s truth and love. We need to see it as we now see the outward world.
We believe in the inevitable retribution of God’s laws. We need to see
this; to see that selfishness is death, and generosity life; to see that
humility is exaltation, and that pride is abasement. Having seen law, we
need also to see grace, the reality of forgiveness, the reality of a
Father’s love. We need to see immortality and eternity, while we are yet
surrounded with the world of sense and time; to see that the two worlds
are not two, but one, all temporal things having their roots in spiritual
things. This is what we need for comfort, for no hardship would seem hard
while we were thus looking at the things which are eternal, and knowing
that every light affliction works out an eternal weight of glory. This is
what we need for improvement. For no efforts at improvement can accomplish
that which this inward inspiration can do. It is a tide which bears us on.
It takes from us the weight of years. It is the sap which rises into every
branch, penetrates every twig, swells the buds, expands the leaves, opens
the blossoms, ripens the fruit, and causes universal growth. And it is
what we need for usefulness. For how mechanical and lifeless are efforts
at usefulness which proceed merely from the sense of duty! How blessed are
those which proceed from a heart filled with love and peace!

Christian inspiration, then, reveals inwardly the spirit of Christ, and so
gives us a new heart, and makes of us new creatures. It is the most
essential and vital part of Christianity, yet it is that part of
Christianity which is the least known and prized. How many dogmatists
there are fighting for doctrines; how many ceremonialists earnest about
forms; how many conscientious Christians trying hard to do their
duties;—to one spiritual Christian, whose Christianity consists in living
in the spirit, that he may walk in the spirit!

One reason for this seems to be the prevalence of false views concerning
the nature of Christian inspiration. It has been regarded as wholly
different in its laws from other inspiration, as an arbitrary influence
without laws or conditions. Now, in fact, the inspiration of the
Christian, while it differs in its subject from that of the poet, rests on
the same mental faculty, and has analogous conditions. The condition of
the poet’s inspiration is, that loving the outward beauty of the natural
world, and faithfully studying its truth, he should then hold himself
ready, in strong desire, to see, inwardly, ideal truth and ideal beauty.
And so the Christian, believing in the outward Christ, and loving him,
holds himself expectant of an inward revelation of that same Jesus in his
glorified and higher influence. All inspiration has its conditions and
laws. The poet’s eye, in its fine frenzy, must look from heaven to earth,
and from earth to heaven. His inward inspiration is in strict accordance
with his outward occupation and his outward fidelity. Every man is
inwardly inspired, according to the nature of his outward work.
Shakespeare cannot discover America, nor Columbus write Hamlet. And it is
only he who believes in Christ, and so endeavors to obey and serve him,
who receives an inward sight of his essential spirit. Christian
inspiration is not arbitrary, is not unnatural, is not limited. It is the
life of Christ, flowing steadily and constantly into all hearts which are
prepared for it, which long for it, and which hold themselves ready to
receive it.

We are thus prepared to state more distinctly the difference between
inspiration in general and Christian inspiration in particular.

(_a._) These two inspirations _resemble_ each other in resulting from the
exercise of the same mental faculties, since the state of mind in both
cases is not that of reflection, but perception; and the perception is
inward perception. Newton fixes his mind steadily upon the confused
mathematical thought within till it becomes clear. Milton fixes his mind
upon the inward image of ideal truth and beauty till it grows so distinct
that he can put it into corresponding words. Columbus meditates upon the
thought of a Western Continent till it seems so plain to him that he is
ready to set sail for it. And so Paul and John look steadily at the Christ
formed within them till they see clearly what is Christ’s thought
concerning every question, every subject.

(_b._) The two inspirations also are alike in this, that the truth seen is
in both cases, as to its substance, given to us by God. For the truths
seen by Newton, Milton, Descartes, and Columbus were not inventions of
theirs, but divine realities shown to them by God.

(_c._) In both cases the form of the truth seen comes from the exercise of
the human faculties of each individual upon the substance thus given. For
Paul and John, no less than Newton and Milton, worked up in their own
minds the truth seen. This is evident from the fact, that, while their
writings agree in contents and substance with each other, they differ from
each other in form and style. Each writer of the New Testament has his own
distinctly marked style, not only of expression, but also of thought.

(_d._) They are alike also in combining truth of substance with
fallibility of statement. The substance of every inspired man’s thought is
truth, because it is the reality shown to him by God. The form in which he
expresses it varies more or less from this truth, because that comes from
the exercise of his own finite faculties. Newton and Milton looked at
God’s truths, and uttered them as well as they were able. So did Paul and
John. That these last were liable to err in matters of statement appears
from the fact that they did err in some matters, as, for example, in
regard to the speedy coming of Christ.

These being the resemblances between natural and supernatural inspiration,
what are _differences_?

(_a._) The first difference is in the _kind of truths seen_. The truths
seen by Newton and Milton belong to the natural world, those seen by Paul
and John to the supernatural world. The substance of the inspiration in
the one case is nature, in the other case it is Christ. Intercourse with
nature had fed the minds of Newton and Milton with the truth, forming the
material upon which their inspiration could work. Intercourse with Christ,
in the flesh and in the spirit, had filled the minds of Paul and John with
the material on which their inspiration could be exercised. Christ had
come to them outwardly and inwardly, and this was the substance of their
inspiration.

(_b._) The inspiration of Newton and Milton implies genius; that is, a
special faculty in each individual. This possession of genius, or special
faculty, is a condition _sine qua non_, of natural inspiration. It is
solitary, it is individual. But the inspiration of the writers of the New
Testament does not imply genius. Of the eight writers of the New
Testament, only one, viz., Paul, appears to have been a man of natural
genius. He was great by endowment, the others were made great by their
inspiration. In the one case the uncommon man finds wonderful things in
the common world; in the other case the uncommon world shows wonderful
things to the common man.

(_c._) Natural and supernatural inspiration differ also in their occasion.
A miraculous event, namely, the coming of Christ inwardly to their souls
on the day of Pentecost, was the occasion of the apostolic inspiration.
This coming of the Holy Ghost was the second of the two supernatural
events of Christianity, of which the other was the birth of Christ. The
miraculous events in the life of Jesus may have been the natural results
of the coming of such a being into the world. The miracles of Christ’s
life, including his resurrection, may have been natural to a supernatural
being. They are the evidence of a break in the series of causation in the
outward world. In like manner the inward coming of Christ to the hearts of
his disciples in what is called the influence of the Holy Spirit, is
another supernatural event, the natural result of which is the founding of
the Church, the writing of the New Testament, and the newly created life
in individual souls.

These two inspirations, therefore, differ in their substance, source, and
method. The substance of one consists of truths of the natural order, the
other of the supernatural order. The source of one is the world of nature,
the source of the other is the inward Christ. And the method of the one is
that of individual genius, which is solitary, while the method of the
other is that of love or communion.




§ 6. Inspiration of the Scriptures, especially of the New Testament
Scriptures.


We now pass on to ask, What is the inspiration of the New Testament, or of
its writers?

The writers of the New Testament had no different inspiration from that of
all other Christians. We nowhere hear of any one receiving an inspiration
to enable him to write a Gospel or an Epistle. They distinctly repel the
idea of any such special or distinct inspiration. “By one spirit we have
all been baptized into one body, and have been all made to drink into one
spirit.” Gifts are different, but the spirit is one and the same in all.
But even among these diversities of gifts, nothing is said of any gift for
writing Gospels or Epistles. Probably, therefore, the inspiration by which
these were written was precisely the same as that by which they preached
to the Gentiles or taught in the Church. It was an inward sight of Christ,
an inward sight of his truth and love, which enabled them to speak and
write with authority—the authority of those who saw what they said, and
knew it to be true. “We speak what we know, and testify what we have
seen.” Hence it is that we find in their writings so much substance, so
much comprehensiveness, so much insight. They are in constant communion
with an invisible world of truth. They describe what is before their eyes.

A book given by inspiration is not a book made perfect by miracle, but a
book, the writer of which was in a state open to influences from a higher
sphere. All books which the human race has accepted as inspired—Vedas,
Koran, Zendavesta—are sacred scriptures; all that _lasts_ is inspired.
Perpetuity, not infallibility, is the sign of inspiration.


    “The word unto the prophet spoken
    Was writ on tables yet unbroken;
    The word by seers or sibyls told
    In groves of oak or fanes of gold
    Still floats upon the morning wind,
    Still whispers to the willing mind.
    One accent of the Holy Ghost
    The heedless world has never lost.”


The famous proof-text on this subject is that in the Second Epistle of
Paul to Timothy: “All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, reproof, correction, and instruction in
righteousness.” To what Scripture did Paul refer? Some say to the Jewish
Scripture. Some say to the Jewish and Christian writings. But the
Christian writings were not then all written, and were not collected into
what we call the New Testament. The apostle does not limit himself to
these. He says, “_All_ Scripture is inspired”—not merely Jewish or
Christian Scripture, but all sacred writing. All the writings of every age
which are looked upon as Scripture, which men from age to age reverence
and honor as such, were _not_ of man’s invention, not of man’s device, but
came from some irrepressible influence acting on the soul from within. The
poet before quoted says truly,—


    “Out from the heart of nature rolled
    The burdens of the Bible old.
    The litanies of nations came,
    Like the volcano’s tongue of flame,
    Up from the burning cone below,
    The canticles of love and woe.
    The hand that rounded Peter’s dome,
    And groined the aisles of Christian Rome,
    Wrought in a sad sincerity.
    Himself from God he could not free;
    He builded better than he knew;
    The conscious stone to beauty grew.”


There is a truth in this—a profound truth. The Bible is not an exceptional
book in this, that it has no parallels in nature to its method of
production. It is true that Phidias was inspired to make his statue and to
build the Parthenon.


    “Such and so grew those holy piles,
    While love and terror laid the tiles.
    Earth proudly wears the Parthenon
    As the best gem upon her zone,
    And morning opes in haste her lids
    To gaze upon the Pyramids;
    O’er England’s abbeys bends the sky
    As on its friends with kindred eye;
    For out of thought’s interior sphere
    These wonders rose to upper air.”


When Mr. Emerson and Theodore Parker compare in this way the Bible with
the Vedas or the Parthenon, we often feel that it degrades the Bible, and
takes away its special sanctity. But this is not necessarily the case.
There may be a wide gulf between the inspiration of the Bible and that of
the Vedas, or of Homer or Plato; and yet they may all belong to the same
class of works. There is a wide gulf between _man_ and the highest of the
inferior animals; and yet we put man into the class MAMMALIA, along with
oxen, whales, and cats, and into the same Order with apes and bats. We do
not think that man is degraded by being thus classified. He occupies a
distinct species in this order and class. So the New Testament and Old
Testament constitute two distinct species, of which they are the sole
representatives of one genus of inspired books; but that _genus_ belongs
to the same _order_ as the Vedas, Edda, Zendavesta, and Koran, and that
order belongs to the same _class_ as the poems of Homer and Dante, the
architecture of the Parthenon and the Strasburg Minster, the discovery of
America by Columbus, and of the law of gravitation by Newton.

The _class_ of works which we call inspired comprehends, as we have before
said, all which come to man by a certain influx into his soul—not by
looking out of himself, but by looking into himself. Sometimes we go and
search and find thoughts; sometimes thoughts come and find us. “They flash
upon our inner eye;” they haunt us, and pursue us, and take possession of
us. So Columbus was haunted by the idea of a continent in the west; so
Newton was haunted by his discovery long before he made it; so the
“Paradise Lost” pursued Milton long before it was written. Every really
great work must have in it more or less of this element which we call
inspiration.

But while the great works of genius belong to the class of inspired works,
we make a distinct order out of the great religious works which have been
the sacred Scriptures of races of men. They evidently came from a higher
inspiration than the works of science and the works of art. They have
ruled men’s souls for thousands of years. These, then, we place in an
_Order_ by themselves, and it is no discredit to the Bible to be ranked
with the works of Confucius, which have kept the Chinese orderly,
peaceful, industrious, and happy for almost twenty-six centuries.

But still, among these sacred books the Bible may be said to constitute a
distinct _genus_, because it differs from all the rest in two ways—in
teaching the holiness of God and the unity of God. The writer has been a
careful reader of all these sacred books for twenty years; he has read
them with respect; in no captious spirit; wishing to find in them all the
truth he could. He has found in them much truth—much in accordance with
Christianity. But he sees a wide difference between them all and the
Bible. They are all _profitable_ for doctrine, for reproof, for
instruction; but they are not Holy Scriptures in the sense in which we
ascribe that word to the Bible. The Old Testament, though having in it
many harsh and hard features, belonging to the Jewish mind, has strains
which rise into a higher region than anything in the Vedas or the
Zendavesta. The Proverbs of Solomon are about on a level with the books of
Confucius. But nowhere in all these Ethnic Scriptures are strains like
some of the Psalms—like passages in Isaiah and Jeremiah. The laws of Menu
are low compared with the Pentateuch.

But if the Old and New Testament make a genus by themselves, they divide
again into two species. There is a specific difference between the New
Testament and the Old. The New Testament inspiration is of a far deeper,
higher, and broader character than the other. In fact, we ought, perhaps,
to make a special order by itself from the New Testament writings. They
are so full of life, light, and love—they are so strong yet so tender—so
pure yet so free! They have no cant of piety, no formalism, but breathe
throughout a heavenly atmosphere. Their inspiration is of the highest kind
of all.

But what is this Holy Spirit? What does it teach? Scientific truth? No.
Scientific truth has been taught the world by other channels. Bacon and
Newton, La Place and Cuvier, Linnæus and De Candolle, have been inspired
to teach science. Their knowledge came, not only by observation, not only
by study, but by patiently opening their minds to receive impressions from
above. Were the writers of the Bible inspired to teach history? We think
not. There are histories of the Jews in the Bible, and they are likely to
be as authentic, as histories, as are those of Herodotus and Livy, and
other painstaking and sincere historians. But the special inspiration of
the Bible does not appear in the historic books.

But are not _all_ parts of the Bible equally inspired by this Holy Spirit?
By no means. We can easily see that they are not. It is evident that there
is nothing spiritually edifying in a large part of the history of the Old
Testament—the account of Samson, the story of Gideon, large parts of the
books of Judges and Chronicles, the Song of Solomon, the book of Esther.
The book of Ecclesiastes is full, throughout, of a dark and terrible
scepticism. Now, all these books are valuable, exceedingly so, as history,
but not as proceeding from the Holy Spirit.

But it may be said, “If the history of the Bible is not inspired, it may
be erroneous.” Certainly it may. We have seen that the account of creation
in the book of Genesis is probably erroneous. It contains one great faith,
luminous throughout—namely, that there is one God, Creator of all worlds
and of mankind. But as to the _order_ of creation,—the six days, the
garden of Eden,—all we can say is, that there may be some way by which
Moses could, in vision, have seen these things, represented in picture, as
they happened long before. There may be such a kind of unveiling of the
past before the inner eye of the soul. We do not deny it, for it is not
wise to deny where we know nothing. But we can assert that Christianity
does not require us to believe those chapters of Genesis to contain
historic truth. It may be allegorical truth. It may be a parable,
representing how every little child comes into an Eden of innocence, and
is tempted by that wily serpent, the sophistical understanding, and is
betrayed by desire, his Eve, and goes out of his garden of childhood,
where all life proceeds spontaneously and by impulse, into a world of work
and labor. If it be such an allegory as that, it teaches us quite as much
as if it were history.




§ 7. Authority of the Scriptures.


We have seen that the Bible, though inspired, is not infallible. But, it
is said, unless the Bible is infallible it has no authority. This we deny.
Inspiration is not infallibility, but inspiration _is_ authority. The
inspired man is always an authority. Phidias and Michael Angelo are
authorities in sculpture; Titian and Rafaelle are authorities in painting;
Mozart and Beethoven in music; and Paul, John, Peter, in religion.

Authority without infallibility is the problem before us. It is evident
that authority is desirable; it is equally evident that infallibility is
impossible. Can there, therefore, be the one without the other? Can God
reveal himself to man through a fallible medium? Can the writers of the
New Testament be so inspired as to be able to communicate truth, and yet
so inspired as not to be infallible? To all these questions we answer,
_Yes_; and will try to show it to be so.

Suppose that you are going through a forest in company with others. You
have lost your way. No one knows which way to go; dangers are around
you—dangers from cold, hunger, wild beasts, enemies. If you go the wrong
way, you may all perish; if you go the right way, you will reach your
destination and be safe. Under these circumstances, one of the party
climbs a tree, and when he has reached the top he cries out with joy, “I
see the way we ought to go. We must go to the right. I see the ocean in
that direction, and the spires of the city to which we are bound.” You all
immediately go the way that he directs. He has become an authority to you.
You follow his guidance implicitly, and put your lives into his hands,
depending upon the truth of what he says. Why? Because he has been where
you have not been, and has seen what you have not seen, and you believe
him honest and true. He has no motive to deceive you. This is his
authority.

But is it equivalent to infallibility? By no means. No one supposes him to
be infallible. If, after following his direction for a while, you see no
signs to show that you are in the right way, you begin to think that he
may have been mistaken, and some one else climbs a tree to verify his
judgment, or to correct it. But if, instead, signs begin to appear to show
that you are in the right way, your faith in your guide is confirmed, and
his authority is practically increased.

What gives a man authority as a guide, teacher, counsellor, is not our
belief in his infallibility, but our belief in his knowledge; if we
believe that he knows something we do not know, he becomes thereby an
authority to us. If he has been where we have not been, and seen what we
have not seen, he is an authority. A man who has just come from Europe or
from California, who has been in the midst of a great battle, who has
studied a subject which others have not studied, and made himself familiar
with it, such a man is an authority to others. Observe men listening to
him. All defer to him while he is speaking on this subject. He may be much
more ignorant than they are in regard to other things, but, if he has had
superior opportunities in regard to this subject, he is an authority. Yet
they do not believe him infallible; for if, in the course of his
conversation, he says anything which seems contradictory, incredible,
absurd, they begin to withdraw their confidence, and may withdraw it
wholly. But if, on the other hand, what he says is clear, consistent,
solid with information, his authority is increased continually, and his
bearers defer to him more and more.

Now, the authority of the writers of the New Testament is exactly of this
kind. The authority of inspiration everywhere is of this kind. An inspired
man is one who is believed to have been where we have not been, and to
have seen what we have not seen.

In Cooper’s novels there is a character whom he calls Leatherstocking,
familiar with the woods, knowing all their signs, acquainted with the
habits of bird, beast, and Indian. He guides the travellers through the
wilderness, and, by his superior knowledge, saves them from the Indian
ambush and the pursuing savage. They commit themselves implicitly to his
guidance, trust their lives to him. Why? Because they confide in his
knowledge of woodcraft and in his fidelity. As regards all matters
pertaining to the forest, he is an authority; their teacher if they want
information, their guide if they are ignorant of the way, their saviour in
imminent peril from savage beasts and savage men. He is an authority to
them, a perfect authority; for they confide in him entirely, without a
shade of doubt. But no one thinks him infallible, nor supposes it
necessary to believe him infallible, in order to trust him entirely.

Just so a ship on a lee shore, in the midst of a driving storm, throws up
signal rockets or fires a gun for a pilot. A white sail emerges from the
mist; it is the pilot-boat. A man climbs on board, and the captain gives
to him the command of the ship. All his orders are obeyed implicitly. The
ship, laden with a precious cargo and hundreds of lives, is confided to a
rough-looking man whom no one ever saw before, who is to guide them
through a narrow channel, where to vary a few fathoms to the right or left
will be utter destruction. The pilot is invested with absolute authority
as regards bringing the vessel into port.

When Columbus came back from his first voyage, and reported the discovery
of America, was he not an _authority_? Did not men throng around him, to
hear of what he had seen and done? Yet who believed him infallible. He who
has been where I have not been, and seen what I have not seen, is an
_authority_ to me. If I believe him honest, and no impostor, then I learn
from him, and depend on his testimony. Now, the writers of the New
Testament have been where we have not been. They have ascended heights,
and sounded depths in the spiritual world unknown to us. So they are
authorities to us, provided we have enough of their spirit in us to enable
us to see and know their inspiration. For, unless I have some musical
spirit in me, I cannot discern the inspiration of Mozart; unless I have
some mathematical spirit in me, I cannot discern the mathematical
inspiration of Newton and Kepler. So the natural man (the man who has
nothing in him corresponding to the Christian inspiration) cannot discern
the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness to him, for they
are spiritually discerned or judged. He lives in external things, as babes
do. The authority of the Spirit in the Bible is that it awakens and
appeals to whatever spiritual element exists in our soul, and compels it
to feel and admit its truth.

Jesus, it is said, in giving the Sermon on the Mount, taught as one having
authority, and not as the Scribes. What was his authority, then? Not
official authority, for he was not yet known to be the Christ, hardly yet
known to be a prophet. Not merely the _authority_ coming from an imposing
manner; not an authoritative air, or tone, or manner, certainly. That was
precisely the tone and manner which the Scribes _did_ have in _their_
teaching. But the authority is in the Sermon itself. Its truths are so
wonderfully distinct and self-evident, they carry conviction with them.
Jesus sees so plainly all that he says—there is no hesitation, no
obscurity, no perhapses in his language. He is like one describing what is
before his eyes, what he knows to be true because he sees it while he is
saying it. It is, in short, the authority which always attends knowledge.
He who knows anything, and can speak with certainty, carries conviction
with him, though we do not suppose him to be infallible, nor is it thought
necessary to believe him so, in order to give to him this authority.

By such examples, we see that in earthly matters of the very highest
importance we ascribe authority without supposing infallibility. Now, if
we analyze the source of this authority, we shall find that it comes,
first, from the testimony of others, and, secondly, from our own
experience. Leatherstocking comes recommended to the travellers as a
skilful and faithful guide, and they trust him, at first, on the simple
ground of that recommendation. But they do not trust him entirely or fully
on that ground. They watch him while they trust him,—perhaps we ought
rather to say, they _try_ him, than that they _trust_ him. But, after they
have tried him day by day, week by week, and find him always skilful,
always faithful, they come to place a more and more implicit trust in his
guidance; he becomes more and more an authority.

So the pilot comes at first recommended only by his office. His office
implies the testimony of those who ought to know that he is able to guide
the vessel into the harbor. But if, besides this, there is some one on
board who knows his ability and fidelity by previous experience, and says,
“We are all safe now; this is the famous John Smith or William Brown, the
best pilot in the harbor,” then everybody is ready to trust him more
entirely.

Knowledge and fidelity, _not_ infallibility, these make a man an authority
to others in things pertaining to this life—knowledge and fidelity,
evidenced to us, first by the testimony of others, and secondly by our own
experience. Testimony leads us to _try_ a man and trust him partially,
trust him, but watch him. Add to this our own experience of his knowledge
and fidelity, and we trust him wholly.

There are two worlds of knowledge—outward and inward. Knowledge of the
outward world comes to us through the senses, by observation; knowledge of
the inward world comes to us through the consciousness, by insight or
inspiration. Every man’s knowledge has come to him by both of these
methods. The soul has a perceptive power with which it can look either
way. It looks outward through the senses, and perceives an external world;
it looks inward through the consciousness, and perceives an internal
world. It looks outward, and perceives forms, hears sounds, becomes
acquainted with external nature. It looks inward, and becomes acquainted
with justice, holiness, love, freedom, duty, sin, immortality, the
infinite, the eternal, God.

But just as it depends on various conditions as to what a man shall see
through the senses in time and space, so it depends on other conditions as
to what a man shall see beyond time and space in the spiritual world. The
conditions in the first instance are, good perceptive organs, a genius for
observation, educated powers for observation, knowledge of what to
observe, and finally opportunities for observation, or being able to go
where the things are which are to be seen. A blind man standing in front
of the Parthenon would be no authority to us as to its architecture;
neither would the most sharp-sighted person who should happen in be in
America, instead of Greece. So an Indian, with the finest perceptive
faculty, and standing directly in front of this majestic temple, would
give a very poor account of it, from want of previous knowledge. He, only,
would be an authority to us in regard to such a building, who should
combine with good perceptive organs, and some knowledge of the subject, an
opportunity for looking at it.

When we speak of inspiration, we mean, in regard to the inward world,
exactly the same thing. We mean that a man has his spiritual organs in a
healthy condition, that he has some knowledge of spiritual things, and
that he has been placed by divine Providence where he is able to see them.
Some men are lifted into a world of spiritual perception, when they see
things not seen by other men. They become prophets, apostles, lawgivers to
the human race. They are invested with authority. Men believe what they
say, and do what they command, and put their souls into their hands, just
as they trust their bodies to the guide of the pilot.

These are the inspired men—the men to whom revelations have been made.
They have authority, because they have been where we have not been, and
seen what we have not seen. But they have not infallibility, because, as
the apostle says, they have this treasure in earthen vessels. This divine
knowledge is contained in a finite, and therefore fallible mind. But we
see by means of our former illustrations that to grant their fallibility
does not detract at all from their authority.

And again, their authority is certified to us exactly as in the other
instances. They come recommended by external testimony, and on the
strength of that testimony we confide in them and try them. If we find
that they are not able to teach us, they cease to be authorities to us.
But if we find that they are full of truth, they become our guides and
teachers, and their authority is more and more confirmed; that they are
good and true guides, is evidenced by their being able to guide us. They
lead us into deeper depths of truth and love. They become the teachers of
their race. The centuries which pass add more and more weight to their
authority. They inspire us, therefore they are themselves inspired. It is
no more necessary, after this, to prove their inspiration, in the sense
which I have given, than to prove that the sun shines.

One remarkable illustration of this process, by which the test of
Scripture, as inspired, is that it should be profitable for doctrine,
reproof, and instruction, is to be found in the Epistle of Barnabas.
Barnabas introduced Paul to the apostles at Jerusalem, and is called, in
the book of Acts, a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost. He was sent on a
mission to Antioch by the apostles; afterwards was specially pointed out
by the Holy Ghost to go with Paul on his mission. (Acts 13:2.) He is
styled a prophet in this place, and we read that the Holy Spirit said,
“Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.”

During this mission Barnabas seems to have been the more important of the
two, for at Lystra the people called _him_ Jupiter, and Paul Mercury.
Barnabas and Paul appeared before the first council at Jerusalem; and the
apostles, in their letter, say, “Our beloved Barnabas, and a man that has
hazarded his life for the name of the Lord Jesus.” Now, this Barnabas,
called an apostle in the book of Acts, companion of Paul, sent on a
mission by the Holy Spirit, and commended by the apostles at Jerusalem,
was believed by the early Church to have written an Epistle. It is quoted
as his, seven times by Clement of Alexandria, in the second century, three
times by Origen, and by other writers.

Accordingly, it was originally included in the New Testament, and for
nearly four hundred years made a part of it. The oldest manuscript of the
New Testament in the world, supposed to have been written in the fourth
century, contains the Epistle of Barnabas; and one reason for believing
the manuscript so old, is that it _does_ contain it. This manuscript was
found by the celebrated German critic Tischendorf, in 1859, in the convent
of St. Catharine, at Mount Sinai. Why, then, is not this Epistle of
Barnabas printed in our New Testament? Whoever reads it will easily see
the reason. It is because it does not deserve to be there; it does not
have the marks of a high inspiration; it is made up in a great degree of
quotations from the Old Testament, of imitations of St. Paul, and of
allegories. It evidently dropped out of the Bible by its own weight. It
had every opportunity offered it to become a part of sacred Scripture; but
being tried by Paul’s test, it was found not to be profitable for
doctrine, reproof, or anything else, and so the copyists saved their time,
labor, and vellum by leaving it out. It was received on testimony, and
discarded after experience. It had authority at first, because of its
supposed author; it lost it afterwards, by means of its empty self.

This, then, is the authority of the writers of the Bible. It is the
authority of inspired men—men who have been into spiritual regions where
most men have not gone, and seen what most men have not seen. It is not
infallibility. They are capable of mistakes and error. Their being in the
Bible is only so far a proof that they are inspired, as it gives the
testimony of the Church that it has found the proofs of inspiration in
their writings. The Christian community has followed the apostolic
direction, and tried the spirits whether they were of God or not, and has
come to the conclusion that these New Testament writers have the marks of
inspiration. For you will observe that the present code of the New
Testament was gradually formed, and that not by the votes of councils or
the decisions of bishops, but by the feelings of the Christian community.
An inward instinct, and no external authority, presided over the
collection of the Scriptures, gradually dropping out some books (like
Barnabas, Hermas, and the Revelation of Peter), and taking in others.

So the Christian Church says to us, of the New Testament, “Here is a book
concerning which we testify that the writings in it are profitable for
doctrine; that its writers have superior knowledge in regard to spiritual
things; that they are inspired men, who have been taken up into a region
where most men have never gone, and seen what most men have never seen,
and therefore _know_ more than most of us about spiritual truth.”

But you may say, “If inspiration gives _knowledge_, and these writers are
inspired, then they do more than believe or think what they say about God,
duty, and immortality. They _know_; and if they _know_, does not that mean
that they are infallible?” No, knowledge is not infallibility. It is true
that inspiration gives knowledge, while speculation only gives opinion.
This is the reason why inspired men speak with authority, and philosophers
without it. But knowledge, though it gives authority, does not give
infallibility.

A Frenchman _knows_ the French language; still he may make mistakes in
speaking it. The man from California knows that country, but he may be
mistaken about it. Thus, if these writers are not infallible, they may
make mistakes; and if so, how are we to distinguish between their truth
and their error? This is a fair question: let us try to answer it.

Let us return to our former comparison of travellers and their guide. How
are you to distinguish between your guide’s knowledge and his errors?

Probably, when your guide begins to be uncertain as to the way, he will
show his uncertainty in his behavior. He will become doubtful, hesitating,
undecided; he will, by and by, supposing him honest, begin to express his
uncertainty, and say, “I am not quite sure of this path.”

It is just so with inspired writers. While their inspiration runs in a
full tide, they speak confidently; they are distinct in their statements.

Again, if your guide begins to speak of things outside of his province, he
does not carry much authority. If Leatherstocking discusses Shakespeare,
or the pilot begins to talk about politics, his opinions carry no weight
except what is inherent to them.

So when the writers of the Bible, leaving themes of religion and morals,
describe natural objects, as the leviathan or behemoth, we give no more
credit to their descriptions than we should to those of any other writer
of their day.

A question would arise here whether history was a subject of inspiration
or not; that is, whether an inspired writer, when he comes to speak of
historic facts, has any more authority than another. There may be some way
by which past events might be presented by inspiration to the mind of one
caught up by the spirit into another world. But the writers of the Old and
New Testament are careless about dates and numbers, and do not seem to be
made accurate by any special gift. I should, therefore, incline to the
opinion that the historic books of the Bible have no authority except that
of their reasonableness and conformity to what we might believe on other
grounds. As fragments of history, coming from so remote a past, they are
invaluable, when we treat them as simple, honest records of what was then
believed or known.

Take, for instance, the story of the deluge, and compare it with similar
stories in other mythologies. We find it so corroborated by these, that we
may believe that there is a basis of reality in it.




§ 8. The Christian Prepossession.


It is a great thing to read a book with expectation instead of distrust.
Expectation opens the mind to light, and makes it easy to see. Distrust
closes it. If I have read Shakespeare till I feel sure of his poetic
inspiration, then I read with expectation all he writes; I am looking for
truth and beauty, and so I find it. If I had never read Shakespeare, nor
heard of him, and Hamlet were put into my hand, I should probably be
displeased with something or other, and throw it aside, and so lose the
deepness and loveliness of that wonderful creation. How much we find in
the words of Jesus and Paul, because we read them with expectation and
hope! because we read them always looking for what is deep and high!

Nevertheless many persons recommend a contrary course. They say that we
ought to forget all that has been told us about the Book, and read it as
if we had never seen it before. But this method is neither practicable nor
desirable. It is impossible to look at the Bible as though it were an
unknown book; impossible to forget that it is the text book of
Christianity; regarded as sacred by millions of our fellow-men; the source
of spiritual and moral life to the world for the last fifteen hundred
years; that our parents and friends have found in it strength for duty,
comfort in trial, hope in the hour of death. You might as well tell the
child who begins to study geography to forget that he lives in America, or
when he studies the history of the United States, to forget that it is the
history of his own land. Nor would it be desirable to study the New
Testament thus. For it is this grand belief concerning it which makes us
desire to study it at all. Were it not for this belief it might be
occasionally read by a student in the interest of science, but never by
the mass of the community. Faith in its divine origin and divine purpose,
causes it to be read in families, schools, churches, to be used as a
manual of prayer in the closet, and to grow familiar in every home. The
Book is surrounded by a traditional halo of wonder, reverence, and hope,
and this gives us motive and power with which to read it. If a cold
criticism, a sceptical spirit, shall ever succeed in causing the New
Testament to be regarded as a common book, on the natural plane of human
thought, full of errors and imperfections, inspired only as Plato is
inspired, then it will be read as Plato is read, that is, by one man in a
million. It is not desirable to lose the reverence which causes us to
expect extraordinary truth and good in certain books, men, and
institutions; for so we lose the best motive power of the soul; so life
becomes tame, the day empty, and events unmeaning.

It is, therefore, perfectly right for the Church to surround Christ and
Christianity with this divine aureola of reverence and wonder, not
exaggerating it, but neither understating it. For this wonder and
reverence, when legitimate, is a great treasure of spiritual life,
animating and elevating, which the Church possesses in order that it may
communicate it. It is continually proclaiming its good news; constantly
asserting that through Christ God has given it a divine peace; that in
Christ there is a marvellous truth and beauty; and that the Gospels and
Epistles, which contain his life and truth, have a strange power of
raising us above ourselves, and bringing us into communion with an eternal
world. When this is said, not by rote, or as a mere form, but from sincere
conviction, the spirit of faith creates faith, and faith is the great
motive which leads to action.

As it is the duty of the Church to excite our interest in the New
Testament, by declaring its own love and respect for it, so it is right
for the student of the New Testament to give a certain preliminary weight
to this testimony of the Church in commencing his study. This is what we
call the Christian prepossession. And it regards the New Testament exactly
as when a friend whose judgment we respect earnestly recommends to us some
book which he has read, and which has done him good. He recommends it to
us as a good book, and he recommends it with enthusiasm. His enthusiasm
produces in us a desire to become acquainted with the book, and a certain
hope that we shall find in it what our friend has found. This hope leads
on towards fruition, and is one of its conditions. It ought not,
therefore, to be relinquished; but neither should it lead us to accept
blindly everything which we are told. We must look with our own eyes,
think with our own mind, feel with our own heart.

To wish to come to the study of the Bible without prepossession in its
favor is, therefore, a foolish wish; for, without prepossession in its
favor, we should have little motive for studying it at all. It is our
faith in the Bible that leads us to read it; and faith here, as
everywhere, is the motive power which reason has only to guide and
restrain. Faith is the brave steed which carries us forward, full of fire
and full of pride. Reason is the bridle by which he is guided, supported,
and restrained. There is a story of a thief so skilful that he could steal
a man’s horse from under him without his knowing it, and so leave him
holding the bridle in his hand, and supposing himself to be still on
horseback. So are those deceived who think to live by reason without
faith. The motive power of their life has been taken away from them, and
they do not know it; they suppose that they can ride with a bridle and
saddle, without a horse.

To read the New Testament to any purpose, we must, therefore, read with
the faith that there is some great good to be got from it. But what is the
true foundation of this faith? Is it legitimate, or is it an illusion? The
basis of this faith is to be found in the fact that the Bible has done so
much, and is doing so much, for the world—a fact which cannot be stated
better than in these words of one who is not commonly supposed to have too
high a reverence for the Bible:—


    “This collection of books has taken such a hold on the world as no
    other. The literature of Greece, which goes up like incense from
    that land of temples and heroic deeds, has not half the influence
    of this book from a nation alike despised in ancient and modern
    times. It is read of a Sabbath in all the ten thousand pulpits of
    our land. In all the temples of Christendom is its voice lifted up
    week by week. The sun never sets on its gleaming page. It goes
    equally to the cottage of the plain man and the palace of the
    king. It is woven into the literature of the scholar, and colors
    the talk of the street. The bark of the merchant cannot sail the
    sea without it, no ship of war go to the conflict but the Bible is
    there. It enters men’s closets; mingles in all the grief and
    cheerfulness of life. The affianced maiden prays God in Scripture
    for strength in her new duties; men are married by Scripture. The
    Bible attends them in their sickness; when the fever of the world
    is on them. The aching head finds a softer pillow when the Bible
    lies underneath. The mariner, escaping from shipwreck, clutches
    this first of his treasures, and keeps it sacred to God. It goes
    with the pedler in his crowded pack; cheers him at eventide, when
    he sits down dusty and fatigued; brightens the freshness of his
    morning face. It blesses us when we are born; gives names to half
    Christendom; rejoices with us; has sympathy for our mourning;
    tempers our grief to finer issues. It is the better part of our
    sermons. It lifts man above himself; our best of uttered prayers
    are in its storied speech, wherewith our fathers and the
    patriarchs prayed. The timid man, about awaking from this dream of
    life, looks through the glass of Scripture, and his eye grows
    bright; he does not fear to stand alone, to tread the way unknown
    and distant, to take the death-angel by the hand, and bid farewell
    to wife, and babes, and home. Men rest on this their dearest
    hopes. It tells them of God, and of his blessed Son; of earthly
    duties and of heavenly rest. Foolish men find it the source of
    Plato’s wisdom, and the science of Newton, and the art of Raphael.
    Men who believe nothing else that is spiritual believe the Bible
    all through; without this they would not confess, say they, even
    that there was a God.”—_Theodore Parker, Discourse of Religion._


A book which exercises this great influence over our fellow-men ought to
be approached with reverence. It is for the same reason that we approach
with faith and expectation the writings of Shakespeare and Milton. We read
them expecting to find in them great truths, and this expectation enables
us to find them. “Seek and ye shall find” is the law. How often we should
have been disappointed and dissatisfied with such books, and have thrown
them aside impatiently, had we not remembered the great universal
testimony to their surpassing excellence!

This Christian prepossession is, however, only a general confidence that
there is something exceedingly good in the New Testament; that it is a
book containing in some way a divine revelation, in some way or other
inspired, in some way likely to be a great help and comfort to our
spiritual nature, and the best guide we can have for this life and towards
the next. It is an expectation of all this, an expectation based on the
testimony of mankind. So far it is a reasonable expectation. So far it is
right and just to entertain it. It is the natural inheritance to which we
were born, by being born Christians. To throw it away, or to try to throw
it away, would be as though one should try to throw away the habits of
civilization which he inherits by being born in a civilized community, and
try to go back and start as a savage. It is neither more futile nor more
foolish in the one case than in the other.

But, though this Christian prepossession is a perfectly legitimate one
with which to begin, it is not a legitimate one in which to remain. It is
our business, by the free action of our intellect, to change this general
and vague expectation into a distinct opinion of one kind or another.
Protestantism allows us to take our faith in the Bible from the Church,
but not to take from the Church our opinions about the Bible. Faith may,
and ought to be, received, but opinions are to be formed. An opinion or
belief received from another man is his opinion, and not ours.

With regard to any other book this would be self-evident. For example,
suppose that I have never read the play of Hamlet. I hear it universally
spoken of as one of the greatest works of the human intellect. That
naturally and properly creates in my mind the expectation of finding it
so. It produces the general belief that it is a great work of genius. But
suppose that, besides this general expectation, I should also accept from
my neighbors their particular opinions concerning the play. I hear them
say that it is more philosophical, but less dramatic, than Macbeth; that
the character of Hamlet is overcharged with intellect, and the like. If,
now, I adopt and repeat these opinions, without having read the play, it
is evident that I am only a parrot or an echo. It is evident that they are
not _my_ opinions at all, and that they indeed interfere with my having
any opinions. Fifty thousand echoes of a voice leave us only one voice and
fifty thousand echoes.

This distinction between faith and opinion, which we have already spoken
of, is of the utmost practical importance. We may add here that, for want
of it, intellectual people try to go to the study of the Bible without
faith in the Bible, and religious people think they must accept all their
opinions from others, and take them in ready made. It is not absolutely
essential to have opinions; but if we do have them, they ought to be our
own. Faith must be received, opinions must be formed.

All persons, therefore, ought to form opinions for themselves about the
New Testament. They may bring to the work a faith in the New Testament, as
being in some sense or other a revelation, as being written in some way or
other by inspired men, as being somehow or other a holy book, the
legitimate source of spiritual life, moral goodness, and inward peace.




§ 9. Conclusion.


If the views given in this chapter are reasonable, we shall conclude that
Orthodoxy is right in maintaining the supreme excellence and value of the
Christian Scriptures, but wrong in claiming for them infallible accuracy.
It is right in saying that they are written by inspired men, but wrong in
considering this inspiration a guarantee against all possible error or
mistake. It is right in calling the Bible “The Holy Scripture,” but wrong
in denying to the scriptures of other religious some divine influx and
some religious life. It is right in asking that the Bible be read with
faith and expectation; wrong in demanding for it unreasoning, uncritical
submission. Let reverence for its spirit and criticism of its letter go
hand in hand; for reverence and criticism, faith and reason, docility to
great masters and freedom in seeking for ourselves, are antagonist,
indeed, but not contradictory. They are not hostile, but helpful, though
acting in opposite directions—like the opposition of the thumb and fingers
in the human hand, which makes of it such a wonderful servant of the
thought. They belong to the group of sisterly powers which the Creator has
placed in the human soul—varied, complex, like and unlike.


                      “Facies non omnibus una,
    Nec diversa tamen, qualis decet esse sororum.”





