
  WHY AUTHORS GO WRONG
  AND
  OTHER EXPLANATIONS




  WHY AUTHORS
  GO WRONG

  AND OTHER EXPLANATIONS

  BY

  GRANT M. OVERTON
  AUTHOR OF “THE WOMEN WHO MAKE OUR NOVELS”

  [Illustration]


  NEW YORK
  MOFFAT, YARD & COMPANY
  1919




  COPYRIGHT, 1919,
  BY
  MOFFAT, YARD & COMPANY




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                    PAGE

     I. WHY AUTHORS GO WRONG                    1

    II. A BARBARIC YAWP                        25

   III. IN THE CRITICAL COURT                  39

    IV. BOOK “REVIEWING”                       51

     V. LITERARY EDITORS, BY ONE OF THEM      103

    VI. WHAT EVERY PUBLISHER KNOWS            119

   VII. THE SECRET OF THE BEST SELLER         145

  VIII. WRITING A NOVEL                       173




  WHY AUTHORS GO WRONG
  AND
  OTHER EXPLANATIONS




  WHY AUTHORS GO
  WRONG

  AND OTHER EXPLANATIONS




I

WHY AUTHORS GO WRONG


The subject of _Why Authors Go Wrong_ is one to answering which a
book might adequately be devoted and perhaps we shall write a book
about it one of these days, but not now. When, as and if written the
book dealing with the question will necessarily show the misleading
nature of Mr. Arnold Bennett’s title, _The Truth About an Author_--a
readable little volume which does not tell the truth about an author
in general, but only what we are politely requested to accept as the
truth about Arnold Bennett. Mr. Bennett may or may not be telling the
truth about himself in that book; his regard for the truth in respect
of the characters of his fiction has been variable. Perhaps he is more
scrupulous when it comes to himself, but we are at liberty to doubt it.
For a man who will occasionally paint other persons--even fictionary
persons--as worse than they really are may not unnaturally be expected
to depict himself as somewhat better than he is.

We must not stay with Mr. Bennett any longer just now. It is enough
that he has not been content to wait for the curtain to rise and has
insisted on thrusting himself into our prologue. Exit; and let us get
back where we were.

We were indicating that _Why Authors Go Wrong_ is an extensive subject.
It is so extensive because there are many authors and many, many more
readers. It is extensive because it is a moral and not a literary
question, a human and not an artistic problem. It is extensive because
it is really unanswerable and anything that is essentially unanswerable
necessitates prolonged efforts to answer it, this on the well-known
theory that it is better that many be bored than that a few remain
dissatisfied.


2

Let us take up these considerations one by one.

It seems unlikely that any one will misunderstand the precise subject
itself. What, exactly, is meant by an author “going wrong”? The
familiar euphemism, as perhaps most frequently used, is anything but
ambiguous. Ambiguous-sounding words are generally fraught with a deadly
and specific meaning--another illustration of the eternal paradox of
sound and sense.

But as used in the instance of an author, “going wrong” has a great
variety of meanings. An author has gone wrong, for example, when he has
deliberately done work under his best; he has gone wrong when he has
written for sentimental or æsthetic reasons and not, as he should, for
money primarily; he has gone wrong when he tries to uplift or educate
his readers; he has gone wrong when he has written too many books,
or has not written enough books, or has written too fast or not fast
enough, or has written what he saw and not what he felt, or what he
felt and not what he saw, or posed in any fashion whatsoever.

Ezra Pound, for example, has gone atrociously wrong by becoming a
French Decadent instead of remaining a son of Idaho and growing up to
be an American. Of course as a French Decadent he will always be a
failure; as Benjamin De Casseres puts it, “the reality underlying his
exquisite art is bourgeois and American. He is a ghost materialized by
cunning effects of lights and mirrors.”


3

Mr. Robert W. Chambers went wrong in an entirely different fashion. The
usual charge brought against Mr. Chambers is that he consented to do
less than his best because it profited him. This is entirely untrue.
Mr. Chambers’s one mistake was that he did not write to make money.
Every writer should, because writing is a business and a business is
something which can only be decently conducted with that end in view.
Fancy a real estate business which should not be conducted to make
money! We should have to stop it immediately. It would be a menace to
the community, for there is no telling what wickedness of purpose might
lie behind it. A business not conducted primarily to make money is not
a business but a blind; and very likely a cover for operations of a
criminal character. The safety of mankind lies in knowing motives and
is imperilled by any enterprise that disguises them.

And so for Mr. Chambers to refrain deliberately from writing to make
money was a very wrong thing for him to do. Far from having a wicked
motive, he had a highly creditable motive, which does not excuse him in
the least. His praiseworthy purpose was to write the best that was in
him for the sake of giving pleasure to the widest possible number of
his readers. There does not seem to be much doubt that he has done it;
those who most disapprove of him will hardly deny that the vast sales
of his half a hundred stories are incontestable evidence of his success
in his aim. But what is the result? On every hand he is misjudged
and condemned. He is accused of acting on the right motive, which
is called wrong! He is not blamed, as he should be, for acting on a
wrong motive, which would, if understood, have been called right! What
he should have done, of course, was to write sanely and consistently
to make money, as did Amelia Barr. Mrs. Barr was not a victim of
widespread contemporary injustice and Mr. Chambers is and will remain
so.

Take another illustration--Mr. Winston Churchill. One of the ablest
living American novelists, he has gone so wrong that it cannot
honestly be supposed he will ever go right again. His earlier novels
were not only delightful but actually important. His later novels are
intolerable. In such a novel as _The Inside of the Cup_ Mr. Churchill
is not writing with the honorable and matter-of-course object of
selling a large number of copies and getting an income from them; he is
writing with the dishonorable and unavowed object of setting certain
ideas before you, the contemplation of which will, in his opinion, do
you good. He wants you to think about the horror of a clergyman in
leading strings to his wealthiest parishioner. As a fact, there is no
horror in such a situation and Mr. Churchill cannot conjure up any.
There is no horror, there are only two fools. Now if a man is a fool,
he’s a fool; he cannot become anything else, least of all a sensible
man. A clergyman in thrall to a rich individual of his congregation
is a fool; and to picture him as painfully emancipating himself and
becoming not only sensible but, as it were, heroic is to ask us to
accept a contradiction in terms. For a fool is not a man who lacks
sense, but a man who cannot acquire sense. Not even a miracle can make
him sensible; if it could there would be no trouble with _The Inside
of the Cup_, for a miracle, being, as G. K. Chesterton says, merely an
exceptional occurrence, will always be acquiesced in by the intelligent
reader.


4

It would be possible to continue at great length giving examples of
authors who have gone wrong and specifying the fifty-seven varieties
of ways they have erred. But the mere enumeration of fallen authors
is terribly depressing and quite useless. If we are to accomplish any
good end we must try to find out why they have allowed themselves to be
deceived or betrayed and what can be done in the shape of rescue work
or preventive effort in the future. Perhaps we can reclaim some of them
and guide others aright.

After a consideration of cases--we shall not clog the discussion with
statistics and shall confine ourselves to general results--we have been
led by all the evidence to the conclusion that the principal trouble
is with the authors. Little or none of the blame for the unfortunate
situation rests on their readers. Indeed, in the majority of cases the
readers are the great and unyielding force making for sanity and virtue
in the author. Without the persistent moral pressure exerted by their
readers many, many more authors would certainly stray from the path of
business rectitude--not literary rectitude, for there is no such thing.
What is humanly right is right in letters and nothing is right in
letters that is wrong in the world.

The commonest way in which authors go wrong is one already stated: By
ceasing to write primarily for money, for a living and as much more as
may come the writer’s way. The commonest reason why authors go wrong in
this way is comical--or would be if it were not so common. They feel
ashamed to write for money first and last; they are seized with an
absurd idea that there is something implicitly disgraceful in acting
upon such a motive. And so to avoid something that they falsely imagine
to be disgraceful they do something that they know is disgraceful; they
write from some other motive and let the reader innocently think they
are writing with the old and normal and honorable motive.

So widespread is this delusion that it is absolutely necessary
to digress for a moment and explain why writing to make money is
respectable! Why is anything respectable? Because it meets a human
necessity and meets it in an open and aboveboard fashion without
detriment to society in general or the individual in particular. All
lawful business conforms to this definition and writing for money
certainly does. Writing--or painting or sculpturing or anything
else--not done to make money is not respectable because (1) it meets no
human necessity, (2) it is not done openly and aboveboard, (3) it is
invariably detrimental to society, and (4) it is nearly always harmful
to individuals, and most harmful to the individual engaged upon it.

It is useless to say that a man who writes or paints or carves for
something other than money meets a human necessity--a spiritual
thirst for beauty, perhaps. There is no spiritual thirst for beauty
which cannot be satisfied completely by work done for an adequate and
monetary reward. And to satisfy the human longing for the beautiful
without requiring a proper price is to demoralize society by showing
men that they can have something for nothing.


5

Now it is just here that the moral pressure of the great body of
readers is felt, a pressure that is constantly misunderstood by the
author. So surely as the writer has turned from writing to make money
and has taken up writing for art’s sake (whatever that means) or
writing for some ethical purpose or writing in the interest of some
propaganda, though it be merely the propaganda of his own poor, single
intellect--just so surely as he has done this his readers find him
out. Whether they then continue to read him or not depends entirely on
what they think of his new and unavowed (but patent) motive. Of course
readers ought to be stern; having caught their author in a wrong motive
they ought to punish him by deserting him instantly. But readers are
human; they are even surprisingly selfish at times; they are capable of
considering their own enjoyment, and, dreadful to say, they are capable
of considering it first. So if, as in the case of Mr. Chambers, they
find his new motive friendly and flattering they read him more than
ever; on the other hand, if they find the changed purpose disagreeable
or tiresome, aiming to uplift them or to shock them unpleasantly or
(sometimes) to make fun of them, they quit that author cold. And
they hardly ever come back. Usually the author is not perspicacious
enough to grasp the cause of the defection; it is amazing how seldom
authors think there can be anything wrong with themselves. Usually the
abandoned author goes right over and joins a small sect of highbrows
and proclaims the deplorable state of his national literature. “The
public be damned!” he says in effect, but the public is not damned, it
is he that is damned, and the public has done its utmost to save him.

Sometimes an author deliberately does work that is less than his
best, but he never does this with the idea of making money, or, if he
entertains that idea, he fools no one but himself. There are known and
even (we believe) recorded instances of an author ridiculing his own
output and avowing with what he probably thought audacious candor:
“Of course, this latest story of mine is junk--but it’ll sell 100,000
copies!”

It never does. The author is perfectly truthful in describing the book
as worthless. If he implies as he always will in such a case that he
deliberately did less than his best he is an unconscious liar. It was
his best and its worthlessness was solely the result of his total
insincerity. For a man or woman may write a very bad book and write it
with an utter sincerity that will sell hundreds of thousands of copies;
but no one can write a very fine book insincerely and have it sell.

The author who thinks that he has written a rather inferior novel for
the sake of huge royalties has actually written the best he has in
him, namely, a piece of cheese. The author who has actually written
beneath his best has not done it for money, but to avoid making money.
He thinks it is his best; he thinks it is something utterly artistic,
æsthetically wonderful, highbrowedly pure, lofty and serene; he scorns
money; to make money by it would be to soil it. What he cannot see is
that it is not his best; that it is very likely quite his worst; that
when he has done his best he will unavoidably make money unless, like
the misguided mortal we have just mentioned, deep insincerity vitiates
his work.

We are therefore ready, before going further, to formulate certain
paradoxical principles governing all literary work.


6

To understand why authors go wrong we must first understand how authors
may go right. The paradoxical rules which if observed will hold the
author to the path of virtue and rectitude may be formulated briefly as
follows:

1. An author must write to make money first of all, and every other
purpose must be secondary to this purpose of money making.

The paradoxy inherent in this principle is that while writing the
author must never for a single moment think of the money he may make.

2. Every writer must have a stern and insistent moral purpose in his
writing, and especially must he be animated by this purpose if he is
writing fiction.

The paradoxy here is that never, under any circumstances, may the
writer exhibit his moral purpose in his work.

3. A writer must not write too much nor must he write too little. He is
writing too much if his successive books sell better and better; he is
writing too little if each book shows declining sales.

This may appear paradoxical, but consider: If the writer’s work is
selling with accelerated speed the market for his wares will very
quickly be over-supplied. This happened to Mr. Kipling one day. He had
the wisdom to stop writing almost entirely, to let his production fall
to an attenuated trickle; with the result that saturation was avoided,
and there is now and will long continue to be a good, brisk, steady
demand for his product.

On the other hand, consider the case of Mrs. Blank (the reader will
not expect us to be either so ungallant or so professionally unethical
or so commercially unfair as to give her name). Mrs. Blank wrote a
book every two or three years, and each was more of a plug than its
predecessor. She began writing a book a year, and the third volume
under her altered schedule was a best seller. It was also her best
novel.


7

Then why? why? why? do the authors go wrong? Because, if we must say
it in plain English, they disregard every principle of successful
authorship. When they have written a book or two and have made money
they get it into their heads that it is ignoble to write for money
and they try to write for something else--for Art, usually. But it
is impossible to write for Art, for Art is not an end but a means.
When they do not try to write for Art they try to write for an Ethical
Purpose, but they exhibit it as inescapably as if the book were a
pulpit and the reader were sitting in a pew. Indeed, some modern
fiction cannot be read unless you are sitting in a pew, and a very
stiff and straight backed pew at that; not one of these old fashioned,
roomy, high walled family pews such as Dickens let us sit in, pews
in which one could be comfortable and easy and which held the whole
family, pews in which you could box the children’s ears lightly without
doing it publicly; no! the pews the novelists make us sit in these
days are these confounded modern pews which stop with a jab in the
small of your back and which are no better than public benches, but are
intensely more uncomfortable--pews in which, to ease your misery, you
can do nothing but look for the mote in your neighbor’s eye and the
wrong color in your neighbor’s cravat.

Because--to get back to the whys of the authors--because when they are
popular they overpopularize themselves, and when they are unpopular
they lack the gumption to write more steadily and fight more gamely
for recognition. We don’t mean critical recognition, but popular
recognition. How can an author expect the public, his public, any
public to go on swallowing him in increased amounts at meals placed
ever closer together--for any length of time? And how, equally, can an
author expect a public, his public, or any public, to acquire a taste
for his work when he serves them a sample once a week, then once a
month, then once a year? Why, a person could not acquire a taste for
olives that way.


8

We have no desire to be personal for the sake of being personal, but
we have every desire to be personal in this discussion for the sake
of being impersonal, pointed, helpful and clear. It is time to take a
perfectly fresh and perfectly illustrative example of how not to write
fiction. We shall take the case of Mr. Owen Johnson and his new novel,
_Virtuous Wives_.

Mr. Johnson will be suspected by the dense and conventional censors
of American literature of having written _Virtuous Wives_ to make
money. Alackaday, no! If he had a much better book might have come
from his typewriter. Mr. Johnson was not thinking primarily of
money, as he should have been (prior to the actual writing of the
story). He was filled with a moral and uplifting aim. He had been
shocked to the marrow by the spectacle of the lives led by some New
York women--the kind Alice Duer Miller writes discreetly about. The
participation of America in the war had not begun. The performances of
an inconsiderable few were unduly conspicuous. Mr. Johnson decided to
write a novel that would hold up these disgusting triflers (and worse)
to the scorn of sane and decent Americans. He set to work. He finished
his book. It was serialized in one of the several magazines which have
displaced forever the old Sunday school library in the field of Awful
Warning literature. In these forums Mr. Galsworthy and Gouverneur
Morris inscribe our present-day chronicles of the Schoenberg-Cotta
family, and writ large over their instalments, as part of the editorial
blurb, we read the expression of a fervent belief that Vice has never
been so Powerfully, Brilliantly and Convincingly Depicted in All Its
Horror by Any Pen. But we divagate.

Mr. Johnson’s novel was printed serially and appeared then as a book
with a solemn preface--the final indecent exhibition, outside of the
story itself, of his serious moral purpose. And as a book it is failing
utterly of its purpose. It has sold and is selling and Mr. Johnson is
making and will make money out of it--which is what he did not want.
What he did want he made impossible when he unmasked his great aim.

The world may be perverse, but you have to take it as it is. The world
may be childish, but none of us will live to see it grow up. If the
world thinks you write with the honest and understandable object of
making a living it attributes no ulterior motive to you. The world
says: “John Smith, the butcher, sells me beefsteak in order to buy Mrs.
Smith a new hat and the little Smiths shoes.” The world buys the steaks
and relishes them. But if John Smith tells the world and his wife
every time they come to his shop: “I am selling you this large, juicy
steak to give you good red blood and make you Fit,” then the world and
his wife are resentful and say: “We think we don’t like your large,
juicy steaks. We are red blooded enough to have our own preferences.
We will just go on down the street to the delicatessen--we mean the
Liberty food shop--and buy some de-Hohenzollernized frankfurters, the
well-known Liberty sausage. To hell with the Kaiser!” And so John Smith
merely makes money. Oh, yes, he makes money; a large, juicy steak is a
large, juicy steak no matter how deadly the good intent in selling it.
But John Smith is defeated in his real purpose. He does not furnish the
world and his wife with the red corpuscles he yearned to give them.


9

At this juncture we seem to hear exasperated cries of this character:
“What do you mean by saying that an author must write for money first
and last and yet must have a stern moral purpose? How can the two be
reconciled? Why must he think of money until he begins to write and
never after he begins to write? We understand why the moral object must
not obtrude itself, but why need it be there at all?”

Can a man serve two masters? Can he serve money and morality? Foolish
question No. 58,914! He not only can but he always does when his work
is good.

A painter--a good painter--is a man who burns to enrich the world with
his work and is determined to make the world pay him decently for it.
A good sculptor is a man who has gritted his teeth with a resolution
to give the world certain beautiful figures for which the world must
reward him--or he will know the reason why! A good corset manufacturer
is a man who is filled with an almost holy yearning to make people more
shapely and more comfortable than he found them--and he is fanatically
resolved that they shall acknowledge his achievement by making him rich!

For that’s the whole secret. How is a man to know that he has painted
great portraits or landscapes or carved lovely monuments or made
thousands shapelier and more easeful if not by the money they paid him?
How is an author to know that he has amused or instructed thousands if
not by the size of his royalty checks? By hearsay? By mind reading? By
plucking the petals of a daisy--“They love me. They love me not”?

Every man can and must serve two masters, but the one is the thing that
masters him and the other is the evidence of his mastery. Every man
must before beginning work fix his mind intently upon the making of
money, the money which shall be an evidence of his mastery; every man
on beginning work and for the duration of the work must fix his mind
intently and exclusively on the service of morality, the great master
whose slave he is in the execution of an Invisible Purpose. And no man
dare let his moral purpose expose itself in his work, for to do that
is to do a presumptuous and sacrilegious thing. The Great Moralizer,
who has in his hands each little one of us workers, holds his Purpose
invisible to us; how then can we venture to make visible what He keeps
invisible, how can we have the audacity to practice a technique that He
Himself does not employ?

For He made the world and all that is in it. And He made it with a
moral end in view, as we most of us believe. But not the wisest of
us pretends that that moral object is clearly visible. It does not
disclose itself to us directly; we are aware of it only indirectly; and
are influenced by it forevermore. If the world was so made, who are
we that think ourselves so much more adroit than Him as to be able to
expose boldly what He veils and to reveal what He hath hidden?

There are those, of course, who see no moral explanation of the
universe; but they are not always consistent. There is that famous
passage of Joseph Conrad’s in which he declines the ethical view
and says he would fondly regard the panorama of creation as pure
spectacle--the marvellous spectacle being, perchance, a moral end in
itself. And yet no man ever wrote with a deeper manifestation and a
more perfect concealment of his moral purpose than Conrad; for exactly
the thing to which all his tales are passionate witnesses is the
sense of fidelity, of loyalty, of endurance--above all, the sense of
fidelity--that exists in mankind. Man, in the Conradist view, is a
creature of an inexhaustible loyalty to himself and to his fellows.
This inner and utter fidelity it is which makes the whole legend of
_Lord Jim_, which is the despairing cry that rings out at the last
in _Victory_, which reaches lyric heights in _Youth_, which is the
profound pathos of _The End of the Tether_, which, in its corruption
by an incorruptible metal, the silver of the mine, forms the dreadful
tragedy of _Nostromo_. An immortal, Conrad, but not the admiring and
passive spectator he diffidently declares himself to be!


10

Have we covered all the cases? Obviously not. It is no more possible
to deal with all the authors who go wrong than it is to call all
the sinners to repentance. But sin is primarily a question between
the sinner and his own conscience, and the errors of authors are
invariably questions between the authors and the public. The public
is the best conscience many an author has; and the substitution of a
private self-justification for a public vindication has seldom been a
markedly successful undertaking in human history. Yet there is a class
of writers for whom no public vindication is possible; who affect,
indeed, to scorn it; who set themselves up as little gods. They are the
worshippers of Art. They are the ones who not only do not admit but
who deliberately deny a moral purpose in anything; who think that a
something they call pure Beauty is the sole end of existence, of work,
of life, and is alone to be worshipped. It is a cult of Baal.

For these Artists despise money, and in despising money they cheapen
themselves and become creatures of barter. They sneer at morality and
reject it; immediately the world disappears: “And the earth was without
form, and void.” They demoralize honest people with whom they come
in contact by demolishing the possibly imperfect but really workable
standards which govern normal lives--and never replacing them. What
is their Beauty? It is what each one of them thinks beautiful. What
is their Art? It is what each cold little selfish soul among them
chooses to call Art. What is their achievement? Self-destruction. They
are the spiritual suicides, they are the moral defectives, they are
the outcasts of humanity, the lepers among the workers of the world.
For them there can be neither pity nor forgiveness; for they deny the
beauty of rewarded toil, the sincerity of honest labor, the mystical
humanity of man.

Of them no more. Let us go back in a closing moment to the
contemplation of the great body of men and women who labor cheerfully
and honorably, if rather often somewhat mistakenly, to make their
living, to do good work and make the world pay them for it, yet leaving
with the world the firm conviction that it has had a little the better
of the bargain! These are the authors who “go wrong,” and with whose
well-meant errors we have been dealing, not very methodically but
perhaps not unhelpfully. Is there, then, no parting word of advice we
can give our authors? To be sure there is! When our authors are quite
sure they will not go wrong, they may go write!




A BARBARIC YAWP




