IV

BOOK “REVIEWING”


On the subject of _Book “Reviewing”_ we feel we can speak freely,
knowing all about the business, as we do, though by no means a
practitioner, and having no convictions on the score of it. For
we point with pride to the fact that, though many times indicted,
a conviction has never been secured against us. However, it isn’t
considered good form (whatever that is) to talk about your own crimes.
For instance, after exhausting the weather, you should say pleasantly
to your neighbor: “What an interesting burglary you committed last
night! We were all quite stirred up!” It is almost improper (much worse
than merely immoral) to exhibit your natural egoism by remarking: “If I
do say it, that murder I did on Tuesday was a particularly good job!”

For this reason, if for no other, we would refrain, ordinarily, from
talking about book “reviewing”; but since Robert Cortes Holliday has
mentioned the subject in his _Walking-Stick Papers_ and thus introduced
the indelicate topic once and for all, there really seems no course
open but to pick up the theme and treat it in a serious, thoughtful
way.


2

Book reviewing is so called because the books are not reviewed, or
viewed (some say not even read). They are described with more or less
accuracy and at a variable length. They are praised, condemned, weighed
and solved by the use of logarithms. They are read, digested, quoted
and tested for butter fat. They are examined, evalued, enjoyed and
assessed; criticised, and frequently found fault with (not the same
thing, of course); chronicled and even orchestrated by the few who
never write words without writing both words and music. James Huneker
could make Irvin Cobb sound like a performance by the Boston Symphony.
Others, like Benjamin De Casseres, have a dramatic gift. Mr. De
Casseres writes book revues.


3

Any one can review a book and every one should be encouraged to do it.
It is unskilled labor. Good book reviewers earn from $150 to $230 a
week, working only in their spare time, like the good-looking young
men and women who sell the _Saturday Evening Post_, the _Ladies’ Home
Journal_ and the _Country Gentleman_ but who seldom earn over $100
a week. Book reviewing is one of the very few subjects not taught by
the correspondence schools, simply because there is nothing to teach.
It is so simple a child can operate it with perfect safety. Write for
circular giving full particulars and our handy phrasebook listing 2,567
standard phrases indispensable to any reviewer--FREE.

In reviewing a book there is no method to be followed. Like one of the
playerpianos, you shut the doors (i.e., close the covers) and play (or
write) _by instinct_! Although no directions are necessary we will
suggest a few things to overcome the beginner’s utterly irrational
sense of helplessness.

One of the most useful comments in dealing with very scholarly volumes,
such as _A History of the Statistical Process in Modern Philanthropical
Enterprises_ by Jacob Jones, is as follows: “Mr. Jones’s work shows
signs of haste.” The peculiar advantage of this is that you do
not libel Mr. Jones; the haste may have been the printer’s or the
publisher’s or almost anybody’s but the postoffice’s. In the case of a
piece of light fiction the best way to start your review is by saying:
“A new book from the pen of Alice Apostrophe is always welcome.” But
suppose the book is a first book? One of the finest opening sentences
for the review of a first book runs: “For a first novel, George
Lamplit’s _Good Gracious!_ is a tale of distinct promise.” Be careful
to say “distinct”; it is an adjective that fits perfectly over the
shoulders of any average-chested noun. It gives the noun that upright,
swagger carriage a careful writer likes his nouns to have.


4

But clothes do not make the man and words do not make the book review.
A book review must have a Structure, a Skeleton, if it be no more than
the skeleton in the book closet. It must have a backbone and a bite. It
must be able to stand erect and look the author in the face and tell
him to go to the Home for Indigent Authors which the Authors’ League
will build one of these days after it has met running expenses.

Our favorite book reviewer reviews the ordinary book in four lines and
a semi-colon. Unusual books drain his vital energy to the extent of a
paragraph and a half, three adjectives to the square inch.

He makes it a point to have one commendatory phrase and one derogatory
phrase, which gives a nicely balanced, “on the one hand ... on the
other hand” effect. He says that the book is attractively bound but
badly printed; well-written but deficient in emotional intensity; full
of action but weak in characterization; has a good plot but is devoid
of style.

He reads all the books he reviews. Every little while he pounces upon a
misquotation on page 438, or a misprint on page 279. Reviewers who do
not read the books they review may chance upon such details while idly
turning the uncut leaves or while looking at the back cover, but they
never bring in three runs on the other side’s error. They spot the fact
that the heroine’s mother, who was killed in a train accident in the
fourth chapter, buys a refrigerator in the twenty-third chapter, and
they indulge in an unpardonable witticism as to the heroine’s mother’s
whereabouts after her demise. But the wrong accent on the Greek word in
