VI

WHAT EVERY PUBLISHER KNOWS


A big subject? Not necessarily. Discussed by an authority? No, indeed.
On the contrary, about to be written upon by an amateur recording
impressions extending a little over a year but formed in several
relationships--as a “literary editor,” as an author and, involuntarily,
as an author’s agent--but all friendly. Also, perhaps, as a pretty
regular reader of publishers’ products. What will first appear as
vastness in the subject will shrink on a moment’s examination. For our
title is concerned only with what _every_ publisher knows. A common
piece of knowledge; or if not, after all, very “common,” at least
commonly held--by book publishers.

To state the main conclusion first: The one thing that every publisher
knows, so far as a humble experience can deduce, is that what is called
“general” publishing--meaning fiction and other books of general
appeal--is a highly speculative enterprise and hardly a business at
all. The clearest analogy seems to be with the theatrical business.
Producing books and producing plays is terrifyingly alike. Full of
risks. Requiring, unless genius is manifested, considerable money
capital. Likely to make, and far more likely to lose, small fortunes
overnight.... Fatally fascinating. More an art than an organization
but usually requiring an organization for the exhibition of the
most brilliant art--like opera. A habit comparable with hasheesh.
Heart-lifting--and headachy. ’Twas the night before publication and all
through the house not a creature was stirring, not even a stenographer.
The day dawned bright and clear and a re-order for fifty more copies
came in the afternoon mail.... Absentmindedly, the publisher-bridegroom
pulled a contract instead of the wedding ring from his pocket. “With
this royalty I thee wed,” he murmured. And so she was published and
they lived happily ever after until she left him because he did not
clothe the children suitably, using green cloth with purple stamping.


2

A fine old publishing house once went back over the record of about
1,200 published books. This was a rather conservative firm, as little
of a gambler as possible; its books had placed it, in every respect, in
the first rank of publishing houses.

Of the 1,200 books just one in ten had made any sizable amount of
money. The remaining 1,080 had either lost money, broken even, or made
sums smaller than the interest on the money tied up in them. Most
of the 120 profitable books had been highly profitable; it will not
surprise you to learn this when you reflect that these lucrative books
had each to foot the bill, more or less, for nine others. So much for
the analysis of figures. But what lay behind the figures? In some cases
it was possible to tell why a particular book had sold. More often it
wasn’t.... Is this a business?


3

Thorwald Alembert Jenkinson has a book published. It’s not a bad book,
either; very good novel, as a matter of fact. Sales rather poor. Mr.
Jenkinson’s publisher takes his next book with a natural reluctance,
buoyed up by the certitude that this is a better story and has in it
elements that promise popularity. The publisher’s salesman goes on the
road. In Dodge City, Iowa, let us say, he enters a bookseller’s and
begins to talk the new Jenkinson novel. At the sound of his voice and
the sight of the dummy the bookseller lifts repelling hands and backs
away in horror.

“Stock that?” asks the bookseller rhetorically. “Not on your life!
Why,” with a gesture toward one shelf, “there’s his first book. Twenty
copies and only two sold!”

The new Jenkinson novel has a wretched advance sale. Readers, not
seeing it in the bookshops, may yet call for it when they read a
review--not necessarily a favorable account--or when they see it
advertised. If Mr. Jenkinson wrote histories or biographies the
bookseller’s wholly human attitude would not much matter. But a novel
is different. The customer wanting Jenkinson’s _History of France_
would order it or go elsewhere, most likely. The customer wanting
Jenkinson’s new novel is quite often content with Tarkington’s instead.

When you go to the ticket agency to get seats at a Broadway show and
find they have none left for _Whoop ’Er Up_ you grumble, and then buy
seats at _Let’s All Go_. Not that you really care. Not that any one
really cares. The man who produced _Whoop ’Er Up_ is also the producer
of _Let’s All Go_, both theatres are owned by a single group, the
librettists are one and the same and the music of both is equally
bad, proceeding from an identical source. Even the stagehands work
interchangeably on a strict union scale. But Mr. Jenkinson did not
write Tarkington’s novel, the two books are published by firms that
have not a dollar in common, and only the bookseller can preserve an
evatanguayan indifference over your choice.


4

The publisher’s salesman comes to the bookseller’s lair equipped with
dummies. These show the book’s exterior, its size, thickness, paper,
binding and (very important) its jacket. Within the dummy are blank
pages, or perhaps the first twenty pages of the book printed over and
over to give the volume requisite thickness. The bookseller may read
these twenty pages. If the author has got plenty of action into them
the bookseller is favorably impressed. Mainly he depends for his idea
of the book upon what the salesman and the publisher’s catalogue tells
him. He has to. He can’t read ’em all.

Sometimes the salesman can illustrate his remarks. Henry Leverage wrote
an ingenious story called _Whispering Wires_ in which the explanation
of a mysterious murder depended upon the telephone, converted by a
too-gifted electrician into a single-shot pistol. Offering the story
to the booksellers, Harry Apeler carried parts of a telephone receiver
about the country with him, unscrewing and screwing on again the
delicate disc that you put against your ear and showing how the deed
was done.


5

The bookseller, like every one else, goes by experience. It is, or
has been, his experience that collections of short stories do not
sell well. And this is true despite O. Henry, Fannie Hurst and Edna
Ferber. It is so true that publishers shy at short story volumes.
Where there is a name that will command attention--Alice Brown,
Theodore Dreiser--or where a special appeal is possible, as in Edward
J. O’Brien’s _The Best Short Stories of 191-_, books made up of short
tales may sell. But there are depressing precedents.

In his interesting article on _The Publishing Business_, appearing in
1916 in the _Publishers’ Weekly_ and since reprinted as a booklet,
Temple Scott cites Henri Bergson’s _Creative Evolution_ as a modern
instance of a special sort of book finding its own very special, but
surprisingly large, public. “Nine booksellers out of ten ‘passed’ it
when the traveller brought it round,” observes Mr. Scott. “Fortunately,
for the publisher, the press acted the part of the expert, and public
attention was secured.” Was the bookseller to blame? Most decidedly
not. _Creative Evolution_ is nothing to tie up your money in on a dim
chance that somewhere an enthusiastic audience waits for the Bergsonian
gospel.

Mr. Scott’s article, which is inconclusive, in our opinion, points
out clearly that as no two books are like each other no two books are
really the same article. Much fiction, to be sure, is of a single
stamp; many books, and here we are by no means limited to fiction,
have whatever unity comes from the authorship of a single hand. This
unity may exist, elusively, as in the stories of Joseph Conrad, or
may be confined almost wholly to the presence of the same name on two
titlepages, as in the fact that _The Virginian_ and _The Pentecost of
Calamity_ are both the work of Owen Wister.

No! Two books are most often and emphatically _not_ the same article.
Mr. Scott is wholly right when he points out every book should have
advertising, or other attention, peculiar to itself. A method of
reporting one book will not do for another, any more than a publisher’s
circular describing one book will do to describe a second. The art of
reporting books or other news, like the art of advertising books or
other commodities, is one of endless differentiation. In the absence of
real originality, freshness and ideas, both objects go unachieved or
else are achieved by speciousness, not to say guile. You, for example,
do not really believe that by reading Hannibal Halcombe’s _How to Heap
Up Happiness_ you will be able to acquire the equivalent of a college
education in 52 weeks. But somewhere in _How to Heap Up Happiness_ Mr.
Halcombe tells how he made money or how he learned to enjoy pictures
on magazine covers or a happy solution of his unoriginal domestic
troubles--any one of which you may crave to know and honest information
of which will probably send you after the book.


6

At this point in the discussion of our subject we have had the
incredible folly to look back at our outline. Yes, there is an
outline--or a thing of shreds and patches which once went by that
description. What, you will say, wrecked so soon, after a mere
introduction of 1,500 words or so? Certainly. Outlines are to writers
what architects’ plans are to builders, or what red rags are supposed
to be to bulls. Or, as the proverbial (our favorite adjective) chaff
before the wind. Our outline says that the subject of selling books
should be subdivision (c) under division 1 of the three partitions of
our subject. All Gaul and Poland are not the only objects divided in
three parts. Every serious subject is, likewise.

Never mind. We shall have to struggle along as best we can. We have
been talking about selling books, or what every publisher knows in
regard to it. Well, then, every publisher knows that selling books as
it has mainly to be conducted under present conditions, is just as much
a matter of merchandising as selling bonnets, bathrobes and birdseed.
But this is one of the things that people outside the publishing and
bookselling businesses seldom grasp. A cultural air, for them, invests
the book business. The curse of the genteel hangs about it. It is
almost professional, like medicine and baseball. It has an odor, like
sanctity.... All wrong.

Bonnets, bathrobes, birdseed, books. All are saleable if you go about
it right. And how is that? you ask.

The best way to sell bonnets is to lay a great foundational demand for
headgear. The best way to sell bathrobes is to encourage bathing. The
best way to sell birdseed is to put a canary in every home. It might
be supposed that the best way to sell books would be to get people to
read. Yes, it might be far more valuable in the end to stimulate and
spread the reading habit than to try to sell 100,000 copies of any
particular book.

Of course every publisher knows this and of course all the publishers,
associating themselves for the promotion of a common cause not
inconceivably allied to the general welfare, spend time and money in
the effort to make readers--not of Mrs. Halcyon Hunter’s _Love Has
Wings_ or Mr. Caspar Cartouche’s _Martin the Magnificent_, but of
books, just good books of any sort soever. Yes, of course....

This would be--beg pardon, is--the thing that actually and immediately
as well as ultimately counts: Let us get people to read, to like to
read, to _enjoy_ reading, and they will, sooner or later, read books.
Sooner or later they’ll become book readers and book buyers. Sooner or
later books will sell as well as automobiles....

On the merely technical side of bookselling, on the immediate
problem of selling particular new novels, collections of short
stories, histories, books of verse, and all the rest, the publishers
have, collectively at least, not much to learn from their fellow
merchants with the bonnets, bathrobes and birdseed. The mechanism
of merchandising is so highly developed in America that many of the
methods resemble the interchangeable parts of standardized manufactures
everywhere. Suppose we have a look at these methods.


7

The lesson of flexibility has been fully mastered by at least two
American publishing houses. With their very large lists of new books
they contrive to avoid, as much as possible, fixed publication dates.
While their rivals are pinning themselves fast six months ahead, these
publishers are moving largely but conditionally six and nine months
ahead, and less largely but with swift certainty three months, two
months, even one month from the passing moment. And they are absolutely
right and profit by their rightness. For this reason: Everything that
is printed has in it an element of that timeliness, that ephemerality
if you like but also that widening ripple of human interest which is
the unique essence of what we call “news.” This quality is present, in
a perceptible amount, even in the most serious sort of printed matter.
Let us take, as an example, Darwin’s _Origin of Species_. Oh! exclaims
the reader, there surely is a book with no ephemerality about it! No?
But there was an immense quantity of just that in its publication.
It came at the right hour. Fifty years earlier it would have gone
unnoticed. To-day it is transcended by a body of biological knowledge
that Darwin knew not.

Fifty years, one way or the other, would have made a vast difference in
the reception, the import, the influence of even so epochal a book as
_The Origin of Species_. Now a little reflection will show that, in the
case of lesser books, the matter of time is far more sharply important.
Darwin’s book was so massive that ten or twenty years either way might
not have mattered. But in such a case as John Spargo’s _Bolshevism_ a
few months may matter. In the case of _Mr. Britling_ the month as well
as the year mattered vitally. Time is everything, in the fate of many
a book, even as in the fate of a magazine article, a poem, an essay, a
short story. Arthur Guy Empey was on the very hour with _Over the Top_;
but the appearance of his _Tales from a Dugout_ a few days after the
signing of the armistice on November 11, 1918, was one of the minor
tragedies of the war.

Therefore the publisher who can, as nearly as human and mechanical
conditions permit, preserve flexibility in his publishing plans, has
a very great advantage over inelastic competitors. That iron-clad
arrangements at half year ahead can be avoided the methods of two of
the most important American houses demonstrate. Either can get out a
book on a month’s notice. More than once in a season this spells the
difference between a sale of 5,000 and one of 15,000 copies--that is,
between not much more than “breaking even” and making a handsome profit.


8

Every book that is published requires advertising though perhaps
no two books call for advertising in just the same way. One of
the best American publishing houses figures certain sums for
advertising--whatever form it may take--in its costs of manufacture
and then the individual volumes have to take each their chances of
getting, each, its proper share of the money. Other houses have similar
unsatisfactory devices for providing an advertising fund. The result is
too often not unlike the revolving fund with which American railways
were furnished by Congress--it revolved so fast that there wasn’t
enough to go round long.

A very big publishing house does differently. To the cost of
manufacture of each book is added a specific, flat and appropriate sum
of money to advertise that particular book. The price of the book is
fixed accordingly. When the book is published there is a definite sum
ready to advertise it. No book goes unadvertised. If the book “catches
on” there is no trouble, naturally, about more advertising money; if
it does not sell the advertising of it stops when the money set aside
has been exhausted and the publishers take their loss with a clear
conscience; they have done their duty by the book. It may be added that
this policy has always paid. Combined with other distinctive methods it
has put the house which adopted it in the front rank.


9

Whether to publish a small, carefully selected list of books in a
season or a large and comprehensive list is not wholly decided by the
capital at the publisher’s command. Despite the doubling of all costs
of book manufacture, publishing is not yet an enterprise which requires
a great amount of capital, as compared with other industries of
corresponding volume. The older a publishing house the more likely it
is to restrict its list of new books. It has more to lose and less to
gain by taking a great number of risks in new publications. At the same
time it is subjected to severe competition because the capital required
to become a book publisher is not large. Hence much caution, too much,
no doubt, in many cases and every season. Still, promising manuscripts
are lamentably few. “Look at the stuff that gets published,” is the
classic demonstration of the case.

The older the house, the stronger its already accumulated list, the
more conservative, naturally, it becomes, the less inclined to play
with loaded dice in the shape of manuscripts. Yet a policy of extreme
caution and conservatism is more dangerous and deadly than a dash of
the gambler’s makeup. Two poor seasons together are noticed by the
trade; four poor seasons together may put a house badly behind. A
season with ten books only, all good, all selling moderately well,
is perhaps more meritorious and more valuable in the long run than
a season with thirty books, nearly all poor except for one or two
sensational successes. But the fellow who brings out the thirty books
and has one or two decided best sellers is the fellow who will make
large profits, attract attention and acquire prestige. It is far
better to try everything you can that seems to have “a chance” than to
miss something awfully good. And, provided you drop the bad potatoes
quickly, it will pay you better in the end.

There _must_ be a big success somewhere on your list. A row of
respectable and undistinguished books is the most serious of defeats.


10

Suppose you were a book publisher and had put out a novel or two by
Author A. with excellent results on the profit side of the ledger.
Author A. is plainly a valuable property, like a copper mine in war
time. A.’s third manuscript comes along in due time. It is entirely
different from the first two so-successful novels; it is pretty certain
to disappoint A.’s “audience.” You canvass the subject with A., who
can’t “see” your arguments and suggestions. It comes to this: Either
you publish the third novel or you lose A. Which, darling reader, would
you, if you were the publisher, do? Would you choose the lady and _The
Tiger_?

You are neatly started as a book publisher. You can’t get advance sales
for your productions (to borrow a term from the theatre). You go to
Memphis and Syracuse and interview booksellers. They say to you: “For
heaven’s sake, get authors whose names mean something! Why should we
stock fiction by Horatius Hotaling when we can dispose of 125 copies of
E. Phillips Oppenheim’s latest in ten days from publication?” Returning
thoughtfully to New York, you happen to meet a Celebrated Author.
Toward the close of luncheon at the Brevoort he offers to let you have
a book of short stories. One of them (it will be the title-story, of
course) was published in the _Saturday Evening Post_, bringing to Mr.
Lorimer, the editor, 2,500 letters and 117 telegrams of evenly divided
praise and condemnation. Short stories are a stiff proposition; but the
Celebrated Author has a name that will insure a certain advance sale
and a fame that will insure reviewers’ attention. For you to become his
publisher will be as prestigious as it is adventitious.

From ethical and other motives, you seek out the C. A.’s present
publisher--old, well-established house--and inquire if Octavo &
Duodecimo will have any objection to your publishing the C. A.’s book
of tales. Mr. Octavo replies in friendly accents:

“Not a bit! Not a bit! Go to it! However, we’ve lent ... (the C. A.)
$2,500 at one time or another in advance moneys on a projected novel.
Travel as far as you like with him, but remember that he can’t give you
a novel until he has given us one or has repaid that $2,500.”

What to do? ’Tis indeed a pretty problem. If you pay Octavo & Duodecimo
$2,500 you can have the C. A.’s next novel--worth several times as much
as any book of tales, at the least. On the other hand, there is no
certainty that the C. A. will deliver you the manuscript of a novel. He
has been going to deliver it to Octavo & Duodecimo for three years. And
you can’t afford to tie up $2,500 on the chance that he’ll do for you
what he hasn’t done for them. Because $2,500 is, to you, a lot of money.

In the particular instance where this happened (except for details, we
narrate an actual occurrence) the beginning publisher went ahead and
published the book of tales, and afterward another book of tales, and
let Octavo & Duodecimo keep their option on the C. A.’s next novel, if
he ever writes any. The probabilities are that the C. A. will write
short stories for the rest of his life rather than deliver a novel
from which he will receive not one cent until $2,500 has been deducted
from the royalties.


11

English authors are keenest on advance money. The English writer who
will undertake to do a book without some cash in hand before putting
pen to paper is a great rarity. An American publisher who wants
English manuscripts and goes to London without his checkbook won’t
get anywhere. A little real money will go far. It will be almost
unnecessary for the publisher who has it to entrain for those country
houses where English novelists drink tea and train roses. Kent,
Sussex, Norfolk, Yorkshire, Wessex, &c., will go down to London. Mr.
Britling will motor into town to talk about a contract. All the London
clubs will be named as rendezvous. Visiting cards will reach the
publisher’s hotel, signifying the advent of Mr. Percival Fotheringay
of Houndsditch, Bayswater, Wapping Old Stairs, London, B. C. Ah, yes,
Fotheringay; wonderful stories of Whitechapel and the East End, really!
Knows the people--what?

It has to be said that advances on books seem to retard their delivery.
We have in mind a famous English author (though he might as well be
American, so far as this particular point is concerned) who got an
advance of $500 (wasn’t it?) some years ago from Quarto & Folio--on a
book of essays. Quarto & Folio have carried that title in their spring
and fall catalogues of forthcoming books ever since. Spring and fall
they despair afresh. Daylight saving did nothing to help them--an hour
gained was a mere bagatelle in the cycles of time through which _Fads
and Fatalities_ keeps moving in a regular and always equidistant orbit.
If some day the League of Nations shall ordain that the calendar be set
ahead six months Quarto & Folio may get the completed manuscript of
_Fads and Fatalities_.

American authors are much less insistent on advance payments than their
cousins 3,000 miles removed. A foremost American publishing house has
two inflexible rules: No advance payments and no verdict on uncompleted
manuscripts. Inflexible--but it is to be suspected that though this
house never bends the rule there are times when it has to break it.
What won’t bend must break. There are a few authors for whom any
publisher will do anything except go to jail. Probably you would make
the same extensive efforts to retain your exclusive rights in a South
African diamond digging which had already produced a bunch of Kohinoors.


12

There is a gentleman’s agreement among publishers, arrived at some
years back, not to indulge in cutthroat competition for each other’s
authors. This ethical principle, like most ethical principles now
existing, is dictated quite as much by considerations of keeping a
whole skin as by a sense of professional honor. There are some men in
the book publishing business whose honorable standards have a respect
for the other fellow’s property first among their Fourteen Points.
There are others who are best controlled by a knowledge that to do
so-and-so would be very unhealthy for themselves.

The agreement, like most unwritten laws, is interpreted with various
shadings. Some of these are subtle and some of them are not. It is
variously applied by different men in different cases, sometimes
unquestionably and sometimes doubtfully. But in the main it is pretty
extensively and strictly upheld, in spirit as in letter.

How far it transgresses authors’ privileges or limits authors’
opportunities would be difficult to say. In the nature of the case, any
such understanding must operate to some extent to lessen the chances
of an author receiving the highest possible compensation for his work.
Whether this is offset by the favors and concessions, pecuniary and
otherwise, made to an author by a publisher to whom he adheres, can’t
be settled. The relation of author and publisher, at best, calls for,
and generally elicits, striking displays of loyalty on both sides.
Particularly among Americans, the most idealistic people on earth.

In its practical working this publishers’ understanding operates to
prevent any publisher “approaching” an author who has an accepted
publisher of his books. Unless you, as a publisher, are yourself
approached by Author B., whose several books have been brought out by
Publisher C., you are theoretically bound hand and foot. And even if
Author B. comes to you there are circumstances under which you may
well find it desirable to talk B.’s proposal over with C., hitherto
his publisher. After that talk you may wish B. were in Halifax. If
everybody told the truth matters would be greatly simplified. Or would
they?

If you hear that Author D., who writes very good sellers, is
dissatisfied with Publisher F., what is your duty in the circumstances?
Author D. may not come to you, for there are many publishers for such
as he to choose from. Shall we say it is your duty to acquaint D.,
indirectly perhaps, with the manifest advantages of bringing you his
next novel? We’ll say so.

Whatever publishers agree to, authors are free. And every publisher
knows how easy it is to lose an author. Why, they leave you like that!
(Business of snapping fingers.) And for the lightest reasons! (Register
pain or maybe mournfulness.) If D. W. Griffith wanted to make a Movie
of a Publisher Losing an Author he would find the action too swift for
the camera to record. Might as well try to film _The Birth of a Notion_.


13

One of the most fascinating mysteries about publishers, at least
to authors, is the method or methods by which they determine the
availability of manuscripts. Fine word, availability. Noncommittal and
all that. It has no taint of infallibility--which is the last attribute
a publisher makes pretensions to.

There are places where one man decides whether a manuscript will do and
there are places where it takes practically the whole clerical force
and several plebiscites to accept or reject the author’s offering.
One house which stands in the front rank in this country accepts and
rejects mainly on the verdicts of outsiders--specialists, however, in
various fields. Another foremost publishing house has a special test
for “popular” novels in manuscript. An extra ration of chewing gum is
served out to all the stenographers and they are turned loose on the
type-written pages. If they react well the firm signs a contract and
prints a first edition of from 5,000 to 25,000 copies, depending on
whether it is a first novel or not and the precise comments of the
girls at page 378.

Always the sales manager reads the manuscript, if it is at all
seriously considered. What he says has much weight. He’s the boy who
will have to sell the book to the trade and unless he can see things in
it, or can be got to, there is practically no hope despite Dr. Munyon’s
index finger.

Recently a publishing house of national reputation has done a useful
thing--we are not prepared to say it is wholly new--by establishing
a liaison officer. This person does not pass on manuscripts, unless
incidentally by way of offering his verdict to be considered with
the verdicts of other department heads. But once a manuscript has
been accepted by the house it goes straight to this man who reads it
intensively and sets down, on separate sheets, everything about it that
might be useful to (a) the advertising manager, (b) the sales manager
and his force, and (c) the editorial people handling the firm’s book
publicity effort.


14

A little knowledge of book publishing teaches immense humility. The
number of known instances in which experienced publishers have erred in
judgment is large. Authors always like to hear of these. But too much
must not be deduced from them. Every one has heard of the rejection
of Henry Sydnor Harrison’s novel _Queed_. Many have heard of the
publisher who decided not to “do” Vicente Blasco Ibañez’s _The Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse_. There was more than one of him, by the
way, and in each case he had an exceedingly bad translation to take
or reject (we are told), the only worthy translation, apparently,
being that which was brought out with such sensational success in the
early fall of 1918. A publisher lost _Spoon River Anthology_ because
of a delay in acceptance--he wanted the opinion of a confrere not
easily reached. For every publisher’s mistake of this sort there could
probably be cited an instance of perspicacity much more striking. Such
was the acceptance of Edward Lucas White’s _El Supremo_ after many
rejections. And how about the publisher who accepted _Queed_?


15

Let us conclude these haphazard and very likely unhelpful musings on an
endless subject by telling a true story.

In the spring of 1919 one of the principal publishing houses in America
and England undertook the publication of a very unusual sort of a
novel, semi-autobiographical, a work of love and leisure by a man who
had gained distinction as an executive. It was a fine piece of work,
though strange; had a delightful reminiscential quality. The book was
made up, a first edition of moderate size printed and bound. It was
not till this had been done and the book was ready to place on sale
that the head of this publishing house had an opportunity to read it.

The Head is a veteran publisher famous for his prescience in the matter
of manuscripts and for honorable dealings.

He read the book through and was charmed by it; he looked at the book
and was unhappy. He sent for everybody who had had to do with the
making of this book. He held up his copy and fluttered pages and said,
in effect:

“This has been done all wrong. Here is a book of quite exceptional
quality. I don’t think it will sell. Only moderately, though perhaps
rather steadily for some years to come. It won’t make us money. To
speak of. But it deserves, intrinsically, better treatment. Better
binding. This is only ordinary six-months’-selling novel binding. It
deserves larger type. Type with a more beautiful face. Fewer lines to
the page. Lovelier dress from cover to cover.

“Throw away the edition that has been printed. Destroy it or something.
At least, hide it. Don’t let any of it get out. For this has been done
wrong, all wrong. Do it over.”

So they went away from his presence and did it right. It meant throwing
away about $2,000. Or was it a $2,000 investment in the good opinion of
people who buy, read and love books?




THE SECRET OF THE BEST SELLER




