III

IN THE CRITICAL COURT


_The Critical Court being in session, William Dean Howells, H. W.
Boynton, W. C. Brownell, Wilson Follett and William Marion Reedy
sitting, the case of Booth Tarkington, novelist, is called._

COUNSEL FOR THE PROSECUTION: If it please the court, this case should
go over. The defendant, Mr. Tarkington, is not dead yet.

Mr. HOWELLS: I do not know how my colleagues feel, but I have no
objection to considering the work of Mr. Tarkington while he is alive.

Mr. FOLLETT: I think it would be better if we deferred the
consideration of Mr. Tarkington until it is a little older.

COUNSEL FOR THE DEFENSE (_in this case Mr. Robert Cortes Holliday,
biographer of Tarkington_): “It”?

Mr. FOLLETT: I mean his work, or works. Perhaps I should have said
“them.”

Mr. HOLLIDAY: “They,” not “them.” Exception. And “are” instead of “is.”
Gentlemen, I have no wish to prejudice the case for my client, but I
must point out that if you wait until he is a little older he may be
dead.

Mr. BOYNTON: So much the better. We can then consider his works in
their complete state and with reference to his entire life.

Mr. HOLLIDAY: But it would then be impossible to give any assistance to
Mr. Tarkington. The chance to influence his work would have passed.

Mr. BROWNELL: That is relatively unimportant.

Mr. HOLLIDAY: I beg pardon but Mr. Tarkington feels it rather important
to him.

Mr. BOYNTON: My dear Mr. Holliday, you really must remember that it is
not what seems important to Mr. Tarkington that can count with us, but
what is important in our eyes.

Mr. HOLLIDAY: Self-importance.

Mr. BOYNTON (_stiffly_): Certainly not. Merely self-confidence. But
on my own behalf I may say this: I am unwilling to consider Mr.
Tarkington’s works in this place at this time; but I am willing to
pass judgment in an article for a newspaper or a monthly magazine or
some other purely perishable medium. That should be sufficient for Mr.
Tarkington.

Mr. FOLLETT: I think the possibility of considering Mr. Tarkington must
be ruled out, anyway, as one or more of his so-called works have first
appeared serially in the _Saturday Evening Post_.

Mr. HOLLIDAY (_noting the effect of this revelation on the members of
the court_): Very well, I will not insist. Booth, you will have to get
along the best you can with newspaper and magazine reviews and with
what people write to you or tell you face to face. Be brave, Tark, and
do as you aren’t done by. After all, a few million people read you
and you make enough to live on. The court will pass on you after you
are dead, and if you dictate any books on the ouija board the court’s
verdict may be helpful to you then; you might even manage the later
Henry James manner.

CLERK OF THE COURT (_Prof. William Lyon Phelps_): Next case! Mrs.
Atherton please step forward!

Mrs. ATHERTON (_advancing with composure_): I can find no one to act
for me, so I will be my own counsel. I will say at the outset that I
do not care for the court, individually or collectively, nor for its
verdict, whatever it may be.

Prof. PHELPS: I must warn you that anything you say may, and probably
will, be used against you.

Mrs. ATHERTON: Oh, I don’t mind that; it’s the things the members of
the court have said against me that I purpose to use against them.

Mr. BROWNELL: Are you, by any chance, referring to me, Madam?

Mrs. ATHERTON: I do not refer to persons, Mr. Brownell. I hit
them. No, I had Mr. Boynton particularly in mind. And perhaps Gene
Stratton-Porter. Is she here? (_Looks around menacingly_). No. Well, go
ahead with your nonsense.

Mr. HOWELLS (_rising_): I think I will withdraw from consideration of
this case. Mrs. Atherton has challenged me so often----

Mr. BOYNTON: No, stay. _I_ am going to stick it out----

Mr. FOLLETT: I think there is no question but that we should hold the
defendant in contempt.

Mrs. ATHERTON: Mutual, I assure you. (_She sweeps out of the room and a
large section of the public quietly follows her._)

CLERK PHELPS: Joseph Hergesheimer to the bar! (_A short, stocky fellow
with twinkling eyes steps forward._) Mr. Hergesheimer?

Mr. HERGESHEIMER: Right.

Mr. REEDY: Good boy, Joe!

Mr. FOLLETT: It won’t do, it won’t do at all. There’s only _The Three
Black Pennys and Gold and Iron_ and a novel called _Java Head_ to go
by. _Saturday Evening Post._ And bewilderingly unlike each other. Seem
artistic but are too popular, I fancy, really to be sound.

Mr. HERGESHEIMER: With all respect, I should like to ask whether this
is a court of record?

Mr. HOWELLS: It is.

Mr. HERGESHEIMER: In that case I think I shall press for a verdict
which may be very helpful to me. I should like also to have the members
of the court on record respecting my work.

Mr. BOYNTON: Just as I feared. My dear fellow, while we should like to
be helpful and will endeavor to give you advice to that end it must
be done unobtrusively ... current reviews ... we’ll compare your work
with that of Hawthorne and Hardy or perhaps a standard Frenchman. That
will give you something to work for. But you cannot expect us to say
anything definite about you at this stage of your work. Suppose we were
to say what we really think, or what some really think, that you are
the most promising writer in America to-day, promising in the sense
that you have most of your work before you and in the sense that your
work is both popular and artistically fine. Don’t you see the risk?

Mr. HERGESHEIMER: I do, and I also see that you would make your own
reputation much more than you would make mine. I write a story. I risk
everything with that story. You deliver a verdict. Why shouldn’t you
take a decent chance, too?

Mr. FOLLETT: Why should I take any more chances than I have to with my
contemporaries? I pick them pretty carefully, I can tell you.

Mr. HERGESHEIMER: I shall write a novel to be published after my death.
There was Henry Adams. He stipulated that _The Education of Henry
Adams_ should not be published until after his death; and everybody
says it is positively brilliant.

Mr. FOLLETT (_relieved_): That is a wise decision. But don’t be
disheartened. I’ll probably be able to get around to you in ten years,
anyway. (_Mr. Hergesheimer bows and retires._)

CLERK PHELPS: John Galsworthy!

Mr. FOLLETT (_brightening_): Some of the Englishmen! This is better!
Besides, I know all about Galsworthy.

Mr. GALSWORTHY (_coming forward_): I feel much honored.

COUNSEL FOR THE PROSECUTION: If the court please, I must state that for
some time now Mr. Galsworthy has been published serially in a magazine
with a circulation of one digit and six ciphers. Or one cipher and six
digits, I cannot remember which.

Mr. BROWNELL: What, six? Then he has more readers than can be counted
on the fingers of one hand. There are only five fingers on a hand. I
think this is conclusive.

Mr. BOYNTON: Oh, decidedly.

Mr. FOLLETT: But I put him in my book on modern novelists, all of whom
were hand picked.

Mr. GALSWORTHY (_with much calmness for one uttering a terrible
heresy_): Perhaps that’s the difficulty, really. All hand picked.
Do you know, I rather believe in literary windfalls. But I beg to
withdraw. (_And he does._)

THE CLERK: Herbert George Wells!

Mr. WELLS (_sauntering up and speaking with a certain inattention_):
Respecting my long novel, Joan and Peter, there are some points that
need to be made clear. Peter, you know, is called Petah by Joan. Petah
is a sapient fellow. He is even able to admire the Germans because,
after all, they knew where they were going, they knew what they were
after, their education had them headed for something. It had, indeed.
I think Petah overlooks the fact that it had headed them for Paris in
1914.

The point that Oswald and I make in the book is that England and the
Empire, in 1914 and prior thereto, had not been headed for anything,
educationally or otherwise, except Littleness in every field of
political endeavor, except Stupidity in every province of human
affairs. And the proof of this, we argue, is found in the first three
years of the Great War. No doubt. The first three years of the war
prove so many things that this may well be among them; don’t you think
so?

Without detracting from the damning case which Oswald and I make out
against England it does occur to me, as I poke over my material for a
new book, that as the proof of a pudding is in the eating so the proof
of a nation at war is in the fighting. Indisputable as the bankruptcy
of much British leadership has been, indisputable as it is that General
Gough lost tens of thousands of prisoners, hundreds of guns and vast
stores of ammunition, it is equally indisputable that the Australians
who died like flies at the Dardanelles died like men, that the Tommies
who were shot by their own guns at Neuve Chapelle went forward like
heroes, that the undersized and undernourished and unintellectual
Londoners from Whitechapel who fell in Flanders gave up their immortal
souls like freemen and Englishmen and kinsmen of the Lion Heart.

And if it comes to a question as to the blame for the war as
distinguished from the question as to the blame for the British conduct
of the war, the latter being that with which _Joan and Peter_ is
almost wholly concerned, I should like to point out now, on behalf of
myself and the readers of my next book, that perhaps I am not entirely
blameless. Perhaps I bear an infinitesimal portion of the terrible
responsibility which I have showed some unwillingness to place entirely
and clearly on Germany.

For after all, it was Science that made the war and that waged it; it
was the idolatry of Science that had transformed the German nation by
transforming the German nature. It was the proofs of what Science could
do that convinced Prussia of her power, that made her confident that
with this new weapon she could overstride the earth. I had a part in
setting up that worship of Science. I have been not only one of its
prophets but a high priest in its temple.

And I am all the more dismayed, therefore, when I find myself, as in
_Joan and Peter_, still kneeling at the shrine. What is the cure for
war? I ask. Petah tells us that our energies must have some other
outlet. We must explore the poles and dig through the earth to China.
He himself will go back to Cambridge and get a medical degree; and if
he is good enough he’ll do something on the border line between biology
and chemistry. Joan will build model houses. And the really curious
thing is that the pair of them seem disposed to run the unspeakable
risks of trying to educate still another generation, a generation
which, should it have to fight a war with a conquering horde from Mars,
might blame Peter and Joan severely for the sacrifices involved, just
as _they_ blame the old Victorians for the sacrifice of 1914-1918.

Mr. HOWELLS: In heaven’s name, what is this tirade?

Mr. BROWNELL: Mr. Wells is merely writing his next book, that’s all.

(_As it is impossible to stop Mr. Wells the court adjourns without a
day._)




BOOK “REVIEWING”




