II

A BARBARIC YAWP


It was the handy phrase to describe Walt Whitman: The “barbaric yawp.”
In its elegant inelegance the neatly adjectived noun was felt to be
really brilliant. Stump speakers “made the eagle scream”; a chap like
Whitman had to be characterized handily too.

The epigrammatic mind is the card index mind. Now the remarkable thing
about the card index is its casualty list. People who card index things
are people who proceed to forget those things. The same metal rod
that transfixes the perforated cards pierces the indexers’ brains. A
mechanical device has been called into play. Brains are unnecessary any
more. The day of pigeonholes was slightly better; for the pigeonholes
were not unlike the human brain in which things are tucked away
together, because they really have some association with each other.
But the card index alphabetizes ruthlessly. Fancy an alphabetical brain!

Epigrams are like that. A man cannot take the trouble to think; he
falls back on an epigram. He cannot take the trouble to remember and so
he card indexes. The upshot is that he can find nothing in the card
index and of course has no recollection to fall back on. Or he recalls
the epigram without having the slightest idea what it was meant to
signify.

But this is not to be about card indexes nor even about epigrams. It is
to be a barbaric yawp, by which it is to be supposed was once meant the
happy consciousness and the proud wonder that struck into the heart of
an American poet. Whitman was not so much a poet as the chanteyman of
Longfellow’s Ship of State. There was an hour when the chanteyman had
an inspiration, when he saw as by an apocalyptic light all the people
of these United States linked and joined in a common effort. Every man,
woman and child of the millions tailed on the rope; every one of them
put his weight and muscle to the task. It was a tremendous hour. It was
the hour of a common effort. It was the hour for which, Walt felt, men
had risked their lives a century earlier. It was a revealed hour; it
had not yet arrived; but it was sure to come. And in the glow of that
revelation the singer lifted up his voice and sang.... God grant he may
be hearing the mighty chorus!


2

America is not a land, but a people. And a people may have no land and
still they will remain a people. There has, for years, been no country
of Poland; but there are Poles. There has been a country of Russia for
centuries, but there is to-day no Russian people. What makes a people?
Not a land certainly. Not political forms nor political sovereignty.
Not even political independence. Nor, for that matter, voices that
pretend or aspire to speak the thoughts of a nation. Poland has had
such voices and Russia has had her artists, musicians, novelists, poets.

The thing that makes a people is a thing over which statesmen have
no control. Geography throws no light on the subject. Nor does that
study of the races of man which is called anthropology. It is not
a psychological secret (psychology covers a multitude of guesses).
Philosophy may evolve beautiful systems of thought, but systems of
thought have nothing to do with the particular puzzle before us.

The secret must be sought elsewhere. Is it an inherited thing, this
thing that makes a people? That can’t be; ours is a mixed inheritance
here in America. Is it an abstract idea? Abstract ideas are never
more than architectural pencillings and seldom harden into concrete
foundations. Is it a common emotion? If it were we should be able to
agree on a name for it. Is it an instinct? An instinct might be back of
it.

What is left? Can it be a religion? As such it should be easily
recognizable. But an element of religion? An act of faith?

Yes, for faith may exist with or without a creed, and the act of faith
may be deliberate or involuntary. Willed or unwilled the faith is
held; formulated or unformulated the essential creed is there. Let us
look at the people of America, men and women of very divergent types
and tempers far apart; men and women of inextricable heredities and
of confusing beliefs--even, ordinarily, of clashing purposes. Each
believes a set of things, but the beliefs of them all can be reduced
to a lowest common denominator, a belief in each other; just as the
beliefs of them all have a highest common multiple, a willingness to
die in defence of America. To some of them America means a past, to
some the past has no meaning; to some of them America means a future,
to others a future is without significance. But to all of them America
means a present to be safeguarded at the cost of their lives, if need
be; and the fact that the present is the translation of the past to
some and the reading of the future to others is incidental.


3

We would apply these considerations to the affair of literature; and
having been tiresomely generalizing we shall get down to cases that
every one can understand.

The point we have tried to make condenses to this: The present is
supremely important to us all. To some of us it is all important
because of the past, and to some of us it is of immense moment because
of the future, and to the greatest number (probably) the present is of
overshadowing concern because it _is_ the present--the time when they
count and make themselves count. It is now or never, as it always is in
life, though the urgency of the hour is not always so apparent.

It was now or never with the armies in the field, with the men training
in the camps, with the coal miners, the shipbuilders, the food savers
in the kitchens. It is just as much now or never with the poets, the
novelists, the essayists--with the workers in every line, although they
may not see so distinctly the immediacy of the hour. Everybody saw the
necessity of doing things to win the war; many can see the necessity
of doing things that will constitute a sort of winning after the war.
There is always something to be won. If it is not a war it is an after
the war. “Peace hath its victories no less renowned than war” is a fine
sounding line customarily recited without the slightest recognition of
its real meaning. The poet did not mean that the victories of peace
were as greatly acclaimed as the victories of war, but that the sum
total of their renown was as great or greater because they are more
enduring.


4

Now for the cases.

It is the duty, the opportunity and the privilege of America now, in
the present hour, to make it impossible hereafter for any one to raise
such a question as Bliss Perry brings up in his book _The American
Spirit in Literature_, namely, whether there is an independent American
literature. Not only does Mr. Perry raise the question, but, stated
as baldly as we have stated it, the query was thereupon discussed,
with great seriousness, by a well-known American book review! We are
happy to say that both Mr. Perry and the book review decided that
there _is_ such a thing as an American literature, and that American
writing is not a mere adjunct (perhaps a caudal appendage) of English
literature. All Americans will feel deeply gratified that they could
honorably come to such a conclusion. But not all Americans will feel
gratified that the conclusion was reached on the strength of Emerson,
Lowell, Longfellow, Whittier, Holmes, Whitman, Poe and others of the
immortal dead. Some Americans will wish with a faint and timid longing
that the conclusion might have been reached, or at least sustained,
on the strength of Tarkington, Robert Herrick, Edith Wharton, Mary
Johnston, Gertrude Atherton, Mary S. Watts, William Allen White, Edgar
Lee Masters, Amy Lowell, Edna Ferber, Joseph Hergesheimer, Owen Wister
and a dozen or so other living writers over whose relative importance
as witnesses for the affirmative we have no desire to quarrel. Mr.
Howells, we believe, was called to the stand.

If we had not seen it we should refuse to credit our senses. The idea
of any one holding court to-day to decide the question as to the
existence of an independent American literature is incredibly funny.
It is the peculiarity of criticism that any one can set up a court
anywhere at any time for any purpose and with unlimited jurisdiction.
There are no rules of procedure. There are no rules of evidence. There
is no jury; the people who read books may sit packed in the court
room, but there must be no interruptions. Order in the court! Usually
the critic-judge sits alone, but sometimes there are special sessions
with a full bench. Writs are issued, subpœnas served, witnesses are
called and testimony is taken. An injunction may be applied for, either
temporary or permanent. Nothing is easier than to be held in contempt.


5

The most striking peculiarity of procedure in the Critical Court is
with regard to what constitutes evidence. You might, in the innocence
of your heart, suppose that a man’s writings would constitute the only
admissible evidence. Not at all. His writings have really nothing to
do with the case. What is his Purpose? If, as a sincere individual,
he has anywhere exposed or stated his object in writing books counsel
objects to the admission of this Purpose as evidence on the ground that
it is incompetent, irrelevant and immaterial; and not sound Art. On the
other hand if, as an artist, he has embodied his Purpose in his fiction
so that every intelligent reader may discover it for himself and feel
the glow of a personal discovery, counsel will object to the admission
of his books as evidence on the ground that they are incompetent,
irrelevant and immaterial; and not the best proof. Counsel will demand
that the man himself be examined personally as to his purpose (if he
is alive) or will demand a searching examination of his private life
(if he be dead). The witness is always a culprit and browbeating the
witness is always in order. I am a highbrow and you are a lowbrow; what
the devil do you mean by writing a book anyway?

Before the trial begins the critic-judge enunciates certain principles
on which the verdict will be based and the verdict is based on those
principles whether they find any application in the testimony or not.
A favorite principle with the man on the bench is that all that is
not obscure is not Art. It isn’t phrased as intelligibly as that,
to be sure; a common way to put it is to lay down the rule that the
popularity of a book (which means the extent to which it is understood
and therefore appreciated) has nothing to do with the case, tra-la,
has nothing to do with the case. Another principle is that sound can
be greater than sense, which, in the lingo of the Highest Criticism,
is the dictum that words and sentences can have a beauty apart from
the meaning (if any) that they seek to convey. And there really is
something in this idea; for example, what could be lovelier than the
old line, “Eeny, meeny, miny-mo”? Shakespeare, a commercial fellow who
wrote plays for a living, knew this when he let one of his characters
sing:

  “When that I was and a little tiny boy,
    With hey, ho, the wind and the rain,
  A foolish thing was but a toy,
    For the rain it raineth every day.”

And a little earlier in _Twelfth Night_:

  “Like a mad lad,
  Pare thy nails, dad;
    Adieu, goodman devil.”

Which is not only beautiful as sound, but without the least sense
unless it hath the vulgarity to be looked for in the work of a
mercenary playwright.


6

But the strangest thing about the proceedings in the Critical Court
is their lack of contemporary interest. Rarely, indeed, is anything
decided here until it has been decided everywhere else. For the
great decisions are the decisions of life and not decisions on the
past. A man has written twenty books and he is dead. He is ripe for
consideration by the Critical Court. A man has written two novels
and has eighteen more ahead of him. The Critical Court will leave
him alone until he is past all helping. It seems never to occur to
the critic-judge that a young man who has written two novels is more
important than a dead man who has written twenty novels. For the young
man who has written two novels has some novels yet to be written;
he can be helped, strengthened, encouraged, advised, corrected,
warned, counselled, rebuked, praised, blamed, presented with bills of
particulars, and--heartened. If he has not genius nothing can put it
in him, but if he has, many things can be done to help him exploit it.
And a man who is dead cannot be affected by anything you say or do; the
critic-judge has lost his chance of shaping that writer’s work and can
no longer write a decree, only an epitaph.

To be brutally frank: Nobody cares what the Critical Court thinks
of Whitman or Poe or Longfellow or Hawthorne. Everybody cares
what Tarkington does next, what Mary Johnston tackles, what the
developments are in the William Allen White case, what becomes of
Joseph Hergesheimer, whether Amy Lowell achieves great work in that
contrapuntal poetry she calls polyphonic prose. On these things depend
the present era in American literature and the possibilities of the
future. And these things are more or less under our control.

The people of America not only believe that there is an independent
American literature, but they believe that there will continue to be.
Some of them believe in the past of that literature, some of them
believe in its future; but all of them believe in its present and its
presence. Their voice may be stifled in the Critical Court (silence
in the court!) but it is audible everywhere else. It is heard in the
bookshops where piles of new fiction melt away, where new verse is in
brisk demand, where new biographies and historical works are bought
daily and where books on all sorts of weighty subjects flake down from
the shelves into the hands of customers.

The voice of the American people is articulate in the offices of
newspapers which deal with the news of new books. It makes a
seismographic record in the ledgers of publishing houses. It comes to
almost every writer in letters of inquiry, comment and commendation.
What, do you suppose, a writer like Gene Stratton-Porter cares whether
the Critical Court excludes her work or condemns it? She can re-read
hundreds and thousands of letters from men and women who tell her how
profoundly her books have--tickled their fancy? pleased their love of
verbal beauty? taxed their intellectuals to understand? No, merely how
profoundly her books have altered their whole lives.

Hear ye! Hear ye! Hear ye! The Critical Court is in session. All who
have business with the court draw near and give attention!




IN THE CRITICAL COURT




