Chapter XVII gets by them; and as for the psychological impulse which
led the hero to jump from Brooklyn Bridge on the Fourth of July they
miss it entirely and betray their neglect of their duty by alluding
to him as a poor devil crazed with the heat. The fact is, of course,
that he did a Steve Brodie because he found something obscurely hateful
in the Manhattan skyline. Day after day, while walking to his work on
the Brooklyn Rapid Transit, he gazed at the saw-toothed outline of the
buildings limned against the sky. Day by day his soul kept asking: “Why
_don’t_ they get a gold filling for that cavity between the Singer and
Woolworth towers?” And he would ask himself despondently: “Is this what
I live for?” And gradually he felt that it was not. He felt that it
might be something to die about, however. And so, with the rashness
of youth, he leaped. The George Meredith-Thomas Hardy irony came into
the story when he was pulled out of the river by his rival in Dorinda’s
affections, Gregory Anthracyte, owner of the magnificent steam yacht
_Chuggermugger_.

So much for the anatomy of a book review. Put backbone into it. Read
before you write. Look before you leap. Be just, be fair, be impartial;
and when you damn, damn with faint praise, and when you praise, praise
with faint damns. Be all things to all books. Remember the author.
Review as you would be reviewed by. If a book is nothing in your life
it may be the fault of your life. And it is always less expensive to
revise your life than to revise the book. Your life is not printed from
plates that cost a fortune to make and another fortune to throw away.
“Life is too short to read inferior books,” eh? Books are too good
to be guillotined by inferior lives--or inferior livers. Bacon said
some books were to be digested, but he neglected to mention a cure for
dyspeptics.


5

But when we say so much we have only touched the surface of a profound
matter. The truth of that matter, the full depth of it, may as well be
plumbed at once. A book cannot be reviewed. It can only be written
about or around. It is insusceptible of such handling as is accorded a
play, for example.

A man with more or less experience in seeing plays and with more or
less knowledge of the drama goes to the first performance of a new
comedy or tragedy or whatnot. There it is before him in speech and
motion and color. It is acted. The play, structurally, is good or bad;
the acting is either good or bad. Every item of the performance is
capable of being resolved separately and estimated; and the collective
interest or importance of these items can be determined, is, in fact,
determined once and for all by the performance itself. The observer
gets their collective impact at once and his task is really nothing but
a consideration afterward in such detail as he cares to enter upon of
just how that impact was secured. Did you ever, in your algebra days,
or even in your arithmetically earnest childhood, “factor” a quantity
or a number? Take 91. A little difficult, 91, but after some mental
and pencil investigation you found that it was obtained by multiplying
13 by 7. Very well. You knew how the impact of 91 was produced; it was
produced by multiplying 13 by 7. You had reviewed the number 91 in the
sense that you might review a play.

Now it is impossible to review a book as you would factor a number or
a play. You can’t be sure of the factors that make up the collective
impact of the book upon you. There’s no way of getting at them.
They are summed up in the book itself and no book can be split into
multipliable parts. A book is not the author times an idea times the
views of the publisher. A book is unfactorable, often undecipherable.
It is a growth. It is a series of accretions about a central thought.
The central thought is like the grain of sand which the oyster has
pearled over. The central thought may even be a diseased thought and
the pearl may be a very lovely and brilliant pearl, superficially at
least, for all that. There is nothing to do with a book but to take
it as it is or go at it hammer and tongs, scalpel and curette, chisel
and auger--smashing it to pieces, scraping and cutting, boring and
cleaving through the layers of words and subsidiary ideas and getting
down eventually to the heart of it, to the grain of sand, the irritant
thought that was the earliest foundation.

Such surgery may be highly skilful or highly and wickedly destructive;
it may uncover something worth while and it may not; naturally, you
don’t go in for much of it, if you are wise, and as a general thing
you take a book as it is and not as it once was or as the author may,
in the innocence of his heart or the subtlety of his experience, have
intended it to be.


6

Surgery on a book is like surgery on a human being, for a book is
alive; ordinarily the only justification for it is the chance of
saving life. If the operator can save the author’s life (as an
author) by cutting he ought to go ahead, of course. The fate of one
book is nothing as against the lives of books yet unwritten; the
feelings of the author are not necessarily of more account than the
screams of the sick child’s parent. There have been such literary
operations for which, in lieu of the $1,000 fee of medical practise,
the surgeon has been rewarded and more than repaid by a private letter
of acknowledgement and heartfelt thanks. No matter how hard up the
recipient of such a letter may be, the missive seldom turns up in those
auction rooms where the A. L. S. (or Autograph Letter with Signature)
sometimes brings an unexpected and astonishingly large price.


7

There is a good deal to be said for taking a book as it is. Most books,
in fact, should be taken that way. For the number of books which
contain within them issues of life and death is always very small. You
may handle new books for a year and come upon only one such. And when
you do, unless you recognize its momentousness, no responsibility
rests on _you_ to do anything except follow a routine procedure. In
this domain ignorance is a wholly valid excuse; no one would think
of blaming a general practitioner of medicine for not removing the
patient’s vermiform appendix on principle, so to say. Unless he
apprehended conclusively that the man had appendicitis and unless he
knew the technique of the operation he would certainly be blamed for
performing it. Similarly, unless the handler of new books is dead sure
that a fatality threatens Harold Bell Wright or John Galsworthy or Mary
Roberts Rinehart, unless the new book of Mr. Wright or Mr. Galsworthy
or Mrs. Rinehart is a recognizable and unmistakable symptom, unless,
further, he knows what to uncover in that book and how to uncover it,
he has no business to take the matter in hand at all. Though the way of
most “reviewers” with new books suggests that their fundamental motto
must be that one good botch deserves another.

Not at all. Better, if you don’t know what to do, to leave bad enough
alone.

But since the book as it is forms 99 per cent. of the subject under
consideration this aspect of dealing with new books should be
considered first and most extensively. Afterward we can revert to the
one percent. of books that require to go under the knife.


8

Now the secret of taking a book as it is was never very abstruse and is
always perfectly simple; nevertheless, it seems utterly to elude most
of the persons who deal with new books. It is a secret only because it
is forever hidden from their eyes. Or maybe they deliberately look the
other way.

There exists in the world as at present constituted a person called
the reporter. He is, mostly, an adjunct of the daily newspaper; in
small places, of the weekly newspaper. It is, however, in the cities
of America that he is brought to his perfection and in this connection
it is worth while pointing out what Irvin Cobb has already noted--the
difference between the New York reporter and the reporter of almost
any other city in America. The New York reporter “works with” his
rival on another sheet; the reporter outside New York almost never
does this. Cobb attributed the difference to the impossible tasks that
confront reporters in New York, impossible, that is, for single-handed
accomplishment. A man who should attempt to cover alone some New York
assignments, to “beat” his fellow, would be lost. Of course where a
New York paper details half a dozen men to a job real competition
between rival outfits is feasible and sometimes occurs. But the point
here is this: The New York reporter, by generally “working with” his
fellow from another daily, has made of his work a profession, with
professional ideals and standards, a code, unwritten but delicate and
decidedly high rules of what is honorable and what is not. Elsewhere
reporting remains a business, decently conducted to be sure, open in
many instances to manifestations of chivalry; but essentially keen,
sharp-edged, cutthroat competition.

Now it is of the reporter in his best and highest estate that we would
speak here--the reporter who is not only a keen and honest observer but
a happy recorder of what he sees and hears and a professional person
with ethical ideals in no respect inferior to those of any recognized
professional man on earth.

There are many things which such a reporter will not do under any
pressure of circumstance or at the beck of any promise of reward. He
will not distort the facts, he will not suppress them, he will not put
in people’s mouths words that they did not say and he will not let
the reader take their words at face value if, in the reporter’s own
knowledge, the utterance should be perceptibly discounted. No reporter
can see and hear everything and no reporter’s story can record even
everything that the observer contrived to see and hear. It must record
such things as will arouse in the reader’s mind a correct image and a
just impression.

How is this to be done? Why, there is no formula. There’s no set of
rules. There’s nothing but a purpose animating every word the man
writes, a purpose served, and only half-consciously served, by a
thousand turns of expression, a thousand choices of words. Like all
honest endeavors to effect a purpose the thing is spoiled, annulled,
made empty of result by deliberate art. Good reporters are neither
born nor made; they evolve themselves and without much help from
any outside agency, either. They can be hindered but not prevented,
helped but not hurt. You may remember a saying that God helps those
who help themselves. The common interpretation of this is that when
a man gets up and does something of his own initiative Providence
is pretty likely to play into his hands a little; not at all, that
isn’t what the proverb means. What it does mean is just this: That
those who help themselves, who really do lift themselves by their
bootstraps, are helped by God; that it isn’t they who do the lifting
but somebody bigger than themselves. Now there is no doubt whatever
that good reporters are good reporters because God makes them so. They
aren’t good reporters at three years of age; they get to be. Does this
seem discouraging? It ought to be immensely encouraging, heartening,
actually “uplifting” in the finest sense of a tormented word. For if
we believed that good reporters were born and not made there would be
no hope for any except the gifted few, endowed from the start; and if
we believed that good reporters were made and not born there would be
absolutely no excuse for any failures whatever--every one should be
potentially a good reporter and it would be simply a matter of correct
training. But if we believe that a good reporter is neither born nor
made, but makes himself with the aid of God we can be unqualifiedly
cheerful. There is hope for almost any one under such a dispensation;
moreover, if we believe in God at all and in mankind at all we must
believe that between God and mankind the supply of topnotch reporters
will never entirely fail. The two together will come pretty nearly
meeting the demand every day in the year.


9

Perhaps the reader is grumbling, in fact, we seem to hear murmurs. What
has all this about the genesis and nature of good reporters to do with
the publication of new books? Why, this: The only person who can deal
adequately and amply with 99 new books out of a hundred--the 99 that
require to be taken as they are--is the good reporter. He’s the boy
who can read the new book as he would look and listen at a political
convention, or hop around at a fire--getting the facts, getting them
straight (yes, indeed, they do get them straight) and setting them
down, swiftly and selectively, to reproduce in the mind of the public
the precise effect of the book itself. The effect--not the means by
which it was achieved, not the desirability of it having been achieved,
not the artistic quality of it, not the moral worth of it, not
anything in the way of a corollary or lesson or a deduction, however
obvious--just the effect. That’s reporting. That’s getting and giving
the news. And that’s what the public wants.

Some people seem to think there is something shameful in giving the
public what it wants. They would, one supposes, highly commend the
grocer who gave his customer something “just as good” or (according to
the grocer) “decidedly better.” But substitution, open or concealed, is
an immoral practice. Nothing can justify it, no nobility of intention
can take it out of the class of deception and cheating.

But, they cry, the public does not want what is sufficiently good, let
alone what is best for it; that is why it is wrong to give the public
what it wants. So they shift their ground and think to escape on a high
moral plateau or table land. But the table land is a tip-table land.
What they mean is that they are confidently setting their judgment of
what the public ought to want against the public’s plain decision what
it does want. They are a few dozens against many millions, yet in their
few dozen intelligences is collected more wisdom than has been the
age-long and cumulative inheritance of all the other sons of earth.
They really believe that.... Pitiable....


10

A new book is news. This might almost be set down as axiomatic and not
as a proposition needing formal demonstration by the Euclidean process.
Yet it is susceptible of such demonstration and we shall demonstrate
accordingly.

In the strict sense, anything that happens is news. Everybody remembers
the old distinction, that if a dog bites a man it is very likely not
news, but that if a man bites a dog it is news beyond all cavil. Such a
generalization is useful and fairly harmless (like the generalization
we ourselves have just indulged in and are about proving) if--a big
if--the broad exception be noted. If a dog bites John D. Rockefeller,
Jr., it is not only news but rather more important, or certainly
more interesting, news than if John Jones of Howlersville bites a
dog. For the chances are that John Jones of Howlersville is a poor
demented creature, after all. Now the dog that bites Mr. Rockefeller
is very likely a poor, demented creature, too; but the distinction
lies in this: the dog bitten by John Jones is almost certainly not as
well-known or as interesting or as important in the lives of a number
of people as Mr. Rockefeller. Pair off the cur that puts his teeth
in the Rockefeller ankle, if you like, with the wretch who puts his
teeth in an innocent canine bystander (it’s the innocent bystander who
always gets hurt); do this and you still have to match up the hound of
Howlersville with Mr. Rockefeller. And the scale of news values tips
heavily away from Howlersville and in the direction of 26 Broadway.

So it is plain that not all that happens is news compared with some
that happens. The law of specific interest, an intellectual counterpart
of the law of specific gravity in the physical world, rules in the
world of events. Any one handling news who disregards this law does so
at his extreme peril, just as any one building a ship heavier than the
water it displaces may reasonably expect to see his fine craft sink
without a trace.

Since a new book is a thing happening it is news, subject to the broad
correction we have been discussing above, namely, that in comparison
with other new books it may not be news at all, its specific interest
may be so slight as to be negligible entirely.

But if a particular new book _is_ news, if its specific interest is
moderately great, then obviously, we think, the person best fitted to
deal with it is a person trained to deal with news, namely, a reporter.
Naturally we all prefer a good reporter.


11

The question will at once be raised: How is the specific interest of a
new book to be determined? We answer: Just as the specific interest of
any kind of potential news or actual news is determined--in competition
with the other news of the day and hour. What is news one day isn’t
news another. This is a phenomenon of which the regular reader of
every daily paper is more or less consciously aware. There are some
days when “there’s no news in the paper.” There are other days when
the news in the paper is so big and so important that all the lesser
occurrences which ordinarily get themselves chronicled are crowded
out. Granting a white paper supply which does not at present exist, it
would, of course, be possible on the “big days” to record all these
lesser doings; and consistently, day in and day out, to print nicely
proportioned accounts of every event attaining to a certain fixed
level of specific interest. But the reader who may think he would
like this would speedily find out that he didn’t. Some days he would
have a twelve page newspaper and other days (not Sundays, either) he
would have one of thirty-six pages. He would be lost, or rather, his
attention would be lost in the jungle of events that all happened
within twenty-four hours, with the profuse luxuriance of tropical
vegetation shooting up skyward by inches and feet overnight. His
natural appetite for a knowledge of what his fellows were doing would
be alternately starved and overfed; malnutrition would lead to chronic
and incurable dyspepsia; soon he would become a hateful misanthrope,
shunning his fellow men and having a seizure every time Mr. Hearst
brought out the eighth edition (which is the earliest and first) of the
New York _Evening Journal_. It is really dreadful to think what havoc
a literal adhesion to the motto of the New York _Times_--“All the news
that’s fit to print”--would work in New York City.

No mortal has more than a certain amount of time daily and a certain
amount of attention (according to his mental habit and personal
interest) to bestow on the perusal of a newspaper, or news, or the
printed page of whatever kind. On Sunday he has much more, it is
likely, but still there is a limit and a perfectly finite bound.
Consequently the whole problem for the persons engaged in gathering and
preparing news for presentation to readers sums up in this: “How many
of the day’s doings attaining or exceeding a certain level of public
interest and importance, shall we set before our clients?” Easily
answered, in most cases; and the size of the paper is the index of the
answer. Question Two: “_What_ of the day’s doings shall be served up in
the determined space?”

For this question there is never an absolute or ready answer,
and there never can be. On some of the affairs to be reported all
journalists would agree; but they would differ in their estimates of
the relative worth of even these and the lengths at which they should
be treated; about lesser occurrences there would be no fixed percentage
of agreement.


12

Now the application of all this to the business of giving the news of
books should be fairly clear. A new book is news--and so, sometimes, is
an old one, rediscovered. Since a new book is news it should be dealt
with by a news reporter. Not all that happens is news; not all the new
books published are news; new books, like new events of all sorts, are
news when they compete successfully with a majority of their kind.

There is no more sense in _reporting_--that is, describing individually
at greater or less length--all the new books than there would be in
reporting every incident on the police blotters of a lively American
city. _Recording_ new books is another matter; somewhere, somehow,
most occurrences in this world get recorded in written words that
reach nearly all who are interested in the happenings (as in letters)
or are accessible to the interested few (as the police records). The
difference between the reporter and the recorder is not entirely a
difference of details given. The recorder usually follows a prescribed
formula and makes his record conform thereto; the good reporter never
has a formula and never can have one. Let us see how this works out
with the news of books.


13

The recorder of new books generally compiles a list of _Books Received_
or _Books Just Published_ and he does it in this uninspired and
conscientious manner:

  IN THE HEART OF A FOOL. By William Allen White. A story of Kansas
  in the last half-century, centered in a single town, showing its
  evolution from prairie to an industrial city with difficult economic
  and labor problems; the story told in the lives of a group of people,
  pioneers and the sons of pioneers--their work, ambitions, personal
  affairs, &c. New York: The Macmillan Company. $1.60.

That would be under the heading _Fiction_. An entry under the heading
_Literary Studies_ or _Essays_ might read:

  OUR POETS OF TO-DAY. By Howard Willard Cook. Volume II. in a series
  of books on modern American writers. Sketches of sixty-eight American
  poets, nearly all living, including Edgar Lee Masters, Amy Lowell,
  Witter Bynner, Robert Service, Edgar Guest, Charles Divine, Carl
  Sandburg, Joyce Kilmer, Sara Teasdale, George Edward Woodberry, Percy
  Mackaye, Harriet W. Monroe, &c. New York: Moffat, Yard & Co. $1.60.

These we hasten to say would be unusually full and satisfactory
records, but they would be records just the same--formal and precise
statements of events, like the chronological facts affixed to dates
in an almanac. If all records were like these there would be less
objection to them; but it is an astonishing truth that most records
are badly kept. Why, one may never fathom; since the very formality
and precision make a good record easy. Yet almost any of the principal
pages or magazines in the United States devoted to the news of new
books is likely to make a record on this order:

  IN THE HEART OF A FOOL. By William Allen White. Novel of contemporary
  American life. New York, &c.

Such a record is, of course, worse than inadequate; it is actually
misleading. Mr. White’s book happens to cover a period of fifty years.
“Contemporary American life” would characterize quite as well, or quite
as badly, a story of New York and Tuxedo by Robert W. Chambers.


14

The reporter works in entirely another manner. He is concerned to
present the facts about a new book in a way sufficiently arresting
and entertaining to engage the reader. As Mr. Holliday says with fine
perception, the true function of the describer of new books is simply
to bring a particular volume to the attention of its proper public.
To do that it is absolutely necessary to “give the book,” at least to
the extent of enabling the reader of the article to determine, with
reasonable accuracy (1) whether the book is for him, that is, addressed
to a public of which he is one, and (2) whether he wants to read it or
not.

Whether the book is good or bad is not the point. A man interested in
sociology may conceivably want to read a book on sociology even though
it is an exceedingly bad book on that subject and even though he knows
its worthlessness. He may want to profit by the author’s mistakes;
he may want to write a book to correct them; or he may merely want
to be amused at the spectacle of a fellow sociologist making a fool
of himself, a spectacle by no means rare but hardly ever without a
capacity for giving joy to the mildly malicious.

The determination of the goodness or badness of a book is not and
should not be a deliberate purpose of the good book reporter. Why?
Well, in many cases it is a task of supererogation. Take a reporter
who goes to cover a public meeting at which speeches are made. He does
not find it necessary to say that Mr. So-and-So’s speech was good.
He records what Mr. So-and-So says, or a fair sample of it; which is
enough. The reader can see for himself how good or bad it was and reach
a conclusion based on the facts as tempered by his personal beliefs,
tastes and ideas.

In the same way, it is superfluous for the book reporter to say that
Miss Such-and-Such’s book on New York is rotten. All he need do is
to set down the incredible fact that Miss Such-and-Such locates the
Woolworth building at Broadway, Fifth Avenue and Twenty-third street,
and refers to the Aquarium as the fisheries section of the Bronx Zoo.
If this should not appear a sufficient notice of the horrible nature
of the volume the reporter may very properly give the truth about
the Woolworth building and the Aquarium for the benefit of people
who have never visited New York and might be unable to detect Miss
Such-and-Such’s idiosyncrasies.

The rule holds in less tangible matters. Why should the book reporter
ask his reader to accept his dictum that the literary style of a writer
is atrocious when he can easily prove it by a few sentences or a
paragraph from the book?


15

Yet books are still in the main “reviewed,” instead of being given into
the hands of trained news reporters. Anything worse than the average
book “review” it would certainly be difficult to find in the length
and breadth of America. And England, despite the possession of some
brilliant talents, is nearly as badly off.

No one who is not qualified as a critic should attempt to criticise new
books.

There are but few critics in any generation--half a dozen or perhaps
a dozen men in any single one of the larger countries are all who
could qualify at a given time; that much seems evident. What is a
critic? A critic is a person with an education unusually wide either
in life or in letters, and preferably in both. He is a person with
huge backgrounds. He has read thousands of books and has by one
means or another abstracted the essence of thousands more. He has
perhaps travelled a good deal, though this is not essential; but he
has certainly lived with a most peculiar and exceptional intensity,
descending to greater emotional and intellectual depths than the
majority of mankind and scaling higher summits; he has, in some degree,
the faculty of living other people’s lives and sharing their human
experiences which is the faculty that, in a transcendent degree,
belongs to the novelist and storyteller. A critic knows the past and
the present so well that he is able to erect standards, or uncover old
standards, by which he can and does measure the worth of everything
that comes before him. He can actually show you, in exact and
inescapable detail, how De Morgan compares with Dickens and how Gilbert
K. Chesterton ranks with Swift and whether Thackeray learned more from
Fielding or from Daniel Defoe and he can trace the relation between a
period in the life of Joseph Conrad and certain scenes and settings in
_The Arrow of Gold_.

Such a man is a critic. Of course critics make mistakes but they are
not mistakes of ignorance, of personal unfitness for the task, of
pretension to a knowledge they haven’t. They are mistakes of judgment;
such mistakes as very eminent jurists sometimes make after years on the
bench. The jurist is reversed by the higher court and the critic is
reversed by the appellate decree of the future.

The mistakes of a real critic, like the mistakes of a real jurist,
are always made on defensible, and sometimes very sound, grounds;
they are reasoned and seasoned conclusions even if they are not the
correct conclusions. The mistakes of the 9,763 persons who assume
the critical ermine without any fitness to wear it are quite another
matter; and they are just the mistakes that would be made by a layman
sitting in the jurist’s seat. The jurist knows the precedents, the
rules of evidence, the law; he is tolerant and admits exceptions into
the record. So the critic; with the difference that the true critic
merely presides and leaves the verdict to that great jury of true and
right instincts which we call “the public.” The genuine critic is
concerned chiefly to see that the case gets before the jury cleanly.
Without presuming to tell the jury what its verdict must be--except
in extraordinary circumstances--he does instruct it what the verdict
should be on, what should be considered in arriving at it, what
principles should guide the decision.

But the near-critic (God save the mark!) has it in his mind that he
must play judge and jury too. He doesn’t like the writer’s style, or
thinks the plot is poor, or this bad or that defective. Instead of
carefully outlining the evidence on which the public might reach a
correct verdict on these points he delivers a dictum. It doesn’t go, of
course, at least for long; and it never will.

Let us be as specific as is possible in this, as specific, that is, as
a general discussion can be and remain widely applicable.

I don’t like the writer’s style. I am not a person of critical
equipment or pretensions. I am, we will say, a book reporter. I do not
declare, with a fiat and a flourish, that the style is bad; I merely
present a chunk of it. There is the evidence, and nothing else is so
competent, so relevant or so material, as the lawyers would say. I
may, in the necessity to be brief and the absence of space for an
excerpt, say that the style is adjectival, or adverbial, or diffuse,
or involved or florid or something of that sort, _if I know it to be_.
These would be statements of fact. “Bad” is a statement of opinion.

I may call the plot “weak” if it is weak (a fact) and if I know
weakness in a plot (which qualifies me to announce the fact). But if I
call the plot “poor” I am taking a good deal upon myself. Its poorness
is a matter of opinion. Some stories are spoiled by a strong plot
which dominates the reader’s interest almost to the exclusion of other
things--fine characterization, atmosphere, and so on.

And even restrictions of space can hardly excuse the lack of courtesy,
or worse, shown by the near-critic who calls the plot weak or the style
diffuse or involved, however much these may be facts, and who does not
at least briefly explain in what way the style is diffuse (or involved)
and wherein the weakness of the plot resides. But to put a finger on
the how or the where or the why requires a knowledge and an insight
that the near-critic does not possess and will not take the trouble to
acquire; so we are asking him to do the impossible. Nevertheless we can
ask him to do the possible; and that is to leave off talking or writing
on matters he knows nothing about.


16

The task of training good book reporters is not a thing to be easily
and lightly undertaken. And the first essential in the making of such
a reporter is the inculcation of a considerable humility of mind. A
near-critic can afford to think he knows it all, but a book reporter
cannot. Besides a sense of his own limitations the book reporter must
possess and develop afresh from time to time a mental attitude which
may best be summed up in this distinction: When a piece of writing
seems to him defective he must stop short and ask himself, “Is this
defect a fact or is it my personal feeling?” If it is a fact he must
establish it to his own, and then to the reader’s, satisfaction. If
it is his personal impression or feeling, merely, as he may conclude
on maturer reflection, he owes it to those who will read his article
either not to record it or to record it as a personal thing. There is
no sense in saying only the good things that can be said about a book
that has bad things in it. Such a course is dishonest. It is equally
dishonest, and infinitely more common, to pass off private opinions as
statements of fact.

When in doubt, the doubt should be resolved in favor of the author. A
good working test of fact versus personal opinion is this: If you, as a
reporter, cannot put your finger on the apparent flaw, cannot give the
how or where or why of the thing that seems wrong, it must be treated
as your personal feeling. A fact that you cannot buttress might as well
not be a fact at all--unless, of course, it is self-evident, in which
case you have only to state it or exhibit your evidence to command a
universal assent.

All that we have been saying respecting the fact or fancy of a
flaw in a piece of writing applies with equal force, naturally, to
the favorable as well as the unfavorable conclusion you, as a book
reporter, may reach. Because a story strikes you as wonderful it does
not follow that it is wonderful. You are under a moral obligation,
at least, to establish the wonder of it. The procedure for the book
reporter who has to describe favorably and for the book reporter who
has to report unfavorably is the same. First comes the question of
fact, then the citation, if possible, of evidence; and if that be
impossible the brief indication of the how, the where, the why of the
merit reported. If the meritoriousness remains a matter of personal
impression it ought so to be characterized but may warrantably be
recorded where an adverse impression would go unmentioned. The
presumption is in favor of the author. It should be kept so.


17

In all this there is nothing impossible, nothing millennial. But what
has been outlined of the work of the true book reporter is as far as
possible from what we very generally get to-day. We get unthinking
praise and unthinking condemnation; we do not expect analysis but
we have a right to expect straightaway exposition and a condensed
transliteration of the book being dealt with.

“Praise,” we have just said, and “condemnation.” That is what it is,
and there is no room in the book reporter’s task either for praise or
condemnation. He is not there to praise the book any more than a man is
at a political convention to praise a nominating speech; he is there
to describe the book, to describe the speech, to _report_ either. A
newspaperman who should begin his account of a meeting in this fashion,
“In a lamentably poor speech, showing evidences of hasty preparation,
Elihu Root,” &c., would be fired--and ought to be. No matter if a
majority of those who heard Mr. Root thought the same way about it.


18

The book reporter will be governed in his work by the precise news
value in the book he is dealing with at the moment he is dealing with
it. This needs illustration.

On November 11, 1918, an armistice was concluded in Europe, terminating
a war that had lasted over four years. In that four years books
relating to the war then being waged had sold heavily, even at times
outselling fiction. Had the war drawn to a gradual end the sales of
these war books would probably have lessened, little by little, until
they reached and maintained a fairly steady level. From this they would
doubtless have declined, as the end drew near, lower and lower, until
the foreseen end came, when the interest in them would have been as
great, but not much greater, than the normal interest in works of a
historical or biographical sort.

But the end came overnight; and suddenly the whole face of the world
was transformed. The reaction in the normal person was intense. In
an instant war books of several pronounced types became intolerable
reading. _How I Reacted to the War_, by Quintus Quintuple seemed
tremendously unimportant. Even _Mr. Britling_ was, momentarily, utterly
stale and out of date. Reminiscences of the German ex-Kaiser were
neither interesting nor important; he was a fugitive in Holland.

The book reporter who had any sense of news values grasped this
immediately. Books that a month earlier would have been worth 1,000
to 1,500 word articles were worth a few lines or no space at all.
On the other hand books which had a historical value and a place as
interesting public records, such as _Ambassador Morgenthau’s Story_,
were not diminished either in interest or in importance.

Some books which had been inconsequential were correspondingly exalted
by the unprecedented turn of affairs. These were books on such
subjects as the re-education of disabled fighters, the principles
which might underlie the formation of a league of nations, problems of
reconstruction of every sort. They had been worth, some of them, very
small articles a week earlier; now they were worth a column or two
apiece.


19

No doubt we ought to conclude this possibly tedious essay with some
observations on the one per cent. of books which call for swift
surgery. But such an enterprise is, if not impossible, extraordinarily
difficult for the reason that the same operation is never called for
twice.

In a sense it is like cutting diamonds, or splitting a large stone
into smaller stones. The problem varies each time. The cutter respects
certain principles and follows a careful technique. That is all.

We shall, for the sake of the curious, take an actual instance. In
1918 there was published a novel called _Foes_ by Mary Johnston, an
American novelist of an endowment so decided as fairly to entitle her
to the designation “a genius.”

Miss Johnston’s first novel had appeared twenty years earlier. Her
first four books--nay, her first two, the second being _To Have and to
Hold_--placed her firmly in the front rank of living romantic writers.
The thing that distinguished her romanticism was its sense of drama in
human affairs and human destiny. Added to this was a command of live,
nervous, highly poetic prose. History--romance; it did not matter. She
could set either movingly before you.

Her work showed steady progress, reaching a sustained culmination in
her two Civil War novels, _The Long Roll_ and _Cease Firing_. She
experimented a little, as in her poetic drama of the French Revolution,
_The Goddess of Reason_, and in _The Fortunes of Garin_, a tapestry
of mediæval France. _The Wanderers_ was a more decided venture, but a
perfectly successful. Then came _Foes_.

Considered purely as a romantic narrative, as a story of friendship
transformed into hatred and the pursuit of a private feud under the
guise of wreaking Divine vengeance, _Foes_ is a superb tale. Considered
as a novel, _Foes_ is a terrible failure.

Why? Is it not sufficient to write a superb tale? Yes, if you have
essayed nothing more. Is a novel anything more than “a good story,
well told”? Yes, if the writer essays to make more of it.

The novelist who has aimed at nothing beyond the “good story, well
told” has a just grievance against any one who asks anything further.
But against the novelist who has endeavored to make his story, however
good, however well told, the vehicle for a human philosophy or a
metaphysical speculation, the reader has a just grievance--if the
endeavor has been unsuccessful or if the philosophy is unsound.

Now as to the soundness or unsoundness of a particular philosophy
every reader must pronounce for himself. The metaphysical idea which
was the basis of Miss Johnston’s novel was this: All gods are one. All
deities are one. Christ, Buddha; it matters not. “There swam upon him
another great perspective. He saw Christ in light, Buddha in light.
The glorified--the unified. _Union._” Upon this idea Miss Johnston
reconciles her two foes.

This perfectly comprehensible mystical conception is the rock on which
the whole story is founded--and the rock on which it goes to pieces.
It will be seen at once that the conception is one which no Christian
can entertain and remain a Christian--nor any Buddhist, and remain
a Buddhist, either. To the vast majority of mankind, therefore, the
philosophy of _Foes_ was unsound and the novel was worthless except
for the superficial incidents and the lovely prose in which they were
recounted.

It might be thought that for those who accepted the mystical concept
Miss Johnson imposed, _Foes_ would have been a novel of the first rank.
No, indeed; and for this reason:

Her piece of mysticism was supposed to be arrived at and embraced by a
dour Scotchman of about the year of Our Lord 1750. It was supposed to
transform the whole nature of that man so as to lead him to give over
a life-long enmity in which he had looked upon himself as a Divine
instrument to punish an evil-doer.

Now however reasonable or sound or inspiring and inspiriting the
mystical idea may have seemed to any reader, he could not but be
fatally aware that, as presented, the thing was a flat impossibility.
Scotchmen of the year 1750 were Christians above all else. They were,
if you like, savage Christians; some of them were irreligious, some of
them were God-defying, none of them were Deists in the all-inclusive
sense that Miss Johnston prescribes. The idea that Christ and Buddha
might possibly be nothing but different manifestations of the Deity
is an idea which could never have occurred to the eighteenth century
Scotch mind--and never did. Least of all could it have occurred to such
a man as Miss Johnston delineates in Alexander Jardine.

The thing is therefore utterly anachronistic. It is a historical
anachronism, if you like, the history here being the history of the
human spirit in its religious aspects. Every reader of the book, no
matter how willing he may have been to accept the novelist’s underlying
idea, was aware that the endeavor to convey it had utterly failed,
was aware that Miss Johnston had simply projected _her_ idea, _her_
favorite bit of mysticism, into the mind of one of her characters, a
Scotchman living a century and a half earlier! But the thoughts that
one may think in the twentieth century while tramping the Virginia
hills are not thoughts that could have dawned in the mind of a Scottish
laird in the eighteenth century, not even though he lay in the
flowering grass of the Roman Campagna.

... And so there, in _Foes_, we have the book in a hundred which called
for something more than the intelligent and accurate work of the
book reporter. Here was a case of a good novelist, and a very, very
good one, gone utterly wrong. It was not sufficient to convey to the
prospective reader a just idea of the story and of the qualities of it.
It was necessary to cut and slash, as cleanly and as swiftly and as
economically as possible--and as dispassionately--to the root of the
trouble. For if Miss Johnston were to repeat this sort of performance
her reputation would suffer, not to speak of her royalties; readers
would be enraged or misled; young writers playing the sedulous ape
would inflict dreadful things upon us; tastes and tempers would be
spoiled; publishers would lose money;--and, much the worst of all, the
world would be deprived of the splendid work Mary Johnston could do
while she was doing the exceedingly bad work she did do.

Perhaps the most disturbing thing about the blunder in _Foes_ was the
fact that there was no necessity for it. The Christian religion, which
was the religion of Alexander Jardine, provides for reconciliation,
indeed, it exacts it. There was the way for Miss Johnston to bring her
foes together. Of course, it would not have been intellectually so
exciting. But there is such a thing as emotional appeal, and it is not
always base; there are emotions in the human so high and so lofty that
it is wiser not to try to transcend them....


The appearance of part of the foregoing in _Books and the Book World_
of _The Sun_, New York, brought a letter from Kansas which should find
a place in this volume. The letter, with the attempted answer, may as
well be given here. The writer is head of the English department in a
State college. He wrote:


20

“I hope that the mails lost for your college professors of English
subscribers their copies of _Books and the Book World_ [containing the
foregoing observations on _Book Reporting_].... College professors do
not like to be disturbed--and most of us cannot be, for that matter.
The TNT in those pages was not meant for us, perhaps, but it should
have been.

“When I read _Book Reporting_ I dictated three pages of protest, but
did not send it on--thanks to my better judgment.... Then I decided,
since you had added so much to my perturbation, to ask you to help me.

“We need it out here--literary help only, of course. This is the only
State college on what was once known as the ‘Great Plains.’ W. F.
Cody won his sobriquet on Government land which is now our campus.
Our students are the sons and daughters of pioneers who won over
grasshoppers, droughts, hot winds and one crop farms. They are so near
to real life that the teaching of literature must be as real as the
literature--rather, it ought to be. That’s where I want you to help me.

“I am not teaching literature here now as I was taught geology back in
Missouri. That’s as near as I shall tell you how I teach--it is bad
enough and you might not help me if I did. (Perhaps, in fairness to
you, I should say that for several years never less than one-third of
those to whom we gave degrees have majored in English, and always as
many as the next two departments combined.)

“Here’s what I am tired of and want to get away from:

“1. Testing students on reading a book by asking fact questions about
what is in the book--memory work, you see.

“2. Demanding of students a scholarship in the study of literature that
is so academic that it is Prussian.

“3. Demanding that students serve time in literature classes as a means
of measuring their advance in the study of literature.

“Here’s what I want you to help me with in some definite concrete way:
(Sounds like a college professor making an assignment--beg pardon.)

“1. Could you suggest a scheme of ‘book reporting’ for college students
in literature classes? (An old book to a new person is news, isn’t it?)

“2. Give me a list of books published during the last ten years that
should be included in college English laboratory classes in literature.
I want your list. I have my own, but fear it is too academic.

“3. What are some of the things which should enter into the training
of teachers of high school English? Part of our work, especially in
the summer, is to give such training to men and women who will teach
composition and literature in Kansas high schools.

“Your help will not only be appreciated, but it will be used.”


21

To answer adequately these requests would take about six months’ work
and the answers would make a slender book. And then they would exhibit
the defects inseparable from a one man response. None of which excuses
a failure to attempt to answer, though it must extenuate failures in
the attempt.

We shall try to answer, in this place, though necessarily without
completeness. If nothing better than a few suggestions is the result,
why--suggestions may be all that is really needed.

And first respecting the things our friend is tired of and wants to get
away from:

1. Fact questions about what is in the book--memory work--are not much
use if they stop with the outline of the story. What is _not_ in the
book may be more important than what is. Why did the author select this
scene for narration and omit that other, intrinsically (it seems) the
more dramatically interesting of the two? See _The Flirt_, by Booth
Tarkington, where a double murder gets only a few lines and a small
boy’s doings occupy whole chapters.

2. Scholarship is less important than wide reading, though the two
aren’t mutually exclusive. A wide acquaintance doesn’t preclude a few
profoundly intimate friendships. Textual study has spoiled Chaucer,
Shakespeare and Milton for most of us. Fifty years hence Kipling and
Masefield will be spoiled in the same way.

3. Time serving over literature is a waste of time. There are only
three ways to teach literature. The first is by directing students
to books for _voluntary_ reading--hundreds of books, thousands.
The second is by class lectures--entertaining, idea’d, anecdoted,
catholic in range and expository in character. The third is by
conversation--argumentative at times, analytic at moments, but mostly
by way of exchanging information and opinions.

Study books as you study people. Mix among them. You don’t take notes
on people unless, perchance, in a diary. Keep a diary on books you
read, if you like, but don’t “take notes.” Look for those qualities in
books that you look for in people and make your acquaintances by the
same (perhaps unformulated) rules. To read snobbishly is as bad as to
practise snobbery among your fellows.


22

We go on to the first of our friend’s requests for help. It is a scheme
for “book reporting” for college students in literature classes and he
premises that an old book to a new reader is news. Of course it is.

Let the student take up a book that’s new to him and read it by
himself, afterward writing a report of it to be read to the class. When
he comes to write his report he must keep in the forefront of his mind
this one thing:

To tell the others accurately enough about that book so that each one
of them will know whether or not _he_ wants to read it.

That is all the book reporter ever tries for. No book is intended for
everybody, but almost every book is intended for somebody. The problem
of the book reporter is to find the reader.

Comparison may help. For instance, those who enjoy Milton’s pastoral
poetry will probably enjoy the long poem in Robert Nichols’s _Ardours
and Endurances_. Those who like Thackeray will like Mary S. Watts.
Those who like Anna Katharine Green will thank you for sending them to
_The Moonstone_, by one Wilkie Collins.

Most stories depend upon suspense in the action for their main effect.
You must not “give away” the story so as to spoil it for the reader. In
a mystery story you may state the mystery and appraise the solution or
even characterize it--but you mustn’t reveal it.

Tell ’em that Mr. Hergesheimer’s _Java Head_ is an atmospheric marvel,
but will disappoint many readers who put action first. Tell ’em that
William Allen White writes (often) banally, but so saturates his novel
with his own bigheartedness that he makes you laugh and cry. Tell ’em
the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth as well as you can
make it out--and for heaven’s sake ask yourself with every assertion:
“Is this a fact or is it my personal opinion?” _And a fact, for your
purpose, will be an opinion in which a large majority of readers will
concur._


23

“Give me a list of books published during the last ten years that
should be included in college English laboratory classes in literature.
I want your list. I have my own, but fear it is too academic.”

The following list is an offhand attempt to comply with this request.
It is offered merely for the suggestions it may contain. If the ten
year restriction is rigid we ask pardon for such titles as may be a
little older than that. Strike them out.

For Kansans: Willa Sibert Cather’s novels, _O Pioneers!_ and _My
Antonia_, chronicling people and epochs of Kansas-Nebraska. William
Allen White’s _A Certain Rich Man_ and _In the Heart of a Fool_, less
for their Kansas-ness than for their Americanism and humanity.

For Middle Westerners: Meredith Nicholson’s _The Valley of Democracy_.
Zona Gale’s _Birth_. Carl Sandburg’s _Chicago Poems_. Edgar Lee
Masters’s _Spoon River Anthology_. Vachel Lindsay’s longer poems.
Mary S. Watts’s _Nathan Burke_ and _Van Cleve: His Friends and His
Family_. Lord Charnwood’s life of Lincoln. William Dean Howells’s _The
Leatherwood God_. Booth Tarkington’s _The Conquest of Canaan_ (first
published about fourteen years ago) and _The Magnificent Ambersons_.
Gene Stratton-Porter’s _A Daughter of the Land_, her _Freckles_ and her
_A Girl of the Limberlost_. One or two books by Harold Bell Wright.
_The Passing of the Frontier_, by Emerson Hough, and other books in the
Chronicles of America series published by the Yale University Press.

For Americans: Mary S. Watts’s _The Rise of Jennie Cushing_. Owen
Wister’s _The Virginian_ (if not barred under the ten year rule). Booth
Tarkington’s _The Flirt_. Novels with American settings by Gertrude
Atherton and Stewart Edward White. Mary Johnston’s _The Long Roll_
and _Cease Firing_. Willa Sibert Cather’s _The Song of the Lark_.
Edith Wharton’s _Ethan Frome_. Alice Brown’s _The Prisoner_. Ellen
Glasgow’s _The Deliverance_. Corra Harris’s _A Circuit-Rider’s Wife_.
All of O. Henry. Margaret Deland’s _The Iron Woman_. Earlier novels by
Winston Churchill. Ernest Poole’s _The Harbor_. Joseph Hergesheimer’s
_The Three Black Pennys_, his _Gold and Iron_ and his _Java Head_.
Historical books by Theodore Roosevelt. American biographies too
numerous to mention. _From Isolation to Leadership: A Review of
American Foreign Policy_ by Latané (published by the educational
department of Doubleday, Page & Company). Essays, such as those of
Agnes Repplier.

Each of these enumerations presupposes the books already named, or most
of them. Don’t treat them as pieces of literary workmanship. Many of
them aren’t. Those that have fine literary workmanship have something
else, too--and it’s the other thing, or things, that count. Fine art
in a book is like good breeding in a person, a passport, not a Magna
Charta. “Manners makyth man”--yah!


24

We are also asked:

“What are some of the things which should enter into the training of
teachers of high school English?”

We reply:

A regard for literature, not as it reflects life, but as it moulds
lives. A profound respect for an author who can find 100,000 readers, a
respect at least equal to that entertained for an author who can write
superlatively well. For instance: Get it out of your head that you can
afford to condescend toward a best seller, or to worship such a writer
as Stevenson for his sheer craftsmanship.

An instinct for what will nourish the ordinary man or woman as keen
as your perception of what will be relished by the fastidious reader.
Don’t insist that people must live on what you, or any one else,
declare to be good for them. It is not for nothing that they “don’t
know anything about literature, _but know what they like_.”

A confidence in the greater wisdom of the greatest number. Tarkington
got it right. The public wants the best it is capable of understanding;
its understanding may not be the highest understanding, but “the writer
who stoops to conquer doesn’t conquer.” Neither does the writer who
never concedes anything. The public’s standard can’t always be wrong;
the private standards can’t always be right.

Arnold Bennett says, quite rightly, that the classics are made and
kept alive by “the passionate few.” But the business of high school
teachers of English is not with the passionate few--who will look after
themselves--but with the unimpassioned many. You can lead the student
to Mr. Pope’s Pierian spring, but you cannot make him drink. Unless
you can show him, in the Missourian sense, it’s all off. If you can’t
tell what it is a girl likes in Grace S. Richmond how are you going to
show her what she’ll like in Dickens? Unless you know what it is that
“they” get out of these books they _do_ read you won’t be able to bait
the hook with the things you want them to read. Don’t you think you’ve
got a lot to learn yourself? And mightn’t you do worse than sit down
yourself and read attentively, at whatever personal cost, some of the
best sellers?

It all goes back to the size of the teacher’s share of our common
humanity. A person who can’t read a detective story for the sake of the
thrills has no business teaching high school English. A person who is a
literary snob is unfit to teach high school English. A person who can’t
sense (better yet, share) the common feeling about a popular writer and
comprehend the basis of it and sympathize a little with it and express
it more or less articulately in everyday speech is not qualified to
teach high school English.


25

A word about writing “compositions” in high school English classes.
Make ’em write stories instead. If they want to tackle thumbnail
sketches or abstracter writing--little essays--why, let ’em.
Abstractions in thought and writing are like the ocean--it’s fatally
easy to get beyond your depth, and every one else’s. Read what Sir
Arthur Quiller-Couch says about this in his _Studies in Literature_.
Once in a while a theologian urges us to “get back to the Bible.” Well,
there is one sense, at least, in which the world would do well to get
back to the Bible, or to the Old Testament, at any rate. As Gardiner
points out in his _The Bible as English Literature_, it was the
fortune or misfortune of ancient Hebrew that it had no abstractions.
Everything was stated in terms of the five senses. There was no
such word as “virtue”; you said “sweet smellingness” or “pleasant
tastingness” or something like that. And everybody knew what you meant.
Whereas “virtue” means anything from personal chastity to a general
meritoriousness that nobody can define. The Greeks introduced abstract
thinking and expression and some Germans blighted the world by their
abuse.

What should enter into the training of high school teachers of English?
Only humbleness, sanity, catholicity of viewpoint, humor, a continual
willingness to learn, a continuous faith in the people--and undying
enthusiasm. Only these--and the love of books.




LITERARY EDITORS

BY ONE OF THEM




