VIII

WRITING A NOVEL


There are at least as many ways of writing a novel as there are
novelists and doubtless there are more; for it is to be presumed that
every novelist varies somewhat in his methods of labor. The literature
on the business of novel-writing is not extensive. Some observations
and advice on the part of Mr. Arnold Bennett are, indeed, about all
the average reader encounters; we have forgotten whether they are
embedded in _The Truth About An Author_ or in that other masterpiece,
_How to Live on 2,400 Words a Day_. It may be remarked that there is
no difficulty in living on 2,400 words a day, none at all, where the
writer receives five cents a word or better.

But there we go, talking about money, a shameful subject that
has only a backstairs relation to Art. Let us ascend the
front staircase together, first. Let us enter the parlor of
Beauty-Is-Truth-Truth-Beauty, which, the poet assured us, is all
we know or need to know. Let us seat ourselves in lovely æsthetic
surroundings. If later we have to go out the back way maybe we can
accomplish it unobserved.

There are only three motives for writing a novel. The first is to
satisfy the writer’s self, the second is to please or instruct other
persons, the third is to earn money. We will consider these motives in
order.


2

The best novels are written from a blending of all three motives. But
it is doubtful if a good novel has ever been written in which the
desire to satisfy some instinct in himself was not present in the
writer’s purpose.

Just what this instinct is can’t so easily be answered. Without
doubt the greatest part of it is the instinct of paternity. Into the
physiological aspects of the subject we shall not enter, though they
are supported by a considerable body of evidence. The longing to
father--or mother--certain fictitious characters is not often to be
denied. Sometimes the story as a story, as an entity, is the beloved
child of its author. Did not Dickens father Little Nell? How, do you
suppose, Barrie has thought of himself in relation to some of his
youngsters? Any one who has read _Lore of Proserpine_ not only believes
in fairies but understands the soul of Maurice Hewlett. The relation of
the creator of a story to his persons is not necessarily parental. It
is always intensely human.

O. Henry was variously a Big Brother (before the Big Brothers had been
thought of), a father, an uncle, a friend, a distant cousin, a mere
acquaintance, a sworn enemy of his people. It has to be so. For the
writer lives among the people he creates. The cap of Fortunatus makes
him invisible to them but he is always there--not to interfere with
them nor to shape their destinies but to watch them come together or
fly apart, to hear what they say, to guess what they think (from what
they say and from the way they behave), to worry over them, applaud
them, frown; but forever as a recorder.


3

None of the author’s troubles must appear in the finished record.
Still wearing Fortunatus’s cap he is required to be as invisible to
the reader as to the people he describes. There are exceptions to this
rule. Dickens was the most notable. Many readers prefer to have a tale
told them by a narrator frankly prejudiced in favor of some of the
characters and against others. Many--but not a majority.

In the best novel that Booth Tarkington has so far written, _The
Flirt_, the dominating figure is a heartless young woman to whom the
reader continuously itches to administer prussic acid in a fatal
dose. But Mr. Tarkington does not scald Cora Madison with boiling
invective nor blister her with hot irony. He relates her doings in the
main almost dispassionately; and set forth thus nakedly they are more
damnable than any amount of sound and fury could make them appear to
be. Mr. Tarkington does not wave the prussic acid bottle, though here
and there, distilled through his narrative and perceptible more in the
things he selects to tell about than in his manner of telling them, the
reader is conscious of a faint odor of almond blossoms, signifying that
the author has uncorked the acid bottle--perhaps that his restraint in
not emptying it may be the more emphasized.

May we set things down a little at random? Then let us seize this
moment to point out to the intending novel writer some omissions in
_The Flirt_. Our pupil will, when he comes to write his novel, be
certain to think of the “strong scenes.” He will be painfully eager
to get them down. It is these scenes that will “grip” the reader and
assure his book of a sale of 100,000 copies.

Battle, murder and sudden death are generally held to be the very meat
of a strong scene. But when the drunkard Ray Vilas, Cora Madison’s
discarded lover, shoots down Valentine Corliss and then kills himself,
Mr. Tarkington does not fill pages with it. He takes scarce fifteen
lines--perhaps a little over 100 words--to tell of the double slaying.
Nor does he relate what Ray Vilas and Cora said to each other in that
last interview which immediately preceded the crime. “Probably,” says
Mr. Tarkington, “Cora told him the truth, all of it; though of course
she seldom told quite the truth about anything in which she herself was
concerned”--or words to that effect.

Where oh where is the strong scene? Ah, one man’s strength is
another’s weakness. _The Flirt_ is full of strong scenes but they are
infrequently the scenes which the intending novel writer, reviewing his
tale before setting to work, would select as the most promising.


4

Besides the instinct of paternity--or perhaps in place of it--the
novelist may feel an instinct to build something, or to paint a
beautiful picture, or mold a lovely figure. This yearning of the
artist, so-called, is sometimes denoted by the word “self-expression,”
a misnomer, if it be not a euphemism, for the longing to fatherhood.
There is just as much “self-expression” in the paternity of a boy or a
girl as in the creation of a book, a picture or a building. The child,
in any case, has innumerable other ancestors; you are not the first to
have written such a book or painted such a picture.

How about the second motive in novel-writing, the desire to please or
instruct others? The only safe generalization about it seems to be
this: A novel written exclusively from this motive will be a bad novel.
A novel is not, above everything, a didactic enterprise. Yet even
those enterprises of the human race which are in their essence purely
didactic, designed “to warn, to comfort, to command,” such as sermons
and lessons in school, seldom achieve their greatest possible effect if
instruction or improvement be the preacher’s or teacher’s unadorned and
unconcealed and only purpose.

Take a school lesson. Teachers who get the best results are invariably
found to have added some element besides bare instruction to their
work. Sometimes they have made the lesson entertaining; sometimes they
have exercised that imponderable thing we call “personal magnetism”;
sometimes they have supplied an incentive to learn that didn’t exist in
the lesson itself.

Take a sermon. If the auditor does not feel the presence in it of
something besides the mere intelligence the words convey the sermon
leaves the auditor cold.

Pure intellect is not a force in human affairs. Bach wrote music with a
very high intellectual content but the small leaven of sublime melody
is present in his work that lasts through the centuries. Shakespeare
and Beethoven employed intellect and emotionalism in the proportion
of fifty-fifty. Sir Joshua Reynolds mixed his paint “with brains,
sir”; but the significant thing is that Sir Joshua did not use only
gray matter on his palette. Those who economize on emotionalism in
one direction usually make up for it, not always consciously, in
another. Joseph Hergesheimer, writing _Java Head_, is very sparing
in the emotionalism bound up with action and decidedly lavish in the
emotionalism inseparable from sensuous coloring and “atmosphere.”

No, a novel written wholly to instruct will never do; but neither
will a novel written entirely to please, to give æsthetic or sensuous
enjoyment to the reader. Such a novel is like a portion of a fine
French sauce--with nothing to spread it on. It is honey without a crust
to dip.


5

Writing a novel purely to make money has a tainted air, thanks to
the long vogue of a false tradition. If so, _The Vicar of Wakefield_
ought to be banished from public libraries; for Goldsmith needed the
money and made no bones about saying so. The facts are, of course,
unascertainable; but we would be willing to wager, were there any way
of deciding the bet, that more novels of the first rank have been
written either solely or preponderantly to earn money than for any
other reason whatever.

It isn’t writing for the sake of the money that determines the merit of
the result; _that_ is settled by two other factors, the author’s skill
and the author’s conscience. And the word “skill” here necessarily
includes each and every endowment the writer possesses as well as such
proficiency as he may have acquired.

Suppose A. and B. both to have material for a first-rate novel. Both
are equally skilled in novel writing. Both are equally conscientious.
A. writes his novel for his own satisfaction and to please and instruct
others. He is careful and honest about it. He delights in it. B. writes
his novel purely to make a few thousand dollars. He is, naturally,
careful and honest in doing the job; and he probably takes such
pleasure in it as a man may take in doing well anything he can do well,
from laying a sewer to flying an airplane. We submit that B.’s may
easily be the better novel. It is true that B. is under a pressure that
A. does not know and that B.’s work may be affected in ways of which he
is not directly aware by the necessity to sell his finished product.
But most of the best work in the world is done under some compulsion or
other; and it is the sum of human experience that the compulsion to do
work which will find favor in the eyes of the worker’s fellows is the
healthfullest compulsion of them all. Certainly it is more healthful
than the compulsion merely to please yourself. And if B. is under a
pressure A.’s danger lies precisely in the fact that he is not under a
pressure, or under too slight a pressure. It is a tenable hypothesis
that Flaubert would have been a better novelist if he had had to make
a living by his pen. Some indirect evidence on the point may possibly
be found in the careers of certain writers whose first books were the
product of a need to buy bread and butter; and whose later books were
the product of no need at all--nor met any.

So much for motives in novel-writing. You should write (1) because you
need the money, (2) to satisfy your own instincts, and (3) to please
and, perchance, instruct other persons.

Take a week or two to get your motives in order and then, and not until
then, read what follows, which has to do with how you are presently to
proceed about the business of writing your novel.


6

It is settled that you are going to write a novel. You have examined
your motive and found it pure and worthy of you. Comes now the great
question of how to set about the business.

At this point let no one rise up and “point out” that Arnold Bennett
has told how. Arnold Bennett has told how to do everything--how to
live on twenty-four hours a day (but not how to enjoy it), how to write
books, how to acquire culture, how to be yourself and manage yourself
(in the unfortunate event that you cannot be someone else or have no
one, like a wife, to manage you), how to do everything, indeed, except
rise up and call Arnold Bennett blessed.

The trouble with Mr. Bennett’s directions is--they won’t work.

Mr. Bennett tells you to write like everything and get as much of your
novel done as possible before the Era of Discouragement sets in. Then,
no matter how great your Moment of Depression, you will be able to
stand beside the table, fondly stroking a pile of pages a foot high,
and reassure yourself, saying: “Well, but here, at least, is so much
done. No! I cannot take my hand from the plough now! No! I must Go On.
I must complete my destiny.” (One’s novel is always one’s Destiny of
the moment.)

It sounds well, but the truth is that when you strike the Writer’s
Doldrums the sight of all that completed manuscript only enrages you to
the last degree. You are embittered by the spectacle of so much effort
wasted. You feel like tearing it up or flinging it in the wastebasket.
If you are a Rudyard Kipling or an Edna Ferber, you do that thing. And
your wife or your mother carefully retrieves your _Recessional_ or
your _Dawn O’Hara_ and sends it to the publisher who brings it out,
regardless of expense, and sells a large number of copies--to the
booksellers, anyway.

Mr. Bennett also tells you how to plan the long, slow culminant
movement of your novel; how to walk in the park and compose those neat
little climaxes which should so desirably terminate each chapter; how
to---- But what’s the use? Let us illustrate with a fable.

Once an American, meeting Mr. Bennett in London, saluted him, jocularly
(he meant it jocularly) with the American Indian word of greeting:
“How?”

Mr. Bennett immediately began to tell him how and the American never
got away until George H. Doran, the publisher, who was standing near
by, exclaimed:

“That’s enough, Enoch, for a dollar volume!”

(Mr. Doran, knowing Bennett well, calls him by his first name, a
circumstance that should be pointed out to G. K. Chesterton, who would
evolve a touching paradox about the familiarity of the unfamiliar.)

That will do for Arnold. If we mention Arnold again it must distinctly
be understood that we have reference to some other Arnold--Benedict
Arnold or Matthew Arnold or Dorothy Arnold or Arnold Daly.

Well, to get back (in order to get forward), you are about beginning
your novel (nice locution, “about beginning”) and are naturally taking
all the advice you can get, if it doesn’t cost prohibitively, and this
we are about to give doesn’t.

The first thing for you to do is not, necessarily, to decide on the
subject of your novel.

It is not absolutely indispensable to select the subject of a novel
before beginning to write it. Many authors prefer to write a third
or a half of the novel before definitely committing themselves to a
particular theme. For example, take _The Roll Call_, by Arnold--it
must have been Arnold Constable, or perhaps it was Matthew. _The Roll
Call_ is a very striking illustration of the point we would make.
Somewhere along toward the end of _The Roll Call_ the author decided
that the subject of the novel should be the war and its effect on the
son of Hilda Lessways by her bigamous first husband--or, he wasn’t
exactly her husband, being a bigamist, but we will let it go at that.
Now Hilda Lessways was, or became, the wife of Edwin Clayhanger;
and George Cannon, Clayhanger’s--would you say, stepson? Hilda’s
son, anyway--George Cannon, the son of a gun--oh, pardon, the son
of Bigamist Cannon--the stepson of, or son of the wife of, Edwin
Clayhanger of the Five Towns--George Cannon.... Where were we?...
Hilda Lessways Clayhanger, the--well, wife--of Bigamist Cannon....

The relationships in this novel are very confusing, like the novel and
the subject of it, but if you can read the book you will see that it
illustrates our point perfectly.


7

Well, go ahead and write. Don’t worry about the subject. You know how
it is, a person often can’t see the forest for the trees. When you’re
writing 70,000 words or maybe a few more you can’t expect to see your
way out of ’em very easily. When you are out of the trees you can look
back and see the forest. And when you are out of the woods of words you
can glance over ’em and find out what they were all about.

However, the 80,000 words have to be written, and it is up to you,
somehow or other, to set down the 90,000 parts of speech in a row. Now
100,000 words cannot be written without taking thought. Any one who has
actually inscribed 120,000 words knows that. Any one who has written
the 150,000 words necessary to make a good-sized novel (though William
Allen White wouldn’t call _that_ good measure) understands the terrible
difficulties that confront a mortal when he sits down to enter upon the
task of authorship, the task of putting on paper the 200,000 mono- or
polysyllables that shall hold the reader breathless to the end, if only
from the difficulty of pronouncing some of them.

Where to start? For those who are not yet equipped with self-starters
we here set down a few really first-class openings for either the
spring or fall novel trade:

“Marinda was frightened. When she was frightened her eyes changed
color. They were dark now, and glittering restlessly like the sea
when the wind hauls northwest. Jack Hathaway, unfamiliar with weather
signs, took no heed of the impending squall. He laughed recklessly,
dangerously....” (Story of youth and struggle.)

“The peasant combed the lice from his beard, spat and said, grumbling:
‘Send us ploughs that we may till the soil and save Russia.... Send us
ploughs.’” (Realistic story of Russia.)

“Darkness, suave, dense, enfolding, lay over the soft loam of the
fields. The girl, moving silently across the field, felt the mystery
of the dark; the scent of the soil and the caress of the night alike
enchanted her. Hidden in the folds of her dress, clutched tightly in
her fingers, was the ribbon he had given her. With a quick indrawing
of her breath she paused, and, screened by the utter blackness that
enveloped her, pressed it to her lips....” (Story of the countryside.
Simple, trusting innocence. Lots of atmosphere. After crossing the
field the girl strikes across Haunted Heath, a description of which
fills the second chapter.)

All these are pretty safe bets, if you’re terribly hard up. Think them
over. Practice them daily for a few weeks.


8

Now that you have some idea about writing a novel it may be as well for
you to consider the consequences before proceeding to the irrevocable
act.

One of the consequences will certainly be the discovery of many
things in the completed manuscript that you never intended. This is
no frivolous allusion to the typographical errors you will find--for
a typewriter is as capable of spoonerisms as the human tongue. We
have reference to things that you did not consciously put into your
narrative.

And first let it be said that many things that seem to you unconscious
in the work of skilled writers are deliberate art (as the phrase goes).
The trouble is that the deliberation usually spoils the art. An example
must be had and we will take it in a novel by the gifted American,
Joseph Hergesheimer. Before proceeding further with this Manual for
Beginners read _Java Head_ if you can; if not, never mind.

Now in _Java Head_ the purpose of Mr. Hergesheimer was, aside from
the evocation of a beautiful bit of a vanished past, the delineation
of several persons of whom one represented the East destroyed in the
West and another the West destroyed in the East. Edward Dunsack, back
in Salem, Massachusetts, the victim of the opium habit, represented
the West destroyed in the East; the Chinese wife of Gerrit Ammidon
represented the East destroyed in the West. Mr. Hergesheimer took an
artist’s pride in the fact that the double destruction was accomplished
with what seemed to him the greatest possible economy of means; almost
the only external agency employed, he pointed out, was opium. Very
well; this is æstheticism, pure and not so simple as it looks. It is a
Pattern. It is a musical phrase or theme presented as a certain flight
of notes in the treble, repeated or echoed and inverted in the bass. It
is a curve on one side of a staircase balanced by a curve on the other.
It is a thing of symmetry and grace and it is the expression, perfect
in its way, of an idea. Kipling expressed very much the same idea when
he told us that East is East and West is West and never the twain shall
meet. Mr. Hergesheimer amplifies and extends. If the two are brought in
contact each is fatal to the other. Is that all?

It is not all, it is the mere beginning. When you examine _Java Head_
with the Pattern in mind you immediately discover that the Pattern
is carried out in bewildering detail. Everything is symmetrically
arranged. For instance, many a reader must have been puzzled and
bewildered by the heartbreaking episode at the close of the novel in
which Roger Brevard denies the delightful girl Sidsall Ammidon. The
affair bears no relation to the currents of the tale; it is just a
little eddy to one side; it is unnecessarily cruel and wounding to our
sensibilities. Why have it at all?

The answer is that in his main narrative Mr. Hergesheimer has set
before us Gerrit Ammidon, a fellow so quixotic that he marries twice
out of sheer chivalry. He has drawn for us the fantastic scroll of
such a man, a sea-shape not to be matched on shore. Well, then,
down in the corner, he must inscribe for us another contrasting,
balancing, compensating, miniatured scroll--a land-shape in the person
of Roger Brevard who is so unquixotic as to offset Gerrit Ammidon
completely. Gerrit Ammidon will marry twice for incredible reasons
and Roger Brevard will not even marry once for the most compelling
of reasons--love. The beautiful melody proclaimed by the violins is
brutally parodied by the tubas.


9

Is it all right thus? It is not all right thus and it never can be so
long as life remains the unpatterned thing we discern it to be. If
life were completely patterned it would most certainly not be worth
living. When we say that life is unpatterned we mean, of course, that
we cannot read all its patterns (we like to assume that all patterns
are there, because it comforts us to think of a fundamental Order and
Symmetry).

But so long as life is largely unpatterned, or so long as we cannot
discern all its patterns, life is eager, interesting, surprising and
altogether distracting and lovely however bewildering and distressing,
too. Different people take the unreadable differently. Some, like
Thomas Hardy, take it in defiant bitterness of spirit; some, like
Joseph Conrad, take it in profound faith and wonder. Hardy sees the
disorder that he cannot fathom; Conrad admires the design that he can
only incompletely trace. To Hardy the world is a place where--

  “As flies to wanton boys are we to the gods;
  They kill us for their sport.”

To Conrad the world is a place where men may continually make the
glorious and heartening discovery that a solidarity exists among them;
that they are united by a bond as unbreakable as it is mysterious.

And to others, as regrettably to Mr. Hergesheimer writing _Java Head_,
the world is a place where it is momentarily sufficient to trace
casual symmetries without thought of their relation to an ineluctable
whole.


10

What, then, is the novelist to do? Is it not obvious that he must not
busy himself too carefully with the business of patterning the things
he has to tell? For the moment he has traced everything out nicely and
beautifully he may know for a surety that he has cut himself off from
the larger design of Life. He has got his little corner of the Oriental
rug all mapped out with the greatest exactitude. But he has lost touch
with the bigger intricacy beyond his corner. It is a prayer rug. He had
better kneel down and pray.

Now there are novels in which no pattern at all is traced; and these
are as bad as those which minutely map a mere corner. These are
meaningless and confused stories in which nobody can discern any cause
or effect, any order or law, any symmetry or proportion or expressed
idea. These are the novels which have been justified as a “slice of
life” and which have brought into undeserved disrepute the frequently
painstaking manner of their telling. The trouble is seldom primarily,
as so many people think, with the material but with its presentation.
You may take almost any material you like and so present it as to make
it mean something; and you may also take almost any material you like
and so present it as to make it mean nothing to anybody. A heap of
bricks is meaningless; but the same bricks are intelligible expressed
as a building of whatever sort, or merely as a sidewalk with zigzags,
perhaps, of a varicolor.

The point we would make--and we might as well try to drive it home
without further ineffectual attempts at illustration--is that you must
do some patterning with your material, whether bricks for a building or
lives for a story; but if you pattern too preciously your building will
be contemptible and your story without a soul. In your building you
must not be so decided as to leave no play for another’s imagination,
contemplating the structure. In your narrative you must not be so
dogmatic about two and two adding to four as to leave no room for a
wild speculation that perhaps they came to five. For it is not the
certainty that two and two have always made four but the possibility
that some day they may make five that makes life worth living--and
guessing about on the printed page.


11

Perhaps the most serious consequence of writing a novel is the
revelation of yourself it inevitably entails.

We are not thinking, principally, of the discovery you will make of the
size of your own soul. We have in mind the laying bare of yourself to
others.

Of course you do reveal yourself to yourself when you write a book to
reveal others to others. It has been supposed that a man cannot say or
do a thing which does not expose his nature. This is nonsense; you do
not expose your nature every time you take the subway, though a trip
therein may very well be an index to your manners. The fact remains
that no man ever made a book or a play or a song or a poem, with any
command of the technique of his work, without in some measure giving
himself away. Where this is not enough of an inducement some other,
such as a tin whistle with every bound copy, is offered; no small
addition as it enables the reviewer to declare, hand on heart, that
“this story is not to be whistled down the wind.” Some have doubted
Bernard Shaw’s Irishism, which seems the queerer as nearly everything
he has written has carried a shillelagh concealed between the covers.
Recently Frank K. Reilly of Chicago gave away one-cent pieces to
advertise a book called _Penny of Top Hill Trail_. He might be said,
and in fact he hereby is said, thus to have coppered his risk in
publishing it.... All of which is likely to be mistaken for jesting.
Let us therefore jest that we may be taken with utmost seriousness.

The revelation of yourself to yourself, which the mere act of writing a
novel brings to pass, may naturally be either pleasant or unpleasant.
Very likely it is unpleasant in a majority of instances, a condition
which need not necessarily reflect upon our poor human nature. If
we did not aspire so high for ourselves we should not suffer such
awful disappointments on finding out where we actually get off. The
only moral, if there is one, lies in our ridiculous aim. Imagine the
sickening of heart with which Oscar Wilde contemplated himself after
completing _The Picture of Dorian Grey_! And imagine the lift it must
have given him to look within himself as he worked at _The Ballad of
Reading Gaol_! The circumstances of life and even the actual conduct of
a man are not necessarily here or there--or anywhere at all--in this
intimate contemplation. There is one mirror before which we never pose.
God made man in His own image. God made His own image and put it in
every man.

It is there! Nothing in life transcends the wonder of the moment when,
each for himself, we make this discovery. Then comes the struggle
to remold ourselves nearer to our heart’s desire. It succeeds or it
doesn’t; perhaps it succeeds only slightly; anyway we try for it.
The sleeper, twisting and turning, dreaming and struggling, is the
perfect likeness of ourselves in the waking hours of our whole earthly
existence. Because they have seen this some have thought life no
better than a nightmare. Voltaire suggested that the earth and all that
dwelt thereon was only the bad dream of a god on some other planet. We
would point out the bright side of this possibility: It presupposes the
existence somewhere of a mince pie so delicious and so powerful as to
evoke the likenesses of Cæsar and Samuel Gompers, giraffes, Mr. Taft,
violets, Mr. Roosevelt, Piotr Ilitch Tchaikovski, Billy Sunday, Wu-Ting
Fang, Helen of Troy and Mother Jones, groundhogs, H. G. Wells; perhaps
Bolshevism is the last writhe. Mince pie, unwisely eaten instead of
the dietetic nectar and ambrosia, may well explain the whole confused
universe. And you and I--we can create another universe, equally
exciting, by eating mince pie to-night!... You see there is a bright
side to everything, for the mince pie is undoubtedly of a heavenly
flavor.

We were saying, when sidetracked by the necessity of explaining the
universe, that the self-revelation which writing a book entails is in
most cases depressing, but not by any means always so. Boswell was not
much of a man judged by the standards of his own day or ours, either
one, yet Boswell knew himself better than he knew Dr. Johnson by the
time he had finished his life of the Doctor. It must have bucked him up
immensely to know that he was at least big enough himself to measure
a bigger man up and down, in and out, criss-cross and sideways,
setting down the complicated result without any error that the human
intelligence can detect. It must have appeased the ironical soul of
Henry Adams to realise that he was one of the very few men who had
never fooled himself about himself, and that evidence of his phenomenal
achievement in the shape of the book _The Education of Henry Adams_,
would survive him after his death--or at least, after the difficulties
of communicating with those on earth had noticeably increased (we make
this wise modification lest someone match Sir Oliver Lodge’s _Raymond,
or Life After Death_ with a volume called _Henry, or Re-Education After
Death_).

It must have sent a thrill of pleasure through the by no means
insensitive frame of Joseph Conrad when he discovered, on completing
_Nostromo_, that he had a profounder insight into the economic bases
of modern social and political affairs than nine-tenths of the
professional economists and sociologists--plus a knowledge of the
human heart that they have never dreamed worth while. For Conrad saw
clearly, and so saw simply; the “silver of the mine” of this, his
greatest story, was, it is true, an incorruptible metal, but it could
and did alter the corruptible nature of man--and would continue to do
so through generation after generation long after his Mediterranean
sailor-hero had become dust.

Even in the case of the humble and unknown writer whose completed
manuscript, after many tedious journeys, comes home to him at last,
to be re-read regretfully but with an undying belief not so much in
the work itself as in what it was meant to express and so evidently
failed to--even in his case the great consolation is the attestation
of a creed. Very bad men have died, as does the artist in Shaw’s _The
Doctor’s Dilemma_, voicing with clarity and beauty the belief in which
they think they have lived or ought to have lived; but a piece of
work is always an actual living of some part of the creed that is in
you. It may be a failure but it has, with all its faults, a gallant
quality, the quality of the deed done, which men have always admired,
and because of which they have invented those things we call words to
embody their praise.

But what of the consequences of revealing yourself to others? Writing
a novel will surely mean that you will incur them. We must speak of
them briefly; and then we may get on to the thing for which you are
doubtless waiting with terrible patience--the way to write the novel
itself. Never fear! If you will but endure steadfastly you shall Know
All.


12

“Certainly, publish everything,” commented the New York _Times_
editorially upon a proposal to give out earnings, or some other
detail, of private businesses. “All privacy is scandalous,” added the
newspaper. In this satirical utterance lies the ultimate justification
for writing a novel.

All privacy is scandalous. If you don’t believe it, read some of the
prose of James Joyce. _A Portrait of The Artist As a Young Man_ will do
for a starter. _Ulysses_ is a follow-up. H. G. Wells likes the first,
while deploring so much sewerage in the open street. You see, nothing
but a sincere conviction concerning the wickedness of leaving anything
at all unmentioned in public could justify such narratives as Mr.
Joyce’s.

In a less repulsive sense, the scandal of privacy is what underlies
any novel of what we generally call the “realistic” sort. Mr.
Dreiser, for instance, thinks it scandalous that we should not know
and publicly proclaim the true nature of such men as Hurstwood in
his _Sister Carrie_. Mr. Hardy thinks it scandalous that the world
should not publicly acknowledge the purity of Tess Durbeyfield and
therefore he gives us a book in which she is, as the subtitle says,
“faithfully presented.” Gene Stratton-Porter thinks it scandalous not
to tell the truth about such a boy as Freckles. The much-experienced
Mr. Tarkington, stirred to his marrow by what seems almost a world
conspiracy to condone the insufferable conceit of the George Amberson
Minafers among us, writes _The Magnificent Ambersons_ to make us
confess how we hate ’em--and how our instinctive faith in them is
vindicated at last.

Every novelist who gains a public of any size or permanence
deliberately, and even joyfully, faces the consequences of the
revelation of himself to some thousands of his fellow-creatures.
We don’t mean that he always delineates himself in the person of a
character, or several characters, in his stories. He may do that, of
course, but the self-exposure is generally much more merciless. The
novelist can withhold from the character which, more or less, stands
for himself his baser qualities. What he cannot withhold from the
reader is his own mind’s limitations.

A novel is bounded by the author’s horizons. If a man can see only so
far and only so deep his book will show it. If he cannot look abroad,
but can perceive nothing beyond the nose on his face, that fact will be
fully apparent to his co-spectators who turn the pages of his story. If
he can see only certain colors those who look on with him will be aware
of his defect. Above all, if he can see persons as all bad or all good,
all black or all white, he will be hanged in effigy along with the
puppets he has put on paper.

This is the reason why every one should write a novel. There is only
one thing comparable with it as a means of self-immolation. That, of
course, is tenure of public office. And as there are not nearly enough
public offices to serve the need of individual discipline, novelizing
should be encouraged, fomented--we had almost said, made compulsory.
Compulsion, however, defeats its own ends. Let us elect to public
offices, as we would choose to fill scholarships, those who cannot,
through some misfortune, write novels; and let us induce all the other
people in the world that we can to put pen to paper--not that they may
enrich the world with immortal stories, not that they may make money,
become famous or come to know themselves, but solely that we may know
them for what they are.

If Albert Burleson had been induced to write a novel would we have
made him a Congressman and would President Wilson have made him
Postmaster-General? If William, sometime of Germany, had written
a novel would the Germans have acquiesced in his theory of Divine
Right? Georges Clemenceau wrote novels and was chosen of the people to
lead them. Hall Caine and Marie Corelli and Rider Haggard and Arnold
Bennett have written novels which enable us to gauge them pretty
accurately--and not one of them has yet been invited to help run the
League of Nations. The reason is simple: We know them too well.

All privacy is scandalous. Thomas Dixon says: “It is positively
immoral that the world should run on without knowing the depths to
which I can sink. I must write _The Way of a Man_ and make the world
properly contemptuous of me.” Zona Gale reflects to herself: “After
all, with nothing but these few romances and these _Friendship Village_
stories, people have no true insight into my real tastes, affinities,
predilections, qualities of mind. I will write about a fruit and
pickle salesman, an ineffectual sort of person who becomes, almost
involuntarily, a paperhanger. That will give them the idea of me they
lack.”

William Allen White, without consciously thinking anything of the
kind, is dimly aware that people generally have a right to know him as
a big-hearted man who makes some mistakes but whose sympathy is with
the individual man and woman and whose passion is for social progress.
The best way to make people generally acquainted with William Allen
White is to write a novel--say, _In The Heart of a Fool_, which they
will read.... The best way to get to know anybody is to get him to
talking about somebody else. Talk about one’s self is a little too
self-conscious.

And there you have it! It is exactly because such a writer as H. G.
Wells is in reality pretty nearly always talking about himself that
we find it so difficult to appraise him rightly on the basis of his
novels. Self-consciousness is never absent from a Wells book. It is
this acute self-consciousness that makes so much of Henry James
valueless to the great majority of readers. They cannot get past it, or
behind it. The great test fails. Mr. James is dead, and the only way
left to get at the truth of Mr. Wells will be to make him Chancellor
of the Exchequer or, in a socialized British republic, Secretary of
Un-War....

Dare to be a Daniel Carson Goodman. Write That Novel. Don’t
procrastinate, don’t temporize. Do It Now, reserving all rights of
translation of words into action in all countries, including the
Scandinavian. Full detailed instructions as to the actual writing
follow.


13

You may not have noticed it, but even so successful a novelist as
Robert W. Chambers is careful to respect the three unities that
Aristotle (wasn’t it?) prescribed and the Greeks took always into
account. Not in a single one of his fifty novels does the popular Mr.
Chambers disregard the three Greek unities. Invariably he looks out for
the time, the place and the girl.

If Aristotle recommended it and Robert W. Chambers sticks to it,
perhaps you, about to write your first novel, had better attend to it
also.

Now, to work! About a title. Better have one, even if it’s only
provisional, before you begin to write. If you can, get the real,
right title at the outset. Sometimes having it will help you
through--not to speak of such cases as Eleanor Hallowell Abbott’s. The
author of _Molly Make-Believe_, _The Sick-a-Bed Lady_ and _Old-Dad_
gets her real, right title and then the story mushrooms out of it,
like a house afire. Ourselves, we are personally the same. We have
three corking titles for as many novels. One is written. The other two
we haven’t to worry about. They have only to live up to their titles,
which may be difficult for them but will make it easy for ourselves.
We have a Standard. Everything that lives up to the promise of our
superlative title goes in, everything that is alien to it or unworthy
of it, stays out. This, we may add parenthetically, was the original
motive in instituting titles of nobility. A man was made a Baron. Very
well, it was expected that he would conform his character and conduct
accordingly. Things suitable to a Baron he would thenceforth be and do,
things unbefitting his new, exalted station he would kindly omit.... It
works better with books than with people, so cheer up. Your novel will
come out more satisfactorily than you think.

Which brings us to the matter of the ending. Should it be happy or
otherwise? More words have been wasted on this subject than on any
other aspect of fictioneering. You must understand from the very first
that you, personally, have nothing whatever to say about the ending
of your story. That will be decided by the people of your tale and the
events among which they live. In other words, the preponderant force in
determining the ending is--inevitability.

Most people misunderstand inevitability. Others merely worry about it,
as if it were to-morrow’s weather. Shall we take an umbrella, they ask
anxiously, lest it rain inevitably? Or will the inevitable come off
hot, so that an overcoat will be a nuisance? Nobody knows, not even
the weather forecaster in Washington. If there were a corresponding
official whose duty it would be to forecast with equal inaccuracy the
endings of novels life would go on much the same. Readers would still
worry about the last page because they would know that the official
prediction would be wrong at least half the time. If the Ending
Forecaster prophesied: “Lovers meet happily on page 378; villain
probably killed in train accident” we would go drearily forward
confident that page 378 would disclose the heroine, under a lowering
sky, clasped in the villain’s arms while the hero lay prone under a
stalled Rolls-Royce, trying to find out why the carburetor didn’t
carburete.

Inevitability is not the same as heredity. Heredity can be rigorously
controlled--novelists are the real eugenists--but inevitability is
like natural selection or the origin of species or mutations or O.
Henry: It is the unexpected that happens. Environment has little in
common with inevitability. In the pages of any competent novelist the
girl in the slums will sooner or later disclose her possession of the
most unlikely traits. Her bravery, her innocence will become even more
manifest than her beauty. The young feller from Fifth avenue, whose
earliest environment included orange spoons and Etruscan pottery, will
turn out to be a lowdown brute. Environment is what we want it to be,
inevitability is what we are.

You think, of course, that you can pre-determine the outcome of
this story you are going to write. Yes, you can! You can no more
pre-determine the ending than you can pre-determine the girl your son
will marry. It’s exactly like that. For you must come face to face,
before you have written 50 pages of your book, with an appalling and
inspiring Fact. You might as well face it here.


14

The position of the novelist engaged in writing a novel can only be
indicated by a shocking exaggeration which is this: He is not much
better than a medium in a trance.

Now of course such a statement calls for the most exact explanation.
Nobody can give it. Such a statement calls for indisputable evidence.
None exists. Such a statement, unexplained and unsupported by
testimony, is a gross and unscientific assumption not even worthy to
be damned by being called a hypothesis. You said it. Nevertheless, the
thing’s so.

We, personally, having written a novel--or maybe two--know what we
are talking about. The immense and permanent curiosity of people all
over the planet who read books at all fixes itself upon the question,
in respect of the novelist: “_How_ does he write?” As Mary S. Watts
remarks, that is the one thing no novelist can tell you. He doesn’t
know himself. But though it is the one thing the novelist can’t tell
you it is not one of those things that, in the words of Artemus Ward,
no feller kin find out. Any one can find out by writing a novel.

And to write one you need little beyond a few personalities firmly in
mind, a typewriter and lots of white paper. An outline is superfluous
and sometimes harmful. Put a sheet of paper in the machine and write
the title, in capital letters. Below, write: “By Theophrastus Such,” or
whatever you happen unfortunately to be called or elect, in bad taste,
to call yourself. Begin.

You will have the first few pages, the opening scene, possibly the
first chapter, fairly in mind; you may have mental notes on one or two
things your people will say. Beyond that you have only the haziest
idea of what it will all be about. Write.

As you write it will come to you. Somehow. What do you care how? Let
the psychologists stew over that.

They, in all probability, will figure out that the story has already
completely formed itself, in all its essentials and in many details,
in your subconscious mind, the lowermost cellar of your uninteresting
personality where moth and rust do not corrupt, whatever harm they
may do higher up, and where the cobwebs lie even more thickly than in
your alleged brain. As you write, and as the result of the mere act
of writing, the story, lying dormant in your subcellar, slowly shakes
a leg, quivers, stretches, extends itself to its full length, yawns,
rises with sundry anatomical contortions and advancing crosses the
threshold of your subconsciousness into the well-dusted and cleaned
basement of your consciousness whence it is but a step to full daylight
and the shadow of printed black characters upon a to-and-fro travelling
page.

In other words, you are an automaton; and to be an automaton in this
world of exuberant originality is a blissful thing.

Your brain is not engaged at all. This is why writing fiction actually
rests the brain. It is why those who are suffering from brain-fag
find recreation and enjoyment, health and mental strength in writing
a short story or a novel. The short story is a two weeks’ vacation
for the tired mind. Writing a novel is a month, with full pay. It is
true that readers are rather prone to resent the widespread habit of
novelists recuperating and recovering their mental faculties at their
readers’ expense. This resentment is without any justification in fact,
since for every novelist who recovers from brain-fag by writing a work
of fiction there are thousands of readers who restore their exhausted
intellects with a complete rest by reading the aforesaid work of
fiction.

Of course the subconscious cellar theory of novel-writing is not final
and authoritative. There is at least one other tenable explanation of
how novels are written, and we proceed to give it.

This is that the story is projected through the personality of the
writer who is, in all respects, no more than a mechanism and whose rôle
may be accurately compared to that of a telephone transmitter in a talk
over the wire.

This theory has the important virtue of explaining convincingly all the
worst novels, as well as all the best. For a telephone transmitter is
not responsible for what is spoken into it or for what it transmits.
It is not to blame for some very silly conversations. It has no merit
because it forwards some very wise words. Similarly, if the novelist is
merely a transmitter, a peculiarly delicate and sensitive medium for
conveying what is said and done somewhere else, perhaps on some other
plane by some other variety of mortals, the novelist is in no wise to
blame for the performances or utterances of his characters, or clients
as they ought, in this view, to be called; the same novelist might, and
probably would, be the means of transmitting the news of splendid deeds
and the superb utterances of glorious people, composing one story, and
the inanities, verbal or otherwise, of a lot of fourth dimensional
Greenwich Villagers, constituting another and infinitely inferior
story.... To be sure this explanation, which relieves the novelist
of almost all responsibility for his novels, ought also to take from
him all the credit for good work. If he is a painfully conscientious
mortal he may grieve for years over this; but if his first or his
second or his third book sells 100,000 copies he will probably be
willing, in the words of the poet, to take the cash and let the credit
go. Very greedy men invariably insist on not merely taking the cash
but claiming the credit as well; saintly men clutch at the credit and
instruct their publishers that all author’s royalties are to be made
over to the Fund for Heating the Igloos of Aged and Helpless Eskimos.
But the funny thing about the whole business is that the world, which
habitually withholds credit where credit is due, at other times insists
on bestowing credit anyway. There have been whole human philosophies
based upon the principle of Renunciation and even whole novels, such
as those of Henry James. But it doesn’t work. Renounce, if you like,
all credit for the books which bear your name on the title-page. The
world will weave its laurel wreath and crown you with bays just the
same. Men have become baldheaded in a single night in the effort to
avoid unmerited honor and by noon the next day have looked as if they
were bacchantes or at least hardy perennials, so thick have been the
vine leaves in their hair, or rather on the site of it.... Which takes
us away from our subject. Where were we? Oh, yes, about writing your
novel....

As soon as you have done two or three days’ stint on the book--you
ought to plan to write so many words a day or a week, and it’s no
matter that you don’t know what they will be--as soon as you’ve got
a fairish start you will find that you have several persons in your
story who are, to all intents and purposes, as much alive as yourself
and considerably more self-willed. They will promptly take the story
in their hands and you will have nothing to do in the remaining 50,000
words or more but to set down what happens. The extreme physical
fatigue consequent upon writing so many words is all you have to
guard against. Play golf or tennis, if you can, so as to offset this
physical fatigue by the physical rest and intellectual exercise they
respectively afford. Auction bridge in the evenings, or, as Frank M.
O’Brien says, reading De Morgan and listening to the phonograph, will
give you the emotional outlet you seek.


15

No doubt many who have read the foregoing will turn up their noses at
the well-meant advice it contains, considering that we have largely
jested on a serious subject. We take this occasion to declare most
earnestly, at the conclusion of our remarks, that we have seldom been
so serious in our life. Such occasional levities as we have allowed
ourselves to indulge in have been plain and obvious, and of no more
importance in the general scheme of what we have been discussing than
the story of the Irishman with which the gifted after-dinner speaker
circumspectly introduces his most burning thoughts.

We mean what we have said. Writing a novel is one of the most rounded
forms of self-education. It is one of the most honorable too, since,
unlike the holder of public office, the person who is getting the
education does not do so at the public expense. We have regard,
naturally, to the mere act of _writing_ the novel. If afterward it
finds a publisher and less probably a public--that has nothing to
do with the author, whose self-culture, intensive, satisfying and
wholesome, has been completed before that time.

Whether a novelist deserves any credit for the novel he writes is a
question, but he will get the credit for it anyway and nothing matters
where so wonderful an experience is to be gained. Next to being
hypnotized, there is nothing like it; and it has the great advantage
that you know what you are doing whereas the hypnotic subject does
not. No preparation is necessary or even desirable since, even in
so specific a detail as the outline of the story the people of your
narrative take things entirely in their own hands and reduce the
outline to the now well-known status of a scrap of paper.... We talk of
“advice” in writing a novel. The best advice is not to take any.


THE END




TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES:


  Italicized text is surrounded by underscores: _italics_.

  Obvious typographical errors have been corrected.

  Inconsistencies in hyphenation have been standardized.

