NOTES ON LEIGHTON. [1]

Surely if ever work not in the sacred Canon might suggest a belief of
inspiration,--of something more than human,--this it is. When Mr. Elwyn
made this assertion, I took it as the hyperbole of affection: but now I
subscribe to it seriously, and bless the hour that introduced me to the
knowledge of the evangelical, apostolical Archbishop Leighton.

April 1814.


Next to the inspired Scriptures--yea, and as the vibration of that once
struck hour remaining on the air, stands Leighton's Commentary on the
1st Epistle of St. Peter.


Comment Vol. I. p. 2.

 --their redemption and salvation by Christ Jesus; that inheritance of
  immortality bought by his blood for them, and the evidence and
  stability of their right and title to it.

By the blood of Christ I mean this. I contemplate the Christ,

1;--As 'Christus agens', the Jehovah Christ, the Word:

2;--As 'Christus patiens', The God Incarnate.

In the former he is 'relative ad intellectum humanum, lux lucifica, sol
intelligibilis: relative ad existentiam humanam, anima animans, calor
fovens'. In the latter he is 'vita vivificans, principium spiritualis,
id est, veræ reproductionis in vitam veram'. Now this principle, or 'vis
vitæ vitam vivificans', considered in 'forma passiva, assimilationem
patiens', at the same time that it excites the soul to the vital act of
assimilating--this is the Blood of Christ, really present through faith
to, and actually partaken by, the faithful. Of this the body is the
continual product, that is, a good life-the merits of Christ acting on
the soul, redemptive.


Ib. pp. 13-15.

  Of their sanctification: 'elect unto obedience', &c.

That the doctrines asserted in this and the two or three following pages
cannot be denied or explained away, without removing (as the modern
Unitarians), or (as the Arminians) unsettling and undermining, the
foundations of the Faith, I am fully convinced; and equally so, that
nothing is gained by the change, the very same logical consequences
being deducible from the tenets of the Church Arminians;--scarcely more
so, indeed, from those which they still hold in common with Luther,
Zuinglius, Calvin, Knox, and Cranmer and the other Fathers of the
Reformation in England, and which are therefore most unfairly entitled
Calvinism--than from those which they have attempted to substitute in
their place. Nay, the shock given to the moral sense by these
consequences is, to my feelings, aggravated in the Arminian doctrine by
the thin yet dishonest disguise. Meantime the consequences appear to me,
in point of logic, legitimately concluded from the terms of the
premisses. What shall we say then? Where lies the fault? In the original
doctrines expressed in the premisses? God forbid. In the particular
deductions, logically considered? But these we have found legitimate.
Where then? I answer in deducing any consequences by such a process, and
according to such rules. The rules are alien and inapplicable; the
process presumptuous, yea, preposterous. The error, [Greek: to prôton
pseudos], lies in the false assumption of a logical deducibility at all,
in this instance.

First:--because the terms from which the conclusion must be
drawn-('termini in majore præmissi, a quibus scientialiter et
scientifice demonstrandum erat') are accommodations and not
scientific--that is, proper and adequate, not 'per idem', but 'per quam
maxime simile', or rather 'quam maxime dissimile':

Secondly;--because the truths in question are transcendant, and have
their evidence, if any, in the ideas themselves, and for the reason; and
do not and cannot derive it from the conceptions of the understanding,
which cannot comprehend the truths, but is to be comprehended in and by
them, ('John' i. 5.):

Lastly, and chiefly;--because these truths, as they do not originate in
the intellective faculty of man, so neither are they addressed primarily
to our intellect; but are substantiated for us by their correspondence
to the wants, cravings, and interests of the moral being, for which they
were given, and without which they would be devoid of all meaning,--'vox
et præterea nihil'. The only conclusions, therefore, that can be drawn
from them, must be such as are implied in the origin and purpose of
their revelation; and the legitimacy of all conclusions must be tried by
their consistency with those moral interests, those spiritual
necessities, which are the proper final cause of the truths and of our
faith therein. For some of the faithful these truths have, I doubt not,
an evidence of reason; but for the whole household of faith their
certainty is in their working. Now it is this, by which, in all cases,
we know and determine existence in the first instance. That which works
in us or on us exists for us. The shapes and forms that follow the
working as its results or products, whether the shapes cognizable by
sense or the forms distinguished by the intellect, are after all but the
particularizations of this working; its proper names, as it were, as
John, James, Peter, in respect of human nature. They are all derived
from the relations in which finite beings stand to each other; and are
therefore heterogeneous and, except by accommodation, devoid of meaning
and purpose when applied to the working in and by which God makes his
existence known to us, and (we may presume to say) especially exists for
the soul in whom he thus works. On these grounds, therefore, I hold the
doctrines of original sin, the redemption therefrom by the Cross of
Christ, and change of heart as the consequent; without adopting the
additions to the doctrines inferred by one set of divines, the modern
Calvinists, or acknowledging the consequences burdened on the doctrines
by their antagonists. Nor is this my faith fairly liable to any
inconvenience, if only it be remembered that it is a spiritual working,
of which I speak, and a spiritual knowledge,--not through the 'medium'
of image, the seeking after which is superstition; nor yet by any
sensation, the watching for which is enthusiasm, and the conceit of its
presence fanatical distemperature. "Do the will of the Father, and ye
shall 'know' it."

We must distinguish the life and the soul; though there is a certain
sense in which the life may be called the soul; that is, the life is the
soul of the body. But the soul is the life of the man, and Christ is the
life of the soul. Now the spirit of man, the spirit subsistent, is
deeper than both, not only deeper than the body and its life, but deeper
than the soul; and the Spirit descendent and supersistent is higher than
both. In the regenerated man the height and the depth become one--the
Spirit communeth with the spirit--and the soul is the 'inter-ens', or
'ens inter-medium' between the life and the spirit;--the 'participium',
not as a compound, however, but as a 'medium indifferens'--in the same
sense in which heat may be designated as the indifference between light
and gravity. And what is the Reason?--The spirit in its presence to the
understanding abstractedly from its presence in the will,--nay, in many,
during the negation of the latter. The spirit present to man, but not
appropriated by him, is the reason of man:--the reason in the process of
its identification with the will is the spirit.


Ib. pp. 63-4.

  Can we deny that it is unbelief of those things that causeth this
  neglect and forgetting of them? The discourse, the tongue of men and
  angels cannot beget divine belief of the happiness to come; only He
  that gives it, gives faith likewise to apprehend it, and lay hold upon
  it, and upon our believing to be filled with joy in the hopes of it.


Most true, most true!


Ib. p. 68.

  In spiritual trials that are the sharpest and most fiery of all, when
  the furnace is within a man, when God doth not only shut up his
  loving-kindness from its feeling, but seems to shut it up in hot
  displeasure, when he writes bitter things against it; yet then to
  depend upon him, and wait for his salvation, this is not only a true,
  but a strong and very refined faith indeed, and the more he smites,
  the more to cleave to him. * * * Though I saw, as it were, his hand
  lifted up to destroy me, yet from that same hand would I expect
  salvation.

Bless God, O my soul, for this sweet and strong comforter! It is the
honey in the lion.


Ib. p. 75.

  This natural men may discourse of, and that very knowingly, and give a
  kind of natural credit to it as to a history that may be true; but
  firmly to believe that there is divine truth in all these things, and
  to have a persuasion of it stronger than of the very things we see
  with our eyes; such an assent as this is the peculiar work of the
  Spirit of God, and is certainly saving faith.

'Lord I believe: help thou my unbelief!' My reason acquiesces, and I
believe enough to fear. O, grant me the belief that brings sweet hope!


Ib. p. 76.

  Faith * * causes the soul to find all that is spoken of him in the
  word, and his beauty there represented, to be abundantly true, makes
  it really taste of his sweetness, and by that possesses the heart more
  strongly with his love, persuading it of the truth of those things,
  not by reasons and arguments, but by an inexpressible kind of
  evidence, that they only know that have it.

Either this is true, or religion is not religion; that is, it adds
nothing to our human reason; 'non religat'. Grant it, grant it me, O
Lord!


Ib. pp. 104-5.

  This sweet stream of their doctrine did, as the rivers, make its own
  banks fertile and pleasant as it ran by, and flowed still forward to
  after ages, and by the confluence of more such prophecies grew greater
  as it went, till it fell in with the main current of the Gospel in the
  New Testament, both acted and preached by the great Prophet himself,
  whom they foretold to come, and recorded by his Apostles and
  Evangelists, and thus united into one river, clear as crystal. This
  doctrine of salvation in the Scriptures hath still refreshed the city
  of God, his Church under the Gospel, and still shall do so, till it
  empty itself into the ocean of eternity.

In the whole course of my studies I do not remember to have read so
beautiful an allegory as this; so various and detailed, and yet so just
and natural.


Ib. p. 121.

  There is a truth in it, that all sin arises from some kind of
  ignorance * * *. For were the true visage of sin seen at a full light,
  undressed and unpainted, it were impossible, while it so appeared,
  that any one soul could be in love with it, but would rather flee from
  it as hideous and abominable.

This is the only (defect, shall I say? No, but the only) omission I have
felt in this divine Writer--for him we understand by feeling,
experimentally--that he doth not notice the horrible tyranny of habit.
What the Archbishop says, is most true of beginners in sin; but this is
the foretaste of hell, to see and loathe the deformity of the wedded
vice, and yet still to embrace and nourish it.


Ib. p. 122.

  He calls those times wherein Christ was unknown to them, 'the times of
  their ignorance'. Though the stars shine never so bright, and the moon
  with them in its full, yet they do not, altogether, make it day: still
  it is night till the sun appear.

How beautiful, and yet how simple, and as it were unconscious of its own
beauty!


Ib. p. 124.

  You were running to destruction in the way of sin, and there was a
  voice, together with the Gospel preaching to your ear, that spake into
  your heart, and called you back from that path of death to the way of
  holiness, which is the only way of life. He hath severed you from the
  mass of the profane world, and picked you out to be jewels for
  himself.

O, how divine! Surely, nothing less than the Spirit of Christ could have
inspired such thoughts in such language. Other divines,--Donne and
Jeremy Taylor for instance,--have converted their worldly gifts, and
applied them to holy ends; but here the gifts themselves seem unearthly.


Ib. p. 138.

  As in religion, so in the course and practice of men's lives, the
  stream of sin runs from one age to another, and every age makes it
  greater, adding somewhat to what it receives, as rivers grow in their
  course by the accession of brooks that fall into them; and every man
  when he is born, falls like a drop into this main current of
  corruption, and so is carried down it, and this by reason of its
  strength, and his own nature, which willingly dissolves into it, and
  runs along with it.

In this single period we have religion, the spirit,--philosophy, the
soul,--and poetry, the body and drapery united;--Plato glorified by St.
Paul; and yet coming as unostentatiously as any speech from an innocent
girl of fifteen.


Ib. p. 158.

  The chief point of obedience is believing; the proper obedience to
  truth is to give credit to it.

This is not quite so perspicuous and single-sensed as Archbishop
Leighton's sentences in general are. This effect is occasioned by the
omission of the word "this," or "divine," or the truth "in Christ." For
truth in the ordinary and scientific sense is received by a spontaneous,
rather than chosen by a voluntary, act; and the apprehension of the same
(belief) supposes a position of congruity rather than an act of
obedience. Far otherwise is it with the truth that is the object of
Christian faith: and it is this truth of which Leighton is speaking.
Belief indeed is a living part of this faith; but only as long as it is
a living part. In other words, belief is implied in faith; but faith is
not necessarily implied in belief. 'The devils believe.'


Ib. p. 166.

  Hence learn that true conversion is not so slight a work as we
  commonly account it. It is not the outward change of some bad customs,
  which gains the name of a reformed man in the ordinary dialect; it is
  new birth and being, and elsewhere called 'a new creation. Though it
  be but a change in qualities', yet it is such a one, and the qualities
  so far distant from what they before were, &c.

I dare not affirm that this is erroneously said; but it is one of the
comparatively few passages that are of service as reminding me that it
is not the Scripture that I am reading. Not the qualities merely, but
the root of the qualities is trans-created. How else could it be a
birth,--a creation?


Ib. p. 170.

  This natural life is compared, even by natural men, to the vainest
  things, and scarce find they things light enough to express it vain;
  and as it is here called grass, so they compare the generations of men
  to the leaves of trees. * * * 'Man that is born of a woman is of few
  days, and full of trouble. He cometh forth like a flower and is cut
  down. Job' xiv. 1, 2. Psalm xc. 12; xxxix. 4.

It is the fashion to decry scholastic distinctions as useless
subtleties, or mere phantoms--'entia logica, vel etiam verbalia solum'.
And yet in order to secure a safe and Christian interpretation to these
and numerous other passages of like phrase and import in the Old
Testament, it is of highest concernment that we should distinguish the
personeity or spirit, as the source and principle of personality, from
the person itself as the particular product at any one period, and as
that which cannot be evolved or sustained but by the co-agency of the
system and circumstances in which the individuals are placed. In this
latter sense it is that 'man' is used in the Psalms, in Job, and
elsewhere--and the term made synonymous with flesh. That which
constitutes the spirit in man, both for others and itself, is the real
man; and to this the elements and elementary powers contribute its bulk
([Greek: tò] 'videri et tangi') wholly, and its phenomenal form in part,
both as co-efficients, and as conditions. Now as these are under a law
of vanity and incessant change,--[Greek: tà màe ónta, all' aèi
ginómena],--so must all be, to the production and continuance of which
they are indispensable. On this hangs the doctrine of the resurrection
of the body, as an essential part of the doctrine of immortality;--on
this the Scriptural (and only true and philosophical) sense of the soul,
'psyche' or life, as resulting from the continual assurgency of the
spirit through the body;--and on this the begetting of a new life, a
regenerate soul, by the descent of the divine Spirit on the spirit of
man. When the spirit by sanctification is fitted for an incorruptible
body, then shall it be raised into a world of incorruption, and a
celestial body shall burgeon forth thereto, the germ of which had been
implanted by the redeeming and creative Word in this world. Truly hath
it been said of the elect:--They fall asleep in earth, but awake in
heaven. So St. Paul expressly teaches: and as the passage (1. 'Cor'. xv.
35--54,) was written for the express purpose of rectifying the notions
of the converts concerning the Resurrection, all other passages in the
New Testament must be interpreted in harmony with it. But John,
likewise,--describing the same great event, as subsequent to, and
contra-distinguished from, the partial or millennary Resurrection--which
(whether we are to understand the Apostle symbolically or literally) is
to take place in the present world,--beholds 'a new earth' and 'a new
heaven' as antecedent to, or coincident with, the appearance of the New
Jerusalem,--that is, the state of glory, and the resurrection to life
everlasting. The old earth and its heaven had passed away from the face
of Him on the throne, at the moment that it gave up the dead. 'Rev'.
xx.-xxi.


Ib. pp. 174-5.

  'But the word of the Lord endureth for ever.'

  And with respect to those learned men that apply the text to God, I
  remember not that this 'abiding for ever' is used to express God's
  eternity in himself.

No; nor is it here used for that purpose; but yet I cannot doubt but
that either the Word, [Greek: Ho Lógos en archae], or the Divine
promises in and through the incarnate Word, with the gracious influences
proceeding from him, are here meant--and not the written [Greek:
rháemata] or Scriptures.


Ib. p. 194.

  If any one's head or tongue should grow apace, and all the rest stand
  at a stay, it would certainly make him a monster; and they are no
  other that are knowing and discovering Christians, and grow daily in
  that, but not at all in holiness of heart and life, which is the
  proper growth of the children of God.

Father in heaven, have mercy on me! Christ, Lamb of God, have mercy on
me! Save me, Lord, or I perish! Alas! I am perishing.


Ib. p. 200.

  A well-furnished table may please a man, while he hath health and
  appetite; but offer it to him in the height of a fever, how unpleasant
  it would be then! Though never so richly decked, it is then not only
  useless, but hateful to him. But the kindness and love of God is then
  as seasonable and refreshing to him, as in health, and possibly more.

To the regenerate;--but to the conscious sinner a source of terrors
insupportable.


Ib. p. 211.

  These things hold likewise in the other stones of this building,
  chosen before time: all that should be of this building are
  fore-ordained in God's purpose, all written in that book beforehand,
  and then in due time they are chosen, by actual calling, according to
  that purpose, hewed out and severed by God's own hand from the quarry
  of corrupt nature;--dead stones in themselves, as the rest, but made
  living by his bringing them to Christ, and so made truly precious',
  and accounted precious by him that hath made them so.

Though this is not only true, but a most important truth, it would yet
have been well to have obviated the apparent carnal consequences.


Ib. p. 216.

  All sacrifice is not taken away; but it is changed from the offering
  of those things formerly in use, to spiritual sacrifices. Now these
  are every way preferable; they are easier and cheaper to us, and yet
  more precious and acceptable to God.

Still understand,--to the regenerate. To others, they are not only not
easy and cheap, but unpurchaseable and impossible too. O God have mercy
upon me!


Ib. p. 229.

  Though I be beset on all hands, be accused by the Law, and mine own
  conscience, and by Satan, and have nothing to answer for myself; yet
  here I will stay, for I am sure in him there is salvation, and no
  where else.

"Here I _will_ stay." But alas! the poor sinner has forfeited the powers
of willing; miserable wishing is all he can command. O, the dreadful
injury of an irreligious education! To be taught our prayers, and the
awful truths of religion, in the same tone in which we are taught the
Latin Grammar,--and too often inspiring the same sensations of weariness
and disgust!


Vol. II. p. 242.

  And thus are reproaches mentioned amongst the sufferings of Christ in
  the Gospel, and not as the least; the railings and mockings that were
  darted at him, and fixed to the Cross, are mentioned more than the
  very nails that fixed him. And ('Heb'. xii. 2,) the 'shame' of the
  Cross, though he was above it, and despised it, yet that shame added
  much to the burden of it.

I understand Leighton thus: that though our Lord felt it not as 'shame',
nor was wounded by the revilings of the people in the way of any
correspondent resentment or sting, which yet we may be without blame,
yet he suffered from the same as sin, and as an addition to the guilt of
his persecutors, which could not but aggravate the burden which he had
taken on himself, as being sin in its most devilish form.


Ib. p. 293.

  This therefore is mainly to be studied, that the seat of humility be
  the heart. Although it will be seen in the carriage yet as little as
  it can * * *. And this I would recommend as a safe way: ever let thy
  thoughts concerning thyself be below what thou utterest; and what thou
  seest needful or fitting to say to thy own abasement, be not only
  content (which most are not) to be taken at thy word, and believed to
  be such by them that hear thee, but be desirous of it; and let that be
  the end of thy speech, to persuade them, and gain it of them, that
  they really take thee for as worthless a man as thou dost express
  thyself.

Alas! this is a most delicate and difficult subject: and the safest way,
and the only safe general rule is the silence that accompanies the
inward act of looking at the contrast in all that is of our own doing
and impulse! So may praises be made their own antidote.


Vol. III. p. 20. Serm. I.

  'They shall see God'. What this is we cannot tell you, nor can you
  conceive it: but walk heavenwards in purity, and long to be there,
  where you shall know what it means: 'for you shall know him as he is'.

We say; "Now I see the full meaning, force and beauty of a passage,--we
see them through the words." Is not Christ the Word--the substantial,
consubstantial Word, [Greek: ho ôn eis tòn kólpon tou patrós],--not as
our words, arbitrary; nor even as the words of Nature phenomenal merely?
If even through the words a powerful and perspicuous author--(as in the
next to inspired Commentary of Archbishop Leighton,--for whom God be
praised!)--I identify myself with the excellent writer, and his thoughts
become my thoughts: what must not the blessing be to be thus identified
first with the Filial Word, and then with the Father in and through Him?


Ib. p. 63. Serm. V.

  In this elementary world, light being (as we hear,) the first visible,
  all things are seen by it, and it by itself. Thus is Christ, among
  spiritual things, in the elect world of his Church; all things are
  'made manifest by the light', says the Apostle, 'Eph'. v. 13, speaking
  of Christ as the following verse doth evidently testify. It is in his
  word that he shines, and makes it a directing and convincing light, to
  discover all things that concern his Church and himself, to be known
  by its own brightness. How impertinent then is that question so much
  tossed by the Romish Church, "How know you the Scriptures (say they)
  to be the word of God, without the testimony of the Church?" I would
  ask one of them again, How they can know that it is daylight, except
  some light a candle to let them see it? They are little versed in
  Scripture that know not that it is frequently called light; and they
  are senseless that know not that light is seen and known by itself.
  'If our Gospel be hid', says the Apostle, 'it is hid to them that
  perish': the god of this world having blinded their minds against the
  light of the glorious Gospel, no wonder if such stand in need of a
  testimony. A blind man knows not that it is light at noon-day, but by
  report: but to those that have eyes, light is seen by itself.

On the true test of the Scriptures. Oh! were it not for my manifold
infirmities, whereby I am so all unlike the white-robed Leighton, I
could almost conceit that my soul had been an emanation from his! So
many and so remarkable are the coincidences, and these in parts of his
works that I could not have seen--and so uniform the congruity of the
whole. As I read, I seem to myself to be only thinking my own thoughts
over again, now in the same and now in a different order.


Ib. p. 68.

  The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews calls him (Christ) [Greek:
  apaúgasma], 'the brightness of his Father's glory, and the character
  of his person', (i. 3.) And under these expressions lies that
  remarkable mystery of the Son's eternal relation to the Father, which
  is rather humbly to be adored, than boldly to be explained, either by
  God's perfect understanding of his own essence, or by any other
  notion.

Certainly not by a transfer of a notion, and this too a notion of a
faculty itself but notional and limitary, to the Supreme Reality. But
there are ideas which are of higher origin than the notions of the
understanding, and by the irradiation of which the understanding itself
becomes a human understanding. Of such 'veritates verificæ' Leighton
himself in other words speaks often. Surely, there must have been an
intelligible propriety in the terms, 'Logos', Word, 'Begotten before all
creation',--an adequate idea or 'icon', or the Evangelists and Apostolic
penmen would not have adopted them. They did not invent the terms; but
took them and used them as they were taken and applied by Philo and both
the Greek and Oriental sages. Nay, the precise and orthodox, yet
frequent, use of these terms by Philo, and by the Jewish authors of that
traditionalæ wisdom,--degraded in after times, but which in its purest
parts existed long before the Christian æra,--is the strongest extrinsic
argument against the Arians, Socinians, and Unitarians, in proof that
St. John must have meant to deceive his readers, if he did not use them
in the known and received sense. To a Materialist indeed, or to those
who deny all knowledges not resolvable into notices from the five
senses, these terms as applied to spiritual beings must appear
inexplicable or senseless. But so must spirit. To me, (why do I say to
me?) to Bull, to Waterland, to Gregory Nazianzen, Basil, Athanasius,
Augustine, the terms, Word and generation, have appeared admirably, yea,
most awfully pregnant and appropriate;--but still as the language of
those who know that they are placed with their backs to substances--and
which therefore they can name only from the correspondent shadows--yet
not (God forbid!) as if the substances were the same as the
shadows;--which yet Leighton supposed in this his censure,--for if he
did not, he then censures himself and a number of his most beautiful
passages. These, and two or three other sentences,--slips of human
infirmity,--are useful in reminding me that Leighton's works are not
inspired Scripture.


'Postscript'.

On a second consideration of this passage, and a revisal of my marginal
animadversion--yet how dare I apply such a word to a passage written by
a minister of Christ so clearly under the especial light of the divine
grace as was Archbishop Leighton?--I am inclined to think that Leighton
confined his censure to the attempts to "explain" the Trinity,--and this
by "notions,"--and not to the assertion of the adorable acts implied in
the terms both of the Evangelists and Apostles, and of the Church before
as well as after Christ's ascension; nor to the assent of the pure
reason to the truths, and more than assent to, the affirmation of the
ideas.


Ib. p. 73.

This fifth Sermon, excellent in parts, is yet on the whole the least
excellent of Leighton's works,--and breathes less of either his own
character as a man, or the character of his religious philosophy. The
style too is in many places below Leighton's ordinary style--in some
places even turbid, operose, and catechrestic;--for example,--"to
trample on smilings with one foot and on frownings with the other."


Ib. p. 77. Serm. VI.

Leighton, I presume, was acquainted with the Hebrew Language, but he
does not appear to have studied it much. His observation on the 'heart',
as used in the Old Testament, shews that he did not know that the
ancient Hebrews supposed the heart to be the seat of intellect, and
therefore used it exactly as we use the head.


Ib. p. 104. Serm. VII.

This seventh Sermon is admirable throughout, Leighton throughout. O what
a contrast might be presented by publishing some discourse of some Court
divine, (South for instance,) preached under the same state of affairs,
and printing the two in columns!


Ib. p. 107. Serm. VIII.

  In all love three things are necessary; some goodness in the object,
  either true and real, or apparent and seeming to be so; for the soul,
  be it ever so evil, can affect nothing but which it takes in some way
  to be good.

This assertion in these words has been so often made, from Plato's times
to ours, that even wise men repeat it without perhaps much examination
whether it be not equivocal--or rather (I suspect) true only in that
sense in which it would amount to nothing--nothing to the purpose at
least. This is to be regretted--for it is a mischievous equivoque, to
make 'good' a synonyme of 'pleasant,' or even the 'genus' of which
pleasure is a 'species'. It is a grievous mistake to say, that bad men
seek pleasure because it is good. No! like children they call it good
because it is pleasant. Even the useful must derive its meaning from the
good, not 'vice versa'.


Postscript.

The lines in p. 107, noted by me, are one of a myriad instances to prove
how rash it is to quote single sentences or assertions from the
correctest writers, without collating them with the known system or
express convictions of the author. It would be easy to cite fifty
passages from Archbishop Leighton's works in direct contradiction to the
sentence in question--which he had learnt in the schools when a lad, and
afterwards had heard and met with so often that he was not aware that he
had never sifted its real purport. This eighth Sermon is another most
admirable discourse.


Ib. Serm. IX. p. 12.

  The reasonable creature, it is true, hath more liberty in its actions,
  freely choosing one thing and rejecting another; yet it cannot be
  denied, that in acting of that liberty, their choice and refusal
  [A] follow the sway of their nature and condition.

[A] I would fain substitute for 'follow,' the words, 'are most often
determined, and always affected, by.' I do not deny that the will
follows the nature; but then the nature itself is a will.


Ib.

  As the angels and glorified souls, (their nature being perfectly holy
  and unalterably such,) they cannot sin; they can delight in nothing
  but obeying and praising that God, in the enjoyment of whom their
  happiness consisteth.

If angels be other than spirits made perfect, or, as Leighton writes,
"glorified souls,"--the "unalterable by nature" seems to me rashly
asserted.


Ib.

  The mind, [Greek: phrónaema]. Some render it the prudence or wisdom of
  the flesh. Here you have it, the carnal mind; but the word signifies,
  indeed, an act of the mind, rather than either the faculty itself, or
  the habit of prudence in it, so as it discovers what is the frame of
  both those.

I doubt. [Greek: Phrónaema] signifies an act: and so far I agree with
Leighton. But [Greek: phrónaema sarkòs] is 'the flesh' (that is, the
natural man,) in the act or habitude of minding--but those acts, taken
collectively, are the faculty--the understanding.

How often have I found reason to regret, that Leighton had not clearly
made out to himself the diversity of reason and the understanding!


Ib. Serm. XV. p. 196.

  A narrow enthralled heart, fettered with the love of lower things, and
  cleaving to some particular sins, or but some one, and that secret,
  may keep foot a while in the way of God's commandments, in some steps
  of them; but it must give up quickly, is not able to run on to the end
  of the goal.

One of the blessed privileges of the spiritual man (and such Leighton
was,) is a piercing insight into the diseases of which he himself is
clear. [Greek: Eléaeson Kyrie!]


Ib. Serm. XVI. p. 204.

  Know you not that the redeemed of Christ and He are one? They live one
  life, Christ lives in them, and if 'any man hath not the Spirit of
  Christ, he is none of his', as the Apostle declares in this chapter.
  So then this we are plainly to tell you, and consider it; you that
  will not let go your sins to lay hold on Christ, have as yet no share
  in him.

  But on the other side: the truth is, that when souls are once set upon
  this search, they commonly wind the notion too high, and subtilize too
  much in the dispute, and so entangle and perplex themselves, and drive
  themselves further off from that comfort that they are seeking after;
  such measures and marks they set to themselves for their rule and
  standard; and unless they find those without all controversy in
  themselves, they will not believe that they have an interest in
  Christ, and this blessed and safe estate in him.

  To such I would only say, Are you in a willing league with any known
  sin? &c.

An admirable antidote for such as, too sober and sincere to pass off
feverous sensations for spiritualities, have been perplexed by Wesley's
assertions--that a certainty of having been elected is an indispensable
mark of election. Whitfield's ultra-Calvinism is Gospel gentleness and
Pauline sobriety compared with Wesley's Arminianism in the outset of his
career. But the main and most noticeable difference between Leighton and
the modern Methodists is to be found in the uniform selfishness of the
latter. Not "Do you wish to love God?" "Do you love your neighbour?" "Do
you think, 'O how dear and lovely must Christ be!'"--but--"Are you
certain that Christ has saved 'you'; that he died for 'you--you--you
--yourself'?" on to the end of the chapter. This is Wesley's doctrine.


Lecture IX. vol. IV. p. 96.

  For that this was his fixed purpose, Lucretius not only vows, but also
  boasts of it, and loads him (Epicurus) with ill-advised praises, for
  endeavouring through the whole course of his philosophy to free the
  minds of men from all the bonds and ties of religion.

But surely in this passage 'religio' must be rendered superstition, the
most effectual means for the removal of which Epicurus supposed himself
to have found in the exclusion of the 'gods many and lords many', from
their imagined agency in all the 'phænomena' of nature and the events
of history, substituting for these the belief in fixed laws, having in
themselves their evidence and necessity. On this account, in this
passage at least, Lucretius praises his master.


Ib. p. 105.

  They always seemed to me to act a very ridiculous part, who contend,
  that the effect of the divine decree is absolutely irreconcilable with
  human liberty; because the natural and necessary liberty of a rational
  creature is to act or choose from a rational motive, or spontaneously,
  and of purpose: but who sees not, that, on the supposition of the most
  absolute decree, this liberty is not taken away, but rather
  established and confirmed? For the decree is, 'that such an one shall
  make choice of, or do some particular thing freely. And whoever
  pretends to deny, that whatever is done or chosen, whether good or
  indifferent, is so done or chosen, or, at least, may be so, espouses
  an absurdity.'

I fear, I fear, that this is a sophism not worthy of Archbishop
Leighton. It seems to me tantamount to saying--"I force that man to do
so or so without my forcing him." But however that may be, the following
sentences are more precious than diamonds. They are divine.


Ib. Lect. XI. p. 113.

  For that this world, compounded of so many and such heterogeneous
  parts, should proceed, by way of natural and necessary emanation, from
  that one first, present, and most simple nature, nobody, I imagine,
  could believe, or in the least suspect * * *. But if he produced all
  these things freely, * * how much more consistent is it to believe,
  that this was done in time, than to imagine it was from eternity!

It is inconceivable how any thing can be created in time; and production
is incompatible with interspace.


Ib. Lect. XV. p. 152.

  The Platonists divide the world into two, the sensible and
  intellectual world * * *. According to this hypothesis, those parables
  and metaphors, which are often taken from natural things to illustrate
  such as are divine, will not be similitudes taken entirely at
  pleasure; but are often, in a great measure, founded in nature, and
  the things themselves.

I have asserted the same thing, and more fully shown wherein the
difference consists of symbolic and metaphorical, in my first Lay
Sermon; and the substantial correspondence of the genuine Platonic
doctrine and logic with those of Lord Bacon, in my Essays on Method, in
the Friend. [2]


Ib. Lect. XIX. p. 201.

  Even the philosophers give their testimony to this truth, and their
  sentiments on the subject are not altogether to be rejected; for they
  almost unanimously are agreed, that felicity, so far as it can be
  enjoyed in this life, consists solely, or at least principally, in
  virtue: but as to their assertion, that this virtue is perfect in a
  perfect life, it is rather expressing what were to be wished, than
  describing things as they are.

And why are the philosophers to be judged according to a different rule?
On what ground can it be asserted that the Stoics believed in the actual
existence of their God-like perfection in any individual? or that they
meant more than this--"To no man can the name of the Wise be given in
its absolute sense, who is not perfect even as his Father in heaven is
perfect!"


Ib. Lect. XXI. p. 225.

  In like manner, if we suppose God to be the first of all beings, we
  must, unavoidably, therefrom conclude his unity. As to the ineffable
  Trinity subsisting in this Unity, a mystery discovered only by the
  Sacred Scriptures, especially in the New Testament, where it is more
  clearly revealed than in the Old, let others boldly pry into it, if
  they please, while we receive it with our humble faith, and think it
  sufficient for us to admire and adore.

But surely it having been revealed to us, we may venture to say,--that a
positive unity, so far from excluding, implies plurality, and that the
Godhead is a fulness, [Greek: plaeroma].


Ib. Lect. XXIV. p. 245.

  Ask yourselves, therefore, 'what you would be at', and with what
  dispositions you come to this most sacred table?

In an age of colloquial idioms, when to write in a loose slang had
become a mark of loyalty, this is the only L'Estrange vulgarism I have
met with in Leighton.


Ib. Exhortation to the Students, p. 252.

  Study to acquire such a philosophy as is not barren and babbling, but
  solid and true; not such a one as floats upon the surface of endless
  verbal controversies, but one that enters into the nature of things;
  for he spoke good sense that said, "The philosophy of the Greeks was a
  mere jargon, and noise of words."

If so, then so is all philosophy: for what system is there, the elements
and outlines of which are not to be found in the Greek schools? Here
Leighton followed too incautiously the Fathers.



[Footnote 1: Works of Leighton, 4 vols. 8vo. London 1819. Ed.]


[Footnote 2: 'Statesman's Manual', p. 230. 2nd edit. Friend, III. 3d
edit. Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





