NOTES ON SHERLOCK'S VINDICATION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE TRINITY. [1]


Sect. I. p. 3.

  Some new philosophers will tell you that the notion of a spirit or an
  immaterial substance is a contradiction; for by substance they
  understand nothing but matter, and then an immaterial substance is
  immaterial matter, that is, matter and no matter, which is a
  contradiction; but yet this does not prove an immaterial substance to
  be a contradiction, unless they could first prove that there is no
  substance but matter; and that they cannot conceive any other
  substance but matter, does not prove that there is no other.

Certainly not: but if not only they, but Dr. Sherlock himself and all
mankind, are incapable of attaching any sense to the term substance, but
that of matter,--then for us it would be a contradiction, or a
groundless assertion. Thus: By 'substance' I do not mean the only notion
we can attach to the word; but a somewhat, I know not what, may, for
aught I know, not be contradictory to spirit! Why should we use the
equivocal word, 'substance' (after all but an 'ens logicum'), instead of
the definite term 'self-subsistent?' We are equally conscious of mind,
and of that which we call 'body;' and the only possible philosophical
questions are these three:

1. Are they co-ordinate as agent and re-agent;

2. Or is the one subordinate to the other, as effect to cause, and which
is the cause or ground, which the effect or product;

3. Or are they co-ordinate, but not inter-dependent, that is, 'per
harmonium præstabilitam'.


Ib. p. 4.

  Now so far as we understand the nature of any being, we can certainly
  tell what is contrary and contradictious to its nature; as that
  accidents should subsist without 'their subject', &c.

That accidents should subsist (rather, exist) without a subject, may be
a contradiction, but not that they exist without this or that subject.
The words 'their subject' are 'a petitio principii'.


Ib.

  These and such like are the manifest absurdities and contradictions of
  Transubstantiation; and we know that they are so, because we know the
  nature of a body, &c.

Indeed! Were I either Romanist or Unitarian, I should desire no better
than the admission of body having an 'esse' not in the 'percipi', and
really subsisting, ([Greek: autò tò chraema]) as the supporter of its
accidents. At all events, the Romanist, declaring the accidents to be
those ordinarily impressed on the senses ([Greek: tà phaínomena kaì
aísthaeta]) by bread and wine, does at the same time declare the flesh
and blood not to be the [Greek: phaínomena kaì aísthaeta] so called, but
the [Greek: noúmena kaì autà tà chráemata]. There is therefore no
contradiction in the terms, however reasonless the doctrine may be, and
however unnecessary the interpretation on which it is pretended. I
confess, had I been in Luther's place, I would not have rested so much
of my quarrel with the Papists on this point; nor can I agree with our
Arminian divines in their ridicule of Transubstantiation. The most
rational doctrine is perhaps, for some purposes, at least, the 'rem
credimus, modum nescimus'; next to that, the doctrine of the
Sacramentaries, that it is 'signum sub rei nomine', as when we call a
portrait of Caius, Caius. But of all the remainder, Impanation,
Consubstantiation, and the like, I confess that I should prefer the
Transubstantiation of the Pontifical doctors.


Ib. p. 6.

  The proof of this comes to this one point, that we may have sufficient
  evidence of the being of a thing whose nature we cannot conceive and
  comprehend: he who will not own this, contradicts the sense and
  experience of mankind; and he who confesses this, and yet rejects the
  belief of that which he has good evidence for, merely because he
  cannot conceive it, is a very absurd and senseless infidel.

Here again, though a zealous believer of the truth asserted, I must
object to the Bishop's logic. None but the weakest men have objected to
the Tri-unity merely because the 'modus' is above their comprehension:
for so is the influence of thought on muscular motion; so is life
itself; so in short is every first truth of necessity; for to comprehend
a thing, is to know its antecedent and consequent. But they affirm that
it is against their reason. Besides, there seems an equivocation in the
use of 'comprehend' and 'conceive' in the same meaning. When a man tells
me, that his will can lift his arm, I conceive his meaning; though I do
not comprehend the fact, I understand 'him'. But the Socinians say;--We
do not understand 'you'. We cannot attach to the word 'God,' more than
three possible meanings; either,

1. A person, or self-conscious being;

2. Or a thing;

3. Or a quality, property, or attribute.

If you take the first, then you admit the contradiction; if either of
the latter two, you have not three Persons and one God, but three
Persons having equal shares in one thing, or three with the same
attributes, that is, three Gods. Sherlock does not meet this.

Let me repeat the difficulty, if possible, more clearly. The argument of
the philosophic Unitarians, as Wissowatius, who, mistaken as they were,
are not to be confounded with their degenerate successors, the
Priestleyans and Belshamites, may be thus expressed. By the term, God,
we can only conceive you to suppose one or other of three meanings.

1. Either you understand by it a person, in the common sense of an
intelligent or self-conscious being;--or,

2. a thing with its qualities and properties;--or,

3. certain powers and attributes, comprised under the word nature.

If we suppose the first, the contradiction is manifest, and you
yourselves admit it, and therefore forbid us so to interpret your words.
For if by God you mean Person, then three Persons and one God, would be
the same as three Persons and one Person. If we take the second as your
meaning, as an infinite thing is an absurdity, we have three finite
Gods, like Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto, who shared the universe between
them. If the latter, we have three Persons with the same attributes;
--and if a Person with infinite attributes be what we mean by God, then
we have either three Gods, or involve the contradiction above mentioned.
It is unphilosophic, by admission of all philosophers, they add, to
multiply causes beyond the necessity. Now if there are three Persons of
infinite and the same attributes, dismiss two, and you lose nothing but
a numerical phantom."

The answer to this must commence by a denial of the premisses 'in toto':
and this both Bull and Waterland have done most successfully. But I very
much doubt, whether Sherlock on his principles could have evaded the
Unitarian logic. In fact it is scarcely possible to acquit him
altogether of a 'quasi-Tritheism'.


Sect. II. p. 13.

  'For like as we are compelled by the Christian verity to acknowledge
  every Person by himself to be God and Lord';--

(That is, by especial revelation.)

  'So are we forbidden by the Catholic religion to say, There are three
  Gods, or three Lords.'

That is, by the religion contained in, and given in accompaniment with,
the universal reason, 'the light that lighteth every man that cometh
into the world'.


Ib. p. 14.

  This Creed (Athanasian) does not pretend to explain how there are
  three Persons, each of which is God, and yet but One God, (of which
  more hereafter,) but only asserts the thing, that thus it is, and thus
  it must be if we believe a Trinity in Unity; which should make all
  men, who would be thought neither Arians nor Socinians, more cautious
  how they express the least dislike of the Athanasian Creed, which must
  either argue, that they condemn it, before they understand it, or that
  they have some secret dislike to the doctrine of the Trinity.

The dislike commonly felt is not of the doctrine of the Trinity, but of
the positive anathematic assertion of the everlasting perdition of all
and of each who doubt the same;--an assertion deduced from Scripture
only by a train of captious consequences, and equivocations. Thus, A.:
"I honour and admire Caius for his great learning." B.: "The knowledge
of the Sanscrit is an important article in Caius's learning." A.: "I
have been often in his company, and have found no reason for believing
this." B.: "O! then you deny his learning, are envious, and Caius's
enemy." A.: "God forbid! I love and admire him. I know him for a
transcendant linguist in the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and modern European
languages;--and with or without the Sanscrit, I look up to him, and rely
on his erudition in all cases, in which I am concerned. And it is this
perfect trust, this unfeigned respect, that is the appointed criterion
of Caius's friends and disciples, and not their full acquaintance with
each and all particulars of his superiority." Thus without Christ, or in
any other power but that of Christ, and (subjectively) of faith in
Christ, no man can be saved; but does it follow, that no man can have
Christian faith who is ignorant or erroneous as to any one point of
Christian theology? Will a soul be condemned to everlasting perdition
for want of logical 'acumen' in the perception of consequences?--If he
verily embrace Christ as his Redeemer, and unfeignedly feel in himself
the necessity of Redemption, he implicitly holds the Divinity of Christ,
whatever from want or defect of logic may be his notion 'explicite'.


Ib. p. 18.

  'But the whole three Persons are co-eternal, and co-equal'. And yet
  this we must acknowledge to be true, if we acknowledge all three
  Persons to be eternal, for in eternity there can be no 'afore, or
  after other'.

It must, however, be considered as a serious defect in a Creed, if
excluding subordination, without mentioning any particular form, it
gives no hint of any other form in which it admits it. The only 'minus'
admitted by the Athanasian Creed is the inferiority of Christ's Humanity
to the Divinity generally; but both Scripture and the Nicene Creed teach
a subordination of the Son to the Father, independent of the Incarnation
of the Son. Now this is not inserted, and therefore the denial in the
assertion 'none is greater or less than another', is universal, and a
plain contradiction of Christ speaking of Himself as the co-eternal Son;
'My Father is greater than I'. Speaking of himself as the co-eternal
Son, I say;--for how superfluous would it have been, a truism how
unworthy of our Lord, to have said in effect, that "a creature is less
than God!" And after all, Creeds assuredly are not to be imposed 'ad
libitum'--a new Creed, or at least a new form and choice of articles and
expressions, at the pleasure of individuals. Now where is the authority
of the Athanasian Creed? In what consists its necessity? If it be the
same as the Nicene, why not be content with the Nicene? If it differs,
how dare we retain both? [2] If the Athanasian does not say more or
different, but only differs by omission of a necessary article, then to
impose it, is as absurd as to force a mutilated copy on one who has
already the perfect original. Lastly, it is not enough that an abstract
contains nothing which may not by a chain of consequences be deduced
from the books of the Evangelists and Apostles, in order for it to be a
Creed for the whole Christian Church. For a Creed is or ought to be a
'syllepsis' of those primary fundamental truths that are, as it were,
the starting-post, from which the Christian must commence his
progression. The full-grown Christian needs no other Creed than the
Scriptures themselves. Highly valuable is the Nicene Creed; but it has
its chief value as an historical document, proving that the same texts
in Scripture received the same interpretation, while the Greek was a
living language, as now.


Sect. III. p. 23.

  If what he says is true: 'He that errs in a question of faith, after
  having used reasonable diligence to be rightly informed, is in no
  fault at all'; how comes an atheist, or an infidel, a Turk, or a Jew,
  to be in any fault? Does our author think that no atheist or infidel,
  no unbelieving Jew or heathen, ever used reasonable diligence to be
  rightly informed? * * * If you say, he confines this to such points as
  have always been controverted in the churches of God, I desire to know
  a reason why he thus confines it? For does not his reason equally
  extend to the Christian Faith itself, as to those points which have
  been controverted in Christian Churches?

And the Notary might ask in his turn: "Do you believe that the
Christians either of the Greek or of the Western Church will be damned,
according as the truth may be respecting the procession of the Holy
Ghost? or that either the Sacramentary or the Lutheran? or again, the
Consubstantiationist, or the Transubstantiationist? If not, why do you
stop here? Whence this sudden palsy in the limbs of your charity? Again,
does this eternal damnation of the individual depend on the supposed
importance of the article denied? Or on the moral state of the
individual, on the inward source of this denial? And lastly, who
authorized either you, or the pseudo-Athanasius, to interpret Catholic
faith by belief, arising out of the apparent predominance of the grounds
for, over those against, the truth of the positions asserted; much more,
by belief as a mere passive acquiescence of the understanding? Were all
damned who died during the period when 'totus fere mundus factus est
Arianus', as one of the Fathers admits? Alas! alas! how long will it be
ere Christians take the plain middle road between intolerance and
indifference, by adopting the literal sense and Scriptural import of
heresy, that is, wilful error, or belief originating in some perversion
of the will; and of heretics, (for such there are, nay, even orthodox
heretics), that is, men wilfully unconscious of their own wilfulness, in
their limpet-like adhesion to a favourite tenet?"


Ib. p. 26.

  All Christians must confess, that there is no other name given under
  heaven whereby men can be saved, but only the name of Christ.

Now this is a most awful question, on which depends whether Christ was
more than Socrates; for to bring God from heaven to reproclaim the Ten
Commandments, is 'too too' ridiculous. Need I say I incline to Sherlock?
But yet I cannot give to faith the meaning he does, though I give it
all, and more than all, the power. But if that Name, as power, saved the
Jewish Church before they knew the Name, as name, how much more now, if
only the will be not guiltily averse? Any miracle does in kind as truly
bring God from heaven as the Incarnation, which the Socinians wholly
forget, as in other points. They receive without scruple what they have
learned without examination, and then transfer to the first article
which they do look into, all the difficulties that belong equally to the
former: as the Simonidean doubts concerning God to the Trinity, and the
like.


Ib. p. 27.

The Eclectic Neo-Platonists (Sallustius and others,) justified their
Polytheism on much the same pretext as is in fact involved in the
language of this page; [Greek: polloì mèn en dè mia theótaeti]. This
indeed seems to me decisive in favour of Waterland's scheme against this
of Sherlock's;--namely, that in the latter we find no sufficient reason
why in the nature of things this intermutual consciousness might not be
possessed by thirty instead of three. It seems a strange confounding
[Greek: hetéron genéôn] to answer, "True; but the latter only happens to
be the fact!"--just as if we were speaking of the number of persons in
the Privy Council.


Ib. p. 28.

  'Notes'. By keeping this faith 'whole and undefiled', must be meant
  that a man should believe and profess it without adding to it or
  taking from it. * * * First, for adding. What if an honest plain man,
  because he is a Christian and a Protestant, should think it necessary
  to add this article to the Athanasian Creed;--'I believe the Holy
  Scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be a divine, infallible and
  complete rule both for faith and manners'. I hope no Protestant would
  think a man damned for such addition; and if so, then this Creed of
  Athanasius is at least an unnecessary rule of faith.

  'Answer'. That is to say, it is an addition to the Catholic Faith to
  own the Scriptures to be the rule of faith; as if it were an addition
  to the laws of England to own the original records of them in the
  Tower.

This Notary manages his cause most weakly, and Sherlock 'fibs' him like
a scientific pugilist. But he himself exposes weak parts, as in p. 27.
The objection to the Athanasian Creed urged by better men than the
Notary, yea, by divines not less orthodox than Sherlock himself, is
this: not that this Creed adds to the Scriptures, but that it adds to
the original 'Symbolum Fidei', the 'Regula', the 'Canon', by which,
according to the greater number of the 'ante'-Nicene Fathers, the books
of the New Testament were themselves tried and determined to be
Scripture. Now this 'Symbolum' was to bring together all that must be
believed, even by the babes in faith, or to what purpose was it made?
Now, say they, the Nicene Creed is really nothing more than a verbal
explication of the common Creed, but the clause in the Athanasian
('which faith', &c.), however fairly deduced from Scripture, is not
contained in the Creed, or selection of certain articles of Faith from
the Scriptures, or not at least from those preachings and narrations, of
which the New Testament Scriptures are the repository. Might not a
Papist plead equally in support of the Creed of Pope Pius: "The new
articles are deduced from Scripture; that is, in our opinion, and that
most expressly in our Lord's several and solemn addresses to St. Peter."
So again Sherlock's answer to this paragraph from the Notes is
evasive,--for it is very possible, nay, it is, and has been the case,
that a man may believe in the facts and doctrines contained in the New
Testament, and yet not believe the Holy Scripture to be either divine,
infallible, or complete.


Sect. IV. p. 50.

  We know not what the substance of an infinite mind is, nor how such
  substances as have no parts or extension can touch each other, or be
  thus externally united; but we know the unity of a mind or spirit
  reaches as far as its self-consciousness does, for that is one spirit,
  which knows and feels itself, and its own thoughts and motions, and if
  we mean this by 'circum-incession', three persons thus intimate to
  each other are numerically one.

The question still returns; have these three infinite minds, at once
self-conscious and conscious of each other's consciousness, always the
very same thoughts? If so, this mutual consciousness is unmeaning, or
derivative; and the three do not cease to be three because they are
three sames. If not, then there is Tritheism evidently.


Ib. p. 64.

  St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. ii. 10. 'That the Spirit searcheth all
  things, yea the deep things of God'. So that the Holy Spirit knows all
  that is in God, even his most deep and secret counsels, which is an
  argument that he is very intimate with him; but this is not all: it is
  the manner of knowing, which must prove this consciousness of which I
  speak: and that the Apostle adds in the next verse, that the Spirit of
  God knows all that is in God, just as the spirit of a man knows all
  that is in man: that is, not by external revelation or communication
  of this knowledge, but by self-consciousness, by an internal
  sensation, which is owing to an essential unity. 'For what man knoweth
  the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in him; even so
  the things of God knoweth no man but the Spirit of God.'

It would be interesting, if it were feasible, to point out the epoch at
which the text mode of arguing in polemic controversy became
predominant; I mean by single texts without any modification by the
context. I suspect that it commenced, or rather that it first became the
fashion, under the Dort or systematic theologians, and during the so
called Quinquarticular Controversy. This quotation from St. Paul is a
striking instance:--for St. Paul is speaking of the holy spirit of which
true spiritual Christians are partakers, and by which or in which those
Christians are enabled to search all things, even the deep things of
God. No person is here spoken of, but reference is made to the
philosophic principle, that can only act immediately, that is,
interpenetratively, as two globules of quicksilver, and co-adunatively.
Now, perceiving and knowing were considered as immediate acts relatively
to the objects perceived and known:--'ergo', the 'principium sciendi'
must be one (that is, homogeneous or consubstantial) with the
'principium essendi quoad objectum cognitum'. In order therefore for a
man to understand, or even to know of, God, he must have a god-like
spirit communicated to him, wherewith, as with an inward eye, which is
both eye and light, he sees the spiritual truths. Now I have no
objection to his calling this spirit a 'person,' if only the term
'person' be so understood as to permit of its being partaken of by all
spiritual creatures, as light and the power of vision are partaken of by
all seeing ones. But it is too evident that Sherlock supposes the
Father, as Father, to possess a spirit, that is, an intellective
faculty, by which he knows the Spirit, that is, the third co-equal
Person; and that this Spirit, the Person, has a spirit, that is, an
intellective faculty, by which he knows the Father; and the 'Logos' in
like manner relatively to both. So too, the Father has a 'logos' with
which he distinguishes the 'Logos';--and the 'Logos' has a 'logos', and
so on: that is to say, there are three several though not severed triune
Gods, each being the same position three times 'realiter positum', as
three guineas from the same mint, supposing them to differ no more than
they appear to us to differ;--but whether a difference wholly and
exclusively numerical is a conceivable notion, except under the
predicament of space and time; whether it be not absurd to affirm it,
where interspace and interval cannot be affirmed without absurdity--this
is the question; or rather it is no question.


Ib. p. 68.

  Nor do we divide the substance, but unite these three Persons in one
  numerical essence: for we know nothing of the unity of the mind, but
  self-consciousness, as I showed before; and therefore as the
  self-consciousness of every Person to itself makes them distinct
  Persons, so the mutual consciousness of all three divine Persons to
  each other makes them all but one infinite God: as far as
  consciousness reaches, so far the unity of a spirit extends, for we
  know no other unity of a mind or spirit, but consciousness.

But this contradicts the preceding paragraph, in which the Father is
self-conscious that he is the Father and not the Son, and the Son that
he is not the Father, and that the Father is not he. Now how can the
Son's being conscious that the Father is conscious that he is not the
Son, constitute a numerical unity? And wherein can such a consciousness
as that attributed to the Son differ from absolute certainty? Is not God
conscious of every thought of man;--and would Sherlock allow me to
deduce the unity of the divine consciousness with the human? Sherlock's
is doubtless a very plain and intelligible account of three Gods in the
most absolute intimacy with each other, so that they are all as one; but
by no means of three persons that are one God. I do not wonder that
Waterland and the other followers of Bull were alarmed.


Ib. p. 72.

  Even among men it is only knowledge that is power. Human power, and
  human knowledge, as that signifies a knowledge how to do anything, are
  commensurate; whatever human skill extends to, human power can effect:
  nay, every man can do what he knows how to do, if he has proper
  instruments and materials to do it with.

This proves that perfect knowledge supposes perfect power: and that they
are one and the same. "If he have proper instruments:"--does not this
show that the means are supposed co-present with the knowledge, not the
same with it?


Ib.

  For it is nothing but thought which moves our bodies, and all the
  members of them, which are the immediate instruments of all human
  force and power: excepting mechanical motions which do not depend upon
  our wills, such as the motion of the heart, the circulation of the
  blood, the concoction of our meat and the like. All voluntary motions
  are not only directed but caused by thought: and so indeed it must be,
  or there could be no motion in the world; for matter cannot move
  itself, and therefore some mind must be the first mover, which makes
  it very plain, that infinite truth and wisdom is infinite and almighty
  power.

Even this, though not ill-conceived, is inaccurately expressed.


Ib. p. 81.

  There is no contradiction that three infinite minds should be
  absolutely perfect in wisdom, goodness, justice and power; for these
  are perfections which may be in more than one, as three men may all
  know the same things, and be equally just and good: but three such
  minds cannot be absolutely perfect without being mutually conscious to
  each other, as they are to themselves.

Will any man in his senses affirm, that my knowledge is increased by
saying "all" three times following? Is it not mere repetition in time?
If the Son has thoughts which the Father, as the Father, could not have
but for his interpenetration of the Son's consciousness, then I can
understand it; but then these are not three Absolutes, but three modes
of perfection constituting one Absolute; and by what right Sherlock
could call the one Father, more than the other, I cannot see.


Ib. p. 88.

  And yet if we consider these three divine Persons as containing each
  other in themselves, and essentially one by a mutual consciousness,
  this pretended contradiction vanishes: for then the Father is the one
  true God, because the Father has the Son and the Holy Spirit in
  himself: and the Son may he called the one true God, because the Son
  has the Father and the Holy Ghost in himself, &c.

Nay, this is to my understanding three Gods, and Sherlock seems to have
brought in the material phantom of a thing or substance.


Ib. p. 97.

  But if these three distinct Persons are not separated, but essentially
  united unto one, each of them may be God, and all three but one God:
  for if these three Persons,--each of whom [Greek: monadikôs], as it is
  in the Creed, singly by himself, not separately from the other divine
  Persons, is God and Lord, are essentially united into one, there can
  be but one God and one Lord; and how each of these persons is God, and
  all of them but one God, by their mutual consciousness, I have already
  explained.

--"That is,--if the three Persons are not three;"--so might the Arian
answer, unless Sherlock had shown the difference of separate and
distinct relatively to mind. "For what other separation can be conceived
in mind but distinction? Distinction may be joined with imperfection, as
ignorance, or forgetfulness; and so it is in men:--and if this be called
separation by a metaphor from bodies, then the conclusion would be that
in the Supreme Mind there is distinction without imperfection; and then
the question is, whence comes plurality of Persons? Can it be conceived
other than as the result of imperfection, that is, finiteness?


Ib. p. 98.

  Thus each Divine Person is God, and all of them but the same one God;
  as I explained it before.

O no! asserted it.


Ib. p. 98-9.

  This one supreme God is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a Trinity in
  Unity, three Persons and one God. Now Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
  with all their divine attributes and perfections (excepting their
  personal properties, which the Schools call the 'modi subsistendi',
  that one is the Father, the other the Son, and the other the Holy
  Ghost, which cannot be communicated to each other) are whole and
  entire in each Person by a mutual consciousness; each feels the other
  Persons in himself, all their essential wisdom, power, goodness,
  justice, as he feels himself, and this makes them essentially one, as
  I have proved at large.


Will not the Arian object, "You admit the 'modus subsistendi' to be a
divine perfection, and you affirm that it is incommunicable. Does it not
follow therefore, that there are perfections which the All-perfect does
not possess?" This would not apply to Bishop Bull or Waterland.


Sect. V. p. 102.

  St. Austin in his sixth book of the Trinity takes notice of a common
  argument used by the orthodox fathers against the Arians, to prove the
  co-eternity of the Son with the Father, that if the Son be the Wisdom
  and Power of God, as St. Paul teaches (1 'Cor'. i.) and God was never
  without his Wisdom and Power, the Son must he co-eternal with the
  Father. * * * But this acute Father discovers a great inconvenience in
  this argument, for it forces us to say that the Father is not wise,
  but by that Wisdom which he begot, not being himself Wisdom as the
  Father: and then we must consider whether the Son himself, as he is
  God of God, and Light of Light, may be said to be Wisdom of Wisdom, if
  God the Father be not Wisdom, but only begets Wisdom.

The proper answer to Augustine is, that the Son and Holy Ghost are
necessary and essential, not contingent: and that 'his' argument has a
still greater inconvenience, as shewn in note p. 98.


Ib. pp. 110-113.

  But what makes St. Gregory dispute thus nicely, and oppose the common
  and ordinary forms of speech? Did he in good earnest believe that
  there is but one man in the world? No, no! he acknowledged as many men
  as we do; a great multitude who had the same human nature, and that
  every one who had a human nature was an individual man, distinguished
  and divided from all other individuals of the same nature. What makes
  him so zealous then against saying, that Peter, James and John are
  three men? Only this; that he says man is the name of nature, and
  therefore to say there are three men is the same as to say, there are
  three human natures of a different kind; for if there are three human
  natures, they must differ from each other, or they cannot be three;
  and so you deny Peter, James, and John to be [Greek: homooúsioi], or
  of the same nature; and for the same reason we must say that though
  the Father be God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, yet there are
  not three Gods, but [Greek: mía theótaes], one Godhead and Divinity.

Sherlock struggles in vain, in my opinion at least, to clear these
Fathers of egregious logomachy, whatever may have been the soundness of
their faith, spite of the quibbles by which they endeavoured to evince
its rationality. The very change of the terms is suspicious. "Yes! we
might say three Gods" (it would be answered,) "as we say and ought to
say three men: for man and humanity, [Greek: ánthropôs] and [Greek:
ánthrôpótaes] are not the same terms;--so if the Father be God, the Son
God, and the Holy Ghost God, there would be three Gods, though not
[Greek: treis theótaetes],--that is, three Godheads."


Ib. p. 115-16.

  Gregory Nyssen tells us that [Greek: theòs] is [Greek: theatàes] and
  [Greek: éphoros], the inspector and governor of the world, that is, it
  is a name of energy, operation and power; and if this virtue, energy,
  and operation be the very same in all the Persons of the Trinity,
  Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, then they are but one God, but one power
  and energy. * * * The Father does nothing by himself, nor the Son by
  himself, nor the Holy Ghost by himself; but the whole energy and
  operation of the Deity relating to creatures begins with the Father,
  passes to the Son, and from Father and Son to the Holy Spirit; the
  Holy Spirit does not act anything separately; there are not three
  distinct operations, as there are three Persons, [Greek: allà mìa tìs
  gínetai agathou Bouláematos kínaesis kaì diakósmaesis];--but one
  motion and disposition of the good will, which passes through the
  whole Trinity from Father to Son, and to the Holy Ghost, and this is
  done [Greek: achrónos kaì adiarétôs], without any distance of time, or
  propagating the motion from one to the other, but by one thought, as
  it is in one numerical mind and spirit, and therefore, though they are
  three Persons, they are but one numerical power and energy.

But this is either Tritheism or Sabellianism; it is hard to say which.
Either the [Greek: Boúlaema] subsists in the Son, and in the Holy Ghost,
and not merely passes through them, and then there would be three
numerical [Greek: Bouláemata], as well as three numerical Persons:
'ergo', [Greek: treis theoì àe theataí] (according to Gregory Nyssen's
shallow and disprovable etymology), which would be Tritheism: or [Greek:
hén ti gínetai Boúlaema], and then the Son and Holy Ghost are but terms
of relation, which is Sabellianism. But in fact this Gregory and the
others were Tritheists in the mode of their conception, though they did
not wish to be so, and refused even to believe themselves such.

Gregory Nyssen, Cyril of Alexandria, Maximus and Damascen were charged
with "a kind of Tritheism" by Petavius and Dr. Cudworth, who, according
to Sherlock, have "mistaken their meaning." See pp. 106-9, of this
"Vindication."


Ib. p. 117.

  For I leave any man to judge, whether this [Greek: mía kínaesis
  Bouláematos], this one single motion of will, which is in the same
  instant in Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, can signify anything else but
  a mutual consciousness, which makes them numerically one, and as
  intimate to each other, as every man is to himself, as I have already
  explained it.

Is not God conscious to all my thoughts, though I am not conscious of
God's? Would Sherlock endure that I should infer: 'ergo', God is
numerically one with me, though I am not numerically one with God? I
have never seen, but greatly wish to see, Waterland's controversial
tracts against Sherlock. Again: according to Sherlock's conception, it
would seem to follow that we ought to make a triad of triads, or an
ennead.

1. Father--Son--Holy Ghost.
2. Son--Father--Holy Ghost.
3. Holy Ghost--Son--Father.

Else there is an 'x' in the Father which is not in the Son, a 'y' in the
Son which is not in the Father, and a 'z' in the Holy Ghost which is in
neither: that is, each by himself is not total God.


Ib. p. 120.

  But however he might be mistaken in his philosophy, he was not in his
  divinity; for he asserts a numerical unity of the divine nature, not a
  mere specific unity, which is nothing but a logical notion, nor a
  collective unity, which is nothing but a company who are naturally
  many: but a true subsisting numerical unity of nature; and if the
  difficulty of explaining this, and his zeal to defend it, forced him
  upon some unintelligible niceties, to prove that the same numerical
  human nature too is but one in all men, it is hard to charge him with
  teaching, that there are three independent and co-ordinate Gods,
  because we think he has not proved that Peter, James, and John, are
  but one man. This will make very foul work with the Fathers, if we
  charge them with all those erroneous conceits about the Trinity, which
  we can fancy in their inconvenient ways of explaining that venerable
  mystery, especially when they compare that mysterious unity with any
  natural unions.

So that after all this obscuration of the obscure, Sherlock ends by
fairly throwing up his briefs, and yet calls out, "Not guilty!
'Victoria'!" And what is this but to say: These Fathers did indeed
involve Tritheism in their mode of defending the Tri-personality; but
they were not Tritheists:--though it would be far more accurate to say,
that they were Tritheists, but not so as to make any practical breach of
the Unity;--as if, for instance, Peter, James, and John had three silver
tickets, by shewing one of which either or all three would have the same
thing as if they had shewn all three tickets, and 'vice versa', all
three tickets could produce no more than each one; each corresponding to
the whole.


Ib.

  I am sure St. Gregory was so far from suspecting that he should be
  charged with Tritheism upon this account, that he fences against
  another charge of mixing and confounding the 'Hypostases' or Persons,
  by denying any difference or diversity of nature, [Greek: hôs ek tou
  màe déchesthai tàen katà physin diaphoràn, míxin tina tôn hypostáseôn
  kaì anakúklaesin kataskeúzonta], which argues that he thought he had
  so fully asserted the unity of the divine essence, that some might
  suspect he had left but one Person, as well as one nature in God.

This is just what I have said, p. 116. Whether Sabellianism or
Tritheism, I observed is hard to determine. Extremes meet.


Ib. p. 121.

  Secondly, to this 'homo-ousiotes' the Fathers added a numerical unity
  of the divine essence. This Petavius has proved at large by numerous
  testimonies, even from those very Fathers, whom he before accused for
  making God only collectively one, as three men are one man; such as
  Gregory Nyssen, St. Cyril, Maximus, Damascen; which is a
  demonstration, that however 'he might mistake' their explication of
  it, from the unity of human nature, they were far enough from
  Tritheism, or one collective God.

This is most uncandid. Sherlock, even to be consistent with his own
confession, § 1. p. 120, ought to have said, "However he might mistake
their 'intention', in consequence of their inconvenient and
unphilosophical explication;" which mistake, in fact, consisted in
taking them at their word.


Ib.

  Petavius greatly commends Boethius's explication of this mystery,
  which is the very same he had before condemned in Gregory Nyssen, and
  those other Fathers.--That Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are one God,
  not three Gods: 'hujus conjunctionis ratio est indifferentia': that
  is, such a sameness of nature as admits of no difference or variety,
  or an exact 'homo-ousiotes', as he explains it. * * Those make a
  difference, who augment and diminish, as the Arians do; who
  distinguish the Trinity into different natures, as well as Persons, of
  different worth and excellency, and thus divide and multiply the
  Trinity into a plurality of Gods. 'Principium enim pluralitatis
  alteritas est. Præter alteritatem enim nec pluralitas quid sit
  intelligi potest'.

Then if so, what becomes of the Persons? Have the Persons attributes
distinct from their nature;--or does not their common nature constitute
their common attributes? 'Principium enim, &c.'


Ib. p. 124.

  That the Fathers universally acknowledged that the operation of the
  whole Trinity, 'ad extra', is but one, Petavius has proved beyond all
  contradiction; and hence they conclude the unity of the divine nature
  and essence; for every nature has a virtue and energy of its own; for
  nature is a principle of action, and if the energy and operation be
  but one, there can be but one nature; and if there be two distinct and
  divided operations, if either of them can act alone without the other,
  there must be two divided natures.

Then it was not the Son but the whole Trinity that was crucified: for
surely this was an operation 'ad extra'.


Ib. p. 126.

  But to do St. Austin right, though he do not name this consciousness,
  yet he explains this Trinity in Unity by examples of mutual
  consciousness. I named one of his similitudes before, of the unity of
  our understanding, memory, and will, 'which' are all conscious to each
  other; that we remember what we understand and will; we understand
  what we remember and will; and what we will we remember and
  understand; and therefore all these three faculties do penetrate and
  comprehend each other.

'Which'! The 'man' is self-conscious alike when he remembers, wills, and
understands; but in what sense is the generic term "memory" conscious to
the generic word "will?" This is mere nonsense. Are memory,
understanding, and volition persons,--self-subsistents? If not, what are
they to the purpose? Who doubts that Jehovah is consciously powerful,
consciously wise, consciously good; and that it is the same Jehovah, who
in being omnipotent, is good and wise; in being wise, omnipotent and
good; in being good, is wise and omnipotent? But what has all this to do
with a distinction of Persons? Instead of one Tri-unity we might have a
mille-unity. The fact is, that Sherlock, and (for aught I know) Gregory
Nyssen, had not the clear idea of the Trinity, positively; but only a
negative Arianism.


Ib. p. 127.

  He proceeds to shew that this unity is without all manner of confusion
  and mixture, * * for the mind that loves, is in the love. * * * And
  the knowledge of the mind which knows and loves itself, is in the
  mind, and in its love, because it loves itself, knowing, and knows
  itself loving: and thus also two are in each, for the mind which knows
  and loves itself, with its knowledge is in love, and with its love is
  in knowledge.

Then why do we make tri-personality in unity peculiar to God?

The doctrine of the Trinity (the foundation of all rational theology, no
less than the precondition and ground of the rational possibility of the
Christian Faith, that is, the Incarnation and Redemption), rests
securely on the position,--that in man 'omni actioni præit sua propria
passio; Deus autem est actus purissimus sine ulla potentialitate'. As
the tune produced between the breeze and Eolian harp is not a
self-subsistent, so neither memory, nor understanding, nor even love in
man: for he is a passive as well as active being: he is a patible agent.
But in God this is not so. Whatever is necessarily of him, (God of God,
Light of Light), is necessarily all act; therefore necessarily
self-subsistent, though not necessarily self-originated. This then is
the true mystery, because the true unique; that the Son of God has
origination without passion, that is, without ceasing to be a pure act:
while a created entity is, as far as it is merely creaturely and
distinguishable from the Creator, a mere 'passio' or recipient. This
unicity we strive, not to 'express', for that is impossible; but to
designate, by the nearest, though inadequate, analogy,--'Begotten'.


Ib. p. 133.

  As for the Holy Ghost, whose nature is represented to be love, I do
  not indeed find in Scripture that it is any where said, that the Holy
  Ghost is that mutual love, wherewith Father and Son love each other:
  but this we know, that there is a mutual love between Father and Son:
  'the Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his
  hands'.--John iii. 35. 'And the Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him
  all things that himself doeth'.-John v. 20; and our Saviour himself
  tells us, 'I love the Father'.--John xiv. 31. And I shewed before,
  that love is a distinct act, 'and therefore in God must be a person:
  for there are no accidents nor faculties in God.'

This most important, nay, fundamental truth, so familiar to the elder
philosophy, and so strongly and distinctly enunciated by Philo Judæus,
the senior and contemporary of the Evangelists, is to our modern divines
darkness and a sound.


Sect. VI. pp. 147-8.

  Yes; you'll say, that there should be three Persons, each of which is
  God, and yet but one God, is a contradiction: but what principle of
  natural reason does it contradict?

Surely never did argument vertiginate more! I had just acceded to
Sherlock's exposition of the Trinity, as the Supreme Being, his reflex
act of self-consciousness and his love, all forming one supreme mind;
and now he tells me, that each is the whole Supreme Mind, and denies
that three, each 'per se' the whole God, are not the same as three Gods!
I grant that division and separation are terms inapplicable, yet surely
three distinct though undivided Gods, are three Gods. That the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, are the one true God, I fully believe; but not
Sherlock's exposition of the doctrine. Nay, I think it would have been
far better to have worded the mystery thus:--The Father together with
his Son and Spirit, is the one true God.

"Each 'per se' God." This is the [Greek: prôton méga pseudos] of
Sherlock's scheme. Each of the three is whole God, because neither is,
or can be 'per se'; the Father himself being 'a se', but not 'per se'.


Ib. p. 149.

  For it is demonstrable that if there be three Persons and one God,
  each Person must be God, and yet there cannot be three distinct Gods,
  but one. For if each Person be not God, all three cannot be God,
  unless the Godhead have Persons in it which are not God.

Three persons having the same nature are three persons;--and if to
possess without limitation the divine nature, as opposed to the human,
is what we mean by God, why then three such persons are three Gods, and
will bethought so, till Gregory Nyssen can persuade us that John, James,
and Peter, each possessing the human nature, are not three men. John is
a man, James is a man, and Peter is a man: but they are not three men,
but one man!


Ib. p. 150.

  I affirm, that natural reason is not the rule and measure of
  expounding Scripture, no more than it is of expounding any other
  writing. The true and only way to interpret any writing, even the
  Scriptures themselves, is to examine the use and propriety of words
  and phrases, the connexion, scope, and design of the text, its
  allusion to ancient customs and usages, or disputes. For there is no
  other good reason to be given for any exposition, but that the words
  signify so, and the circumstances of the place, and the apparent scope
  of the writer require it.

This and the following paragraph are excellent. 'O si sic omnia'!


Ib. p. 153.

  Reconcile men to the doctrine (of the Trinity), and the Scripture is
  plain without any farther comment. This I have now endeavoured; and I
  believe our adversaries will talk more sparingly of absurdities and
  contradictions for the future, and they will lose the best argument
  they have against the orthodox expositions of Scripture.

Good doctor! you sadly over-rated both your own powers, and the docility
of your adversaries. If so clear a head and so zealous a Trinitarian as
Dr. Waterland could not digest your exposition, or acquit it of
Tritheism, little hope is there of finding the Unitarians more
persuadable.


Ib. p. 154.

  Though Christ be God himself, yet if there be three Persons in the
  Godhead, the equality and sameness of nature does not destroy the
  subordination of Persons: a Son is equal to his Father by nature, but
  inferior to him as his Son: if the Father, as I have explained it, be
  original mind and wisdom, the Son a personal, subsisting, but reflex
  image of his Father's wisdom, though their eternal wisdom be equal and
  the same, yet the original is superior to the image, the Father to the
  Son.

But why? We men deem it so, because the image is but a shadow, and not
equal to the original; but if it were the same in all perfections, how
could that, which is exactly the same, be less? Again, God is all
Being:--consequently there can nothing be added to the idea, except what
implies a negation or diminution of it. If one and the same Being is
equal to the Father, as touching his Godhead, but inferior as man; then
it is + 'm-x', which is not = + 'm'. But of two men I may say, that they
are equal to each other. A. = + courage-wisdom. B. = + wisdom-courage.
Both wise and courageous; but A. inferior in wisdom, B. in courage. But
God is all-perfect.


Ib. p. 156.

  So born before all creatures, as [Greek: prôtótokos] also signifies,
  'that by him were all things created'.

  'All things were created by him, and for him, and he is before all
  things', (which is the explication of [Greek: pôrtótokos pásaes
  ktíseos], begotten before the whole creation', and therefore no part
  of the creation himself.)

This is quite right. Our version should here be corrected. [Greek:
Prôto] or [Greek: prótaton] is here an intense comparative,--'infinitely
before'.


Ib. p. 159.

  That he 'being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
  with God', &c.--Phil. ii. 8, 9.

I should be inclined to adopt an interpretation of the unusual phrase
[Greek: hárpagmon] somewhat different both from the Socinian and the
Church version:--"who being in the form of God did not 'think equality
with God a thing to be seized with violence', but made, &c."


Ib. p. 160.

  Is a mere creature a fit lieutenant or representative of God in
  personal or prerogative acts of government and power? Must not every
  being be represented by one of his own kind, a man by a man, an angel
  by an angel, in such acts as are proper to their natures? and must not
  God then be represented by one who is God? Is any creature capable of
  the government of the world? Does not this require infinite wisdom and
  infinite power? And can God communicate infinite wisdom and infinite
  power to a creature or a finite nature? That is, can a creature be
  made a true and essential God?

This is sound reasoning. It is to be regretted that Sherlock had not
confined himself to logical comments on the Scripture, instead of
attempting metaphysical solutions.


Ib. pp. 161-3.

I find little or nothing to 'object to' in this exposition, from pp.
161-163 inclusively, of 'Phil'. ii. 8, 9. And yet I seem to feel, as if
a something that should have been prefixed, and to which all these
considerations would have been excellent seconds, were missing. To
explain the Cross by the necessity of sacrificial blood, and the
sacrificial blood as a type and 'ante'-delegate or pre-substitute of the
Cross, is too like an 'argumentum in circulo'.


Ib. p. 164.

  And though Christ be the eternal Son of God, and the natural Lord and
  heir of all things, yet 'God hath' in this 'highly exalted him' and
  given 'him a name which is above every name, that at' (or in [Greek:
  en]) 'the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven',
  &c.--Phil. ii. 9, 10, 11.

Never was a sublime passage more debased than by this rendering of
[Greek: en] by 'at', instead of 'in';--'at' the 'phenomenon', instead of
'in' the 'noumenon'. For such is the force of 'nomen', name, in this and
similar passages, namely, 'in vera et substantiali potestate Jesu': that
is, [Greek: en lógô kaì dià lógou], the true 'noumenon' or 'ens
intelligibile' of Christ. To bow at hearing the 'cognomen' may become a
universal, but it is still only a non-essential, consequence of the
former. But the debasement of the idea is not the worst evil of this
false rendering;--it has afforded the pretext and authority for
un-Christian intolerance.


Ib. p. 168.

  'The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment to the
  Son'.--John v. 22. Should the Father judge the world he 'must' judge
  as the maker and sovereign of the world, by the strict rules of
  righteousness and justice, and then how could any sinner be saved?

(Why? Is mercy incompatible with righteousness? How then can the Son be
righteous?)

  But he has committed judgment to the Son, as a mediatory king, who
  judges by the equity and chancery of the Gospel.

This article required exposition incomparably more than the simple
doctrine of the Trinity, plain and evident 'simplici intuitu', and
rendered obscure only by diverting the mental vision by terms drawn from
matter and multitude. In the Trinity all the 'Hows'? may and should be
answered by 'Look'! just as a wise tutor would do in stating the fact of
a double or treble motion, as of a ball rolling north ward on the deck
of a ship sailing south, while the earth is turning from west to east.
And in like manner, that is, 'per intuitum intellectualem', must all the
mysteries of faith be contemplated;--they are intelligible 'per se',
not discursively and 'per analogiam'. For the truths are unique, and may
have shadows and types, but no analogies. At this moment I have no
intuition, no intellectual diagram, of this article of the commission of
all judgment to the Son, and therefore a multitude of plausible
objections present themselves, which I cannot solve--nor do I expect to
solve them till by faith I see the thing itself.--Is not mercy an
attribute of the Deity, as Deity, and not exclusively of the Person of
the Son? And is not the authorizing another to judge by equity and mercy
the same as judging so ourselves? If the Father can do the former, why
not the latter?


Ib. p. 171.

  And therefore now it is given him to have life in himself, as the
  Father hath life in himself, as the original fountain of all life, by
  whom the Son himself lives: all life is derived from God, either by
  eternal generation, or procession, or creation; and thus Christ hath
  life in himself also; to the new creation he is the fountain of life:
  'he quickeneth whom he will'.

The truths which hitherto had been metaphysical, then began to be
historical. The Eternal was to be manifested in time. Hence Christ came
with signs and wonders; that is, the absolute, or the anterior to cause
and effect, manifested itself as a 'phenomenon' in time, but with the
predicates of eternity;--and this is the only possible definition of a
miracle 'in re ipsa', and not merely 'ad hominem', or 'ad ignorantiam'.


Ib. p. 177.

  His next argument consists in applying such things to the divinity of
  our Saviour as belong to his humanity; 'that he increased in wisdom,
  &c.:--that he knows not the day of judgment';--which he evidently
  speaks of himself as man: as all the ancient Fathers confess. In St.
  Mark it is said, 'But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no,
  not the angels that are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father'.
  St. Matthew does not mention the Son: 'Of that day and hour knoweth no
  man, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only'.

How much more politic, as well as ingenuous, it had been to have
acknowledged the difficulty of this text. So far from its being evident,
the evidence would be on the Arian side, were it not that so many
express texts determine us to the contrary.


Ib.

  Which shows that the Son in St. Matthew is included in the [Greek:
  oudeìs] none, or no man, and therefore concerns him only as a man: for
  the Father 'includes the whole Trinity', and therefore includes the
  Son, who seeth whatever his Father doth.

This is an 'argumentum in circulo', and 'petitio rei sub lite'. Why is
he called the Son in 'antithesis' to the Father, if it meant, "no not
the Christ, except in his character of the co-eternal Son, included in
the Father?" If it "concerned him only as a man," why is he placed after
the angels? Why called the 'Son' simply, instead of the Son of Man, or
the Messiah?


Ib.

  [Greek: Oudeìs] is not [Greek: oudeìs anthrôpôn], but, 'no one': as in
  John i. 18. 'No one hath seen God at any time'; that is, he is by
  essence invisible.

This most difficult text I have not seen explained satisfactorily. I
have thought that the [Greek: ággeloi] must here be taken in the primary
sense of the word, namely, as messengers, or missionary Prophets: Of
this day knoweth no one, not the messengers or revealers of God's
purposes now in heaven, no, not the Son, the greatest of Prophets,--that
is, he in that character promised to declare all that in that character
it was given to him to know.


Ib. p. 186.

  When St. Paul calls the Father the One God, he expressly opposes it to
  the many gods of the heathens. 'For though there be that are called
  gods, &c. but to us, there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all
  things; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
  him': where the 'one God' and 'one Lord and Mediator' is opposed to
  the many gods and many lords or mediators which were worshipped by the
  heathens.

But surely the 'one Lord' is as much distinguished from the 'one God',
as both are contradistinguished from the 'gods many and lords many' of
the heathens. Besides 'the Father' is not the term used in that age in
distinction from the gods that are no gods; but [Greek: Ho epì pántôn
theós].


Ib. p. 222.

  'The Word was with God'; that is, it was not yet in the world, or not
  yet made flesh; but with God.--'John' i. 1. So that to be 'with God',
  signifies nothing but not to be in the world.


_'The Word was with God.'_

  Grotius does say, that this was opposed to the Word's being made
  flesh, and appearing in the world: but he was far enough from thinking
  that these words have only a negative sense: * * * for he tells us
  what the positive sense is, that with God is [Greek: parà tô patrí],
  with the Father, * * and explains it by what Wisdom says, 'Prov'. vii.
  30. 'Then I was by him, &c.' which he does not think a 'prosopopoeia',
  but spoken of a subsisting person.

But even this is scarcely tenable even as Greek. Had this been St.
John's meaning, surely he would have said, [Greek: en theô], not [Greek:
pròs tòn theón], in the nearest proximity that is not confusion. But it
is strange, that Sherlock should not have seen that Grotius had a
hankering toward Socinianism, but, like a 'shy cock', and a man of the
world, was always ready to unsay what he had said.



[Footnote 1: A Vindication of the Doctrine of the Holy and ever Blessed
Trinity and the Incarnation of the Son of God, occasioned by the Brief
