Notes on the Creed of St Athanasius, and the Brief History of the
Unitarians, or Socinians. and containing an answer to both. By Wm.
Sherlock, London. 8vo. 1690.]


[Footnote 2: The third General Council, that at Ephesus in 431, decreed

  "that it should not be lawful for any man to publish or compose
  another Faith or Creed than that which was defined by the Nicene
  Council."

Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





NOTES ON WATERLAND'S VINDICATION OF CHRIST'S DIVINITY. [1]


'In initio'.

It would be no easy matter to find a tolerably competent individual who
more venerates the writings of Waterland than I do, and long have done.
But still in how many pages do I not see reason to regret, that the
total idea of the 4=3=1,--of the adorable Tetractys, eternally
self-manifested in the Triad, Father, Son, and Spirit,--was never in its
cloudless unity present to him. Hence both he and Bishop Bull too often
treat it as a peculiarity of positive religion, which is to be cleared
of all contradiction to reason, and then, thus negatively qualified, to
be actually received by an act of the mere will; 'sit pro ratione
voluntas'. Now, on the other hand, I affirm, that the article of the
Trinity is religion, is reason, and its universal 'formula'; and that
there neither is, nor can be, any religion, any reason, but what is, or
is an expansion of the truth of the Trinity; in short, that all other
pretended religions, pagan or 'pseudo'-Christian (for example,
Sabellian, Arian, Socinian), are in themselves Atheism; though God
forbid, that I should call or even think the men so denominated
Atheists. I affirm a heresy often, but never dare denounce the holder a
heretic.

On this ground only can it be made comprehensible, how any honest and
commonly intelligent man can withstand the proofs and sound logic of
Bull and Waterland, that they failed in the first place to present the
idea itself of the great doctrine which they so ably advocated. Take my
self, S.T.C. as a humble instance. I was never so befooled as to think
that the author of the fourth Gospel, or that St. Paul, ever taught the
Priestleyan Psilanthropism, or that Unitarianisn (presumptuously, nay,
absurdly so called), was the doctrine of the New Testament generally.
But during the sixteen months of my aberration from the Catholic Faith,
I presumed that the tenets of the divinity of Christ, the Redemption,
and the like, were irrational, and that what was contradictory to reason
could not have been revealed by the Supreme Reason. As soon as I
discovered that these doctrines were not only consistent with reason,
but themselves very reason, I returned at once to the literal
interpretation of the Scriptures, and to the Faith.

As to Dr. Samuel Clarke, the fact is, every generation has its one or
more over-rated men. Clarke was such in the reign of George I.; Dr.
Johnson eminently so in that of George III.; Lord Byron being the star
now in the ascendant.

In every religious and moral use of the word, God, taken absolutely,
that is, not as a God, or the God, but as God, a relativity, a
distinction in kind 'ab omni quod non est Deus', is so essentially
implied, that it is a matter of perfect indifference, whether we assert
a world without God, or make God the world. The one is as truly Atheism
as the other. In fact, for all moral and practical purposes they are the
same position differently expressed; for whether I say, God is the
world, or the world is God, the inevitable conclusion, the sense and
import is, that there is no other God than the world, that is, there is
no other meaning to the term God. Whatever you may mean by, or choose to
believe of, the world, that and that alone you mean by, and believe of,
God. Now I very much question whether in any other sense Atheism, that
is, speculative Atheism, is possible. For even in the Lucretian, the
coarsest and crudest scheme of the Epicurean doctrine, a hylozism, a
potential life, is clearly implied, as also in the celebrated 'lene
clinamen' becoming actual. Desperadoes articulating breath into a
blasphemy of nonsense, to which they themselves attach no connected
meaning, and the wickedness of which is alone intelligible, there may
be; but a La Place, or a La Grand, would, and with justice, resent and
repel the imputation of a belief in chance, or of a denial of law,
order, and self-balancing life and power in the world. Their error is,
that they make them the proper and underived attributes of the world. It
follows then, that Pantheism is equivalent to Atheism, and that there is
no other Atheism actually existing, or speculatively conceivable, but
Pantheism. Now I hold it demonstrable that a consistent Socinianism,
following its own consequences, must come to Pantheism, and in ungodding
the Saviour must deify cats and dogs, fleas and frogs. There is, there
can be, no 'medium' between the Catholic Faith of Trinal Unity, and
Atheism disguised in the self-contradicting term, Pantheism;--for every
thing God, and no God, are identical positions.


Query I. p. 1.

  'The Word was God'.--John i. 1. 'I am the Lord, and there is none
  else; there is no God besides me'.--Is. xiv. 5, &c.

In all these texts the 'was', or 'is', ought to be rendered positively,
or objectively, and not as a mere connective: 'The Word Is God', and
saith, 'I Am the Lord; there is no God besides me', the Supreme Being,
'Deitas objectiva'. The Father saith, 'I Am in that I am,--Deitas
subjectiva'.


Ib. p. 2.

  Whether all other beings, besides the one Supreme God, be not excluded
  by the texts of Isaiah (to which many more might be added), and
  consequently, whether Christ can be God at all, unless He be the same
  with the Supreme God?

  The sum of your answer to this query is, that the texts cited from
  Isaiah, are spoken of one Person only, the Person of the Father, &c.

O most unhappy mistranslation of 'Hypostasis' by Person! The Word is
properly the only Person.


Ib. p. 3.

  Now, upon your hypothesis, we must add; that even the Son of God
  himself, however divine he may be thought, is really no God at all in
  any just and proper sense. He is no more than a nominal God, and
  stands excluded with the rest. All worship of him, and reliance upon
  him, will be idolatry, as much as the worship of angels, or men, or of
  the gods of the heathen would be. God the Father he is God, and he
  only, and 'him only shall thou serve'. This I take to be a clear
  consequence from your principles, and unavoidable.

Waterland's argument is absolutely unanswerable by a worshipper of
Christ. The modern 'ultra'-Socinian cuts the knot.


Query II. p. 43.

  And therefore he might as justly bear the style and title of 'Lord
  God, God of Abraham', &c. while he acted in that capacity, as he did
  that of 'Mediator, Messiah, Son of the Father', &c. after that he
  condescended to act in another, and to discover his personal relation.

And why, then, did not Dr. Waterland,--why did not his great
predecessor in this glorious controversy, Bishop Bull,--contend for a
revisal of our established version of the Bible, but especially of the
New Testament? Either the unanimous belief and testimony of the first
five or six centuries, grounded on the reiterated declarations of John
and Paul, and the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews, were erroneous,
or at best doubtful;--and then why not wipe them off; why these
references to them?--or else they were, as I believe, and both Bull and
Waterland believed, the very truth; and then why continue the
translation of the Hebrew into English at second-hand through the
'medium' of the Septuagint? Have we not adopted the Hebrew word,
Jehovah,? Is not the [Greek: Kyrios], or Lord, of the LXX. a Greek
substitute, in countless instances, for the Hebrew Jehovah? Why not then
restore the original word, and in the Old Testament religiously render
Jehovah by Jehovah, and every text of the New Testament, referring to
the Old, by the Hebrew word in the text referred to? Had this been done,
Socinianism would have been scarcely possible in England.

Why was not this done?--I will tell you why. Because that great truth,
in which are contained all treasures of all possible knowledge, was
still opaque even to Bull and Waterland;--because the Idea itself--that
'Idea Idearum', the one substrative truth which is the form, manner, and
involvent of all truths,--was never present to either of them in its
entireness, unity, and transparency. They most ably vindicated the
doctrine of the Trinity, negatively, against the charge of positive
irrationality. With equal ability they shewed the contradictions, nay,
the absurdities, involved in the rejection of the same by a professed
Christian. They demonstrated the utterly un-Scriptural and
contra-Scriptural nature of Arianism, and Sabellianism, and Socinianism.
But the self-evidence of the great Truth, as a universal of the
reason,--as the reason itself--as a light which revealed itself by its
own essence as light--this they had not had vouchsafed to them.


Query XV. p. 225-6.

  The pretence is, that we equivocate in talking of eternal generation.

All generation is necessarily [Greek: ánarchón ti], without dividuous
beginning, and herein contradistinguished from creation.


Ib. p. 226.

  True, it is not the same with human generation.

Not the same 'eodem modo', certainly; but it is so essentially the same
that the generation of the Son of God is the transcendent, which gives
to human generation its right to be so called. It is in the most proper,
that is, the fontal, sense of the term, generation.


Ib.

  You have not proved that all generation implies beginning; and what is
  more, cannot.

It would be difficult to disprove the contrary. Generation with a
beginning is not generation, but creation. Hence we may see how
necessary it is that in all important controversies we should predefine
the terms negatively, that is, exclude and preclude all that is not
meant by them; and then the positive meaning, that is, what is meant by
them, will be the easy result,--the post-definition, which is at once
the real definition and impletion, the circumference and the area.


Ib. p. 227-8.

  It is a usual thing with many, (moralists may account for it), when
  they meet with a difficulty which they cannot readily answer,
  immediately to conclude that the doctrine is false, and to run
  directly into the opposite persuasion;--not considering that they may
  meet with much more weighty objections there than before; or that they
  may have reason sufficient to maintain and believe many things in
  philosophy and divinity, though they cannot answer every question
  which may be started, or every difficulty which may be raised against
  them.

O, if Bull and Waterland had been first philosophers, and then divines,
instead of being first, manacled, or say articled clerks of a guild;--if
the clear free intuition of the truth had led them to the Article, and
not the Article to the defence of it as not having been proved to be
false,--how different would have been the result! Now we feel only the
inconsistency of Arianism, not the truth of the doctrine attacked.
Arianism is confuted, and in such a manner, that I will not reject the
Catholic Faith upon the Arian's grounds. It may, I allow, be still true.
But that it is true, because the Arians have hitherto failed to prove
its falsehood, is no logical conclusion. The Unitarian may have better
luck; or if he fail, the Deist.


Query XVI. p. 234.

  But God's 'thoughts are not our thoughts'.

That is, as I would interpret the text;--the ideas in and by which God
reveals himself to man are not the same with, and are not to be judged
by, the conceptions which the human understanding generalizes from the
notices of the senses, common to man and to irrational animals, dogs,
elephants, beavers, and the like, endowed with the same senses.
Therefore I regard this paragraph, p. 223-4, as a specimen of admirable
special pleading 'ad hominem' in the Court of eristic Logic; but I
condemn it as a wilful resignation or temporary self-deposition of the
reason. I will not suppose what my reason declares to be no position at
all, and therefore an impossible sub-position.


Ib. p. 235.

  Let us keep to the terms we began with; lest by the changing of words
  we make a change of ideas, and alter the very state of the question.

This misuse, or rather this 'omnium-gatherum' expansion and consequent
extenuation of the word, Idea and Ideas, may be regarded as a calamity
inflicted by Mr. Locke on the reigns of William III. Queen Anne, and the
first two Georges.


Ib. p. 237.

  Sacrifice was one instance of worship required under the Law; and it
  is said;--'He that sacrificeth unto any God, save unto the Lord only,
  he shall be utterly destroyed' (Exod. xxii. 20.) Now suppose any
  person, considering with himself that only absolute and sovereign
  sacrifice was appropriated to God by this law, should have gone and
  sacrificed to other Gods, and have been convicted of it before the
  judges. The apology he must have made for it, I suppose, must have run
  thus: "Gentlemen, though I have sacrificed to other Gods, yet I hope
  you'll observe, that I did it not absolutely: I meant not any absolute
  or supreme sacrifice (which is all that the Law forbids), but relative
  and inferior only. I regulated my intentions with all imaginable care,
  and my esteem with the most critical exactness. I considered the other
  Gods, whom I sacrificed to, as inferior only and infinitely so;
  reserving all sovereign sacrifice to the supreme God of Israel." This,
  or the like apology must, I presume, have brought off the criminal
  with some applause for his acuteness, if your principles be true.
  Either you must allow this, or you must be content to say, that not
  only absolute supreme sacrifice (if there be any sense in that
  phrase), but all sacrifice was by the Law appropriate to God only, &c.
  &c.

How was it possible for an Arian to answer this? But it was impossible;
and Arianism was extinguished by Waterland, but in order to the increase
of Socinianism; and this, I doubt not, Waterland foresaw. He was too
wise a man to suppose that the exposure of the folly and falsehood of
one form of Infidelism would cure or prevent Infidelity. Enough, that he
made it more bare-faced--I might say, bare-breeched; for modern
Unitarianism is verily the 'sans-culotterie' of religion.


Ib. p. 239.

  You imagine that acts of religious worship are to derive their
  signification and quality from the intention and meaning of the
  worshippers: whereas the very reverse of it is the truth.

Truly excellent. Let the Church of England praise God for her Saints--a
more glorious Kalendar than Rome can show!


Ib. p. 251.

  The sum then of the case is this: If the Son could be included as
  being uncreated, and very God; as Creator, Sustainer, Preserver of all
  things, and one with the Father; then he might be worshipped upon
  their (the Ante-Nicene Fathers') principles, but otherwise could not.

Every where in this invaluable writer I have to regret the absence of
all distinct idea of the I Am as the proper attribute of the Father; and
hence, the ignorance of the proper Jehovaism of the Son; and hence, that
while we worship the Son together with the Father, we nevertheless pray
to the Father only through the Son.


Query XVII.

  And we may never be able perfectly to comprehend the relations of the
  three persons, 'ad intra', amongst themselves; the ineffable order and
  economy of the ever-blessed co-eternal Trinity.

"Comprehend!" No. For how can any spiritual truth be comprehended? Who
can comprehend his own will; or his own personeity, that is, his I-ship
(Ichheit'); or his own mind, that is, his person; or his own life? But
we can distinctly apprehend them. In strictness, the Idea, God, like all
other ideas rightly so called, and as contradistinguished from
conception, is not so properly above, as alien from, comprehension. It
is like smelling a sound.


Query XVIII. p. 269.

  From what hath been observed, it may appear sufficiently that the
  divine [Greek: Lógos] was our King and our God long before; that he
  had the same claim and title to religious worship that the Father
  himself had--'only not so distinctly revealed'.

Here I differ 'toto orbe' from Waterland, and say with Luther and
Zinzendorf, that before the Baptism of John the 'Logos' alone had been
distinctly revealed, and that first in Christ he declared himself a Son,
namely, the co-eternal only-begotten Son, and thus revealed the Father.
Indeed the want of the Idea of the 1=3 could alone have prevented
Waterland from inferring this from his own query II. and the texts cited
by him pp. 28-38. The Father cannot be revealed except in and through
the Son, his eternal 'exegesis'. The contrary position is an absurdity.
The Supreme Will, indeed, the Absolute Good, knoweth himself as the
Father: but the act of self-affirmation, the I Am in that I Am, is not a
manifestation 'ad extra', not an 'exegesis'.


Ib. p. 274.

  This point being settled, I might allow you that, in some sense,
  distinct worship commenced with the distinct title of Son or Redeemer:
  that is, our blessed Lord was then first worshipped, or commanded to
  be worshipped by us, under that distinct title or character; having
  before had no other title or character peculiar and proper to himself,
  but only what was common to the Father and him too.

Rather shall I say that the Son and the Spirit, the Word and the Wisdom,
were alone worshipped, because alone revealed under the Law. See
Proverbs, i. ii.

The passage quoted from Bishop Bull is very plausible and very eloquent;
but only 'cum multis granis salis sumend'.


Query XIX. p. 279.

  That the Father, whose honour had been sufficiently secured under the
  Jewish dispensation, and could not but be so under the Christian also,
  &c.

Here again! This contradiction of Waterland to his own principles is
continually recurring;--yea, and in one place he involves the very
Tritheism, of which he was so victorious an antagonist, namely, that the
Father is Jehovah, the Son Jehovah, and the Spirit Jehovah;--thus making
Jehovah either a mere synonyme of God--whereas he himself rightly
renders it  [Greek: Ho Ôn], which St. John every where, and St. Paul no
less, makes the peculiar name of the Son, [Greek: monogenàes uhiòs, ho
ôn eis tòn kólpon tou patrós]--; or he affirms the same absurdity, as if
had said: The Father is the Son, and the Son is the Son, and the Holy
Ghost is the Son, and yet there are not three Sons but one Son. N. B.
[Greek: Ho òn] is the verbal noun of [Greek: hos esti], not of [Greek:
egô eimí]. It is strange how little use has been made of that profound
and most pregnant text, 'John' i. 18!


Query XX. p. 302.

  The [Greek: homooúsion] itself might have been spared, at least out of
  the Creeds, had not a fraudulent abuse of good words brought matters
  to that pass, that the Catholic Faith was in danger of being lost even
  under Catholic language.

Most assuredly the very 'disputable' rendering of [Greek: homoousion] by
consubstantial, or of one substance with, not only might have been
spared, but should have been superseded. Why not--as is felt to be for
the interest of science in all the physical sciences--retain the same
term in all languages? Why not 'usia' and homoüsial, as well as
'hypostasis', hypostatic, homogeneous, heterogeneous, and the like;--or
as Baptism, Eucharist, Liturgy, Epiphany and the rest?


Query XXI. p. 303.

  The Doctor's insinuating from the 300 texts, which style the Father
  God absolutely, or the one God, that the Son is not strictly and
  essentially God, not one God with the Father, is a strained and remote
  inference of his own.

Waterland has weakened his argument by seeming to admit that in all
these 300 texts the Father, 'distinctive', is meant.


Ib. p. 316-17.

  The simplicity of God is another mystery. * * When we come to inquire
  whether all extension, or all plurality, diversity, composition of
  substance and accident, and the like, be consistent with it, then it
  is we discover how confused and inadequate our ideas are. * * To this
  head belongs that perplexing question (beset with difficulties on all
  sides), whether the divine substance be extended or no.

Surely, the far larger part of these assumed difficulties rests on a
misapplication either of the senses to the sense, or of the sense to the
understanding, or of the understanding to the reason;--in short, on an
asking for images where only theorems can be, or requiring theorems for
thoughts, that is, conceptions or notions, or lastly, conceptions for
ideas.


Query XXIII. p. 351.

  But taking advantage of the ambiguity of the word 'hypostasis',
  sometimes used to signify substance, and sometimes person, you
  contrive a fallacy.

And why did not Waterland lift up his voice against this mischievous
abuse of the term 'hypostasis', and the perversion of its Latin
rendering, 'substantia' as being equivalent to [Greek: ousía]? Why
[Greek: ousía] should not have been rendered by 'essentia', I cannot
conceive. 'Est' seems a contraction of 'esset', and 'ens' of 'essens':
[Greek: ôn, ousa, ousía] = 'essens, essentis, essentia'.


Ib. p. 354.

  Let me desire you not to give so great a loose to your fancy in divine
  things: you seem to consider every thing under the notion of extension
  and sensible images.

Very true. The whole delusion of the Anti-Trinitarians arises out of
this, that they apply the property of imaginable matter--in which A. is,
that is, can only be imagined, by exclusion of B. as the universal
predicate of all substantial being.


Ib. p. 357.

  And our English Unitarians * * have been still refining upon the
  Socinian scheme, * * and have brought it still nearer to Sabellianism.

The Sabellian and the Unitarian seem to differ only in this;--that what
the Sabellian calls union with, the Unitarian calls full inspiration by,
the Divinity.


Ib. p. 359.

  It is obvious, at first sight, that the true Arian or Semi-Arian
  scheme (which you would be thought to come up to at least) can never
  tolerably support itself without taking in the Catholic principle of a
  human soul to join with the Word.

Here comes one of the consequences of the Cartesian Dualism: as if
[Greek: sàrx], the living body, could be or exist without a soul, or a
human living body without a human soul! [Greek: Sàrx] is not Greek for
carrion, nor [Greek: sôma] for carcase.


Query XXIV. p. 371.

  Necessary existence is an essential character, and belongs equally to
  Father and Son.

Subsistent in themselves are Father, Son and Spirit: the Father only has
origin in himself.


Query XXVI. p. 412.

  The words [Greek: ouch hôs genómenon] he construes thus: "not as
  eternally generated," as if he had read [Greek: gennômenon], supplying
  [Greek: aïdíôs] by imagination. The sense and meaning of the word
  [Greek: genómenon], signifying made, or created, is so fixed and
  certain in this author, &c.

This is but one of fifty instances in which the true Englishing of
[Greek: genómenos, egéneto], &c. would have prevented all mistake. It is
not 'made', but 'became'. Thus here:--begotten eternally, and not as one
that became; that is, as not having been before. The only-begotten Son
never 'became'; but all things 'became' through him.


Ib. 412.

  'Et nos etiam Sermoni atque Rationi, itemque Virtuti, per quæ omnia
  molitum Deum ediximus, propriam substantiam Spiritum inscribimus; cui
  et Sermo insit prænuntianti, et Ratio adsit disponenti, et Virtus
  perficienti. Hunc ex Deo prolatum didicimus, et prolatione generatum,
  et idcirco Filium Dei et Deum dictum ex unitate substantiæ'.--Tertull.
  Apol. c. 21.

How strange and crude the realism of the Christian Faith appears in
Tertullian's rugged Latin!


Ib. p. 414.

  He represents Tertullian as making the Son, in his highest capacity,
  ignorant of the day of judgment.

Of the true sense of the text, Mark xiii. 32., I still remain in doubt;
but, though as zealous and stedfast a Homoüsian as Bull and Waterland
themselves, I am inclined to understand it of the Son in his highest
capacity; but I would avoid the inferiorizing consequences by a stricter
rendering of the [Greek: ei màe ho Patáer]. The [Greek: monon] of St.
Matthew xxiv. 36. is here omitted. I think Waterland's a very
unsatisfying solution of this text.


Ib. p. 415.

  'Exclamans quod se Deus reliquisset, &c. Habes ipsum exclamantem in
  passione, Deus meus, Deus meus, ut quid me dereliquisti? Sed hæc vox
  carnis et animæ, id est, hominis; nec Sermonis, nec Spiritus',
  &c.--Tertull. Adv. Prax. c. 26. c. 30.

The ignorance of the Fathers, and, Origen excepted, of the Ante-Nicene
Fathers in particular, in all that respects Hebrew learning and the New
Testament references to the Old Testament, is shown in this so early
fantastic misinterpretation grounded on the fact of our Lord's
reminding, and as it were giving out aloud to John and Mary the
twenty-second Psalm, the prediction of his present sufferings and after
glory. But the entire passage in Tertullian, though no proof of his
Arianism, is full of proofs of his want of insight into the true sense
of the Scripture texts. Indeed without detracting from the inestimable
services of the Fathers from Tertullian to Augustine respecting the
fundamental article of the Christian Faith, yet commencing from the
fifth century, I dare claim for the Reformed Church of England the
honorable name of [Greek: archaspistàes] of Trinitarianism, and the
foremost rank among the Churches, Roman or Protestant: the learned
Romanist divines themselves admit this, and make a merit of the
reluctance with which they nevertheless admit it, in respect of Bishop
Bull. [2]


Ib. p. 421.

  It seems to me that if there be not reasons of conscience obliging a
  good man to speak out, there are always reasons of prudence which
  should make a wise man hold his tongue.

True, and as happily expressed. To this, however, the honest
Anti-Trinitarian must come at last: "Well, well, I admit that John and
Paul thought differently; but this remains my opinion."


Query XXVII. p. 427.

  [Greek: Ton alaethinòn kaì óntôs ónta Theòn, tòn tou Christou patéra].
 --Athanas. Cont. Gent.

  The just and literal rendering of the passage is this: 'The true God
  who in reality is such, namely, the Father of Christ.'

The passage admits of a somewhat different interpretation from this of
Waterland's, and of equal, if not greater, force against the Arian
notion: namely, taking [Greek: tòn óntôs ónta] distinctively from
[Greek: ho ôn]--the 'Ens omnis entitatis, etiam suæ', that is, the I Am
the Father, in distinction from the 'Ens Supremum', the Son. It cannot,
however, be denied that in changing the 'formula' of the 'Tetractys'
into the 'Trias', by merging the 'Prothesis' in the 'Thesis', the
Identity in the Ipseity, the Christian Fathers subjected their
exposition to many inconveniences.


Ib. p. 432.

  [Greek: Ouch ho poiaetàes tôn hólôn éstai Theòs ho tô Môsei eipôn
  autòn einai Theòn Abraàm, kaì Theòn Isaàk, kaì Theòn Iakôb].--Justin
  Mart. Dial. p. 180.

  The meaning is, that that divine Person, who called himself God, and
  was God, was not the Person of the Father, whose ordinary character is
  that of maker of all things, but another divine Person, namely, God
  the Son. * * It was Justin's business to shew that there was a divine
  Person, one who was God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and was not the
  Father; and therefore there were two divine Persons.

At all events, it was a very incautious expression on the part of
Justin, though his meaning was, doubtless, that which Waterland gives.
The same most improper, or at best, most inconvenient because equivocal
phrase, has been, as I think, interpolated into our Apostles' Creed.


Ib. p. 436.

  [Greek: Taeroito d' àn, hôs ho emòs lógos, ehis mèn Theòs, eis hèn
  aítion kaì Ghiou kaì Pneúmatos anapheroménôn. k.t.l.]--Greg. Naz.
  Orat. 29.

  We may, as I conceive, preserve (the doctrine of) one God, by
  referring both the Son and Holy Ghost to one cause, &c.

Another instance of the inconvenience of the Trias compared with the
Tetractys.



[Footnote 1: A Vindication of Christ's Divinity: being a defence of some
queries relating to Dr. Clarke's scheme of the Holy Trinity, &c. By
Daniel Waterland. 2nd edit. Cambridge, 1719. Ed.]


[Footnote 2:

  'Y sino ahí está el Doctor Jorge Bull Profesor de Teología, y
  Presbitero de la Iglesia Anglicana, que murió Obispo de San David el
  año de 1716, cuyas obras teologico--escolasticas, en folio, nada deben
  á las mas alambicadas que se han estampado en Salamanca y en Coimbra;
  y como los puntos que por la mayor parte trató en ellas son sobre los
  misterios capitales de nuestra Santa Fé, conviene á saber, sobre el
  misterio de la Trinidad, y sobre el de la Divinidad de Cristo, en los
  cuales su Pseudaiglesia Anglicana no se desvia de la Catolica, en
  verdad, que los manejó con tanto nervio y con tanta delicadeza, que
  los teologos ortodojos mas escolastizados, como si dijéramos
  electrizados, hacen grande estimacion de dichas obras. Y aun en los
  dos Tratados que escribió acerca de la Justification, que es punto mas
  resvaladizo, en los principios que abrazó, no se separó de los
  teologos Catolicos; pero en algunas consecuencias que infirio, ya dió
  bastantemente á entender la mala leche que habia mamado.'

Fray. Gerundio. ii. 7. Ed.]





       *       *       *       *       *





