Part II. p. 14.

  It behoved him (Dr. Hawker in his Letter to the Barrister) to show in
  what manner a covenant can exist without terms or conditions.

According to the Methodists there is a condition,--that of faith in the
power and promise of Christ, and the virtue of the Cross. And were it
otherwise, the objection is scarcely appropriate except at the Old
Bailey, or in the Court of King's Bench. The Barrister might have framed
a second law-syllogism, as acute as his former. The laws of England
allow no binding covenant in a transfer of goods or chattels without
value received. But there can be no value received by God:--'Ergo',
there can be no covenant between God and man. And if Jehovah should be
as courteous as the House of Commons, and acknowledge the jurisdiction
of the Courts at Westminster, the pleading might hold perhaps, and the
Pentateuch be quashed after an argument before the judges. Besides, how
childish to puff up the empty bladder of an old metaphysical foot-ball
on the 'modus operandi interior' of Justification into a shew of
practical substance; as if it were no less solid than a cannon ball!
Why, drive it with all the vehemence that five toes can exert, it would
not kill a louse on the head of Methodism. Repentance, godly sorrow,
abhorrence of sin as sin, and not merely dread from forecast of the
consequences, these the Arminian would call means of obtaining
salvation, while the Methodist (more philosophically perhaps) names them
signs of the work of free grace commencing and the dawning of the sun of
redemption. And pray where is the practical difference?


Ib. p. 26.

  Jesus answered him thus--'Verily, I say unto you, unless a man be born
  of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
  God'.--The true sense of which is obviously this:--Except a man be
  initiated into my religion by Baptism, (which 'at that time' was
  always 'preceded by a confession of faith') and unless he manifest his
  sincere reception of it, by leading that upright and 'spiritual' life
  which it enjoins, 'he cannot enter the kingdom of heaven', or be a
  partaker of that happiness which it belongs to me to confer on those
  who believe in my name and keep my sayings.

Upon my faith as a Christian, if no more is meant by being born again
than this, the speaker must have had the strongest taste in metaphors of
any teacher in verse or prose on record, Jacob Behmen himself not
excepted. The very Alchemists lag behind. Pity, however, that our
Barrister has not shown us how this plain and obvious business of
Baptism agrees with ver. 8. of the same chapter: 'The wind bloweth where
it listeth', &c. Now if this does not express a visitation of the mind
by a somewhat not in the own power or fore-thought of the mind itself,
what are words meant for?


Ib. p. 29.

  The true meaning of being 'born again', in the sense in which our
  Saviour uses the phrase, implies nothing more or less, in plain terms,
  than this:--to repent; to lead for the future a religious life instead
  of a life of disobedience; to believe the Holy Scriptures, and to pray
  for grace and assistance to persevere in our obedience to the end. All
  this any man of common sense might explain in a few words.

Pray, then, (for I will take the Barrister's own commentary,) what does
the man of common sense mean by grace? If he will explain grace in any
other way than as the circumstances 'ab extra' (which would be mere
mockery and in direct contradiction to a score of texts), and yet
without mystery, I will undertake for Dr. Hawker and Co. to make the new
birth itself as plain as a pikestaff, or a whale's foal, or Sarah
Robarts's rabbits.


Ib. p. 30.

  So that they go on in their sin waiting for a new birth, &c.

"So that they go on in their sin!"--Who would not suppose it notorious
that every Methodist meeting-house was a cage of Newgate larks making up
their minds to die game?


Ib.

  The following account is extracted from the Methodist Magazine for
  1798: "The Lord astonished 'Sarah Roberts' with his mercy, by 'setting
  her at liberty, while employed' in the necessary business of 'washing'
  for her family, &c.

N. B. Not the famous rabbit-woman.--She was Robarts.


Ib. p. 31.

  A washerwoman has 'all her sins blotted out' in the twinkling of an
  eye, and while reeking with suds is received in the family of the
  Redeemer's kingdom. Surely this is a most abominable profanation of
  all that is serious, &c.

And where pray is the absurdity of this? Has Christ declared any
antipathy to washerwomen, or the Holy Ghost to warm suds? Why does not
the Barrister try his hand at the "abominable profanation," in a story
of a certain woman with an issue of blood who was made free by touching
the hem of a garment, without the previous knowledge of the wearer?

  'Rode, caper, vitem: tamen hinc cum stabis ad aras, In tua quod fundi
  cornua possit, erit'.


Ib. p. 32.

  The leading design of John the Baptist * * was * this:--to prepare the
  minds of men for the reception of that pure system of moral truth
  which the Saviour, by divine authority, was speedily to inculcate, and
  of those sublime doctrines of a resurrection and a future judgment,
  which, as powerful motives to the practice of holiness, he was soon to
  reveal.

What then? Did not John the Baptist himself teach a pure system of moral
truth? Was John so much more ignorant than Paul before his conversion,
and the whole Jewish nation, except a few rich freethinkers, as to be
ignorant of the "sublime doctrines of a resurrection and a future
judgment?" This, I well know, is the strong-hold of Socinianism; but
surely one single unprejudiced perusal of the New Testament,--not to
suppose an acquaintance with Kidder or Lightfoot--would blow it down,
like a house of cards!


Ib. p. 33.

 --their faiths in the efficacy of their own rites, and creeds, and
  ceremonies, and their whole train of 'substitutions' for 'moral duty',
  was so entire, and in their opinion was such a 'saving faith', that
  they could not at all interpret any language that seemed to dispute
  their value, or deny their importance.

Poor strange Jews! They had, doubtless, what Darwin would call a
specific 'paralysis' of the auditory nerves to the writings of their own
Prophets, which yet were read Sabbath after Sabbath in their public
Synagogues. For neither John nor Christ himself ever did, or indeed
could, speak in language more contemptuous of the folly of considering
rites as substitutions for moral duty, or in severer words denounce the
blasphemy of such an opinion. Why need I refer to Isaiah or Micah?


Ib. p. 34.

  Thus it was that this moral preacher explained and enforced the duty
  of repentance, and thus it was that he prepared the way for the
  greatest and best of teachers, &c.

Well then, if all this was but a preparation for the doctrines of
Christ, those doctrines themselves must surely have been something
different, and more difficult? Oh no! John's preparation consisted in a
complete rehearsal of the 'Drama didacticum', which Christ and the
Apostles were to exhibit to a full audience!--Nay, prithee, good
Barrister! do not be too rash in charging the Methodists with a
monstrous burlesque of the Gospel!


Ib. p. 37.

  --the logic of the new Evangelists will convince him that it is a
  contradiction in terms even to 'suppose' himself 'capable of doing any
  thing' to help 'or bringing any thing to recommend himself to the
  Divine favour'.

Now, suppose the wisdom of these endless attacks on an old abstruse
metaphysical notion to be allowed, yet why in the name of common candour
does not the Barrister ring the same 'tocsin' against his friend Dr.
Priestley's scheme of Necessity;--or against his idolized Paley, who
explained the will as a sensation, produced by the action of the
intellect on the muscles, and the intellect itself as a catenation of
ideas, and ideas as configurations of the organized brain? Would not
every syllable apply, yea, and more strongly, more indisputably? And
would his fellow-sectaries thank him, or admit the consequences? Or has
any late Socinian divine discovered, that Do as ye would be done unto,
is an interpolated precept?


Ib. p. 39.

  "Even repentance and faith," (says Dr. Hawker,) "those most essential
  qualifications of the mind, for the participation and enjoyment of the
  blessings of the Gospel, (and which all real disciples of the Lord
  Jesus cannot but possess,) are 'never supposed as a condition which
  the sinner performs to entitle him to mercy', but merely as evidences
  that he is brought and has obtained mercy. 'They cannot be the
  conditions' of obtaining salvation."

Ought not this single quotation to have satisfied the Barrister, that no
practical difference is deducible from these doctrines? "Essential
qualifications," says the Methodist:--"terms and conditions," says the
spiritual higgler. But if a man begins to reflect on his past life, is
he to withstand the inclination? God forbid! exclaim both. If he feels a
commencing shame and sorrow, is he to check the feeling? God forbid! cry
both in one breath! But should not remembrancers be thrown in the way of
sinners, and the voice of warning sound through every street and every
wilderness? Doubtless, quoth the Rationalist. We do it, we do it, shout
the Methodists. In every corner of every lane, in the high road, and in
the waste, we send forth the voice--Come to Christ, and repent, and be
cleansed! Aye, quoth the Rationalist, but I say Repent, and become
clean, and go to Christ--Now is not Mr. Rationalist as great a bigot as
the Methodists, as he is, 'me judice', a worse psychologist?


