CHAPTER XVIII

The next day was Sunday.  George jumped out of bed with the dawn.  He
whistled and sang scraps of songs as he took his bath.  The sun shone.
What a full, happy world it was, anyhow!  And he had given up the game
last night?  Why, life was just beginning for him!  He was nothing but
a boy--not yet thirty.  He would make a big success soon, and then try
to win--to win----  He stopped, breathless, looking into the distance,
and his eyes slowly grew wet with passion and longing.

He left the house and struck across the country through the woodland
and farms.  He did not know why he went--he had to go.  When he reached
the Dunbar woods, he stood in the thicket for hours, watching the
house.  She came out at last and sat down on the steps to play with the
dog.  Last night in her white, delicate beauty she had not seemed
real--she was far off, like an angel coming down into his depths of
misery.

But to-day she sat on the steps in her pretty blue gown, and laughed
and rolled Tramp over, and sung snatches of songs, and was nothing but
a foolish girl.  For so many years he had been thinking of work and
money-making and bosses.  All of that mean drudgery fell out of sight
now.  He was a man, young, alone, on fire with hope and passion.  His
share of life had been mean and pinched; yonder was youth and gladness
and tranquillity.  The world was empty, save for themselves.  He was
here, and there was the one woman in it--the one woman.

He looked at his tanned, rough fingers.  Last night she had folded them
in her two soft little hands, and drawn him on--on into home!

He would go up to her now and tell her----

George pushed aside the bushes, but at that moment Lucy rose and went
into the house.  After a moment he crossed the lawn and sat down on the
piazza, calling the dog to him.  She would come back soon.  Tramp's
head rested on his knee as he stroked it.  It was here her hand had
touched it--and here----

The scent of roses was heavy in the sunshine, the bees hummed; he sat
there in a hazy dream, waiting for the door to open and the joy of his
life to begin.

He was dragged roughly enough out of his dream.

Miss Dunbar's landau drove to the door to take her to church.  George
looked up, carelessly noting how quiet and perfectly appointed it was,
from the brown liveries of the negro coachman and footman to the
trappings on the black ponies.  There were no horses of such high breed
in Delaware.  He stood up suddenly, his jaws pale as if he had been
struck.  What money there was in it!  He had forgotten.  She was a
great heiress.

She came out at the moment.  He scanned her fiercely, the plain, costly
gown, the ruby blazing on her ungloved hand.  Then he glanced down at
his own shabby Sunday suit.  She was the richest woman in Delaware, and
he had not a dollar in his pocket, and no way to earn one.

He went up to her, courteously took her hand when she held it out,
blushing and dimpling, bowed to her aunt, saying that he had merely
walked over to put her into her carriage, and, having shut the door,
looked after them, hat in hand, smiling when she glanced shyly back at
him.

Then he laughed loudly.  If he had the salary that she paid her negro
driver he would be lucky!  And he had meant to marry her.  He laughed
again and took his way homeward.




CHAPTER XIX

His mother was waiting to give George his breakfast.  Whether he chose
to lie in bed until noon or to walk twenty miles at dawn, she smiled a
joyful approval.  But neither the crisp toast, nor the fried chicken,
nor any of her funny stories, would penetrate the blackness of his
gloom.

"Oh, by the way!" she said; "here is a letter that came by last night's
mail.  I forgot to give it to you."

He glanced at the envelope.  "Great Heavens!  It is life and death to
me, and you forget it to tell Jack's pert sayings!"  He read the letter
and threw it down.

"What is it, George?" she asked humbly.

"Burnett & Hoyle offer me a place in their house."

"Mr. Hoyle is an old friend of mine.  I wrote to him.  What is the
salary, George?"

"Forty dollars a week.  I could earn more as a coachman--for some rich
heiress."

"But George dear----  It would be a beginning.  They are brokers, and
there are so many short cuts to fortune in that business!  Do try it,
my son."

"Of course I'll try it.  Do you think I'm a fool?  It will keep me from
starving.  But I want something else in life than to be kept from
starving, mother."

He stretched out his arms with a groan, and walked to the window.  She
followed him with wretched, comprehending eyes.  Why did not Lucy give
him her fortune?  Any woman would be honored who could give George her
fortune.

"I always have heard that brokers know the short cuts to wealth," she
said calmly.  "You go on the Street some day, and come back a
millionaire."

"That is a woman's idea of business.  Instead, I will sit on a high
stool and drudge all day, and on Saturday get my wages, and after three
or four years I'll make a fight for ten dollars more a week, and thank
God if I get it.  'A short cut to fortune!'"

Mrs. Waldeaux carefully averted her eyes from him. "You may marry," she
said, "and it may happen that your wife also will have some little
income----"

"Mother!  Look at me!" he interrupted her sternly.  "I will never be
dependent on my wife, so help me God!"

"No, George, no!  Of course not.  Don't speak so loud.  Only, I thought
if she had a small sum of her own, she would feel more comfortable,
that's all."


In spite of his ill temper George threw himself into his work with
zeal.  After a couple of months he came home for a day.  He was dressed
with the quiet elegance which once had been so important in his eyes.

His mother noted it shrewdly.  "A man has more courage to face life,
decently clothed," she said to herself.

He did not come again until winter.  Lucy happened to be spending the
day with Mrs. Waldeaux.  There were no liveried servants, no priceless
rings, no Worth gown in sight.  She was just the shy, foolish girl whom
he had once for an hour looked upon as his wife.  George talked about
Wall Street to her, being now wise as to stocks; took her out
sleighing, and when in the evening she took Jack in her arms and sang
him to sleep, sat listening with his head buried in his hands.  Mrs.
Waldeaux carried the boy up to bed, and Lucy and George were left
alone.  They talked long and earnestly.

"She consulted me about her affairs," he said, after she was gone, his
eyes shining.

"I am afraid she does not understand business!" Mrs. Waldeaux replied
anxiously.

"Oh, like a woman!  That is, not at all.  Her whole property is in the
hands of The Consolidated Good Faith Companies.  I reminded her of the
old adage, 'Never put all of your eggs into one basket.'"

"But that is so sound a basket, George!" "Yes.  It is thought so," with
a shrug.

"Poor child!  She needs a guardian to advise her."

Waldeaux's countenance grew black.  "She should employ an attorney.  It
certainly will never be my duty to advise Miss Dunbar," he retorted
irritably.


George showed himself shrewd and able in his work.  Mr. Hoyle was a
powerful backer.  Before spring his salary was doubled.  But what was
that?  The gulf between him and the great heiress gaped, impassable.

Lucy spent much time with her old friend, and Frances at last broke the
silence concerning him.

"The boy never before knew what love was.  And it is you that he loves,
child."

"He has not told me so," said Lucy coldly.

"No.  And never will.  It is your wealth that makes him dumb.  I wish
it was gone," said Frances earnestly.  "Gone.  You would be so happy.
What is money compared to being----"

"George's wife?" Lucy laughed.

"Yes.  George's wife.  I know what he is worth," his mother said
boldly.  "You might give it away?" looking eagerly in the girl's face.
"In charity."

"I might do so," said Miss Dunbar tranquilly.


One morning in April Mrs. Waldeaux saw George coming up from the
station.  She ran to meet him.

He was pale and breathless with excitement.  "What is it?  What has
happened?" she cried.

"Hush--h!  Come in.  Shut the door.  No one must hear.  The
Consolidated Companies have failed.  They have robbed their depositors."

"Well, George?  What have we---- Oh, Lucy!"

"Yes, Lucy!  She is ruined!  She has nothing.  It was all there."  He
paced up and down, hoarse with agitation and triumph.  "She mustn't
know it, mother, until she is safe in another home."

"Another home?" "Oh, surely you understand!  Here--if she will come.
Poor little girl!  She has not a dollar!  I am getting a big salary.  I
can work for you all.  My God!  I will have her at last!  Unless----
Perhaps she won't come!  Mother, do you think she will come?"  He
caught her arm, his jaws twitched, the tears stood in his eyes, as when
he used to come to her with his boyish troubles.

"How can I tell?" said Frances.  "Go and ask her."




