CHAPTER VII.

Jesters--Court of Queen Elizabeth--James I.--The "Counterblasts to
  Tobacco"--Puritans--Charles
  II.--Rochester--Buckingham--Dryden--Butler.


Professed fools seem to have been highly appreciated in the time of
Shakespeare. They do not correspond to our modern idea of a fool,
because there was intention in their actions, and yet we could not have
considered them to be really sensible men. Nor had they great talent,
their gifts being generally lower than those of our professed wits.

Addison observes that, "when a man of wit makes us laugh, it is by
betraying some oddness or infirmity in his own character," and at the
present day, not only do those who indulge much in humour often say
things approaching nonsense, and make themselves in other ways
ridiculous, but their object, being entirely idle diversion and
pleasantry, appears foolish and puerile. Those who cultivate humour are
not generally to be complimented on their success, and a popular writer
has thus classified fools--"First, the ordinary fool; secondly the fool
who is one, and does not know it; thirdly, the fool who is not satisfied
with being one in reality, but undertakes in addition to play the fool."
Thus, to a certain extent we may always regard a professed wit as a
silly fellow, but still at the present day the acts or sayings of an
absolute idiot or lunatic, would be depressing and offensive, and could
afford little amusement in any way except accidentally.[54] They would
resemble the incongruities in dreams which although strange are not
generally laughable. And if we are not amused with a fool, neither are
we with a man who imitates him, although Cicero says that humour
consists in a man who is not a fool, speaking as though he were one.
Some mistake supposed to be made by an ordinary man is what amuses us,
and although humorous sayings originated in an imitation of ludicrous
things, and Quintilian's observation sometimes holds good that the same
things, which if they drop from us unintentionally are foolish, if we
imitate them are humorous; still humour is not confined to this; there
is generally no such imitation, and the witty sayings of the present day
are seldom representations of such things as anyone would utter in
earnest, whether he were a fool or not.

We must not confuse folly and wit, though they may exist in the same
person and in close relationship. The latter requires intelligence and
intention. If a humorous man ever purposely enacts the dullard, the
impersonation is always modified--he is like Snug, the joiner, who does
not "fright the ladies." There is always some peculiar point in his
blunders; if he acted the fool to the life we should not laugh with him.
We always see something clever and admirable in him, and to be
successful in this way, a man should possess considerable mental gifts,
and be able to gauge the feelings of others. Still we can hardly assent
to the proposition that "it takes a wise man to make a fool." A man may
be witty without having any constructive power of mind. It is easier to
find fault than to be faultless, to see a blemish than to produce what
is perfect--a pilot may point out rocks, but not be able to steer a safe
course.

At the time of which we are now speaking, the double character of the
court fool corresponded with that early and inferior humour which was
always on the verge of the ludicrous. The connection thus established,
long remained and led to witty observations being often spoken of as
"foolerie." Upon this conceit or confusion Shakespeare founded the
speech of Jaques in "As you like it."

  Act II. Scene IV.

  _Jaques._ A fool! a fool!--I met a fool i' the forest,
  A motley fool:--a miserable fool!--
  As I do live by food, I met a fool:
  Who laid him down, and basked him in the sun,
  And railed on Lady Fortune in good terms.
  In good set terms--and yet a motley fool.
  "Good morrow, fool," quoth I. "No, Sir," quoth he,
  "Call me not fool till heaven hath sent me fortune."
  And then he drew a dial from his poke,
  And looking on it with lack lustre eye,
  Says very wisely, "It is ten o'clock;"
  "Thus we may see," quoth he, "how the world wags;
  'Tis but an hour ago since it was nine,
  And after one hour more t'will be eleven,
  And so from hour to hour we ripe and ripe,
  And then from hour to hour we rot and rot,
  And thereby hangs a tale."

There is nothing very laughable in the above reflections, but they
contain a deep satire, and afford a beautiful example of Shakespearian
complexity. From the mixture of wisdom and folly compounded in the
"fool" of the day--who was then, it must be remembered, the monitor of
the great--it is here implied that in his awkward way he sometimes
arrived at truth better than the sage. As supremely wise men are often
regarded as fools, so what seems folly may be the highest
wisdom--"motley's your only wear."

The fool is generally represented in Shakespeare as saying things which
have a certain wit and shrewdness.

     _Clown._ God bless thee, lady.

     _Olivia._ Take the fool away.

     _Clo._ Do you not hear, fellows? Take away the lady.

            *       *       *       *       *

     Good Madonna, why mournest thou?

     _Oli._ Good fool, for my brother's death.

     _Clo._ I think his soul is in hell, Madonna.

     _Oli._ I know his soul is in heaven, fool.

     _Clo._ The more fool, Madonna, to mourn for your brother's soul
     being in heaven. Take away the fool, gentlemen.

In King Lear.

     _Fool._ Dost thou know the difference, my boy, between a bitter
     fool and a sweet one?

     _Lear._ No, lad, teach me.

     _Fool._ That lord that counselled thee

  To give away thy land,
  Come place him here by me--
  Do thou for him stand:
  The sweet and bitter fool
  Will presently appear,
  The one in motley here,
  The other found out there.

     _Lear._ Dost thou call me fool, boy?

     _Fool._ All thy other titles thou hast given away that thou wast
     born with.

     _Kent._ This is not altogether a fool, my lord.

The fact was that wit was now gradually improving, and was being wielded
by so called fools in such a way that it could not be confounded with
fatuity. The time was approaching when the humour manufactured by
professed jesters would not be appreciated. Something higher and keener,
such as Shakespeare has here shadowed forth would be required. This was
not reached in Ben Jonson's time, but fools and their artifices are by
him discarded for something more natural, for country bumpkins and
servants, ludicrous in their stupidity, knavery and drunkenness. As
civilization advanced, jugglers and clowns were relegated to country
fairs.

Henry the Eighth, at the commencement of his reign was a great patron of
men of wit and learning, and probably the humour of More, as well as his
virtue, recommended him to the King. We read that at Cardinal Morton's
entertainments of his Christmas company, the future Chancellor, then a
boy, would often mount the stage and extemporize with so much wit and
talent as to surpass all the professional players. During his university
course, and shortly afterwards, he wrote many neat Latin epigrams of
which the two following rough translations will give some idea--

  "A thief about to be accused, implored
     Advice, and sent his counsel many a pound,
   The counsel, when o'er mighty tomes he'd pored,
     Replied, 'If you'd escape, you must abscond.'

  "Once in the loving cup, a guest saw flies,
     Removed them, drank, and then put back a few.
   And, being questioned, sagely thus replies,
     'I like them not--but cannot speak for you.'"

He was to the last fond of pleasantry and kept a jester.

The daughter of Henry the Eighth and Anne Boleyn[55] could scarcely have
been deficient in mirthfulness, and we find that the dangers through
which she passed in her youth were not able to extinguish Elizabeth's
love of humour. According to the custom of the day she exhibited this
not only in her sayings, but, as comedians were then often received in
great houses, she ordered in 1583 that twelve of them should be made
grooms of the chamber, be sworn the Queen's servants, and be arrayed in
her livery. The most remarkable of these was Tarlton. He came of humble
origin. Fuller says that, while tending his father's swine, a servant of
Robert, Earl of Leicester, passing by was so pleased with his _happy
unhappy_ answers that he took him to court. But Tarlton's humour was
often that of the common fool, and depended generally upon action, look,
and voice. His face was in this respect his fortune, for he had a flat
nose and squinting eyes. Nash mentions that on one occasion he "peept
out his head," probably with a grimace, at the audience, which caused a
burst of laughter, and led one of the justices, who did not understand
the fun, to beat the people on the bare pates, inasmuch as they, "being
farmers and hinds, had dared to laugh at the Queen's men." He was
celebrated for his jigs, _i.e._ extempore songs accompanied with tabor
and pipe, and sometimes with dancing.

Fuller says he had great influence with Elizabeth, and could "undumpish"
her at pleasure. Her favourites were wont to go to him to prepare their
access to her, and "he told the Queen more of her faults than most of
her chaplains, and cured her melancholy better than all her physicians."

Bohun says that, "at supper she would divert herself with her friends
and attendants, and if they made no answer she would put them upon mirth
and pleasant discourse with great civility. She would then also admit
Tarlton, a famous comedian and pleasant talker, and other men to divert
her with stories of the town, and the common jests or accidents, but so
that they kept within the bounds of modesty." Tarlton, on one occasion,
cast reflections upon Leicester; and said of Raleigh, "the knave
commands the Queen," at which she was so much offended that she forbade
any of her jesters to approach her table.

The jests of Scogan, or rather those attributed to him, were very
popular in Elizabeth's time. This man was court-fool to Henry VII., and
is said to have been "of pleasant wit and bent to merrie devices." He
was fond of practical jokes, and often attacked the clergy. Elizabeth
seems to have had a natural gift of humour, and we read of many of her
witty sayings. On one occasion, upon an archbishop finding fault with
some of her actions, and quoting Scripture to prove she had acted more
as a politician than a Christian. "I see, my lord," she replied, "that
you have read the scriptures, but not the book of Kings." She was so
well acquainted with proverbs, that on being presented with a collection
of English aphorisms, and told by the author that it contained them
all, she answered, "Nay, where is 'Bate me an ace, quoth Bolton.'"

Among the sayings, good for the period, which have been attributed to
her, we read that when the Archduke raised the siege of Grave, the Queen
who heard of it before her secretary, said to him, "Wot you that the
Archduke is risen from the Grave." When at Lord Burleigh's she promised
to make seven knights, and the gentlemen to be so honoured were placed
in a line as the Queen was going out. The least worthy of them, however,
were through interest with Lord Burleigh placed first, so that they
might have precedence of creation. But the Queen passed down the row and
took no notice of them; but when she had reached the screen, turned, and
observing, "I had almost forgotten my promise," proceeded to knight from
the lower end. On one of her Privy Council saying "Your Majesty was too
politic for my Lord Burleigh," she replied, "I have but followed the
scripture--'the first shall be last and the last first.'"

The cares of sovereignty, and the opposition of her Roman Catholic
subjects led Elizabeth's humour to assume a somewhat severe complexion.
Her thoughts gradually became more earnest, and her jests cynical.
Moreover, as seen in Shakespeare, the age in which she lived was
reflective, and the budding activity of mind was directed towards great
interests. There was not that impression of the vanity of all things,
which grows up with the extension and maturity of society, and attracts
the mind to more fanciful and less grave considerations. A good contrast
between Elizabeth's position, and that of James I. may be seen in the
following occurrences. When Henry IV. had given the order of St. Michael
to Nicolas Clifford and Anthony Shirley, she commanded them to return
it. "I will not," she said, "have my sheep follow the pipe of a strange
shepherd;"[56] but when James I. was told that several noblemen of his
court and council, received pensions from Spain, the King replied that
he knew it well, and only wished the King of Spain would give them ten
times as much, as it would render him less able to make war upon him.

James was a man of a very eccentric and grotesque fancy, combined with a
considerable amount of intelligence and learning. He was particularly
fond of religious controversy, and wrote what he considered to be an
important work on "Demonologie." From one passage we might suppose that
he thought it sinful to laugh, as he says that man can only laugh,
because he can only sin. But he kept two clowns for his amusement, and
also appreciated Ben Jonson, to whom he gave the direction of the Court
Masques. He occasionally made some caustic remarks, which have come down
to us, such as, "Who denys a thing he even now spake, is like him that
looks in my face and picks my pocket." "A travelling preacher and a
travelling woman never come to any good at all."

Sir Henry Wooton told him how the Prince of Conde sued for the title of
Altesse from the Synod of Venice. The King replied, "The Prince had good
reason to sue for it, and that the Seigniory had done ill to deny it
him, considering that the world knew how well he deserved it; it being
his custom to raise himself upon every man's back, and to make himself
the higher by every man's tail he could get upon. And for that cause he
hoped to see him elevated by the just Justice of God to as high a
dignity as the gallows at last."

James the First's writings were mostly of a religious character, and
some of them were sufficiently ludicrous. But in his "Counterblaste to
Tobacco," his indignation is often mixed with humour. He observes that
smoking came from the Indians, and continues--

"And now, good countreymen let vs (I pray you) consider what honour or
policy can move vs to imitate the barbarous and beastly maneres of the
wilde, Godlesse and slavish Indians, especially in so vile and stinking
a custome? Shall wee that disdaine to imitate the manners of our
neighbour France.... Shall wee, I say without blushing abase ourselves
so farre as to imitate these beastly Indians, slaves to the Spaniards,
refuse to the world, and as yet aliens from the Holy Covenant of God?
Why doe wee not as well imitate them in walking naked as they doe? in
preferring glasses, feathers, and such toyes to gold and precious
stones, as they doe? Yea, why do wee not deny God, and adore the divel
as they doe?"

He proceeds to combat the theory, "That the braines of all men beeing
naturally cold and wet, all drie and hote things should be good for
them." "It is," he says, "as if a man, because the liver is hote, and as
it were an oven to the stomache, would therefore apply and weare close
upon his liver and stomache a cake of lead; he might within a short time
(I hope) bee susteined very cheape at an Ordinarie, besides the clearing
of his conscience from that dreadful sinne of gluttonie."

Towards the end he gives some medical testimony--

"Surely smoke becomes a kitchin farre better than a dining chamber, and
yet it makes a kitchin also oftentimes in the inward parts of men,
soyling and infecting them with an vnctuous and oily kind of soote, as
hath been found in some great tobacco takers, that after their death,
were opened."

Addison, speaking of James' love of jesting, observes:--"The age in
which the pun chiefly flourished was in the reign of King James the
First. That learned monarch was himself a tolerable punster, and made
very few bishops or privy-councillors that had not sometime or other
signalized themselves by a clinch or a conundrum. It was therefore in
this age that the pun appeared with pomp and dignity. It had been before
admitted into merry speeches and ludicrous compositions, but was now
delivered with great gravity from the pulpit, or pronounced in the most
solemn manner at the council-table." Verbal humour continued to be
admired for its ingenuity in the reign of Charles I. The childish taste
of the time in this respect is prominently exhibited in the "Fames
Roule," written by a Mrs. Mary Fage, in honour of the royal family and
principal peers of the realm. It consists of short poems, and each one
forms an acrostic, and commences with an anagram of the name.

The following will give specimens of this ridiculous composition:--

  "To the high and mighty. Princesse Mary,
  Eldest Daughter of our Soveraigne Lord King Charles.

  MARY STVARTE.

  Anagramma.

  A MERRY STATV.

  "M irth may with Princes very well agree,
   A Merry Statv then faire Madam be;
   R ightly 'twill fit your age, your vertues grace;
   Y eelding A Merry Statv in your face.

  "S mile then, high Lady, while of mirth write I,
   T hat so my Muse may with alacrity,
   U nto your Highness sing without all feare,
   A nd a true Statv of your vertues reare:
   R eaching whereto, that she may higher flee,
   T hus humbly beg I on my bended knee,
   E ver A Merry Statv be to me."

  GEORGE MANNERS.

  Anagramma.

  NOR AS GREEN GEM.

  "G reat honoured Peere, and _Rutland's_ Noble Earle,
   E ven in vertue shining like a Pearle
   O ver all _Europe_, adding to your birth,
   R adiant bright beames of your true honoured worth:
   G em great and precious, see you are remaining
   E ver the rayes of vertue's beames retaining.

  "M aking all _Europe_ stand amazed quite,
   A nd wonder much at _Rutland's_ glorious light,
   N or _as_ a _green gem_ let your lustre be,
   N o, _greenness_ here betokens _levity_,
   E ver more as a precious gem remain you,
   R ed or some orient colour still retaine you;
   S o _nor as green gem_, will the world proclaime you."

The jester still remained in office in Charles the First's reign and
Archee assumed the old prerogative of the motley in telling home truths
to his master. On one occasion he was ordered by the King to say grace,
as the chaplain was away, upon which the jester pronounced it, "All
glory be to God on high, and little Laud to the devil." At which all the
courtiers smiled, because it reflected upon the Archbishop of
Canterbury, who was a little man. The King said he would tell Laud, and
what would he do then? "Oh!" said Archee, "I will hide me where he will
never find me." "Where is that?" asked the King. "In his pulpit,"
answered Archee, "for I am sure he never goes there."

The rebellion against Charles the First and the success of the Puritans
led to a remarkable development of religious feeling. Men seemed for the
moment to think more of the next world than of the present, seasoned
their language with texts, and from Scripture adopted new names suitable
to a new life. Their usual tone of conversation is thus humorously
described by Harrison Ainsworth.

Captain Stelfax pays Colonel Maunsel a domiciliary visit, and an old
Royalist retainer tells the redoubtable Roundhead that he looks more
like a roystering Cavalier than a Puritan, to which the latter replies--

"Go to, knave, and liken me not to a profane follower of Jehoram. Take
heed that thou answerest me truthfully. Thou art newly returned from
the battle-field whereat the young man Charles Stuart was utterly
routed, and where our general, like Pekah the son of Remaliah slew many
thousands of men in one day, because they had forsaken the Lord God of
their fathers. Didst thou bear arms in the service of Ahaz?"

One Increase Micklegift soon afterwards fell into the captain's bad
graces--

"I begin to suspect it was by thy instrumentality that he hath escaped."

"How could that be seeing I was with thee in the closet." Micklegift
rejoined.

"It might easily be, since it was by thy devise that I was led into the
snare. Bitterly shalt thou rue it, if I find thee leagued with the
Amalekites."

All this affords a good idea of the phraseology of these men, some of
whom indulged in such names as "Nehemiah, Lift-up-Hand" and
"Better-Late-than-Never," and it must be remembered, to their credit,
that there never was a more orderly army than that of Cromwell. In
accordance with the sentiments then entertained all theatrical
exhibitions were prohibited. Such austerity and self-denial could not be
of long continuance--it was kept up by an effort, and led to an
inevitable reaction, and so we find that the court of the "Merry
Monarch" became notorious in history for its dissipation. Humour
proportionally changed from what it had been under Charles I., and we
read that that the old Earl of Norwich, who had been esteemed the
greatest wit, was now quite out of fashion.

Barbarous nations have little idea of delicacy of any kind; and
civilisation finds it hard entirely to change nature, so that
where-ever the ground is allowed to lie fallow, the old weeds appear in
their noisesome rankness. Hence from time to time we find indelicacy
springing up, and made to serve the purposes of those who know that the
evil plant is not radically extirpated. One of the most offensive men in
this respect was Peter Aretinus, an Italian adventurer, who became a
great favourite with the Emperor Charles V. He is said to have died from
falling back over his chair in a fit of laughter, on hearing some
indelicate joke. But modes of death have often been invented to accord
with the lives of those who suffered them, just as dithyrambic Anacreon
is said to have been choked by a grape stone.

Louis XI. was also addicted to this jesting which is not convenient. We
read that he told Edward IV. in a jocose way that he was right glad to
see him at Paris, and that if he would come and divert himself with the
gay ladies there, he would assign for his confessor, the Cardinal of
Bourbon, who, he knew, would grant him easy absolution for peccadilloes
of love and gallantry. Edward was much pleased with this raillery, for
he knew the Cardinal was a gay man. Louis was afterwards in great alarm
upon Edward's acceptance of his invitation.

The humour of Charles II. and his court consisted more of jollity than
wit. The king was always ready to laugh outright, even in church at the
sermon. He encouraged and led the way in an indelicate kind of jesting,
which he seems to have learned during his travels in France. On his
telling Lord Shaftesbury, "I believe Shaftesbury, that thou art the
wickedest dog in England," the statesman humbly replied, "May it please
your Majesty, of a subject, I believe I am." We should not expect too
much from the son of Henrietta Maria. It is related that one morning
when at Exeter, pressing her hand to her head she said to her physician,
"Mayerne, I am afraid I shall go mad some day." "Nay," he replied, "your
Majesty need not fear _going_ mad; you have been so some time."

But Charles owed much to his gay and easy manner. Notwithstanding his
faults "he was so pleasant a man that no one could be sorrowful under
his government." He sometimes dined at the annual civic banquet, and one
of the company present on the occasion when Sir Robert Viner was Lord
Mayor, refers to it as follows. "Sir Robert was a very loyal man, and if
you will allow the expression, very fond of his sovereign, but what with
the joy he felt at heart for the honour done him by his prince and
through the warmth he was in with continual toasting healths of the
royal family, his lordship grew a little fond of His Majesty, and
entered into a familiarity not altogether so graceful in so public a
place. The king understood very well how to extricate himself in all
kinds of difficulties, and with a hint to the company to avoid ceremony,
stole off and made towards his coach which stood ready for him in
Guildhall yard. But the Mayor liked his company so well, and was grown
so intimate, that he pursued him hastily and catching him fast by the
hand, cried out with a vehement oath and accent, 'Sir, you shall stay
and take t'other bottle.' The airy monarch looked kindly at him over his
shoulder, and with a smile and graceful air (for I saw him at the time
and do now) repeated this line of the old song 'He that's drunk is as
great as a King,' and immediately turned back and complied with his
request."

Tom Killegrew was the last of his cloth; forced and constant jesting
becoming less and less appreciated. As the jesters approached their end,
they had more of the moralist and politician in them than of the
mountebank. We may judge of Killegrew's wit, when we read that one day
on his appearance Charles said to his gay companions, "Now we shall hear
our faults." "No," replied the jester, "I don't care to trouble my head
with that which all the town talks of."[57] Killegrew must have had fine
scope for his sarcasm. In these times the character of the monarch gave
the tone to society, and was reflected in the dramatists. Thus we find
the earnestness of Elizabeth in Shakespeare, the whimsicality of James
in Jonson, and the licentiousness of Charles II. in the poets of the
Restoration. The deterioration of men and of humour in the last reign is
marked by the fact that ridicule was mostly directed not against vice as
in Roman satire, but against undeserved misfortunes. Even virtue and
learning did not afford immunity; Bishop Warburton writes: "This weapon
(in the dissolute times of Charles II.) completed the ruin of the best
minister of that age. The historians tell us that Chancellor Hyde was
brought into his Majesty's contempt by this court argument. They
mimicked his walk and gesture with a fire-shovel and bellows for the
mace and purse."

The indelicacy of which Charles and his companions was guilty, was not
of a primitive and ignorant kind, but always of an amatory character,
and at the expense of the fair sex; jests formerly so common as to
obtain the name of "japes." The writers of that day are objectionable
not merely for coarseness of this kind, but for the large amount of it,
as one artiste in complimentary attire might be tolerated where a crowd
of seminude performers could not. The poems of Sedley and Rochester are
as abundant in indelicacy as they are deficient in humour. The epigram
of Sedley to "Julius" gives a more correct idea of his character than of
his usual dullness.

     "Thou swearest thou'll drink no more; kind Heaven send Me such a
     cook or coachman, but no friend."

Rochester might have produced something good. His verses have more
traces of poetry and humour than we should expect from a man who out of
the thirty-four years of his life, was for five of them continually
drunk. He nearly always attunes his harp to the old subject, so as to
become hopelessly monotonous. Inconstancy has great charms for him, and
he consequently imputes it also to the ladies--

  "Womankind more joy discovers
   Making fools, than keeping lovers."

Again:

  "Love like other little boys,
   Cries for hearts as they for toys,
   Which when gained, in childish play,
   Wantonly are thrown away."

He seems to have been oppressed by a disbelief in any kind of good in
the world. His philosophy, whenever he ventured upon any, was sceptical
and irreverent. His best attempt in this direction was a poem "Upon
Nothing," which commences:

  "Nothing! thou elder brother ev'n to shade,
   That had'st a being 'ere the world was made,
   And (well fixt) art alone of ending not afraid.
   Ere Time and Place were, Time and Place were not,
   When primitive Nothing, Something straight begot,
   Then all proceeded from the great united--What?"

Sometimes he amused himself writing libels on the king, and some of his
satires contain more or less truth, as--

  "His father's foes he does reward,
   Preserving those that cut off's head,
   Old Cavaliers, the crown's best guard,
   He lets them starve for want of bread.
     Never was a King endued
   With so much grace and gratitude."

Buckingham does not appear to have agreed with Rochester about Charles,
for he writes, "He was an illustrious exception to all the common rules
of physiognomy, for with a most saturnine and harsh sort of countenance,
he was both of a merry and merciful disposition." Buckingham's humour
was of a very poor description, but he wrote a Comedy "The Rehearsal,"
which was highly approved, mostly, however, because aimed at Dryden, and
the heroic drama. From one passage in it, we observe that he noticed the
difference between the effect of humour in the plot, and in the dialogue
of the play--

     _Prettyman._ Well, Tom, I hope shortly we shall have another coin
     for thee; for now the wars are coming on, I shall grow to be a man
     of metal.

     _Bayes._ O, you did not do that half enough.

     _Johnson._ Methinks he does it admirably.

     _Bayes._ I, pretty well, but he does not hit me in't, he does not
     top his part.

     _Thimble._ That's the way to be stamped yourself, Sir, I shall see
     you come home like an angel for the king's evil, with a hole bored
     through you.

     _Bayes._ There he has hit it up to the hilt. How do you like it
     now, gentlemen? is not this pure wit?

     _Smith._ 'Tis snip snap, Sir, as you say, but methinks not pleasant
     nor to the purpose, for the play does not go on. The plot stands
     still.

     _Bayes._ Why, what the devil is the plot good for but to bring in
     fine things.

Dryden could scarcely be expected to remain silent under the blow here
aimed at his plays. An opportunity for revenge soon presented itself,
when he undertook to compose a political satire upon Monmouth and his
intrigues. Some say that this remarkable poem was written at the command
of Charles. It had a great success, five editions being sold within the
year--one cause of its popularity being its novel character. The idea of
introducing Scriptural impersonations into a poem was new or nearly so,
and very successful. Monmouth had already been called Absalom, and as
the King (David) was very fond of him, it was desirable to place his
shortcomings to the account of his advisers, represented by Achitophel.
The way in which Dryden handled his adversaries may be understood from
such passages as:--

  "Levi, thou art a load: I'll lay thee down
   And show rebellion bare, without a gown;
   Poor slaves in metre, dull and addle-pated
   Who rhime below e'en David's psalms translated."

Doeg is another enemy:--

  "'Twere pity treason at his door to lay
   Who makes heaven's gate a lock to its own key.
   Let him rail on, let his invective muse
   Have four and twenty letters to abuse,
   Which, if he jumbles to one line of sense
   Indict him of a capital offence."

This satire led to some replies, which Dryden crushed in his "Mac
Flecnoe," a poem named after an Irish priest--an inferior poet--who, but
for this notice, would never have been known to posterity. Shadwell was
the man really aimed at; Mac Flecnoe exclaims:--

  "Shadwell alone, of all my sons, is he
   Who stands confirmed in full stupidity,
   The rest to some faint meaning make pretence
   But Shadwell never deviates into sense."[58]

After much in the same strain, he finishes with:--

  "Thy genius calls thee not to purchase fame
   In keen iambics, but mild anagram.
   Leave writing plays, and choose for thy command
   Some peaceful province in acrostic land,
   There thou mayest wings display and altars raise,
   And torture one poor world ten thousand ways."

Dryden calls this kind of satire Varronian, as he weaves a sort of
imaginary story into which he introduces the object of his attack. He
was under the impression that this was the first piece of ridicule
written in heroics, and his claim seemed correct as far as England was
concerned, but Boileau and Tassoni had preceded him. Willmot says,
"Dryden is wanting in the graceful humour of Tassoni, and exquisite
power of Boileau. His wit has more weight than edge--it beat in armour,
but could not cut gause." The greater part of Dryden's satire could not
cut anything, nor be distinguished from elaborate vituperation. He
wrote an essay on Satire, in which he shows a much better knowledge of
history than of humour. His best passages are in the "Spanish Friars,"
but they are weak and mainly directed against the profligacy of the
Church. The servant says of the friar, "There's a huge, fat religious
gentleman coming up, Sir. He says he's but a friar, but he's big enough
to be a Pope; his gills are as rosy as a turkey-cock's; his great belly
walks in state before him like an harbinger, and his gouty legs come
limping after it. Never was such a ton of devotion seen."

Samuel Butler affords one of the many examples of highly gifted literary
men who have died in great poverty. His works, recommended by Lord
Dorset, were read largely, and even by the King himself; but there was
then no great demand for books, and authors had to look to patrons, and
eat the uncertain bread of dependence. We may suppose, however, that he
was an improvident man, for during his life he held several offices, and
was at one time steward of Ludlow Castle.

Butler possessed a real gift of humour, and an astonishing fertility of
invention. To us there seems to be still too much indelicacy in his
writings, though less than heretofore, and there is a considerable
amount of bear-fighting, both in the literal and metaphorical sense.
This rough and cruel pastime was very common in that day. We read of
bear-baiting at Kenilworth to amuse Queen Elizabeth, and Alleyn, the
munificent founder of Dulwich College, was not only a dramatic author
and manager, but "Master of the bears and dogs," which seems to have
been a post of honour. To the present day, a ring for such sports is to
be seen outside the principal gate of Battle Abbey.

We have already observed that the drama of Spain became the model for
that of modern Europe, and we are not therefore surprised to find that
the main design in Sir Hudibras is to produce an English Don Quixote.
All the accessories of the work point to this imitation; there is a long
account of his arms, his Squire, and horse. But beyond this, he aimed at
several well-known rogues of his day, especially those pretending to
necromancy and prophetic powers, who seem to have been numerous.[59]
This gave the poem an interest at that day which it cannot have now, and
it was increased by the amusing hits he makes at the Puritans, who had
lately convulsed the State, and whom he had been able to gauge when he
was employed by Sir Samuel Luke.[60] The lines are well known in which
he speaks of the time:--

  "When pulpit, drum, ecclesiastic,
   Was beat with fist, instead of a stick;"

and the general outcry against dignitaries is thus represented:--

  "The oyster women locked their fish up
   And trudged away to cry 'No Bishop';
   Botchers left old clothes in the lurch,
   And fell to turn and patch the church;
   Some cry'd the Covenant, instead
   Of pudding, pies, and gingerbread!"

Sir Hudibras is a Presbyterian "true blue."

  "Such as do build their faith upon
   The holy test of pike and gun;
   Decide all controversies by
   Infallible artillery:
   And prove their doctrine orthodox
   By apostolic blows and knocks.

  "Rather than fail, they will defy
   That which they love most tenderly;
   Quarrel with minced pies, and disparage.
   Their best and dearest friend, plum porridge;
   Fat pig and goose itself oppose,
   And blaspheme custard through the nose."

Sir Hudibras was learned in controversy:--

  "For he a rope of sand could twist
   As tough as learned Sorbonist
   And weave fine cobwebs fit for skull
   That's empty when the moon is full,
   Such as take lodgings in a head
   That's to be let unfurnished."

He had been at the siege of "Bullen," by Henry VIII., and his breeches
were lined

            "With many a piece
   Of ammunition, bread and cheese,
   And fat black puddings, proper food
   For warriors that delight in blood.
   For as he said he always chose
   To carry victual in his hose,
   That often tempted rats and mice
   The ammunition to surprise."

Hudibras speaking of men fighting with an unworthy enemy, says:--

  "So th' Emperor Caligula
   That triumphed o'er the British sea,
   Took crabs and oysters prisoners,
   And lobsters 'stead of cuirassiers;
   Engaged his legions in fierce bustles
   With periwinkles, prawns, and mussels,
   And led his troops with furious gallops
   To charge whole regiments of scallops;
   Not like their ancient way of war,
   To wait on his triumphal car;
   But, when he went to dine or sup,
   More bravely ate his captives up."

Butler begins one canto with

  "Ah me! what perils do environ
   The man that meddles with cold iron."

His political views are seen in the following:

  "For as a fly that goes to bed
   Rests with its tail above its head,
   So in this mongrel state of ours
   The rabble are the supreme powers.
   That horsed us on their backs to show us
   A jadish trick at last, and throw us."

Several minor poems have been attributed to Butler, but most of them
have been considered spurious. Some, however, are admitted--one of which
is a humorous skit against the Royal Society, who were supposed at that
day to be too minutely subtle. It is called "An Elephant in the Moon."
"Some learned astronomers think they have made a great discovery, but it
is really owing to a mouse and some gnats having got into their
telescope."

The light, short metre in which Butler composed his comic narrative was
well suited to the subject, and corresponded to the "swift iambics" of
Archilochus. Dryden says that double rhymes are necessary companions of
burlesque writing. Addison, however, is of opinion that Hudibras "would
have made a much more agreeable figure in heroics," to which Cowden
Clarke replies, "Why, bless his head! the whole and sole intention of
the poem is _mock_ heroic, and the structure of the verse is burlesque,"
and he also tells us that Butler's rhymes constitute one feature of his
wit. Certainly he had some strange terminations to his lines. Hudibras
speaking of hanging Sidrophel and Whackum says:--

  "I'll make them serve for perpendiclars
   As true as e'er were used by bricklayers."

One of the bear-baiting mob annoys Rapho's steed, who

  "Began to kick, and fling, and wince,
   As if he'd been beside his sense,
   Striving to disengage from thistle
   That gall'd him sorely under his tail."

Again we have:--

  "An ancient castle that commands
   Th' adjacent parts, in all the fabric
   You shall not see one stone, nor a brick."

The astrologers made an instrument to examine the moon to

  "Tell what her diameter per inch is;
   And prove that she's not made of green cheese."

By the interchange which often takes place between the poetical and
ludicrous, this roughness of versification, then allowable, appears now
so childish, that Lamb and Cowden Clark mistook it for humour. But we
might extract from the writers of that day many ridiculous rhymes,
evidently intended to be serious.

The humour of Butler was in his time more popular than the sentiment of
Milton, but he obtained no commensurate remuneration. Wycherley kindly
endeavoured to interest Buckingham on his behalf, and had almost
succeeded, when two handsome women passed by, and the Duke left him in
pursuit of them. John Wesley's father has written Butler's epitaph in
imperishable sarcasm:--

  "See him when starved to death and turned to dust,
   Presented with a monumental bust;
   The poet's fate is here in emblem shown,
   He asked for bread, and he received--a stone."




