CHAPTER XI.

Congreve--Lord Dorset.


The birthplace of Congreve is uncertain, but he was born about 1671, and
was educated in Kilkenny and Dublin. He is an instance of that union of
Irish versatility with English reflection, which has produced the most
celebrated wits. We also mark in him a considerable improvement in
delicacy. "The Old Batchelor" was his first play, the success of which
was so great that Lord Halifax made him one of the commissioners for
licensing hackney-coaches; he afterwards gave him a place in the Pipe
Office and Custom House.

Belmour begins very suitably by saying--

     "Come come, leave business to idlers, and wisdom to fools; they
     have need of 'em. Wit be my faculty, and pleasure my occupation;
     and let Father Time shake his glass."

Speaking of Belinda, he says--

     "In my conscience I believe the baggage loves me, for she never
     speaks well of me herself, nor suffers anybody else to rail at me."

Heartwell, an old bachelor, says--

     "Women's asses bear great burdens; are forced to undergo dressing,
     dancing, singing, sighing, whining, rhyming, flattery, lying,
     grinning, cringing, and the drudgery of loving to boot.... Every
     man plays the fool once in his life, but to marry is to play the
     fool all one's life long."

In Belinda we have a specimen of one of the fast young ladies of the
period, who certainly seems to have used strong language. She cries,

     Oh, that most inhuman, barbarous, hackney-coach! I am jolted to a
     jelly, am I not horridly touz'd?

She chides Belmour,

     Prithee hold thy tongue! Lord! he has so pestered me with flowers
     and stuff, I think I shan't endure the sight of a fire for a
     twelvemonth.

     _Belmour._ Yet all can't melt that cruel frozen heart.

     _Bel._ O, gad! I hate your hideous fancy--you said that once
     before--if you must talk impertinently, for Heaven's sake let it be
     with variety; don't come always like the devil wrapped in flames.
     I'll not hear a sentence more that begins with, "I burn," or an "I
     beseech you, Madam."

At last she exclaims,

     "O! my conscience! I could find in my heart to marry thee, purely
     to be rid of thee."

There is frequently a conflict of wit. Sharper tells Sir Joseph Willot
that he lost many pounds, when he was defending him in a scuffle the
night before. He hopes he will repay him.

     Money is but dirt, Sir Joseph; mere dirt, Sir Joseph.

     _Sir Joseph._ But I profess 'tis a dirt I have washed my hands of
     at present.

Lord Froth in "The Double Dealer" says,

     There is nothing more unbecoming in a man of gravity than to laugh,
     to be pleased with what pleases the crowd. When I laugh, I always
     laugh alone.

     _Brisk._ I suppose that's because you laugh at your own jests.

Sir Paul Plyant in great wroth expresses himself as follows:

The subjects of Congreve's Comedies would often be thought objectionable
at the present day. The humour is not in the plot, but in the general
dialogue. In "Love for Love," Ben Legend, a sailor, speaking of lawyers,
says--

     Lawyer, I believe there's many a cranny and leak unstopt in your
     conscience. If so be that one had a pump to your bosom, I believe
     we should discern a foul hold. They say a witch will sail in a
     sieve, but I believe the devil would not venture aboard your
     conscience.

The last play he wrote, which failed, was deficient in wit, but had
plenty of inebriety in it. After singing a drinking song, Sir Wilful
says in "The Way of the World."

     The sun's a good pimple, an honest soaker, he has a cellar at your
     Antipodes. If I travel, Aunt, I touch at your Antipodes--your
     Antipodes are a good rascally sort of topsy-turvy fellows. If I had
     a bumper I'd stand on my head, and drink a health to them.

            *       *       *       *       *

     _Scandal._ Yes, mine (_pictures_) are not in black and white, and
     yet there are some set out in their true colours, both men and
     women. I can show you pride, folly, affectation, wantonness,
     inconstancy, covetousness, dissimulation, malice and ignorance all
     in one piece. Then I can show your lying, foppery, vanity,
     cowardice, bragging, incontinence, and ugliness in another piece,
     and yet one of them is a celebrated beauty, and t'other a professed
     beau. I have paintings, too, some pleasant enough.

     _Mrs. Frail._ Come, let's hear 'em.

     _Scan._ Why, I have a beau in a bagnio cupping for a complexion,
     and sweating for a shape.

     _Mrs. F._ So----

     _Scan._ Then I have a lady burning brandy in a cellar with a
     hackney coachman.

     _Mrs. F._ Oh! well, but that story is not true.

     _Scan._ I have some hieroglyphics, too; I have a lawyer with a
     hundred hands, two heads, and but one face; a divine with two faces
     and one head; and I have a soldier with his brains in his belly,
     and his heart where his head should be.

It has been said that Congreve retired on the appearance of Mrs.
Centlivre, but so high was the opinion entertained of his genius that he
was buried in Westminster Abbey, and his pall was supported by noblemen.
Pope was one of his greatest admirers, and dedicated his translation of
Homer to him.

Dryden writes on Congreve.

  "In easy dialogue is Fletcher's praise,
   He moved the mind, but had not power to raise,
   Great Jonson did by strength of judgment please,
   Yet doubling Fletcher's force, he wants his ease.
   In differing talents both adorned their age,
   One for the study, t'other for the stage,
   But both to Congreve justly shall submit,
   One matched in judgment, both over-matched in wit."

Macaulay says "the wit of Congreve far outshines that of every comic
writer, except Sheridan, who has arisen within the last two centuries."

Lord Dorset of whom we have above spoken deserves some passing notice.
He was high in the favour of Charles II., James, and William; and was
one of the most accomplished of the courtiers of that day, who,
notwithwstanding their dissipation, were more or less scholars, and
wrote poetry. What was better, he was a munificent supporter of real
literary genius, and patronized Dryden, and to judge by their
commendations was not neglectful of Congreve and Pope.

Most of his poems are in the pastoral strain, but do not show any great
talent. Two or three of them have some humour--

  "Dorinda's sparkling wit and eyes
   United, cast too fierce a light,
   Which blazes high, but quickly dies,
   Pains not the heart, but hurts the sight;

         *       *       *       *       *

  "Love is a calmer, gentler joy,
   Smooth are his looks, and soft his pace;
   Her cupid is a blackguard boy
   That runs his link right in your face."

Lord Dorset was at the battle of Opdam when the Dutch Admiral's fleet
was destroyed in 1665. The night before the engagement he wrote the well
known epistle

  "To all you ladies now on land,
   We men at sea indite,
   And first would have you understand
   How hard it is to write;
   The Muses now and Neptune too,
   We must implore to write to you.
                  With a fa la la la la.

  "For though the Muses should prove kind,
   And fill our empty brain,
   Yet if rough Neptune raise the wind,
   To wave the azure main,
   Our paper, pen and ink, and we,
   Roll up and down our ships at sea.
                  With a fa, la, &c.

  "Should foggy Opdam chance to throw
   Our sad and dismal story,
   The Dutch would scorn so weak a foe,
   And quit their fort at Goree;
   For what resistance can they find
   From men who've left their hearts behind?
                  With a fa, la, &c.

  "In justice you cannot refuse
   To think of our distress,
   When we for hope of honour lose
   Our certain happiness;
   All those designs are but to prove
   Ourselves more worthy of your love.
                  With a fa, la, &c.

  "And now we've told you all our loves,
   And likewise all our fears,
   In hopes this declaration moves,
   Some pity from your tears;
   Let's hear of no inconstancy,
   We have too much of that at sea.
                  With a fa la la la la."

We can easily understand how the above lines were suggested, for in
those times the same officers served both in army and navy, and many of
the young sparks taken from the gaieties of London had not yet acquired
their sea legs. Wycherley is said to have been present at some of the
engagements with the Dutch.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


       *       *       *       *       *


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Of course this will scarcely apply in those cases in which, by
abstraction, we overlook the creative action of the mind, and regard its
humorous productions as ludicrous. Nor does it hold good where from long
exercise of ingenuity a habit has been formed and amusing fancies spring
up, as it were naturally, and so involuntarily that, for the moment, we
see them only as ludicrous. This view changes almost instantaneously,
and beneath it we often find the best humour. It may be said that such
cases should be placed entirely under the head of humour, but can we
maintain that a man is unaware when he is humorous? The most telling
effects are produced by the ludicrous, and where the creative action of
the mind is scarcely discernible. Efforts to be humorous are seldom
crowned with success; we require something that appears to be real or
original, either as a close rendering of actual occurrences, or a
spontaneous efflorescence of genius. Among the latter class we may
reckon some of our most exquisite and permanent sayings.

[2] A story is told of a Mr. Crispe, a merchant of London, who although
deaf, when Sir Alexander Cary made a speech before his execution,
followed the motion of his lips so as to be able to relate it to his
friends.

[3] Mrs. Barbauld had such a perpetual smile that one of her friends
said it made her jaws ache to look at her.

[4] St. Paul, who was brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, gives a
different account in Rom. iv. 19. See also Heb. xi. 11.

[5] Soame Jenyns strangely imagined that a portion of the happiness of
Seraphim and of just men made perfect would be derived from an exquisite
perception of the ludicrous; while Addison mentions that a learned monk
laid it down as a doctrine that laughter was the effect of original sin,
and that Adam could not laugh before the fall. Some of the early
Christians felt so strongly the incompatibility of strong human emotions
with the divine nature that they expunged the words "Jesus wept."

[6] Perhaps Solomon was amused by them, for in the catalogue of the
valuable things brought in his ships are apes and peacocks.

[7] I cannot see in Homer any of that philosophic satire on the
condition of mortals, which some have found in those passages where men
are represented as being deceived and tricked by the gods. Anything so
deep would be beyond humour. He very probably conceived that the gods,
whom he represented as similar to men, were sometimes not above playing
severe practical jokes on them. The so-called irony of Sophocles in like
manner, is too philosophical and bitter for humour.

[8] Tom Brown, the humorist, says, Lycambes complimented the Iambics of
Archilochus with the most convincing proof of their wit and goodness.

[9] Archilochus could not have been called a satirist in the correct
sense of the word. His observations were mostly personal or
philosophical. He had evidently considerable power in illustrating the
moral by the physical world, and one of his sayings "Speak not evil of
the dead," has become proverbial.

[10] Irony had previously been used in Asia. The only specimens of
humour in the Old Testament are of this character, as in Job, "No doubt
but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you;" where Elijah says
to the prophets of Baal, "Cry aloud, for he is a god," and the children
call after Elisha, "Go up, thou bald-head."

[11] Magnes and others of the day used similar titles. We read that
there were once three Homeric hymns extant, named "The Monkeys," "The
seven-times-shorn Goat," and "The Song on the Thrushes."

[12] After disposing of his daughters for a bunch of garlic and a little
salt, he exclaims, "Oh, Mercury, God of Traffic, grant that I may sell
my wife as profitably, and my mother too!"

[13] So the pun may be represented.

[14] Certainly not before 460 B.C.

[15] Compare our "Billingsgate."

[16] We sometimes speak of a seedy coat.

[17] The answers to the above riddles are, thistledown, sleep, night and
day, shade.

[18] "Gugga" seems to have corresponded with our "Nigger."

[19] About three and nine pence.

[20] Roman mirrors made of silver.

[21] _Scurra_ originally meant a neighbour, then a gossip, then a
pleasant fellow, and finally a jocose, and in those rude times a
scurrilous man.

[22] There is a story of Caligula having had an actor burnt alive for
making an offensive pun in an Atellane play. Sometimes nicknames were
thus made. Placidus was Acidus, Labienus, Rabienus; Claudius Tiberius
Nero was Caldius Biberius Mero.

[23] I have been obliged to omit some of the pungent indelicacy of the
original. The Pope was the sacrificing priest.

[24] We meet with such words as _verrucosus_, _sanna_, a grimace, and
_stloppus_, the sound made by striking the inflated cheeks.

[25] "A satirist is always to be suspected, who to make vice odious
dwells upon all its acts and minutest circumstances with a sort of
relish and retrospective fondness."--_Lamb._

[26] Palindromes, such as "Tibi subito motibus ibit." We have some in
English, as where our forefather addresses his wife "Madam, I'm Adam."

[27] Pyrogenes has a double meaning, "born of corn," and "born of fire,"
alluding to Bacchus' mother having been burnt. Bromos is a kind of
cereal, Bromion a name for Bacchus.

[28] A man of Capreae, having caught an unusually large barbel, presented
it to Tiberius, who was so enraged at his being able to find him in his
retreat, that he ordered his face to be scrubbed with the fish.

[29] Some of the pagans put off Christian baptism till the last moment
under this idea.

[30] There seems to me to be several reasons for drawing this
conclusion.

[31] "Semel minusne, an bis minus; non sat scio, An utrumque eorum,
ut quondam audivi dicier Jovi ipsi regi noluit concedere."

[32] The answers to these enigmas are rose, fleas, sea-mew, visions,
wheels.

[33] As late as the fourteenth century there were only four classical
works in the Royal Library at Paris.

[34] Ritson characteristically observes, "There is this distinction
between the heathen deities and Christian saints, that the fables of the
former were indebted for their existence to the flowing inspiration of
the sublime poet, and the legends of the latter to the gloomy fanaticism
of a lazy monk or a stinking priest."

[35] Sometimes anciently called "West Wales."

[36] King Alfred advanced so far as to make a translation of a classical
history written by Orosius in 416; but the object of the work was to
show that Christianity was not the cause of the evils which had befallen
the Roman Empire.

[37] Two of them are mentioned as superior to Homer. One pretended to be
derived from Dares, a Phrygian, who fought on the Trojan side, and
another from Dictys, a Cretan, who was with the Greeks.

[38] The kind of stories prevalent in these countries may be conjectured
from the two related by John of Bromton, as believed by the natives. One
relates that the head of a child lies at the bottom of the Gulf of
Sataliah in Asia Minor, and that when the head is partly upright, such
storms prevail in the gulf that no vessel can live, but when it is lying
down there is a calm. The other asserts that once in every month a great
black dragon comes in the clouds, plunges his head into the stream, but
leaves his tail in the sky, and draws up the water, so that even ships
are carried into the air. The only way for sailors to escape this
monster, is to make a great noise by beating and shouting, so as to
frighten him.

[39] Originally an Arcadian superstition.

[40] Pinnacles.

[41] Tiles.

[42] The following is the original.

  "Meum est propositum in taberna mori,
   Vinum sit appositum morientis ori,
   Ut dicant cum venerint angelorum chori,
   Deus sit propitius huic potatori."

[43] An idea probably borrowed from the classical writers.

[44] Or the "Amiable," a translation of his father's name.

[45] Mr. Drummond in his Life of Erasmus.

[46] Reprinted by Halliwell.

[47] See "Art-Journal."

[48] I remember to have seen such a procession at Como in the Holy Week.
The various accessories of the Passion were borne along on the top of
poles with appropriate mottoes, for example: Two ladders crossed, "He
bowed the heavens and came down." A stuffed cock, "The cock crew." A
barber's basin, "Pilate washed his hands," &c. The effect was almost
ludicrous.

[49] Lucian makes the father of Cleanthis congratulate himself on having
obtained a buffoon for his son's wedding feast. This individual was an
ugly little fellow with close shaven head, except a few straggling hairs
made up to resemble a cock. He began by dancing and contorting his body
and spouting some AEgytian verses, then he launched all kinds of
fooleries at the company. Most laughed, but on his calling Alcidamas a
Maltese puppy, he was challenged to fight or have his brains dashed out.

[50] But this may have been traditional, for the fools in classic times
were sometimes shaven.

[51] Wright's "History of the Grotesque."

[52] Such as the Wife of Bath's tale, and in "January and May," or the
"Marchante's Tale."

[53] She was roasting a pig.

[54] Most of the ridiculous answers said to have been made at
examinations are mere humorous inventions. We almost think there must be
a slight improvement made in the following, though they are upon the
authority of an examiner,

   What are the great Jewish Feasts?
   Purim, Urim, and Thummin.
   What bounded Samaria on the East?
   The Jordan.
   What on the West?
   The other side of Jordan.
   Derive an English word from the Latin _necto_?
   Necktie.

Nor can we doubt that a slight humorous colouring has been introduced
into the following from the "Memorials of Archibald Constable," recently
published by his son.--An old deaf relation said on her death-bed to her
attendant, "Ann, if I should be spared, I hope my nephew will get the
doctor to open my head, and see whether anything can be done for my
hearing."

[55] One of Anne Boleyn's principal favourites was Sir Thomas Wyatt, who
was celebrated at that day as a man of humour, though at present we see
nothing in his poems but a few poetical conceits. The titles of them are
suggestive: "The Lover sending sighs to move his suit." "Of his Love who
pricked her finger with a needle." "The Lover praiseth the beauty of his
Lady's hand." He wrote the following upon the Queen's name:--

  "What word is that, that changeth not,
   Though it be turned and made in twain?
   It is mine Anna, God it wot,
   The only causer of my pain;
   My love that meedeth with disdain;
   Yet is it loved, what will you more?
   It is my salve and eke my sore."


[56] Christina of Sweden made a similar remark when the Order of the
Garter was sent to Charles Gustavus.

[57] Pace had said the same to Queen Elizabeth, and from such strokes
jesters were called 'honest,' as 'Honest Jo,' &c.

[58] There is little humour in Shadwell's works; he succeeded Dryden as
Poet Laureate, which was perhaps the cause of the above lines.

Rochester said, "If Shadwell had burnt all he wrote, and printed all he
spoke, he would have had more wit and humour than any poet." Probably
his wit would have been like Rochester's. Whether Shadwell were himself
a good poet or not, he made a hit at the poetasters of his day, in which
he showed some genius.

  _Poet._     O, very loftily!
    The winged vallance of your eyes advance
    Shake off your canopied and downie trance:
    Phoebus already quaffs the morning dew,
    Each does his daily lease of life renew.
  Now you shall hear description, 'tis the very life of poetry.
    He darts his beams on the lark's mossy house,
    And from his quiet tenement doth rouse
    The little charming and harmonious fowl
    Which sings its lump of body to a soul.
    Swiftly it clambers up in the steep air
    With warbling notes, and makes each note a stair.


[59] Sir Roger L'Estrange gives the names of the people attacked.

[60] One of Cromwell's principal officers.

[61] Thus familiarly called, no doubt owing to the custom of giving pet
names to jesters.

[62] Guardian, Vol. I. No. 2.

[63] Fence.

  London: Printed by A. Schulze, 13, Poland Street.





