CHAPTER VI.

Shakespeare--Ben Jonson--Beaumont and Fletcher--The Wise Men of Gotham.


Greene, in his admonition to his brother sinners of the stage, tells
them that "there is an vpstart crow beautified with our feathers an
absolute Johannes factotum, in his own conceyt the onely Shake-scene in
a countrey," and in truth these olden writers are principally
interesting as having laid the foundations upon which Shakespeare built
some of his earliest plays. The genius of our great dramatist was
essentially poetic, and some of his plays, which we now call comedies,
were originally entitled "histories." How seldom do we hear any of his
humorous passages quoted, or find them reckoned among our household
words! From some of his observations we might think he was altogether
averse from jocosity. Henry V. says

     "How ill gray hairs become a fool--a jester!"

In "Much ado about Nothing," Beatrice speaks as follows--

     "Why, he is the Prince's jester; a very dull fool, only his gift is
     in devising unprofitable slanders; none but libertines delight in
     him, and the commendation is not in his wit, but in his villany,
     for he both pleases men and angers them, and then they laugh at him
     and beat him."

But notwithstanding all this condemnation Beatrice is herself the
liveliest character in Shakespeare, and her lady's wit is some of the
best he shows--

     _Beatrice._ For hear me, Hero; wooing, wedding, and repenting is as
     a Scotch jig, a measure and a cinque-pace; the first suit is hot
     and hasty, like a Scotch jig, and full as fantastical; the wedding
     mannerly-modest, as a measure full of state and ancientry; and then
     comes repentance, and with his bad legs, falls into the cinque-pace
     faster and faster, till he sinks into his grave.

     _Leonato._ Cousin, you apprehend shrewdly.

     _Beat._ I have a good eye, uncle; I can see a church, by daylight.

In the "Merchant of Venice" Lorenzo thus answers Launcelot--

     "How every fool can play upon the word. I think the best grace of
     wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable
     in none but parrots."

Again Lorenzo--

  "Oh, dear discretion, how his words are suited,
   The fool hath planted in his memory
   An army of good words: And I do know
   A many fools that stand in better place
   Garnished like him, that for a tricksie word
   Defie the matter."

Comedians from Aristophanes downwards have been wont to complain in one
place of that which they adopt in another--their object not being to
adopt fixed principles so much as to show the varying shades of human
thought. Shakespeare required something light to bring his deep
reflections into bolder relief, and therefore frequently had recourse to
humour. We are not surprised that he had no very high estimate of it,
when we find him so much dependant upon "the alms-basket of words."
There is so much of this in his plays, that it is almost superfluous to
quote, but a few instances may be taken at random. Falstaff to Poins--

     "You are straight enough in the shoulders; you care not who sees
     your back--call you that backing your friends? A plague upon such
     backing; give me a man who will face me."

Falstaff to Prince Henry. Act I. Scene II.

     I prythee, sweet wag, when thou art king, as God save thy
     grace--majesty, I should say, for grace thou wilt have none--

     _P. Hen._ What! none?

     _Fal._ No, by my troth; not so much as will serve to be prologue to
     an egg and butter.

In Love's Labour Lost. Act I. Scene II.

     _Armado._ Comfort me, boy. What great men have been in love?

     _Inoth._ Hercules, master.

     _Arm._ Most sweet Hercules! More authority, dear boy, name more;
     and, sweet my child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.

     _Inoth._ Samson, master; he was a man of good carriage, for he
     raised the town gates on his back like a porter, and he was in
     love.

In the musicians scene, in Romeo and Juliet, Act IV. Scene V. we find--

     _Musician._ Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.

     _Peter._ Then have at you with my wit. I will dry beat you with my
     iron wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like:

  When griping grief the heart doth wound,
  And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
  Then music with her silver sound--

     Why _silver_ sound? Why music with her silver sound? What say you,
     Simon Catling?

     _First Mins._ Marry, Sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.

     _Peter._ Pretty. What say you, Hugh Rebeck?

     _Sec. Mins._ I say "silver sound," because musicians sound for
     silver.

     _Peter._ Pretty, too! What say you, James Soundpost?

     _Third Mins._ Faith! I know not what to say.

     _Peter._ O! I cry for mercy; you are the singer; I will say for
     you. It is music with her silver sound, because musicians have no
     gold for sounding.

We may here observe that the puns of Shakespeare are never of the
"atrocious" class; there is always something to back them up, and give
them a shadow of probability. The tournaments of humour which he is fond
of introducing, although good in effect upon the stage, are not
favourable for any keen wit. Such conflicts must be kept up by artifice,
cannot flow from natural suggestion, and degenerate into a mere
splintering of words. One cause of the absence of "salt" in his writings
is that he was not of a censorious or cynical spirit; another was that
his turn of mind was rather sentimental than gay. Shakespeare evidently
knew there might be humour among men of attainments, for he writes,--

  "None are so surely caught, when they are catched,
   As wit turned fool; folly is wisdom hatched,
   Hath wisdom's warrant and the help of school
   And wits' own grace to grace a learned fool."

But with him, those who indulge in it are clowns, simpletons, and
profligates. Few of his grand characters are witty. Perhaps he was
conscious of the great difficulty there would be in finding suitable
sayings for them. Indelicacy and hostility would have to be alike
avoided, and thus when the sage Gonzalo is to be amusing, he sketches a
Utopian state of things, which he would introduce were he King of the
island on which they are cast. He would surpass the golden age.
Sebastian and Antonio laugh at him, and cry "God save the King," Alonzo
replies "Prythee, no more, thou dost talk nothing (_i.e._ nonsense) to
me." Gonzalo replies that he did so purposely "to minister occasion to
those gentlemen, who are of such sensible and nimble lungs that they
always use to laugh at nothing." They retort that they were not laughing
at his humour, but at himself. "Who," he replies, "in this merry fooling
am nothing to you" meaning, apparently, that he is acting the fool
intentionally and out of his real character.

Hamlet, when his mind is distraught, "like sweet bells jangled," is
allowed to indulge in a little punning, and Biron is humorous, for which
he is reproached by Rosalind, who tells him that he is one

  "Whose influence is begot of that loose grace
   Which shallow laughing hearers give to fools;"

that only silly thoughtless people admire wit, and that

  "A jest's prosperity lies in the ear
   Of him that hears it--never in the tongue
   Of him that makes it."

Here the variable character of humour is recognised, but it is not to be
supposed that Rosalind's arguments were intended to be strictly correct.
Very much must depend upon the form in which a jest is produced, and
without the tongue of the utterer, it cannot exist though the sympathy
of the listener is required for its appreciation.

In Shakespeare's plays, and in most comedies we find humour in the
representation of ludicrous characters. Words, which would be dull
enough in ordinary cases, become highly amusing when coming from men of
peculiar views. Sometimes people are represented as perpetually riding
their hobby, or harping on one favourite subject. We have an instance of
this in Holophernes and his pedantry; and the conversation between the
two gravediggers in Hamlet, is largely indebted for its relish to the
contrast between the language of the men and their occupation. In the
same way, the ignorance and misrepresentations of rustics in play
acting, which Shakespeare had probably often observed in the
provinces--gives zest to the exaggerated caricature in "Midsummer
Night's Dream."--

     _Bottom._ There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe
     that will never please. First, Pyramus must draw a sword to kill
     himself, which ladies cannot abide. How answer you that?

     _Snout._ By'r lakin a parlous fear.

     _Starveling._ I believe we must leave the killing out, when all is
     done.

     _Bottom._ Not a whit. I have a device to make all well. Write me a
     prologue, and let the prologue seem to say, we will not do harm
     with our swords, and that Pyramus is not killed indeed; and for the
     more better assurance, tell them that I, Pyramus, am not Pyramus,
     but Bottom the weaver; this will put them out of fear.

            *       *       *       *       *

     _Snout._ Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion?

     _Sta._ I fear it, I promise you.

     _Bottom._ Masters, you ought to consider with yourselves to bring
     in--God shield us! a lion among ladies is a most dreadful thing;
     for there is not a more fearful wildfowl than your lion living, and
     we ought to look to it.

     _Snout._ Therefore another prologue must tell, he is not a lion.

     _Bottom._ Nay, you must name his name, and half his face must be
     seen through the lion's neck; and he must himself speak through,
     saying thus, or to the same effect--"Ladies," or "Fair ladies, I
     would wish you," or "I would request you," or "I would entreat you
     not to fear, nor to tremble: my life for yours. If you think I come
     hither as a lion, it were pity of my life: no, I am no such thing.
     I am a man as other men are," and there then let him name his name
     and tell them plainly he is Snug the joiner.

When the play comes on for performance and Snug the joiner roars "like
any sucking dove," the Duke Theseus remarks--

     A very gentle beast, and of a good conscience.

     _Demetrius._ The very best as a beast, my lord, that e'er I saw.

     _Lysander._ This lion is a very fox for his valour.

     _Theseus._ True, and a goose for his discretion.

     _Demetrius._ Not so, my lord, for his valour cannot carry his
     discretion, and the fox carries the goose.

     _Theseus._ His discretion, I am sure, cannot carry his valour, for
     the goose carries not the fox.

The enigmas and logical quibbles, which he occasionally intermingles
with his verbal conceits, remind us of the old philosophic paradoxes.
Sometimes a riddle is attempted; thus, he asks--"What was a month old at
Cain's birth, that's not five weeks old now?" Answer--"The Moon."

Taken generally, there is such a remarkable uniformity in Shakespeare's
humour as must acquit him of all charge of plagiarism in this respect,
and may go some way towards proving the general originality of his
plays. Certainly, verbal conceits were then in high favour, and the
character of Shakespeare's humour is only one of many proofs that
pleasantry had not at this time reached its highest excellence.

To Shakespeare's kindness and discretion Ben Jonson owed his first
introduction to dramatic fame. The young poet had presented "Every Man
in his Humour," to one of the leading players of the company to which
Shakespeare belonged, and the comedian upon reading it, determined to
refuse it. Jonson's fate was trembling in the balance; he was a
struggling man, and, had he been unsuccessful, might have eventually,
returned to his bricklayer's work, but he was destined to be raised up
for his own benefit and that of others. Shakespeare was present when his
play was about to be rejected, asked to be allowed to look over it, and,
at once recognising the poet's talent, recommended it to his companions.
From that moment Jonson's career was secured. But he was never destined
to acquire the lasting fame of Shakespeare. With him the stream of
Comedy was losing its deep and strong reflections, and beginning to flow
in a swifter and shallower current, meandering through labyrinths of
court and city life. Perhaps, also, his large amount of humorous
illustration, which must have been mostly ephemeral, tended to cut short
his fame. The best of it is interwoven with his several designs and
plots, as where, in "The Alchemist," a gentleman leaves his house in
town, and his housekeeper fills it with fortune-tellers vagabonds, who
carry on their trade there; and in "The Fox" a rich and childless man is
courted by his friends, from whom he obtains presents under the pretence
that he will leave them his property. In this last play a parasite is
introduced, and in general these plays abound with classical allusions,
sometimes very incongruously intermixed with modern concerns. An
indiscriminating admiration of ancient literature and art was as much
one of the features of the day, as was its crude humour--a cleverness
joined to folly and attributed to boobies and simpletons. Much of this
jocosity scarcely deserves the name of humour, and we may remark that in
Jonson's time it did not receive it. With him humour is thus defined--

  "To be a quality of air or water,
   And in itself holds these two properties,
   Moisture and fluxure.... Now thus far
   It may by metaphor apply itself
   Unto the general disposition:
   As when some one peculiar quality
   Doth so possess a man, that it doth draw
   All his affects, his spirits, and his power."

The social peculiarities of the day are frequently alluded to by Jonson.
In "Every Man out of his own Humour," we have complete directions for
the conduct of a gentleman of the time. Smoking, then lately introduced,
is especially mentioned as one of the necessities of foppery. Cob, a
water-bearer says, "Ods me, I marle what pleasure or felicity they have
in taking this roguish tobacco. It's good for nothing but to choke a
man, and fill him full of smoke and embers: there were four died out of
one house last week with taking of it, and two more the bell went for
yesternight; one of them they say will never 'scape it: he cast up a
bushel of soot yesterday."

In Cynthia's Revels a courtier is thus described--

"He walks most commonly with a clove or toothpick in his mouth: he is
the very mint of compliment, all his behaviours are pointed: his face is
another volume of essays, and his beard is Aristarchus. He speaks all
cream skimmed, and more affected than a dozen waiting women. The other
gallant is his zany, and doth most of these tricks after him, sweats to
imitate him in everything to a hair, except his beard, which is not yet
extant."

But the stamp of the age is especially prominent in the constant
recurrence of verbal conceits. Jonson was fond of coining words, and of
using such as are long and little known. He evidently found this a
successful kind of humour, and may have partly imitated Plautus--

Lady Politick Would-be, to Volpone, supposed sick--

  Seed pearl were good now, boiled with syrup of apples,
  Tincture of gold, and coral, citron pills,
  Your elicampane root, myrobalanes--

     _Volpone (tired with her talk)_ Ah me! I have ta'en a grasshopper
     by the wing.

In "The Alchemist" Subtle says to Face,

     Sirrah my varlet, stand you forth and speak to him
     Like a philosopher: answer in the language,
     Name the vexations and the martyrizations
     Of metals in the work.

     Face. Sir, putrefaction,
     Solution, ablution, sublimation,
     Cohabation, calcination, ceration and
     Fixation.

From "Every Man out of his Humour."

     _Macilente._ Pork! heart! what dost thou with such a greasy dish? I
     think thou dost varnish thy face with the fat on't, it looks so
     like a glue-pot.

     _Carlo._ True, my raw-boned rogue, and if thou wouldst farce thy
     lean ribs with it too, they would not like rugged laths, rub out so
     many doublets as they do; but thou knowest not a good dish thou. No
     marvel though, that saucy stubborn generation, the Jews, were
     forbidden it, for what would they have done, well pampered with fat
     pork, that durst murmur at their Maker out of garlick and onions?
     'Slight! fed with it--the strummel-patched, goggle-eyed,
     grumbledones would have gigantomachized.--

The following extracts will give a slight idea of Ben Jonson's varied
talent. At the conclusion of a play directed against plagiarists and
libellers, he sums up--

  "Blush, folly, blush! here's none that fears
   The wagging of an ass's ears,
   Although a wolfish case he wears.
   Detraction is but baseness varlet
   And apes are apes, though clothed in scarlet."

From "The Alchemist."


     _Tribulation._ What makes the devil so devilish, I would ask you.
     Sathan our common enemy, but his being
     Perpetually about the fire, and boiling
     Brimstone and arsenic?...

     _Fastidious._ How like you her wit.

     _Macilente._ Her ingenuity is excellent, Sir.

     _Fast._ You see the subject of her sweet fingers there (_the viol_)
     oh, she tickles it so that--she makes it laugh most divinely--I'll
     tell you a good jest just now, and yourself shall say it's a good
     one. I have wished myself to be that instrument, I think a thousand
     times, and not so few by heaven.

The two following are from "Bartholomew Fair."

     _Littlewit._ I envy no man my delicates, Sir.

     _Winwife._ Alas, you have the garden where they grow still. A wife
     here with a strawberry breath, cherry lips, apricot cheeks, and a
     soft velvet head like a melicotton.

     _Lit._ Good i' faith! now dulness upon us, that I had not that
     before him, that I should not light on't as well as he! Velvet
     head!...

     _Knockem._ Sir, I will take your counsel, and cut my hair, and
     leave vapours. I see that tobacco and bottle ale, and pig and whit,
     and very Ursula herself is all vanity.

     _Busy._ Only pig was not comprehended in my admonition--the rest
     were: for long hair, it is an ensign of pride, a banner: and the
     world is full of those banners--very full of banners. And bottle
     ale is a drink of Satan's, a diet-drink of Satan's devised to puff
     us up, and make us swell in this latter age of vanity; as the smoke
     of tobacco to keep us in mist and error: but the fleshly woman,
     which you call Ursula, is above all to be avoided, having the marks
     upon her of the three enemies of man--the world, as being in the
     Fair, the Devil, as being in the fire;[53] and the flesh as being
     herself.

Ben Jonson has a strange, and I believe original conceit of introducing
persons to explain their plays, and make remarks on the characters.
Sometimes many interruptions of this kind occur in the course of a
drama, affording variety and amusement to the audience, or the reader.
In "Midsummer's Night's Dream" we have the insertion of a play within a
play. The following taken from Jonson's epigrams have fine complexity,
and show a certain tinge of humour.


  THE HOUR GLASS.

  "Consider this small dust here in the glass,
          By atoms moved:
   Could you believe that this the body was
          Of one that loved;
   And in his mistress' flame, playing like a fly,
   Was turned to cinders by her eye:
   Yes; and in death as like unblest,
          To have't exprest,
   Ev'n ashes of lovers find no rest."


  MY PICTURE.--LEFT IN SCOTLAND.

  I now think Love is rather deaf than blind,
  For else it could not be
      That she,
  Whom I adore so much, should so slight me,
  And cast my suit behind;
  I'm sure my language to her was as sweet,
  And every close did meet
  In sentence of as subtle feet,
  As hath the youngest, he,
  That sits in shadow of Apollo's tree.
  Oh! but my conscious fears
  That fly my thoughts between
  Tell me that she hath seen
  My hundreds of gray hairs,
  Told seven and forty years,
  Read so much waste, as she cannot embrace
  My mountain belly, and my rocky face,
  And all these through her eyes have stopt her ears.

Although fond of indulging in strong language, Jonson is scarcely ever
guilty of any really coarse allusion--he expresses his aversion from
anything of the kind, and this in the age in which he lived, argued
great refinement of feeling.

In Fletcher we mark a progress in humour. Ben Jonson was so personal
that he made enemies, and was suspected of attacking Inigo Jones and
others, but Fletcher was general in his references, and merely ridiculed
the manners of the age. The classic element disappears, and quibbling
and playing with words--so fashionable in Shakespeare's time--is not
found in this author, whose humour has more point, and generally more
sarcasm, but of a refined character.

The name of Fletcher is invariably connected with Beaumont. The two
young men lived together in the same house, and it is even said wore
each other's clothes. But Beaumont only lived to be twenty-nine, and has
left little in comparison with the voluminous works of Fletcher. They
were both born in a good position, and, mingling in the fashionable
society of their day, filled their pages with love intrigues, in colours
not then offensive. Fletcher never married, and those who look for
contrasts between fathers and children may learn that his father, who
was Bishop of London, was suspended by Elizabeth for taking a second
wife. Our author is said to have been himself a comedy, and his death,
if we can believe the story, was consistent with his gay life, for we
are told that, through waiting in London for a new suit of clothes, he
died of cholera, which was raging there at the time.

Here is a specimen of his sketches--the character of a rich usurer--

  _Sanchio._ Thou'art very brave.

  _Cacafogo._ I've reason; I have money.

  _San._ Is money reason?

  _Cac._ Yes, and rhyme too, captain.
  If you've no money you're an ass.

  _San._ I thank you.

  _Cac._ You've manners! ever thank him that has money.

  _San._ Wilt thou lend me any?

  _Cac._ Not a farthing, captain; captains are casual things.

  _San._ Why, so are all men:
  Thou shalt have my bond.

  _Cac._ Nor bonds, nor fetters, captain:
  My money is my own; I make no doubt on't.

  _Juan._ What dost thou do with it?

  _Cac._ Put it to pious uses--
  Buy wine--

  _Juan._ Are you for the wars, Sir?

  _Cac._ I am not poor enough to be a soldier,
  Nor have I faith enough to ward a bullet;
  This is no living for a trench, I take it.

  _Juan._ You have said wisely.

  _Cac._ Had you but money

  You'd swear it, colonel. I'd rather drill at home
  A hundred thousand crowns, and with more honour,
  Than exercise ten thousand fools with nothing;
  A wise man safely feeds, fools cut their fingers.

The prurient coarseness of Fletcher is due to the peculiar
licentiousness of the period. In his plays, although kissing is
sometimes provocative of jealousy, it is generally regarded, even by
persons of rank, as of less importance than it is now by boys and girls,
who play "Kiss in the ring." In "Rule a wife and have a wife" Margarita
says to the Duke

  "I may kiss a stranger,
   For you must be so now."

This lady is desirous of obtaining a very easy husband, who will let her
do whatever she likes. A friend says she has found one for her in Leon,
who is forthwith introduced. Margarita puts some questions to him to
ascertain his docility, and then says--

  "Let me try your kisses--
   How the fool shakes!--I will not eat you, Sir.
   Beshrew my heart, he kisses wondrous manly!
   You must not look to be my master, Sir,
   Nor talk i' th' house as though you wore the breeches,
   No, nor command in anything. . . You must not be saucy,
   No, nor at any time familiar with me;
   Scarce know me when I call not."

After trying and approving his kisses again, she tells him that he is
not to start or be offended if he sees her kissing anyone else. He is to
keep in the cellar, when not wanted. The proposed husband promises to be
most obedient and accommodating in everything, but as soon as he is
accepted and the ceremony performed, he appears in a totally different
character. He informs his wife, in whose magnificent house he goes to
live--

    You've nothing to do here, Madam,
    But as a servant to sweep clean the lodgings,
    And at my farther will to do me service.
    _Margarita_ (_to her servants._) Get me my coach!
    _Leon._ Let me see who dare get it
  Till I command; I'll make him draw your coach
  And eat your couch, (which will be hard duty).

On Cacafogo making some slighting remark, this gentle individual
exclaims--

  "Peace! dirt and dunghill!
   I will not lose mine anger on a rascal;
   Provoke me more,--I will beat thy blown body
   Till thou rebound'st again like a tennis-ball."

In "Monsieur Thomas" we have the following jovial passage--

  _Francisco._ What hast thou there? a julep?

  _Hylas._ He must not touch it;
  'Tis present death.

  _Thomas._ You are an ass, a twirepipe,
  A Jeffery John Bo-peep! Thou minister?
  Thou mend a left-handed pack-saddle? Out! puppy!
  My Friend, Frank, but a very foolish fellow.
  Dost thou see that bottle? view it well.

  _Fran._ I do, Tom.

  _Tho._ There be as many lives in it as a cat carries;
  'Tis everlasting liquor.

  _Fran._ What?

  _Tho._ Old sack, boy.
  Old reverend sack; which for ought that I can read yet
  Was the philosopher's stone the wise King Ptolomus
  Did all his wonders by.

  _Fran._ I see no harm, Tom.
  Drink with a moderation.

  _Tho._ Drink with sugar,
  Which I have ready here, and here a glass, boy.

         *       *       *       *       *

  Hang up your juleps, and your Portugal possets,
  Your barley broths and sorrel soups; they are mangy
  And breed the scratches only: Give me sack!

The devil now becomes a constant resource for humour. In "The Chances"
Antonio has lost his jewels. His servant suggests that the thieves have
"taken towards the ports."

  _Ant._ Get me a conjurer,
  One that can raise a water-devil. I'll port 'em.
  Play at duck and drake with my money? Take heed, fiddler,
  I'll dance ye by this hand: your fiddlestick
  I'll grease of a new fashion, for presuming
  To meddle with my de-gambos! get me a conjurer,
  Inquire me out a man that lets out devils.

Beaumont and Fletcher were great conversationalists, their racy raillery
is said to have been as good as their plays. They were members of the
celebrated Mermaid Club in Fleet Street, a centre where the wits of the
day sharpened their humour in friendly conflict. In his epistle to Ben
Jonson, Beaumont writes--

          "What things have we seen
  Done at the 'Mermaid!' heard words that have been
  So nimble and so full of subtle flame,
  As if that every one from whom they came
  Had meant to put his whole wit in a jest,
  And had resolved to live a fool the rest
  Of his dull life."

Here it was that Shakespeare and Jonson often contended, the former like
"a light English man-of-war" the latter like "a high-built Spanish
galleon."

To some portion of the seventeenth century, we must attribute those
curious stories called "The Merry tales of the Wise Men of Gotham"
although by some they have been attributed to Andrew Gotham, a physician
of Henry VIII. They are said to have been suggested by a circumstance
which occurred in the time of King John. He intended to pass through
Gotham, a village in Northamptonshire, but the inhabitants placed some
difficulties in his way. On his expressing his determination to carry
out his project, and sending officers to make inquiries about the
opposition offered, the inhabitants were seized with a panic and
pretended to have lost their senses. This was the tradition upon which,
in after-times, these tales were founded, and being unobjectionable they
are well adapted for the nursery, but being mere exercises of ingenuity
they afford but very slight pleasure to older minds. Although aimless,
there is something clever in them. The Wise Men determine to hedge round
a cuckoo to keep it in so that it should sing all the year. The bird
seeing the hedge flies away. "A vengeance on her," say the Wise Men, "we
made not the hedge high enough." There is the story of the young man,
whose mother told him to throw sheep's eyes at his sweetheart, and who,
literally, performed her bidding. One Good Friday the Men of Gotham
consulted what to do with their red herrings, and other salt fish, and
agreed to cart them into a pond that the number might increase next
year. At the beginning of the next summer they drag the pond, and only
find a great eel. "A mischief on him," they say, "he hath eaten up our
fish." Some propose to chop him in pieces, but the rest think it would
be best to drown him, so they throw him into another pond. Twelve men of
Gotham go to fish, and some stand on dry land, and some in the water.
And one says "We have ventured wonderfully in wading; I pray that none
of us come home drowned." So they begin to count, and as each omits
himself he can only count eleven, and so they go back to the water, and
make great lamentation. A courtier, who meets them, convinces them of
their mistake by laying his whip on each of them, who calls out in turn
"Here's one," until twelve are counted. The minister of Gotham preaches
that men should not drink in Lent. A man, who comes for absolution, and
confesses to having been drunk in Lent, replies that fish should swim.
"Yes," returns the priest, "but in water." "I cannot enjoin your
prayer," he adds, "for you cannot say your Paternoster. It is folly to
make you fast because you never get meat. Labour hard, and get a dinner
on Sunday, and I will come and dine with you."




