CHAPTER XXI--FLASHING GEMS


Eagerly the adventurers looked through the opening at the end of the
passage into the larger cave. The men opened the small oven in which the
balls of white chemicals and carbon mixed, had been baked, and a pile of
things, that looked like irregularly-shaped marbles, were placed in the
steel box.

This box, which was about the size of a trunk, was of massive metal. It
was placed in a recess in the solid rock, and all about were layers of
asbestos and other substances that were nonconductors of heat.

“That box becomes red hot,” exclaimed Mr. Jenks, in a whisper. “When
things are in readiness, that lever is pulled and the diamonds are
made. I pulled it once, but I did not then know the process involved. I
supposed that the lightning had nothing to do with making the diamonds.”

“It has--a most important part,” said Mr. Parker. The hidden adventurers
could talk in perfect safety now, for the men in the large cave were too
excited to pay much attention to them. The muttering of the thunder
grew louder, and at times a particularly loud crash told that a bolt had
struck somewhere in the vicinity of the cave.

“But, bless my watch-charm!” exclaimed Mr. Damon, “I didn't know
lightning made diamonds.”

“It does not--always,” went on the scientist. “But great heat and
pressure are necessary to create the gems. In nature this was probably
obtained by prehistoric volcanic fires, and by the terrific pressure of
immense rocks. It is possible to make diamonds in the laboratory of the
chemist, but they are so minute as to be practically valueless.

“However, these men seem to have hit upon a new plan. They utilize the
terrific heat of lightning, and the pressure which is instantaneously
obtained when the bolt strikes. I am anxious to see how it is done.
Look, I think they are getting ready to make the gems.”

Indeed there seemed to be an air of expectancy among the diamond makers.
The mixing machine had now been stopped, and, as it was more quiet
in the cave, our friends, in their hiding-place, had to speak in mere
whispers. All the men were now gathered about the great steel box.

This receptacle had been closed by a solid metal door, which was screwed
and clamped tight. Then one of the men examined a number of heavily
insulated electric wires that extended from the box off into the
darkness where Tom and his companions could not discern them.

“That's Folwell--the man I befriended, and who got me into this game,”
 whispered Mr. Jenks. “He was also one of the first to turn against me. I
think he's one of the leaders.”

Folwell came back, after having gone into a dark part of the cave. He
went over to an electrical switch on one of the stone walls.

“It's almost time,” Tom heard him say to his confederates. “The storm is
coming up rapidly.”

“Will it be severe enough?” asked one of the helpers. “We had all our
work for nothing last time. The flashes weren't heavy enough.”

“These will be,” asserted Folwell. “The indicator shows nearly a million
volts now, and it's increasing.”

“A million volts!” exclaimed Tom. “I hope it doesn't strike anywhere
around here.”

“Oh, it will probably be harmlessly conducted down on the heavy wires,”
 said Mr. Parker. “We are in no danger, at present, though ultimately I
expect to see the whole mountain shattered by a lightning bolt.”

“Cheerful prospect,” murmured Tom.

There was a terrific crash outside. The rocky floor of the cave
trembled.

“Here she comes!” cried Folwell. “Get back, everybody! I'm going to
throw over the switch now!”

The men retreated well away from the steel box. Folwell threw over the
lever--the same one Mr. Jenks remembered pulling. Then the man ran
to the electric switch on the wall, and snapped that into place,
establishing a connection.

There was a moment's pause, as Folwell ran to join the others in their
place of safety. Then from without there came a most nerve-racking and
terrifying crash. It seemed as if the very mountain would be rent into
fragments.

Watching with eager eyes, the adventurers saw sparks flash from the
steel box. Instantly it became red hot, and then glowed white and
incandescent. It was almost at the melting point.

Then came comparative quiet, as the echoes of the thunder died away amid
the mountain peaks.

“I guess that did the trick!” cried Folwell. “It was a terrific crash
all right!”

He and the others ran forward. The steel box was now a cherry red,
for it was cooling. Folwell threw back the lever, and another man
disconnected the switch. There was a period of waiting until the box was
cool enough to open. Then the heavy door was swung back.

With a long iron rod Folwell drew something from the retort. It was the
tray which had held the white balls. But they were white no longer, for
they had been turned into diamonds. From their hiding-place Tom and the
others could see the flashing gems, for, in spite of the fact that the
diamonds were uncut, some of them sparkled most brilliantly, due to the
peculiar manner in which they were made.

“We have the secret of the diamonds!” whispered Mr. Jenks. “There must
be a quart of the gems there!”

The men gathered about Folwell, uttering exclamations of delight. The
diamonds were too hot to handle yet.

“That's going some!” exclaimed the chief of the diamond makers. “We have
a small fortune here.”

The was a sudden commotion at one end of the cave. A man rushed in. At
the sight of him Tom stared and uttered an exclamation.

“Munson--the stowaway!” he whispered.

“Hello!” cried Folwell, as he saw his confederate. “I thought you were
East, keeping Jenks away from here.”

“He got the best of me!” cried Munson, “he and that Tom Swift! I stowed
away on their airship, but they found me out by a wireless message,
and marooned me in the woods. I've been trying to get here ever since!
Didn't you get my messages of warning?”

“No--what warnings?” cried Folwell.

“About Jenks, Tom Swift and the others. They're here--they must be on
Phantom Mountain now. In fact, I shouldn't be surprised if they were in
this cave. I traced them to their camp, but they're gone. They may be
among us now--in some of the secret recesses!”

For an instant Folwell stared at the bearer of these tidings. Then he
cried out:

“Scatter men, and find these fellows! We must get them before they
discover our secret!”

“It's too late--we know it!” exulted Tom Swift. Then he whispered to
the others to hurry to the part of the cave where Bill Renshaw had first
hidden them.




