CHAPTER V--A MYSTERIOUS MAN


For several minutes Andy Foger did not arise. He remained prostrate in
the dust, and Tom, observing him, thought perhaps the bully might have
been seriously injured. But, a little later, Andy cautiously raised his
head, and inquired in a frightened voice:

“Is it--is it gone?”

“Is what gone?” asked Tom, grimly.

At the sound of his voice, Andy looked up. “Was that you, Tom Swift?” he
demanded. “Did you knock me off my wheel?”

“My monoplane and I together did,” was the reply; “or, rather, we
didn't. It was the nervous reaction caused by your fright, and
the knowledge that you had done wrong, that made you jump over the
handlebars. That's the scientific explanation.”

“You--you did it!” stammered Andy, getting to his feet. He wasn't hurt
much, Tom thought.

“Have it your own way,” resumed our hero. “Did you think it was a
hob-goblin in a chariot of fire after you, Andy?”

“Huh! Never mind what I thought! I'll have you arrested for this!”

“Will you? Delighted, as the boys say. Hop in my airship and I'll take
you right into town. And when I get you there I'll make a charge of
malicious mischief against you, for breaking the propeller of the
Butterfly and slashing her wings. I've mended her up, however, so she
goes better than ever, and I can take you to the police station in jig
time. Want to come, Andy?”

This was too much for the bully. He knew that Tom would have a clear
case against him, and he did not dare answer. Instead he shuffled over
to where his wheel lay, picked it up, and rode slowly off.

“Good riddance,” murmured Tom. He looked about, and saw that he was near
a house, in the rear of which was a good-sized barn. “Guess I'll ask
if I can leave the Butterfly there,” he murmured, and, ringing the
doorbell, he was greeted by a man.

“I'll pay you if you'll let me store my machine in the barn a little
while, until I go into the city, and return,” spoke the lad.

“Indeed, you're welcome to leave it there without pay,” was the answer.
“I'm interested in airships, and, I'll consider it a favor if you'll let
me look yours over while it's here.”

Tom readily agreed, and a few minutes later he had caught a trolley
going into the city. He was soon in one of the largest jewelry stores of
Chester.

“I'd like to get an expert opinion as to whether or not those stones are
diamonds,” spoke Tom, to the polite clerk who came up to wait on him,
and our hero handed over the two gems which Mr. Jenks had given him.
“I'm willing to pay for the appraisement, of course,” the young inventor
added, as he saw the clerk looking rather doubtfully at him, for Tom had
on a rough suit, which he always donned when he flew in his monoplane.

“I'll turn them over to our Mr. Porter, a gem expert,” said the clerk.
“Please be seated.”

The young man disappeared into a private office with the stones, and Tom
waited. He wondered if he was going to have his trouble for his pains.
Presently two elderly gentlemen came from the little room, on the glass
door of which appeared the word “Diamonds.”

“Who brought these stones in?” asked one of the men, evidently the
proprietor, from the deference paid him by the clerk. The latter
motioned to Tom.

“Will you kindly step inside here?” requested the elderly man. When the
door was closed, Tom found himself in a room which was mostly taken up
with a bench for the display of precious stones, a few chairs, and some
lights arranged peculiarly; while various scales and instruments stood
on a table.

“You wished an opinion on--on these?” queried the proprietor of the
place. Tom noticed at once that the word “diamonds” was not used.

“I wanted to find out if they were of any value,” he said. “Are they
diamonds?”

“Would you mind stating where you got them?” asked the other of the two
men.

“Is that necessary?” inquired the lad. “I came by them in a legitimate
manner, if that's what you mean, and I can satisfy you on that point.
I am willing to pay for any information you may give me as to their
value.”

“Oh, it isn't that,” the proprietor hastened to assure him. “But these
are diamonds of such a peculiar kind, so perfect and without a flaw,
that I wondered from what part of the world they came.”

“Then they are diamonds?” asked Tom, eagerly.

“The finest I have ever tested!” declared the other man, evidently Mr.
Porter, the gem expert. “They are a joy to look at, Mr. Roberts,” he
went on, turning to the proprietor. “If it is possible to get a supply
of them you would be justified in asking half as much again as we charge
for African or Indian diamonds. The Kimberly products are not to be
compared to these,” and he looked at the two stones in his hand--the one
cut, and sparkling brilliantly, the other in a rough state.

“Do you care to state where these diamonds came from?” asked Mr.
Roberts, looking critically at Tom.

“I had rather not,” answered the lad. “It is enough for me to know that
they are diamonds. How much is your charge?”

“Nothing,” was the unexpected answer. “We are very glad to have had the
opportunity of seeing such stones. Is there any chance of getting any
more?”

“Perhaps,” answered Tom, as he accepted the gems which the expert held
out to him.

“Then might we speak for a supply?” went on Mr. Roberts, eagerly. “We
will pay you the full market price.”

“What is the value of these stones?” asked Tom.

Mr. Roberts looked at his gem expert.

“It is difficult to say,” was the answer of the man who had handed Tom
the gems. “They are so far superior to the usual run of diamonds, that
I feel justified in saying that the cut one would bring fifteen hundred
dollars, anywhere. In fact, I would offer that for it. The other is
larger, though what it would lose in cutting would be hard to say. I
should say it was worth two thousand dollars as it is now.”

“Thirty-five hundred dollars for these two stones!” exclaimed Tom.

“They are worth every cent of it,” declared Mr. Roberts. “Do you want to
sell?”

Tom shook his head. He could scarcely believe the good news. Mr. Jenks
had told the truth. Now the young inventor could go with him to seek the
diamond makers.

“Can you get any more of these?” went on Mr. Roberts.

“I think so--that is I don't know--I am going to try,” answered the lad.

“Then if you succeed I wish you would sell us some,” fairly begged the
proprietor of the store.

“I will,” promised Tom, but he little knew what lay before him, or
perhaps he would not have made that promise. He thanked the diamond
merchant for his kindness, and arranged to have the cut stone set in a
pin for Miss Nestor. The uncut gem Tom took away with him.

Thinking of many things, and wondering how best to start in his airship
Red Cloud for the mysterious Phantom Mountain, Tom hurried back to where
he had left the monoplane, wheeled it out, and was soon soaring through
the air toward Shopton.

“I think I'll go with Mr. Jenks,” he decided, as he prepared for a
landing in the open space near his aeroplane shed. “It will be a
risky trip, perhaps, but I've taken risks before. When Mr. Jenks comes
to-night I'll tell him I'll help him to get his rights, and discover the
secret of the diamond makers.”

As Tom was wheeling the Butterfly into the shed, Eradicate came out to
help him.

“Dere's a gen'man here to see yo', Massa Tom,” said the colored man.

“Who is it?”

“I dunno. He keep askin' ef yo' de lad what done bust up Earthquake
Island, an' send lightnin' flashes up to de sky, an' all sech questions
laik dat.”

“It isn't Mr. Damon; is it, Rad? He hasn't been around in some time.”

“No, Massa Tom, it ain't him. I knows dat blessin' man good an' proper.
I jest wish he'd bless mah mule Boomerang some day, an' take some oh
de temper out ob him. No, sah, it ain't Massa Damon. De gen'man's in de
airship shed waitin' fo' you.”

“In the airship shed! No strangers are allowed in there, Rad.”

“I knows it, Massa Tom, but he done persisted his se'f inter it, an'
he wouldn't come out when I told him; an' your pa an' Mr. Jackson ain't
home.”

“I'll see about this,” exclaimed Tom, striding to the large shed, where
the Red Cloud was kept. As he entered it he saw a man looking over the
wonderful craft.

“Did you want to see me?” asked Tom, sharply, for he did not like
strangers prowling around.

“I did, and I apologize for entering here, but I am interested in
airships, and I thought you might want to hire a pilot. I am in need
of employment, and I have had considerable to do with balloons and
aeroplanes, but never with an airship like this, which combines the two
features. Do you wish to hire any one.”

“No, I don't!” replied Tom, sharply, for he did not like the looks of
the man.

“I was told that you did,” was the rather surprising answer.

“Who told you?”

The man looked all around the shed, before replying, as if fearful of
being overheard. Then, stepping close to Tom, he whispered:

“Mr. Jenks told me!”

“Mr. Jenks?” Tom could not conceal his astonishment.

“Yes. Mr. Barcoe Jenks. But I did not come here to merely ask you for
employment. I would like to hire out to you, but the real object of my
visit was to say this to you.”

The man approached still closer to Tom, and, in a lower voice, and one
that could scarcely be heard, he fairly hissed:

“Don't go with Barcoe Jenks to seek the diamond makers!”

Then, before Tom could put out a hand to detain him, had the lad so
wished, the man turned suddenly, and fairly ran from the shed.




