CHAPTER XV--THE LANDSLIDE


Gathered about the young inventor, the three men looked at the warning.
The writing was poor, and it was evident that an attempt had been made
to disguise it. But there was no misspelling of words, and there were no
rudely drawn daggers, or bloody hands or anything of that sort. In fact,
it was a very business-like sort of warning.

“Rather odd,” commented Mr. Jenks. “Black paper and white ink.”

“White ink is easy enough to make,” stated Mr. Parker. “I fancy they
wanted it as conspicuous as possible.”

“Yes,” agreed Tom, “and this warning, together with the antics of the
thing in white last night, shows that they are aware of our presence
here, and perhaps know who we are. We will have to be on our guard.”

“Do you think that fellow Munson, whom we left in the forest, could have
gotten here and warned them?” asked Mr. Damon.

“It's possible,” admitted Tom, “but now let's see if the person who
pinned this warning on our tent took any of our things.”

A hasty examination, however, showed that nothing had been disturbed,
and Tom and Mr. Damon were soon getting supper ready, everyone talking,
during the progress of the meal, about the events of the day, and the
rather weird culmination of it.

“Well, we haven't had a great deal of success--so far,” admitted Tom, as
they sat about the fire, in the fast gathering dusk. “I think, perhaps,
we'd better try on the other side of the mountain to-morrow. We've
explored this side pretty thoroughly.”

“Good idea,” commented Mr. Jenks. “We'll do it, and move our camp. I
only hope those fellows don't find our airship and destroy it. We'll
have a hard time getting back to civilization again, if we have to walk
all the way.”

This contingency caused Tom some uneasiness. He did not like to think
that the unscrupulous men might damage the Red Cloud, that had been
built only after hard labor. But he knew he could accomplish nothing by
worrying, and he tried to dismiss the matter from his mind.

They rather expected to see the thing in white again that night, but it
did not appear, and morning came without anything having disturbed their
heavy sleep, for they were tired from the day's tramp.

It took them the greater part of the day to make a circuit of the base
of Phantom Mountain in order to get to a place where a sort of trail led
upward.

“It's too late to do anything to-night,” decided Tom, as they set up the
tent. “We'll rest, and start the first thing in the morning.”

“And the ghost isn't likely to find us here,” added Mr. Damon. “Where
are you going, Mr. Parker?” he asked, as he saw the scientist tramping a
little way up the side of the mountain.

“I am going to make some observations,” was the answer, and no one paid
any more attention to him for some time. Supper was nearly ready when
Mr. Parker returned. His face wore a rather serious air, and Mr. Damon,
noting it, asked laughingly:

“Well, did you discover any volcanoes, that may erupt during the night,
and scare us to death?”

“No,” replied Mr. Parker, calmly, “but there is every indication that we
will soon have a terrific electrical storm. From a high peak I caught a
glimpse of one working this way across the mountains.”

“Then we'd better fasten the tent well down,” called Tom. “We don't want
it to blow away.”

“There will not be much danger from wind,” was Mr. Parker's opinion.

“From what then?” asked Mr. Jenks.

“From the discharges of lightning among these mountain peaks, which
contain so much iron ore. We will be in grave danger.”

The fact that the scientist had not always made correct predictions was
not now considered by his hearers, and Tom and the two men gazed at Mr.
Parker in some alarm.

“Is there anything we can do to avoid it?” asked Mr. Jenks.

“The only thing to do would be to leave the mountain,” was the answer,
“and, as the iron ore extends for miles, we can not get out of the
danger zone before the storm will reach us. It will be here in less than
half an hour.”

“Then we'd better have supper,” remarked Tom, practically, “and get
ready for it. Perhaps it may not be as bad as Mr. Parker fears.”

“It will be bad enough,” declared the gloomy scientist, and he seemed to
find pleasure in his announcement.

The meal was soon over, and Tom busied himself in looking to the guy
ropes of the tent, for he feared lest there might be wind with the
storm. That it was coming was evident, for now low mutterings of thunder
could be heard off toward the west.

Black clouds rapidly obscured the heavens, and the sound of thunder
increased. Fitful flashes of lightning could be seen forking across the
sky in jagged chains of purple light.

“It's going to be a heavy storm,” Tom admitted to himself. “I hope
lightning doesn't strike around here.”

The storm came on rapidly, but there was a curious quietness in the air
that was more alarming than if a wind had blown. The campfire burned
steadily, and there was a certain oppressiveness in the atmosphere.

It was now quite dark, save when the fitful lightning flashes came,
and they illuminated the scene brilliantly for a few seconds. Then, by
contrast, it was blacker than ever.

Suddenly, as Tom was gazing up toward the peak of Phantom Mountain, he
saw something that caused him to cry out in alarm. He pointed upward,
and whispered hoarsely:

“The ghost again! There's our friend in white!”

The others looked, and saw the same weird figure that had menaced them
when they were encamped on the other side of the peak.

“They must have followed us,” said Mr. Jenks, in a low voice.

Slowly the figure advanced, It waved the long white arms, as if in
warning. At times it would be only dimly visible in the blackness, then,
suddenly it would stand out in bold relief as a great flash of fire
split the clouds.

The thunder, meanwhile, had been growing louder and sharper, indicating
the nearer approach of the storm. Each lightning flash was followed in a
second or two, by a terrific clap. Still there was no wind nor rain, and
the campfire burned steadily.

All at once there was a crash as if the very mountain had split asunder,
and the adventurers saw a great ball of purple-bluish fire shoot down,
as if from some cloud, and strike against the side of the crag, not a
hundred feet from where stood the ghostly figure in white.

“That was a bad one,” cried Mr. Damon, shouting so as to be heard above
the echoes of the thunderclap.

Almost as he spoke there came another explosion, even louder than the
one preceding. A great ball of fire, pear shaped, leaped for the same
spot in the mountain.

“There's a mass of iron ore there!” yelled Mr. Parker. “The lightning is
attracted to it!”

His voice was swallowed up in the terrific crash that followed, and,
as there came another flash of the celestial fire, the figure in
white could be seen hurrying back up the mountain trail. Evidently the
electrical storm, with lightning bolts discharging so close, was too
much for the “ghost.”

In another instant it looked as if the whole place about where the
diamond seekers stood, was a mass of fire. Great forked tongues of
lightning leaped from the clouds, and seemed to lick the ground. There
was a rattle and bang of thunder, like the firing of a battery of guns.
Tom and the others felt themselves tingling all over, as if they had
hold of an electrical battery, and there was a strong smell of sulphur
in the air.

“We are in the midst of the storm!” cried Mr. Parker. “We are standing
on a mass of iron ore! Any minute may be our last!”

But fate had not intended the adventurers for death by lightning. Almost
as suddenly as it had begun, the discharge of the tongues of fire ceased
in the immediate vicinity of our friends. They stood still--awed--not
knowing what to do.

Then, once more, came a terrific clap! A great mass of fire, like some
red-hot ingot from a foundry, was hurled through the air, straight at
the face of the mountain, and at the spot where the figure in white had
stood but a few minutes before.

Instantly the earth trembled, as it had at Earthquake Island, but it was
not the same. It was over in a few seconds. Then, as the diamond seekers
looked, they saw in the glare of a score of lightning flashes that
followed the one great clap, the whole side of the mountain slip away,
and go crashing into the valley below.

“A landslide!” cried Mr. Parker. “That is the landslide which I
predicted! The lightning bolt has split Phantom Mountain!”




